St. AUGUSTINE, OF THE CITY OF GOD: WITH THE LEARNED COMMENTS OF IO. LOD.
VIVES.

Englished by I. H.

DISSIPABIT AVGVSTINVS.


Printed by GEORGE ELD. 1610.



TO THE HONORABLEST PATRON OF MUSES AND GOOD MINDS, LORD WILLIAM Earl of
Penbroke, Knight of the Honorable Order, etc.
RIght gracious and graceful Lord, your late imaginary, but now actual
Trauailer, then to most-conceited Uiraginia, now to almost-concealed Uirginia;
then a light, but not lewd, now a sage and allowed translator; then of a
scarce known nouice, now a famous Father; then of a devised Country scarce on
earth, now of a desired City sure in heaven; then of Utopia, now of Eutopia;
not as by testament, but as a testimony of gratitude, observance, and
hearts-honour to your Honor, bequeathed at hence-parting (thereby scarce
perfecting) this his translation at the imprinting to your Lordships
protecting. He, that against detraction beyond expectation, then found your
sweet patronage in a matter of small moment, without distrust or disturbance
in this work of more worth, more weight, as he approved his more ability, so
would not but expect your Honors more acceptance.

Though these be Churchmen, and this a Church-matter, he unapt, or unworthy to
hold trafique with either; yet here Saint Augustine, and his Commenter Uiues;
most favor of the secular: and the one accordingly to Marcellinus, the other
to our King Henry, directed their dedications; and as translators are only
tied, to have, and give, true understanding: so are they freer then the authors
to suit themselves a Patron. Which as to Scipio, the staff and stay, the
type and top of that Cornelian stem, in quam, vt plura genera in vnam
arborem, videtur insita multorum illuminata sapientia, your (...). in Br^.
poor Pacuuius, Terence, or Ennius, (or what you list, so he be yours) thought
most convenient to consecrate. Wherefore his legacy laid at your Honors
feet, is rather here delivered to your Honors humbly thrise-kissed hands by
his poor delegate.

Your Lordships true-deuoted, Th. Th.

HENRY King of England, to IOANNES LODOVICVS VIVES greeting.
WORTHY Sir, and our very well-beloved friend, as soon as Saint AUGUSTINE de
ciuitate Dei, enlightened with your comments came to our hands, being right
welcome to us, it caused us to doubt, whom we should most congratulate; either
you, by whose so learned labor so ehoise a work is finished; or Saint
AUGUSTINE, who long time imperfect and obscure, is now at last brought from
darkness to light, and restored to his ancient integrity, or all posterity,
whom these your Commentaries shall infinitely profit. But whereas it pleased
you, to dedicate these Commentaries to our name, we cannot but retain a
grateful mind, and return you great thanks, in that especially your mind
therein seems to manifest no vulgar love and observance toward us. Wherefore
we would have you persuaded, that our favor and good will shall never fail in
your affairs, whatsoever occasion shall be offered, that may tend to your
avail. So fare you happily well. From our Court at Greenwich, the XXIIII. day
of January M. D. XXIII.

IOANNES LODOVICVS VIVES to the renowned Prince HENRY the Eight, King of
England, Lord of Ireland, etc. Salutations.
IT is so ordered by nature of men's dispositions, most famous King, as we
admire them truly and heartely, whom we perceive excel in that knowledge,
which pleases us most, and is approved amongst all: diverse are given to diverse
studies and exercises, nature does so ordain, as by this variety the world
should consist both beautiful and wonderful: and yet, as he speaks, Every
man's own is fairest to himself. Your Majesty long since has been esteemed,
yea and admired, for your opulency and large extended Empire, not conquered by
arms and homicide, but lineally conuaied from your parents as, also for your
strengh of mind and body, and for your warlike prowes. But now since you have
also given good proof and essaies, how able are you in strength of wit and
studies of wisdom, you are grown much greater and more admirable among all
learned men, not, but that they highly esteemed you before, especially for that
you join mildnes with majesty, goodness with government, thereby to appear a
louelier and liuelier image of the Prince of Nature, who as he is greatest, so
is he best, yea best before he proved greatest. But men given to learning do
not so much bewonder your wealth or your power, as with exceeding love they
embrace and adore, that you are good and gracious: not deeming it to be admired
that you are King, since even wicked men have often been Kings, yea and
remarkable for fair endowments of the body. But when your defense of the
Sacraments came forth, the^ which nothing can be more elega^t, more pure, more
religious, and in one word more christian, the reputation of your minds goodness
was much more confirmed, if more it might be: for it was now infixed in the
minds of al, most firm and assured by many examples as if fastened with nails,
and admiration thereof arose in all men: yea even in those who think nothing
more honorable, more maiesticall then the power of a King; and those that place
riches above al things, and that ascribe exceeding much to the gifts of the
body, to beauty, brawny strength, and agility, and that are students in the
arts of war, as if war were the omnipotent co^mander of al things: wher-hence
it comes to pass, that all Princes, by all means and mediations they may, do
ambitiously strive to hold frindship with you, al affecting to be joined to
you, or by confederacy, or which is more wished by alliance. Nor want you the
studies of private men, which by the splender of your virtues you have raised,
alluring some with your beneficence, or eather magnificeuce, others with your
humanity and sweetness of demeanor, al with wisdom and justice, two virtues
indeed for a King. You being such I do insooth confess my impudency, that often
times I did affect to be known unto you: for this is my opinion, that it is no
mean praise to be but known of you. And whereas at all other times fit
occasion was wanting, it now voluntary presented it self, my Commentaries upon
S. AUGUSTINES books de ciuitate dei, being in a readiness: which when I
bethought me to who^ I might dedicate in such sort, as both I might win some
favor worth the esteeming, for my labor, and he to who^ they should be
presented, might not think so much learning as leasing, so much study as
stubble, not a book, but a burden or bundel were proffered unto him; as also I
might send them to a Censor as grave as gracious, who only allowing the^, they
might seem approved and commended by the applause of all men, you only came
to mind for many reasons and respects. First, for that such is your virtue and
learning, as even to you I should have presented them, if you had bin a private
man: next did I see this was the next way to attain my desire, which erst I
had conceived and in my self avowed. Moreover, as they tell that have tried,
you are open-handed, and hearted to such kind of presents, then which scarce
any may be more welcome to you. For who should offer you gold, filuer or gems,
garments, horses or armo^, should power water into the sea, and bring trees to
the wood. And truly as in all other things, so in this, you do most wisely,
to think that glory, beseeming your virtue and deserts, is purchased with all
posterity by books and momuments of learned men, if not by mine or those like
me, yet surely by showing your self affable and gracious to learned men, you
shall light upon some one, by whose style, as a most conning pencill, the
picture of that excellent and al-surmounting mind, purtraied and polished may
be commended to eternity, not to be covered with the rust of oblivion, nor
corrupted by injury of after ages, but that posterity an uncorrupted witness
of virtues, should not be silent of what is worthy to be spoken of, both to
the glory of your self, when you are restored to heaven, though that be the
best and best to be regarded, and also, which is principal and most to be
aspired, to the example of them that shall then live. Besides all this, this
work is most agreeable to your disposition and studies, wherein Saint
AUGUSTINE has collected (as in a treasury) the best part of those readings,
which he had selected in the ancient authors; as ready to dispute with
sharpest wits best furnished with choicest eloquence and learning. Whereby it
is fallne out, that he intending another point, has preserved the relics of
some the best things, whose native seat and dwelling, where they used to be
fet and found, was foully ouerturned. And therefore some great men of this later
age have bin much helped by these writings of AUGUSTINE, for VARRO, SALVST,
LIVY, and TVLLIE de republica: as HERMOLAVS, POLITIANVS, BLONDVS, BEROALDVS:
all which you shall so read, not as they were new or unheard of, but recognize
them as of old. Add hereunto, that you and Saint AUGUSTINES point and purpose
in writing, seem almost to intend and attain the same end. For as you wrote
for that better Rome against Babylon, so Saint AUGUSTINE against Babylon
defended that ancient, christian and holier Rome. This work, not mine, but
Saint AUGUSTINES, by whom I am protected, is also suitable unto your greatness,
whether the author be respected, or the matter of the work. The author is
AUGUSTINE, (good GOD) how holy, how learned a man, what a light, what a lean
to the christian commonwealth, on whom only it rested for many rites, many
statutes, customs, holy and venerable ceremonies! and not without cause. For
in that man was most plentiful study, most exact knowledge of holy writ, a
sharp and clear judgment, a wit admirably quick and piercing. He was a most
diligent defender of undefiled piety, of most sweet behauior, composed and
conformed to the charity of the Gospel, renowned and honored for his integrity
and holiness of life; all which a man might hardly prosecute in a full volume,
much less in an Epistle. It is well, I speak of a writer known of all, and
familiar to you. Now the work is not concerning the children of Niobe, or the
gates of Thebes, or mending clothes, or preparing pleasures, or manuring
grounds, which yet have been arguments presented even to Kings: but concerning
both Cities, of the World, and GOD, wherein Angels, devils, and all men are
contained, how they were borne, how bred, how grown, whether they tend, and
what they shall do when they come to their work: which to unfold, he has
omitted no profane nor sacred learning, which he does not both touch and
explane; as the exploites of the Romans, their gods, and ceremonies, the
Philosophers opinions, the original of heaven and earth, of Angels, devils,
and men: from what grounds Gods people grew, and how thence brought along to
our LORD CHRIST. Then are the Two Cities compared, of GOD and the World, and
the Assyrian, Sicyonian, Argiue, Attick, Latin, and Persian governments
induced. Next what the Prophets, both Heathenish, and Jewish, did foretell of
CHRIST. Then speaking of true felicity, he refuteth and refelleth the opinions
of the ancient Philosophers concerning it. Afterward, how CHRIST shall come,
the judge of quick and dead, to sentence good and evil. Moreover of the
torments of the damned. Lastly of the joys and eternally felicity of Godly
men. And all this with a wonderful wit, exceeding sharpness, most neat
learning, a clear and polisht style, such as became an author trauersed and
exercised in all kind of learning and writings, and as beseemed those great
and excellent matters, and fitted those with whom he disputed. Him therefore
shall you read most famous and best minded King, at such hours, as you
withdraw from the mighty affairs and turmoiles of your kingdom to employ on
learning and ornaments of the mind, and withal take a taste of our
Commentaries; whereof let me say, as Ovid said of his books de Faestis, when
he presented them to GERMANICVS CaeSAR. A learned Princes judgment to under
go,
As sent to read to Phoebus, our leaves go.


Which if I shall find they dislike not you, I shall not fear the allowance
of others, for who will be so impudent, as not to be ashamed to dissent from
so exact a judgment? which if any dare do, your even silent authority, shall
yet protect me. Farewell worthiest King, and recon VIVES most devoted to you,
in any place, so he be reconed one of yours. From Louaine the seventh of July.
M. D. XXII.

AN ADVERTISMENT OF IOANNES LODOVICVS VIVES Of Ualentia. DECLARING WHAT Manner
of people the Goths were, and how they toooke Rome.
WHERE AS AUGUSTINE TOOK OCcasion by the captivity of the Romans to write of
the City of GOD, to answer them, which injuriously slaundered the Christian
Religion, as the cause of those enormities and miseries, which befell them: It
shall not be lost labor for us (sounding the depth of the matter) to relate
from the Original, what kind of people the Goths were, how they came into
Italy, and surprised the City of Rome. First it is clear and evident, that
the former age named those Getes, whom the succeeding age named Goths,
because this age adulterated, and corrupted many of the ancient words. For
those two Poets, to wit, RVTILVS and CLAVDIAN, when-soeuer they speak of the
Goths, do always name Getes. OROSIVS also in his History says, the Getes
who now are named Goths, departing out of their Country with bag and
baggage, leaving their houses empty, entered safely into the Roman Provinces
with all their forces, being such a people, as ALEXANDER said were to be
avoided, PYRRHVS abhorred, and CaeSAR shunned. HIEROME upon Genesis, testifies
that the Goths were named Getes of the learned in former time. Also they were
Getes which inhabited about the River Ister, as STRABO, MELA, PLINY, and
others auerre: possessing the Region adjacent, a great part of it lying waste
and unmanured, being intemperate through extremity of cold: also the further
parts of Ister to Scithia, and the hither parts toward Thracia. Where the
Town Tomus is, famous by the banishment of OVID, who often writes, that he
lived amongst the Getes: They also inhabited the Mediterranean parts toward
Germany, and the spring head of the River Ister. STRABO writes in his
seventh book, that in former time they were named DACI and DAVI, when those
nearer unto Pontus were named GETES by the Greeks, and that both those people
spoke one kind of language. Although PLINY intimates unto us, that there was
no other difference between this people, but that the Greeks named them
Getes, whom the Romans called Daci. But we will follow STRABO in this
place. The Getes (says he), are a barbarous and savage nation, strong and of
a stout mind, contemning death, because they are persuaded that the souls do
return again, as MELA writes: or if they do not return, yet that they are
not vttterly extinguished, and that they remove into better places: But if
neither happen, yet that death is better than life. It is reported that in
later times the Getes were named Ostrogothes, and the Daci called Visigothes
after their country names: because these bordered more toward the West, and
the other more toward the East. But oftentimes these names are attributed as
well to the one as to the other, without any difference, both by the old and
new writers. They report that this nation when the Romans did flourish most,
made an invasion into a Province of the people of Rome, in the war of
MITHRIDATES: whom LVCVLLVS being General, and managing the military affairs
in Asia, with a great army expelled out of Misia.

After that they departed out of their own country bounds with Baerebista
their Captain after he had accustomed them to labor and millitary
discipline, and that they brought many Nations under the yoke of subjection.
And that having passed over the river Isther with a great army, they wasted
and spoiled Thracia, Macedonia, Illiryum far into the countries, putting the
Romans in great fear of them.

And that while the Romans were making ready their forces to go out against
them BaeREBISTA their Captain dyed.

AUGUSTUS sent forth almost ten Legions against them, and so wasted and
diminished their forces, that he brought them from two hundred thousand to
forty thousand, and sped so well against them, that he had almost subiugated
the whole Nation to the Roman Empire. But a few years after they entering
into the bounds of the Romans, slew OPPIVS SABINVS, and his army, who had
borne the office of a Consul: yet CORNELIUS FVSCVS (DOMITIAN being Emperor)
after many bickerings at last repressed their fury.

TRAIANVS the Emperor warred often against them, whereby he got himself
great glory and renown. ANTONIUS CARACALLA plagued them grievously,
opportunity serving his turn, when they neither dreamed nor suspected any such
matter. Also in the days of GORDIANVS they spread themselves often into the
bounds of the Romans: But GORDIANVS the younger compelled them with little
labor to depart out of their Province with great loss. Now this stout and
mutinous people, discontented with the limits of their own abode, many times
hunted after opportunity to invade the possessions of other nations.

Therefore PHILIPPUS VOSTRENSIS being Emperor (who first of the Roman Princes
professed Christian religion) More then three hundred thousand of them, making
a great slaughter and spoil, entered forciblie into Thracia and Mysia,
adjoining neaerest unto them. DECIVS was sent to drive them away, who had such
bad luck in his attempts, that he gave over before he obtained his purpose,
which thing he closely smothered succeeding PHILIPPUS in his government.

Afterward GALLVS the father and VOLVSIANVS his son concluded a peace with them
upon conditions unprofitable unto themselves, which the Goths kept not very
long, bearing themselves bold upon the slothfulness and idleness of
GALIENVS the Prince, and assailed not only to make an attempt against Thracia,
and Mysia, but also against Asia Minor. They wasted and spoiled Bythinia, and
returning (...) Europe, they made great spoil and wast in Thrasia and
Macedonia: and when they were making toward Achaia, MA^RINVS incountred them,
discomfited them, a^ put them to flight, pursuing them so hard at the heels,
that he drove them into their own bounds. But they did not stay long there,
although now departing out of their bounds, they were to deal with a most
valiant Prince, who had bone no less fortunate than he was valorous, if he had
lived longer in his Princely government CLAVDI S was the man which partly
destroyed, and partly took CCC thousand of them. Which is an argument that the
number of this people were almost infinite. For not many years after they rose
up in arms against AVRELIAVS, possessing the Empire, and were vanquished at
the first encounter at Danubius. (...) COTANTINVS made such a slaughter of
them, that at last he enforced them to be at quiet for many years. For the
condit on of their fight was such, that they did neither conquer without great
harm done to (...) enemies: nor were overcome without much hurt done to
themselves And these things were acted by the Goths, while they had proper
places of their own to inhabit. Now in the reign of Prince VALENS, the Hunns
which are likewise Scythians themselves, yet more cruel, barbarous and rude,
in the affairs of humane Commerce, remaining near the Riphaean mountains,
enclosed between Tanais and the people, named Massagetae: chased the Goths by
force out of the region which they did inhabit. And although this region be
not very commodious for the use of men, by reason of the extreme coldness: yet
the Hunns did esteem it to be more wholesome and pleasant than all the rest,
being a people bred and brought up in a soil seldom warmed with the beams of
the sun. Now the Goths driven out of their country houses and dwelling places
having The Goths (...) driven out of their country by the Hunns,
been accustomed before time to invade the bounds of other Nations, were now in
such a narrow straight, that they must either valiantly lose their lives, or
remain within the possessions of strangers, having none of their own. There
are some that affirm that those Getes (which we said were named Ostrogothes)
came into the territories of the people of Rome, but that the Visigothes
dismayed and amated with the adverse fortune of their associats, advised
themselves to shift their dwelling, dreading to abide the like tempest, that
the Ostrogothes had suffered, the forces of the Hunns ouerflowing al, like the
swelling Sea) spoiling and destroying the neighboring countries round about.
This matter induced the Visigothes to dispatch Ambassadors with spee die
expedition to VALENS the Romame Emperor, who in the name of the whole Nation
humbly entreated, that he would grant them the country of Mysia, which is on
this side the River Danubius, for their habitation and dwelling, ^arnestly
pretesting and vowing in the behalf of all their Contrymen; that they would
all receive the Christian Religion, and become true and faithful Tributaries
to the people of Rome, manfully defending those bounds of the Romans by their
sword and goods, from the violent invasions of the rest of the Scythians.
VALENS pleased with their conutions, sent LVPI^INIVS and MAVINVS unto them, as
Duumuiri to divide the ground, and assign^ places of habitations to the
Visigoths. But they began to lay burdens of oppression upon the necks of the
people through their coueteousnesse and cruelty: now for a while the Goths
did patiently bear and lightly regarded the wrong done unto them, because they
were loath, being but lately entered into the bounds of strangers to kindle
any fire of sedition: supposing that those greedy Captains being glutted with
wealth would make an end of their oppressions. But while these coueteous
wretches had little care for the distribution and provision of victuals: they
caused such a grievous famine as was not only a destruction to those hungry
Captains themselves, but also to the Roman prince, For the Goths being
assailed with pinching famine (like hungry beasts) took up their weapons
hastily, killing the Roman Captains and their Guard, and then having armed
themselves, they range over all Mysia, and so from thencepasse into the
nearest Thracia, which they compelled to become tributary unto them. Here
VALENS encountered them, and there was a sore and bloody battle on both sides,
so that the Romans were scattered and put to flight, and a great many of them
slaughtered. The Emperor himself being wounded was taken prisoner by the
enemy, whom they burned alive, so great was their fury after the effusion of
so much Valens the Emperor burnt alive
blood. And then being proud of their victory, they march forward to
Bizantium, and no repugnant forces stopping their passage, they besiege the
City, which held out for some space of time by her own strength, by the
industry and council of DOMINICA, who was wife unto VALENS: for the hearts of
the Citizens were fast united toward the Prince by the great bounty and
liberality of DOMINICA. Afterward, the siege being raized by the valor and
power of VALENTINIANVS, brother to VALENS, they retired back and departed.
VALENTINIANVS adopted THEODOSIUS a Spaniard, sent for out of Spain, and made
him partaker of his Empire. He vanquished and put the Goths to the worst in
many battles, compelling them to be humble suitors for peace, which being
granted, HALARICVS their King coming to visit THEODOSIUS being sick, fell
himself also into a disease, of which he died within a few months after:
Neither had they any other King, or Captain but such as the Roman Emperor
elected and appointed over them.

In the mean while THEODOSIUS of Millan, who was a prince without all
controversy equal to the rest, and inferior to none of the most renowned, as
well in war, as peaee, departed out of this life, leaving two sons behind
him, named ARCHADIVS and HONORIVS, and one daughter called PLACIDIA. He made
ARCHADIVS governor over Byzantium and the Oriental Regiment, and HONORIVS
over the Occidentall, and the City of Rome. And because they were somewhat
young, he assigned Tutors and Gardians over them in his Testament, for their
better education: namely RVFFINVS over ARCHADIVS, and STELICO over HONORIVS,
both of them being crafty and wicked wretches, and so qualified by nature, as
they could easily insinuate them selves into the bosom of Princes. These two
bad Protectors abusing the Minority of these Princes (being an age subject to
injury) that they might increase their own riches and strengthen themselves
with great power; did not bend their affects to the fruition of any private
greatness: but their ambitious and treacherous thoughts aimed at the highest
step of Royal dignity. RVFFINVS coueted the Empire for himself, STILICO
for his son. Thus both of them busied their wits, and stretched the sinews
of their strength to satisfy their aspiring thoughts: but they perceived,
that they could not come to the vpshotte of their desires but in the time of
war: because then the peaceable state being troubled, with the tempest of
war, their hateful thoughts could not so well be discovered, and might with
far greater facility be effected, the minds of the Princes being perplexed
with terrors of the wars, which might be an occasion to grant any thing to
men nearest unto them, and such as should have the chiefest command in the
administration of all affairs. For they were not ignorant that in quiet time
of peace (as in a fair and calm day) the dark clouds of their black minds
would soon have been discerned, and that punishment should with more
expedition be inflicted upon them, the Princes and Nobles having leisure of
consultation concerning that matter. Wherefore both of them solicit and incite
the Goths (a people ready to blow the bellows to kindle the flame of sedition
and tumults of war) that they would make war against their Prince, setting an
edge upon their greedy appetit with hope of a great rich booty: the Goths
supposing now that opportunity was their friend, so that they might do some
great good for themselves: or at least (the war not attempted) return home
again with no small prey: betook themselves to arms, and having created
HALARICVS to be their King, one of their own body, and of the famous house
of the BALTHI: depart out of their own bounds, not without great fear and
terror of those which bordered near unto them. And within a while after
RADAGAISVS The house of the Balthi.
joined himself unto their King with two hundred thousand Goths: and when as
no one land was able to nourrish two such hugh armies, the Generals were
constrained to separate their Tents, and one of them going one way, and the
other another way through Panonia, Illiricum, and Noricum, they burn, and
spoil all things, that comes in their way, and at last they come into Italy.
Now RVFFINVS, foolishly executing his designments, was slain by those
soldiers at Thessalonica. But STILICO more The death of the traitor Ruffinus.
cra^tilie concealed his wicked plot. And now RADAGAISVS was come to the City
of Rome with his army marching through Etruria, putting all in great fear and
terror, which way soever he went. The City of Rome troubled with exceeding
fear sends mercenarie captains against him at his first approach. Now
RADAGAISVS v^isedly and rashly ordering his army, threw himself, as it were,
headlong into places of disadvantage. So that the multitude of his soldiers
pyned, and were consumed with famine, deprived of their victual, And he
himself seeing things were come to this unlucky event, attempted with a small
company, to escape by flight be a secret and private way, but he was
intercepted, and slain by the Roman soldiers, and a great multitude of
Goths The death of Radagaisus.
were sold at a very low rate. After this overthrow, and slaughter of the
Goths, HALARICYS enters into Italy, affrighting every one with far greater
dread, then RADAGAISVS had done before, When tidings was brought unto STILICO,
which was at Byzantium, he sent some of his soldiers before him, which should
set upon the rereward of the army of the Goths, and by that means hinder
them from making any great slaughter, or spoil of the country.

Afterward, he marched forward toward them by the coast of the upper sea,
with all the forces of his horsemen and foote-men. The two armies pitch their
Tents near Rauenna, the Goths got that part which is named Pollentia via, who
in respect of their infinite number did far exceed the Romans: but in regard
of skill, and military discipline, they were in no sort comparable unto them.
Now STILICO had often times got the upper hand over the Goths by his
warrelike policy, and had cooped them up in such a narrow place, that
sitting idly at home he might have ended the wars at his pleasure, if he
had been willing. But he resolved to remain with his army until the
Vandalls his friends and favorites were come into France. For he was persuaded
without any doubt that then good occasion would be offered unto him for
obteyning the Empire for EVCHLRIVS his son.

Therefore he trifled away the time by making a few light skrmishes with the
enemy. But when HALARICVS had ferrited out his hidden drift by secret passages,
he disclosed it to HONORIVS. And when as by this good turn (as by a rich
gift) he supposed he should both calm the fury, and insinuate himself into
the favor of HONORIVS: he was encoraged to make petition unto him, by the same
ambassadors which he sent to reveal the treason of STILICO, that he would
grant part of France unto him for his people to inhabit there, promising that
they should live after the laws of the Romans, to the aduancment of the Roman
Empire, and their wars; and that they would be inferior to none of their
Provinces either in fealty, or dutiful service. The Emperor amazed with this
doubtful mischief, made choice rather to admit the Goths into part of his
dominion then to procure a final destruction to him and his, by the disloyalty
of perfidious STILICO. But HALARICVS was not the first, that discovered to
HONORIVS what villainy ST^ was forging. Nevertheless he thought it was
dangerous for him at any time to put such a man to death, as was father in law
unto him by his two wives, being also so potent and mighty by his riches
far above the highest degree of any private person. Therefore having
dispatched his letters, he sends them unto STILICO by the ambassadors of the
Goths, willing him without delay to permit the Goths, to have free access into
France. STILICO gave but cold entertainment to this news: for he saw tha^ he
was defrauded of his great hope, and he likewise suspected that his secret
consultations some-time hidden in his breast, were now divulged and dispersed
into the air. Yet for all that, his stout, and stuborne mind made some pause
upon the matter: at last making choice of that which was safest for him, he
answered that he would obey the commandment of his Prince.

Nevertheless being loath to give over so, and that the matter might not
slip wholly out of his hands, he suborneth one named SAVLVS and the
soldiers of the Jews to follow the Goths hard at the heels, who killing
some thousands of them, opportunity being offered, might by that means
exasperat the minds of the people and move them to break the league. Now
this SAVLVS upon the LORDS Day, which by the ancient institution of our
religion we observe as sacred and holy: wherein the Goths were wholly
intentive to divine services: made a sudden and violent assault against them,
and in the first tumult and uproar slew some of them. The Goths being
terrified with this unexpected accident, consult suddenly, as well as they
might, in such a sudden and fearful case, whether they should arm themselves
for their defense, or not. For they held it a heinous crime, to touch any
weapons, to shed man's blood, to make any slaughter of men on the festival
day of Our Savior. But when the fury of the Jews was without any mean, and
measure in killing, murdering and slaying, then every private person following
his own mind, armed himself for his own safety, attending no longer what
council might asigne them to do. Now many of them being armed, and come
together, HALARICVS having put his companies in arr (...) so ^ll as shortness
of time would give leave casilie repressed the rage and madness of this (...)
and vnwar like people. For the Goths having a little conflict with them (...)
the Jews, and put them to flight. Afterward having complained that they were
enforced to pollute and contaminate the sacred and divine law, by the cruelty
of them who had violated the laws of men: and also calling upon Christ, in
whose name they took their oath when the league was confirmed between them,
whose holy day they had polluted against their will, with effusion of blood,
murders, and slaughter; then without (...) inflamed with fury and rage, they
march thorough Italy to displate their bloody colloures before the City of
Rome.

Now not long before STILICO had dismissed some of his soldiers, as men of
small reckning, and of no use but in time of war: but by reason of the
instant terror of imminent danger, he was constrained to send to the Emperor,
to have them sent back again unto him, with a new supply of other companies,
that he might go with all the strength they could make to withstand the
enterprises of the Goths. HONORIVS being thoroughly possessed concerning the
plot of traiterous STILICO sends a great army of soldiers unto him: having
privily given the captains in charge, that watching fit occasion they
should suddenly kill STILICO and his son. Now they having consulted one with
another concerning this action, and appointed a certain^ day, when they might
coragiously execute the commaundent of their prince: suddenly a^dat unawares
set upon STILICO and his son, some on this side some on that, and so slew
them both, and some of his kindered which made resistance to rescue them. This
quick dispatch The deserved death of traitorous Stil^ and his son.
of these two Traitors was acted at Rome in Foro Paci, in the Market place of
peace. But the improuident and carclesse Emperor, after his general was
slain, had no care to place another in his room. I think he did it to prevent
that any other having the like power should attempt the like practice. So that
now the army being destitute of a chief commander, was pitifully discomfited
by the Goths, who made such hauoke, and slaughther of the soldiers, that the
very name of the Goths, bred an exceeding terror and discoragement in the
hearts of them all. Now the Goths having put the Romans to the foil, bring
their bloody ensigns to the City of Rome, and took the same, afflicted with
a long siege, and being entered into the town they begin to rifle, ransacke
and spoil it, being far more greedy every man to get a good booty, then to
commit slaughters, rapes, adulteries, and such like odious and filthy facts as
are commonly acted by the unbridled outrage of dissolute soldiers, at the
sacking of Cities. For when HALARICVS was ready to enter into the City, he
caused two Edicts to be proclaimed to his soldiers. The one was, that every
man should abstain from slaughter, and laying violent hands upon any person:
because such cruel deeds, did highly displease him. The other was, that
whosoever had taken Sanctuary in the temples of the chief Apostles, should
have no harm done unto them, nor those holy temples be profaned by any, and
that the offender should suffer death. The City of Rome was taken by the
Goths, after it was founded Anno. M. C. L. XIIII. Call. April. PLAVIVS, and
VARRO being Consulls. But after what manner is was taken, the Historiographers
make small relation. PAPT STA EGNATIVS says, that he had the manner of the
taking of it, out of the works of PROCOPIVS a Greek author: and that he did
not a little marvel why the Interpreter did wittingly, and willingly
ouer-skippe that place: or if it were so, that he lighted upon an imperfect
book, that he took no better heed to mark what was wanting. I my self have
not seen PROCOPIVS the Greek author, therefore the truth of the cause shall
rely upon the credit of EGNATIVS: a man very industrious and learned, as
far as I can judge by his works. These are his words ensuing. HALARICVS
had now besieged Rome, the space of two years, when HONORIVS remaining
careless at Rauenna was neither able, nor durst come to succor and relieve the
City. For he regarded nothing less then the welfare and safety of the City,
after the death of STILICO, having no care to place another General in his
room, which might have managed the wars against the Goths. These things
were motives to stir up the Goths to besiege the City, perceiving that
either the Roman soldiers daily decayed, or that they went about their
affairs without any courage. But when they found that they could not win it
by force, having besieged it a long time in vain: then their barbarous enemies
turn their thoughts to attempt what they may do by policy. And now they
begin to make a false show of their departing home into their own country,
wherefore they call three hundred young men, out of their whole army,
excelling in actiuity of body and courage of mind, which they give as a present
to the Noblemen of Rome, having instructed them before hand, that by their
lowly carriage, and obsequious service, they should bend themselves to win the
favor, and good liking of their masters; and that on a certain day concluded
between them, about noonetime, when the Roman princes were either a sleep, or
idly disposed, they should come speedily to the gate, which is named Asinaria
Porta, and there suddenly rushing upon the keepers, murder them speedely, and
then set open the gate for their countrymen to enter, being ready at hand. In
the mean while the Goths prolonged their return, dissembling cunningly that
some-time they wanted this thing, and some-time that. At last these three
hundred young men wake^il to take the tide of opportunity, dispatched their
task coragiously, which they had undertaken, and, at the appointed day set the
gate wide open to their countri-men, and friends. Now the Goths having gotten
entrance, rifle, ransack, spoil, and wast the whole City, procuring far
greater dishonor, and shame unto the Roman Nation, then they did loss by the
taking of it. There are some which think the gate was set open by the means
of PROBA, a most famous, and wealthy woman, pitying the lamentable, and
distressed case of the common people, who died every where, like brute beasts,
pined with famine, and afflicted with grievous diseases.

There are two things worthy of serious marking, first that HALARICVS made an
Edict, that no violence or harm should be offered unto them, which fled into
the Temples of the Saints, especially of Saint PETER and PAVL, which thing was
carefully kept. Next, when it was told HONORIVS being at Rauenna, that Rome was
lost: he thought it had been meant of a certain Frenchman a quarrellous,
and fighting fellow whose name was ROME, maruelling that he was so soon gone,
with whom he had so little before been most pleasant. And thus much writes
EGNAT^VS.

Now the most blasphemous and wicked people fa^sly imputed the cause of all
their miseries and enormities unto the Christian Religion: denying that ever it
would have come to pass, that Rome should have been taken, if they had kept
still the Religions devoutly observed by their Ancestors and commended by
tradition unto their Posterity. As though the Frenchmen before time had not
taken, wasted, and ransacked that City, for the very same cause, namely for
the breach of their oath: yea at that time when the profane ceremonies of their
Heathenish Religion (as they say) were in their chiefest prime, and pride. And
as though few Christian Emperors had managed their affairs well, or as though
the decay of the Empire and ruin of it did not begin under the Emperors of the
Gentiles. And as if HONORIVS had not lost Rome, by the same negligence, and
sloathfulnesse, that GALIENVS lost Aegipt, A^a, (...), passing the matter over
with a pleasant test when news came unto him of the l^se of them. Wherefore
against these slanderous persons who would have been enemies, and adversaries
of the Christian Religion though no calamity had happened to them, AUGUSTINE
wrote two and twenty books: defending the City of God (that is to say) the
Christian Religion, against the rage, and fury of their frantic and impious
calumniations.

FINIS.
The argument out of the second book of the Retractations of Saint Augustine.
TRiumphant Rome, ruinated and dejected from her throne of Majesty, into a
gulphe of calamity, by the violent irruption of the barbarous Goths, managing
their bloody wars under the standard of ALARICVS: the worshippers of false, and
many gods, (whom we brand in the forehead with the common name of heathen^
Pagans) began to breath out more damnable and virulent blasphemies against the
true GOD, then their bestiall mouths had ever breathed out bef^: laboring
with might and maine to lay a heap of slanders upon the neck of Christian
rel^on, as the wicked Mother of all this mischief, and murderer of their
worldly happiness. Wherefore the fire and zeal of Gods House, burning within
my bowels, I resolved to compile these books of the City of God, to batter
down the strongest hold of their bitter blasphemies, and dispel the thick
clouds of their gross errors. Some years passed over my head, before I could
compile and finish the whole frame of this work, by reason of many intercedent
affairs, whose impatient have of quick expedition would admit no delay. But at
last this great, and laborious work of the City of God, was ended in two and
twenty books: of which the first five rebate the edge of their erroneous
opinions, which build the prosperity of humane affairs upon such a tottering
foundation, that they think it cannot stand long, unless it be shored up by
the worship of many gods, whom the blinded Pagans have been accustomed to
worship and adore: auerring (but their truth is mere false-hood) that neglect
and contempt of their unworthy adoration has been the fountain from whence
these bitter waters of adverse occurrences have streamed abundantly, and
ouerflowed them. But the other five following are not meale-mouthed, but speak
boldly against them which confess, that the spring of worldly evils is not
exhausted, nor shall ever be dried up: but the current flowing some-time more,
sometimes less, sometimes swiftly, some times slowly, changing their state
according to the circumstance of places times and persons: yet fondly are they
opinionated (for verity has not made them a warrant) that the devout adoration
of many gods, in which sacrifices are offered unto their imaginary Deity, is
profitable for the life which we hope for after death. Therefore in these ten
books the absurdity of these two vain opinions, both deadly foes unto
Christian religion, is discovered and confuted. But least some man may vpbraid
me that I am too forward to disprove the assertions of others, and slow enough
to prove mine own: the other part of this work, which is confined within the
bounds of twelve books, is directed to that purpose. Although in the first ten
(where it is needful) we are not behind hand to confirm the truth of our
own opinions and also to infringe the authority of contrary oppositions in the
twelve books ensewing. Therefore the first four of the twelve following,
contain the original of two Cities: of which one belongs to GOD, the other
to this World. The second four contain their progress. The third four,
which are the last, contain their due bounds. Now though all the two and
twenty books are compiled together of both Cities: yet they have taken their
title from the better part, and have the name of the City of God printed on
their forehead. In the tenth book it ought not to be set down for a
miracle, that the fire falling Retract. 1. Chap. 8.
from heaven ran between the divided sacrifices, when ABRAHAM sacrificed,
because this was showed unto him in a vision. In the seventeenth book, where
it is said of SAMVEL. He was not of the sons of ARON: it should rather have
been said, He was not the son of the Retract. 2. Chap. 5.
Priest. For it was a more lawful custom, that the sons of the Priests
should succeed in the room of the deceassed Priests. For the Father of SAMVEL
is found in the sons of ARON, but he was not a Priest: yet not so in his
sons, as if ARON had begot him, but in such sort as all of that people are
said to be the sons of ISRAEL. This work begins thus, That most glorious
society and celestial City of GOD etc.

THE CONTENTS OF THE first book of the City of God.
1. Of the adversaries of the name of Christ spared by the Barbarians, in the
sacking of Rome, only for Christ's sake, 2. There never was war wherein the
Conquerors would spare them whom they conquered, for the gods they worshipped.
3. Of the Romans fondness in thinking that those gods could help them,
which could not help Troy, in her distress. 4. Of the Sanctuary of Juno in
Troy, which freed not any (that fled into it) from the Greeks at the Cities
sack; whereas the Churches of the Apostles saved all comers from the
Barbarians at the sack of Rome. Caesar's opinion, touching the enemies custom
in the sack of Cities. 5. That the Romans themselves never spared the
Temples, of those Cities which they conquered. 6. That the cruel effects
following the losses of war, did but follow the custom of war: and wherein
they were moderated, it was through the power of the name of Jesus Christ. 7.
Of the commodities and discommodities commonly communicated both to good and
ill. 8. Of the causes of such corrections as fall both upon the good and bad
together. 9. That the Saints in their loss of things temporal, loose not any
thing at all. 10. Of the end of this transitory life, whether it be long or
short. 11. Of burial of the dead* that it is not prejudicial to the state of
a Christian soul to be forbidden it. 12. The reasons why we should bury the
bodies of the Saints. 13. Of the captivity of the Saints, and that (...) they
never wanted spiritual comfort. 14. Of Marcus Regulus, who was a famous
example to animate all men to the enduring of voluntary ^tiuity for their
religion: which notwithstanding was unprofitable unto him, by reason of his
Paganism. 15. Whether the taxes that the holy Uirgins suffered against their
wills in their captiuities, could pollute the virtues of their mind. 16. Of
such as chose a voluntary death, to avoid the fear of pain and dishonor. 17.
Of the violent lust of the soldiers, executed upon the bodies of the captives;
against their consents. 18. Of Lucrecia that stabbed her self, because Tarquins
son had ravished her. 19. That their is no authority which allows christians
to be their own deaths in what cause so ever. 20. Of some sort of killing
men, which notwithstanding are no murders. 21. That voluntary death can never
be any sign of magnanimity, or greatness of spirit. 22. Of Cato who killed
himself, being not able to endure Caesar's victory. 23. That the Christians
excel Regulus in that virtue, wherein he excelled most. 24. That sin is not
to be avoided by sin. 25. Of some unlawful acts, done by the Saints, and by
what occasion they were done. 26. Whether we ought to fly sin with
voluntary death. 27. How it was a Judgment of GOD, that the enemy was
permitted to exercise his lust upon the Christians bodies. 28. What the
servants of Christ may answer the Infidells, when they vpbraide them with
Christ's not delivering them in their afliction from the fury of the enemies
fury. 29. That such as complain of the Christian times, desire nothing, but to
live in filthy pleasures. 30. By what degrees of corruption the Romans ambition
grew to such a height. 31. Of the first inducing of stage-plaies. 32. Of some
vices in the Romans, which their Cities ruin, did never reform. 33. Of the
clemency of GOD, in moderating this calamity of Rome. 34. Of such of GODS elect
as live secretly as yet amongst the Infidells, and of such as are false
Christians. 35. What subjects are to be handled in the following discourse.
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK OF SAINT AUGUSTINE Bishop of Hippo, his City of God, unto
MARCELLINVS.
Of the adversaries of the name of Christ, spared by the Barbarians in the
sacking of Rome, only for Christ's sake. CHAP. 1.
THAT most glorious society and celestial City of Gods faithful, which is
partly seated in the course of these declining times, wherein he that lives
(a) by faith, is a Pilgrim amongst the wicked; and partly in that Habac. 2.
solid estate of eternity, which as yet the other part does patiently expect,
until (b) righteousness be turned into judgment, being then by the proper
excellence to obtain Romans 8. Psalm. 93.
the last victory, and be crowned in perfection of peace; have I undertaken to
defend in this work: which I intend unto you (my dearest (c) Marcellinus) as
being your due by my promise, and exhibit it against all those that prefer
their false gods before this Cities founder: The work is great and difficult,
but God the master of all difficulties is our helper. For I know well what
strong arguments are required Psalm. 61.
to make the proud know the virtue of humility, by which (not being enhansed
by humane glory, but endowed with divine grace) it surmounts all earthly
loftiness, which totters through the own transitory instability. For the
King, the builder of this City, whereof we are now to discourse, has opened
his mind to his people, in the divine law, thus: God resists the proud, and
gives James 4. 1. Pet. 5.
grace to the humble. (d) Now this which is indeed only Gods, the swelling
pride of an ambitious mind affects also, and loves to hear this as parcel
of his praise. (e) Parcere subiectis and debellare superbos. Aenead. 6.

To spare the lowly, and strike down the proud.


Wherefore touching the Temporal City (which longing after domination, though
it hold all the other nations under it, yet in it self is ouer-ruled by the
own lust (f) after sovereignty) we may not omit to speak whatsoever the
quality of our proposed subject shall require or permit, for out of this,
arise the foes against whom Gods City is to be guarded. Yet some of these
reclaiming their impious errors have become good Citizens therein: but others
burning with an extreme violence of hate against it, are so thanklesse to the
Redeemer of it for so manifest benefits of his, that at this day they would not
speak a word against it, but that in the holy places thereof, flying thither
from the sword of the foe, they found that life and safety wherein now they
glory. Are not these Romans become persecutors of Christ, whom the very
Barbarians saved for Christ's sake? yes, the Churches of the Apostles, and the
Martyrs can testify this, which in that great sack were free both to their
(g) own, and (h) strangers. Even thither came the rage of the bloody enemy:
even there the murders fury stopped: even thither were the distressed led by
their pitiful foes (who had spared them, though finding them out of those
sanctuaries) least they should light upon some that should not extend the like
pity. And even they that elsewhere raged in slaughters, coming but to those
places, that forbad what law of war elsewhere allowed, all their headlong
fury curbed it self, and all their desire of conquest was conquered. And so
escaped many then, that since have detracted all they can from Christianity:
they can impute their cities other calamities, wholly unto Christ, but that good
which was bestowed on the^ only for Christ's honor (namely the sparing of their
lives) that they impute not unto our Christ, but unto their own fate: whereas
if they had any judgment, they would rather attribute these calamities and
miseries of mortality, all unto the providence of God, which uses to reform
the corruptions of men's manners, by (i) war and oppressions, and laudably to
exercise the righteous in such afflictions, and having so tried them, either to
transport them to a more excellent estate, or to keep them longer in the world
for other ends and uses. And whereas the bloody Barbarians against all custom
of war, spared them both in other places, for the honor of Christ, and in
those large houses that were dedicated unto him, (made large, to contain many,
for the larger extent of pity;) this ought they to ascribe to these Christian
times, to give God thanks for it, and to have true recourse by this means
unto Gods name, thereby to avoid the (k) pains of eternal damnation: which
name many of them as then falsely took up, as a sure shelter against the
storms of present ruin. For even those that you may now behold most
petulantly insulting over Christ's servants, most of them had never escaped the
general massacre, had they not counterfeited themselves to be the servants of
Christ. But now through their ungrateful pride, and ungodly madness they
stand against that name (in perverseness of heart, and to their eternal
captiuation in darkness) to which they fled with a dissembling tongue, for the
obtaining of the enjoying but of this temporal light.

The Commentaries of John Lodouicus Viues upon the first Chapter of the first
book of Saint Augustine, of the City of God.
HE that lives (a) by faith] Habacuc. 2. 4. The just shall live by faith, so
says Paul in diverse places: for this indeed is the provision of our lives
voyage. In the text it is diversely read: some-time, by my faith; some-time, by
his faith: the seventy Interpreters translate it, (...), he shall live by the
faith of himself, or his faith. (b) Righteousness be turned into iudgement]
Psalm. 19. The true Hebrew says; Because righteousness shall be turned into
judgment: It is meant of the end of the world, whereunto that also belongs
that follows: The last victory: The Church upon earth warreth daily, and
conquereth daily: but the end of one war is but a step into another. That
shall be the last and most perfect victory, when the Church shall be wholly
translated into heaven, to remain for ever in peace with the King and
peacemaker, Jesus Christ. (c) Marcellinus,] There are extant in Augustines
Epistles, some dedicated unto Marcellinus, and again some from him to
Augustine. Their acquaintance it seems begun in Africa: for thus writes
Orosius of this Lib. 7. c. 42
Marcellinus: In those days by Honorius his command, and Constantines
assistance, there was a general peace and unity throughout the whole Church
of Africa, and the body of Christ (which we indeed are) was cured by a willing
or thankful consent on all sides: this holy command being put in execution by
Marcellinus, a man full fraught with wisdom, industry, and endeavor of all
goodness. (d) Now this which indeed is only Gods.] Either because such in
their pride, The Romans the proudest nation.
desire what is properly Gods, namely to resist the proud; or, because pride
(in others) is of it self so hated of the proud, that the proudest nation of
all (the Romans) rejoiced to have this reckoned up as parcel of their
glories, that they kept down the proud: That the Romans were proud
themselves, and by reason of their own pride hated it in all others, the words
of Cato Censorius do prove, in his Oration to the Senate for the Rhodians:
They say (quoth he) the Rhodians are proud: obiecting that which I would not
have spoken of my children: They are indeed proud: what is that to us? Are you
grieved that any should be prouder then our selves? Unto which words Gellius
adds this. There is nothing can be spoken either sharper or gentler Lib. 7.
then this reproof unto those most proud high-minded men, that love pride in
themselves and reprove it in others. (e) To spare] Virgill having reckoned up
diverse praises of other nations A Eneid. 6.
wherein they excelled the Romans, at length turning to Rome, says thus:
Turegere imperio populos Roman memento,
Haetibi erunt arts, pacique imponere morem,
Parcere subiectis and debellare superbos.
But (Roman) let thy study be to sway
Thy realms with awe to force them peace obey,
To spare the lowly, and to pull down pride, etc.
To obey peace, is all one as to keep or observe it. (f) Lust after
soueraigntie]: It is an old Proverb: The tyrants subjects are his slaves, and
himself slave to his lusts and pleasures. So said Diogenes the Cynick of the
Persian King, and Tully in his Paradoxes of Caesar. (g) Their owne] that is,
Christians. (h) Strangers;] namely such as did not worship Christ's Godhead:
whom Augustine terms Pagans. (i) By warre] This appears most plain in the
Romans, who lived more orderly in the times of war, then at any time else,
though in most secured peace. (k) The pain of eternal damnation] Not only
those temporal and momentarie punishments.

There never was war wherein the conquerors would spare them whom they
conquered, for the Gods they worshipped. CHAP. 2.
THere has been thus many wars chronicled, partly before Rome was At the
last sack of Jerusalem the Romans themselves filled the Temple with dead
bodies.
builded, and partly since her founding: let them read, and find me any one
City taken by a stranger foe, that would spare any that they found retired
into the temples of their gods, or any Barbarian Captain, that ever commanded,
that in the sack of the town none should be touched that were fled into such
or such temples. (d) Did not Aeneas see Priamus slain before the Altar, and
with his blood Sanguine faedantem quos ipse sacrauerat ignes?
Sprinkling the flames himself had hallowed?
Did not (d) Diomede and Ulysses, having slaughtred all the keepers of the high
tower, -- caesis summae custodibus arcis,
Corripuere sacram effigiem manibusque cruentis,
Virgineas ausi diuae contingere vittas.
Snatch up the sacred statue, and with hands
Besmeer'd in blood, durst touch the (d) Virgins veil?
(e) Yet is not that true which follows: Ex illo fluere ac retro sublapsa
referri
Spes Danaum. --
From thence the Grecians hopes decline, and fail.
For after all this, they conquered: after this they threw down Troy with
sword and fire: after this they smote off Priams head before the Altar that he
fled unto. Neither perished Troy because it lost the Palladium: for what had
the Palladium lost first, that it self should perish? perhaps the keepers?
indeed it is true, they being slain, it was soon taken away: For the Image
kept not the men, but the men kept the Image (f) But why then was it adored as
the preserver of the country and Citizens, when it could not preserve the own
keepers?

L. VIVES.
DId not (a) Aeneas,] so says Uirgill: There saw I Priam, Hecuba, and all
their hundred daughters at the altar, etc. This happened upon that night when
Troy was taken and A Eneid. 2.
burned by the Greeks: and Neoptolemus Pirrhus, Achilles his son slew Priam
at the altar. (b) Himself had hallowed,] Wherein he shows the greater
indignity, because those gods did not assist him, which he himself had made
and consecrated in that very place. I think it is meant of Vesta in whose
temple perpetual fire was kept: Uirgils Commentators do not explain it: let
each man take it as he please. (c) Diomedes,] This also is from Uirgill in the
said book: the words are Sinons, and meant of the Palladium, which in the
Troyan war Diomedes and Ulisses stole out of the Temple of Pallas. Nor feared
they sacrilege, as to the which they added murder, and yet was (their party)
the Grecians, conquerours over Troy. The Palladium was an Image of Pallas,
whereof there are so many relations extant, that I should think it idle to
proceed in recounting all men's opinions thereof. Yet The Image of the Pallad^.
will I extract what seems most likely, out of Varro, Dionysius
Halicarnasseus, Ovid, Plutarch, and Seruius: Chrysas the Daughter of Pallas
being married unto Dardanus, brought with her for her dowry this Palladium, and
the Images of the Great gods: for which, Dardanus built a Temple in
Samothracia; all which Images afterward in his Grand-childs time, were
transported from thence into Ilium, an Oracle forewarning them, that as long as
the Palladium was there kept, so long the City should continue vnruined.
Wherefore it was placed in the most secret part of all the temple, and another
Palladium made like that, was set in open sight, and carelessly respected. Now
when Pirrhus had heard of Helenus, a Prophet, one of Priams sons, that Troy
was inexpugnable, as long as the Palladium was safe, and that he had told this
unto the Greek Princes, Ulisses and Diomedes entered the town in disguise, and
getting to the Tower, set upon the keepers, slew them, and took away that
false Palladium. But the other, after the sack of Troy, together with the other
great gods called the Troi^ns Penates, Sycas delivered unto Aeneas, who carried
them all into Italy with him. And so from Alba Louga, or (as Uarro thinks)
from Lauinium, the Palladium was removed unto Rome, and set up in the house of
Uesta, which being by chance set on fire, Lucius Metellus then chief Priest,
with the loss of his eyes, fetched it forth of the midst of the flames. The
Palladium was openly seen at the burning of the Temple of V^sta, in the time
of Heliogabalus, says Herodian. There was another Palladium, which Nicias did
dedicate, in the Tower of Athens. (d) Uirgins veil,] For Pallas ever was a
Virgin. (e) Yet is not that true,] For it was spoken by the liar Sinon: though
it may be held for true that then the Grecians hope was ouer-throwne.
Nevertheless they got the City. (f) But why then,] an argument which the
Logicians call, a minore: how can that preserve the City and the country,
that cannot preserve the own keepers and guard, which is a work of less
moment, and yet in nature nearer concerning it?

Of the Romans fondness in thinking that those Gods could help them which
could not help Troy, in her distress. CHAP. 3.
BEhold unto what Patrones the Romans rejoiced to commit the protection of
their City! O too too pitteous error! Nay, they are angry at us when we
speak thus of their Gods: but never with their teachers and inuentors, but pay
them money for learning them such fooleries: yea and moreover have vouchsafed
their Authors, both stipends from the common treasury and ample honors
besides: and namely in Virgill, who was therefore taught unto their children,
because that they think this great and most renowned Poet being fastened in
their minds, whilst they are young, will never easily be forgotten: according
to that of Horace. (a) Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem, -- Testa
diu. Epist. 2.

The liquors that new vessels first contains,
Behind them leave a taste that long remains.
Even in the forenamed Poet Virgill, is Juno presented as the Trojans foe,
inciting Aeolus the King of winds against them in these words* (b) Gens
inimica mihi Tyrrhenum nauigat aequor
Ilium in Italiam portans, victosque penates. Aene. 1.

The nation that I hate, in peace sails by,
with Troy and Troyes fallen Gods to Italy.
(c) Yea would any wiseman have commended the defense of Rome unto Gods
already proved unable to defend themselves? but suppose (d) Juno spoke this as
a woman in anger, not knowing what she said: what says (the so often surnamed
(e) godly) Aeneas himself? does he not say plainly- (f) Panthus Otriades,
arcis, Phoebique sacerdos,
Sacra manu, Victosque deos parvumque nepotem Aene. 2.

Ipse trahit, cursuque, amens ad limina tendit.
Panthus a Priest of Phoebus and the Tower,
Burdned with his fallen gods, and in his hand
His poor young nephew, flies unto the strand?
Does he not hold these Gods (which he dares call fallen) rather commended unto
him, then he to them: it being said to him- (g) Sacra suosque tibi commendat
Troia penates? Aene. 2.

To thee does Troy commend her Gods, her all?
If Virgill then call them fallen Gods, and conquered Gods, needing man's help
for their escape after their overthrow and fall, how mad are men to think that
there was any wit shown in committing Rome to their keeping, or that it
could not be lost, if first it lost not them? To worship conquered and cast
Gods, as guardians, and defenders, what is it but to put by good deityes, and
adore wicked (i) devils? Were there not more wisdom shown in believing, (not
that Rome had not come to this calamity, unless it had first lost them, but)
that they had long since come to nothing had not Rome been as the especially
careful keeper of them? Who sees not (that will see any thing) what an idle
presumption it is, to build any impossibility of being conquered, upon
defenders that have been conquered? and to think that Rome therefore perished
because it had lost the Gods (k) guardians; when possibly, the only cause why
it perished, was, because it would set the rest upon such soon perishing
guardians? Nor listed the Poets to lie when they sung thus of these subverted
Gods; it was truth that enforced their vigorous spirits to confess it. But of
this, more fitly in another place hereafter: At this time (as I resolved at
first) I will have a little bout (as well as I can) with those ungrateful
persons, whose blasphemous tongues throw those calamities upon Christ, which
are only the guerdons of their own perverseness: But whereas Christ's name
alone was of power to procure them their undeserved safety, that, they do
scorn to acknowledge: and being mad with sacrilegious petulancy, they
practice their foul terms upon his name, which like false wretches they
were before glad to take upon them to save their lives by: and those filthy
tongues which (when they were in Christ's houses) fear kept silent, to remain
there with more safety, where even for his sake they found mercy; those
selfsame, getting forth again, shoot at his deity with all their envenomed
shafts of malice, and curses of hostility.

L. VIVES.
QVo (a) semel] Horace Epist. 2. Commonly cited to prove the power of custom
in young and tender minds: such is this too, Neque amissos Colores Lana refert
madefacta fuco.
Wool did in grain, will not change hew, nor stain.
(b) Gens inimica] Aeneads the 1. Juno was foe to Troy: first, because they
came from Dardanus, son of Jove and Electra, one of his whores. Secondly
because Ganymede, Trois son being taken up to heaven was made Jove's cup bearer
and Hebe, Iunos daughter put by. Thirdly because Antigone, Laomedons daughter,
scorned Iunos beauty, being therefore turned into a storke: Lastly because she
was cast, in the contention of beauty, by the judgment of Paris, Priams son.
(c) Yea? would any wise man] The discourse of these Penates, household or
peculiar Gods, is much more intricate then that of the Palladium. I think they
are called Penates, quasi Penites, because they were their penitissimi, their
most inward and proper Gods. Macrobius holds with them that say they are our
Penates by which we do penitus spirare, by whom we breath, and have our body,
and by whom we possess our souls reason. So the Penates are the keepers or
Gods Guardians of particular estates. The Penates of all mankind were held to
be Pallas, the highest Ether, Jove the middle Ether, and Juno the lowest.
Heaven also has the Penates as Martianus Capella says in his Nuptiae. And on
earth, every City and every house has the peculiar Gods Guardians. For every
house is a little City: or rather every City a great house. And as these have
the Gods, so has the fire also: Dionysius Halicarnasseus writes that Romulus
ordained particular Vesta's for every Court, over all which, his successor Numa
set up a common Vesta, which was the fire of the City, as Cicero says in his
2. De legibus. But what Penates Aeneas brought into Italy, is uncertain. Some
say Neptune and Apollo, who (as we read) built the walls of Troy: Other say
Vesta: For Virgill having said. Sacra suosque, etc.
To thee does Troy commend her Gods, etc. -- Adds presently,
Sic ait, and manibus vittas, Vestamque potentem,
Aeternumque adytis effert penetr alibus ignem.
This said, he fetches forth the eternal fire:
Almighty Vesta, and her pure attire --
Now I think Vesta was none of the Penates, but the fire, added to them, and
therefore the Dictator, and the rest of the Roman Magistrates on the day of
their instalment sacrificed to Vesta and the Gods guardians. Of this Vesta and
these Gods thus says Tully in his twentieth book de natura deoru^. Nam vestae
nomen, etc. The name of Vesta we have from the Greeks: it is that which they
call (...). And her power is over fires and altars: Therefore in the worship of
that Godesse which is the guardian to the most inward and internal things, all
the prayers and sacrifices offered are external: Nor are the Penates far
different from the power aforesaid: being either derived from Penu, which is
whatsoever man eats, or of penitu^s, in that they What Penu is.
are placed within, and therefore called of the Poets, Penetrales, chamber or
closetary gods. Thus far Tully. But here is no time for further dispute of this
matter. Dionysius in his first book says he saw in a certain blind obscure
temple not far from the Forum, two Images of the Trojan gods, like two young
men, sitting, and having Iauelins in their hands (two very old pieces of work)
and upon them inscribed D. Penates: and that in most of the temples were Images
in fashion and habit like these old ones. I make no question these were Castor
and Pollux: for in other places they are called the Romans Penates, which
Prudentius testifies unto Symmachus in these words. -- Gemini quoque fratres
Corrupta de matre nothi Ledeia Proles
Nocturnique equites celsae duo numina Romae, Impendent etc.
-- And the two brothers
The bastard twins of Laeda and the Swan,
Night-riders, as the Patron gods do watch
The walls of stately Rome, etc. --


But these were not the Patron Gods of Troy, for even in the beginning of the
Troyan war, presently upon the rape of Hellen, they died. And therefore she
being ignorant of their death, looks for them amongst the other Greek Nobles
from the walls of Troy. Homer. Iliad. 3. Neither were these two the Dij magni,
the great Gods, for Heaven and earth (as Varro says in his. 3. book de lingua
Latina) are (as the Samothracians principles do teach) the Dii magni, the
great Gods, and those whom I have named by so many names. For Who were the Dij
magni.
neither were the two men's shapes which Aeneas set up before the gates at*
Samothracia, these great Gods, nor as the vulgar opinion holds, were the
Samothracians Gods, Castor and Pollux: Thus far Varro. The Troyan Penates
were those (...), those great gods which sat as protectors of the City and
Latium. Amongst which the Palladium was one, and the Sempiternall fire another,
and hereupon it is that Virgill sings this. -- Vestaque matter
Quae Tuscum Tyberim, and Romana palatia seruas etc.
-- And mother Vesta, she that looks,
To Romes fair buildings, and old Tybers brooks etc.


Though indeed they held it a wicked fact to name the peculiar god Guardian of
the City, nor hold that it is Vesta. Valerius Soranus lost his life for being
so bold as to name that name. But of this too much already, (d) But suppose
Juno spoke] For Seruius and Donate say that Juno called them the fallen gods to
make them the more contemptible, and free Aeolus from suspecting that he went
about to do ought against the gods. (e) Godly] Godly in duty Piety.
unto his gods, his Father, and his Son, all whom he saved from burning. For
Godliness is a dutiful worship unto God, our Country, our Parents, and our
kinsfolks: breefely, a thankfulness unto all to whom we are indebted. (f)
Panthus] This is our of the second of the Aeneads, beginning at this verse.
Ecce autem telis Panthus delapsus. Achiuu^m.
Panthus Otriades etc.
(g) Sacra suosque] These are Hectors words spoken to Aeneas in a dream. (h)
That Rome had not come] An Argument from the event of one thing, to the event
of the like: the sense is corrupted in the latin: it should have been: non
Romam ad istam cladem: that it had run thus: Vt sapientius multo existimaret si
non illud putaret, Romam ad hanc cladem non fuisse venturam, nisi illi
periissent, sed illud potius putaret illos olim etc. (i) deuills] for the old
writers acknowledged some of these Daemones, or Genii to be very evil* and
slothful. For one Genius excelled another in virtue, wisdom, and power.
Augustus his Genius was more cheerful and lofty then was Mark Anthonies, as
that same Aegiptian magician affirmed in Plutarke in Mark Anthonies life. Nor
does our Christian religion deny that there is pre-eminence of some above
others as well amongst the Angels as the Devils, (k) Gods guardians] Just such
guardians as Plato in his Policy says that drunken and luxurious Magistrates
are, that need guardians for themselves.

Of the sanctuary of Juno in Troy which freed not any (that fled into it) from
the Greeks at the Cities sack, where as the Churches of the Apostles saved
all comers from the Barbarians, at the sack of Rome. Caesar's opinion touching
the enemies custom in the sack of Cities. CHAP. 4.
NOr could Troy it self that was (as I said before) (a) the mother of the
Romans progeny, in all her hallowed temples, save any one from the Grecian
force and fury, though they worshipped the same gods: nay did they not in the
very sanctuary of Juno, -- (b) Ipso Iunonis asylo
Custodes lecti (c) Phaenix, and dirus Ulysses
Praedam asseruabant. Huc vndique Troia gaza
Incensis erepta adytis, mensaeque deorum,
Crateresque auro solidi, captiuaque vestis
Congerit etc.
-- To Iunos sanctuary
Comes all the prey, and what they thither carry
Is kept by choice men; the Phenician
And dire Ulysses: thither the whole state
Of Troies wealth swarms, the gods, their temples plate,
There lies the gold in heaps, and robes of worth
Snatched from the flaming coffers -- etc.


Behold, the place dedicated unto so great a goddess was chosen out (not to
serve for a place whence they might lawfully pull prisoners, but) for a prison
wherein to shut up all they took. Now compare this temple, not of any vulgar
god, of the common sort, but of Jupiters sister, and Queen of all the other
gods, unto the Churches built as memorialls of the Apostles. To the first, all
the spoils that were plucked from the gods and flaming temples were carried, not
to be bestowed back to the vanquished, but to be shared amongst the
vanquishers. To the second, both that which was the places own and (d) what
ever was found also els-whereto belong to such places, with all religious honor
and reverence was restored. There, was freedom lost, here saved: there, was
bondage shut in; here, it was shut out: thither were men brought by their
proud foes, for to undergo slavery: hither were men brought by their pitiful
foes, to be secured from slavery. Lastly, the temple of Juno was chosen by the
(e) unconstant Greeks to practice their proud covetousness in, whereas the
Churches of Christ were by (f) the naturally cruel Barbarians, chosen to
exercise their pious humility in. Perhaps the Greeks in that their victory
spared those that fled into the temples of the (g) Common gods, and did not
dare to hurt or captiuate such as escaped thither: But in that, Virgill plays
the Poet indeed, and faignes it. Indeed there he describes the (h) general
custom of most enemies in the sacking of cities, and conquests; which (i)
custom, Caesar himself (as Salust, that noble, true historian records)
forgets not to avouch, in his sentence given upon the conspirators in the
Senate House: that (in these spoils) the Virgins are ravished, the Children
torn from their Parents bosoms, the Matrons made the objects, of all the
victors lust, the temples, and houses all spoiled, all things turned into
burning, and slaughter: and lastly all places stopped full of weapons, carcasses,
blood, and lamentation. If Caesar had not named temples, we might have thought
it the custom of a foe to spare such places as are the habitations of their
gods: but the Senators feared the ruin of their temples, not by an unknown or
stranger enemy, but by (k) Catiline, and his followers, who were Senators and
Citizens of Rome themselves. But these were villains though, and their
countries parricides.

L. VIVES.
MOther (a) of the Romanes] For the Troyans that came with Aeneas into Italy
built Lauinium; the Lauinians, Albalonga, the Albans, Rome. But Saluste says
that the Troyans themselves that wandered about with Aeneas without dwellings,
built Rome at the first. (b) Iunonis] They are Aeneas his words Aenead. 2. (c)
Phaenix] Amintors Son, Phaenix.
and Achilles his Master, one that taught him to say well and do well: Homer.
Illiad. 3. (d) What ever was] There was at this sack of Rome a huge quantity
of gold taken out of the Vaticane, but by Alaricus his command, it was al
restored. Oros. Lib. 7 (e) Unconstant Greekes] It was the Greeks character at
Rome, and therefore they called them Graeculi: and some coppies of Augustines
books have Graeculoru^: here Cicero in his oration for Flaccus says these
words, Wherein we earnestly desire you to remember the rashness of the
multitude, and the truly Greekish l^ity. So means Lucian in his Me^ces
seruientibus, and ^mblichus calls his Grecians, light-witted. (f) even
naturally cruell] This is added for more fullness to the comparison. The
Barbarians are apposed to the Greeks; not all Barbarians, but the naturally
savage and cruel, unto those that would have al humanity to be derived from
them alone. Cicero writes thus to his brother Quintus, ruling then in Asia
minor, which is Greece. Seeing we rule over those amongst whom not only
humanity is in it self, but seems from thence to be derived unto all others,
verily let us seek to ascribe that chiefly unto them from whom we our selves
received it. (g) common gods] For the Greeks and the Troyans worshipped the
some gods. (h) general custome] True, least his speech otherwise might have
made reprehension seem rather peculiar unto the Greeks then unto other
Nations in their conquests of Cities. (i) which custome] Caius Caesar being
then Praetor (and afterward Dictator) having (...) the conspiracy of Catiline,
being asked by the Consul Cicero, what he thought f^ should be done unto the
conspirators; answered, as Saluste sets down; That these (...) which he had
rehearsed, must needs have come to effect, not only in this war, by reason it
was domestical, but that it is wars custom, to produce such bloody effects,
which the vanquished of all sorts are sure to feel. Tully against Verres says
thus: I omit to speak of the deflowring of free Virgins, and the rauishing of
the matrons, etc. which were committed in that sack of the City, not through
hostile hate, nor military looseness, nor custom of war, nor right of
conquest. Thus far Tully. (k) Catiline] The history is at large in Saluste:
and else where I will take occasion to say somewhat of it.

That the Romans themselves never spared the Temples of those Cities which
they conquered. CHAP. 5.
But why should we spend time in discoursing of many nations, that have waged
wars together, and yet never spared the conquered habitations of one another
gods: let us go to the Romans themselves: yes; I say, let us observe the
Romans themselves, whose chief glory it was, Parcere subiectis and debellare
superbos.
To spare the lowly, and pull down the proud.
And (a) being offered injury, rather to pardon then persecute: in all their
spacious conquests of Towns and Cities, in all their progress and
augmentation of their domination, show us unto what one Temple they granted
this privilege, that it should secure him that could fly into it from the
enemies sword? Did they ever do so, and yet their Histories not record it? Is
it like that they that hunted thus for monuments of praise, would endure the
suppression of this so goodly a commendation? Indeed that great Roman (b)
Marcus Marcellus that took that goodly City of (c) Syracusa, is said to have
wept before the ruin, and shed his own (d) tears ere he shed their blood:
(e) having a care to preserve the chastity even of his foes from violation.
For before he gave leave to the invasion, he made an absolute Edict, that no
violence should be offered unto any free person: yet was the City in hostile
manner, subverted utterly, nor find we any where recorded, that this so chaste
and gentle a general ever commanded to spare such as fled for refuge to this
Temple or that: which (had it been otherwise) would not have been omitted,
since neither his compassion, nor his command for the captives chastity, is
left vnrecorded. So is (f) Fabius the conqueror of Tarentum commended for
abstayning from making booty of their Images. For his (g) Secretary asking him
what they should do with the Images of the gods, whereof they had as then taken
a great many: he seasoned his continency with a conceit, for asking what they
were, and being answered that there were many of them great ones, and some of
them armed: O (said he) let us leave the Tarentines their angry gods. Seeing
therefore that the Roman Historiographers neither concealed Marcellus his
weeping, nor Fabius his jesting, neither the chaste pity of the one, nor the
merry abstinencie of the other, with what reason should they omit that, if any
of them had given such privilege to some men in honor of their gods, that they
might save their lives by taking sanctuary in such or such a Temple, where
neither rape nor slaughter should have any power or place?

L. VIVES.
BEing (a) offered injury,] Saluste in his conspiracy of Catiline, speaking of
the ancient Increase by remission.
manners of the Romans, gives them this commendation: That they increased by
pardoning. (b) Marcus Marcellus,] There was two sorts of the Claudii in Rome:
the one noble, arising from that Appius Claudius that upon the expulsion of the
Kings came from Regillum The Claudian family.
unto Rome, and there was chosen Senator, and his family made a Patriot: the
other was Plebeyan, or vulgar, but yet as powerful as the first, and as
worthy, as Suetonius in the life of Tyberius does testify. And of this later,
this man of whom Augustine here writes, was the first that was called
Marcellus, as Plutarch writes out of Possidonius. Now I wonder at this great
error of so great an Historiographer, and one that was most exact in the Roman
affairs: for there were Claudii Marcelli a hundred years before. But he of
whom we speak was (...) times Consul: for the second time he was created
Consul, because the election was corrupt, he discharged it not. Now if one
reckon right, he was five times Consul, first with Cornelius Scipio, in the
war of France, wherein he took (...) spoils from Vir^domarus the French
King: and those were the third and last wars which the Romans had waged with
so many nations and under so many Generals. After his second Consulship he
took S^acusa. In his fourth Consulship (he and Quintus Crispinus being
intrapped by the enemies) this great, valorous and judicious Captain lost his
life; in the eleventh year of the second Carthaginian war, after he had
fought nine and thirty set battles, as Pliny in Syracusa.
his seventh book witnesses. (c) Syracusa,] It is a city in Sicily, now
ancient, and whilom wealthy: three years did this Marcellus besiege it, and at
length took it; beating as much spoil from that conquest (very near) as from
the conquest of Carthage, which at that time was in the greatest height, and
stood as Romes parallel in power and authority. (d) Teares] So faith Li^) lib.
25. Marcellus entering upon the walls, and looking over all the city, standing
at that time (...) and goodly, is said to have shed tears, partly for joy of
this so great a conquest, and partly for pity of the Cities ancient glory: The
ouer-throwe of the Athenian navy, the wrack of two great armies with their
Captains; so many wars and rich Kings, and all that before him to be in a
moment on fire, came all into his mind at once. This is also in Ualerius
Maximus. de humanitate. (e) Nay he had a care,] Liuie, as before. Marcellus by
a general consent of the Captains, forbad the soldiers to violate any free
body, leaving them all the (...) ^or spoil: which edict contained the
assurance of the said free women from death and all other violence, as well a^
Fabius.
that of their chastities. (f) Fabius the conqueror of Tarentum,] In the second
Carthaginian war, Tarentum, a famous city in Calabria fell from the Romans
unto Han^bal, but (...) Salinator the Captain of the Roman garrison, retired
into the tower. This City Fab^ Maximus recovered, and gave his soldiors the
spoil of it. This is that Fabius that in the said second Punicke war, by his
sole wisdom put life into all the Romans dying hopes, and by his cunning
protraction blunted the fury of Hannibal. And of him Enius said truly. Vnus
homo nobis cunctando restituit rem,
One man's wise, set delay, restored us all.
I neither can nor list now to stand upon all the errors of the first
Commentator of this book: it were too tedious, and too troublesome. But
because in this place he goes astray with many others, who indeed in other
men's judgments are learned in such matters, but in their own judgments most
learned, (nor, to say truth, are they unlearned,) I could not choose but give
the reader this admonition, that this Fabius is not he that was called
Maximus, but his Grandfather was called so: because he being Censor with P.
Decius, divided the whole commonty of Rome into four Tribes, which he named
Vrbanae: though I deny not that this Fabius of whom Augustine speaks,
deserved this name, but the world as then did not give it him. (g) Secretary]
Hereof read Liuie in his 27. Book.

That the cruel effects following the losses of war, did but follow the
custom of war: and wherein they were moderated, it was through the power of
the name of Jesus Christ. CHAP. 6.
THerefore all the spoil, murder, burning, violence and affliction, that in
this fresh call amity fell upon Rome, were nothing but the ordinary effects
following the (a) custom of war. But that which was so unaccustomed, that
the savage nature of the Barbarians should put on a new shape and appear so
merciful, that it would make choice of great and spacious Churches, to fill
with such as it meant to show pity on, from which none should be haled to
slaughter or slavery, in which none should be hurt, to which many by their
courteous foes should be conducted, and out of which none should be lead into
bondage; This is due to the name of Christ, this is due to the Christian
profession; he that sees not this is blind, he that sees it and praises it
not is thanklesse, he that hinders him that praises it, is mad. God forbid
that any man of sense should attribute this unto the Barbarians brutishness:
It was God that struck a terror into their truculent and bloody spirits, it was
he that bridled them, it was he that so wonderously restrained them, that had
so long before foretold this by his Prophet. (b) I will visit their offenses
with the rod, and their sin with scourges: yet will I not utterly take my
mercy from them. Psalm. 89. 32. 33.


L. VIVES.
Custom (a) of war,] Quintilian records the accidents that follow the
sacking of Cities in his eight book, thus: The flames were spread through the
temples, a terrible cracking A description of the sack of a city.
of falling houses was heard: and one confused sound of a thousand several
clamours. Some fled they knew not whether: some stuck fast in their last
embraces of their friends, the children and the women howled, and the old men
(unluckily spared until that fatal day): then followed the tearing away of
all the goods out of house and temple, and the talk of those that had carried
away one burden and ran for another, and the poor prisoners were driven in
chains before their takers: and the mother endeavoring to carry her silly
infant with her, and where the most gain was, there went the victors together
by the ears. Now these things came thus to pass, because the soldiers (as they
are a most proud and insolent kind of men, without all mean and modesty)
have no power to temper their avarice, lust or fury in their victory: and
again (because taking the town by force) if they should not do thus for
terror to the enemy, they might justly fear to suffer the like of the enemy.
(b) I will visit] It is spoken of the sons of David, Psalm. 89. If they be not
good, etc.

Of the commodities, and discomodities commonly communicated both to good and
ill. CHAP. 7.
YEa but (will (a) some say) Why does God suffer his mercy to be extended unto
the graceless and thankelesse? Oh! why should we judge, but because it is his
work that makes the sun to shine daily both on good and Romans 5. 45.
bad, and the rain to fall both on the just and unjust? For what though some by
meditating upon this, take occasion to reform their enormities with
repentance? and other some (as the Apostle says) despising the riches of Gods
goodness, and long suffering, in their hardness of heart and impenitency (b) do
lay up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of
Gods just judgment, Romans 2. 5.
who will (c) reward each man according to his works? Nevertheless Gods
patience still inuiteth the wicked unto repentance as this scourge does
instruct the good unto patience. The mercy of God imbraceth the good with love,
as his severity does correct the bad with pains. For it seemed good to the
almighty providence to prepare such goods, in the world to come, as the just
only should enjoy, and not the unjust: and such evils, as the wicked only
should feel, and not the godly. But as for these temporal goods, of this
world, he has left them to the common use both of good and badde: that the
goods of this world should not be too much desired, because even the wicked do
also partake them: and that the evils of this world should not be too cowardly
avoided, wherewith the good are sometimes affected. But there is great
difference in the (d) use both of that estate in this world, which is called
prosperous, and that which is (e) called adverse. For neither do these
temporal goods extol a good man, nor do the evil deiect him. But the evil
man must needs be subject to the punishment of this earthly vnhappin^sse,
because he is first corrupted by this earthly happiness: Yet in the
distributing of these temporal blessings God shows his provident operation.
For if all sin were presently punished: there should be nothing to do at the
last judgment: and again if no sin were here openly punished, the divine
providence would not be believed: And so in prosperity, if God should not give
competency of worldly and apparent blessings to some that ask them, we would
say he has nothing to do with them: and should he give them to all that ask
them, we should think he were not to be served but for them: and so his
service should not make us godly, but rather greedy. This being thus, what ever
affliction good men and badde do suffer together in this life, it does not
prove the persons vndistinct, because so they both do jointly endure like
pains: for as in one fire, gold shines and chafe smoaketh, and as under one
(f) f^yle the straw is bruised, and the ear cleansed; nor is the lees and the
oil confused because they are both pressed in one press, so likewise one and
the same violence of affliction, proves, purifieth, and (g) melts the good,
and conde^eth, wastes and casts out the badde. And thus in one and the same
distress do the wicked offend God by detestation and blasphemy, and the good
do glorify him by praise and prayer. So great is the difference wherein we
ponder not what, but how a man suffers his affects. For one and the same motion
makes the mud smell filthily, and the unguent swell most fragrantly.

L. VIVES.
SOme (a) say] because the aforesaid words were spoken of the sons of David
(that is, Thesaur^ what it is.
the godly) How should the mercy of God be extended unto the wicked? (b) Do lay
vp] or heap together. For Thesaurus, is a laying together of evil things as
well as good: and it is ordinary with the Greeks to say (...), the treasure of
Ills, and Plautus has Thesaurus stupri, the treasure of whoredom. (c)
Willreward] * Human goods what they are.
commonly it is read, Does reward: Augustine has it in better forme^ for the
Apostle speaks of the world to come: and the greek is (...), Reddet will
reward. (d) Use both of that] Terence in his Heautontimoreumenos says: such
things as are called humane goods, namely our parents, country, lineage,
friends and wealth: all these are but as his mind is that possesses them: to
him that can use them well, they are good; to him that uses them otherwise
then well, they are evil. This Terence has out of Plato in diverse places.
((...)) Is called aduerse] N^mely of the vulgar and such as are ignorant of the
true natures of things. (f) Flaile] Virgill in the first of his Georgikes,
reckons the Flaile amongst the instruments of husbandry. Plinye in his
eighteenth What Tribula is.
book says: The harvest corn is thrashed forth upon the floor sometime with
flayles, sometime with the feet of horses, and sometime with staves. So that
this same Tribulum, is an instrument wherewith the corn being ripe is
thrashed forth on the floor: (our fittest english is a flaile.) How this is
done, Varro teaches in his first book De re rustica. (g) Melts the good]
Makes them liquid: it is a simily taken from gold: to exclude further
disputation hereof; the scripture says the good are melted with charity: My
soul melted as my beloved spoke, says the Canticles: but if a man will follow
this theme he shall never find an end. The fittest teacher in this kind is
the holy scripture.

Of the causes of such corrections as fall both upon the good and bad together.
CHAP. 8.
But tell me now in all this desolation what one thing did the Christians
endure, which due and faithful consideration, might not turn unto their
edifica^tion? For first they might with fear observe to what a mass iniquity
was increased, at which the just God being displeased had sent these
afflictions upon the world and that though they themselves were far from the
society of the wicked, yet should they not hold themselves so purely separate
from all faults, that they should think themselves too good to suffer a
temporal correction for diverse faults that might be found in their
conuersations: for to omit this, that there is no man how ever laudable in his
conversation, that in some things (a) yields not unto the concupiscence of the
flesh; and that though he decline not unto the gulf of reprobate offense and
habitation of all brutish filthiness, yet slips now and then into some
enormities, and those either seldom, or so much more ordinary as then they are
less momentary: To omit all this, how hard a thing is it to find one, that
makes a true use of their fellowship, for whose horrible pride, luxury,
avarice, bestiall iniquity and irreligiousnesse, the Lord (as his (b) Prophets
have threatened) does lay his heavy hand upon the whole world? How few do we
find that live with them, as good men ought to live with them. For either we
keep aloof, and forbear to give them due instructions, admonitions or
reprehensions, or else we hold their reformation too great a labor: either
we are afraid to offend them, or else we eschew their hate for our own
greater temporal preferment, and fear their opposition either in those things
which our greediness longs to enjoy, or in those which our weakness is
afraid to forgo: so that though the lives of the wicked be still disliked of
the good, and that thereby the one do avoid that damnation which in the world
to come is the assured inheritance of the other, yet because they wink at
their damnable exorbitances, by reason they fear by them to loose their own
vain temporalities, justly do they partake with them in the punishments
temporal though they shall not do so in the eternal; Justly do they in these
divine corrections, taste the bitterness of these transitory afflictions with
them, to whom when they deserved those afflictions, they through the love of
this life, forbear to show themselves better: indeed he that forbeares to
reprehend ill courses in some that follow them, because he will take a more fit
time, or because he doubts his reprehention may rather tend to their ruin then
their reformation, or because he thinks that others that are weak, may by
this correction be offended in their Godly endeauours or diuerted from the true
faith: In this case forbearance arises not from occasion of greediness, but
from the counsel of charity, (c) But their's is the fault indeed who live a
life quite contrary, wholly abhorring the courses of the wicked, yet will
ouerpasse to tax the others sins whereof they ought to be most severe
reprehenders and correctors, because they fear to offend them, and so be hurt
in their possession of those things whose use is lawful both unto good and
bad, affecting temporalities in this kind far more greedily then is fit for
such as are but pilgrims in this world, and such as expect (d) the hope of a
celestial inheritance? for it is not only those of the weaker sort that live
in marriage, having (or seeking to have) children, and keeping houses and
families: whom the Apostle in the Church does instruct how to live, the wives
with their husbands and the husbands with their wives: children with their
parents and the parents with their children: the servants with their masters
and the masters with their servants: it is not these alone that get together
these worldly goods with industry, and loose them with sorrow, and because of
which they dare not offend such men as in their filthy and contaminate lives do
extremely displease them: but it is also those of the highter sort, such as
are no way chayned in marriage, such as are content with poor fare and mean
attire. Many of these through too much love of their good name and safety
through their fear of the deceits and violence of the wicked; through frailty
and weakness, forbear to reprove the wicked when they have offended. And
although they do not fear them so far, as to be drawn to actual imitation
of these their vicious demeanours; yet this which they will not act with them,
they will not reprehend in them (though herein they might reform some of them
by this reprehension:) by reason that (in case they did not reform them) their
own fame and their safety might come in danger of destruction. Now herein
they do at no hand consider how they are bound to see that their fame and
safety be necessarily employed in the instruction of others, but they do
nothing but poyse it in their own infirmity, which loves to be stroaked with
a smooth tongue, and delights in the (e) day of man: fearing the censure of
the vulgar, and the torture and destruction of body: that is, they forbear
this duty, not through any effect of charity, but merely through the power
of avarice and greedy affection. Wherefore I hold this a great cause, why the
good livers do partake with the bad in their afflictions, when it is Gods
pleasure to correct the corruption of manners with the punishment of temporal
calamities. For they both endure one scourge, not because they are both guilty
of one disordered life, but because they both do too much affect this
transitory life; not in like measure, but yet both together: which the good
man should contemn, that the other by them being corrected and amended, might
attain the life eternal: who if they would not join with them in this
endeavor of attaining beatitude, they should be (f) borne with all and loved
as our enemies are to be loved in Christianity: we being uncertain whilst
they live here, whether ever their heart shall be turned unto better or no,
which to do, the good men have (not the like, but) far greater reason,
because unto them (g) the Prophet says: He is taken away for his iniquity,
but his blood will I require at the watch-mans hand, (h) for unto Ezech. 33.
this end were watchmen, that is rulers over the people placed in the
churches, that they should (i) not spare to reprehend enormities. Nor yet is
any other man altogether free from this guilt, whatsoever he be, ruler or not
ruler, who in that daily commerce and conversation, wherein humane necessity
confines him, observes any thing blame worthy, and to reprehend it, seeking to
avoid the others displeasure, being drawn hereunto by these vanities which
he does not use as he should, but affects much more then he should. Again,
there is another reason why the righteous should endure these temporal
inflictions, and was cause of holy (k) Jobs sufferance, namely that hereby the
soul may be proved and fully known whether it has so much godly virtue as
to love God freely, and for himself alone. These reasons being well
considered, tell me whether any thing be casual unto the good, that tends
not to their good: unless we shall hold that the Apostle talked idely when he
said: (l) We know all things work together for the best unto them that love
God?

L. VIVES.
IN something (a) yeelds] The lust of the flesh is so inwardly inherent in our
bodies, and that affect is so inborne in us by nature (that great workman of
all things living) who has so subtly infused it into our breasts, that even
when our mind is quiet upon another object we do propagate our offspring in
the like affection: so that we can by no means have a thought of the
performing of this desire, without being stung within with a certain secret
delight: which many do make a sin, but too too venial. (b) by his Prophets]
and that very often, as is plain in Esaias, and Jeremy. (c) But this is the
fault] Cicero in his offices says: There be some that although that which they
think be very good, yet for fear of envy dare not speak it. (d) The hope] As
the guide of their pilgrimage: (e) the day of man] 1. Cor. 4. I pass little to
be judged of you or of the day of man: that is, the judgment of man, wherein
each man is condemned or approved of men: whose contrary is the day of the
Lord, which searches and censureth the secrets of all hearts: (f) borne with
and loued] The wicked are not only to be endured, but even to be loved also,
God commanding us to love even our enemies. Mat. 5. (g) The Prophet] Ezechiel,
Chap. 33. But if the watchman see the sword come and blow not the trumpet, and
the people be not warned: and the sword come and take away any person from
among them, he is taken away for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at
the watch-mans hands. (h) For unto this end were watch-men] (...) in Greek is
Speculator in latin, a watchman, a discryer, an obseruer, and a Governor,
Cicero in his seventh book of his Epistles to Atticus says thus: Pompey
would have me to be the (...) the Sentinel of Campania and all the
sea-coastes, and one to whom the whole sum of the business should have
special relation. Andromache in Homer calls Hector Troiae (...), the watchman
or guardian of Troy. The Athenians called their Intelligencers, and such as
they sent out to observe the practices of their tributary cities Episcopos,
Overseers, and (...), watchmen; the Lacedaemonians called them (...),
Moderatores, Governors. Archadius the Lawyer calls them Episcopos that had
charge of the provision for vittailes. Some think the preposition (...) to be
here a Pleonasme (whereof Eustathius one of Homers interpreters is one) and
that (...) and (...) is all one. 1. Not spare to reprehend] So says saint Paul
unto Titus: And so do our Bishops even in these times, whom with tears we
behold haled unto martyrdom because they tell the truth in too bitter terms,
and persecute vice through all, not respecting a whit their revenues nor
dignities. Christ Jesus glorify them (k) Iobs] The history all men know; and
Hierome upon the same says: These things fell upon Job, that he might show
outwardly unto men the love that he held inwardly unto God. (l) UUee know] Romans
8. 28. Adverse and prosperous fortune ar both assistants in the good man's
salvation: and there is nothing befalls them but he can convert it unto the
augmentation of his virtues.

That the Saints in their loss of things temporal loose not any thing at all.
CHAP. 9.
THey lost all that they had: what? their faith? their zeal? their goods of
the (a) inward man; which inritcheth the soul before God? These are a
Christians riches, whereof the Apostle being possessed said: Godliness is a
great gain if man be content with what he has: for we brought nothing into
this 1. Tim. 6. 6. 7. 8.
world, nor can we carry any thing out: therefore when we have food and
raiment, let us content our-selues therewith, for they that will be rich fall
into temptation and snares, and into many foolish and hurtful desires, which
drown men in perdition and destruction, for (b) coueteousnesse of money is the
root of all evil, which while some lusting after, have erred from the faith
and cast themselves in many (c) sorrows. Such therefore as lost their goods
in that destruction, if they held them as the aforesaid Apostle (d) (poor
without, but rich within) taught them: that is, if they used the world so as if
they used it not at all, then might they truly say with him that was so sore
assalted and yet never ouerthrown (e) Nak^d came I out of my mothers womb, and
naked shall I return thither again. The Lord has Job 1. 21.
given it, and the Lord has taken it away, as it has pleased the Lord so
comes it to pass: blessed be the name of the Lord. He held his Lords will,
(as a good servant) for great possessions, and by attending that, enritched his
spirit: nor grieved he at all at the loss of that in his life time, which
death perforce would make him leave shortly after. But those far weaker
souls, though they prefer not these worldly things before Christ, yet stick
unto them with a certain exorbitant affection, they must needs feel such
pain in the loosing of them, as their offense deserved in loving of them: and
endure the sorrows in the same measure that they cast themselves into
sorrows: As I said before out of the Apostle. For it was meet for them to
taste a little of the discipline of experience, seeing thy had so long
neglected instruction by words: for the Apostle having said: They that will be
rich fall into temptations; etc. Herein does he reprehend the desire after
riches only, not the use of them: teaching likewise 1. Tim. 6. 9
(f) elsewhere: Charge them that are rich in this world that they be not high
minded, 16. verse. 17 18. and 19.
and that they trust not in their uncertain wealth, but in the living God, who
gives us plentifully all things to enjoy: That they do good and be (g) rich
in good works, ready to distribute and communicate: laying up in store for
themselves a good foundation against the time to come, that they may obtain
the true life. They that did thus with their riches by easing small burdens,
^eaped great gains; taking more joy in that part which by their free
distributio^ unto others they had (h) kept more safely, then they felt sorrow
for that which by their care to preserve to themselves they lost so easily. For
it was likely that that perish hear on earth which they had no mind to
remove into a more secure custody. For they that follow their Lords
Counsel, when he says unto them, Lay not up treasures for your selves upon
the earth where the moth and rust corrupt, or where thieves dig through and
steal, but lay up treasures for your selves in Heaven, Math. 6, 19 20. 21.
where neither rust nor moth corrupt: nor thieves dig through and steal, for
where your treasure is, there will your heart be also: these (I say) in the
time of tribulation were sure to find how well they were advised in following
that Master of al truth, and that diligent and dreadles keeper of all good
treasure: For seeing there were many that reioiced because they had hidden
their treasure in a place which the foe by chance ouer-passed and found not:
how much more certain and secure might their comfort be, that by their Gods
instruction had retired thither with their substance, whether they were sure
the Paulinus bishop of Nola.
foe could not come? And therefore one (i) Paulinus being Bishop of Nola, and
having refused infinite riches for voluntary poverty (and yet was he rich
in holiness) when the Barbarians sacked Nola, and held him prisoner, thus
prayed he in his heart (as he told us afterward) Lord let me not be
troubled for gold nor silver: for where all my treasures are, thou know:
Even there had he laid up all his, where he had advised him to lay it who
foretold these miseries to fall upon the world. And so others, in that they
obeyed GODS instructions for the choice and preservation of the true treasure
indeed, had even their worldly treasures preserved from the fury of the
Barbarians: But others paid for their disobedience, and because their precedent
wisdom could not do it, their sub-sequent experience taught them how to
dispose of such temporal trash. Some Christians by their enemies were put
unto torture, to make them discover where their goods lay: but that good
whereby (k) themselves were good, they could neither loose, nor discover. But
if they had rather have endured torture then discover their (l) Mammon of
iniquity, then were they far from good. But those that suffered so much for
gold, were to be instructed what should be endured for Christ: that they might
rather learn to love him that enricheth his Martyrs with eternal felicity,
then gold and silver for which it is miserable to endure any torment, whether
it be concealed by lying, or discovered by telling the truth. For no man that
ever confessed Christ could lose him amongst all the torments: whereas no man
could ever save his gold but by denying it. Wherefore even those very torments
are more profitable, in that they teach a man to love an incoruptible good,
then those goods in that they procure their owners torture through the blind
love they bear unto them, But some that had no such goods, and yet were
thought to have them, were tortured also. Why? perhaps they had a desire to
them though they had them not, and were poor against their wills, not of their
own election: And then though their possessions did not justly deserve those
afflictions, yet their affections did. But if their minds flew a loftyer
pitch, beholding both the possession and the affection of riches with an eye
of scorn, I make a doubt whether any such were ever tormented in this kind,
or being so innocent, incurred any such imputation. But if they did, truly,
they in these their tortures, confessing their sanctified poverty, confessed
CHRIST himself* And therefore though the extorted confession of such holy
poverty could not deserve to be believed of the enemy, yet should he not be
put to this pain without an heavenly reward for his pains.

L. VIVES.
INward (a) man] The mind: being often so used in Paul's Epistles. (b)
Coueteousnesse of mony] The vulgar translation has Cupiditas, but Augustine
has auaritia, a better word: for the Greek is (...), love of money. (c) Many
sorrowes] Thus far Paul. (d) Poor without] He means the Apostle Paul. (e)
Naked] The words of Job, comforting himself in the loss of his goods and
children. (f) elsewhere] namely in the same chapter, Verse. 17. (g) Rich in
good workes] In these things they shall be rich indeed. (h) Kept more safely]
Laying up the treasure of eternity for themselves in heaven, in that they have
given freely unto the poor and needy. Which is declared by that which
follows in the same chapter of Matthew, being Christ's own works, (i) And
therefore one Paulinus] The Goths having sacked Rome, and ouer-running all
Latium, the (...), Campania, Calabria, Salentinum, Apulia, or Aprutium;
spoiling and wasting al as they went, like a general deluge, their fury
extended as far as Consentia (a City in Calabria called now Cosenza) and forty
years after that Genserike with the Moors and Vandals brake out again, took
Rome, filling all Campania with ruin, raized the city of Nola. Of which
City at that time, Paulinus was Bishop (as Paulus Diaconus writes) a most
holy and (as Saint Gregory says) an eloquent man, exceedingly read in human
learning, and not altogether void of the spirit of prophecy, who having spent
all he had in redeeming Christian captives, and seeing a widow bewayling her
captive son, and pouring forth her pious lamentations mixed with tears, his
piety so urged him that he could not rest until he had crossed over into
Affricke with the widow, where her son was prisoner: And there by exchange of
himself for her son, redeemed him, and gave him free unto his mother. Now
his sanctity, growing admirable in the eyes of the Barbarians, he had the
freedom of all his citizens given him, and so was sent back to his country.
Thereof read at large in Gregory's third book of Dialogues. But I think
Augustine speaks not of this later invasion (for then was Paulinus departed
this life) but of the first irruption of the Goths (k) Whereby themselves
were good] Namely, their virtue which no man can deprive them off: and that
only is the good which makes the possessors good. For if riches be good (as
Tully says in his Paradoxes) why do they not make them good that enjoy them?
(l) Mammon] Mammon (after Hierome) is a Syriake word: signifying that unto them
that (...) does unto the Greeks, namely Riches: Augustine elswere says that
Mammon in the Punike language is gain, and that the Affrican and Hebrew
tongues do accord in the signification Mammon.
of many words. Sermon. de verb. Dom. and quaest. Euang.

Of the end of this transitory life whether it be long or short. CHAP. 10.
THe extremity of famine they say destroyed many Christians in these The
benefit of famine*
invasions. Well even of this also the faithful by enduring it patiently, have
made good use. For such as the famine made an end off, it deliueuered from the
evils of this life, as well as any other bodily disease could do: such as it
ended not, it taught them a sparing diet, and ableness to fast. Yea, but many
Christians were destroyed by the foulest variety that might be, falling by so
many sorts of death: why this is not to be disliked off, since it is common
to all that ever have been borne. This I know that no man is dead that should
not at leng^h have died. For the lives ending, makes the long life and the
short all one* neither is their one better and another worse, nor one longer,
then another shorter, which is not in this end, made equal. And what skils it
what kind of death do dispatch our life, when he that dies cannot be forced
to die again? And seeing that every mortal man, in the daily casualties of
this life is threatened continually with inumerable sorts of death, as long as
he is uncertain which of them he shall taste; tell me whether it were better
to (a) suffer but one in dying once for ever, or still to live in continual
fear, then al those extremes of death? I know how unworthy a choice it were
to choose rather to live under the awe of so many deaths, then by once dying
to be freed from all their fear for ever. But it is one thing when the weak
sensitive flesh does fear it, and another when the purified reason of the
soul ouer-comes it. A bad death never follows a good life: for there is
nothing that makes death bad but that estate which follows death. Therefore
let not their care that needs must dye be employed upon the manner of their
death, but upon the estate that they are eternally to inherit after death.
Wherefore seeing that all Christians know that the death of the religious (b)
beggar amongst the dogs licking his sores, was better the^ the death of the
wicked rich man in all his (c) silks and purples, what power has the horror
of any kind of death to affright their souls that have led a virtuous life?

L. VIVES.
SVffer but one] So said Caesar; that he had rather suffer one death at once
then fear it continually. (b) Religious begger] the story is at large in Saint
Luke, the 16. Chapter beginning at the 19. verse of Lazarus and the rich
glutton, etc. (c) Silks.] Byssus, is a kind of most delicate line, as Pliny
says in his natural history. lib. 19.

Of buryall of the dead: that it is not prejudicial to the state of a
Christian soul to be forbidden it. CHAP 11.
OH, but in this great slaughter the dead could not be buried: Tush our holy
faith regards not that, holding fast the promise: It is not so frail as to
think that the ravenous beasts can deprive the body of any part to be wanting
in the resurrection, where not a hair of the head shall be missing. Nor would
the scripture have said: Fear not them that kill the body but are not able to
kill the soul: if that which the foe could do unto our dead bodies in this
Mat, 10. 28.
world should any way prejudice our perfection in the world to come: Unless
any man will be so absurd as to contend that they that can kill the body are not
to be feared before death least they should kill it, but after death least
having killed it they should not permit it burial. Is it false then which
Christ says, Those that kill the body, after they can do no more, and that
they have power to do so much hurt unto the dead carcass? God forbid that
should be false which is spoken by the truth it self: Therefore it is said
they do something in killing, because then they afflict the bodyly sense for a
while: but afterward they can afflict it no more, because there is no sense in
a dead body. So then suppose that many of the Christians bodies never came in
the earth: what of that, no man has taken any of them both from earth and
heaven, have they? No: And both these does his glorious presence replenish that
knows how to restore every Atome of his work in the created. The Psalmist
indeed complayneth thus: The dead (a) bodies of thy servants have they given to
be meat unto the fowls of the air: and the flesh of thy Saints unto the
beasts of the earth: Their Psalm, 79. 2.
blood have they shed like waters round about Jerusalem, and there was none
to bury them. But this is spoken to intimate their villainy that did it, rather
then their misery that suffered it. For though that unto the eyes of man these
acts seem bloody and tyranous, yet, precious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of his Saints. And therefore all these ceremonies concerning the dead,
the care of the burial, the fashions of the Sepulchers, and the pompes of the
funerals, are rather solaces to the living, then furtherances to the dead. (b)
For if a goodly and rich tomb be any help to the wicked man being dead,
then is the poor and mean one a hindrance unto the godly man in like case.
The family of that rich (c) gorgeous glutton, prepared him a sumptuous
funeral unto the eyes of men: but one far more sumptuous did the ministering
Angels prepare for the poor vlcered beggar, in the sight of God: They bore him
Luc. 16. 22.
not into any Sepulcher of Marble, but placed him in the bosom of Abraham.
This do they (d) scoff at, against whom we are to defend the city of God.
And yet even (e) their own Philosophers have contemned the respect of burial:
and oftentimes (f) whole armies, fighting and falling for their earthly
country, went stoutly to these slaughters, without ever taking thought where
to be laid, in what Marble tomb, or in what beasts belly. And the (g) Poets
were allowed to speak their pleasures of this theme, with applause of the
vulgar, as one does thus: Caelo tegitur qui non habet vrnam.
Who wants a grave, Heaven serves for his tomb.


What little reason then have these miscreants, to insult over the Christians,
that lie unburied, unto whom, a new restitution of their whole bodies is
promised, to be restored them (h) in a moment, not only out of the earth
alone, 1. Cor. 15. 52.
but even out of all the most secret Angles of all the other elements, wherein
any body is or can possibly be included.

L. VIVES.
DEad (a) carcasses, (...), morticinia, the dead flesh. (b) For if a goodly.]
Et eternos animam collegit in orbs,
Non illuc auro positi, nec thure sepulti
Perueniunt, -- Lucan. lib. 9.
The eternal spheres his glorious spirit do hold, Sepulchers.

To which come few that lie embalmd in gold, etc.
(c) Gorgious] of whom in the Chapter before. (d) Scoff at] The Romans had
great care over their burials: whence arose many obseruances concerning the
religious performance thereof: and it was indeed a penalty of the law: he that
does this or that, let him be cast forth unburied: and so in the declamations:
he that forsakes his parents in their necessities, let him be cast forth
unburied: he that does not declare the causes of their death before the
Senate, let him be cast forth unburied; An homicide, cast him out unburied.
And so speaks Cicero to the peoples humor for Milo, when he affirms Clodius
his carcass to be therein the more wretched, because it wanted the solemn
rites and honors of burial. (e) Philosophers] those of the Heathen: as
Diogenes the Cynike for one, that bad his dead body should be cast unto the
dogs and fowls of the air: and being answered by his friends, that they would
rent and tear it: set a staff by me then, said he, and I will beat them away
with it: tush you your self shall be senseless quoth they: nay then quoth he
what need I fear their tearing of me? This also did Menippus, and almost all
the Cyniks. Cicero in his Quaestiones Tusculanae records this answer of
Theodorus of Cyrene unto Lysmachus that threatened him the cross: let thy
courtiers fear that (quoth he) but as for me I care not whether I ^ot on the
air or in the earth: and so also says Socrates in Plato's dialogue called
Phaedo. (f) Whole armies] meaning perhaps those legions which Cato the elder
speak of in his Origines, that would go thither with cheerfulness, from
whence they knew they should never return. Nay, it was no custom before
Hercules his time to bury the dead that fell in war^ for Aelian in his
Historia varia does affirm Hercules the first inuenter of that custom. (g)
Poets to speake] with the peoples approbation. Lucan in his 7. book of the
Pharsalian war, speaking of the dead that Caesar forbad should be burned, or
buried, after he had brought forth (as his custom is) many worthy and grave
sentences concerning this matter, at length he speaks thus unto Caesar: Nil
agis hac ira, tabesne Cadauera soluat,
An rogus, hand refert: placido natura receptat
Cuncta sinu:
In this thy wrath is worthless: all is one,
Whether by fire or putrefaction
Their carcasses dissolve: kind nature still
Takes all into her bosom.
And a little after: -- Capit omnia tellus
Quae genuit; caelo tegitur qui non habet vrnam
Earths offspring still returns unto earths womb,
Who wants a grave, heaven serves for his tomb.
And so says the Declamer in Seneca: Nature gives every man a grave; to the
shipwrackt the water wherein he is lost: the bodies of the crucified drop
from their crosses unto their graves: those that are burned quick their very
punishment entombes them. And Virgill, who appoints a place of punishment in
hell for the unburied, yet in Anchises his words, shows how small the loss of
a grave is. That verse of Maecenas (Nec tumulum curo, sepelit natura relictos:
I weigh no tomb: nature entombes the meanest:)
Is highly commended of antiquity. The Urna, was a vessel wherein the
relics and ashes of the burned body was kept. (h) In a moment,] 1. Corinthians.
15. 52.

The reasons why we should bury the bodies of the Saints. CHAP. 12.
NOtwithstanding the bodies of the dead are not to be contemned and cast away,
chiefly of the righteous and faithful, which the holy ghost used as organs
and instruments unto all good works. For if the garment or ring of ones father
be so much the more esteemed of his posterity, by how much they held him
dearer in their affection, then is not our bodies to be despised, being we
wear them more near unto our selves then any attire whatsoever. For this is
no part of external (a) ornament or assistance unto man, but of his express
nature. And therefore the funerals of the righteous in the times of old were
performed with a zealous care, their burials celebrated, and their monuments
provided, and they themselves in their life time would lay charges upon their
children concerning the burying or translating of their bodies. (b) Tobye in
burying of the dead was acceptable unto God, as the Angel testifies. T^. 2.
And the Lord himself being to arise again on the third day, commended the
good work of that (c) religious woman, who powered the precious Math. 26. Job.
19. 42
ointment upon his head and body, and did it to bury him. And the (d) Gospel
has crowned them with eternal praise that took down his body from the
cross, and gave it honest and honorable burial. But yet these authorities
prove not any sense to be in the dead carcases themselves, but signify that
the providence of God extends even unto the very bodies of the dead (for he
is pleased with such good deeds) and do buildvp the belief of the
resurrection. Where by the way we may learn this profitable lesson, how great
the reward of almsdeeds done unto the living, may be (e) since this duty and
favor shown but unto the dead is not forgotten of God. There are other
prophetical places of the holy (f) Patriarchs concerning the intombing or the
translation of their own bodies. But this is no place to handle them in, Genesis
47. etc.
and of this we have already spoken sufficiently: but if the necessaries of
man's life, as meat and clothing, though they be wanting in great extremity,
yet cannot subvert the good man's patience, nor draw him from goodness: how
much less power shall those things have which are omitted in the burying of
the dead, to afflict the souls that are already at quiet in the secret
receptacles of the righteous? And therefore, when as in that great overthrow of
Rome, and of other Cities, the bodies of the Christians wanted these rights: it
was neitheir fault in the living, that could not perform them, nor hurt to the
dead, that could not feel them.

L. VIVES.
(a) ORnament] The Platonists held only the soul to be man, and the body to
be but a case or cover unto it, or rather a prison. But Augustine holds the
surer opinion, that the body is a part of the man. (b) Toby] Toby the 2. and
12. (c) The good work of that religious] meaning Mary Magdalen. Math. 26. 10.
and 12. (d) Gospell] John the 19. 38. etc. meant of Joseph of Arimathea and
Nicodemus. (e) Since this] a draught of cold water given in the name of the
Lord shall not want reward. Math. 10. 42. (f) Patriarches] Jacob at his death
charged his son Joseph to carry his body unto the Sepulcher of his elders,
and not to leave it in Aegipt, Genes. 47. 29. 30. And Joseph himself commanded
his brethren that they should remember, and tell their posterity that when
they went away into the land of promise, they should carry his bones thither
with them. Genesis the last Chapter and 25. verse.

Of the captivity of the Saints, and that therein they never wanted spiritual
comfort. CHAP. 13.
I, But many Christians (say they) were lead into captivity: This indeed had
been a lamentable case, if they had been lead unto some place where they could
not possibly have found their God. But for comforts in captivity, the
scriptures have store: The (a) three children were in bondage: so was Daniel,
so were (b) others of the Prophets: but they never wanted God, their comforter.
Dan. 1.
No more did he here abandon his faithful; being under the command of
barbarous men, who forsook not his (c) Prophet being even in the belly of a
beast. This now they with whom we are to deal, had rather scorn, then
believe, yet of that fable in their own books they are fully persuaded,
namely that that same excellent harper (d) Arion of Methymna, being cast over
board, was taken up on a Dolphins back, and so borne safe to land. Is our
history of Jonas more incredible then this? yes, because it is more (e)
admirable; and it is more admirable, because more powerful. Jonas 2.


L. VIVES.
THe (a) Three children] D^. 1. 6. Ananias, Azarias and Misael together with
Daeniell himself were prisoners in Babylon under Nabuchadnczzar. (b) Others of
the Prophets] As Jeremy, Ezechiel, and others (c) Prophet] Meaning Jonas who
was three days in the Whales belly: a figure of Christ our Saviors
resurrection from death to life. (d) Arion] The tale of Arion and the Dolphin
is common amongst authors. Herodotus was the Arion.
first that wrote it? Musar. lib. 1. After him Ovid in his Fastorum, and Pliny,
lib. 9. Gellius, lib. 16. Aelian in his book de animalibus and others: Arion
was a harper in Nethyni^ a town of Lesbos, in the time of the seven Sages of
Greece: for Periander loved him dearly. (Some say he first invented the
Tragic verse and the Chorus, and sung in Dithyrambiques:) This Arion
returning out of Italy with great wealth, and perceiving the sailors conspiring
his destruction for his money, entreated them to take all he had and save his
life, which when he could not obtain, he begged leave but to play a little
upon his harp to comfort himself therewith against death, and unto the sound
of his instrument they say their gathered diverse Dolphins together, and Arion
being skild in the nature of this fish, with his harp and all as he was,
leaped out of the ship upon one of their backs, who carried him safe and
sound unto Taenarus: where yet is seen the Image of a Dolphin swiming with a
man upon his back. Pliny proves by many examples that the Dolphin is a lover
of man. (e) Admirable:] To be kept so long in the Whales guts.

Of Marcus Regulus, who was a famous example to animate all men to the enduring
of vol^ntary captivity for their religion: which notwithstanding, was
unprofitable unto him by reason of his Paganism. CHAP. 14.
YEt for all this our enemies have one worthy exmaple proposed by one of their
most famous men, for y^ willing toleration of bondagein the cause of religion:
(a) Marcus Attilius Regulus, general of the Romans forces was prisoner at
Carthage: Now the Carthaginians being more desirous to exchange their prisoners
then to keep them, sent Regulus with their Ambassadors to Rome to treat upon
this exchange, having first sworn him, that in case he effected not what they
desired he should return as captive unto Carthage, so he went unto Rome, and
having a day of audience granted him, he persuaded the direct contrary unto
his embassage: because he held it was not profitable for the Romans to exchange
their prisoners. Nor after this perswasiue speech did the Romans compel him
to return unto his enemies, but willingly did he go back again for saving of
his oath. But his cruel foes put him to death with horrible and exquisite
torments: for shutting him (b) in a narrow barrel, stricken all full of sharp
nails, and so forcing him to stand upright, being not able to lean to any
side without extreme pains, they killed him even with ouerwatching him. This
virtue in him is worthy of everlasting praise, being made greater by so great
infelicity. Now his oath of return, was taken (c) by those gods for the neglect
of whose forbidden worship those infidells hold these plagues laid upon
mankind. But if these gods (being worshipped only for the attainement of
temporal prosperity) either desired, or permitted these pains to be laid upon
one that kept his oath so truly, what greater plague could they in their most
deserved wrath have inflicted upon a most perjured villain then they laid upon
this religious worthy? but why do not I confirm mine (d) argument with a
double proo^e? If he worshipped his gods so sincerely, that for keeping the oath
which he had taken by their deities, he would leave his natural country to
return (not unto what place he liked, but) unto his greatest enemies, if he
held that religiousnesse of his any way beneficial unto his temporal estate,
(which he ended in such horrible pains) he was far deceived. For his
example has taught all the world that those Gods of his never further their
worshippers in any prosperity of this life; since he that was so devout and
dutiful a servant of theirs, for all that they could do, was conquered and
led away captive: Now if the worship of these Gods return men's happiness in
the life to come, why then do they callumniate the profession of the
Christians, saying, that that misery fell upon the city, because it gave over
the worship of the old gods, when as were it never so vowed unto their worship,
yet might it taste of as much temporal misfortune as ever did Regulus: unless
any man will stand in such brainelesse blindness against the pure truth, as to
say that a whole city duly worshipping these Gods cannot be miserable, when
one only man may, as though the gods power were of more hability and
promptness to preserve generals, then perticulars: (e) what? does not every
multitude consist of singularities? If they say that Regulus even in all that
bondage and torment might nevertheless be happy in the (f) virtue of his
constant mind, then let us rather follow the quest of that virtue by which an
whole city may be made truly happy, for a cities happiness and a
particular A City.
man's do not arise from any several heads: the city being nothing but a
multitude of men united in one formality of religion and estate: wherefore as
yet I call not Regulus his virtue into any question. It is now sufficient that
his very example is of power to enforce them to confess that the worship
exhibited unto the gods, aims not any way at bodily prosperity, nor at things
externally accident unto man; because that Regulus chose rather to forge all
these, then to offend his gods before whom he had passed his oath. But what
shall we say to these men, that dare glory that they had had one city of that
quality whereof they fear to have all the rest? If they have no such fear,
let them then acknowledge, that what befell Regulus, the same may befall an
whole city, though their devotion may parallel his in this worship of their
gods; and therefore let them cease to slander the times of Christianity. But
seeing that our question arose about the captiued Christians, let such as
hereby take especial occasion to deride and scorn that saving religion, mark
but this, and be silent: that if it were no disgrace unto their gods, that one
of their most zealous worshippers, by keeping his oath made unto them, should
be nevertheless deprived of his country, and have no place left him to retire
to, but must perforce be returned to his enemies, amongst whom he had already
endured an hard and wretched captivity, and was now lastly to taste of a
tedious death, in most execrable, strange, and cruel torments: then far less
cause is there to accuse the name of Christ for the captivity of his Saints,
for that they, expecting the heavenly habitation in true faith, knew full well,
that they were but pilgrims in their native soiles and (g) habitations here
upon earth, and subject to all the miseries of mortality.

L. VIVES.
MArcus (a) Attilius Regulus] This is a famous history, and recorded by many.
This Regulus in the first Carthaginian war, was made Consul with Lucius
Manlius Attilius Regulus.
Uolsco: unto which two the Affrican war was committed: being the sole war
that the Romans at that time waged: Regulus was the first Roman that ever
lead army over the Seas into Affricke, where having foiled the Carthaginians
in many battles he drove them to seek for help of Zanthippus of
Lacedaemon, a singular and well practiced captain, by whose means the war
was renewed, and in a set fight the Roman army overcome, and Attilius Regulus
taken by his enemies. Who having been kept diverse years prisoner in Carthage
together with his fellow captives, in the foureteenth year of the war, and
the 503. after the building of Rome, was sent Ambassador to the Romans about
the exchanging of their prisoners: swearing unto his enemies to return unless
he attained the effect of his Embassage. Coming to Rome, and having a day of
hearing appointed, the Consul desired him to ascend the Consuls seat, and
thence to utter his opinion of the Embassage; which he at first refused to
utter: but being commanded by the Senate to do it, he did so, and thereupon
utterly diswaded that which the Carthaginians desired; because the Carthaginian
prisoners at Rome were young, and able for the wars, but the Romans at
Carthage, old, past military use, and not very needful in counsel. To his
opinion the whole Senate assented: Now he himself, though he were hindered
by his children, kinsmen, servants, countrymen, familiars, clients, and the
most part of the people, yet would not stay, but needs would go to discharge
his oath which he had sworn to his enemies, although he knew that the
Affricans would hate him deadly, and so put him to death with some cruel
torture or other. So returning unto Carthage, and declaring the effect of his
embassage, he was put to death indeed with strange and intolerable torments.
(b) In a narrow barrell] some relate it in another manner, but all agree that
he was ouer-watched unto death. (c) By the gods] It had been more
significantly spoken, to have said by those gods, etc. with an emphasis. (d)
Argument with a double proof,] It is a Dilemma: If man receive the reward
following the due worship of those gods in this life, why perished Regulus,
being so devout in that kind? if he have it not until after this life, why do
they as whippers expect the prosperous estate of this life from them? (e) What
does not each multitude] How then can the multitude be happy, when every
particular man is miserable? (f) Virtue of his minde] So holds Tully in many
places, Seneca also, and all learned and wise men, speaking of Regulus. (g)
Habitations,] meaning these earthly ones.

Whether the Taxes that the holy Virgins suffered against their wills in their
captiuities, could pollute the virtues of their mind. CHAP. 15.
O But they think they give the Christians a foul blow, when they aggrauate
the disgrace of their captivity, by urging the rapes which were wrought not
only upon married and mariageable persons, but even upon some Votaresses also:
Here are we not to speak of faith, or godliness, or of the virtue of
chastity, but our discourse must run a narrow course, (a) betwixt shame and
reason. (b) Nor care we so much to give an answer unto strangers in this, as
to minister comfort unto our fellow Christians. Be this therefore granted as
our first position, that that power by which man lives well, resting
enthroned, and established in the mind, commands every member of the body, and
the body is sanctified by the sanctification of the will: which sactimonie of
the will, if it remain firm and inuiolate, what way The will sanctifies the
body.
soever the body be disposed of or abused, (if the party enduring this abuse
cannot avoid it (d) without an express offense) this sufferance lays no
crime upon the soul. But because every body is subject to suffer the effects
both of the fury, and the lusts of him that subdueth it that which it
suffers in this latter kind, though it be not a destroyer of ones
chastity, yet is it a procurer of ones shame: Because otherwise, it might be
thought, that that was suffered with the consent of the mind, which it may be
could not be suffered without some delight of the flesh: And therefore as for
those, who to avoid this did voluntarily destroy themselves, what human
heart can choose but pity them? yet as touching such as would not do so,
fearing by avoiding others villainy, to incur their own damnation, he that
imputes this as a fault unto them, is not vnguiltie of the fault of folly.

L. VIVES.
Between (a) shame and reason] for shame says that the very violation of the
body is to be called evil; but Reason denies it. (b) Nor care we] This we
will speak as a comforting unto our Christian women that endured these
violences. (c) In the minde] The Platonists place the soul and her powers in
the head, as in a Tower, sitting there, as the commander of our actions, and
the ouer-seer of our labors, as Claudian says. (d) Without sin,] for if we
can avoid it without sin, we ought to endeavor this auoydance with all our
powers.

Of such as chose a voluntary death, to avoid the fear of pain and
dishonor. CHAP. 16.
FOR if it be not lawful for a private man to kill any man, how ever guilty,
unless the law have granted a special allowance for it, then surely
whosoever killes himself is guilty of homicide: And so much the more guilty
does that killing of himself make himself, by how much the more guiltless
he was in that cause for which he killd himself. For if Judas (a) his fact
be worthily detested, and yet the Truth (b) says, that by hanging of Math. 27.
himself, he did rather augment then expiate the guilt of his wicked
treachery, because his despair of Gods mercy in his (c) damnable repentance,
left no place in his soul for saving repentance; how much more ought he to
forbear from being cause of his own death, that has no guilt in him worthy
of such a punishment as death: for Judas in hanging himself, hanged but a
wicked man and dyed guilty, not only of Christ's death, but of his own also:
adding the wickedness of being his own death, to that other wickedness of
his, for which he dyed.

L. VIVES.
Judas (a) his fact] which no man but has heard out of the Gospel. (b) Truth
saith] Peter in the first of the Acts affirms, that he did wickedly and
vngodlyly both in betraying of his Lord, and in hanging of himself. (c)
Damnable repentance] For he repented indeed, but so, as he despaired of being
ever able to repent sufficiently for so great a villainy.

Of the violent lust of the Soldiers, executed upon the bodies of the
captives; against their consents. CHAP. 17.
But why should he that has done no man evil, do himself evil, and by
destroying himself, destroy an innocent man, for fear to suffer injury by
the guilte of another, and procure a sin unto himself, by avoiding the sin
of another? O but his fear is, to be defiled by another lust! tush, another
lust cannot pollute thee; if it do, it is not another but thine own. But
chastity being a virtue of the mind, and (a) accompanied with fortitude, by
which it learnes rather to endure all evils, then consent to any, and (b) no
man of this fortitude and chastity, being able to dispose of his body as he
list, but only of the consent and dissent of his mind; what man of wit will
think he loses his chastity, though his captiued body be forcedly
prostitute unto another beastialitie? If chastity were lost thus easily, it
were no virtue of the mind; nor one of (c) those goods, whereby a man lives in
goodness; but were to be reckoned amongst the goods of the body, with
strength, beauty, health, and such like: (d) which if a man do decrease in,
yet it does not follow that he decreaseth in his uprightness of life: but if
chastity be of (e) another kind, why should we endanger our bodies to no end,
which fear to loose it? for if it be (f) a good, belonging to the mind, it is
not lost though the body be violated. Moreover it is the virtue of holy
continency, that when it withstands the pollution of carnal concupiscence,
thereby it sanctifies even the body also: and therefore when the intention
stands firm, and gives no way to vicious affects, the chastity of the body
(g) is not lost, because the will remains still in the holy use, and in the
power too, as far as it can. For the body is not holy in that it is whole, or
untouched in every member, for it may be hurt and wounded by many other
casualties: And the Physician oftentimes for the preservation of the health,
does that unto the body which the eye abhorres to behold. (h) A Midwife trying
a certain maids integretie of the Virginal part, (whether for malice, or by
chance, it is uncertain) spoiled it. Now I think none so foolish as to think
that this virgin lost any part of her bodily sanctity, though that part
endured this breach of integrity. And therefore the intent of the mind
standing firm, (which firmness it is that sanctifies the body) the violence
of another lust cannot deprive so much as the (i) body of this sanctity,
because the perseverance of the mind in continency ever preserves it. But
shall we say that any woman whose corrupt mind has broken her promise unto
God, and yielded her self willingly to the lust of her deceiuer, (though but in
purpose,) is as yet holy in her body, when she has lost that holiness of
mind which sanctified her body? God forbid. And here let us learn, that the
sanctity of body is no more lost, if the sanctity of mind remain, (though
the body be ravished) then it is kept, if the minds holiness be polluted,
though the body it self be untouched. Wherefore if there be no reason, that
a woman that has already suffered an others villainy against her own will,
should destroy her self by voluntary death, how much less ought this course
to be followed before there be any cause? and why should murder be
committed, when the guilt which is feared (being feared from another) is as
yet in doubt of event? Dare they (against whom we defend the sanctity not
only of the Christian women's minds, but even of their bodies in this last
captivity) contradict this clear reason, wherein we affirm, that whilst the
chaste resolution is unchanged by any evil consent, the guilt is wholly the
rauishers, and no part of it imputable unto the ravished?

L. VIVES.
ACcompanied (a) With fortitude] For the virtues are all combined together as
the Philosophers teach. But there are some more peculiarly cohaerent then other
some. (b) No man of this fortitude] Hereupon Plutarch (as I remember) affirms
out of Menander that it is not the part of a valiant and complete man to say I
will not suffer this, but, I will not do this. (c) Those goods] The virtues:
for the Platonistis, and the Peripatetike Philosophers divide al goods into
three sorts: mental, bodily, and fortunes, or external. (d) Which if a man]
This is the Platonistis and Peripatetikes opinion as well as the Stoikes: who
Three sorts of good.
held, that bodily and external goods might have reference unto beatitude, but
none at all unto a good and sanctified life. (e) Another kinde] If it be but a
bodily good, it is not of such worth as we should loose the whole body for it:
for the body is of more worth then it, if it be but such. (f) The body be
violated] So did Brutus and Collatinus comfort sorrowful Lucretia, (of whom
the next Chapter treats) by turning the guilt of the falte from her that was
offended, upon the author of the fact: neither the mind sins (says Liuy)
nor the body: and where consent wanted, guilt wants also. And the Nurse in
Seneca's Hippolitus says: the mind infers looseness, it is not chance. (g)
Is not lost] The bodies chastity flows from that of the mind, (h) A midwife]
He seems to relate a thing done, because he says A certain maidens etc.
(i) So much as the body] How simply was that spoken either of Brutus, or Liuy
(both being wise and judicious men) speaking of the blood of Lucretia being
then newly slain. I swear by this blood, most chaste before this Kings
villainy: as though after his villainy it were not as chaste still, if her mind
were not touched with lust, as they hold it was not.

Of Lucretia, that stabbed her self because Tarquins son had ravished her.
CHAP. 18.
THey extol (a) Lucretia, that Noble and ancient Matron of Rome, with all the
lauds of chastity. This woman, having her body forcibly abused by Sextus
Tarquinius son to Tarquin the proud, she revealed this villainy of the
dissolute youth unto her husband Collatinus, and to Brutus her kinsman, (both
Noble and valorous men) binding them by oath, to (b) revenge this wicked
outrage. And then, loathing the foulness of the fact that had been committed
upon her, she slew her self. What? shall we say she was an adulteress, or was
she chaste? who will stand long in desciding this question. (c) One, declaming
singularly well and truly hereof, says thus: O wonder! there were two, and
yet but one committed the adultery: worthyly and rarely spoken: Intimating in
this commixtion, the spotted lust of the one, and the chaste will of the other;
and gathering his position, not from their bodily conjunction, but from the
diversity of their minds, There were two (says he) yet but one committed the
adultry. But what was that then which she punished so cruelly, having not
committed any falt? (d) He was but chased out of his country, but she was
slain: if it were no vnchastenesse in her to suffer the rape unwillingly, it
was no justice in her being chaste, to make away her self willingly. I appeal
to you, you laws, and Judges of Rome. After any offense be committed, you will
not have (e) the offender put to death without his sentence of condemnation.
Suppose then this case brought before you, and that your judgment was, that
the slain woman was not only uncondemned, but chaste, unguilty, and innocent;
would you not punish the doer of this deed with full severity? This deed did
Lucretia, that so famous Lucretia: this Lucretia being innocent, chaste, and
forcibly wronged, even by (f) Lucretia's self, was murdered: Now give your
sentence. But if you cannot, because the offender is absent, why th^n do you
so extol the murder of so chaste and guiltless a woman? you cannot defend her
before the infernal judges, at any hand, if they be such as your Poets in
their verses decipher them: for according to their judgment, she is (g) to be
placed amongst those. -- Qui sibi lethum,
Insontes pepere^re manu, lacemque perosi (...). (...).

Proiecere animas --
That (guiltless) spoiled themselves through black despite:
And threw their souls to hell, through hate of light:
Whence if she now would gladly return -- Fat^ obstant, tristique palus
innabilis vnda
Alligat. --
Fate, and deep ^ennes forbids their passage thence,
And Stix -- etc.


But how if she be not amongst them, as not dying guiltless, but as being
privy to her own sin? what if it were so (h) which none could know but her
self, that though Tarquinius son offered her force, yet she her self gave a
lustful consent, and (...) did so grieve at that, that she held it worthy to
be punished with death? Though she ought not to have done so, howsoever if she
thought her repentance could be any way accepted of a sort of false gods.) If
it be so, and that it be false that there were two and but one did the sin, but
rather that both were guilty of it, the one by a violent enforcement, the other
by a secret consent, then she died not innocent: And therefore (i) her learned
defenders may well say, that she is not in hell amongst those that destroyed
themselves being guiltless. But this case is in such a strait, that if the
murder be extenuated, the adultery is confirmed, and if this be cleared the
other is agrauated: Nor (k) is there any way out of this argument: If she be an
adulteress, why is she commended? If she be chaste why did she kill her
self? But in this example of this noble woman, this is sufficient for us to
confute those that being themselves far from all thought of sanctity
insult over the Christian women that were forced in this last captivity: that
in Lucrecia's praise, it is said that There were two, and but one committed
adultery. For they then held Lucrecia for one that could not stain her self
with any lasciu^ous consent. Well then in killing her self for suffering
uncleanness, being her self unpolluted, she showed no love unto chastity, but
only discovered the infirmity of her own shame: he shamed at the filthiness
that was committed upon her, though it were (l) without her consent: and (m)
being a Romain, and coueteous of glory, she feared, that (n) if she lived still,
that which she had endured by violence; should be thought to have been
suffered with willingness. And therefore she thought good to show this
punishment to the eyes of men, as a testimony of her mind, unto whom she
could not show her mind indeed: Blushing to be held a partaker in the fact,
which being by another committed so filthyly, she had endured so unwillingly.
Now this course the Christian women did not take; they live still, howsoever
violated: neither for all this revenge they the ruins of others upon
themselves, least they should make an addition of their own guilt unto the
others, if they should go and murder themselves barbarously, because their
enemies had forced them so beastially. For howsoever, they have the glory of
their chastity still within them (o) being the restimony of their conscience,
this they have before the eyes of their God, and this is all they care for
(having no more to look to but to do well that they decline not from the
authority of the law divine, in any finister endeavor to avoid the offense of
mortal man's suspicion.

L. VIVES.
(a) LVcretia] This history of Lucretia is common, though Dionisius relate it
somewhat differing from Liuie; they agree in the sum of the matter (b)
Reuenge] so says Liuie in his person. But give me your right hands and faiths,
to inflict just revenge upon the adulterer: and they all in order gave her
their faiths. (c) One declaming] Who this was I Virgil once pleaded. [] All this
is left out of ye Paris edition.
have not yet read: One Gloss says it was Virgil, as he found recorded by a
great scholar and one that had read much. But Uirgil never was declamer: nor
ever pleaded in cause but one, and that but once: perhaps that great reader
imagined that one to be this, which indeed was never extant. [Which he might
the better do, becasue he had read such store of histories: and better yet, if
he were Licentiat, or Doctor] (d) He was chased] Tarquin the King, and all his
offspring were chased out of the City: of this in the third book: (e) The
offender] The manner of judgment in matter of a Romans life and death.
Cicero says that touching a Romans life there was a decree yt no Judgment
should pass upon it, without the assent of the whole people, in the great
Comitia, or Parliaments, called Centuriata. The form and manner of which
judgment he sets down in his oration for his house; and so does Plutarch in
the Gracchi. (f) Lucretia her selfe] which aggrauats the fact: done by
Lucretia, a noble and worthy matron of the City. (g) Placed amongst these]
Uirgil in the 6. of his Aeneads diuides Hell into nine circles, and of the
third he Hels nine circles.
speaks thus. Proxima deinde tenent maesti loca, qui sibi lethum
Insontes peperere manu, lucemque perosi
Proiecere animas; quam vellent athere in alto
Nunc and pauperiem, and dur^s perferre labores?
Fata obstant, tristique palus innabilis vnda
Alligat and nouies Styx interfusa coercet.


In english thus. In the succeeding round of woe they dwell
That (guiltless) spoild themselves through black despite,
And cast their souls away through hate of light:
O now they wish they might return, to abide
Extremest need, and sharpest toil beside:
But fate and deepes forbid their passage thence
And Styx, that nine times cuttes those groundless fennes.
(h) Which none could know] For who can tell whether she gave consent by the
touch of It is a Literats^, in the text of al editions that I find.
some incited pleasure? (i) Her learned defenders] * It is better to read her
learned defenders, or her not unlearned defenders, then her unlearned
defenders, as some copies have it. (k) Is there any way] It is a Dilemma, If
she were an adulteress, why is she commended? if chaste, why murdered? The
old Rethoricians used to dissolve this kind of Argument either by overthrowing
one of the parts, or by retorting it, called in greek (...), a Antistrophe.
conversion, or retortion: Examples there are diverse in Cicero de Rethorica.
Now Augustine says, that this conclusion is inextricable and unavoidable by
either way. (l) Without The Roman greedy of praise
her consent] For she abhorred to consent unto this act of lust. (m) A
Romaine] The Roman Nation were always most greedy of glory, of whom it is
said: Vincet amor patriae, laudumque immensa cupido.
Their countries love and boundles this of glory. Will conquer, etc.

And Ovid says of Lucrece, in his Fasti: Succubuit famae victa puella metu:
Conquered with fear to loose her fame, she fell.
(n) If she liued] after this uncleanness committed upon her. (o) Being the
testimony] for our glory is this (says Saint Paul 2. Cor. I. 12.) the
testimony of our consciences: And this the Stoikes and all the heathenish wise
men have ever taught.

That there is no authority which allows Christians to be their own deaths in
what cause soever CHAP. 19.
FOr it is not for nothing that we never find it commended in the holy
canonical Scriptures (or but allowed) that either for attaining of
immortality, or avoiding of calamity, we should be our own destructions:
we are forbidden it in the law: Thou shall not kill: especially because it
adds not, Thy (...).
neighbor; as it does in the pohibition of false witness. Thou shall not
bear false witness against thy neighbor: Yet let no man think that he is
free of this later crime, if he bear false witness against himself: because
he that loves his neighbor, begins his love from himself: Seeing it is
written: Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Now if he be no less
guiltless of false Math. 2^.
witness that testifies falsely against himself, then he that does so
against his neighbor (since that in that commandment, wherein false witness
is forbidden, it is forbidden to be practiced against ones neighbor, whence
misunderstanding conceits may suppose that it is not forbidden to bear false
witness against ones self) how much plainer is it to be understood, that a
man may not kill himself, seeing that unto the commandment (Thou shall not
kill) nothing being added, excludes al exception both of others, and of him to
whom the command is given? And therefore some would extend the intent of this
precept, even unto beasts and cattle, and would have it unlawful to kill any
of them. But why not unto herbs also, and all things that grow and are
nourished by the earth? for though these kinds cannot be said to have (a)
sense or feeling, yet they are said to be living: and therefore they may die;
and consequently by violent usage be killed. Wherefore the Apostle speaking of
these kind of seeds, says thus. Fool, that which thou sowest, is not
quickened, except (first) it die. And the Psalmist says: He destrored their
vines with bail: but what? 1. Cor, 12. 36. Psalm. 78. 47.
Shall we therefore think it sin to cut up a twigge, because the
commandment says, thou shall not kill, and so involue our selves in the foul
error of the Manichees? Wherefore setting aside these dotages, when we read
this precept: Thou shall not kill; If we hold it not to be meant of fruits
or trees, because they are not sensitive; nor of unreasonable creatures, either
going, flying, swimming or creeping, because they have no society with us in
reason, which God the Creator has not made common both to them and us; and
therefore by his just ordinance, their deaths and lives are both most
serviceable and useful unto us; then it follows necessarily, that thou shall
not kill, is meant only ofmen: Thou shall not kill, namely, Neither thy self, or
another. For he that kills himself, kills no other but a man.

L. VIVES.
TO have (a) sence] Aristotle says that plants are animate, and living
creatures, but That plants are ani^ate or living creatures.
yet not sensitive. But Plato being of Empedocles his opinion, holds them both
living and sensitive: Either may be: they may die because they do live,
howsoever.

Of some sort of killing men, which notwithstanding are no murders. CHAP. 20.
Indeed the authority of the law divine has set down some exceptions
wherein it is lawful to kill a man. But excepting those whom God commaundes
to be slain, either by his express law, or by some particular command unto
any person by any temporal occasion (and he commits not homicide that owes
his service unto him that commands him, being but as the sword is a help
to him that uses it. And therefore those men do not break the commandment
which forbids killing, who do make war by the authority of (a) Gods
command, or being in some place of public magistracy, do put to death
malefactors according to their laws, that is, according to the rule of justice
and reason. Abraham was not only freed from being blamed as a murderer, but
he was also commended as a godly man in Abraham
that he would have killed his son Isaac, not in wickedness, but in
obedience. And it is a doubtful question, whether it be to be held as a
command from God that (b) Iepthe killed his daughter that met him in his
return, seeing Genesis 22. Judge. 11. 30. 31.
that he had vowed to sacrifice the first living thing that came out of his
house to meet him, when he returned conqueror from the wars. (c) Nor could
Sampson be excused pulling down the house upon himself and his enemies, but
that the spirit within him, which wrought miracles by him, did prompt him unto
this act. Those therefore being excepted, which either the justice of the law,
or the fountain of all justice, Gods particular command, would have killed;
he that kills either himself, or any other, incurreth the guilt of a homicide.

L. VIVES.
AVthority (a) of Gods command] As the Jews did: they waged wars, but it was
by Gods express command. [But if they were counted godly yt to please God
(though [] This is left out in the edition of Paris.
against natural humanity afflicted) his enemies with war and slaughter: truly
then cannot we butbe held the most ungodly of ye world that butcher up so many
thousand Christians against the express will of God] (b) Iepthe] Judges the
11. Chapt. Verse 31. Whose fact was like that, which the Tragedians write of
Agamemnon, who sacrificed his daughter Iphigenia unto Diana at Aulis. Many
reprove this sacrifice of Iephte: for his vow was to be interpreted, as meant
of those things, which were accustomed to be offered with Gods Agamemnon.
good pleasure: and so was that of Agamemnons to have been construed also. (c)
Nor could Sampson] Judges the 16. chapter and the 30. verse.

That voluntary death can never be any sign of magnanimity, or greatness of
spirit. CHAP 21.
WHo soever have committed this homicide upon themselves, may (perhaps) be
commended of some for their greatness of spirit, but never for their
soundness of judgment. But indeed if you look a little deeper into the
matter, it cannot be rightly termed magnanimity, when a man being unable to
endure either casual miseries, or others oppressions (to avoid them)
destroys himself. For that mind discovers it self to be of the
greatest infirmity, that can neither endure hard bondage in his body, or the
fond opinion of the vulgar: and worthily is that spirit entitled great, that
can rather endure calamities then avoid them: And in respect of their own
purity and enlightened conscience, can set at naught the triuiall censures of
mortal men (a) which are most commonly enclowded in a mist of ignorance and
error. If we shall think it a part of magnanimity to put a man's self to
death, then is (b) Cleombrotus. most worthy of this magnanimous title, who
having read Platoes book of the immortality of the soul, cast himself
headlong from the top of a wall, and so leaving this life, went unto another
which he believed was better. For neither calamity, nor guiltiness, either
true or false, urged him to avoid it by destroying himself, but his great
spirit alone was sufficient to make him catch at his death, and break all the
pleasing fetters of this life. Which deed notwithstanding, that it was rather
great, then good, Plato himself, whom he read, might have assured him: who (be
sure) would have done it, or taught it himself, if he had not discerned by the
same instinct whereby he discerned the souls eternity, that this was at no
hand to be practiced, but rather utterly (c) prohibited.

L. VIVES.
Which (a) Are indeed] The ancient wise men were ever wont to call the people
the great Master of Error. (b) Cleombrotus] This was the Ambraciot, who having
The people how styled.
read Plato's dialogue called Phaedo of the immortality of the soul, that he
might leave this life, (which is but as a death,) and pass unto immortality,
threw himself over a wall into the sea, without any other cause in the world.
Of him did Callimachus make an epigrame in Greek, and in Latin, I have seen
it thus. Vita vale, muro praeceps delapsus ab alto,
Dixisti moriens Ambraciota puer:
Nullum in morte malum credens; sed scripta Platonis
Non ita erant animo percipienda tuo.
When Cleombrotus from the turret threw
Himself to death, he cried, new life, adue:
Holding death, hurtlesse: But grave Plato's sense.
He should have read with no such reference.


There was also another Cleombrotus, King of Lacedaemon, whom Epaminondas the
Thebane overcame. (c) Rather utterly prohibited] For in the beginning of his
Phaedo, he says it is wickedness for a man to kill himself: and that God is
angered at such a fact, like the master of a family, when any of his slaves
have killed themselves: and in many other places, he says that without Gods
command, no man ought to leave this life. For here we are all as in a set front
of battle, every one placed, as God our Emperor and General pleases to
appoint us: and greater is his punishment that forsakes his life, then his
that forsakes his colors.

Of Cato, who killed himself, being not able to endure Caesar's victory. CHAP.
22.
But many have killed themselves for fear to fall into the hands of their foes.
We dispute not here de facto, whether it has been done or no, but de Iure,
whether it were to be done or no. For sound reason is before example, al
authorities Reason above examples.
to the contrary, as whereunto all examples do consent, being such as by their
excellence in goodness are worthily imitable: neither Patriarch, Prophet nor
Apostle ever did this: yet our Lord Jesus Christ, when he admonished his
disciples, in persecution to fly from city to city, might have willed them in
such cases to make a present dispatch of themselves, and so to avoid their
Math. 10. 23.
persecutors (hadd he held it fit.) But if he never gave any such
admonition, or command, that any to whom he promised a mansion of eternity at
their deaths, should pass unto their deaths on this fashion; (let then the
heathen that know not God produce al they can) it is plainly unlawful for any
one than serves the only true God to follow this course: But indeed besides
Lu^ia (of whom I think we have sufficiently argued before) it is hard for Cap.
19.
them to find one other example, worth prescribing as a fit authority for
others to follow, besides that (a) Cato only that killed himself at Vtica:
(b) not that he alone was his own deaths-man but because he was accounted as
a (c) learned, and (d) honest man, which may beget a belief, that to do as he
did, were to do well. What should I say of his fact more then his friends
(and (e) some of them learned men) have said? who showed far more judgment in
dissuading the deed, and censuring it as the effect of a spirit rather
dejected, then magnanimous. And of this (f) did Cato himself leave a
testimony in his own famous Son. For if it were base to live under Caesar's
victory: why did he advise his son to this, willing him to entertain a full
hope of Caesar's clemency? Yea why did he not urge him to go willingly to his
end with him? If it were laudable in Torquatus (g) to kill his son that had
fought and foiled his enemy: (though herein he had broken the Dictators
command) why did conquered Cato spare his overthrown son, that spared not
himself? Was it more vile to be a conqueror against law, then to endure a
conqueror against honor? What shall we say then, but that even in the same
measure that he loved his son, whom he both hoped and wished that Caesar
would spare, in the same did he envy Caesar's glory, which he (h) should
have gotten in sparing of him also, or else (to mollify this matter som-what)
he was ashamed to receive such courtesy at Caesar's hands.

L. VIVES.
THat (a) Cato] The Catoe's were of the Portian family, arising from Tusculum a
town The Ca^.
of the Latins. The first of this stock that was called Cato (that is wise
and wary) was Marcus Portius, a man of mean descent, but attaining to all the
honors of Consul, Censor, and of Triumph. His nephews son was Marcus
Portius Cato, both of them were great and (yet) innocent men. The first was
called Mayor, or the Elder, the later Minor, or the younger. The younger being
a Leader in the civil wars of Pompey took his (that was, the commonweals
and the liberties) part, against the vsurparion of Caius Caesar: Now Pompey
being overcome by Caesar at Pharsalia, and Scipio Metellus (Pompey his father
in law) in Africa, this Cato seeing his faction subverted, and Caesar bear al
down before him, being retired unto Vtica (a City in Affrike) and reading
Platoe's Phaed^ twice over together, the same night thrust himself through
with his sword. (b) Not because he alone] No, for many in other wars had
slain themselves, least they should fall into the hand of the enemy: and in
this same war, so did Scipio Metellus, Afranius and King Iuba (c) Learned] A
stoyke and excellently skilled in the wisdom of the Greeks (d) Honest] the
wisdom and innocence that was in both these Catoes grew into a proverb: and
The in^grity of the C^es.
hereof says I^all. T^rtius (...) Caelo cecidit Cato.
Now Heaven has given us a third Cat^.


Velleius Paterculus writing unto Uinicius, thus describes this Cato. He was
descended from Marcus Cato that head of the Porcian family (who was his great
grandfather) he was a man like virtues self, and rather of divine then humane
capacity: he never did good that he cared should be noted: but because he
could not do any thing but good, as holding that only reasonable which was
just: free was he from all the corruptions of man, and evermore swayed his
own fortune to his own liking, Thus far Uelleius: to omit the great
testimonies of Seneca, Lucane, Tully, Saluste and others, of this worthy man.
(e) some of them learned] It is recorded that Apollonides the Stoike, Demetrius
the Peripatetike, and Cleanthes the Physician were then at Utica with Cato. For
he loved much the company of the Greek Philosophers, and his great
grandfather never hated them so much as he respected them. And upon the night
that he slew himself on (says Plutarch) at supper there arose a disputation
about such things as really concern the liberty of a man: wherein, Demetrius
spoke many things against Cato's constant assertions of the praise of such as
killed themselves; which indeed was so vehement, that it begot a suspicion in
them all, that he would follow the same course himself, (f) This did Cato
himselfe] Plutarch writes that when Cato Cato his son.
came to Vtica, he sent away his followers by shipping, and earnestly preswaded
his son to go with them, but could not force him to forsake his father. This
son of his, Caesar afterward pardoned, as Liuy says lib. 114. and Caesar
himself in his Commentaries of the African war. He was (as Plutarch says
in his fathers life) much given to venerie, but in the battle of Phillipi,
fighting valiantly on his cozen Brutus his side for his countries freedom he
was slain, scorning to leave the fight, when the chiefest captains fled. (g)
to kill his sonne] Titus Manlius Torquatus made his sons head be cut off for
fighting contrary Man. Torquat^.
to the edict, though he returned with victory, But of this elsewhere. (h)
should have gotten by sparing of him] Commonly known is that saying of Caesar
to him that brought news of Cato's death: Cato, I envy thy glory, for thou
enuiedst mine, and would not have it reckoned amongst mine other famous acts,
that I saved Cato. Caesar wrote two books called Anticatones, against Cato, as
Cicero and Suetonius testify. The Cardinal of Liege told me that he saw them
both in a certain old library at Liege, and that he would see they should
be sent me, which if he do, I will not defraud the learned of their use and
publication.

That the Christians excel Regulus in that virtue, wherein he excelled most.
CHAP. 23.
But those whom we oppose will not have their Cato excelled by our Job, that
holy man, who choose rather to endure all them horrible torments (a) in his
flesh, then by aduenturing upon death to avoid all those vexations: and other
Saints of high credit and undoubted faith in our scriptures, all which made
choice rather to endure the tirany of their enemies, then be their own
butchers. But now we will prove out of their own records that Regulus was
Cato's better in this glory. For Cato never ouer-came Caesar, unto whom he
scorned to be subject, and chose to murder himself rather then be servant
unto him: But Regulus ouer-came the Africans, and in his generallship, returned
with diverse noble victories unto the Romans, never with any notable loss of
his Citizens, but always of his foes: and yet being afterward conquered by
them, he resolved rather to endure slavery under them, then by death to free
himself from them. And therein he both preserved his paciencie under the
Carthaginians, and his constancy unto the Romans, neither depriving the enemy
of his conquered body, nor his countrymen of his unconquered mind: Neither was
it the love of this life, that kept him from death. This he gave good proof
of, when without dread, he returned back unto his foes, to who^ he had given
worse cause of offense in the Senate House with his tongue then ever he had
done before in the battle with his force: and therefore this so great a
conqueror and contemner of this life, who had rather that his foes should take
it from him by any torments, then that he should give death to himself,
howsoever, must needs hold, that it was a foul guilt for man to be his own
murderer. Rome amongst all her worthies, and eternized spirits, cannot show one
better then he was, for he, for all his great victories, continued (b) most
poor: nor could mishap amate him: for with a fixed resolve and an undaunted
courage returned he unto his deadliest enemies. Now, if those magnanimous and
heroical defenders of their earthly habitacles, and those true and sound
servants of their (indeed false gods (who had power to cut down their
conquered foes by law of arms) seeing themselves afterward to be conquered
of their foes, nevertheless would not be their own butchers, but although
they feared not death at al, yet would rather endure to be slaves to their
foes superiority, then to be their own executioners: How much more then
should the Christians, that adore the true God, and aim wholly at the eternal
dwellings, restrain themselves from this foul wickedness, whenever it
pleases God to expose them for a time to taste of temporal extremities,
either for their trial, or for correction sake, seeing that he never
forsakes them in their humiliation, for whom he being most high, humbled
himself so low: (e) especially being that they are persons whom no laws of
arms or military power can allow to destroy the conquered enemies?

L. VIVES.
IN (a) his flesh] For he was afflicted with a sore kind of vlcere. (b) Most
poore] Liuy in his eighteen book, and Valerius in his examples of poverty
write this: When Attilius knew that his generallship was prolonged another
year more, he wrote to the Senate to have Attilius his poverty.
them send one to supply his place: His chief reason why he would resign his
charge was, because his seven acres of ground (being all the land he had)
was spoiled by the hired soldiers: which if it continued so, his wife and
children could not have whereon to live. So the Senate (giving the charge of
this unto the Aediles) looked better ever after unto Attilius his patrimony.
(c) Especialy being that they] He makes fighting as far from Christian piety,
as religious humanity is from barbarous inhumanity.

That sin is not to be avoided by sin. CHAP. 24.
What a pernicious error then is here crept into the world, that a man should
kill himself, because either his enemy had injured him, or means to iniure
him? whereas he may not kill his enemy, whether he have offended him, or be
about to offend him? This is rather to be feared indeed, that the body,
being subject unto the enemies lust, with touch of some enticing delight do
not allure the will to consent to this impurity: And therefore (say they) it is
not because of another guilt, but for fear of ones own, that such men ought
to kill themselves before sin be committed upon them. Nay, the mind that is
more truly subject unto God and his wisdom, then unto carnal concupiscence
will never be brought to yield unto the lust of the own flesh be it never so
provoked by the lust of another: But if it be a damnable fact, and a
detestable wickedness to kill ones self at all, (as the truth in plain
terms says it is) what man will be so fond as to say, let us sin now,
least we sin hereafter? let us commit murder now, least we fall into
adultery hereafter? If wickedness be so predominant in such an one, as he or
she will not choose rather to suffer in innocence than to escape by guilt: is
it not better to adventure on the uncertainty of the future adultery, then the
certainety of the present murder? is it not better to commit such a sin as
repentance may purge, then such an one as leaves no place at all for
repentance? This I speak for such as for avoiding of guilt (not in others but
in themselves) and fearing to consent to the lust in themselves which another
lust inciteth, do imagine that they ought rather to endure the violence of
death: But far be it from a Christian soul that trusts in his God, that
hops in him and rests on him; far be it (I say) from such to yield unto
the delights of the flesh in any consent unto uncleanness. But if that (a)
concupiscentiall disobedience which dwells as yet in our (b) dying flesh, do
stir it self by the own license against the law of our will; how can it be
but faltlesse in the body of him or her that never consents, when it stirs
without guilt in the body that sleeps.

L. VIVES.
COncupiscentiall (a) Disobedience] The lust of the body is moved of it self
even against all resistance and contradiction of the will: and then the will
being overcome by the flesh, from hence arises shame, as we will show more at
large hereafter. (b) Dying flesh] Our members being subject unto death do die
every day, and yet seem to have in them a life distinct from the life of the
soul: if then the lustful motions that betide us in sleep, be faltlesse,
because the will does not consent, but nature effects them without it; how much
more faltlesse shall those be, wherein the will is so so far from resting
only, that it resists and strives against them?

Of some unlawful acts, done by the Saints, and by what occasion they were
done. CHAP. 25.
But there were (a) some holy women (say they) in these times of persecution,
who flying from the spoylers of their chastities, threw themselves headlong
into a swift river which drowned them and so they died, and yet their
martirdomes are continually honored with religious memorialls in the Catholic
Church. Well, of these I dare not judge rashly in any thing. Whether the Church
have any sufficient testimonies that the divine will advised it to honor these
persons memories, I cannot tell, it may be that Particular vocation,
it has. For what if they did not this through mortal fear, but through
heavenly instinct? not in error, but in obedience? as we must not believe but
that Sampson did. And if God command, and this command be clearly and
doubtlesly discerned to be his, who dares call this obedience into question?
Who dare callumniate the duty of holy love? But every one that shall resolve
to sacrifice his son unto God shall not be cleared of guilt in such a
resolution, because Abraham was praised for it. For the soldier, that in his
order and obeisance to his governor (under whom he fights lawfully) kills
a man, the city neuermakes him guilty of homicid: nay it makes him guilty
offalshood and contempt, if he do not labor in all that he can to do it.
But if he had killed the man of his own voluntary pleasure, then had he
been guilty of shedding human blood, And so he is punished for doing of
that unbidden, for the not doing of which being bid he should also have
been punished. If this be thus at the generals command, then why not at the
creators? He therefore that hears it said, Thou shall not kill thy self, must
kill himself if he command him, whom we may no way gainesay: Only he is to
mark whether this divine command be not involued in any uncertainty. By (b)
the ear we do make conjecture of the conscience, but our judgment cannot
penetrate into the secrets of hearts: No man knows the things of a man, but
the spirit of a man which is in him. This we say, this we affirm, this we 1.
Cor. 2. 11.
universally approve, that no man ought to procure his own death for fear of
temporal miseries; because in doing this he falls into eternal: Neither
may he do it to avoid the sins of others, for in this he makes himself
guilty of a deadly guilt, whom others wickedness could not make guilty: nor
for his own sins past, for which he had more need to wish for life, that
he might repent himself of them: nor for any desire of a better life to be
hoped for after death: Because such as are guilty of the loss of their own
life, never enjoy any better life after their death.

L. VIVES.
But there were (a) some holy women] Ambrose lib. 3. de virginibus, writes
that Pelagia with his mother and sisters cast themselves headlong into a river,
for fear to be ravished Pelagia.
of the soldiers that pursued them: and yet the Church (says he) has placed
her amongst the number of the martires: And Sophronia likewise who killed her
self to avoid the lust of Maxentius Caesar as Eusebins records in his
Ecclesiastical history. (b) by the eare] We judge by appearances of what is
within: for our eye cannot perce into the secrets of man. Sempronia.


Whether we ought to fly sin with voluntary death. CHAP. 26.
THere is one reason of this proposition as yet to handle, which seems to
prove it commodious for a man to suffer a voluntary death: namely least either
alluring pleasures or tormenting pains should enforce him to sin afterward.
Which reason if we will give scope unto, it will run out so far, that one
would think that men should be exhorted to this voluntary butchery, even
then, when by the fount of regeneration they are purified from all their
sins. For then is the time to beware of all sins to come, when all that is
past is pardoned. And if voluntary death do this, why is it not fittest then?
Why does he that is newly baptized forbear his own throat? Why does he
thrust his head freed again into all these imminent dangers of this life,
seeing he may so easily avoid them all by his death: and it is written, He
that lou^th danger shall fall therein? Why then does he love those innumerable
dangers? or if he do not love them, why undertakes he them? Is any man so
fondly Eccl. 3. 27
perverse and so great a contemner of truth, that if he think one should kill
himself to eschew the violence of one oppressor least it draw him unto sin,
will nevertheless a^ouch that one should live still, and endure this whole
world at all times, full of all temptations, both such as may be expected from
one oppressor, and thousands besides without which no man does nor can live?
What is the reason then, why we do spend so much time in our exhortations,
endeavoring to animate (a) those whom we have baptized, (b) either unto
virginity, or chaste widowhood, or honest and honorable marriage; seeing we
have both far shorter and far better ways to abandon all contagion and
danger of sin; namely in persuading every one presently after that remission
of his sins which he has newly obtained in baptism, to betake him
presently to a speedy death, and so send him presently away unto GOD, both
fresh and fair? If any man think that this is fit to be persuaded, I say
not he dotes, but I say he is plain mad: with what face can he say unto a
man, kill thy self, least unto thy small sins thou add a greater by living
in slavery unto a barbarous unchaste master? how can he (but with guilty
shame) say unto a man: kill thy self now that thy sins are forgiven thee,
least thou fall into the like again or worse, by living in this world, so
fraught with manifold temptation, so aluring with unclean delights, so furious
with bloody sacrileges, so hate-full (c) with errors and terrors? it is a shame
and a sin to say the one, and therefore is it so likewise to do the other.
For (d) if there were any reason of just force to authorize this fact, it must
needs be that which is fore-alledged. But it is not that, therefore there is
none. Loath not your lives then (you faithful of Christ) though the foe has
made ha^ock of your chastities. You have a great and true consolation, if your
conscience bear you faithful witness that you never consented unto their
sins who were suffered to commit such outrages upon you.

L. VIVES.
THose (a) whom we have baptized] [Least any man should mistake this place,
understand that in times of old, no man was brought unto baptism, but he was
of sufficient years The old manner of baptizing.
to know what that mystical water meant, and to require his baptism, yea and
that sundry times. Which we see resembled in our baptising of infants unto this
day. For the infant is asked (be it borne on that day, or a day before) whether
it will be baptized? Thrice is this [] all this is left out of ye Paris edition.
question propounded unto it: unto which the Godfathers answer, it will: I
hear that in some Cities of Italy they do for the most part observe the
ancient custom as yet. This I have related only to explane the meaning of
Augustine more fully.] (b) Either to virginity] He touches the three estates
of such as live well in the Church. (c) With so many errors and terrors] Of the
seventh chance, (d) For if there were any reason] A fit kind of argument, by
repugnance: which taking away the adiunct, takes the subject away also. Tully
mentions it in his Topikes.

How it was a judgment of God that the enemy was permitted to exercise his
lust upon the Christian bodies. CHAP. 27.
IF you ask me now why these outrages were thus permitted, I answer the
providence of the creator and governor of the world, is high, and his
judgments are unsearchable (a) and his ways past finding out: But ask your
own Romans 11. 33.
hearts sincerely whether you have boasted in this good of continency and
chastity, or no? whether you have not affected humane commendations for it, and
so thereby have envied it in others? I do not accuse you of that whereof I am
ignorant, nor do I know what answer your hearts will return you unto this
question. But if they answer affirmatively, and say you have done so, then
wonder not at all (b) that you have now lost that, whereby you did but seek
and (c) rejoice to please the eyes of mortal men: and that you lost not that
which could not be showed unto men. If you consented not unto the others
luxury, your souls had the help of Gods grace to keep them from loss, and
likewise felt the disgrace of humane glory, to deter them from the love of
it. But your faint hearts are comforted on both sides: on this side being
approved, and on that side chastised: justified on this, and reformed on the
other. But their hearts that give them answer that they never gloried in the
gift of virginity, viduall chastity, or continence in marriage: but (d)
sorting themselves with the meanest, did (e) with a reverend fear Romans 12. 1^.
Psalm. 2. 1^
rejoice in this gift of God; nor ever repined at the like excellence of
sanctity and purity in others; but neglecting the air of humane fame, (which
always is wont to accrue according to the rarity of the virtue that deserves
it) did wish rather to have their number multiplied, then by reason of their
fewness to become more eminent. Let not those that are such, (if the
Barbarians Just have seized upon some of them) (f) allege that this is
(merely) permitted: nor let them think that God neglects these things
because he sometimes permits that which no man ever commits unpunished:
for some, as weights of sin and evil desires, are let down by a pr^sent and
secret judgment, and some are reserved to that public and universal last
judgment. And perhaps those, who knew themselves vngu^e, and that never had
their hearts puffed up with the good of this chastity, (and yet had their
bodies thus abused by the enemy) had (notwithstanding) some infirmity lurking
within them which (g) if they had escaped; this humiliation by the wars fury
might have increased unto a fastidious pride. Wherefore (h) as some were taken
away by death, least wickedness should alter their understandings, so these
here were forced to forgo (i) something, least excess of prosperity should
have depraved their virtuous modesty. And therefore, from neither sort, either
of those that were proud, in that their bodies were pure from all unclean
touch of others, or that might have grown proud, if they had escaped the rape
done by their foes, from neither of these is their chastity taken away, but
unto them both is humility perwaded. The vainglory which is (k) immanent in
the one, and imminent over the other, was excluded in them both. Though this is
not to be ouer-passed with silence, that some that endured these violences,
might perhaps think, that continency is but a bodily good, remaining as long
as the body remains untouched* but that it is not soly placed in the strength
of the grace-assisted will, which sanctifies both body and soul: nor that it
is a good that cannot be lost against ones will: which error, this affliction
brought them to understand: for it they consider with what conscience they
honor God, and do with an unmoved faith believe this of him, that he will
not, nay cannot any way forsake such as thus and thus do serve him, and
invoke his name, and do not doubt of the great acceptance which he
vouchsafes unto chastity, Then must they need perceive that it follows
necessarily, that he would never suffer this to fall upon his Saints, if that
by this means they should be despoiled of that sanctimonie which he so much
affects in them, and infuseth into them.

L. VIVES.
ANd (a) his wayes] the vulgar (Romans 12. 35.) reads inuestigabiles for the
direct contrary, minime inuestigabiles. Inuestigabilis, is that which is
found, inuestigando, with searching out. But the ways of the Lord cannot be
found out by human understanding. The Greek is (...), imperuestigabiles,
unsearchable. (b) That you lost that] that you lost your fame, and fair
report, and yet lost not your chastity. (c) Rejoiced to please,] that is
lovingly desired. (d) But sorting themselves with the meanest] Romans 12. 16. Be
not high minded, but make your selves equal with them of the lower sort:
(...), says the original, verbally translated: humilibus abducti. (e) With
reverend feare] Psalm. 2. 11. Serve the Lord with fear, or rejoice with
trembling. (f) Alledge] we interpret not causari as the Philosophers do in
the Schools, in causa esse, to be the cause, but causam proferre, to allege
as cause, as Uirgill does, saying: Causando nostros in longum ducis amores.
With allegations thou prolongs our loves.


(g) If they had escaped this humiliation] Augustine here uses humilitas for
humiliatio, (I think) which is, a deiecting of a man by some calamity:
Unless that some will read it thus: Which if they had escaped, the humility
of this wars fury, might have blown them up into fastidious pride. (h) As
some were taken away] The words are in the fourth of the book of Wisdom, the
eleventh verse, and are spoken of Henoch: but they are not here to be
understood as spoken of him: (for he was taken up in his life unto the Lord:)
but of others who after their death were taken up to God for the same cause
that Henoch was, before his death. (i) Some thing] what that something was,
modest shame prohibiteth to speak. (k) Immanent in the one] not as the
Grammarians take it, namely for vncontinuing or transitory, but immanens,
quasi intus manens, inherent, ingrafted, or staying within. Augustine uses it
for to express the figure of Agnomination, or Paranamasia, which is in
Paranomasia.
the two words immanent and imminent; which figure he uses in many other
places.

What the servants of Christ may answer the In^dels, when they vpbrayde them
with Christ's not delivering them (in their afflictions) from the fury of their
enemies fury. CHAP. 28.
Wherefore all the servants of the great and true God have a comfort that's
firm and fixed, not placed upon frail foundations of momentary and
transitory things: and so they pass this temporal life in such manner, as
they never need repent them of enjoying it: because that herein they are
prepared for that which is eternal, using the goods of this world but as in a
pilgrimage, being no way entrapped in them, and so making use of the evils of
this world, as they make them serve always either to their approbation, or
their reformation. Those that insult upon this their uprightness, and (when
they see them fallen into some of these temporal inconveniences) say unto them
(a) where is thy God? Let them tell us, where their Gods are when they are
afflicted Psalm. 42. 3.
with the like oppressions? their gods, which either they worship, or desire to
worship only, for the avoiding of such inconveniences. The family of Christ
can answer, my God is every where present, in all places, whole and powerful,
no space includes him: he can be present, vn-perceiued, and depart away again,
unmoved. And he, when he afflicts us with these adversities, does it either
for trial of our perfections or reforming of our imperfections, still
reserving an eternal reward for our patient sufferance of temporal
distresses. But who are you, that I should vouchsafe to speak unto you,
especially of your gods, but most especially of mine own God (b) who is
terrible and to be feared above all Gods? for all the gods of the Heathen are
Diuills, but the Lord made the heavens. Psalm. 96. 4. 5


L. VIVES.
WHere (a) is thy God?] Psalm. 42. My tears have been my bread day and night,
whilst they daily said unto me: where is now thy God? (b) Who is terrible and
to be feared,] Psalm. 95. 4. 5.

That such as complain of the Christian times desire nothing but to live in
filthy pleasures. CHAP. 29.
IF that (a) your Scipio Nasica were now alive, he that was once your high
Priest, who (when in the fearful terror of the Carthaginian wars, the most
perfect man of all the city was sought for, to undertake the entertainment of
the Phrigian goddess) was chosen by the whole Senate, he whose face perhaps
you now durst not look on, he would shame you from this gross impud^nce of
yours. For what cause is there for you to exclaim at the prosperity of the
Christian faith in these times, but only because you would follow your luxury
uncontrolled, and having removed the impediments of al troublesome oppositions,
swim on in your dishonest and unhallowed dissolution? Your affections do not
stand up for peace, nor for universal plenty and prosperity, to the end that
you might use them when you hauethe^, as honest men should do: that is,
modestly, soberly, temperately, and religiously: No: but that hence you might
keep up your unreasonable expense, in seeking out such infinite variety of
pleasures, and so give birth unto those exorbitances in your prosperities,
which would heap more mischiefs upon you then ever befell you by your enemies.

(b) But Scipio your high Priest, he whom the whole Senate judged the best man
amongst you, fearing that this calamity would fall upon you (that I speak of)
would not have Carthage in those days the sole parallel of the Roman Empire
utterly subverted, but contradicted Cato, that spoke for the destruction of it,
because he feared the foe of all weak spirits, Security: and held that
Carthage would be unto his fellow Citizens (c) as if they were young punies)
both a convenient tutor, and a necessary terror. Nor did his judgment delude
him: the event it self gave sufficient proof whether he spoke true or no: for
afterward when Carthage was raized down, and the greatest curber and terror
of the Roman weale-publike utterly extinguished and brought to nothing;
Presently such an innumerable swarm of inconveniences arose out of this
prosperous estate, that the bonds of concord being all rent asunder and
broken, first with barbarous and (e) bloody seditions, and next (f) by
continual giving of worse and worse causes by civil wars, such slaughters
were effected, so much blood was shed by civil wars, and so much
inhumanitie was practiced in proscribings, riots and rapines, that those
Romans that in the good time of their lives feared no hurt but from their
enemies, now in the corrupt time of their lives endured far worse of their own
fellows: and that lust after sovereignty, which among all other sins of the
world, was most appropriate unto the Romans, and most immoderate in them all,
at length getting head and happy success in a few of the more powerful, it
ouerpressed all the rest, wearing them out and crushing their necks with the
yoke of vilde and slavish bondage.

L. VIVES.
IF that your Scipio (a) Nasica] This man was the son of Cnius Cornelius
Scipio, who was slain together with his brother Publius, by the Carthaginians
in Spain, in the second Scipio Nasica.
war of Africa. In the 14. year of which war the Decemuiri found a verse
amongst the rest of the Prophecies in the books of the Sybils, which foretold
that the enemy should be chased out of Italy if that the mother of the gods
were transported from Pessinuns, a city of Phrygia, unto Rome. Here-vpon an
embassage was sent to Attalus, who as then was King of that country, to demand
the mother of the gods of him, in the name of the Senate and people of Rome.
The Ambassadors as they went, took the Oracle of Delphos in their way, to
know what hope there was of attaining this mother of the gods of the stranger
King Attalus. The Oracle badde them be of good courage, Attalus would not be
against the fulfilling of their request for the Image: but withal willed them
to have an especial care that when she came into Italy, the best man of the
whole City of Rome should give her intertainment, and receive her into his
custody. So the ship returning unto Ostia with the Image of the goddess,
Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica was by the Senators (which were sworn to give
their opinions of the best man of the City) adjudged as the best man, he
being then but a youth and not out of his questorship, which was his first
step unto dignity; and so he by the decree of the Senate, received the
Phrigian goddess: Liuie in his 29. book and many others. (b) But Scipio] In
the 600. The original of the Carthaginian wars.
year after the building of Rome, when the Roman Ambassadors that had bin at
Carthage, reported that there they had found a huge deal of furniture for
shipping, and all things fit for a Nauall war, the Senate held a
consultation about the beginning of a war with the Carthaginians. Now Marcus
Portius Cato being Censor, to assure the Romans their estate at length, gave
counsel not only to begin this war, but utterly to extirpate and demolish
(this terror of theirs) Carthage. But Nasica Scipio (of whom we spoke but now)
would not see the people of Rome exposed to the inconveniences of too much
Idleness, nor that they should swim in too much security: and therefore
would have something to remain as a bridle to curb the headstrong appetite of
a powerful multitude: Where-vppon he gave them the counsel not only not to
destroy Carthage, but even not to begin a war with the Carthaginians
without a lawful and sufficient cause. Liuie and others. (c) As if they were
young punies [Ualerius writes that Appius Claudius used often to say that
employment did far more ext^l the people of Rome then quiet: that excess of
leisure and rest melted them into Labor better unto Rome then quiet.
slothfulness, but the rough name of business, kept the manners of the city
in their pristine state, vndeformed: when the sweet sound of quiet ever led
in great store of corruption. (d) When Carthage was raized] Salust in his war
of Iugurth says thus: for before Carthage was raized, the Senate and People of
Rome governed the weale-publike well, quietly and modestly betwixt th^-selues:
nor was there any contention for glory or domination amongst them: the fear of
the foes kept all the City in good arts and orders: but that fear being once
removed and abolished, then the attendants of prosperous estates, pride and
luxury, thrust in unrestrained. (e) And bloody sedi^. As first yt of Tiberius
Gracchus, then that of Caius his brother, in which two was the first civil
effusion of Citizens blood beheld: the first of these happened ten years
after Carthage was destroyed. (f) By continual giving of worse and worse
causes]. For through the sedition of Caius Gracchus was the office of the
Tribuneship invented, and bestowed on Li^ The (...) W^res.
Drusus, whom the Senators opposed against the Gentlemen, who stood for the law
that Gracchus had made. Hence arose the war called Sociale Bellum, because
Drusus reformed not the city as he promised: and hence arose the war of
Mithridates, who taking advantage of this discord of Italy, made many
thousands of the Italians that traffick'd in his dominions to be slain: and
hence arose the civil war of Marius who sought to get the undertaking of
this Province and war of Mithridates from Sylla. And from the seeds of this
war, sprung the wars of Sertorius, Lepidus, the conspiracy of Catiline, and
lastly the war of Pompey. And from that sprung the Empire of Caesar, and
after his death the civil wars of Anthony, of Brutus and Cassius at the
Philippi: of Sextus Pompeius in Sicilia, and that of Acti^. And lastly the
commonweals freedom turned into a tiriannical monarchy.

By what degrees of corruption the Romans ambition grew to such a height.
CHAP 30.
FOr when (...) ever this lust of sovereignty cease in proud minds, until it
(...) by co^ of honors attained unto the dignity of regal domination? And if
their ambition did not prevail, they then had no mean to continue their
honors: Now ambition would not prevail but amongst a people (...), (...).
(...). (...).
wholly corrupted with coueteousnes and luxury. And the people is alw^s
infected with these two contagions, by the means of affluent prosperity, which
Nasica did wisely hold fit to be foreseen and prevented, by not condiscending
to the abolishing of so strong, so powerful, and so rich a city of their
enemies: thereby to keep luxury in awful fear: that so it might not become
exorbitant, and by that means also covetousness might be repressed. Which two
vices once chained up, virtue (the cities supporter) might flourish, and a
liberty befitting this virtue might stand strong. And hence it was, out of this
most circumspect zeal unto his country, that your said high Priest, who was
chosen by the Senate of those times for the best man, without any difference of
voices, (a thing worthy of often repetition) when the Senate would have built
(a) a Theater, dissuaded them from this vain resolution: and in a most grave
oration, persuaded them not to suffer the (b) luxury of the Greeks to creep
into their old conditions, nor to consent unto the entry of foreign
corruption, to the subversion and extirpation of their native Roman
perfection, working so much by his own only authority, that the whole bench
of the judicious Senate being moved by his reasons, expressly prohibited the use
of (c) those mooueable seats which the Romans began as then to use in the
beholding of Plays. How earnest would he have been to have cleansed the
city of Nasica abolished the sitting at Plays.
Rome of the (d) Plays themselves, if he durst have opposed their authority
whom he held for Gods, being ignorant that they were malicious Devils: or if
he knew it, then it seems he held that they were rather to be pleased, then
despised. For as yet, that heavenly doctrine was not delivered unto the world,
which purifying the heart by faith, changes the affect, with a zealous piety to
desire and aim at the blessings of heaven, or those which are above the
heavens, and freeth men absolutely from the slavery of those proud and
ungracious Devils.

L. VIVES.
BVilt a (a) Theater.] Liuie in his 48. book, and Valerius Maximus de Instit.
antiq. write that Ualerius Messala, and Cassius being Censors, had given order
for a Theater to be The Roman I heater, when first erected.
built, wherein the people of Rome might sit and see plays. But Nasica
labored so with the Senate, that it was held a thing unfit, as prejudicial to
the manners of the people. So by a decree of the Senate, all that preparation
for the Theater was laid aside, and it was decreed that no man should place
any seats, or sit to behold any plays within the city, or within a mile of
the walls. And so from a little while after the third Affrican war, until
the sack of Corinthe, the people beheld all their plays standing, but as then
Lucius Memmius set up a Theater for the Plays at his Triumph, but it stood but
for the time that this triumph lasted. The first standing Theater Pompey the
Great built at Rome of square stone (as Cornelius Tacitus writes, lib. 14.)
the model whereof he had at Mytilene, in the Mithridatique war. Cauea here
in the text, signifies the middle front of the Theater, Cauea what it is in
the Theater.
which afterward was divided into seats for the Gentlemen, severed into ranks
and galleries. Sometimes it is taken for the whole audience, as Seruius notes
upon the eight of the Aeneads. (b) The luxury of the Greeks,] the Grecians
had Theaters before the Romans many ages, and the very Greek name proves
that they came first from Greece. For Theater is derived of (...), which is,
spectare, to behold. (c) Those moveable seates] standing but for a time. For
such Theaters were first in use at Rome before the standing, the continuing
Theaters came in and were made with mooueable seats, as Tacitus says, and the
stage built for the present time. (d) The Plays themselues] Such as were
presented upon the Stage: whereof, in the next book we shall discourse more at
large.

Of the first inducing of Stage Plays. CHAP. 31.
But know, (you that know not this) and mark (you that make show as if you
knew it not, and murmur at him that has set you free from such Lords) that
your Stage Plays, those (a) spectacles of uncleanness, those licentious
vanities, were not first brought up at Rome by the corruptions of the men, but
by the direct commands of your Gods: (b) It were far more tolerable for you
to give divine honors unto the forenamed Scipio, then unto such kind of
deities, for they were not so good as their Priest was: And now do but The
Priest better then his Gods.
observe, whether your minds being drunk with this continual ingurgitation
of error, will suffer you to taste a sip of any true consideration: Your Gods,
for the asswaging of the infection of the Pestilence that seized on their
bodies, commanded an institution of Stage Plays presently to be effected in
their honors: but your Priest, for avoiding the pestilence of your minds,
forbad that any stage should be built for any such action. If you have so much
wit as to prefer the mind before the body, then choose which of the two
said parties to (...) your God of: for (c) the bodily pestilence did not yet
cease, because that the delicate vanity of Stage Plays entered into the ears
of this people (being then wholly given unto wars, and accustomed only to the
(d) Circen^ The (...) (...).
plays) but the wily Devils foreseeing (by natural reason) that this plague
of the bodies should cease, by this means took occasion to thrust one far
worse, not into their bodies, but into their manners, in corrupting of which,
(...) their joy; and such a plague, as blinded the minds of that wretched
peop^ with such impenetrable clouds of darkness, and bespotted them with
such foul stains of deformity, that even now (though this may seem
incredible to Plague of (...) fol^ing the plague of (...).
succeeding ages) when this great Rome was destroyed, such as were p^ssed with
this pestilence, flying from that sack, could come even unto Carthage, and
here contend who should run maddest (e) after stage playing.

L. VIVES.
THose (a) Sp^ctacles of uncleanness,] for there was both most beastly shows
presented, and most filthy words spoken. (b) It were far more tolerable,]
Tertullian in his Apologeticus says: It were better to make Socrates the God
of Wisdom, Aristides of Justice. Themistocies os war, Tully of eloquence,
Sylla of prosperity, Craffus of riches, Pompey of Magnificence, and Cato of
gravity, for these men excel the gods in these specialities. And (...)
any of the ancient writers never denied, that their good men were better then
their gods: (...) (...) for one, De vitae tranquillitate, lib. 2. affirms,
that Cato of Utica was a better ex^ of a wise man then either Hercules or
Ulysses. Lucane calls him the true Father of his (...) worthy the Roman
Altars. (c) The bodily pestilence] Liuie in his 7. book, faith, (...) did the
first institution of Plays for augmentation of Religion, either augment
religion (...) (...) (...), or diminish the pestilence of their bodies. (d)
Circensian Playes] Those did Ro^ (...)
institute at Rome, in the fourth month after he had built the City (as
Fabius Pictor (...)) the same day that he forced away the Sabine Virgins. Some
say it was not until (...) ^fore-said time a great while, whom^ had rather
believe in this. Circenses they (...) (faith S^s) because they were encompassed
with swords: of Circa and (...) the (n^ as yet ^ice) antiquity, having not as
yet built any places fit for such ex^ ^ctifed the between a river side, and a
rank of swords, that the idle might see (...) on both sides. Afterward
Tarquinius Priscus appointed a ring for them, which (...)
(...) ^rward called Circus Max^: and every year once, as Liuie says, were
these games (...) being diversely named, as Magni, and Romani, and Circenses.
They were consecrated (...) God C^sus, whom the Greeks call (...), that is,
Neptune the Horse-rider, to whom Euander (as Dionysuus says) erected a temple
in Latium, and ordained a feast day for him which the Greeks called (...), and
the Latins Consualia, on which day all the horses and mules were exempted from
labor and were decked with garlands. Now that the Romans at that time, and
until the foresaid command, used only the Circensian plays, Liuie, lib. 7.
and valerius de institut are witnesses. (e) after stage playing] not that they
played themselves, Augustine does not mean so, but that they ran a madding
with the desire to see these strange plays.

Of some vices in the Romans, which their Cities ruin did never reform.
CHAP. 32.
O You senseless men, how are you bewitched, not with error but furor, that
when all the nations of the East (as we hear) bewail your cities ruin, and
all the most remote regions bemone your misery with public sorrow, you your
selves run headlong unto the Theaters, seeking them, entering them, filling
them, and playing far madder parts now then ever you did before? This your
plague of mind, this your wrack of honesty, was that, which your Scipio so
feared when he would not have any Theaters built for you: when he saw how
quickly your virtues would be abolished by prosperity, when he would not have
you utterly quitted from all fear of foreign invasions. He was not of
opinion that that co^mon-weale or city was in a happy estate, where the walls
stood firm, and the good manners lay ruined. But the seducements of the damned
spirits prevailed more with you, then the providence of circumspect men. And
hence comes it, that the mischiefs that your seles commit, you are so loath
should be imputed to your selves, but the mischiefs that your selves suffer,
you are ever ready to cast upon the Christian profession, for you in your
security do not seek the peace of the commonweal, but freedom for your
practices of luxury: you are depraved by prosperity, and you cannot be reformed
by adversity. Your Scipio would have had you to fear your foes, and so to
suppress your lusts: but (a) you, though you feel your foes, and are crushed
down by them, yet will not restrain your inordinate affects: (b) you have lost
the benefit of affliction, and though you be made most miserable, yet remain
you most irreformable. And yet it is Gods mercy that you have your lives still:
his very sparing of your lives, summons you unto repentance: he it was, that
(though you be ungrateful) showed you that favor as to escape your enemies
swords by calling of your selves his servants, or flying into the Churches of
his Martyrs.

L. VIVES.
THough (a) you feel your foes] Because you beheld the Plays at Carthage,
with such a dissolute, intemperate affection. (b) You have lost the benefit of
affliction,] whereby men are reformed, and by correction grow instructed: it
being imputed unto them for merit, to tolerate adverse fortune with patience.
Plato in his Gorgias says, that calamities The benefit of affliction
and afflictions are useful both to the sufferers, and the beholders,
bettering them both, one by their pain, the other by example.

Of the clemency of God in moderating this calamity of Rome. CHAP. 33.
IT is said that Romulus and Remus built (a) a Sanctuary, whereunto who so Of
sanctu aries or Asyla.
could escape, should be free from all assault or hurt: their endeavor in this
being to increase the number of their citizens. An example making way for a
wonderful honor unto Christ: The same thing, that the founders of the city
did decree, the same do the destroyers of it: And what if the one did it to
increase the multitude of their citizens, when the other did it to preserve
the multitude of their foes? Let this then, (and what soever besides fitly may
be so used) be used as an answer of our Lord Jesus Christ his flock, and that
pilgrim-citty of God, unto all their wicked enemies.

L. VIVES.
A (a) Sanctuary,] It is a sacred place, from whence it is not lawful to draw
any man: for thence is the name derived, coming of (...), rapio, to draw or
pull, and (...) the primi^ letter. And so by a figure called Lambdacismus, is
made asylum for asyrum. Serui^ (...) 8. Aenead. Though indeed (...) is tollere,
to take away, as Homer uses it: (...) etc. He took away the goodly arms.
After that Hercules was dead, his nephews and post^itie, fearing the oppression
of such as their grandfather had injured, built the first sanctuary at Athens,
naming it the temple of Mercy, out of which no man could be taken, And this
Statius testifies also. Now Romulus and Remus built one between the tower and
the Capitol, calling the place where it stood Inter-montium; intending hereby
that the multitude of offenders flocking hither for hope of pardon, would be a
mean to ^ent the number of inhabitants in this new City. To what God or
Goddess it was (...), it is unknown: Dionisius says he cannot tell. Some
say, unto Veiouis: But the gr^e of the Sa^tie is honored upon the fourth of
the Nones of February, as Ovid writ^ Pastorum 2. In Greece and Asia have been
many sanctuaries. Tiberius Caesar being out of liking with their too much
license, took from them almost all their liberties and privileges, as Tacitus
and Suetonius do report.

Of such of Gods elest as live secretly as yet amongst the Infidels, and of
such as are false Christians. CHAP. 34.
AND let this City of Gods remember, that even amongst her enemies, there are
some concealed, that shall one day be her Citizens: nor let her think it a
fruitless labor to bear their hate (a) until she hear their confession,
as she has also (as long as she is in this pilgrimage of this world) some
that are pertaker of the same sacraments with her, (b) that shall not be
pertakers of the Saints glories with her, who are partly known, and partly
unknown. Yea such there are, that spare not amongst Gods enemies to murmr
against his glory, whose character they bear upon them: going now unto Plays
with them, and by and by, unto the Church with us. But let us not despair of
the reformation of some of these, we have little reason, seeing (...) we have
many secret and predestined friends, even amongst our most (...) adversaries,
and such, as yet know not themselves to be ordained for (...) ^dship. For the
two cities (of the predestinate and the reprobate) are (...).
in this world, confused together, and commixt, until the general judgment
make a separation: of the original progress and due limits of both which
cities, what I think fit to speak, by Gods help and furtherance, I will
now be^ to the glory of the City of God, which being (d) compared with her
(...), will spread her glories to a more full aspect.

L. VIVES.
Until (a) she hear their confession.] At the last discovery, where every
man shall confess himself, which shall be then, when the books of men's
consciences are opened, that is in the world to come. (b) That shall not be
partakers,] According to the words of Christ, Many are called but few are
chosen. (c) Until the general iudgement] So it is in the Gospel. The Angels
shall separate the evil from the midst of the just in the end of the world.
(d) Compared with her contrary,] So Aristotle says, Contraries placed
together, show both the fuller.

What subjects are to be handled in the following discourse. CHAP. 35.
But we have a little more to say unto those that lay the afflictions of the
Roman estate upon the profession of Christianity, which forbids men to
sacrifice unto those Idols. For we must cast up a sum of all the miseries (or
of as many as shall suffice) which that City, or the provinces under her
subjection, endured before those sacrifices were forbidden. All which they
would have imputed unto our religion, had it been then preached and taught
against these sacrifices, when these miseries befell. Secondly, we must show
what customs and conditions the true God vouchsafed to teach them for the
increasing of their Empire, (a that God, in whose hand are all the kingdoms of
the earth: and how their false Gods never helped them a iotte, but rather did
them infinite hurt by deceit and inducement. And lastly, we will disprooue
those who though they be confuted with most manifest proofs, yet will needs
affirm still that their gods are to be worshipped, and that not for the
benefits of this life, but for those which are belonging to the life to come.
Which question (unless I be deceived) will be (b) far more laborious, and
worthier of deeper consideration, in the which we must dispute against the
Philosophers, (c) not against each one, but even the most excellent and
glorious of them all, and such as in many points hold as we hold, and namely of
the immortality of the soul, and of the worlds creation by the true God, and
of his providence, whereby he swayeth the whole creation. But because even
these also are to be confuted, in what they hold opposite unto us, we thought
it our duty not to be slack in this work, but conuincing all the
contradictions of the wicked, as God shall give us power and strength to
advance the verity of the City of God, the true zeal and worship of God,
which is the only way to attain true and eternal felicity. This therefore
shall be the method of our work: and now from this second exordium we will
take each thing in due order.

L. VIVES.
THat God (a) in whose hand] for Christ says, Math. 28. 18. All power is given
unto me in heaven and earth. (b) More laborious] Operosior, harder, of more
toil. (c) Not against each one] not against every common Philosopher or
smatterer, for so is quilibet, taken sometimes, as (...), is often in the
Greek. In this Chapter, Augustine shows briefly both what he has done
already, and how he means to proceed.

Finis Libri primi.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECND BOOK OF THE City of God.
1. Of the method that must of necessity be used in this disputation. 2. A
repitition of the contents of the first book. 3. Of the choice of an history
that will show the miseries that the Romans endured when they worshipped
their Idols, before the increase of Christian religion. 4. That the worshippers
of Pagan gods never received honest instruction from them, but used all
filthiness in their sacri^es. 5. Of the obscaenaties used in the sacrifices
offered unto ye mother of the gods. 6. That the Pagan gods did never establish
the doctrine of living well. 7. That the Philosophers instructions are weak
and bootlesse, in that they bear no divine authority, because that the
examples of the Gods are greater confirmation of vices in men, then the wise
men's disputations are on the contrary. 8. Of the Roman Stage Plays, wherein
the publishing of their foulest impurities did not any way offend, but rather
delight them. 9. What the Romans opinion was touching the restraint of the
liberty of Poefie, which the Greeks (by the council of their Gods) would not
have restrained at all. 10. That the Devils, through their settled desire to
do men mischief, were willing to have any villainy reported of them, whether
true or false. 11. That the Greeks admitted the Plaiers to bear office in
their commonweales, least they should seem unjust, in despising such men as
were the pacifiers of their (...). 12. That the Romans in abridging th^r
liberty which their Poets would have upon men, and allowing them to use it upon
their Gods, did herein show, that they prised themselves above the Gods. 13.
That the Romans might have ^serued their Gods unworthiness, by the (...) of
such obscane solemniti^. 14. That Plato, who would not allow Poets to dwell in
a well governed City, showed herein that his sole worth was better then all
the Gods, who desire to be honored with Stage Plays. 15. That flattery (and
not Reason) created some of the Roman Gods. 16. That if the Roman Gods had
had any care of justice, the City should have had her form of government from
them, rather then to borrow it of other nations. 17. Of the rape of the Sabine
women, and diverse other wicked facts, done in Romes most ancient and honorable
times. 18. What the history of Salust reports of the Romans conditions, both
in their times of danger and those of security. 19. Of the corruptions ruling
in the Roman state before that Christ abolished the worship of their Idols.
20. Of what kind of happiness, and of what conditions the accusers of
Christianity desire to partake. 21. Tullies opinion of the Roman
commonweal. 22. That the Roman Gods never respected whether the City were
corrupted, and so brought to destruction, or no. 23. That the variety of
temporal estates depends not upon the pleasure or displeasure of those
Devils, but upon the judgments of God Almighty. 24. Of the acts of Sylla,
wherein the Devils showed themselves his maine helpers and furtherers. 25. How
powerfully the Devils incite men to villainies, by laying before them examples
of divine authority (as it were) for them to follow in their villainous acts.
26. Of certain obscure instructions concerning good manners, which the Devils
are said to have given in secret, whereas all wickedness was taught in their
public solemnities. 27. What a great means of the subversion of the Roman
estate the induction of those Plays was, which they surmized to be
propitiatory unto the Gods. 28. Of the salvation attained by the Christian
religion. 29. An exhortation to the Romans to renounce their Paganism.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of the method which must of necessity be used in this disputation. CHAP. 1.
IF the weak custom of human sense durst not be so bold, as to oppose it
self against the reasons of apparent truth, but would yield this languid
infirmity unto wholesome instruction, as unto a medicine which were fittest to
apply, until by Gods good assistance, and faiths operation it were thoroughly
cured; then those that can both judge well, and instruct sufficiently, should
not need many words to confute any erroneous opinion, or to make it fully
apparent unto such, as their desires would truly inform. But now, because
there is so great and inueterate a d^sease rooted in the minds of the
ignorant, that they will (out of their extreme blindness, whereby they see
not what is most plain, or out of their obstinate perverseness whereby they
will not brook what they see) defend their irrational and brutish opinions,
after that the truth has beenetaught them as plain as one man can teach
another: hence it is, that (a) there arises a necessity, that binds us to
dilate more fully of what is already most plain, and to give the truth, not
unto their eyes to see, but even into their heads, as it were to touch and
feel. Yet notwithstanding this by the way: What end shall we make of
alteration, if we hold that the answerers are continually to be answered? For,
as for those that either cannot comprehend what is said unto them, or else are
so obstinate in their vain opinions, that though they do understand the truth,
yet will not give it place in their minds, but reply against it, as it is
written of them: like spectators of iniquity, those are eternally frivolous:
And if we should bind our selves to give an answer to every contradiction
that their impudency will thrust forth, (how falsely they care not, so they do
but make a show of opposition unto our assertions) you see what a trouble it
would be, how endless, and how fruitless. And therefore (son Marcelline) I
would neither have you, nor any other (to whom this our work may yield any
benefit in Jesus Christ) to read this volume with any surmise, that I am bound
to answer whatsoever you or they shall hear objected against it: least you
become like unto the women of whom the Apostle says, that they were always
learning, and never able to come 2. Tim. 3.
unto the knowledge of the truth.

L. VIVES.
H^ (...) i^ that (a) there arises a necessity] The latin text is, fit
necessitus, spoken by a G^e figure, (...), says Demosthenes: (...),
necessitas, for necesse: and it is an ordinary phrase with them, though the
Latynes say, est necessitas, as Quintilian has it.

Arepetition of the Contents of the first book. CHAP. 2.
THerefore in the former book, wherein I began to speak of the City of God,
to which purpose all the whole work (by Gods assistance) shall have reserence,
I did first of all take in hand to give them their answer, that are so
shameless as to impute the calamities inflicted upon the world, (and in
particular upon Rome in her last desolation wrought-by the Vandales) unto the
religion of Christ, which forbids men to offerre service or sacrifice unto
devils: whereas they are rather bound to ascribe this as a glory to Christ,
that for his names sake alone, the barbarous nations (beyond all practice and
custom of wars) allowed many and spacious places of religion for those
(ungrateful men) to escape into; and gave such honor unto the servants of
Christ, (not only to the true ones but even to the counterfeit), that what the
law of arms made lawful to do unto all men, they held it utterly unlawful
to offer unto them. And hence arose these questions: How and wherefore these
gracious mercies of God were extended unto such ungodly and ungrateful
wretches as well as to his true servants, and why the afflictions of this siege
fell upon the godly (in part) as well (...) on the reprobate? For the better
dissoluing (a) of which doubts, I stayed somew^ long in a discourse of the
daily guiftes of God, and the miseries of man, ^ing out in the whole tract of
this transitory life, (both which, by reason that they often light confusedly
together, alike, and vndistinguished both upon good ^ers and impious, are very
powerful in moving the hearts of many): and mine especial intent herein was
to give some comfort unto the sanctified and chaste women, who had their
chastities offended by some incontinent acts of the foldiours: and to show
them, that if those accidents had not wrackt their c^ resolutions, they ought
not to be ashamed of life, having no guilt in them whereof to be ashamed, and
then I took occasion to speak somewhat against those that in such villainous
and impudent manner do insult over the poor Christians in their adversities;
and chiefly over the deflowred women; these fellows themselves being most
unmanly and depraved wretches, altogether degenerate from the true Romans,
unto whose honors (being many, and much recorded) these base creatures are so
directly opposite. For it was these, that made Rome (which was first founded,
and after increased by the care (...) industry of her old worthies) to show
more filthy and corrupted in her prosper^y, then she was now in her ruin: for
in this, there fell but stones, walls and houses; but in the lives of such
villains as these, all the monuments, all the ornaments, (not of their walls,
but) of their manners were utterly demolished: as then did ^se fire burn in
their affections, then this was now that did but (...) their houes: with the
close of this, I gave an end unto the first book, and now (as I r^ed) will
proceed, to cast up a reckoning of the sundry mischienes that this City of Rome
has suffered since she was first founded, either in herself or in some of
the Provinces under her command: all which those vile persons would have pinned
upon the back of Christianity, if the doctrine of the gospel against their
false and deceitful gods had in those times been revealed and preached.

L. VIVES.
DI^ing (a) of which d^bs] The first of these, was ye chief question of those
Philosophers yt denied the world to be governed by the providence of God. Plut.
de placit. Philosoph. lib. 1

Of the choice of an history which will show the miseries that the Romans
endured, when they worshipped their Idols, before the increase of Christian
Religion CHAP. 3
But remember this, that when I handled those points, I had to do with the
ignorant, out of whose blockish heads this proverb was first borne: (a) It will
not rain because of the Christian. For there are some others amongst them that
are learned, and love that very history that makes these things plain to their
understanding: but because they love to set ye blind and erronius vulgar at
enmity and dissension with us Christians, they dissemble and conceal this
understanding of theirs, laboring to persuade the people this, that the whole
process of calamities, which at diverse times and in several places (b) fell
and were still to fall upon all the world, had the original, and have had,
only and merely from the profession of Christ, greeuing that it spreads so
far and shines so gloriously against all other their gods and religions. But
let these malicious men read but with us, with what excess of affliction the
Romain estate was wrung and plagued, and that on every side, before that ever
this name (which they so much do envy) did spread the glory to such note: and
then if they can, let them defend their gods goodnesses showed unto them in
these extremities, and if that as their servants they honor them for
protection from these extremities, which if they do but suffer now in any part,
they are ready to lay all the blame upon our necks, for why did their gods
permit their servants to be plagued with these great afflictions (which I am
now to recount) before that the publishing of the name of Christ gave them
cause of offense, by prohibiting their sacrifices.

L. VIVES.
IT (a) will not raine] He rehearses this, as a common speech of the wicked
infidels, who How hateful the name of Christians was once at Rome.
would impute all the evils that happened them unto the Christian cause.
Tertullian, Pretending for the defense of their hatefulness, this vanity
besides, that they held the Christians the only causers of all the mischiefs
and harms that fall upon the state and city. If Tiber ouer-flow his banks,
if Nilus do not water the fields, if the heavens stand, or the earth shake; if
there arise either famine or plague, straight to the Lions with a Christian
cries the whole crew. Cypryan against Demetrianus. If whereas you say that many
complain that it is imputed unto us that there is so often wars,
pestilences, famines, inondations, and droughts, then we must be no longer
silent, etc. (b) Fell, and were still to fall] Through the euer-changing estate
of humanity, and that Fate which is indeed the will of almighty God.

That the worshippers of Pagan gods never received honest instruction from
them; but used all filt hinesse in their sacrifices: CHAP. 4.
FIrst, why would not their gods have a care to see their servants well mannerd:
the true God does worthily neglect those yt neglect his just worship: but as
for those gods whom this wicked and ungrateful crew complain that they are
forbidden to worship, why do they not help to better the lives of their
worshippers by giving the^ some good laws? It was very requisite that as they
carefully attended their gods sacrifices, so their gods should have
graciously amended their imperfections. I (but will some say) every man may be
vicious at his own The gods never taught. their worships good manners.
will and pleasure. True; who denies that? yet notwithstanding, it was the part
of these great gods guardia^s, not to conceal the forms and rudiments of good
and honest life from their suppliants; but to to teach them plain, and fully,
and by theirs Prop^ to correct and restrain the offenders: to testrain evil
doers with publik punishments, and to encourage good livers with full rewards:
what Temple of of (...) this multitude of gods, was ever accessory to any such
sound? we our selves (once in our youth) went to view these spectacles, their
(a) sacriligious mockeries: there we saw the (b) Enthusiastikes, persons rapt
with fury; there we heard the (c) pipers, and took (d) great delight in the
filthy sports that they B^hia Mother of the Gods.
acted before their gods and goddesses: even before Berecynthia (surnamed the
Celestial virgin, and mother to all the gods) even before her litter, (e) upon
the feast day of her very purification, their (f) beastly stage-plaiers acted
such ribauldry, as was a shame (not only for the mother of the gods, but) for
the mother of any senator of any honest man, nay even for the mothers of the
players them selves to give care too: Natural shame has bound us with some
respect unto our parents, which vice it self cannot abolish. But that
beastlynesse of ob^ speeches and actions, which the Players acted in public,
before the mother of all the gods, and in sight and hearing of an huge
multitude of both sexes, they would be ashamed to act at home in private before
their mothers (g) were it but for repitition sake. And as for that company that
were their spec^, though they might easily be drawn thither by curiosity, yet
beholding c^ity so foully injured, me thinks they should have been driven from
thence by the meet shame that immodesty can offend honesty withal. What can
^dges be, it those were sacrifices? or what can be pollution, if this were a
The (...) offered to the Gods.
purification? and these were called (h) Iuncates, as if they made a feast
where all the v^eane d^ of hell might fill their bellies. For who knows not
what (...) of spirit (...) are that take pleasure in these obscurities? unless
he (...) (...) that there be any such unclean spirits that thus illude men
under the names of gods: or else, unless he be such an one as wishes the
pleasure, and fears the displeasure of those damned powers more then he does
the love and wrath of the true and everliving God.

L. VIVES.
SAcriligious (a) mockories] Inuerting this, the holy plays, a phrase used
much by the Pagans. (...) (...) (...).
(b) The Enthusiastikes persons rapt] This place requires some speech of the
mother of the gods: Diodorus Siculus (Biblioth lib. 4.) tells the story of this
Mother of the gods diverse ways. For first he writes thus. Caelus had by his
wife Titaea five and forty children, two of which were women, called Regina,
and Ops: Regina being the elder, and miser of the two, brought up all her other
brethren (to do her mother a pleasure) and therefore she was called the
mother of the gods, and was married to her brother Hiperion, to whom she
(...) Sol and Luna; who being both murdered by their uncles wicked practices,
she fell mad, ranging up and down the Kingdom with a noise of drums and
cimbals, and that this grew to a custom after she was dead. Then he adds
another fable: that one Menoes an ancient King of Phry^ had by his wife
Dindimene, a daughter whom he caused to be cast forth upon mount Cy^, (...)
that the infant being nourished up by wild beasts; grew to be of admirable
beauty, and (...) (...) by a ^pheardesse, was by her brought up as her own
child, and named Cibele (...). (...).
of the (...) (...) (...) was found: that she innented many arts of her own
head, and taught (...) (...) (...) (...) on pipes, danncing, drums and
cimbals, also farying of horses and (...) (...) (...) (...) (...)* wherein she
was so fortunate that they named her The great mother. A^.
G^ing up unto years she fell in love with a youth of that country called
Atis, and being with child^ by (...) was s^ for back by her father Menoes for
a Uirgin: but the guilt being known, (...) and the Nurses were put to death:
and Cibele being extremely in love with Atis fell mad, (...) (...) her
fathers house along with a Timbrell and a cimball, she came to Nisa to Dioni^
(...) (...)) where s^ few years after she dyed: And soon after a great famine
toge^ (...) (...), (...) all P^gia, the inhabitants were commanded by Oracle to
give divine worship to Atis and Cibele: and hence arose the first canonization
of the Mother of the gods. Thus far Diodorus, who no doubt has declared the
true original of it as it was. But some do guess that she was the mother of
Jupiter, Juno, Neptune and Pluto, and therefore was called Rhea, and in latin
Ops: and Cibele, and Vesta, as all one. Nor make I any question but that this
history is confounded, as is usual in every fable of the gods: that she was a
virgin, and therefore named Vesta, and that therefore Atys was feigned to be a
goodly young man, whom she loving, and commanding that she should never meddle
with any other woman, he neglecting her command, fell in love with a Nymph
called Sangritis, which Cybele deprived him of those parts whereby he was
man, and for that reason ever since will have her Priests defective in that
fashion. And because that she was most ordinarily worshipped of the Phrygians
upon Mount Ida, there upon she got the name of the Idean mother, and of
Berecynthia, as also of the Phrigian goddess: Hie Priests were called The
Priests called Galli.
Galli, of the river Gallus in Phrigia, the water whereof being drunk, makes
men mad. And these Galli themselves, do wherle their heads about in their
madness, slashing their faces and bodies with knives, and tearing themselves
with their teeth when they are either mad in show, or mad indeed. Their
goddess, (which was nothing but a great stone upon Mount Ida) the Romans
transported into Italy, the day before the Ides of April, which day they
dedicated unto her honors, and the plays called Megalesia as on that day were
acted. Liuy lib. 29. speaking of the Mother of the gods has these words. They
brought the goddess into the Temple of Victory which is on the Mount
Palatine, the day before the Ides of April. So that was made her feast day.
And all the people brought gifts unto the goddess, unto the Mount Palatine,
and the Temples were spread for banquets, and the Plays were named Megalesia,
this is also in his sixteenth book. About the same time a Temple was dedicated
unto the great Idean mother, which P. Cornelius received, being brought out of
Asia by sea, P. Cornelius Scipio (afterward surnamed Africane) and P. Licinius
being consulls. M. Liuius, and C. Claudius being censors, gave order for the
building of the Temple: And thirteen years after, it was dedicated, or
consecrated by M. Iunius Brutus; M. Cornelius, and T. Sempronius being
Consulls; and the Plays that were made for the dedication thereof, (being the
first plays that ever came on stage;) Antias Valerius affirms were named
Megalesia: Thus far Liuy: To whom Varro agrees also liber. 3. de lingua
Latina. Enthusiastiques, or persons rapt] Were men distraught, taken with
madness, as Bertcynthia's Galli were. Saint Augustine upon Genesis calls them,
men taken with spirits possessed. (c) Pipers] Or the singers, Symphoniacos, it
comes (...), which is Harmony, or consort. In the feasts of Cybele, was much
of this numerall music, with Pipes and Tymbrells. Hereof Ovid sings thus
(in his fastorum, lib, 4.) Protinus inflexo Berecynthia tybia cornu,
Flabit and Idaeae festa parentis erunt:
Ibunt Semimares, and inania tympana tundent;
Aera^ tinnitus are repulsa dabunt.
Then Berecynthias crooked pipes shall blovv,
The Idaan mothers feast approaches now,
Whose gelded Priests along the streets do pass,
With Timbrells, and the tinckling sounds of brass.


And a little after: Tibia dat Phrygios vt dedit ante, modos:
The Phrygian Pipe sounds now, as late before.


Diodorus says the pipe was Cybele's invention, and that she taught Marsiat;
him, that contended with Apollo. (d) We were delighted:] Some read they were
delighted but erroniously: we read it, with more reason, in the first person,
We were delighted with the filthy plays etc. Now though this Berecynthia was
mother to so many gods yet they held that she was a Virgin, as being Vesta as
well as Berecynthia, as also because he would have her father Menoes to take
her for such an one, and so to believe. (e) The feast day of her purification]
The day before the Ides of April, the Galli, her Priests used to carry the
Image of this great Mother in as great pomp, unto the river Almon (which The
ablution of the mother of the gods.
falls into Tyber not far from Rome) and there (according to the order of
an old custom) to wash it in the meeting of both the rivers: I say by an old
custom. For the first day that it was brought from Asia, the Priest washed it
there, whereupon, that order was kept every year. Hereof sings Lucane. (...)
(...) p^ r^ Al^ Cibelen, etc. lib. 1.
Cibele vvasht in Almon they fetch back etc.


But Ovid more p^nely: Est lo^ (...) Tib^ quo lubricus in fluit Almon
E^ (...) (...) per dit in amne minor.
(...) (...) (...) cum vest Sacerdos,
(...) Al^ sacraque louit aquis. Fastorum. 4.
There is a place were Almons current flovves
To Tibers streams, and so his name does lose:
There vvasht the aged priest (in purple clad)
The Goddess, and the relics which he had,


And Prudentius, writing of Saint Romanus his martyrdom, says thus: N^dare
plant^ ante carpentum sci^
Pr^ceres togatos in atris Idaeae sacris
Lapis nig^llus eue^endus essedo,
M^ebris o^s clausus arge^to sedet,
Quem ad laua^rum pr^do ducitis,
Ped^ re^ atterentes ^eis.
Almonis (...) (...) riv^.
I know when Cibels feasts are honored,
Your Lords all barefoot march before the throne,
Whereon, in a rich chariot, the black stone
Sits in a vvomans shape ore siluered,
Which when to purifying you do lead,
You walk before it, in strange uncouth shoes,
Until you reach the place where Almon flovves.


(f) Beastly Stage-players] The first Stage Plays every year were the
Megalesian, wherein the Players coming forth to this new task, spoke most
filthy and abominable lafciuious The Megalesian plays
words upon Cibel and Atis: and at that time diverse of the most civil
Romans, disguising themselves from being known, went wandering about the
streets in all licentiousness. No speech, to act of unclean luxury was left
unpracticed, as Herodian affirms in the life of Co^dus. (g) Even for
repetition sake] though they spoke it but for exercising their memories, for
learning of it by heart. (h) Iuncates] The text is fercula a ferendo, of
carrying, because in sollemnities either of religion or triumph they carry
pictures and statues with reverence, Fercula what they were.
as the Images of the gods and worthies were in the sacrifices: and in their
triumps they carried the pictures of such cities as they had conquered, and
such arms as they had despoyled their foes off, the money that they had taken,
and the rest of the pillage whatsoever, So says Tully, Su^tonius and others.
And such meats also as were set on the table at sacr^, were called Fercula,
because they were brought in upon chargers very statefully, and with a kind of
religious reverence.

Of the obscaenities used in these sacrifices offered unto the mother of the
gods. CHAP. 5.
NOr will I stand to the judgment of those whom I know do rather delight in
the vicious custom of enormities then decline from it: I will have Scipio
Nasica himself to be judge, and he whom the whole Senate proclaimed for their
best man, one whose only hands were thought fit to receive and bring in
this Devils picture: let him but tell us first whether that he desire that his
mothers deserts were such that the Senate should appoint him Di^ ho^r (...) to
be^factors.
divine honors: (as we read that both the Greeks and other Roman nations,
also have ordained for some particular men whose worth they held in high
esteem, and whose persons they thought were made immortal, and admitted
amongst the gods.) Truly he would gladly wish his mother this felicity, if that
such a thing could be. But if we ask him then further, whether he would have
such ^thy pres^tations as Cibeius enacted as parts of his mothers honors;
would he not a^ow (think you) that he had rather have his mother lie dead and
soncelesse, then to live a goddess, to hear and allow such ribauldry? Yes:
Far be it (...) such a worthy Senator of Rome, as would forbid the
building of a Theater in a state maintaind by valor, to wish his mother that
worship (...) please her goddesse-shippe, which could not but offend all
woman-hood. (...) it possible that he could be persuaded, that divinity could
so far alter the lawdable modesty of a woman, as to make her allow her
servants to call upon her in such immodest terms, as being spoken in the
hearing of any living woman, if she stop not her ears and get her gone, the
whole kindred of her father, husband, children and all would blush, and be
ashamed at her shamefulnesse. And therefore such a mother of the gods as this,
(whom even the worst man would shame to have his mother a like unto) did never
seek the best man of Rome (in her entrance into the peoples affections) to
make him better by her counsels and admonitions, but rather worse, by her
deceites and illusions: (like her of whom (a) it is written. A woman hunteth
for the precious life of a man:) that his great spirit being elevated by this
(as it were divine) testimony Pro. 6. 26
of the Senate he holding himself soly the best, might be thus with-drawne
from the truth of religion, and godliness: without which, the worthiest wit is
ever ouer-throwne and extinguished in pride and vain glory, what intent then
(save deceit) had she in selecting the best and most honests man, seeing she
uses and desires such things in her sacrifices as honest men abhor to use,
were it but even in their sports, and recreations?

L. VIVES.
OF whom (a) it is witten] Proverbs 6. 26. Hierome reads it, Capit, takes:
Saint Augustine reads Captat, as the Septuagints do (...), Venatur, hunteth:
more aptly.

That the Pagans gods did never establish the doctrine of living well. CHAP. 6.
HEnce it proceeds that those gods never had care of the lives and manners of
such Cities and nations as gave them divine honors: but contrariwise gave free
permission to such horrible and abominable evils, to enter, not upon their
lands, vines, houses, or treasures, no nor upon the body (which serves the
mind) but upon the mind it self, the ruler of all the flesh, and of all the
rest: this they ever allowed without any prohibition at all. If they did
prohibit it, least it be proved that they did. I know their followers will
talk of certain secret traditions and I know not what, some closely muttred
instructions, tending to the bettring of man's life, but let the^ show where
ever they had any public places ordained for to hear such lectures: (wherein
the Plaiers did not present their filthy gesture and speeches: nor where the
(a) Fugulia were kept with all licentiousness of lust, fitly called Fugalia,
as the Chasers away of all chastity and honesty:) but where the people might
come and hear their gods doctrine concerning the restraint of covetousness,
the suppression of ambition, and the brideling of luxury and riot: where
wretches might learn that which (b) Persius thunders unto them, saying.
Discitique (...) miscri, and causas cognoscite r^rum,
Quid sunus, aut quidnam victuri gignimu^ ^or do
Quis ^tus, aut metoe quam mollis flexus, and Under
Quis modus orgenti, quid fas optare, quid aspe^
V^ nu^mus b^et: patriae charisque propinquis
Quantum elargiri decet, quem te Deus esse
(...), and humana qua part locatuses in re.
Learn wretches, and conceive the course of things
b What man is, and why nature forth him brings: Satyra 3.

His settled c bounds, from whence how soon he straies:
d What welths mean, and e that for which the good man prays
f How to use money: how to give to friends,
What we in earth, g and God in us, intends, etc.


Let them show where these lessons of their instructing Gods were ever read or
rehearsed: whether ever there worshippers were used to hear of any such
matters, as we use to do continually in our Churches, erected for this
purpose in all places wheresoever the religion of Christ is diffused.

L. VIVES.
NOr (a) where the fugalia] Of these feasts I do not remember that I ever read
any thing save here. I would not let to set down somewhat out of my
conjecture that the reader might admit another word for it, but that Augustine
himself adds, truly called The Fugalia.
fugalia, viz of chastity and honesty. And though I know many conjectures which
indeed whilst the truth is unknown are but truth, being once discovered are
ridiculous, yet I will see what good may be done unto others understandings in
this respect: that if I reveal not the truth I may stir up others to seek
it. First Uarro (de lingua latina lib. 5.) writes that one day of the month of
June was named Fugia, because the people on that day fled into Rome in a
tumult: for it was not long after the Galls, who had chased the^ out, were
departed: Fugia, a goddess.
and then the Countries that lay about Rome, as the Ficulneates, and the
Fidenates, conspired all against them: some significations of the flight of
this day do as yet remain in the monuments: whereof in our books of
Antiquities you may read at large; thus far varro. This was the feast of the
goddess fugia, so called because they chased away their enemies: For the next
day after, the Romans conquered all their foes about them, and thereupon these
feasts were kept with great mirth and sollemnity; for they were in a great
fear least the remainder of the Roman nation leaft by the Galls should have
been utterly destroyed by the rest. (Hilus in his book of the gods calls
this goddess Vitula, (now Philo says that Uictoria was called Uitula, as
Macrobius testifies in his Saturnalia.) wherefore these fugalia, Vitula.
or fugialia were feasts kept with all mirth and reuells unto the goddess
Laetitia, the second of the Nones of June. In which feast, it is likely that
the people let themselves loose to all riot and licentiousness. This I speak
not intending to prejudice any other man's assertion, but only to excite others
to look farther into the matter if they hold it a matter worth looking into
The Fugalia wear feasts in Rome instituted for the expulsing of Ta^quin and
the Kings: a Fugando, says Censorinus.
(b) Persius.] In his third satire, upon an old sentence Nosce teipsum, that
had wont to be written upon the door of Apollo his Temple, dilateth as
aforesaid. (c) Bounds from which how soone] In the Hippodromi, or horse-races
there were seven bounders: Domitian in certain games ordained that they
should run but unto the fifth: because he would have the sports sooner
performed. Seven times they touched all these bounds, says Suetonius in his
life. And there was great care and cunning in turning of their horses and
chariots from bound to bound, least he that was behind by his quicker turn
should get before him that led -- Propertius. Aut prius infecto deposcit premia
cursu,
Septima quam metam triuerit ante rota.
Or claims his guerdon ere the course be done,
Before his wheels past the seventh mark have run.


And hereto belongs that of Horace: Od. I. Sunt quos curriculo puluerem
Olympicum,
Collegisseiuuat, metaque feruidis
-- Euitata rotis etc.
Some love to see the Olympic dust to lie,
About their chariot, and to thunder by
-- The mark, with heated wheels etc.


In the courses amongst the Grecians, there were some where it was not
sufficient to run unto the mark, but they must run back again to the
start: their turn at the halfecourse, they called the Diaulodrom^s, for (...)
is the going about of a certain space (as Vitruuius says lib. 5.) which those
that compassed six times were called Dolichodromi, and this is properly the
signification of Meta, and Flexus in the text. Persius either thinks (...).
that it is easy to turn out of a virtuous course into a vicious, or
contrariwise that it is hard to turn from the later to the first, when custom
once has rooted it in our affections and given it power to tiranize: wherefore
he wills us to restrain that use be-times, because it is not in our power to
thrust the yoke of it from our necks, when and where we would. Or he may mean
of the variation of our age, as when we pass from childhood unto man's
estate, wherein it is fit we alter our conditions, (as he in Terence says)
or when we leave our lusty and active part of life, our man's state, for a more
settled and retired age. Whereof Cicero (in his first book de Oratore) says
thus. If the infinite toil of law businesses and the eployments of ambition
should have concurred with the ebb of honors and the decay of our bodily
vigor through age etc. But more plainly in his Oration for Marcus Caelius: and
in the same Metaphore. In this declining age, (for I will hide nothing from
you; my trust of your humanity and wisdom is so great) indeed the young man's
fame stuck a little at the bound, by reason of his unhappy neighborhood and
knowledge of that woman, etc. We must not look to these turns in the
horse-races only, but in our lives also, and within our selves, says Seneca
(de tranquillit. Uitae lib. 1.) There were bounds also in their water-games, or
sea-sights, when and where to turn. Hic viridem Aeneas frondenti ex illice
metam,
Constituit signum nautis pater vndereuerti
Scirent, and longos vbi circumflectere cursus. Says Virgil.
Here did Aencas set upon an oak
A signal, which informed the Sailors plain,
How far to row, and where to turn again. Aevead. (...)


I have seeene this place of the text read thus in an old copy, Qua mollis
flexus et vnde, which indeed is not much amiss: Anthony of Lebrixa, our
industrious gramarian, reads it so. (d) Wealths meane] Out of Plato, whence
Persius has all his morallitie. In the dialogue called Phaedo, Socrates
prays thus: O my dear Pan, and all you other gods give me that eternal
beauty: grant that all my external adjuncts may be confined to my affects
within: let me think him only wealthy that is wise. Let me have but so much
of riches, as no man but he that is temperate can sway, or dispose off. Thus
prayed Socrates: and indeed moderat wealth is better worth wishing, then
excess. (e) And that for which] This he has from Alcibiades in Plato (lib. 2.
de voto) Wherein Plato teaches him what to pray for. The said sentence of
Socrates, Valerius rehearses also. (Lib. 7.) Of prayers Iuuenall says thus:
Orandum est vt sit men's sana in corpore sano.
Pray for a sound soul, in as sound a breast.


Perhaps this limitation of Persius has reference to that which follows. How
to use money. (f) How to use money] Asper in the text joined with Nummus,
signifies the roughness of the coin being newly stamped, and which is worn
smooth by passing from hand to hand. So Pliny calls carved vessels, which
are graced with any bosses or branches standing out, Aspera, Rough Silver.
rough. Suetonius says that Nero sought for tried gold, and rough or new
coined money, with exceeding greediness. Whether it be taken here for newlly
coined, or because rough pieces were better then the smooth, or what they were
I know not. But that the same vneuen'd pieces were called rough, the definition
of roughness in Plato his Timaeus does show. Roughnes) Roughnes defined.
(says he) is hardness commixt with vneuenesse. (g) God in us intends] This
is out of Plato also, who makes God the commander of al mankind, assigning
every one his particular station, as in a pitched field, from whence he may
not depart without his command. And it is a good help unto the instruction of
our life, that each of us know, in what rank of mankind he is placed, so to
adapt his life to his estate, and discharge his function duly: be he a
husbadman or a citizen, a free man or a servant; a craftsman, a scholar, a
minister, a soldiour, an officer, (...) Prince, or a private man.

That the Philosophers instructions are weak and bootlesse, in that they bear
no divine authority: because that the examples of the gods are greater
confirmations of vices in men, then the wise-mens disputations are on the
contrary part. CHAP. 7.
DO you think they will mention their Philosophy schools unto us? as for them
first of al they are derived from Greece, and not from Rome: or if you say they
are now Roman because Greece is become a Province of the Romans, I answer
again that the instructions given there are not of the documents of your gods,
but the inventions of man, whose quick wits especial endeavor was to find by
disputation (a) what secrets were hid in the treasury of nature: (b) what was
to Philosophies precepts.
be desired, and what to be avoided in our Morallity (c) And what was
cohaerent by the Laws of disputation, or not following the induction, or quite
repugnant unto it. And some of these gave light to great inventions, as the
grace of God assisted them, but yet they evermore erred, as the frailty of man
possessed them; the The Philosophers more worthy of divine honor then the Gods.
divine providence justly opposing (d) their vain glory to show the tract of
piety to rise from humbleness unto height, by their comparrison: Which we
shall hereafter take an occasion to search into further by the will of the true
and everlasting God. But if it were true that these Philosophers invented any
means sufficient to direct one to the attaining of a happy course of life, is
there not far greater reason to give them (d) divine honors; then the other?
How much more honest were it for to hear Platoes books read in a Temple of
his, then the Galli gelded in the devils? To view the (e) effeminate
consecrated; the lunatike gashed with cuttes, and each thing else either cruel
or beastiall, or bestially cruel, or cruelly bestiall, so commonly celebrated
in the sollemnities of such gods? Were it not far more worthy to have some
good laws of the gods rehearsed unto the youth for their instruction in
integrity, then to pass the time in vain commendations of the labors of
illuded antiquity; but indeed (f) all the worshippers of such gods, as soon
as they are initiate unto those luxurious and venomous adorations, (g) As
Persius says, do look more after Jupiters deeds, then either Platoes
doctrine, or Catoes opinions. (h) And here-vpon it is that Terence bringes in
the lustful youth gazing upon a table picture wherein was drawn how Jove sent
down a shower of gold into the lap of Danae: and this was a fit president for
this youth to follow in his lust, with a boast that he did but imitate a god.
But what god (says he): Even he that shakes the Temples with his thunder:
since he aid thus, shall I (a mean wretch to him) make bones of it? No; I did
it with all mine heart.

L. VIVES.
WHat (a) secrets were hid] He touches the three kinds of Philosophy: in this
place the Natural. (b) what was to be desired] Here the Moral. (c) What was
coherent] Here the Rational or Logical. Of these hereafter. (d) Their vain
glory] Because all that they invented they ascribed unto their own wits
sharpness, and not a whit unto gods influence. Of this Lactantius disputes at
large. (e) Effeminate consecrated.] Al these Galli were al of them beastly
villains, Sodomites given to al filthiness in the world. Of whom Apuleyus
relates most abominable things, in the eighth and ninth book of his Ass: So
does Lucian also, whence Appuleyus had his argument. (f) All the worships] The
examples of those whom we reverence do move us much: for we indeauor to imitate
them in all things, be they gods or men: the people affects the fashion of the
Prince, the scholars of the master they honor, and all mortal men their
conditions whom they hold immortal. And here-vppon is our Savior Christ and
his Saints set before al of our religion, to be observed and imitated. Plato
lib. de Repub. 2. amongst diverse reasons why he will not tolerate Poets in his
commonwealth, brings this for one, because their fictions of the gods, give
examples, very prejudicial unto the honesty of the readers, as their wars,
thefts, seditions, adulteries and such like. Out of which Lucian has the words
he gives to Menippus in his Necromantia. I says he being a boy and hearing
Hesiod and Homer singing of seditions and wars, not only those of Heroes and
demigods, but even of the gods themselves, their adulteries, rapines,
tyranies, chasings out of parents, and marriages of brethren and sisters,
truly I thought all these things both lawful and lawdable, and affected them
very zealously. For I thought the gods would never have bin lechers, nor have
gone together by the ears amongst themselves, vnlee they had allowed al these
for good and decent. Thus far Lucian. We have rehearsed it in the words of
Thomas Moore: whom to praise negligently, or as if we were otherwise
employed, were Sir Thomas Moore.
grosenes. His due commendations are sufficient to exceed great volumes. For
what is he that can worthily limme forth his sharpnes of wit, his depth of
Judgment, his excellence and variety of learning, his eloquence of Phrase, his
plausibility and integrity of manners, his judicious foresight, his exact
execution, his gentle modesty and vprightnes, and his unmoved loyalty? unless
in one word he will say they are al perfect, entirely absolute, and exact in all
their full proportions? unless he will call them (as they are indeed) ye patterns
and lusters, each of his kind? I speak much, and many that have not known
Moore, will wonder at me: but such as have, will know I speak but truth: so will
such as shall either read his works, or but hear or look upon his actions: but
another time shall be more fit to spread our sails in this man's praises, as in a
spacious Ocean, wherein we will take this full and prosperous wind and write both
much in substance, and much in value of his worthy honors: and that unto
favorable readers. (g) As Persius saith] Satyrd. 3. -- Cum dir^ (...) bids
Mou^ ingen^ fer^ti ^cta (...).
-- When the black lust of sin.
Dipped in hot poison burns the mind within.
It is meant indeed of any gauls; which is hot poison: But Augustine uses
it hear for the generatiue sperme, which some call Virus. (h) Here-vppon it is
that Terence bringes] In his Eunuchus: Chaerea who was carried disguised for an
Eunuch by Parmeno unto Thais, being enamourd on a wench, that Thraso the
soldior had given to her, and telling his fellow Antipho how he had inioyed
her, re^ates it thus: While they prepare to wash, the wench satte in the
Parlour, looking upon a picture wherein was painted how (...) sent down the
shower of gold into Danaes lap: I fell a looking at it with her: and because
he had played the same play before me, my mind gave me greater cause of joy,
seeing a God had turned himself into a man, and stolen unto a woman through
another man's chimney, and what God? Even he that shakes Temples with his
thunder: should I (being but a wretch to him) make bones of it? No I did it
even withal my heart. Thus far Terence. Danae being a fair Virgin, her
father Acrisius Danne.
kept her in a Tower that no man should have access unto her. Now Jupiter
being in love with her, in a shower of gold dropped through the chimney into the
Tower, and so inioyed ^er: that is, with golden gifts (against which no lock,
no guard is strong enough) he corrupted both the keepers and the maid
her-selfe.

Of the Romans Stage plays, wherein the publishing of their gods foulest
imparities, did not any way offend, but rather delight them. CHAP. 8.
I But (will some say) these things are not taught in the institutions of the
gods, but in the inventions of the Poets. I will not say that the gods
mysteries are more obicaene then the Theaters presentations: but this I say
(and will bring history sufficient to convince all those that shall deny it)
that those plays which are formed according to these poetical fictions, were
not exhibited by the Romans unto their gods in their sollemnities through
any ignorant devotion of their own, but only by reason that the gods them
selves did so strictly command, yea and even in some sort extort from them
the public presenting and dedication of those plays unto their honors. This
I handled briefly in the first book. For (a) when the city was first of al
infected with the pestilence, then were stages first ordained at Rome by the
authorization of the chief Priest. And what is he, yt in ordering of his
courses, will not rather choose to follow the rudiments which are to be fetched
out of plays, or whatsoever being instituted by his gods, rather then the
weaker ordinances of mortal men? If the Poets did falsely record Jupiter for
an adulterer then these gods being so chaste, should be the more offended, and
punish the world, for thrusting such a deal of villainy into their ceremonies,
and not for omitting them. (b) Of these stage-plaies the best and most
tolerable are Tragedy and Comedy: being Poetical fables made to be acted at
these shows: wherein notwithstanding was much dishonest matter, in actions,
but none at al of words: and these the old men do cause to be taught to their
children, amongst their most honest and liberal studies.

L. VIVES.
FOr (a) when the city was] Because in this book and in the other following,
Saint Augustine does often make mention of Stage-plaies, it seems a fit place
here to speak somewhat thereof: and what should have been seattered abroad
upon many chapters, I will here lay all into one, for the better understanding
of the rest. And first of their Original, amongst the Greeks first, and the
Romans afterward: for imitation brought them from Greece to Rome. The old
husbandmen of Greece using every year to sacrifice to Liber Pater for their
fruits, The invention of Plays.
first used to sing something at the putting of the fire on the altars, in
stead of prayers: and then to please him the better, they sung over all his
victories, wars, conquests, triumphs, and his captiuation of Kings. For
reward of which pains of theirs, a Goat was first appointed, or the Skin of an
offered Goat, full of wine. So these rewards partly, and partly oftentation,
set many good wits work amongst these plain countrymen, to make verses of this
theme; mean and few at first, but as al things else, in process of time
they grew more elegant and conceited: and because the Kings yt Liber had
conquered, afforded not matter enough for their yearly songs they fell in hand
with the calamities of other Kings, like to the former, and sung much of them
And this song was called a tragedy either of (...), a Goat, the reward of the
conqueror in this Tragedy.
contention, or of the wine-leese wherewith they anointed their faces; called by
the Greeks (...) Now some will have the Comedy to have had the Original from
these sacrifices also: others from the sollemnities of Apollo Nomius, that is
the guardian of sheapheards and villages, some say yt Comedy.
both these sacrifices were celebrated at once. I will set down the most common
opinion. When the Athenians lived as yet in dispersed cotages (Theseus having
not yet reduced them to a City) The husbandmen used after their sacrifices to
break jests, both upon such as were at the sacrifices and such as trauaild by
chance that way: and by these mirthfull scoffs, delighted all the company. Now
after that the city was builded, the husbandmen at the times appointed for the
sollemnities, came into the town in carts, and iested one while at their
fellows, and another while at the citizens, chiefly such as had offended
them. And this was called a Comedy, either of (...) a Village, because they
lived in such, or of (...) away, and (...) to be saucy, or to revel; because
they were profuse and spared no man in the way with their petulent quips. (And
this is rather the true deriuation, because the Athenians as then did not call
the villages (...), but (...).) This custom pleased the citizens, and made
them animate those of the pro^test wits, to write more exactly in this kind of
verse. And so by little and little, the country fellows were thrust out,
whose quips were simple, and how ever envious, yet not bloody: now the city
Poets taxing at first the vices of the citizens with bitterness, did some good
in reclaiming particulars from folly, through fear of being personated: but
afterward when they began to follow their own affects and their friends,
exercising their grudges with sharpness, and using their pens for their
weapons, they would sometimes traduce Princes that never had deserved any such
matter, and even name them. Which trick when Eupol^s had played with Alcibiades
Eupolis.
in his Comedy called Baptis, he caused him to be taken and thrown into the
sea: being then General of the Athenian forces, and having a Navy in the
Haven Pireus: when he was thrown in, it was said Alcibiades rehearsed these
words often times over: thou have often drowned me upon the stage Eupolis, I
will once drown thee in the sea. By this example Alcibiades
the rest of the Poets were so terrified, that Alcibiades got a law past, that
no man should dare to name any man upon the Stage. So that kind of Comedy
called (...) that is the old Three kinds of Comedies. Old. Mean. New.
Comedy, was abolished. Then came in the second, wherein many were girded at
privily suppressing of names under coullors, and this the Nobility fell in
dislike withal, least their factes should be glanced at under hand. So that
was taken quite away: and a new kind invented, which treated of mean persons
under change of names, the argument whereof was ever so different from the
facts of the Nobility, as each man might perceive that they were farthest from
the drift of these taxations. And besides there was such moderation used in all
the effects, that no man could justly complain of them, though they had
spoken of him by name. Of this kind Menander was the chief Poet, who lived
with Alexander the great, beieng somewhat younger then he was. The old kind
flourished in the wars of Peloponesus, and in that kind Aristophanes was
most excellent, by report some say that he was very good at the second sort
also. But doubtless Antiphanes of Larissa was the best in this kind that ever
wrote. And these kinds were all in Greece. But in the four hundredth year
after Rome was builded, T. Sulpitius Potitus, and C. Licinius Stolon being
Consuls, when the City was (both the year before, and that year also)
grievously infected with the plague, by an Oracle out of the books of the
Sibils were Stage Plays called thither (a new accustomed thing to such a
warlike nation.) Their players they had out of Hetruria, and they named them
Histriones:, in the language of that country: And these did dance unto the
flute, without speaking any thing, but not without such conceited gestures as
then were in use elsewhere. And then the Country people of Italy after the
fashion of the Greeks, having sacrificed after their harvest, and given their
gods thanks for their years good increase, after all, in their mirth, used
to jest one upon another for sportes sake, sparing not now and then to cast
forth a sluttish phrase, and some-time a bitter quippe. And this they did
interchangeably, in verses called Fescenini, of such a City in Hetruria These
the Roman Players began to imitate, but never named for that was expressly
forbidden before by a law in the twelve Tables. But these Fescenine uses (...).
wore out of the plays by a little and little, and were left only unto
marryages and triumphs: And such plays began to be invented as were
delightful and yet not offensive, which Horace touches at in his Epistle to
Augustus. So it being not allowable to traduce any man by his name upon the
stage, there sprung up diverse sorts of these playing fables in Italy, after
the manner of the Greeks, as the New Comedy, and the Satyr: Not that which
taxes vices and is bound unto that one kind of verse, which Horace, Persius,
and Iuuenall wrote in: for that was first invented by Lucilius (who served
under Scipio Aemilianus in the wars of Numance.) But that wherein the Satyrs
were brought in, in a sluttish Satyrs.
and approbrious manner, as in hayry coats, heavy paced, and altogether ^nsome
and slouenly. Their Stage was strowed with flowers, leaves and grass, to
resemble the The Satyrs.
Mountains, Woods and Caves; even like as the tragike Stage resembles the
state of kingly Palaces, and the comicall, the fashion of meaner men's houses,
as Vitruuius writes, (Lib. 5.) After these Satires went out of use; The first
True omedie in latin verse was The first new ^omedy at Rome.
written by Liuius Andronicus, Salinators freed servant, after Rome was
builded, just five hundred and forty years, in the Consulshippes of Appius
Claudius Son to Caecus, and Sempronius Tuditanus, the first Carthaginian
war being ended some few years before, as Atticus does account the time.
And this man seconded By Noeuius, Plautus Ennius, Terence, and many other
Comedians after them: what remains of this subject, shall be spoken in the
fittest place.

(b) Of these Stage-plaies the best] In these revels, sometimes there were
plays presented worth the hearing: and sometimes again, the players would act
most filthy gestures in silence, and sometimes speak somewhat for the feast
they kept. Of these Comedies some were called Palliatae, their argument being
Greek and their actors in Greekish cloakes: such Pallia^.
are all Terences and Plautus his: Others Togatae, their argument concerning
the Roman affairs, and their actors presenting it in Roman gowns: such
are those of Afranius. And Togata.
these Togatae are of two sorts, either Pretextatae, the plotte being of the
deeds of some Praetextata.
Kings or Emperors of Rome, wherein the Pretexta, the Noblemans habit must
needs be used; (from which kind I cannot see that the Trabeatae do differ
much, those which C. Melius Trabcata.
of Spoleto, Mecenas his freeman invented: I know not whether they were a^ one
or Tabernaria.
not, having hereof no certain notice:) or Tabernariae, wherein the actions of
the vulgar were desciphered. where are Tragedies, Comedies, Satyrs, and there
are Mimikes, which are called otherwise, Plaine-feete, plani-pedes, wearing
neither shoes nor buskins, but coming The Mimikes.
bare-foote upon the Stage: The Satyrs notwithstanding and the Mi^kes are both
included under the Comedy. And some say so is the Tragedy too. But the
Tragedy discourses of lamentable fortunes, extreme affects, and horrible
villainies, but far from turpitude. The Comedy treates of the Knaueries and
tricks of love, being brought into it by Menander to please the Macedonians
that stood affected to such passages. The Satyr contains the looser Faunes,
and Siluanes whose rusticall iestes delighted much, and sometimes they would
lament. But as they were v^lceanely and slouenly gods, so were their speeches
often times foul, and dishonest to hear. But the Mimikes forbore no
beastliness, but used extreme licentiousness And yet these were more
tolerable then other things which were acted in the sollemnities of Bacchus:
(which for their incredible filthiness were expelled out of Italy by a decree
of the Senate.) Also in the Saturnalia, and Floralia, which two feasts were
celebrated by common Floralia.
strumpets, and the most raskally sort of all men. The actors of the Floralia,
though they reverenced not their own goddess, yet when Cato came, they
reverenced him, and would not act Cato.
them in his presence.

What the Komaines opinion was touching the restraint of the liberty of Poesy,
which the Greeks, by the counsel of their Goades, would not have restrained
at all. CHAP. 9.
WHat the Romans held concerning this point, (a) Cicero records in his
books which he wrote of the Common wealth, where Scipio is brought in saying
thus: If that the priutledge of an old custom had not allowed them, Comedies
could never have given such proofs of their v^esse upon Theaters. And some of
the ancient Greeks pretended a conuenince in their vicious opinion, and made
it a law that (c) the Comedian might speak what he would, of any man, by his
name. Wherefore (as Africanus says well in the same book) Whom did not the
Poet touch, nay whom did he not vex, whom spared he? perhaphs so, says one,
he quipt a sort of wicked, seditious, vulgar fellows, as (d) Cleo (e)
Clytophon, and (f) Hyperbolus: to that we assent (quoth he again) though it
were fitter for such falts to be taxed by the (g) Censor then by a Poet, but
it was no more decent that (h) Pericles should be snuffed at, having so many
years governed the City so well both in war and peace, then it were for (i)
our Plautus, or Naeuius to deride (k) Publius or Cneius Scipio, or for (l)
Caecilius to mock (m) Marcus Cato. And again, a little after, Our twelve
Tables (quoth he) having decreed the observation but of a very few things (n)
upon pain of death, yet thought it good to establish this for one of that few,
that none should (o) write or act any verse, derogatory from the good name of
any man, or prejudicial unto manners. Excellently well! for our lives ought
not to be the objects for Poets to play upon, but for lawful magistracy, and
thoroughly informed justice to judge upon, nor is it fit that men should here
themselves reproached, but in such places as they may answer and defend their
own cause in. Thus much out of Cicero in his fourth book of The Common
wealth: (which I thought good to rehearse word for word, only I was forced to
leave out somewhat, and somewhat to transpose it, for the easier
understanding. For it gives great light unto the proposition which I (if so be
I can) must prove and make apparent.) He proceeds further in this
discourse, and in the end concludes thus, that the ancient Romans utterly
disliked, that any man should be either praised or dispraised upon the stage.
But as I said before, the Greeks in this, though they used less modesty, yet
they followed more conuenience, seeing they saw their gods so well to approve
of the represented disgraces, not only of men, but even of themselves, when
they came upon the stage: whether the plays were fictions of Poetry, or true
histories of their deeds. (and I wish their worshippers had held them only
worth the laughing at; and not worth imitation!) for it were too much pride in
a Prince to seek to have his own fame preserved, when he sees his gods
before him set theirs at six and seven. For where as it is said in their
defense, that these tales of their gods were not true, but merely poetical
inventions, and false fictions, why this does make it more abominable, if you
respect the purity of your religion: and if you observe the malice of the
diuil, what cu^ninger or more deceitful fetch can there be? For when an honest
and worthy ruler of a contry is slandered, is not the sla^der so much more
wicked and impardonable, as this parties life that is slandered is clearer and
sounder from touch of any such matter? what punishment then can be sufficient
for those that offer their gods such foul and impious injury?

L. VIVES.
CIcero (a) records in his] If of all the ancient monuments of learning which
are either Tullyes books de republica.
wholly perished, or yet vnpublished, if I should desire any one extant, it
should be Cicero his six books de Republica. For I doubt not but the work
is admirable, and guess but by the fragments which are extant. I do hear that
there are some that have these books but they keep them as charily as gold
apples; but until they come forth to light let us make use of the conjectures,
recorded in other places of Cicero his works. (b) where Scipio] The Cornelian
family amongst other sur-names, got up that of Scipio. from one of their blood
that was as a staff (Scipionis Vice) to his kind and sickly Father. Of this
family The Sci^.
were many famous men, of whom we mean to speak somewhat in their due
places. This whom Tully brings in, speaking in his work De Republica, was
son unto L. Aemilius Paulus, that conquered Perseus King of Macedon. Scipio
the son of the greater Scipio African adopted him for his son, and so he
was called Aemilianus, of the stock of whence he was descended. He razed
Carthage and Numance. (c) The Comedian,] this was the old Comedy, (...): and
of this we said before, that the citizens for fear of being brought upon the
stage, would either begin to live well (if so they intended) or at least
forbear to be seen do evil. Old comedies.
Socrates said it was meet to expose ones self freely to the Comic Pen; for
if they write true of our vices, they are a mean to reform us: if they write
false, it concerns not us. Yet even Socrates himself that innocent hurtlesse
man was mocked by Aristophanes in his Nebulae, a knauish comedy, set forth
only to that end. And this was one of the greatest proofs, that the
Aristophanes ^is Nebu^ae.
Poets of this Old kind of Comedy, at that time had mercenarie Pens, and
followed perverse and maleuolent affects.

(c) Cleon,] he was a Lether-seller, a seditious fellow, enemy to Nicias,
Demosthenes, Cleon.
and almost unto all honest men: yet no evil souldior, if we may trust
Thucidides and Aristophan^s his ^quites.
Plutarch: against him, did Aristophanes make a comedy, and he called it
Equites, the Knights: and when the Poet would have presented this view of
Cleons extortion and tyrranous rapine to the people, the workman durst not
make a visar like Cleons face, for fear of his power: So the Poet was feign to
dawbe the actors faces with wine lees: and yet they being afraid to enter upon
the Stage, Aristophanes himself came forth alone and acted Cleon, so great was
his rancour against him. For which afterward he was accused of Cleon, and
fined at five talents as himself complains in his comedy called Acharnenses,
that is, he cast up as much as he had taken in, for perhaps Demosthenes and
Nicias had hired him to write it, as Melitus and Anitus, Socrates his enemies
got him with money to pen that comedy called Nephelis. He was a man that
wrote much when he was drunk. This Cleon, Plutarch mentions in his
Politickes also.

(e) Cleophon] This fellow (says Plutarch) was such another as Cleon. (f)
Hyperbolus,] Cleophon. Hiperbolus
Thucidides and Plutarch, and Lucian also in his Misanthropus, do mention this
fellow with the additions of a wicked Citizen, and affirm that he was
banished the City by the law, of Ostracisme, (a kind of suffrage-giuing) not
for any fear of his power and dignity, as others were, but as the common
shame and scandal of the whole town. Cicero in his Brutus speaking of
Glaucias says: He was a man most like Hyperbolus of Athens, whose vile
conditions the old Athenian Comedies gave such bitter notes of. That he was
taxed by Eupolis, Quintilian intima^es in his first book of his Institutions,
speaking of Music. And Caelius Rhodoginus has a whole Chapter of him.
Lection. Antiqu^r. lib. 9. (g) Of the Censor,] Every fifth year the Romans
elected two, to ouer-see the Census, that is, to estimate and Judge of the
wealth, manners, and The Censor.
esteem of every particular citizen. And hereupon they were called Censors,
(for as Festus says, every one held himself worth so much as they rated him
at,) and the Masters of the manners. So says Cicero unto Appius Pulcher. (h)
Pericles] This man, by his eloquence and other civil Pericles.
institutions, did so win the hearts of the Athenians to him, that he was
made the governor of that commonweal for many years together, being ever
both wise and fortunate, in wars abroad, and in peace at home. Eupolis an old
Comedian says, that On his lips sat (...) that is, the Goddess of persuasion,
whom fully (de oratore lib. 3) calls Lepor, Eanius Suada, and Horace (...).
(by the diminutiue) Suadela: of the matter of those verses, Cicero and
Quintilian make very often use in Greek fragments: for the whole Comedies of
Eupolis, and many more, are now lost. These verses are extant in the first
Book of Plinius ^ecilius his Epistles, and part of them also in Suidas. I much
marvel that Politian mentions neither of them in his Chapter of his Centaures,
where he speaks of this. The verses he has out of one of Aristides his
interpretours, whom he names not. Indeed I deny not but that there are more of
his verses, then are either in Suidas or Pliny.

Aristophanes also, the ancient Comedian said that Pericles cast lightning and
thunder from his lips, and confounded all Greece. And this both Eupolis and
he spoke in the pouring out of their callumnies against him, as Tully (de
orat. lib. 3. and de perfecto oratore.) and Quintilian (liber. 12.) do both
affirm. The Comedian scoffed also at his long shaped head, and therefore he
was always pictured in his Helmitte. (i) For our Plautus,] Liuie was the first
Latin Poet, as I have said before, and next after him, Naeuius, who served as
a soldier in the first war of Affricke: Then, Plautus, almost of the same
time with Naeuius: he left many comedies, the most part whereof we have, and
there was no part of Plautus.
all that, or the following age that pleased better then he. Scipio calls
him Our Plautus, not that he ever knew him, but because he was a latin Poet,
and he had spoken of the Greeks before (k) P. or C. Scipio] These were
brethren and as Seruius says twins. Publius was father to the Greater Scipio
Affrican, Cneius unto Nasica that good man, of whom we spoke before. They were
both slain in Spain by the Africanes in the second Carthaginian war,
Scipios the brethren.
which began in the Consulship of Publius. Tully in his Oration for Cornelius
Gallus, calls these two brethren the two Thunderbolts of the Empire: and some
say that that verse of Virgill is meant of them. -- Geminos duo fulmina belli,
Scipiadas --. Aenaed 6.
Scipiades belli ^ulmen, Carthaginis horror -- etc.
-- two thunderbolts of war,
The Scipios -- taking it out of Lucretius.
Wars thunder Scipio, Carthages dread fear etc.


So that these Poets lived in their times. (l) Or Caecilius] Caecilius Statius
lived in the Macedonian, Caecilius.
and Asian war, and was chamber-fellow with Ennius. Volcatius Sedigitus gives
him the prick and praise for Commedy, and Horace approoues his gravity. We
have nothing Cato the elder.
of his now extant. Tully seems not to like of his phrase. (m) Marcus Cato]
The Elder, he that first made the Portian family honorable: he was borne at
Tusculum, and attained the honor of Consul, Triumph, and Censor. Being but of
mean descent, the nobility envied him wholly: but his authority with the
Commonalty was very great: he lived in the times of Ennius and Caecilius. (n)
Few things upon pain of death] There were very few crimes with the old Romans
punished with death, and far fewer in the times that followed: for the
Portian The Portian law.
law forbad the death of any condemned Citizen, allowing only his banishment.
So that it being held death-worthy to deprave any man by writing, proves that
the Romans were extremely afraid of infamy. But here let the Reader observe
the meaning of this law, out of Festus: Capite dimiaui, what.
who speaking of this Capitis Diminutio, this Capital Punishment writes thus,
He is said to be capite diminutus, capitally punished, that is banished, that
of a free man is made a bondslaue to another, that is forbidden fire and water,
and this the Lawiers call, Maxima capitis diminutio, the most capital
punishment of all. For there are three kinds of it: the greatest, the mean,
and the smallest. This I thought good to set down, not out of mine own
judgment: Horace writes thus unto Augustus. -- Quin etiam lex
Paenaque dicta, malo quae nollet carmine quenquam
Describi: vertere modum formidine fustis, etc.
-- besides a penal law
Frobidding all such verse as shame prouokes:
So changed they their notes for fear of strokes etc.


Porphiry upon this place says he that wrote infamous verses upon any man, was
judged to be beaten with clubs: But Acron makes Horace to speak
metaphorically, (o) Acte] The old book has occenasset, should sing out, and I
think better then otherwise: the ancient Latinists (says Festus) used
occentare, for the same for which we use conuitium facere, to mock, Occentare
what it is.
or reproach: which was done aloud, and as it were sung out unto others hearing
a far off, and this was held dishonest.

That the diuills through their settled desire to do men mischief were
willing to have any villainies reported of them, whither true or false. CHAP. 10.
But those wicked spirits, who^ these me^ take to be gods, were desirous to
have such beastly stories spread abroad of the^, (though they themselves had
never acted any such thing) only to keep men's minds inueigled in such bestiall
opinions, as it were in snares, or nets, and by that means to draw them to
predestinate damation for company: whether it be true that such men as those
that love to live in errors, do select for gods, did themselves commit any
such things (for which the diuills set themselves out to be adored, by a
thousand several tricks of hurtful deceit:) or that there were no such
things done at all, but only, those malicious and subtle diuills do cause
them to be feigned of the gods, to the end that there might be sufficient
authority, derived as it were from heaven to earth, for men to commit all
filthiness by. Therefore the Grecians, seeing that they had such gods as these
to serve, thought it not fit to take away any liberty from the Poets in using
these stage-mockes and shames: ^dt is they did either for fear least their
gods should be provoked to anger against them, in case they went about to make
themselves into more honest moulds then they were, and so seem to prefer
themselves before them; or else for desire to be made like their gods, even in
these greatest enormities. And from this imagined conuenience came it, that
they hold the very (a) actors of such plays, to be worthy of honors in their
Cities. For in the same book Of the Commonwealth; (b) Aeschines, of Athens,
an (c) eloquent man, having been an Actor of Tragedies in his youth, is said
to have borne office in the Commonwealth. And Aristodemus (d) another actor of
Tragedies was sent by the Athenians upon an Embassage to Phillip, about
especial and weighty affairs of war and peace. For they held it an unmeet
thing (seeing they saw their gods approve of those actions, and arts of
playing,) to repute those worthy of any note of infamy, that were but the
actors of them.

L. VIVES.
THe very (a) actors] Aemilus Probus speaking of the Greekish fashions says.
In those countries it was no disgrace for any man to come upon the stage, and
set himself as a spectacle to the people: which we hold for partly infamous,
and partly base and unworthy of an honest man. (b) Aeschines] An ^rator of
Athens, enemy to Demosthenes he acted Tragedies upon the stage. And therefore
Demosthenes in his Oration de Corona calls him (...), An apish tragedian,
Aschines.
or a tragical ape. Quintilian says he was Hypocrita, that is Histrio, a
stage-plaier. Plutarche (in 10. Rhetoribus) says he was an Actor of
Tragedies: So says Philostratus also in his book De sophistis, and that he
did not leave his country through constraint, or banishment, but being judged
to be overcome in a contention by ^tesiphon, he went away unto Alexander, who
as then was Emperor of Asia: but hearing that he was dead before he came at
him, he bent his course for Rhodes, and liking the sweet aptness unto study
that that soil afforded, he settled himself there. Aeschines himself in an
Epistle he wrote to the Athenians, seems to affirm, that he had given over
his stage-playing before he bore any place in the Commonwealth (c) an
eloquent man] That he was most eloquent, is most plain: as also that his
voice was sweet, and full: and some there are that asigne him next dignity
unto Demosthenes: nature gave him more worth then industry: Some say he was
scholar unto no man: but of a sudden from a scribe he became an orator, and
that his first oration was against Phillip of Macedon: and hereby he got such
favor and credit amongst the people, that they sent him Ambassador to the
same King. Others asigne him Plato, and Isocrates for his Masters, and some
Leodamas: This Rhodian Rhetorik^; was a certain mean, between the Asian and
the Athenian. Aeschines invented and taught it in his school at Rhodes after
his retirement thither (d) Aristodemus another actor] This man as Demosthenes
writes, went Ambassador to King Philippe with Demosthenes himself, and
Aeschines. This Aristodemus.
is he, who, when Demosthenes asked him what fee he had for pleading,
answered, a talent: I but (quoth Demosthenes) I had more for holding of my
tongue. Critolaus reports this.

That the Grecians admitted their Plaiers to bear office in their
Commonwealths, least they should seem unjust in despising such men as were the
pacifiers of their Gods. CHAP. 11.
THis was the Grecians practice: absurd enough howsoever, but yet most fitly
applied unto the nature of their gods: (a) they durst not exempt the lives of
their citizens from the lashes of poetical pens and plaiers tongues,
because they saw their gods delighted at the traducing of themselves: and they
thought surely, that those men that acted such things upon the stage, as
pleased the gods, ought not to be disliked at any hand by them that were but
servants to those gods: Nay not only, that, but that they ought to be
absolutely and highly honored by their fellow Citizens: for what reason could
they find, for the honoring of the Priests that offered the sacrifices which
the gods accepted well of, and yet allow the actors to be disgracefully
thought of, who had learnt their profession by the special appointment of the
self same gods, that exact these celebrations of them, and are displeased if
they be not sollemnized? Especially seeing that (b) Labeo, (who they say was
most exact in these matters) distinguishes the good spirits from the badde by
this diversity of their worshippes, that (c) the badde ones are delighted with
Slaughters, and tragical inuocations, and the good with mirthfull reuells, and
sportfull honors, such as Plays (quoth he) banquets, and (d) reuelling on
beds are; of which hereafter (so God be pleased) we will discourse more at
large. But to our present purpose: whether it be so that all kinds of honors
be given unto all the gods mixed and confused, as unto only good ones: (for it
is not fit to say there are any evil gods, although indeed they are all
evil, being all unclean spirits) or that according as Labeo says, there
must be a Al unclean spirits are wicked diuills.
discretion used, and that these must have such and such particular rites of
obseruances asigned, and those other, others; howsoever, the Greeks did most
conveniently to hold both Priests and Plaiers worthy of honorable dignities,
the Priests for offering of their sacrifices, and the Plaiers for acting of
their enterludes: least otherwise, they should be guilty of offering injury
either to all their gods, if they all love plays, or (which is worse) to those
whom they account as the good ones, if they only affect them.

L. VIVES.
THey (a) durst not exempt] Sisitheus presenting a Commedy wherein he scoffed
at Cleanthes the Stoicke, whereas others were offended at it, they say the
Philosopher himself replied that it were a shame for a man to fret at such
things, seeing that Hercules, and Dionysius being gods, are daily mocked thus,
and yet are not displeased. (b) Labeo] There were three Labeo's; all of great
skill in the civil law: But the most learned of them all was Antistius Labeo
who The Lab^s.
lived in Augustus his time: he was scholar to Trebatius Testa, and was
cunning not only in the law, but in all antiquity and knowledge, being (as
Gellius reports) an exact historian. But Augustus did not much affect him by
reason of his great freedom of speech, and largeness of wit: This opinion of
his he seems to derive from Platonisme, and Stoicisme, though with some
alteration. For the Platonists held that all the gods were good: but that
amongst the Daemones and Heroes, some were good and some were badde. Porphiry,
in his book of sacrifices says, that a true worshipper must never sacrifice
any living creature unto the gods, but only unto those Daemones. And the same
author in his book De via intelligibilium, explaines more fully which are good
Daemones, and which are evil. But of this, in another place. (c) the bad ones]
The worse that these gods are, and the more infernal, the sadder kind of
inuocations do they desire to be used to them: so do the Hell-gods; Pluto,
Proserpine, and others: Sad sacrifices.
Lucane brings in Erichtho inuocating the infernal Deities thus: -- Sivos
satis ore nefando,
Pollu^oque voco: si nunquam haec carmina fibris, humanis ieiuna ^ano: si
pectora pl^na
Saepe de^i, and laui calido prosecta cerebro: si quis, qui vestris caput
extaque lancibus infant
Imposuit, victurus crat. --
-- If ^uer I ^uok'd
In well black't phrase: if ere my charms lackt guilt of mangling humane
breasts: if I have spilt
Blood in such plenty: brought your quarters vvasht, in their own brains: if
^re the members gasht,
I served you in, were to revive. --


d. reuelling upon beds] Hereof in the third book.

That the Romans in abridging that liberty (with the Poets would have used
upon men,) and in allowing them to use it upon their gods, did herein show,
that they prized themselves above their gods. CHAP. 12.
But the Romans (as Scipio glories in that book of the common wealth) would
by no means have the good names and manners of their citizens liable to the
quippes and censures of the Poets, but inflicted a capital punishment upon all
such as durst offend in that kind: which indeed (in respect of themselves) was
honestly and well instituted, but in respect of their gods most proudly and
irreligiously, for though they knew that their gods were not only pacient, but
even well pleased at the representing of their reproaches and exorbitances, yet
would they hold themselves more unworthy to suffer such injuries then their
gods, thrusting such things into their sollemnities, as they avoided from
themselves by all rigor of laws. Yea Scipio; do thou commend the restraint
of this poetical liberty in taxing your persons, when thou see it has been
ever free to callumniate your gods? Do thou value the (a) Court alone so much
more then the Capitol, then all Rome, nay then all heaven, that the Poets must
be curbed by an express law, from flowring at the Citizens, and yet without
all control of Senator, Censor, Prince, or Priest, have free leave to throw
what slander they please upon the gods? what? was it so unseemly for Plautus,
or Naeuius to traduce P. or Cneius Scipio; or for Caecilius to jest upon M.
Cato? and was it seemly for (b) your Terence to animate a youth to
uncleanness, by the example of the deed of high and mighty Jupiter.

L. VIVES.
YOur (a) Court] The Court, was the place where the senate sat: here it is used
for the Senators: curia what, Terence.
the Capitol, for the gods themselves, (b) your Terence] for indeed he was
very familiar with Scipio and Laelius, and many think that they helped him in
writing of his commedies, which he himself glanceth at in his prologue to his
Adelphy. Memmius thinks he means of Scipio, (in that Oration which he made
for himself.) Quintilian lib, 10. Institut. Of Laelius, Cornelius Nepos makes
mention, and Tully also in one of his epistles unto Atticus: but from other
men's reports.

That the Romans might have observed their gods unworthiness, by their
desires of such obscaene solemnities. CHAP. 13.
IT might be, Scipio (were he alive again) would answer me thus; How can we
possibly set any penalty upon such things as our gods themselves do make
sacred, by their own express induction of those plays into our customs, and
by annexing them to the celebration of their sacrifices and honors, wherein
such things are ever to be acted and celebrated? But why then (say I again)
do not you discern them by this impurity to be no true gods, nor worthy of
any divine honors at all: for if it be altogether unmeet for you to honor
such men as love to see and set forth Plays that are stuffed with the reproach
of the Romans, how then can you judge them to be gods, how then can you but
hold them for unclean spirits, that through desire to deceive others, require
it as part of their greatest honors to be cast in the teeth with their own
filthinesses? Indeed the Romans, though they were locked in those chains of
hurtful superstition, and served such gods as they saw required such dishonest
spectacles at their hands, yet had they such a care of their own honesty and
dignity, that they would never voutchsafe the actors of such vile things, any
honor in their commonwealth, as the Greeks did: but according to Scipio his
words in Cicero: Seeing that (a) they held the art of stage-playing as base and
unmanly, therefore they did not only detain all the honors of the City
from such kind of men, but appointed the (b) Censors in their views, to
remove them from being part of any tribe, and would not voutchsafe them to be
counted as members of the City. A worthy decree, and well beseeming the
Roman wisdom; yet this wisdom would I have to imitate and follow it self:
Rightly has the council of the city in this well desiring and deserving
commendations, (showing it self to be in this, (c) truly Roman,) appointed
that whosoever will choose of a Citizen of Rome to become a Player, he should
not only live secluded from all honors, but by the Censors censure should be
made utterly incapable of living as a member of his proper tribe. But now tell
me but this, why the Players should be branded with inhability to bear
honors, and yet the Plays they act, inserted into the celebration of the gods
honors? The Roman (d) valor flourished a long time, unacquainted with these
theater-tricks: suppose then that men's vain affections gave them their first
induction, and that they crept in by the errors of man's decayed members, does
it hence follow that the gods must take delight in them, or desire them? if so,
why then is the Player debased, by whom the god is pleased? and with what face
can you scandalize the actors and instruments of such stage-guilt, and yet
adore the exacters and commanders of these actions? This now is the
controversy between the Greeks and the Romans. The Greeks think that
they have good reason to honor these Players, seeing that they must honor them
that require these plays: the Romans on the other side, are so far from
gracing them, that they will not allow them place in a (e) Plebeyan tribe, much
less in the court or Senate, but holds them disgraceful to all callings: Now
in this disputation, this only argument gives the vp-shot of all the
controversy. (f) The Greeks propound; If such gods be to be worshipped, then
such actors are also to be held as honorable: The Romans assume: But such
actors are no way to be held as honorable: The Christians conclude, Therefore
such gods are no way to be worshipped.

L. VIVES.
Seeing that (a) they held the art,] It must of force be granted that the
Players were the most pernicious men of conditions that could be, and the
vilest in their villainies: because The infamy of Stage. players.
they could not be allowed for Citizens of that City, which harbored so
many thousands of wicked and ungracious fellows, all as Citizens. That
Players were excluded from being of any tribe, and exempt from paying any tax,
Liuie and Ualerius do both testify: unless Decimus Laberius.
authority made them such; for that seems as a constraint: as befell to
Decimus Laberius, whom Nero requested to act a Mimike of his upon the stage:
and yet he nevertheless was The Attellan comedies.
after that, a gentleman of Rome. For he that is forced to offend the law, is
held not to offend it. But from this decree of plaiers exclusion, the Actors of
the Comedies called Attelanae were exempted, for their comedies were more
grave, and their jests came nearer to the old The Censors view of the city.
Italian form of discipline: Liu: and Valor. And therefore they used no Visars
on the stage, as the rest did. Festus (b) The Censors in their view] Which went
over the estate and conditions of every man, every fifth year (c) truly
Romane] The text is Germane Romanum. The Latins use Germane, for truly,
natiuely, expressly, and naturally: So does Cicero (to shut up all examples in
one) in his fifth oration against Verres: As then (quoth he) I said much, and
this amongst the rest to show plainly the great difference between him, and
that same Numidicum Verum and Germanum, that true and expressly Numidian,
Metellus: So say we Germane Romanum, The orders of the Romans.
truly Roman. Roman is here used by Augustine for Generous, and honestly
bent. (d) the Roman valor flourished a long time] Very near four hundred
years. (e) Plebeyan] There were three orders of Roman Citizens: the
Senatorians, the Patricians, and the Plebeyans; which were the lowest: of these
hereafter. He does not say, a Plebeyan tribe, as though there were any such
distinct one, but because there were Plebeyans, men of the base and common
sort, in every tribe. (f) the Greeks propound thus:] The Logicians, and the
Rhetoricians following them, divide a perfect argument (called by the Greeks
Syllogismus, by the Latins, Ratiocinatio) into The parts of a Syllogism.
three parts: the first that includes and declares the sum of the argument:
this is called the proposition, or exposition, the second which assuming from
the proposition, selects an especial thing which we are to know more fully:
and this is called the Assumption: The third, shuts up the argument, and is
called the Conclusion. How these are placed in discourse, it makes no matter:
the conclusion is sometimes before, and the assumption oftentimes the second,
or the last [And here our false Logicians spoil all; out of their ignorance of
all good arts: and Paris copy defective.
think that change of place does alter the nature of things: lying as fast as
they can invent: and seeming in the schools more then men, in civil
conversation abroad are less then children.]

That Plato, who would not allow Poets to dwell in a well governed City, showed
that his sole worth was better then those gods, that desire to be honored with
stageplaies. CHAP. 14.
Again, we ask another question: why the Poets that make those Comedies, (and
being prohibited by a law of the twelve tables to defame the Citizens, yet do
dishonor the gods with such foul imputations,) are not reputed as dishonest
and disgraceful as the plaiers? what reason can be produced, why the (a)
actors of such poetical figments, being so ignominious to the gods, should be
deputed infamous, and yet the authors be voutchsafed honors? Is not (b) Plato
more praiseworthy then you all, who disputing of the true perfection of a
city would have Poets banished from that society, as enemies to the cities
full perfection? he had both a grief to see his gods so injured, and a care
to keep out these fictions whereby the citizens minds might be abused: Now
make but a comparison of his (c) humanity in expelling of Poets from his city,
least they should delude it with the gods divinity that desired such Plays and
Reuells in their honors; by which the city might be deluded: He, though he did
not (d) induce or persuade them to it, yet advised and counseled the light and
luxurious Greeks in his disputation, to restrain the writing of such things:
But these gods, by command, and constraint, even forced the modest and stayed
Romans to present them with such things: nay not only to present them, but
even to dedicate and consecrate them in all sollemnity unto their honors. Now
to which of these may the city with most honesty ascribe divine worship?
whether to Plato that would forbid these filthy obscaenities, or to these
diuils that exult in deluding of those men whom Plato could not persuade to
truth? This man did (e) Labeo think meet to be reckned amongst the Demigods,
as he did Hercules also, and Romulus: and he prefers the Demigods before the
Heroes, but notwithstanding (f) makes deities Plato held a Demigod.
of them both: But howsoever, I hold this man whom he calls a Demi-god, worthy
to be preferred not only before the Heroes, but even before all their other
gods themselves: And in this the Roman laws do come somewhat nere his
disputations: for where as he condemns all allowance of Poets, they deprive
them of their liberty to rail at any man. He (g) excludes Poets from dwelling
in his city: they deprive the actors of poetical fables from the privileges
of citizens: and it may be (if they durst do ought against gods that require
such stage-games) they would thrust them forth for altogether. Wherefore the
Romans can neither receive nor expect any moral instructions, either for
correcting of falts, or increasing verues, from those gods, whom their own
laws already do subvert and convince. The gods require plays for increase of
their honors: the Romans exclude plaiers from pertaking of theirs: the gods
require their own falts to be celebrated by poets inventions: the Romans
restrain the Poets looseness from touching any of the Romans imperfections.
But Plato, that Demi-god, he both resists this impure affection of the gods,
and shows what ought to be perfected by the (h) towardliness of the
Romans: denying Poets all place in a well ordered Common-welth, howsoever,
whether they presented the figments of their own lusts and fancies, or related
ought else as the guilt of the gods, and therefore of imitable examples: But we
Christians make Plato neither whole God nor Demigod: nor do we vouchsafe to
compare him with any of Gods Angels, or his Prophets, not with any of Christ's
Apostles or his Martirs, no not with any Christian man, and why we will not, by
Gods help, in the due place we will declare. But notwithstanding, seeing they
will needs have him a Demi-god, we think him worthy to be preferred, (if not
before Romulus or Hercules though there was never (i) historian, nor (k) Poet
(l) affirmed, or (m) fained, (n) that he ever killed his brother, (o) or
committed any other mischiuous act, yet at least) before (p) Priapus or any (q)
Cynocephalus, or lastly any (r) Febris, all which the Romans either had as
(s) Gods from strangers, or set them up as their (t) own in peculiar. How then
could such gods as these by any counsel they could give, prevent or cure such
great corruption of minds and manner (whether imminent, or already infused)
seeing they regarded nothing else but to diffuse and augment this contagion of
wickedness, and to have it instilled into the peoples notices from the stage, as
their own acts, or acts which they approve, to the end, yt man's lust might
ru^he course of wickedness freely, after the gods examples? Tully exclaimeth
all in vain upon it (u) who being to speak of Poets, when he came to them
says: The clamor and approbation of the people, when it is joined with these
poetical fictions, as the testimony of some great and learned Master, oh what
darkness does it involue a man in? what fears it inflicts, what lusts it
enflames?

L. VIVES.
THe (a) actors] There are actors, ab agendo, of acting: plaiers upon the
stage, and Authors, the Authors, the Poets that write these fables: though the
name of Author is taken many ways; Actor, Author, Plaier. What Poets Plato
expells.
but this is a Grammar question. (b) Is not Plato] Plato (de rep. lib. 2.)
expels al Poets out of a well ordered city, for the wickedness which they sing
of the gods: and (in the tenth book of the same work) Socrates having spoken
much against them, concludes al in this, yt he holds that poetry only fit to
be excluded, which gives life to unmanly affections: and that to be allowed,'
which is manly, and honest: So yt he condemns not all poetry, for sometimes he
calls Poets, a divine kind of men, namely when they sing himmes to the
Deities: more-ouer he says that if the Poets do sing of any good man, though
he be pore, he is happy: and again that an evil man though he be rich their
songs will make him miserable: if they exceed not in looseness, nor yield to
rancour nor consent unto flattery, nor in their songs sow seeds of corruption,
such poets are profitable Humanity. (...).
members in Plato's commonwealth. (c) His humanity] Humanity is not taken here
for any natural gentleness or courtesy of ye mind, or man's good will, called
in Greek (...), not for any knowledge of ye liberal arts which the Greeks
call (...), but for that nature, by which we are men: as goodness is that by
with we are good: the sense following proves it, for it is compared unto divinity
and in this signification it is also used elsewere as in Tully (de orat lib.
I.) (d) Though he did not induce] Imaruaile much that our Philosophers and
Divines could not out of this place learn Suadere. Persuadere.
the difference of Suadeo, and Persuadeo. But they (which is very nere a
miracle) understand latin without knowing the latin tongue, and are very
perfect Grecians, and can read never a word of Greek: indeed in Greek, (...)
is both suadere, to advise or counsel, and persuadere to persuade or induce.
(e) This man did Labeo] Here will I deliver the orders of the gods; first out of
Uarro, and next out of other books of the Platonists. The Romans call some of
their gods Summi, the highest: others Medioxumi middle-most: others Heroes
infimi, or earthly ones: (...), which the ancients (as Capella affirms)
called Earth. The Medioxumi were such Medioxumi. Heroes.
as were taken up to heaven by their deserts: as Tulli says: (in his book
De legibus:) that is Semi-gods, or as it were a kind of Mungrels begot of
mortallity and immortallity; such were Romulus, Hercules, Aesculapius, Castor
and Pollux, with others. The Heroes were born of mortal parents on both sides,
but by their merits got a more advanced state in desteny then the residue of
the vulgar. Some to add unto these another kind, called Semones: but of them
elsewhere. (f) Makes Deities of them both] Such as here in this world lived
well and holily, the old Romans did still put into the number of the gods when
they were dead, and assigned them feasts called Necya. Cicero de legibus lib.
2. (g) He excludes Poets] In the old copy of Bruges, and Nesci^
Coleigne, the verb repellit, is left out, and for Poeticarum here, is talium
in them. (h) Frowardness of] By their begun virtue, their proof and
demonstration of goodness, though sometimes towardlynesse stands for full
virtue it self: but here it is as I said, and is declared by Towardlynesse.
that which goes before; What was to be performed. (i) Historian.] As there are
that do of Romulus. (k) Poet.] As do of Hercules. (l) Affirmed.] The Historian
did not. (m) Fained.] The Poet did not. (n) That he ever killed his brother]
Which Romulus did, in killing of Remus. (o) Or committed any other mischievous
act, as is true of Hercules, who defiled the whole world with whoredoms,
rapines, robberies and slaughters: yet they thought yt the world was purged of
such guilts by him. (p) Before Priapus] Diodorus says that Priapus was made a
god Priapus.
upon this occasion: Osiris King of Egypt being murdered by the wicked
villeny of his brother Tiphon, the conspirators cut all his body in pieces,
and every one took a share, and because no man would take the privy members,
they threw them into the River Nilus. Afterward Isis the wife of Osiris having
overcome Tiphon, she found all the parts of her husbands body, but the
forenamed, which being lost, she consecrated them, and instituted their
divine worship with many ceremonies, and such as were admitted to be Priests in
Aegipt, offered their first sacrifices unto this: calling it Priapus by an
unknown name, which to cover the dishonesty of the thing meant, the honest
ancients used. The Greeks call this God Phallus, Phallus, seu Ihyphallus.
and Ihtyphallus. Of this these verses are extant in Collumella: lib. 11. --
Sed truncm forte dolatum
Arboris antiquae nun on Uencrare Ityphally,
Terriblis membri, medio qui semper in horto,
Inguinibus puero, praedoni falce minetur.
-- That piece of ancient tree.
Adore, as Ityphallus Deity,
That ougly thing: which in the garden stands
Against bo^es and thieves, with armed gro^ne and hands.
For he was the Keeper of gardens: Diodorus says he was also called Tiphon,
and makes him the son of Uenus and Dionysius: borne (as Seruius and Ualerius
Flaccus say) at Lampsacium, a city in Hellespont and that therefore was named
Lampsasenus, and Hellespontiacus. Virgill Georgi^. Et custo furum etque ^uium,
cum falce saligna
Hellespontiaci seruit tutela Priapi.
And Priap us of Hellespont, with his hook,
Of Willow, well to birds and the eues will look,
And in the Lusus in Priapum, Priapus speaks thus. -- Patria m^ctaber, et olim
Ille ^uus ciuis Lampsace, Gallus ^o.
I Will loose my country: Lampsacus even he
That was borne thine, now Cibels Priest will be.
Some say he was borne in the city Priapus, not far from Lampsacus, near
unto the vineyeards. Strabo thinks his deification was first from Hellespont.
But a new God he is, for Hesiod knew no such in his time: Fulgentius makes him
one of y^ Semones, and says he is not yet taken up Cynocephaelus.
into heaven, his deserts ar so slender. (q) Cynocephalus] y^ is indeed,
Dogs-head. Diodorus (lib. 4.) says that the Cynocephali were a people of
humane shape and voice, but headed like Dogs: a Barbarous and cruel kind of
creatures, and many of them lived in the Islands of Nilus. Osiris had a Son
called Anubis, who following his father in his trauells, bore the Dog for his
arms: and hence it came that he was worshipped in Egypt in the shape of this
creature, Anubis.
and called (by Virgil Aenead. 8) Latrator, the barker, as also because he was
held the keeper of the bodies of Osiris and Isis. Some think that this was
Mercurius, and called thus for his quick capacity and apprehention. (r)
Febris] The Romans erected many altars unto Febris: Cicero makes mention of
one ancient one that stood in the mount Palatine (de legib. lib. 2.) Febris a
goddess.
and of the same Valerius also (in Antiquanstitut.) and Plinye lib. 2. do
speak: as also of another that was placed in the Court of Marius his
monuments, and a third at the upper end of the long street (s) Gods from
strangers] Lucan speaks to Egypt. Nosin templa tuam Romana accepimus Isim,
sc^icanesque Deos and sistra mouentia luctum,
We in Romes temples now thine ^is place.
thy Halfe-dog Gods, and horns that woes do raise.


(t) There own in peculiar as Febris] (u) who being to speak of Poets] in
some books, the words of Tully begins at Accessisset, and not at Clamor. The
whole sentence I take it is out of the book of his commonwealth, in the third
of his Tusculane questions, speaking of the causes which corrupt the seeds of
virtue, which are naturally sown within us; he says: Hereunto also may Poets
be added, who pretending a great deal of doctrine and wisdom, are learnd,
read, heard, and borne away in the mind of every man. But when that great
master, the multitude is added also, and the whole company swarming on every
side unto vices, then chiefly are we infected with depraved opinion, and
drawn from our very express nature. Like unto this also he has in his second
and fourth book, and that at large: which we but touch at, to avoid the
ouer-charging of the reader, or the book, with tediousnes.

That flattery and not reason created some of the Roman Gods. CHAP. 15.
But what other reason in the world (besides flattery) have they to make choice
of these so false and fained gods? Not voutsafinge Plato any little temple,
whom notwithstanding they will have to be a demi-god, (and one who took such
pains in dissuading the corruption of manners through the (a) deprauation of
opinions:) and yet preferring Romulus before diverse of the gods, whom their
most secret and exact doctrine does but make (b) a semi-god, and not The
Flamines.
an entire deity; yet for him they appointed a (c) Flamine, (d) a kind of
Priesthood so far above the rest as (e) their crests did testify that they
had only (f) three of those Flamines for three of their chiefest deities, the
Dial or Iouiall for Jupiter; the Martial, for Mars; and the Quirinall, for
Romulus: for (g) the love of his citizens having (as it were) hoysed him up
into heaven, he was then called (h) Quirinus, and kept that name ever after:
and so by this you see Romulus here is preferred before Neptune and Pluto
Jupiters brother nay even before Saturn, father of them all: so that to make
him great, they give him the same Priesthood that Jupiter was honored by, and
likewise they give one to Mars, his pretended father, it may be rather for his
sake then any other devotion.

L. VIVES.
THrough (a) the deprauation of opinions] some read animi, some animis, some
leaves it out, but the best, is animae (b) A semigod] Let them worship (says
Cicero in his de leg) such as have bin and are held gods, and such as their
meritts have made celestial and instawled in heaven, as Hercules, Liber Pater,
Aesculapius, Castor, Pollux, Quirinus. (c) A Flamine] what I mean to speak of
the Flamine, shall be out of Varro, Dionysius, Festus, Plutarch, Gellius, and
Seruius. Amongst the orders of Priests were Some of Numa Pompilius his
institution, and called by the name of Flamines: their habit of their head was
a hat, as the high Priest had also: but upon the top of it, they wore a tufte
of white woollen thread: therefore were called Flamines quasi Pilamines hairy, or
tufted crowns: some derive it of Pileus, a hat, but that cannot be, for so had
the high Priests Some again say their name came of Filum, a thread, because in
the heat of Summer when it was to hot to wear their hats, they wrapped their
heads about with thread of linen cloth: for to go bare headed-abroade, their
religion forbad them: but upon feast days they were bound to wear their hats
in the ceremonies, Appian of Alexandria says that the Iouiall Flamine wore his
hat and veil both upon feast and no feast days. Others say that they were
called Flamines a Flamineo, which was a kind of yellow head-tire, but more
proper The Iouiall
to women then them. These kind of Priests Numa first ordained, and that three
of them: one for Jupiter, called the Dial of Dios, Jove or Iouiall: one to
Mars, the Martial; and one to Quirinus, the Quirinall. Other gods might have
no Flamines, nor might one of those Gods have more then one, but in process of
time the number increased, and became fifteen: besides those which flattery
consecrated to the dead Caesar's, as one to C. Caesar, by Antonyes law, (which
Cicero reproves (Phillippic 2.) one to Augustus, and so to diverse others. But
those that Numa made were the principal always, and the principal of them
was Jove's Flamin the Dial: he only of all the rest went in a white Hat, and
was held the most reverend: His ceremonies and laws are recounted both by
Plutarch in his Problemes and also by Gellius (lib. 10.) out of Fabius Pictor,
Massurius Sabinus, Varro, and others. The lowst in degree of all the Flamines,
Pomona Goddess.
was the Pomonall Flamine, because Pomona, the goddess of Apples, was of the
least esteem. Others there were of mean dignity, as Vulcanes, Furidas, Father
Falacers, The Goddesses that pretected mount Palatine, and mother Floras. (d)
which kind of Priesthood] Though the Flamines were of great authority yet were
all obedient unto the chief Priest: for so the people commanded it should be,
when in the second war of Affrike: L. Mettellus, being chief Priest
withheld the consul Posthumus, being Mars his Flamine, and would not let him
leave his order, nor his sacrifices: and likewise in the first war of Asia,
P. Licinius, high Priest, staid Q. Fabius Pictor then Praetor and Quirinall
Flamine from going into Sardinia (e) as their crests they wore] Apex, is any
thing that is added to the top, or highest part of a thing: The Flamines Apex
or crest.
here it is that which the Flamine bore upon his head, his cap, or his tufte of
woll. Lucane. Et tollens opicem generoso vertice Flamen:
The Flamine with his cap, and lofty crest:


Sulpitius lost his Priesthood because his crest fell of whilst he was a
sacrificing, says Valerius, (lib. 1.) The Romans gave not this crest but
unto their greatest men in religion: as now we give Miters, they called it Apex
(says Seruius upon the eight Aenead) ab apendo, which is, to overcome: and
hence comes Aptus, and Apiculum filum, that was the small tufted thread which
the Flamines folded their Crests in: Fabius speaks of these Crests and
Virgill. Hin^ exultantes Sal^os, nudosque Laper cos,
lanigerosque apices, --
Here Salii danced naked Lupe^ci there,
and there the tufted crowns. Aenead. 8.


(f) Only three of those their chief and true Flamines, inheritours of the
ancient Flaminshippe (g) the love of his cittizens] Romulus being dead, the
people began to suspect that the Senate had butchered him secretly amongst
themselves. So Julius Proculus, appeased the rage of the Romulus is a God.
multitude by affirming that he saw Romulus ascending up into heaven. Liuye in
his first book. Ennius brings in the people of Rome lamenting for Romulus in
these words. O Romule, Romule, dic,
qualem te patriae custodem Dij genuerunt,
Tu proauxisti nos intra lvmi^s oras,
O Pater, O genitor patriae, O sanguine diso^iunde.
O Romulus, O Romulus, show us,
how they, thy countries guard, the gods begat,
Thou brought us first to light, O thou our father,
thy countries father borne of heavenly seed.


(h) called Quirinus] many of such men's names have been changed after their
deyfying, to make them more venerable, having cast of their styles of
mortality, for so was Laeda (so called Quirinus.
when she was alive) after her death and deification styled Nemesis: and Circe,
Marica: and Ino, Matuta; And Aeneas, Jupiter Indiges, Romulus was called
Quirinus to gratify the Sabines; In which respect also the Romans were
called Quirites of Cures a town of the Sabines, or else as Ovid says. Sieve
quod Hasta, Quiris priscis est dicta Sabinis,
Bellicus a (...) ve^t in Astra deus:
Sieve su^ Reginomenposu^re Quirites
Seu q^a Romany iunxerat ille Cures.
Or, for the Sabines, spears Quirites call:
His weapons name made him celestial,
Or else they so enstil^ him hereupon
because he made them, and the Cures, one.


That if the Roman gods had had any care of Justice, the City should have
had their forms of good government from them, rather then to go and borrow it
of other nations. CHAP. 16.
IF the Romans could have received any good instructions of morality from
their gods, they would never have been (a) beholding to the Athenians for The
Athens law followed by Rome.
Solons laws, as they were, some years after Rome was built: which laws
notwithstanding, they did not observe as they received them, but endeavored to
better them and make them more exact; and though (b) Licurgus fained that he
gave the Lacedaemonians their laws by ye authorization of Apollo, yet the
Romans very wisely would not give credence to him, (c) and therefore gave no
admission to these laws. Indeed (d) Numa Pompilius, Romulus his sucessor is
said to have given them some laws: but (e) al too insufficient for the
government of a City. He taught them many points of their religion (f) but it
is not reported that he had these institutions from the gods: Those
corruptions therefore of mind, conversation, and conditions, which were so
great, that the (g) most learned men durst affirm that these were the cankers
by which all Commonweals perished, though their walls stood never so firm;
those did these gods never endeavor to withold from them that worshipped
them, but as we have proved before, did rather strive to enlarge and augment
them, with all their care and fullest diligence.

L. VIVES.
BEholding (a) to the Athenians] In the 300. year after Romes building: when
there had been many contentions between the Patricians and the Plebeyans,
they sent three Ambassadors to Athens, to copy out Solons laws, and to
learn the policy and ciuility of the rest The laws of the 12. (...).
of the Greeks: that the Roman estate might be conformed and settled after
the manner of the Grecians. Chaerephanes was then governor of Athens, it being
the 82. Olympiade. The Ambassadors dispatched their affairs with all
diligence, and returned the next year after, and then were the Decemuiri
elected to decree laws, and those wrote the first ten tables of the Romans
civil law, and afterward they added two more, all which were approved in
the great Parliament called Comitia Centuriata. And these were their noblest
laws, which were written in the twelve Tables. (Liuy lib. 3. Dionys. lib. 10
and others also) (b) Lycurgus] The laws which Lycurgus gave (as ^e feigned, by
Apollo's oracle) to the Lacedaemonians, are very famous. The Greek and Latin
authors are full of this man's honors, and of the hard laws which he gave the
Spartans There is a work of Xenophons extant, only of these laws, and many
of them are recorded in Plutarche, I need not trouble the Reader in so plain
a matter. Lycurgus (...) (...).
(c) therefore gave no admission] And also, because Solons laws were more
accomodate and appliable to (...) education, and mansuetude, then the rough
severe ones of Lycurgus, as Plato and Aristotle do very well observe. For his
laws aimed at no other end but to make the Spartanis warriers. (d) Numa
Pompilius] He was borne at Cures in the country of the Sabines, and was the
bestman of his time in the world. Of this man read Liuy lib. 1. Dionysius, and
Plutarch, of his whole life, besides diverse others. (e) all to insufficient]
This is plain, for they fetched laws from others. (f) it is not reported]
Yes, he fained that he conferred with Aegeria; but she was rather a Nymph then
a goddess, and besides, this is known to be a fable (g) the most learned] Here
I cannot choose but ad a very conceited saying out of Plautus his comedy called
Persa. Sagaristio the servant asks a Virgin, how strong do thou think this
town is? If the townsmen (quoth she again) be well mannered, I think it is
very strong: if treachery, covetousness, and extortion, be chased out, and
then envy, then ambition, then detraction, then perjury, then flattery, then
injury, then and lastly, (which is hardest of all to get out) villainy: if
these be not all thrust forth, an hundred walls are all too weak to keep out
ruin.

Of the rape of the Sabine women, and diverse other wicked facts, done in Romes
most ancient and honorable times. CHAP. 17.
PErhaps the gods would not give the Romans any laws, because as Salust (a)
says: Justice and honesty prevailed as much with them by nature as by law:
very good: (b) out of this justice and honesty came it (I think) that the (c)
Sabine virgins were ravished. What iuster or honester part can be plaide, then
to force away other men's daughters with all violence possible, rather then to
receive them at the hand of their parents? But if it were unjustly done of the
Sabines to deny the Romans their daughters, was it not far more unjustly
done of them to force them away after that denial? There were more equity
shown in making wars upon those that would not give their daughters to beget
alliance with their neighbors and countrymen, then with those that did but
require back their own, which were injuriously forced from them. Therefore
Mars should rather have helped his warlike son, in revenging the injury of
this rejected proferre of marriage, that so he might have won the Virgin that
he desired, by force of arms. For there might have been some pretense of
warlike law, for the conqueror justly to bear away those whom the conquered
had unjustly denied him before. But he, against all law of peace, violently
forced them from such as denied him them, and then began an unjust war with
their parents, to whom he had given so just a cause of anger. (d) Herein
indeed he had good and happy success: And albeit the (e) Circensian plays
were continued to preserve the memory of this fraudulent act, yet neither the
City nor the Empire did approve such a president: and the Romans were more
willing to err in making Romulus a deity after this deed of iniquity, then to
allow by any law or practice, this fact of his in forcing of women thus, to
stand as an example for others to follow. Out of this justice and honesty
likewise proceeded this, that (g) after Tarquin and his children Tarquine
Collatine deprived of office, and put out of Rome.
were expulsed Rome, (because his son Sextus had ravished Lucresse.) Iunius
Brutus being consul, compelled (h) L. Tarquinius Collatine, husband to that
Lucresse, his fellow officer, a good man, and wholly guiltless, to give over
his place, and abandon the City, which vile deed of his, was done by the
approbation (or at least omission) of the people, who made Collatine Consul,
as well as Brutus himself. Out of this justice and honesty came this also, that
(h) Marcus Camillus that most Camillus exiled by his countries monstrous
ingratitude.
illustrious worthy of his time, that with such ease sudued the warlike
Veientes, the greatest foes of the Romans, and took their chief city from
them: after that they had held the Romans in ten years war, and foiled their
armies so often, that Rome her self began to tremble, and suspected her own
safety: that this man by the malice of his backe-biting enemies, and the
insupportable pride of the Tribunes, being accused of guilt, and perceiving the
city (which he had preserved) so ungrateful, that he needs must be condemned,
was glad to betake himself to willing banishment: and yet (i) in his absence
was fined at ten thousand Asses (k) Being soon after to be called home again
to free his thankelesse country the second time from the Gauls. It yrkes me to
recapitulate the multitude of foul enormities which that city has given act
unto: (l) The great ones seeking to bring the people under their subjection:
the people again on the other side scorning to be Seditions betwixt the great
men and the people.
subject to them, and the ringleaders on both sides aiming wholly rather at
superiority and conquest, then ever giving room to a thought of justice or
honesty.

L. VIVES.
SAlust (a) saith] In his war of Catiline, speaking of the ancient Romans,
he says thus: The law is a civil equity either established in literal laws,
or instilled into the manners by verbal Law.
instructions. Good, is the fount, moderatour and reformer of all law: all
which is done by the Judges Good.
prudence, adapting it self to the nature of the cause, and laying the law to
the cause, not the cause to the law. As Aristotle to this purpose speaks of
the Lesbian rule, (Ethic. 4.) This is also Right and reason: aquum and bonum.
termed right and reason; as Salust again says in his Iugurth Bomilchar is
guilty rather by right and reason, then any national law. Crassus (says
Tully in his Brutus) spoke much at that time against that writing, and yet but
in right and reason, It is also called equitie'. That place (says Cicero for
Caecinna) you fear, and fly, and seek (as I may say) to draw me out of this
plain field of equity, into the strait of words, and into all the literal
corners: in this notwithstanding (says Quintilian) the judges nature is to be
observed, whether it be rather opposed to the law, then unto equity, or no.
Hereof we have spoken something in our Temple of the laws: But the most
copious and exact reading hereof is in Budaeus his notes upon the Pandects:
explaining that place which the Lawyers did not so well understand: Ius est ars
aequi and boni. This man's sharpness of wit, quickness of judgment,
fullness of diligence, and Budaeus his praises.
greatness of learning, no Frenchman ever paralleld, nor in these times any
Italian. There is nothing extant in Greek or Latin, but he has read it, and
read it over, and discussed it thoroughly: In both these toungs he is a like,
and that excellently perfect. He speaks them both as familiarly as he does
French, his natural tongue: nay I make doubt whether he speak them no
better: he will read out a Greek book in Latin words extempore, and out of
a Latin book, in Greek. And yet this which we see so exactly and
excellently written by him, is nothing but his extemporall birthe. He writes
with less pains both Greek and Latin, then very good scholars in both
these tongues can understand them. There is no cranke, no secret, in all these
tongues, but he has searched it out, looked into it, and brought it forth like
Cerberus from darkness into light. Infinite are the significations of words,
and the proprieties of phrase which only Budaeus has fetched out of deepest
oblivion and exposed them to men's understandings. And yet all these singular
and admirable gifts has he attained to by his own industry alone, without
help of any master. O happy fertile wit! that in it self alone found both
master and scholar, and method of instruction! That whose tenth part others
can hardly le^of great and cunning masters, he alone without help of others
drew wholly from himself. I have not yet said any thing of his knowledge in the
law, which he alone has begun to restore from ruin: nor of his Philosophy,
whereof in his books De Ass, he has given such proof, as no man possibly
could but such an one as had daily conversation with such reading of all the
Philosophers, and deep instruction in those studies. To all this may be added
that which indeed excells all things else; an honesty congruent to all this
learning, so rare, and so admirable, that being but considered without the
other graces of wit and learning, it might seem the worlds miracle: his
honesty no more then his learning acknowledges none his superior. A man that
in all the diverse actions of his life, gives his religion always the first
place: A man that having wife and many children, was never drawn from his true
square with any profit or study to augment his estate: but euer-more swaid both
himself and his fortunes, and directed both: Fortune could never lead him
away, though she promised never so fair: he had her always in his power. A
man continually in court, in Embassages, yet never followed Princes favors,
nor nousled them with flatteries. He never augmented his patrimony, because he
would never depart an haires-breadth from honesty: he was always a seuerer
censor of his own conditions then of any others: and having undergone offices
which were objects of the greatest envy, he never found callumnie from any
tongue, nor incurd suspicion of any error, though he had to do with a free
nation, and a people as ready to accuse as froward to suspect. I see I have
forgot breuities bounds, being whirled beyond them with the love I have to
relate the virtues of mine honored friend: now to our purpose. Salusts meaning
therefore is, that as well this civil equity which they call law, as that
natural equity which nature produces in the minds of the judicious, (and
then which nothing is better, it being therefore called good); were no more
powerful with the Romans in their decretall laws, then in the natural
discretions of understanding men. (b) Out of this Iustice] A most bitter
Ironie: a (...).
(...) quippe. (c) That the Sabine Virgins] When as Romulus could not obtain
women of (...) neighboring nations, for his citizens to marry with, by the advice of his grandfather Numitor and the Senate, he gave it out that he
would celebrate some games in honor of Neptune the horse-rider, or
Hippoposeidon: so the women, their neighbors, coming to see the sports, the
Romans took them all away by force, (especially the Sabines) out of the
midst of the exercises. For so had Romulus and his companions resolved: the
fourth month after the building of Rome as Dionysius relates out of Fabius
Pictor. Plutarch says it was the 14. of the Calends of September, and both
agreed: for the city was begun to be built the 12. of the Calends of May on the
feast day called Palilia. Though Gellius (not Aulus with the Attican nights,
but) another ancient writer affirms it was in the 4. year that this was done:
which is the likelier to be true. They took away (as Dionysius says) six
hundred and eighty: which I do hold for the more likely then that which other
talk, of three hundred: from whence the names of the Curiae, or the wards:
Iuba adds three more to the number before. Antias Valerius Thalassus.
names but five hundred twenty and seven. Some say that Thalassus was not a
man, but only the sign given to show them when to begin their rape. Festus,
out of Varro says it was so taken about spinning of woll: as a man would say,
a panier or a basket. (d) herein indeed] Both, those nations, of whence the
women were, whom they forced away, as also others whom the The confederation
against Romulus.
rest by their lamentable entreaties, and the fear of their own dangers
moved, took up arms against the Romans: the Sabines, the Ceninenses, the
Crustumerians, and the Atennates, all combined against them: Romulus seeing so
dangerous a war likely to ensue upon him, confederateth with the Hetrurians,
whose power at that time was very great: and Caelius Vibennus prince Mount
Caelius.
of Hetruria gave Romulus aid, of whom this Mount Caelius in Rome took the
name. His grandfather also sent him succors. So that with small ado he
overthrew the forces of the Ceninenses, the Crustumerians, and the Attenuates:
and contending with the Sabines in a doubtful and dangerous war, upon a sudden
by the entreaty of the women themselves the war ceased, and both the parties
joined in league and amity together. (e) the Circensian plaies] Every year was
there plays, or games celebrated unto Neptune Equester, and they were diversely
called: the Circensian plays, the Great plays, the Roman plays: and amongst
the ancients, Consualia, Consus a god.
of Consus a God to whom they offered sacrifice, and believed him to govern al
Counsels: and of him Romulus asked instruction in all his perils, and in the
doubts of those marriages. His alter was hidden in the earth: because as Plato
says, counsel ought not only to be held ^oly, but secret also. (f) after
Tarquin] Another Ironicall taunte. (g) L. Tarquin Collatine] The Kings being
casheered out of Rome by the great Centuriall Parliament (which Seruius Tullus
The first Consulls.
had before instituted) L Iunius Brutus, and L. Tarquin Collatine, Lucraetias
husband were elected Consulls: the later of which, was son to Egerius,
Tarquinius Priscus his brother, as Liuy says But Nephew to him says
Dionysius: Brutus being desirous not only to expel the King himself, but all
his name with him, disanulled the magistracy of his fellow, because his name
was Tarquin, and so he willingly took his goods, and departed the city, going
to Collatium to dwell. Now Tully (Offic. lib. 3.) confesses that this was no
very honest part of Brutus: but because it was most profitable to the assurance
of the commonwealth, therefore it past for an act of honesty. It has bin
observed (says Julius Obsequens) that no man that ever abrogated his fellows
magistracy lived his year to an end; the first that did so was this Brutus,
the next Tiberius Gracchus, the third P. Tarquinius. (h) Marcus Camillus] This
was he that took the City Veii, Camillus.
after ten years continual siege: At that time began the Romans first to
lodge in tents, and under beast skins in winter, because they hated this people
so deadly that they would not depart thence until the wars were ended: for
ever since the reign of Romulus for three hundred years together held they
almost continual war with the Veientes: Liuius lib. 5. Plutarche in Camillus
his life. This Camillus being said to have dealt unjustly in sharing the
Veientane spoils amongst the people, L. Apuleius cited him to a day of hearing:
But he to avoid their envy (though innocent of that he was charged with,)
got him away to live at Ardea, in exile. This fell out two years before the
Galls took Rome. (i) ten thousand] Liuy says he was fined in his absence at
15000. Assis grauis. Plutarch, at 15000. Assium. Aes And Assis grave was al one
as Ass and Aes grave, all one.
my Budeus proves (k) being soon after] The Galls having taken Rome, Camillus
having gathered an army together of the remainder of the Allian overthrow was
released of his exile, and in a counsel Curiate, made Dictator by them that
were besieged in the Capitol. At first he expelled the Galls out of the
City, and afterward in the road way to Gabii, eight miles from the City,
he gave them a sore ouer-throw. (Liu. lib. 5) Thus this worthy man choose
rather to remember his countries affliction then his own private wrong:
being therefore styled another Romulus. (l) the great ones] These mischieues
were still on foot, for very near five hundred years after the expelling of
their kings, the Patritians, and the Plebeyans were in continual seditions and
hatreds one against another, and both contending for sovereignty: which
ambition was kindeled in the people by a few turbulent Tribunes, and in the
nobles by a sort of ambitious Senators, and hereof does Lucan sing that which
follows. Et (...) consulibu^ turbantes iura Tribuni.
Tribunes and Consulls troubling right at once.


What the history of Saluste reports of the Romans conditions, both in their
times of danger and those of security. CHAP. 18.
THerefore I will keep a mean, and stand rather unto the testimony of Salust
himself, who spoke this in the Romans Praise (whereof we but now discoursed)
that justice and honesty prevailed as much with them by nature, as by law:
extolling those times wherein the city (after the casting out of her kings)
grew, up to such a height in so small a space. Notwithstanding all this, this
same author confesses in (a) the very beginning of the first book of his
history, that when the sway of the state was taken from the Kings and given to
the Consuls, (b) within a very little while after, the city grew to be greatly
troubled with the oppressing power of the great ones; and (c) the division of
the people from the fathers upon that cause, and diverse other dangerous
dissentions; for having recorded how honestly, and in what good concord the
Romans lived together (d) betwixt the second war of Africa, and the last;
and having showed that it was not the love of goodness, but the fear and
distrust of the Carthaginians might, and per^ideousnesse, that was cause of
this good order, and therefore that upon this Nasica would have Carthage stand
still vndemolished, as a fit mean to debar the entrance of iniquity into
Rome, and to keep in integrity by fear; he adds presently upon this, these
words (e) But discord, avarice, ambition, and all such mischiefs as prosperity
is midwife unto, grew unto their full light after the destruction of Charthage,
intimating herein, that they were sown, and continued amongst the Romans
before: which he proves in his following reason. For as for the violent
offensiuenesse of the greater persons (says he) and the division betwixt the
Patricians and the Plebeians thence arising, those were mischiefs amongst us
from the beginning: nor was there any longer respect of equity or moderation
amongst us, then whilst the kings were in expelling and the city and state
quit of Tarquin, and the (f) great war of Hetruria. Thus you see, how that even
in that little space wherein after the expulsion of their Kings they embraced
integrity, it was only fear that forced them to do so, because they stood in
dread of the wars, which Tarquin, upon his expulsion being combined with the
Hetrurians waged against them. Now observe what Salust adds, for after that
(quoth he) the Senators bgan to make slaves of the people, to judge of heads
and, (g) shoulders, as bloudily and imperiously (h) as the ^ings did to chase
men from their possessions: and only they, of the whole crew of factions, (...)
(...) ^rial sway of al, With which outrages (and chiefly with their extreme
taxes and ^tions) the people being sore oppressed, maintaining both soldiers
in continual arms, and paying tribute also besides, at length they stepped out,
took up arms, and drew to (...) head upon Mount Auentine and Mount Sacer. And
then they elected them (...), and set down other laws; but the second war
of Africa gave end to these (...) on both sides. Thus you see in how little a
while, so soon after the expelling of their Kings, the Romans were become
such as he has described them: of whom (notwithstanding) he had affirmed,
that Justice and honesty prevailed as much with them by nature as by law. Now
if those times were found to have been so depraved, wherein the Roman estate
is reported to have been most vncorrupt and absolute, what shall we imagine
may then be spoken or thought of the succeeding ages, which by a graduall
alteration (to use the authors own words) of an honest and honorable city,
became most dishonest and dishonorable, namely after the dissolution of
Carthage, as he himself relates? How he discourses and describes these
times, you may at full behold in his history, and what progress this
corruption of manners made through the midst of the Cities prosperity, even
(k) until the time of the civil wars. But from that time forward, as he
reports, the manners of the better sort did no more fall to decay by little
and little, but ran headlong to ruin, like a swift torrent, such excess of
luxury and avarice entering upon the manners of the youth, that it was fitly
said of Rome, that she brought forth such (l) as would neither keep goods
themselves nor suffer others to keep theirs. Then Salust proceeds, in a
discourse of Sylla's villainies, and of other barbarous blemishes in the
commonwealth: and to his relation in this do all other writers agree in
substance, though (m) they be all far behind him in phrase. But here you
see (and so I hope The common corruption before Christ's coming.
do all men) that whosoever will observe but this, shall easily discover the
large gulf of damnable viciousness into which this City was fallen, long
before the coming of our heavenly King. For these things came to pass, not
only before that ever Christ our Savior taught in the flesh, but even before
he was borne of the Virgin, or took flesh at all: Seeing therefore that they
dare not impute unto their own gods those so many and so great mischiefs,
either the tolerable ones which they suffered before, or the fouler ones which
they incurred after the destruction of Carthage, (howsoever their gods are the
engraffers of such malign opinions in men's minds, (n) as must needs bud forth
such vices,) why then do they blame Christ for the evils present, who forbids
them to adore such false and deuillish gods, by his sweet and saving doctrine,
which do condemn all these Christ the founder of a new city.
harmefull and ungodly affections of man by his divine authority, and from all
those miseries, with-drawes his flock and family by little and little out of
all places of the declining world, to make of their company an eternal and
celestial city, not by the applause of vanity, but by the election of
verity.

L. VIVES.
THis same author (a) confesses,] This history of Saluste concerning the
civil wars of Rome, we have lost. Only some few Orations there are
remaining. (b) Within a very little while,] But fifteen years. (Liu. lib.
2.) Appius Claudius, and P. Seruilius were made Consuls for that year: And
this year was made famous by the death of Tarquin the proud. The death of
Tarquin the proud.
He died at Cumae, whether after his wrackt estate he retired unto
Aristodemus the Tyran. The news of his death sturred both Patricians and
Populars to joy and mirth: but the Patricians reuells were too saucie: for then
they began to offer injury to the people, whom till that day they had obeyed.
(c) The division.] the people divided themselves from the Patricians, The
divisions of the people from the Patriots
because of the sesse laid upon them the seventeenth year after the obtaining
of their liberty: and again because of the tyranny of the Decemuiri in making
cruel laws, Anno. 303. after the building of Rome. Thirdly by reason of their
debts, and the long dissentions between the tribunes and the Senators, some
few years before Pirrhus his war. (d) Betwixt the second] There were three
several wars begun and ended between the Romans and the Carthagenians:
The first in Sicilie 22. years together, and afterward in Affricke: it began
the 390. The (...) of Africa.
year after the building of Rome. Appius Clandius Caudax, and Qu. Fuluius
Flaccus being Consuls. So many are the years in Plinies 33. book, wherein I
think for 585. must be read Plinius corrected
485. Liuy and Eutropius count not so much by thirteen years. The second of
these wars began some 23. years after, P. Scipio, and T. Sempronius being
Consuls: it went through Spain, Sicily, Italy and Affricke, and there it was
ended by Scipio African the elder, seventeen years after the first beginning
of it. The third arose 49. years after that, Manlius, and Martius Censorinus
being Consuls, it was finished three years after in Afric (where it wholly
continued) by Scipio African the younger: and the end of this was the subversion
of Carthage. Of these wars more at large elsewhere. (e) But discorde]
Saluste in his Bellum Iugurthinum. (f) The great war of Hetruria] With
Porsenna the mighty King of Hetruria, Porsenna his (...).
who would have Tarquin restored to his kingdom: and begirt the City of Rome
with a hard and dangerous siege: and had taken it, but that the valor of
Scaeuola terrified him from persisting. Liu. lib. 1. (g) Of the heads and
shoulders] Of death, and other punishments. Those that the Romans adjudged to
death, they first scourged with rods, and then killed them. Sometimes, if the
fact were not very wicked, they did but only scourge them with rodds. Besides,
How offenders were punished at Rome. The Portian and Sempronian laws. Act.
22.
those that were sued by their creditors and brought before the Judge, were
most villanously and miserably abused, their creditours being allowed to chain
them, and beat them like their slaves: against which foul enormitie the
Portian and the Sempronian laws were promulgated, which forbid that the body of
any free Roman should be beaten either with rods or any scourges. (h) To
chase men from their possessions] For, such fields as were won by the valor
of the people of Rome, the rich men would first undertake by the appointment
of the Senate, to till and make fruitful, as if they were hired by the Senate:
marry afterward, (their fellows winking at it) they would thrust the people
from their right, and make themselves absolute lords of all: And hereupon were
the Agrarian laws so often put to be past, concerning the dividing The
Agrarian laws.
of the lands amongst the people: but were never mentioned without great anger
in the Patriots, and huge hurly-burlies in all the City. (i) Mount Sacer] The
people first encamped The first departure of the people.
on Mount Sacer, or the Holy Hill, a little beyond the river Anien, (now called
Teuerone) or as Piso says on Auentine a part of the City. There were the
Tribunes Plebeian first elected, as Tutors of the Populars: who should stand as
watches over the peoples good, and step between The Tribunes.
all injuries that the Patriots should offer them, and be accounted as sacred
men: whom if any man wronged, his head should be given to Jupiter for
sacrifice, and his goods sold all at the temple of Ceres. The second encamping
was upon Auentine, and from thence to fill the City with grearer desolation,
they departed unto Mount Sacer. And then having agreed with the The second
departure.
Senate, they returned to Auentine again, and there recovered their Tribunes:
and from Auentine they went up to the capitol, where in a great Parliament
held by the chief Priest, the tribunes election was assigned and confirmed.
Cic. pro Cornel. de Maiestate. (k) Unto the civil warres] First betwixt the
Senators and the Gracchi, Tiberius first, and then Caius: and so unto the
civil wars betwixt Sylla and Marius. (l) As would neither keep goods
themselues] For such excessive prodigalls, and spending whatsoever they could
seize on, they must needs force means from other men's estates to maintain
this their luxurious riotte: and so they labored to fill a barrel full of
holes. (m) They are all far behind him,] The pithy and succinct style
Saluste phrase.
of Saluste was delightsome to all ages: our Critikes have paralelld him with
the Greek Thucydides; as Quintilian does, lib. 10. (n) Must needs bud] as
branches and woods use to do: it Sy^scere, (...) (...) (...).
is a word much used in the writers of husbandry, Cato and Columella: The
Grecians call it (...), Sy^scere, to grow into woods and bushes, which in
herbs is (...), Luxuriare, to grow rank.

Of the corruptions ruling in the Roman state, before that Christ abolished
the worship of their Idols. CHAP. 19.
BEhold now this commonwealth of Rome, which I am not the first that affirm,
but their own writers, out of whom I speak, do auerre, to have declined from
good by degrees, and of an honest and honorable state, to have fallen into the
greatest dishonesty and dishonor possible. Behold, before ever Christ was
come, how that Carthage being once out of the way, then the Patricians
manners decayed no more by degrees, but ran headlong into corruption like a
swift torrent, the youth of the city was still so defiled with luxury and
avarice.

Now let them read us the good counsel that their gods gave them against this
luxury and avarice: I wish they had only been silent in the instructions of
modesty and chastity, and had not exacted such abominations of their
worshippers, unto which by their false divinity they gave such pernicious
authority. But let them read our laws, and they shall hear them, thundering
out of divine oracles and Gods clouds (as it were) against avarice and
luxury, by the mouths of the Prophets, by the Gospel, the Apostles, their
acts and their Epistles, so divinely, and so excellently, all the people
flocking together to hear them; not as to a vain and iangling Philosophical
disputation but as to an admonition from Heaven. And yet these wretches will
not blame their gods, for letting their weale-publike be so fowlely bespotted
with enormous impieties, before the coming of Christ: but what-soeuer misery
or affliction their effeminate and vnmanlie pride has tasted of since this
coming, that the Christian Religion is sure to have in their teeth withal.
The good rules and precepts whereof, concerning honesty and integrity of
manners, if all the Kings of the earth, and all people, Princes and all the
judges of the earth, young men and Virgins, old men, Children, all ages and
sexes capable of reason, and even the very souldiars, and (a) taxe-takers
themselves (to whom John Baptist speaks) would hear and regard well; their
commonwealths would not only adorn this earth below with present honesty,
but would ascend up to Heaven, there to sit on the highest point of eternal
glory. But because this man does but hear, and that man does not regard, and
the third does despise it, and far more do love the (b) stroaking hand of
viciousness, then the rougher touch of virtue, Christ's children are commanded
to endure with patience the calamities that fall upon them by the ministers of
a wicked commonwealth: be they Kings, Princes, Judges, Soldiers and
Governors, rich or poor, bound or free, of what sex or sort soever, they
must bear all with patience: being by their suffrance here, to attain a
most glorious place in that Royal In the City of God his will is all the law.
and (c) Imperial City of Angels above, and in that Heavenly commonwealth,
where the will of Almighty GOD is their only law, and his law their will.

L. VIVES.
Soldiers and (a) taxe-takers] Luke 3. 12. 13. Then came there Publicanes to
be baptized, and said unto him, Master, what shall we do? And he said unto
them, Require no more Exactors or taxe-takers.
then that which is appointed unto you. Require in this place, in the vulgar
Latin is Facite: in the Greek (...): which as Erasmus first of all noted, is
to be translated Exigite, exact, or require, and hence it is that Saint
Augustine does rightly name the Exactores, taxe-takers, which were the (...),
the Publicanes. (b) The stroaking hand of viciousnesse] He allu death unto
Hesiods two ways to vice and virtue: which Virgill or as (some say) Ausonius
immitated in that same poem of Pythagoras his letter. (c) Imperiall]
Augustissima The verses of the leter Y.
it must needs be, and not Angustissima, most strait or narrow: But withal
take a certain Friars note with you, I had almost told his name, who affirmed
that heavens court is called Augusta here, because the way is straight (as
Christ our Savior says) that leads unto life: and few thera are that enter
in thereat. And that his auditors might bear it the better away, [] No word of
this in the edition of Paris.
he shut it up in this fine verse: Arcta est via vere, quae ducit ad gaudia
vitae.
The way is straight and quickly mist, that leads us up to glories blist.


He showed plainly that he cared not greatly for true position, or quantity of
syllables, so that he made it go roundly off, and sound well.]

Of what kind of happiness, and of what conditions the accusers of
Christianity desire to partake. CHAP. 20.
But such worshippers, and such lovers of those vicious gods, whom they
rejoice to follow and immitate in all villainies and mischieues, those do
never respect the goodness, or the integrity of the commonwealth. No, say
they, let it but stand, let it but be rich and victorious; or (which is best
of all) let it but enjoy security and peace, and what care we? Yes marry, it
does beelong to our care, that every one might have means to increase his
wealth, to nourish the expense of his continual riot, and wherewithal the
greater might still keep under the meaner. Let the poor obey the rich, for
their bellies sakes; and that they may live at ease under their protections:
Let the rich abuse the poor in their huge attendaunces, and mynistring to
their sumptuousness. Let the people applaude such as afford them delights,
not such as proferre them good counsels. Let naught that is hard be enjoined,
naught that is impure be prohibited. Let not the Kings care be how good, but
how subject his people be. Let not subdued Provinces serve their Kings as
reformers of their manners, but as the Lords of their Estates, and the
procurers of their pleasures: Not honoring them sincerely, but fearing them
seruilely. Let the laws look to him that looks after another man's
possessions, rather then him that looks not after his own life. Let no man
be brought before the Judges, but such as have offered violence unto others
Estates, houses, or persons. But for a man's own, let it be free for him to
use it as he list, and so of other men's, if they consent. Let their be good
store of Common Harlottes, either for all that please to use them, or for those
that cannot A description of the public corruption.
keep private ones. Let stately and sumptuous houses be erected, banquets and
feasts sollemnized, let a man drink, eat, game and revel day and night,
where he may or will: (a) let dancing be ordinary in all places: let
luxurious and bloody delights fill the Theater, with dishonest words, and
shows, freely, and vncontroulled. And let him be held an enemy to the
public good, that is an opposite unto this felicity. Let the people turn
away their ears from all such as shall assaie to dissuade or alter them, let
them banish them, let them kill them. Let them be eternized for gods, that
shall procure the people this happiness, and preserve what they have procured.
Let them have what glory or worship they will, what plays they will, or can
exact of their worshippers: only let them work so that this felicity stand
secure from enemy, pestilence, and all other inconveniences. Now tell me, what
reasonable creature would wish such a state, (not unto Rome, but even) to the
house of (b) Sardanapalus? which whilom King, was so far given over to his
pleasures, that he caused it to be written upon his grave, that he only as
then possessed that, which his luxury in his life time had wasted: Now if those
fellows had but a King like this, that would nousle them in these impurities,
and never controull nor correct them in any such courses, they would be
readier to erect a Temple to him, and give him a Flamine, then ever were the
old Romans to do so unto Romulus.

L. VIVES.
LEt (a) Dancings] Saltationes; in the Bruges copy it is Salutationes, in
Coleynes it was Salutiones, but the letter v. is razed out. Surely the love of
Saluting one another was The salutations at Rome.
great in Rome. Highly was he honored that was saluted, and well was he
mannerd, that did salute, but great plausibility attended on both: both were
very popular, and great steps to powrefulnesse. Salust, in Iugurth. Truly some
are very industrious in saluting the people. All the Latins writings are full
of salutations. (b) Sardanapalus] The Grecians called Sardanapalus.
Sardanapalus, Thonos Concoloros. He was the last King of the Assyrians: a man
thrown headlong into all kind of pleasures. Who knowing that Arbaces the
Median prepared to make wars against him, resolved to try the fortune of
war in this affair. But being conquered (as he was an effeminate fellow,
and unfit for all martial exercises) he fled unto his house, and set it on
fire with himself and all his riches in it. Long before this, when he was in
his fullest madness, after pleasures, he causes this epitaph to be engraven
upon his tomb. Sardanapalus his epitaph.
(...) etc.


Tully translates it thus. Haec habeo, quae edi, quaeque exaturata voluptas
Hausit: at illa iacent multa et preclara relicta
What I consumed, and what my guts engross't,
I have: but all the wealth I left, I lost.


What else could any man have written (says Aristotle in Cicero) upon the
grave of an Ox rather then of a King? he says he has that being dead, which
he never had whilst he lived but only while he was a wasting of it.
Chrysippus applies the verses unto his Stoicisme: hereof read Athenaeus lib. 5.

Tully his opinion of the Roman Commonwealth. CHAP. 21.
But if he be scorned that said their commonwealth was most dishonest and
dishonorable, and that these fellows regard not what contagion and corruption
of manners do rage amongst them, so that their state may stand and continue,
now shall they hear that it is not true that Salust says, that their
commonwealth is but become vile and so wicked, but as Cicero says, it is
absolutely gone, it is lost, and nothing of it remains. For he brings in
Scipio (him that destroyed Carthage) disputing of the weale-publike, at such
time as it was (a) presaged that it would perish by that corruption which
Saluste describes. For this disputation was (b) at that time when one of the
Gracchi was slain, from which point Salust affirms all the great seditions
to have had their original, (for in those books there is mention made of his
death.) Now Scipio having said (in the end of the second book) that as in
instruments that go with strings, or wind, or as in voices consorted, there is
one certain proportion of discrepant notes, unto one harmony, the least
alteration whereof is harsh in the care of the skillful hearer: and that this
concord, does ^onsist of a number of contrary sounds, and yet all combined into
one perfect musical melody: so in a cittye that is governed by reason, of all
the heighest, mean and lowest estates, as The harmony of the common wealth.
of soundes, there is one true concord made out of discordant natures: and that
which is harmony in music, is unity in a city: that this is the firmest, and
surest bond of safety unto the commonweal, and that a commonweal can never
stand without equity: when he had dilated at large of the benefit that equity
brings to any government, and of the inconvenience following the absence
thereof: then (c) Pilus, one of the company, begins to speak, and entreated him
to handle this question more fully, and make a larger discourse of justice,
because it was then become a common report (d) that a commonwealth could not be
governed without injustice and injury: hereupon Scipio agreed, that this theme
was to be handled more exactly, and replied: that what was as yet spoken of the
commonwealth was nothing; and that they could not proceed any farther, until
it were proved not only that it is faulse, that a weal public cannot stand
without injury, but also that it is true that it cannot stand without exact
justice. So the disputation concerning this point being deferred until the
next day following, in the third book, it is handled with great controversy.
For Pilus, he undertakes the defense of their opinion, that hold that a state
cannot be governed without injustice, but with this provision, that they should
not think him to be of that opinion himself. And he argued very diligently
for this injustice against justice, endevoring by likely reasons and examples,
to show that the part he defended was useful in the weal public, and that
the contrary was altogether needless Then (e) Laelius being entreated on all
sides, stepped up, and took the defense of justice in hand, and withal his
knowledge, labored to prove that nothing wrackt a city sooner then injustice,
and that no state could stand without perfect justice which when he had
concluded, and the question seemed to be thoroughly discussed, Scipio betook
himself again to his intermitted discourse, and first he rehearses and
approves his definition of a commonwealth, wherein he said it A common wealth.
was the estate of the commonty, then he determines this, that this commonty
is not meant of every rablement of the multitude, but that it is a society,
gathered together in one consent of law, and in one participation of profit.
Then he teaches, (f) the profit of definitions in all disputations: and out of
his definitions he gathers, that only there is a commonwealth, that is,
only there is a good estate of the commonty, where justice and honesty has
free execution, whether it be by (g) a King, by nobles, or by the whole people.
But when the King becomes An estate governed without ^tice is no common weal.
unjust, (whom he calls (h) Tyranne as the Greeks do) or the nobles be
unjust, (whose combination he terms (i) faction) or the people themselves
be unjust, for which he cannot find a fit name, unless he should call the
whole company as he called the King, a Tyran) then that this is not a vicious
commonwealth, (aswas affirmed the day before) but, as the reasons depending
upon those definitions proved most directly, it is just no commonwealth at
all, for it is no Estate of the people, when the Tyran usurps on it by
Faction, nor is the commonty, a commonty, when it is not a society gathered
together in one consent of law and one participation of commodities, as he had
defined a commonty before. Wherefore, seeing the Roman Estate was such as
Saluste does descipher it to be, it was now no dishonest or dishonorable
Commonwealth (as he affirmed) but it was directly no commonwealth at all:
according unto the reasons proposed in that discourse of a commonwealth (k)
before so many great Princes and heads thereof: and as Tully himself, not
speaking by Scipio or any other, but in his own person does demonstrate in the
beginning of his fifth book: where having first rehearsed that verse of (l)
Ennius where he says. Moribus antiquis res stat Romana virisque.
Old manners, and old men vpholden Rome.


Which verse (quoth Tully) whether you respect the breuity, or the verity) me
seems he (m) spoake out as an oracle: for neither the men (unless the city
had had such manners, nor the manners, unless the city, had had such men)
could either have founded, or preserved a commonwealth of that magnitude of
justice, and Empire. And therefore before these our days, the predecessors
conditions, did still make the successors excel, and the worthy men still kept
up the ordinances of honorable antiquity: But now, our age receiving the
commonwealth as an excellent picture, but almost worn out with age, has not
only no care to renew it with such colors as it presented at first, but
never regarded it so much, as to preserve but the bare draught (n) and
lineament of it: For what remainder is there now of those old manners which
this Poet says supported Rome! do we not see them so clearly worn out of
use, and now so far from being followed, that they are quite forgotten? what
need I speak of them men? The manners perished (o) for want of men, the cause
whereof in justice, we should not only be bound to give an account of, but
even to answer it, as a capital offense: It is not any misfortune, it is not
any chance, but it is our own viciousness that has taken away the whole
essence of our commonwealth from us, and left us only the bare name.

This was Cicero's own confession, (p) long after Africanus his death, whom he
induces as a disputant in this work of his of the Commonwealth, but yet (q)
somewhat before the coming of Christ. Which mischieues had they not been (r)
divulged until the increase of Christian Religion, which of all those wretches
would not have been ready to callumniate Christ for them? But why did their
gods look to this no better, nor help to save the state of this
weale-publike, whose loss and ruin Cicero bewaileth with such pitiful
phrase, long before Christ came in the flesh? Nay, let the commenders thereof
observe but in what case it was even then when it consisted of the ancient men
and their manners, whether then it nourished true Justice or no; and whether at
that time it were honest indeed, or but glossed over in show! which Cicero not
conceiving what he said, confesses, in his relation thereof. But, by Gods
grace, we will consider that more fully elsewhere: for in the due place, I
will do what I can to make a plain demonstration out of Cicero's own
definitions of the commonwealth and the people (spoken by Scipio and justified
by many reasons, either of Scipio's own, or such as Tully gives him in this
discourse) that the estate of Rome was never any true commonwealth, because it
never was guided by true justice: Indeed according to some other probable
definitions, and after a sort, it was a kind of commonwealth: but far better
governed by the antiquity of the Romans, then by their posterity. But there
is not any true justice in any commonwealth whatsoever, but in that whereof
Christ is the founder, and the ruler, if you please to call that a commonweal
which we cannot deny is the weal of the commontie. (s) But if this name being
els-where so common, seem too discrepant for our subject and phrase, truly
then there is true justice, but in that City whereof that holy scripture says:
Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God. Psalm. 87. 3.


L. VIVES.
IT was (a) presaged] I do read praesentiebat, he foresawe, for
praesciebater it was presaged. (b) at that time when one of the Gracchi] When
as Tiberius Gracchus had promullgated the Tiberius Gracchus.
law Agraria, to the great grief and amazement of the Patriotts, and would
have his tribuneshippe continued still, thereby to have been more secure
against their injuries, and had effected that no one man should possess above
five hundred acres of ground, Scipio Nasica, being followed by the Senate
killd him: (Scipio Africane being at the sametime in wars at Numance) His
body was thrown into Tyber. This Affricanus, is he, whom Tully brings in
disputing in his garden with Laelius and Furius of the commonwealth, The death
of A^ilian Scipio.
alittle before his death. He was murdered (as it is thought) by the means
of Cayus Gracchus, Tiberius his brother, and Sempronia sister to the Gracchi,
and wife to Scipio. (c) Then Pylus] When as between the second and last
African war, the Athenians sent Ambassadors to Rome, Carneades the
Academicke, Critolaus the Peripatetike, and Diogenes The three learned Athenian
Ambassadors.
the Stoik the most excellent Philosophers of that age, Carneades, either to
exercise his faculty or to show his wit, made an elegant and excellent oration
for justice, in the presence of Cato the elder, Galba, and diverse other great
men: and the next day after, he made another for injustice unto the same
audience, wherein he confuted all the arguments for justice which he brought
the day before, and alleged more strong ones for injustice: this he did, to
show his sect which teaches never to affirm any thing, but only to confute
what others affirm. Out of the later of these orations has L. Furius Pylus
his proofs: who was held for a cunning latinist, and went about his subject of
injustice with far more dexterity L. Furius Pylus.
of learning then the rest, to stir up Laelius his invention in commendations
of his contrary. As Glauco did in Plato's 2. book de Republ. praising
injustice to make Socrates show his cunning in praise of justice. (d) That a
commonwealth could not] It is an old saying: without justice Jupiter himself
cannot play the King: Plut. de doc. Princ. And seeing that the weale-publicke
for the general good of it self and liberty, is often compelled to use
extremity against the Citizens private, and also oftentimes in augmenting the
own power, A commo^-wealth not governed without injustice.
breaks the laws of equity in encroaching upon others: both which
notwithstanding fell still very well out; the Romans altered the old saying,
and made it: A weale-publike cannot be governed without injustice. This
Carneades touched, as Lactantius affirms, and told the Romans themselves,
who possessed all the world, that if they would be just, that is, restore
every man his own they must ever return to their cotages, and lead their
lives in all poverty and necessity. (e) Then Laelius] This controversy does
Cicero speak of in his Laelius also. (f) The benefit of a definition] Plato,
Aristotle, and all the old Philosophers both held and taught that the course of
all disputation ought to be derived first ^om the definition. For you cannot
make a plain discourse of any thing, unless you first lay down what it is.
The use of a definition.
Rodolphus Agricola in his first book de Dialectae inuentione, says; That
this manner of defining is very useful, both for the understanding of the
matter, which being opened in the definition, it is marvelous to see how it
does as it were point out the limmite of knowledge to which all our notions
must bend; and also for the authority of the disputer, for no man can be held
to understand a thing more perfectly, then he that can express it in a pithy
and succinct definition.

Thus far Agricola, whom' Erasmus in his Proverbs does justly praise: and he
it is alone Rod. Agricola.
that may be an example to us that fortune rules in all things, (as Salust
says) and lighteneth or obscureth all, rather according to her pleasure then
the merit and worth of the men themselves. I know not two authors in all our
time nor our fathers, worthier of reading, and observing the^ Rodolphus
Agricola the Phrysian: There is such abundance of wit, art, gravity, judgment,
sweetness, eloquence and learning in all his works: and yet so few there are y^
do know him. The three forms of Rule.
He is as worthy of public note, as either Politian or Hermolaus Barbarus,
both which truly in my conceit he does not only equallize, but exceeds in
Majesty, and elegance of style. (g) Whether it be by a King] He touches at the
forms of Rule. For a Commonwealth is either swayed by the people alone: and
that the Greeks call a Democraticall rule: or by a certain few: and that they
call Oligarchical under with is also contained the rule of the choycest of the
commonwealth which is called Aristocracy: or the rule of the best: (They call
the Nobility the best: but indeed such as were most powerful in the State in
countenance or wealth, such Optimates.
were the right Ooptimates.) And therefore there is not much difference betwixt
Oligarchy and Aristocracy as Tully showed, when he said the second part of the
few Nobles: now the third Tyrannus. what and whence.
kind of Rule is that of one called Monarchy: (h) A Tyran] In ancient times
they called all Kings Tyrans, as well the best as the worst: as Uirgill and
Horace do in their Poemes, for the name in Greek, signifies only Dominion.
Plato who was the only man that laid down the right form of government for
a City, is called (...): A Tyran and a King. Festus thinks (Lib. 15.) That
the word was derived from the notorious cruelty of the Tyrrhenes: But I think
rather yt when the Athenians had brought in the Democratical government, and
other Cities through emulation followed their example, that was the cause that
first brought the word Tyrannus into hatred and contempt: and so they called
their Kings Tyrans, because they governed their own wealth, but not the
Commonwealth: besides that the Romans used it in that manner also, because
they hated the name of a King deadly: and in Greece also, whosoever bore rule
in a City that had before bin free, was called a Tyran, but not a King. (i)
Faction] Memmius (in Salust) speaking of the Seniors, says: They have
transferred the fear Friendship and faction.
that their own guilt surprised them with, unto your slothfulnes: it is that
which has combined them in one hate, one affect and one fear: this in good
men were friendship, but in euillmen it is rightly termed faction. (k) Before
so many great Princes] For it is imagined that at that discourse there were
present, Scipio Affrican, Caius Laelius, surnamed the wise, Lucius Furius:
three, who (at that time, as Porcius says) led the Nobility as they would: and
of the younger sort C. Fanius, Q. Scaeuola the Soothsaier, Laelius his son in
law; and Quintus Tubero, al of worthy families. Ennius] There is nothing of
this man's extant but a few fragments, which I intend to gather out of the
Writers through which they are dispersed and set them forth together in one
volume. He Ennius.
was borne at Rudiae (as Mela and Silius affirm) a City of the Salentines,
and lived first at Tarentum, and afterward at Rome. being very familiar with
Cato, Galba, Flaminius, and other great men: and was made free Dennizen of the
City by Flaminius. (m) Gave out] Effatus, the proper word of the religion. (n)
And Lineaments] A simily taken from painters; who first do only delineate,
and line forth the figure they will draw: which is called a Monogramme: and
then with their coullors they do as it were give spirit and life unto the dead
picture. (o) Want of men] So Salust says in Cataline yt the times are now
barren, and bring not forth a good man. (p) Long after.] About seauenty years.
(q) Before the coming of Christ] Threescore years: For it is just so long
from Tullies Consulship, at which time he wrote his books De repub. unto the
24. year of Augustus his Empire, at which time Christ was borne. (r) diuulged]
Diffamare how used.
So Diffamata is here reported abroad or diuulged: and so likewise other
authors use it. And warning the City to look to their safety, (Diffamauit) he
reported or cried out: (says Apuleius (Asini lib. 4.) That his house was a
fire upon a sudden: [But it is pretty truly, yt Remigius an interpreter of
Saint Paul's Epistles says upon that place with the translatour had turned A
vobis (...). diffamatus est sermo domini. These. 1. 1. 8. For from you sounded
out the Word of the Lord: This Not a word of this in our Paris print.
Commentator says, that saint Paul being not curious in choosing of his words
put Diffamatus, for Divulgatus, or Manifestus. What shall we do with these
School-doctors, that as yet cannot tell whether Paul wrote in Greek or in
Latin? Nay, to mark but the arrogant foolery of these simple fellows: in
such manner as this they will talk and prate so often about the signification
of words, as continually they do in their Logike and Philosophy lectures: and
yet they would not be held for professed Gramarians: but are very easily put out
of patience if any man begin but to discuss their words of art a little more
learnedly] (s) But if this name] It may be he speaks this because a
Commonwealth is a popular government, but Christ's Kingdom is but his alone.

That the Roman Gods never respected whether the City were corrupted, and so
brought to destruction, or no. CHAP. 22.
But to our present purpose: this commonwealth which they say was so good and
so lawdable, before ever that Christ came, was by the judgment of their own
most learned writers, acknowledged to be changed into a most dishonest and
dishonorable one: nay it was become no commonwealth at all, but was fallen
into absolute destruction by their own polluted conditions. Wherefore to have
prevented this ruin, the gods that were the patrons thereof, should (me
thinks) have taken the pains to have given the people that honored them some
precepts for reformation of life and manners, seeing that they had bestowed so
many temples, so many priests, such varitie of ceremonious sacrifices, so many
festival solemnities; so many and so great celebrations of plays and
enterludes upon them. But these devils minded nothing but their own affairs:
they respected not how their worshippers lived: nay their care was to see them
live like devils, only they bound them through fear to afford them these
honors. If they did give them any good counsel, why then let it be produced to
light and read, what laws, of what gods giving were they, that the (a) Gracchi
condemned, to follow their turmoiles and seditions in the City: show which
precept of the gods, (b) Marius or (c) Cinna, or (d) Carbo violated, in their
giving action unto the civil wars: which they began (e) upon such unjust
causes, followed with such cruelty and injuries, and ended in more injurious
cruelties: or what divine authorities (f) Sylla himself broke, whose life,
deeds, and conditions, to hear Salust describe (and other true Historians)
whose hair would not stand up right? What is he now that will not confess
that (g) then the weal public fell absolutely? What is he now that will dare
to produce that sentence of Virgill for this corruption of manners, in the
defense of their gods? (h) Discessere omnes adytis arisque relictis,
Dij, quibus imperium hoc steterat. -- Aen 2.
The gods by whom this Empire stood, left all
The temples and the Altars bare. --.
But admit that this were true: then have they no reason to rail upon
Christianity, or to say that the gods being offended at that, did forsake
them: because it was their predecessors manners, that long ago chaced all
their great multitude of little gods from the city altars, like so many
flies. But where was all this nest of Deities, when the (i) Galls sacked the
city, long before the ancient manners were contaminate? were they present and
yet fast a sleep? the whole city was all subdued at that time, only the
Capitol remained: and that had been surprised too, if (k) the Geese had not
shown themselves better then the gods, and waked when they were all a sleep.
And here-vpon did Rome fall almost into the (l) superstition of the Aegiptians
that worship birds and beasts, for they henceforth kept a holy day, which they
called the (m) gooses feast. But this is but by the way: I come not yet to
dispute of those accidental evils, which are rather corporal then mental and
inflicted by foes, or misfortunes. I am now in discourse of the stains of the
mind, and manners, and how they first decayed by degrees, and afterward fell
headlong into perdition: so that thence ensued so great a destruction to the
weale-publike (though their city walls stood still vnbattered) that their
chiefest authors doubted not to proclaim it lost and gone. Good reason was it
that the gods should abandon their Temples and Altars, and leave the Evil
manners chase ^vay the gods.
town to just destruction, if it had contemned their aduices of reformation.
But what might one think (I pray ye) of those gods, that would abide with the
people that worshipped them, and yet would they never teach them any means to
leave their vices, and follow what was good?

L. VIVES.
THE (a) Gracchi:] These were sons unto Titus Gracchus (who was twice Consul,
triumphed twice, and held the offices of Censor, and Augur) and Cornelia,
younger daughter The Gracchi.
to African the elder: they were young men of great and admirable towardness:
both which defending the Agrarian law, concerning the division of lands, were
murdered by the offended Senate, in their Tribuneships: Tiberius by Nasica a
private man, Caius by L. Opimius the Consul, nine years after: the first with
clubs, and stools feet: the latter with swords: and this was the first civil
dissension that ever came to weapons: Anno P. R. C. DCXXVII. Marius.
(b) Marius] Arpinas was his place of birth; a man ignoble by descent: but came
to be seven times Consul. He first conquered Iugurth, then the Cymbrians,
and Teutishmen, and triumphed of all these: at last envying and hating Sylla,
who was his legate in the war of Iugurthe, he fell to civil wars with him,
wherein Marius was put to the worst, and forced to fly into Africa. (c) Cinna]
Marius being overcome, Sylla going to war upon Mithridates, left C. Cornelius
Cynna, and Octauius Consuls in the city. Cynna, desirous of innovation,
severed Cinna.
himself from his fellow, and was chased out of the City by him and the good
faction, which injury Cynna endeavoring by all means possible to revenge,
calls back Marius out of Africa, and so made war upon his country, and
entering it with mighty powers, he butchered up numbers, and made himself the
second time, and Marius the seventh time Consul, without the voices of the
people, in which Magistracy Marius dyed, after many bloody massacres, and
foul acts committed. (d) Carbo,] There were many of the Carbo's, as Tully
Carbo.
writes to Papyrius Paetus, of the Papyrian family, but not of that of the
Patriotts: This of whom Saint Augustine speaks, was Cneus Papyrius Carbo, one
of Marius his faction, who being overcome by Sylla, fled into Sicily, and
there at Lylibaeum was slain by Pompey the great. (e) Unjust cause L. Sylla,
and Q. Pompeyus being Consuls, the Province of Asia, and the war of
Mitrhidates fell unto Sylla. This Marius stomocked because of his old grudge
at P. Sulpitius, The original of the civil war between Sylla and Marius.
Tribune, a most seditious and wicked fellow, to get the people to make
election of him for the war against Mithridates. The people, though in a huge
tumult, yet took notice of what the Tribune propounded, and commanded it
should be so. Sylla not brooking this disgrace, demanded help of his army,
and offered force to Marius his Ambassadors, who went to take up legions at
Capua: and so brought his angry powers to the City, with intent to wreake this
injury by fraud, or force. Hence arose the seeds of all the civil wars:
for Marius with his faction met him in the City at Port Esquiline, and
there fought a deadly set battle with him. (f) Sylla,] This man was a
Patriot, of the Cornelian family: and having done worthy service in arms, he
was made Consul; In which Magistracy, having conquered Mithridates, chased
out the civil wars, ouer-throwne Marius the younger, Carbo, Sylla.
Norbanus, Sertorius, Domitius, Scipio, and the rest of the Marian faction, he
took upon him perpetual Dictatorship by the law Valerian, wherein he
proscribed many thousands of the Roman Citizens with outrageous cruelty. He
was a most bloody fellow, and given over unto all kind of lust and
intemperance. (g) Then the weal publike] Lucane by the mouth of Cato: Olim
vera fidei, Sylla Marioque receptis,
Libertatis obijt. --.
Whilom, when Marius and feirce Sylla strove,
True liberty fell dead. --
(h) Discessere omnes adytis,] The verse is in the second book of Uirgils
Aeneads, which Seruius and Macrobius do think belongs unto the calling out
of the gods: for when as a The calling out of the gods.
city was besieged, and the enemy had an intent to raze it to the ground,
least they should seem to fight against the gods, and force them from their
habitations against their wills (which they held as a wicked deed) they used to
call them out of the besieged city, by the general that did besiege it, that
they would please to come and dwell amongst the conquerors. So did Camillus at
the Veii, Scipio at Carthage and Numance, and Mummius at Corinth. (i) The Galls
sacked] The The Galls take Rome.
Transalpine Galls burst often into Italy in huge multitudes. The last of them
were the Senones, who first sacked Clusium, and afterward Rome: Anno P. R. C.
CCCLX. whether there were only these, or some Cisalpine Galls amongst them, is
uncertain. (k) The Geese] It is a very common story, that when the Galls had
found a way up to the Capitol, and were climbing up in the night when all the
keepers were a sleep, they were descried by the noise that the geese did make
which they kept in the capitol as consecrated unto Juno. And there-vpon
Manlius The Capitolls Geese.
snatching up his weapons, met a Gall upon the very top of the battlement,
and tumbled him down with his bucklar: whose fall struck down the rest that
were a coming up, and in the mean time, the Romans got them into arms,
and so repulsed the Galls with much ado. (l) Superstition of the Egiptians]
They had certain beasts, which because of their vse-fulnesse they consecrated
as gods: Tullie de not. deor. lib. 1. of them at large in Diodorus, Biblioth.
lib. 2. Egipts beast gods.
Such were the Dog, the Cat, the bird Ibis, the Ox, the Crocodile, the Hawke.
etc. (m) The gooses feast,] Because of that good turn which the Geese did
them, the Romans did every year use this ceremony: (Plut. de Fortuna
Romanor.) I will relate it in Budaeus his words, for I cannot use a more
excellent phrase. A Dog was hanged upon a gallows, and a Goose was placed The
gods honors at Rome.
very decently in a gallant bed or panier, for all men to visit as that day.
For the same cause (says Pliny lib. 29.) there were Dogs hanged up every
year upon a gallows between the Temples of Iuuentus, and Summanus, the
gallows was of an elderne tree: and the first thing that the Censor does after
his institution, is to serve the holy geese with meat.

That the variety of temporal estates depends not upon the pleasure or
displeasure of these devils, but upon the judgments of God almighty. CHAP. 23.
NAy what say you to this, that these their gods do seem to assist them in
fulfilling their desires, and yet are not able to restrain them from brooding
up such desires: for they that helped (a) Marius, an unworthy base borne
fellow, to run through the inducement and managing of such barbarous civil
wars, The happy success of wicked Marius.
to be made seven times Consul, to die an old man in his seventh Consulship,
and to escape the hands of Sylla, that immediately after bare down all before
him, why did not these gods keep Marius from affecting any such bloody deeds,
or excessive cruelty? If his gods did not further him in these acts at all,
then have we good advantage given us by their confession, that this temporal
felicity which they so greatly thirst after, may befall a man without the gods
furtherance: and that other men may be as Marius was, enguirt with health,
power, riches, honors, friends, and long life, and enjoy all these, mauger
the gods beards: and again, that other men may be as Regulus was, tortured in
chains, slavery, misery, ouer-watchings, and torments, and perish in these
extremities, do all the gods what they can to the contrary: which if our
adversaries do acknowledge, then must they needs confess that they do nothing
benefit their worshippers (b) commodity, and consequently that all the honor
given them as out of superfluity: for if they did rather teach the people the
direct contraries to virtue and piety, the rewards whereof are to be expected
after men's deaths, then any thing that way furthering them: and if in these
transitory and temporal benefits, they can neither hinder those they hate,
nor further those they love: why then are they followed with such zeal and
feruencie? why do you mutter that they are departed, as from a course of
turbulent and lamentable times, and hence take occasion to throw callumnious
reproaches upon the religious christians? If that your gods have any power to
hurt or profit men in these worldly affairs, why did they stick to that
accursed Marius, and shrink from that honest Regulus? does not this convince
them of injustice and villainy? Do you think that there was any want of their
worship on the wretches party? think not so: for you never read that Regulus
was slacker in the worship of the gods then Marius was. Nor may you persuade
your selves, that a corrupted course of life is the rather to be followed,
because the gods were held more friendly to Marius then to Regulus: for (c)
Metellus, the honestest man of all the Romans, (d) had five Consuls to his
sons, and lived happy in all temporal estate: and (e) Cateline, that
villenous wretch, was oppressed with misery and brought to naught in the war
which his own guilt had hatched: good men that worship that God who alone can
give felicity, do shine, and are mighty in the true and surest happiness:
wherefore, when as the contaminate conditions of that weale-publike, did
subvert it, the gods never put to their helping hands to stop this inundation
of corruption into their manners, but rather made it more way, and gave the
Commonwealth a larger pass unto destruction. Nor let them shadow themselves
under goodness, or pretend that the Cities wickedness drove them away. No,
no, they were all there, they are produced, they are convicted, they could
neither help the City by their instructions, nor conceal themselves by their
silence. I omit to relate how (f) Marius was commended unto the goddess Marica
by the pitiful Minturnia^s in her Wood, and how they made their prayers to her
that she would prosper all his enterprises, and how he having shaken of his
heavy disperation, returned with a bloody army eue^ unto Rome it self: Where
what a barbarous, cruel, and more then most inhumain victory he obtained, let
them that list to read it, look in those that have recorded it: This as I said
I omit: nor do I impute his murderous felicity unto any Marica's, or I cannot
tell whom, but unto the most secret judgment of the most mighty God to shut
the mouths of our adversaries, and to free those from error that do observe
this with a discreet judgment and not with a preiudicate affect. For if the
devils have any power or can do any thing at all in these affairs, it is no
more then what they are permitted to do by the secret providence of the
almighty: and in this case, they may be allowed to effect somewhat to the end
that we should neither take too much pleasure in this earthly felicity, in that
we see that wicked men like Marius may enjoy it, neither hold it as an evil,
and therefore to be utterly refused, seeing that many good honest men, and
servants of the true and living God have possessed it in spite of all the
devils in hell: and that we should not be so fond as to think that these
unclean spirits are either to be feared for any hurt, nor honored for any
profit they can bring upon man's fortunes. For they are in power, but even as
wicked men upon earth are, so that they cannot do what they please, but are
mere ministers to his ordinance, whose judgments no man can either
comprehendfully, or reprehend justly.

L. VIVES.
THey that helped Marius] Ater he returned out of Africa, he called all the
slaves to his standard, and gave them their freedom: and with all cruelty
spoiled the Collonies of Ostiae, Marius his cruelty.
Antium, Lavinium, and Aritia. Entering the City, he gave his soldiars charge
that to whomsoever he returned not the salute, they should immediately dispatch
him. It is unspeakable to consider the innumerable multitude of all sorts,
Noble and ignoble, that were slaughtered by this means. His cruelty Lucan in
few words does excellently describe. Vir ferus and fat^ ^vpienti perdere Romam.
Sufficiens, --
Cruel and fittest instrument for fate.
To wrack Rome by. --


And yet this bloody man (as I said before) in his seventh Consulship, died
quietly in his bed, as Lucan says: Folix ^uersa Consul moritarus in vrb^.
Happy dead Consul in his ruined town.


Soon after his death, came Sylla out of Asia, and rooted out Marius his son
and all the whole faction of them utterly. (b) Commodity] Saint Augustine
plays with these Antitheses, Compendio and Superfluo: Compendio Breifely, or
Compendio to their commodity, whose contrary is Dispendium, Excess or
Superfluity. (c) Metellus.] Ualerius, lib. 7. and Pliny lib. 7. Q. Metellis
Macedonicus was judged of all men the most happy, as a man endowed Metellus,
his felicity
with all good qualities of body and mind. He was Consul, he was Censor, he
managed great wars with happy success, he attained the glory of a triumph:
he left four sons, three of the^ were Consuls, two of which triumphed: one
of which was Censor: his fourth was Praetor, and pricked for the Consulship, and
(as Uelleius says) he attained it: Besides he had three daughters all
married to Noble and mighty houses, whose children he himself lived to see;
and by this illustrious company, all sprung from his own loins (being of
exceeding age) he was borne forth to his funeral. (d) Five Consuls to his
sonnes] [This history is depraved by some smattering fellow: For I do not
think that Saint Augustine left it so. Unless you will take Quinque filios
Consulares, for Five sons worthy to be Consuls: as my fine Commentator
observed most acutely: which he had not done unless his skill in Logike had
been so excellent [] Paris copy ^eanes (...) this.
as it was: so he finds it to be Consulares quasi Consulabiles, or
Consulificabiles, that is (in the magisteriall phrase) in potentia to become
Consuls.] (e) And Cateline] The life and conditions of L. Sergius Cateline, are
well known because Salust himself the author that reports them, is so well
known. It is said that amongst other reasons, poverty was one of the chief,
Cateline. (
that set him into the conspiracy against his country, for he was one whose
excessive spending exceeded all sufficient means for a man of his rank. In
Syllas time he got much by rapine, and gave Sylla many gifts; who used his
help in the murder of M. Marius, and many others. (f) I omit to relate that
Marius] C. Marius having escaped alone out of the first battle of the civil
wars, fled to Minturnae a town of Campania. The Minturnians to do Sylla a
pleasure sent a fellow to cut his throat: but the fellow being terrified by the
words, and majesty of the man, and Marius his fligt.
running away as one-wholy affrighted, the Minturnians turned their malice to
reverence, and began to think now that Marius was one whom the gods had a
meseriall care of: so that they brought him into the holy Wood which was
consecrated to Marica, a little without the town, and then they set him free
to go whether he would: Plutarch in the life of Marius. Velleius says they
brought him to the marish of Marica: She that was first called Circe (says
Lactantius) after her deifying, was enstiled Marica. Seruius (in Aenaeid. lib.
8.) says, Marica Marica.
was the wife of Faunus, and that she was goddess of the Minturnians shores,
near the river Ly^: H^race: (...) Maricae litterribus tenuisse Lyrim,
Held Lyris swimming near Maricas, shores.
But if we make her the wife of Faunus, it cannot be so: for the Topicall Gods,
that is, the local gods of such and such places, do never change their
habitations, nor go they into other countries: But Poetical license might call
her Marica of Laurentum, when indeed she was Marica of Minturnum. Some say
that by Marica should be understood Uenus: who had a Chapel near unto Marica
wherein was written (...), the Temple of Venus. Hesiod says that Latinus was
the son of Ulisses and Cyrce: which Virgill touches, when he calls him His
gransires form, the sons: Solis aui specimen. But because the times do not
agree, therefore we must take the opinion of Iginius touching this point, who
affirms that there were many that were called by the names of Latinus: and
that therefore the Poet wresteth the concordance of the name, to his own
purpose. Thus much says Seruius.

Of the Acts of Sylla, wherein the Devils showed themselves his maine helpers
and furtherers. CHAP. 24.
NOw as for (a) Sylla himself, who brought all to such a pass, as that the
times before (whereof he professed himself a reformer) in respect of those
that he brought forth, were wished for again and again; when he first of all
set forward against Marius toward Rome, Liuie writes that the entrails in
the sacrifices were so fortunate, that (b) Posthumous the Sooth-sayer would
needs have himself to be kept under guard, with an urgent and willing
proffer to loose his head, if all Syllas intents sorted not (by the assistance
of the gods) unto his head, if all Syllas intents sorted not (by the
assistants of the gods) unto most wished and happy effect. Behold now, the gods
were not yet gone: they had not as yet forsaken their altars, when they did so
plainly fore-shew the event of Syllas purposes: and yet they never endeavored
to mend Sylla's manners. They stuck not to promise him wished happiness; but
never proffered to suppress his wicked affections. Again, when he had
undertaken the Asian war against Mithridates, L. Titius was sent to him on a
message, even from Jupiter himself, who sent him word that he should not fail
to (c) overcome Mithridates: no more he did indeed. And afterward, when he
endeavored to re-enter the city, and to revenge himself, and his injured
friends, upon the lives of the Citizens, he was certified that a certain
soldier of the sixth legion, brought him another message from Jove, how that
he had foretold him of his victory against Mithridates before, and how he
promised him now the second time, that he would give him power to recover the
rule of the weale-publike from all his enemies, but not with out much
bloodshed. Then Sylla asking of what favor the souldior was: when they had
showed him, he remembered that it was he that brought him the other message in
the war of Mithridates, and that he was the same man that now brought him
this: What can be said to this now, that the gods should have such care to
acquaint Sylla with the good events of these his wishes: and yet none of them
have power to reform his foul conditions, being then about to set abroach
such mischiefs by these domestique arms, as should not pollute, but even
utterly abolish the state of the weale-publike? By this very act do they
prove themselves (as I said here-to-fore) directly to be devils. And we do
know, our scripture shows it us, and their own actions confirm it, that
their whole care is to make themselves be reputed for gods, to be worshipped as
divine powers, and to have such honors given them, as shall put the giuers and
the receivers both into one desperate case, at that great day of the Lord.
Besides, when Sylla came to Tarentum, and had sacrificed there, he descryed in
the chief lap The form of a crown^ of gold in the liver of a Calfe.
of the Calves liver, a figure just like a crown of gold: and then Posthumous
the Sooth-sayer answered him again, that it portended him a glorious victory,
and commanded that he alone should eat of these intrayles. And within a
little while after, (d) a servant of one Lucius Pontius came running in, crying
out in Prophetike manner, I bring news from Bellona, the victory is thine
Sylla: and then added, That the Capitol should be fired. Which when he had
said, presently going forth of the rents, he returned the next day in greater
haste then before, and said that the Capitol was now burned: and burned it was
indeed. This now might quickly be done by the devil, both for ease in the
knowledge of it, and speed in the relation. But now to speak to the purpose,
mark but well what kind of gods these men would have, that blaspheame Christ,
for delivering the hearts of the believers from the tyrranie of the devil. The
fellow cried out in his propheticke rapture: The victory is thine, O Sylla,
and to assure them that he spoke by a divine instinct, he told them of a
sudden event that should fall out soon after, in a place from whence he in
whom this spirit spoke, was a great way distant. But he never cried, Forbear
thy Villainies O Sylla: those were left free to be executed by him with such
horror, and committed with such outrage, as is unspeakable, after that victory
which the bright sign of the Crown in the Calves liver did prognosticate unto
him. Now if they were good and just gods, and not wicked fiends, that had given
such signs, then truly these entrails should have expressed the great
mischiefs that should fall upon Sylla himself, rather then any thing else:
for that victory did not benefit his dignity so much, but it hurt his
affections twice as much: for by it was his spirit elevated in vain glory, and
he induced to abuse his prosperity without all moderation, so that these
things made a greater massacre of his manners, then he made of the citizens
bodies. But as for these horred and lamentable events, the gods would never
foretell him of them, either by entrails, Prophesies, Dreams, or
Sooth-sayings: for their fear was least his enormities should be reformed,
not least his fortunes should be subverted. No, their (e) endeavor was, that
this glorious conqueror of his Citizens, might be captiuated and conquered by
the rankest shapes of viciousness, and by these, be more strictly bound and
enchained unto the subjection of the devils themselves.

L. VIVES.
SYlla (a) himself. The Marian faction (during their superiority) governed
the commonwealth with such cruelty and insolence, that all the desires and
hearts of the people longed for Sylla, and called him home, to come and revenge
those tyrannies. But his good beginnings Sylla his cruelty.
lifted him up unto such intolerable pride, and blood-thirst, that afterward
they all acknowledged Marius as a meek lamb in respect of him. Lucane. Sylla
quo^ immensis accessit cladibus vltor,
Ille, quod ^xiguum restabat sanguinis vrbis
Ha^it. --
Then Sylla came to wreake the woes sustained,
And that small quantity that yet remained,
Of Roman blood he drew. --


And a little after: T^ ^ta libert^ odijs, resoluta^ legum
Franis i^ a ^uit: non vni cuncta dabantur,
Sed fecit sibi quisquenefas, semel omnia victor
(...). --
Then hate brake freely forth, and (laws raines gone)
Wrath mounted: not lay all the guilt on one,
But each wrought his own stain: the victors tongue
Licensed all acts at once. --


(b) Posthumius] Cicero (De diuinatione lib. 1.) says that he was also a
Sooth-sayer with Sylla in the war called Sociale, of the Associates or
confederates. In which war, Cicero P^sthumius.
himself was a soldier. Ualerius also affirms this to be true (de
prodigiis.) (c) Mithridates] This was a most valiant King of Pontus, against
whom the people of Rome denounced Mithridaces.
wars, first of all because he chased Nicomedes out of Bythinia. But
afterward, brake the war out beyond all bounds, because that upon one set
day, all the Roman Citizens that were found traffiquing in his dominions,
were murdered every man, by the command of Mithridates himself. This Kings
fortunes did Sylla first of all shake, then did Lucullus break them, and last
of all Pompey did utterly extinguish them, subiecting his whole kingdom unto
the Roman Empire, the King having killed himself. Plutarch in the lives of
Pompey, Lucullus, etc. Appian Alex. in Mithridatico. Florus, and others. (d) A
servant of one] So says Plutarch in his life of Sylla. The Capitol was built
on mount Tarpeius by Tarquin the Proud: and a Temple, the fairest of all them
on the Capitol, was dedicated unto Jupiter by Horatius Puluillus then Consul,
the first year of the Cities liberty. It was burned in the Marian war: Cn:
Carbo, and L. Scipio being Consulls. Anno P. R. C. DCLXXI. Repaired by Sylla,
finished and consecrated by Q. Ca^ulus: only in this (as Sylla said) did fate
detracte from his felicity. Some think it was burnt by Sylla's means, others
by Carbo's the Consulls: Appian says, that it was fired by mere chance, no
man knew how. (e) Endeuoured] Satis agebant, had a diligent and a^xione-care to
effect it.

How powerfully the Devils incite men to villainies, by laying before them
examples of divine authority (as it were) for them to follow in their
villainous acts. CHAP. 25.
WHo is he then (unless he be one of those that loves to imitate such gods)
that by this which is already laid open, does not see, how great a grace of
God it is to be separated from the society of those devils? and how strong
they are in working mischief, by presenting their own examples, as a divine
privilege and authority, whereby men are licensed to work wickedness. Nay,
they The devils together by the cares amongst themselves.
were seen in a (a) certain large plain of Campania, to fight a set battle
amongst themselves, a little before that the citizens fought that bloody
conflict in the same place. For at first there were strange and terrible noyses
heard; and afterward it was affirmed by many, that for certain days
together, one might see two armies in continual fight one against the other.
And after that the fight was ceased, they found the ground all trampled with
the steps of men, and horses, as if they had been made in that battle. If
the deities were truly and really at wars amongst themselves, why then indeed
their example may give a sufficient privilege unto human conflicts: (but by
the way, let this be considered, that these deities in the mean space must
either be very malicious, or very miserable:) but if they did not fight, but
only illuded the eyes of men with such a show, what intended they in this, but
only that the Romans should think that they might lawfully wage civil
wars, as having the practices of the gods themselves for their privileges?
for presently upon this apparition, the civil dissentions began to be
kindled, and some bloody massacres had been effected before. (b) And already
were the hearts of many grieved at that lamentable act of a certain
soldier, who (c) in taking of the spoils of his slain foe, and discovering
him by his face, to be his own brother, with a thund^r of curses upon those
domestique quarrels, he stabd himself to the heart, and fell down dead by his
brothers side. To enuelop and ouer-shadow the irkesomnesse of such events, and
to aggrauate the ardent thirst after more blood and destruction, did those
devils (those false reputed gods) appear unto the Romans eyes in such
fighting figures, to animate the city not to be any whit in doubt to imitate
such actions, as having the example of the gods for a lawful privilege for
the villainies of men. And out of this subtilty did these maleuolent powers give
command for the induction of those Stage Plays, whereof we have spoken at
large already, and wherein such dishonest courses of the gods were portraited
forth unto the worlds eye, upon their stages, and in the theaters; that all men
(both those that believe that their gods did such acts, and those that do not
believe it, but see how pleasing it is to them to behold such impurities) may
hence be bold to take a free license to imitate them, and practice to become
like them in their lives. Least that any man therefore should imagine, that the
Poets have rather done it as a reproach to the gods, then as a thing by them
deserved, (d) when they have written of their fightings The Gods examples
furthered the vvarres.
and brablings one with another, to clear this misconstruction, they
themselves have confirmed these Poesies, to deceive others: and have presented
their combats, and contentions, not only upon the Stage by players, but even
in the plain fields by themselves. This was I enforced to lay down; because
their own authors have made no doubt to affirm and record, that the corrupt
and rotten manners of the Citizens, had consumed the state of the
weale-publike of Rome unto nothing, long before that Christ Jesus came into the
world: for which subversion of their state they will not call their gods into
any question at all, but all the transitory miseries of mortality (which
notwithstanding cannot make a goodman perish whether he live or dye) they are
ready to heap on the shoulders of our Savior Christ. Our Christ, that has so
often powered his all-curing precepts upon the incurable ulcers of their damned
conditions, when their false gods never put to an helping hand, never vp-held
this their religious commonweal from ruining, but cankering the virtues that
vpheld it with their vile acts and examples, rather did all that they could to
thrust it on unto destruction. No man (I think) will affirm that it perished
because that Discessere omnes adytis arisque relictis, -- Dij --
The gods were gone, and left their Altars bare. --
As though their love to virtue, and their offense taken at the wicked vices of
the city had made them depart: no, no, there are too many presages from
intrailes, sooth-sayings, and prophecies, (whereby they confirmed and animated
their servants, and extolled themselves as rulers of the fates, and furtherers
of the wars) that prove and convince them to have been present: for had
they been absent, the Romans in these wars would never have been so far
transported with their own affections, as they were with their Gods
instigations.

L. VIVES.
IN (a) a certain plain of Campania] L. Scipio and C. Norbanus being Consuls,
between Capua and Uulturnum was heard a huge clashing of arms, and sounding
of martial instruments, with an horrible noise and crying, as if two battles
had been there fighting in their greatest fury. This was heard for many days
together. Julius Obsequens. Now this Scipio and this Norbanus were the two
first Consuls with whom the great Sylla had the first conflict, after
Prodigious sounds of battles heard.
his return into Italy, for they were both of Marius his faction. (b) And
already] for when friends and acquaintance meet, and know one another in
contrary fronts of battle: then know they well what kind of war they are
fallen into; and have a full view of the fruits of civil hate: So says
Lucane in his Tharsalia, lib. 4. -- Postquam spacio languentia nullo
Mutua conspicuush ab uerunt lumina vultus.
Et fratres, nat^sque sicos videre patresque,
Deprehensum est civil n^as. --
-- when they from their confronting places,
Gazed a good while in each others faces,
And fathers met their sons, and brethren there,
Then showed the war true eiuill --


(c) Taking of the spoyles] Liuie lib. 79. This fell out when Cynna and Marius
sought that desperate battle with Cn. Pompey, father to Pompey the great.
Ualerius (lib. 5.) says that one of Pompeys soldiers killed his own brother
that served Sertorius in his wars. Liuie Brethren killing one another.
puts Cynna for Sertorius; but both might come to pass: for all the armies
were of Cynna's raising, which not-with-standing were divided into four. Cynna
led one, Marius another, Q. Sertorius the third, Cn. Carbo the fourth. Orosius
writes that Pompey fought a battle with Sertorius, wherein this tragedy of the
two brethren fell out. (d) When they have written of their fightings, and
their] Homer in the wars of Troy, makes the gods to be at great variance,
even unto strokes amongst themselves: Mars, Venus, and Apollo, against
Pallas, Juno, and Neptune.

Of certain obscure instructions concerning good manners which the Devils are
said to have given in secret, whereas all wickedness was taught in their
public solemnities. CHAP. 26.
WHerefore seeing that this is so, seeing that all filthiness confounded with
cruelties, all the gods fowlest facts and shames, whether true or imaginary, by
their own commandments, and upon pain of their displeasures, if it were
otherwise, were set forth to open view, and dedicated unto themselves, in the
most holy and set solemnities, and produced as imitable spectacles to all men's
eyes: to-what end is it then, (a) that seeing these devils, who acknowledge
their own uncleanness, by taking pleasure in such obscaenities, by being
delighted with their own villainies and wickednesses, as well performed as
invented; and by their exacting these celebrations of modest men in such
impudent manner, do confess themselves the authors of all pernicious and
abhorred courses; yet would seem (forsooth) and are reported to have given
certain secret instructions against evil manners, in their most private
habitacles, and unto some of their most selected servants? If it be so, take
here then an excellent observation of the craft and maliciousness of these
unclean spirits. The force of honesty, and chastity, is so great and
powerful upon man's nature, that all men, or almost all men, are moved with
the excellency of it, nor is there any man so wholly abandoned to turpitude,
but he has some feeling of honesty left him. Now for the devils depraved
nature, we must note, that unless he sometime change himself into an angel
of light, (as we read in our scriptures that he will do) he cannot fully 2.
Cor. 11.
effect his intention of deceit. Wherefore he spreads the blasting breath of
all impuritie abroad, and in the mean time, whispers a little air of
dissembled chastity within. He gives light unto the vilest things, and keeps
the best in the dark, honesty lies hid, and shame flies about the streets:
Filthiness must not be acted, but before a great multitude of spectators: but
when goodness is to be taught, the auditorie, is little or none at all: as
though purity were to be blushed at, and uncleanness to be boasted of: But
where are these rules given, but in the devils temples? where, but in the very
Innes, or exchanges of deceit? And the reason is, because that such as are
honest (being but few) should hereby be enueighled, and such as are dishonest,
(which are multitudes) remain unreformed. But as for us, we cannot yet tell
when these good precepts of celestial chastity were given: but this we are
sure of, that before (b) the very temple gates, where the Idol stood, we
beheld an innumerable multitude of people drawn together, and there saw a
large train of Strumpets on one side, and a (c) virgin goddess on the other;
here humble adorations unto her; and there, foul and immodest things acted
before her. We could not see one modest mimike, not one shamefast actor amongst
them all: but all was full of actions of abominable obscaenitie. They knew
well what that virgin deity liked, and pronounced it for the nations to learn
by looking on, and to carry home in their minds. Some there were of the
chaster sort, that turned away their eyes from beholding the filthy gestures of
the players, and yet though they blushed to look upon this artificial
beastliness, they gave scope unto their affections to learn it. For they
durst not behold the impudent gestures of the actors boldly, for being shamed
by the men: and less durst they condemn the ceremonies of that deity whom
they so zealously adored. But this was that presented in the temples, and in
public which none will commit in their own private houses, but in secret. It
were too great a wonder if there were any shame left in those men of power, to
restrain them from acting that, which their very gods do teach them, even in
their principles of religion; and tell them that they shall incur their
displeasures if they do not present them such shows. What spirit can that be,
which does inflame bad minds with a worse instinct, which does urge on the
committing of adultery, and fattes it self upon The devils incite men to
mischief by wicked instigations
the sin committed, but such an one as is delighted with such
representations, filling the temples with diabolical Images, exacting the
presenting of loathsome iniquity in Plays, muttering in secret, I know not
what good Consels, to deceive and delude the poor remainders of honesty, and
professing in public all incitements to perdition, to gather up whole haruests
of men given over unto ruin?

L. VIVES.
TO what end is it (a) that] A diversity of reading. We follow the best copy.
(b) before the temple] He speaks of the sollemnities of the Goddess Flora;
which were kept by all the strumpets and ribalds in the City, as Plutarch,
Ovid, and others do report. For Flora her self was an whore: Lactantius lib.
1. The plays of Flora are celebrated with all lasciviousness The Goddess
Flora.
befitting well the memory of such a whore. For besides the bawdery of
speeches, (which they stuck not to spew forth in all uncleanness) the whores
(at the peoples earnest entreaty) put off all their apparel (those I mean
that were the actors did this) and there they acted their immodest gestures
before the people, until their lustful eyes were fully satisfied with gazing
on them. (c) The virgin goddesse] That was Vesta. Upon the day before the
Calends of May, they kept the feasts of Flora, Vesta, Apollo, and Augustus,
upon Mount Palatine. Ovid. Fastorum. 4. Exit and in Maias festum Florale
Calendas,
Tune repetam, nunc me grandius vrget opus:
Aufert Vesta diem, cognati, Vesta recepta est
Limine: sic iusti constituere Patres.
Phoebus habet partem: Vestae pars altera cessit:
Quod superest illis tertius ipse tenet.
State Palatinae Laurus, pretextaque quercus
Stet: domus aeternos tres habet vna deos.
Let Flora's feasts, that in Mayes Calendes are,
Rest till they come: now, to a greater fair:
This day is Vesta's: she is entertained,
In her sons house: our fathers so ordained.
Phoebus has part, Vesta has part assigned
The third's Augustus share that is left behind.
Live green thou noble oak, and Palatine
Keep green thy days, three gods possess one shrine.


What a great means of the subversion of the Roman estate, the induction of
those scurrilous plays, was, which the surmized to be propitiatory unto their
gods. CHAP. 27.
TErtullius (a) a grave man, and a good Philosopher, being to be made Edile,
cried out in the ears of the whole City, that amongst the other duties of his
magistracy, he must needs go pacify mother Flora, with the celebration of
some sollemne plays: (b) which plays, the more fowly they were presented, the
more devotion was held to be shown. And (c) in another place (being then
Consul, he says that when the City was in great extremity of ruin, they were
feign to present plays continually for ten days together; and nothing was
omitted which might help to pacify the gods, as though it were not fitter to
anger them with temperance, then to please them with luxury: and to procure
their hate by honesty, rather then to flatter them with such deformity. For the
barbarous inhumanity of those (d) men, for whose villainous acts the gods were
to be appeased were it never so great, could not possibly do more hurt, then
that filthiness which was acted as tending to their appeasing, because that in
this, the gods will not be reconciled unto them, but by such means as must
needs produce a destruction of the goodness of men's minds, in lieu of their
preventing the dangers imminent only over their bodies: nor will these
Deities defend the cities walls, until they have first destroyed all
goodness within the walls. This pacification of the gods, so obscaene, so
impure, so wicked, so impudent, so unclean, whose actors the Romans
diss-enabled from all magistracy, (e) and freedom of City, making them as
infamous as they knew them dishonest: this pacification (I say) so beastly,
and so directly opposite unto all truth of Religion, and modesty, these
fabulous inventions of their gods filthiness, these ignominious facts of the
gods themselves (either foully fained, or fowlier effected) the whole city
learned both by seeing and hearing: observing plainly, that their gods were
well pleased with such presentations, and therefore they did both exhibit them
unto their Idols, and did imitate them themselves: But as for that (I know not
indeed well what) honest instruction, and good counsel, which was taught in
such secret, and unto so few, that I am sure was not followed, if it be true,
that it were taught belike it was rather feared, that too many would know it,
then suspected that any few would follow it.

L. VIVES.
TErtullius (a) a grave man] it should surely be Tullius: for this that Saint
Augustine quoteth is out of his orations: Wherefore it must either be: Tullius
that grave man, and that smatterer in Philosophy: (Saint Augustine so deriding
his speculation, that could not free him from such gross errors,) or Tullius
that grave man and thrice worthy Philosopher: to show, that the greatest
Princes were infected with this superstition, and not the vulgar only, nor the
Princes only but the grauest princes, and those that were Philosophers, not
mean ones, but of chief note: adding this, to amplify the equity of his
Philosophy, as Ter maximus, the thrice mighty. Now (says Tully in verrem,
Actio. 6. that I am made Aedile, let me reckon up the charge The office of the
Aedile.
that the city has imposed upon me. I must first present the most sacred
Plays and ceremonial solemnities unto Ceres, Liber and Proserpina: then, I
must reconcile mother Flora unto the City and people of Rome, with the
celebration of her enterludes, etc. (b) Which playes] They were such that the
actors would not play them as long as Cato the elder was present. Seneca,
Valerius, Plutarch and Martial do all report this. (c) In another place] In
Catilinam. Actio. 3, (d) Men for whose] he means Cateline and his
conspiratours, (e) Freedom of Citie] some copies read Tributa amouit, but the
ancient ones do read it Tribu mouit, with more reason.

Of the salvation attained by the Christian religion. CHAP. 28.
WHy then do these men complain think you? because that by the name of
Christ, they see so many discharged of these hellish bands that such unclean
spirits held them in, and of the participation of the same punishment with
them. Their ungrateful iniquity has bound them so strongly in these deuilish
enormities, that they murmr and eat their galls, when they see the people
flock unto the Church, to these pure solemnities of Christ, where both sexes
are so honestly distinguished by their several places; where they may learn
how well to lead their temporal lives here, to become worthy of the eternal
here-after: where the holy doctrine of Gods word is read from an eminent place,
that all may hear it assure a reward to those that follow it, and a judgment
to those that neglect it. Into which place if there chance to come any such as
scoff at such precepts, they are presently either converted by a sudden power,
or cured by a sacred fear: for there is no filthy sights set forth there, nor
any obscaenities to be seen, or to be followed; but there, either the
commandments of the true God are propounded, his miracles related, his gifts
commended, or his graces implored.

An exhortation to the Romans to renounce their Paganism. CHAP. 29.
LEt these rather be the objects of thy desires, thou courageous nation of the
Romans, thou progeny of the Reguli, Scaeuolae, Scipioes, and (a) Fabricii.
long after these, discern but the difference between these, and that
luxurious, filthy shameless maleuolence of the diuills. (b) If nature have
given thee any lawdable eminence, it must be true piety that must purge and
perfect it: impiety contaminates and consumes it. Now then, choose which of
these to follow, that thy praises may arise, not from thy self that may be
misled, but from the true God, who is without all error. Long ago, wast thou
great in popular glory: but as then (as it pleased the providence of the high
God), was the true Religion wanting, for thee to choose and embrace. But now,
awake, and rowse thy self (c) it is now day, thou art already awake in some of
thy children, of whose full virtue, and constant sufferings for the truth we
do justly glory: they even these who fighting at all hands against the powers
of iniquity, and conquering them all by dying undaunted, have purchased this He
means they have bin a great enlargement of the true Church of God, upon
earth, by suffering so constantly.
possession for us with the price of their blood. To partake of which
possession we do now inuit and exhort thee, that thou would become a
Citizen, with the rest, in that city wherein true remission of sins stands
as a glorious sanctuary. Give no ear unto that degenerate brood of thine,
which barketh at the goodness of Christ and Christianity, accusing these times
of badnesse, and yet desiring such as should be worse, by denying tranquillity
to virtue, and giving security unto al iniquity: these times did thou never
approve, nor ever desiredst to secure they temporal estate by them. Now then
reatch up at the heavenly ones, for which, take but a little pains, and thou
shall reap the possession of them, unto all eternity. There shall thou find
no vestall fire, nor (e) stone of the capitol, but one true God, (f) who will
neither limmit thee blessedness in quality, nor time, but give thee an Empire,
both universal, perfect, and eternal. Be no longer led in blindness by these
thy illuding and erroneous gods; reject them from the, and taking up thy true
liberty, shake of their damnable subjection. They are no gods, but wicked
fiends; and all the Empire they can give them is but possession of everlasting
pain. (g) Juno The happiness that the devils can bestow on men.
did never grieve so much that the Troyans (of whom thou descendest) should
arise again to the state of Rome, as these damned devils (whom as yet thou
hold for gods) do envy and repine, that mortal men should ever enjoy the
glories of eternity. And thou thy self have censured them with no obscure
note, in affording them such plays, whose actors thou have branded with
express infamy. Suffer us then to plead thy freedom against all those Impure
devils that imposed the dedication and celebration of their own shame and
filthiness upon thy neck and honor. Thou could remove and dis-inable the
plaiers of those vncleanesses, from all honors: pray likewise unto the true
God, to quit thee from those vile spirits that delight in beholding their own
spots, whither they be true, (which is most ignominious) or feigned, (which is
most malicious). Thou did well in clearing the state of thy City from all
such scurrilous off-scummes as stage-plaiers: look a little further into it:
Gods Majesty can never delight in that which polluteth man's dignity. How then
can thou hold these powers, that loved such unclean plays, as members of
the heavenly society, when thou hold the men that only acted them, as
unworthy to be counted in the worst rank of the members of thy City? The
heavenly City is far above thine, where truth is the victory; holiness the
dignity; happiness the peace, and eternity the continuance. Far is it from
giving place to such gods, if thy city do cast out such men. Wherefore if
thou will come to this city, shun all fellowshippe with the devil.
Unworthy are they of honest men's service, that must be pleased with
dishonesty. Let christian reformation sever thee from having any commerce with
those gods, even as the Censors view separated such men from pertaking of thy
dignities. But as concerning temporal felicity, which is all that the wicked
desire to enjoy; and temporal affliction, which is all they seek to avoid,
hereafter we mean to show, that the devils neither have nor can have any
such power of either, as they are held to have, (though if they had, we are
bound rather to contemn them all, then to worship them, for these benefits,
which seeing that thereby we should utterly debar our selves of that, which
they repine that we should ever attain:) hereafter (I say) shall it be
proved, that they have no such power of those things, as these think they
have, that affirm that they are to be worshipped for such ends. And here
shall this book end.

L. VIVES.
ANd (a) Fabricii.] Fabricius was Consul in Pyrrhus his war at which time
the Romans Fabucius.
virtue was at the height: he was, valourous, poor, continent, and a stranger
to all pleasure, and ambition. (b) If nature have given thee] The Stoikes held
that nature gave every man Virtues seeds.
some gifts: some greater some lesser: and that they were graced, increased,
and perfitted by discipline, education, and exercise. (c) it is now day]
Alluding unto Paul. Romans 13. 12. The night is past, and the day is at hand. The
day, is the clear understanding of goodness, in whose Day, how used.
power the Sun is, as the Psalmist faith. The night is dark and obscure. (d)
in some of thy Children] Meaning, that some of the Romans were already
converted unto Christ. (e) no stone of the Capitol] Jove's Idol, upon the
capitol was of stone: and the Romans used to swear by Per Jove unlapidem.
Jove, that most holy stone: which oath became afterward a proverb. (f) who
will neither limmit] They are the words of Jove in Virgil, Aeneid. 1. promising
the raising up of the Roman Empire. But with far more wisdom did Saluste
(orat. ad Caium Caesarem senen) affirm, that the Roman estate should have a
fall: And African the younger seeing Carthage burn, with the tears in his eyes,
recited a certain verse out of Homer, which intimated that Rome one day should
come to the like ruin. (g) Juno did not] Aeneides the first.

Finis Lib. 2.
THE CONTENTS OF THE third book of the City of God.
1. Of the adverse casualties which only the wicked do fear, and which the
world has always been subject unto, whilst it remained in Paganism.
chapter 1. 2. Whether the Gods to whom the Romans and the Greeks exhibited
like worship, had sufficient cause given them to let Troy be destroyed. chap.
2. 3. That the gods could not justly be offended at the adultery of Paris using
it so freely and frequently themselves. chap. 3. 4. Of Varro's opinion, that it
is meet in policy that some men should faigne themselves to be begotten of
the gods. chap. 4. 5. That it is alltogither unlikely that the gods revenged
Paris his fornication, since they permitted Rhea's to pass unpunished. chap.
5. 6. Of Romulus his murdering of his brother which the gods never revenged.
chap. 6. 7. Of the subversion of Illium by Fimbria a captain of Marius his
faction. chap. 7. 8. Whether it was convenient to commit Rome to the custody of
the Trojan gods. chap. 8. 9. Whether it be credible, that the gods procured
the peace that lasted all Numa's reign. chap. 9. 10. Whether the Romans
might desire justly that their cities estate should arise to pre-eminence by
such furious wars, when it might have rested firm and quiet, in such a peace
as Numa procured. chap. 10. 11. Of the statue of Apollo at Cumae, that shed
tears (as men thought) for the Grecians miseries, though he could not help
them. cap. 11. 12. How fruitless their multitude of gods was unto the
Romans, who induced the^ beyond the institution of Numa. chap. 12 13. By what
right the Romans attained their first wives. chap. 13 14. How impious that
war was which the Romans began with the Albanes, and of the nature of those
victories which ambition seeks to obtain. chap. 14 15. Of the lives and
deaths of the Roman Kings. chap. 15 16. Of the first Roman Consulls, how
the one expelled the other out of his country: and he himself after many
bloody murders, fell by a wound given him by his wounded foe. chap. 16 17. Of
the vexations of the Roman estate after the first beginning of the consulls
rule: And of the little good that their gods all this while did them. chap. 17
18. The miseries of the Romans in the African wars, and the small stead their
gods stood them there in. chap. 18 19. Of the sad accidents that befell in the
second African war, wherein the powers on both sides, were wholly consumed.
chap. 19 20. Of the ruin of the Saguntines, who perished for their confederacy
with Rome, the Romaine^ gods never helping them. chap. 20 21. Of Romes
ingratitude to Scipio, that freed it from imminent danger, and of the
conditions of the citizens in those times that Saluste commends to have
been so virtuous. chap. 21 22. Of the edict of Mythridates, commanding every
Roman that was to be found in Asia, to be put to death. chap. 22 23. Of the
more private and interior mischieues that Rome endured, which were presaged by
that prodigious madness of all the creatures that served the use of man. chap.
23 24. Of the civil discord that arose from the seditions of the Gracchi.
chap. 24 25. Of the temple of Concord built by the Senate in the place, where
these seditions and slaughters were effected. chap 25 26. Of the diverse wars
that followed afther the building of Concords temple. chap. 26 27. Of Silla and
Marius. chap. 27 28. How Silla revenged Marius his murders. chap. 28 29. A
comparison of the Goths irrupsions, with the calamities that the Romans
endured by the Gauls, or by the authors of their civil wars. chap. 29 30.
Of the great and pernicious multitude of the Romans wars a little before
the coming of Christ. chap. 30 31. That those men that are not suffered as now
to worship Idols show themselves fools in imputing their present miseries
unto Christ, seeing that they endured the like when they did worship the
diuills. chap. 31.
FINIS.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of the adverse casualties which only the wicked do fear: and which the world
has always been subject unto, whilst it remained in paganism. CHAP. 1.
WHat we have already spoken I think is sufficient, concerning the depraved
state of men's minds and manners, which is principally to be avoided: that in
these cases these faulse imaginary gods did never endeavor to lighten their
servants of any of these inconveniences, but rather added unto their loades and
furthered their deprivations. Now, I see it is time to take those evils in
hand, which are the only things that these men are so loath to endure, above
and beyond all others, as famine, sickness, war, invasion, thraldom,
slaughter, and such other like, as we have recited in our first book: for
these things alone are they, which evil men account for evils, that do not,
nor are not of power to make men any way evil: nor are these wretches ashamed
to give goods things their due praise, and yet keep evil still themselves
that are the praysers of good: being far more offended at the (a) badnesse of
their lands, then of their lives; as if man were made to enjoy all things
except himself: But notwithstanding all this, their gods (for all their
dutyfull observance) never did go about to restrain the effects of those
evils, which their servants are so sore afraid of, nor ever withheld them
from lighting upon them, for the world was oppressed with diverse extreme and
sore calamities at several times, long before the redemption; and yet (as
touching those times) what other gods but those Idols were there worshipped in
any part of the world except only amongst the Jews (b) and by some other
peculiar persons whom it pleased the unsearchable wisdom of the great God to
illuminate. But because I study to be brief, I will not stand upon the worlds
miseries in general: only what is Romes peculiars, or the Roman Empires, I
mean to relate: that is, such inflictions as before the coming of Christ,
fell either upon the city it self, or upon such provinces as belonged unto
it, either by conquest or society, as members of the body of that commonweal,
of those I mean to speak somewhat in particular.

L. VIVES.
AT the (a) badnesse of their lands] Some read it, si illa mala, others, (and
the more ancient) si villam malam, better, and more acutely by a figure called
Denomination (b) some other peculiar] As Job, and some other gentiles, that
proportioned their lives by the laws of nature, of whom heareafter:

Whether the gods, to whom the Romans and the Greeks exhibited like
worship, had sufficient cause given them to let Troy be destroyed. CHAP. 2.
FIrst therefore of Troy, or Ilium, whence the Romans claim the descent (for
we may not omit nor neglect what we touched at in the 1. book:) why was Troy
beseeged, and destroyed by the Greeks that adored the same gods that it did;
The priuity of (a) Laomedon: the father (say some) was wreaked in this sack,
upon Priam the son. Well then it is true that (b) Apollo and Neptune served as
workmen under the Apollo and Neptune work the building of Troy.
same Laomedon, for otherwise the tale is not true that says that he promised
them pay and brake his oath unto them afterward. Now cannot I but marvel that
such a great fore-knower, as Apollo was, would work for Laomedon, and could
not foretell that he would deceive him: nor is it decent to affirm that
Neptune his uncle Jupiters brother and king of all the sea, should have no
foresight at al in things to come. For (c) Homer brings him in foretelling
great matters of the progeny of Aeneas, whose successors built Rome (yet is
Homer (d) reported to have lived before Iliad 2.
the building of Rome) nay more, he saves Aeneas from Achilles by a cloud,
desiring to raze this periurd city of Troy though it were his own handy-worke
as (e) Virgill declares of him. Thus then these two gods, Neptune and Apollo,
were Aeneid. 5.
utterly ignorant of Laomedons intention to delude them, and builded the walls
of Troy (f) for thanks and for thankelesse persons. Look now, whether it be a
worse matter to put confidence in such gods, or to consume them. But Homer
himself (it seems) did hardly believe this tale, for he makes (g) Neptune
to fight against Troy, and Apollo for it; whereas the fable gives them both
one cause of being offended, namely Laomedons perjury. Let those therefore that
believe such reports be ashamed to acknowledge such deities: and those that
believe them not, let them never draw cauills from the Trojans periuries, nor
marvel that the gods should hate periuries at Troy, and love them at Rome. For
otherwise, how could it come to pass, that besides the abundance of all other
corruption in the city of Rome, there should be such a great company in
Catilines conspiracy that lived only by their tongues practice in perjury and
their hands in murder? what other thing did the senators by taking bribes so
plentifully and by so many false judgments? what other thing did thee (i)
people by selling of their voices, and playing double in all things wherein
they dealt, but (k) heap up the sin of perjury? for even in this universal
corruption, the old custom of giving and taking oaths was still observed, but
that was not for the restraint of wickedness by awe of religion, but to ad
perjury also unto the rest of their monstrous exorbitances.

L. VIVES.
THe perjury (a) of Laomedon] Virgill in the first of his Georgikes: -- Sat is
iampridem sanguine nostro,
Laomedont^ae luimus periuria Troi^.
-- Our blood has long agone,
Paid for the faith-breach of Laomedon.
(a) Then it is true] Apollo and Neptune seeing Laomedon the King of Phrygia,
laying the foundations of the walls of Troy, and marking the hugeness of the
work he went about, agreed for a great sum of gould, to make an end of this
work for him, which having done, he denied that he promised them any thing (c)
Homer brings] Aeneas upon a certain time being in fight with Achilles, and
being put to the worst, in so much that he was almost slain, Neptune speaks
thus: Homer Iliad. 5.

(...). etc. as follows in English thus.

But let us save him yet ere he be slain,
Least great Achilles fury if again
It burst into effect, we help too late:
Whilst it is time, let us deceive his fate:
Least all the stock be quite abolished
Of Dardanus whom I so valued:
Whom Jove his father prised above all
His sons, whose mothers were terrestrial.
But seeing Jove does now detest his line,
This man, in birth and valor near divine,
Shall rule the Phrygians: and through him, their King,
There to an endless nation shall they spring,
Neptunes Prophecy.
Because of these verses in Homer, Dionisius Halicarnasseus writes that many
have affirmed, that Aeneas leaving his fellows in Italy, returned into
Phrigia, and there having repaired Troy, reigned as King, and left the crown
to his posterity after him. But Homer speaks of the Italian Troy, and the
kingdom which arose from that Phygian Troy, namely of the Albians and the
Lauinians; both which nations descended from the Trojans that accompanied
Aeneas (d) Homer reported] at what time Rome was built, or at what time Homer
lived the ancient writers do not justly and uniformly define: though the
first be less dubitable then the latter. Plutarch in the life of Romulus says
that he and Remus first founded the walls in the third year of the sixth
Olimpiad on which day was an eclips of the moon: Dionisius and Eusebius say.
the 1. year of the 7. Olympiade: after the destruction of Troy CCCCXXXII.
years. Solin. in Polihist. Cincius will have it built in the twelth Olympiad:
Pictor in the eighth: Nepos, and Luctatius, (to whom Eratosthenes and
Apollodorus agree) the seventh Olympiade, the second year. Pomponius Atticus
and Tully, the seventh and the third year, therefore by all correspondency of
the Greek computations to ours, it was built in the beginning of the seventh
Olympiad CCCCXXXIII. years after the ruin of Troy. About Homers time of
living, his country, and his parentage, the Greek writers keep a great ado:
Some say he was present at the wars of Troy: Indeed he himself brings in his
Phemius singing in the banquet of the wooers (Odissi.) But whether he do it
through an ambitious desire to grace his Mr. in beyond the reach of the time or
no, it is doubtful. Others say he lived not until an hundred years after this
war of Phrigia: and some there be that ad fifty more unto the number.
Aristarchus gives him to those times about which there was a Colonye planted in
Ionia, sixty years after the subversion of the Heraclidae: CXXX. years after
the Trojans wars. Crates thinks that there was not foure-score years
between the demolishing of Troy and the birth of Homer: Some affirm him to
have been son to Telemachus, Ulysses his son, and Tolycasta, daughter to
Nestor. In the cronicle of Eusebius Bishop of Caesarea we find this recorded:
We find (says he) in the latin history, that Agrippa reigning amongst the
Latins, Homer flourished amongst the Greeks, as Appollodorus the Grammarian,
and Euphorbeus the Historiographer do both testify, CXXIIII years before the
building of Rome, and as Cornelius Nepos says before the first Olympiade an C.
years. Howsoever then it fall out Homer was before the building of Rome: which
Tully also does bear witness of in his Quaestiones Tusculanae. (e) Uirgill
declares.] Aeneid. 5. -- Pelidae tunc ego f^rti,
Congressum Aeneam, nec diis nec viribus aequis,
Nube caua eripui: cuperem cum vertere ab imo,
Structa meis ma^ibus periturae maenia Troiae etc.
-- Then in an hollow cloud,
I saved him, when he combatted that Greek,
Though having neither fate, nor force alike.
Then when mine own^ work Troy, I sought to raze etc.
(f) for thanks and thankelesse] Gratis, and ingratis: that, an aduerbe, this
an adjective, (g) Neptune] Apollo favors the Trojans.
Neptune after that Laomedon had thus cheated him, was always a heavy enemy of
the Troyans: But Apollo, being more gentle, and remiss, was as good friends
with them as before. Virgill, Aeneid. 6. Phaebe graves Troiae semper miscrate
lab^res.
Dardana qui Paridis direxti ^ela manusque,
Corpus in Acacidae etc.
Phoebus, that always pitied Troies distress,
And g^ue the hand of Paris good success.
Against Achilles life. etc.
(h) the senators] by the Semprnoian law which Caius Gracchus preferred, the
Gentlemen of Rome had the judging all causes twenty years together without any
note of infamy and then by the law Plautian were selected fifteen out of every
tribe, by the suffrages of the people The law Sempronian of judgments. The
Plautian The Cornelian, The Aurelian.
to be judges for that year, this was done in the second year of the Italian
war. Cn. Pompeius, son to Sextus, and L. Cato being consuls, Afterward the
law Cornelian which Silla instituted, the authority was reduced to the senate:
who judged ten years together most partially, and most corruptedly When the
greater sort judged says Tully against Verres) there was great complaning of
unjust indgements. Last of all by the law Aurelian, preferred by M Aurelius
Cotta being praetor, both senate and people combined, had the hearing and
censuring of causes (i) the people] Lucane in his first book. Hinc raptifasces
precio, sectorque fauoris,
Ipse sui populus, lethalisque ambitus vrbi:
Annua venali referens certamima campo.
Hence, coin Fought consulships, through this deiection
The people sold their voices: this infection,
Filled Mars his field with strife at each election.


(k) But heapt vp] for the judges were sworn to judge truly, and the people
before they gave their voices were sworn at a sacrifice, not to hold any
reward, or favor of the worth of the commonwealths estate and safety.

That the gods could not justly be offended at the adultry of Paris, using it
so freely and frequently themselves. CHAP. 3.
WHerefore there is no reason to say that these gods who supported the empire
of Troy were offended with the Trojans perjury, when the Greeks did prevail
against all their protections. Nor is it, as some say, in their defense, that
the anger at Paris his (a) adultery made them give over Troyes defense, for it
is their custom to practice sin themselves, and not to punish it in others.
(b) The Trojans (says Salust) as I have heard, were the first founders and
inhabitants of Rome: those were they that came away with Aeneas, and wandered
without any certain abode. If Paris his fact were then to be punished by the
gods judgments, it was either to fall upon the Trojans, or else upon the
Romans, because (c) Aeneas his mother was chief agent therein. But how
should they hate it in Paris, when as they hated it not in Venus, one of their
company, who (to omit her other pranks) committed adultery with Anchifes and by
him was begotten (d) Aeneas. Or why should his falt anger Menelus, and hers (e)
please Vulcane? I do not think the gods such abasers of their wives, or of
themselves, as to vouchsafe mortal men to partake with them in their loves.
Some perhaps will say I scoff at these fables: and handle not so grave a cause
with sufficient gravity: why then if you please let us not believe that Aeneas
is son to Venus I am content, so (f) that Romulus likewise be not held to be
Mars his son. (g) If the one be so, why is not the other so also, Is it
lawful for the gods to meddle carnally with women, and yet unlawful for the
men to meddle carnally with Goddesses: a hard, or rather an incredible
condition, that what was lawful for Mars (h) by Venus her law should not be
lawful for Venus by her own law. But they are both confirmed by the Romain
authority, for (i) Caesar of late, believed no less that (k) Venus was his
grandmother then (l) Romulus of old believed that Mars was his father.

L. VIVES.
PAris his (a) adultery] This I think is known to all, both blind men and
barbers (as they say) that the wars of Troy arose about Alexander Paris his
rape of Hellen, wife unto Menelaus (b) the Troians] at what time, and by whom
Rome was built, Dionisius, Solinus, Plutarch, and diverse others, discourse with
great diversity: he that will know further, let him look in them. (c) Aeneas
his mother] for Paris used Venus as his baud, in the rape of Hellen, and Ue^ in
the contention of the goddesses for beauty, corrupted the judgment of Paris
with promise of Hellen, (d) Aeneas] he was son to Anchises and Uenus. Uirgil.
Tunc ille Aeneas quem Dardanio Anchisa
Alma Venus Phryg as g^nuit Sy^oe^ntis od vn^s?
Art thou that man whom bea^teous Uenus bore,
got by (...) on smooth Symois shore?


And Lucretius. Aeneadum genitrix hominum, diuumque vol^ptas,
Alma Venus. --
Mother to A^eas live, the gods delight
Fair Uenus --


(e) Vulcan] Husband unto Venus, (f) Romulus not be] Dionysius. Ilia, a Vestal
Virgin, going to Mars his wood to fetch some water, was ravished in the Church
(some say) by some of her suitors, Romulus his ^atner.
some, by her uncle Amulius being armed, others by the Genius of the place. But
I think rather that Romulus was the son of some soldiar, and Aeneas of some
whore: and because the soldiars are under Mars, and the whores under Venus,
therefore were they fathered upon them. Aeneas his mother.
Who was Aeneas his true mother, is one of the sound questions that the
grammarians stand upon in the four thousand books of Dydimus, as Seneca
writes. (g) If the one be so] Illud, and illud, for hoc and illud, a figure
rather Poetical then Rhetorical. (h) By Venus her law] A close, but a
conceited quippe. Mars committed adultery with Venus. This was lawful for Mars
by Venus law, that is by the law of lust, which Venus governs: then why
should not the same privilege in lust be allowed to Venus her self, being
goddess thereof: that which is lawful to others by the benefit of Venus, why
should it not be permitted to Venus to use her self freely in her own
dominion of lust, seeing she her-selfe allows it such free use in others. (i)
Caesar] This man was of the Julian family, who was derived from Iulus, Aeneas
his son, and so by him to Venus. This family was brought by King Tullus from
Alba Caesar's family.
longa to Rome, and made a Patrician family. Wherefore Caesar being dictator
built a temple to Venus, which he called the temple of mother Uenus: my Aunt
Iulia (says Caesar in Suetonius) on the mothers side is descended from Kings,
and on the fathers, from gods. For from An^us Martius, a King, the Martii
descended, of which name her mother was: and from Venus came the Iulii, of
which stock our family is sprung. (k) His grand-mother] Set for any
progenitrix, as it is often used. (l) Romulus of old] And Caesar of lat^,
because of the times wherein they lived, being at least six hundred years
distant.

Of Varro's opinion, that it is meet in policy that some men should faigne
themselves to be begotten of the gods. CHAP. 4.
But do you believe this will some say? not I truly. For Varro, one of their
most learned men, does (though faintly, yet almost plainly) confess that they
all are false. But that it is (a) profitable for the cities (says he) to have
their greatest men their generals and governors, believe that they are
begotten of gods, though it be never so false: that their minds being as
illustrate, with part of their parents deity, may be the more daring to
undertake, more seruent to act, and so more fortunate to perform affairs of
value. Which opinion of Varro, (by me here laid down) you see how it opens a
broad way to the falsehood of this belief: and teaches us to know, that many
such fictions may be inserted into religion, whenever it shall seem useful
unto the state of the city, to invent such fables of the gods. But whether
Venus could bear Aeneas by Anchises, or Mars beget Romulus of Syluta, (b)
Numitors daughter* that we leave as we find it, undiscussed. For there is
almost such a question arises in our Scriptures. Whether the wicked angels
did commit fornication with the daughters of men, and Genesis 6.
whether that thereupon came Giants, that is, huge and powrefull men, who
increased and filled all the earth?

L. VIVES.
IT is (a) profitable] It is generally more profitable unto the great men
themselves, who hereby have the peoples love more happily obliged to them. This
made Scipio that he would never The benefit of being held divine.
seek to change that opinion of the people, who held, that he was begot by
some god: and Alexander in Lucian says it furthered him in many great
designs, to be counted the son of Jupiter Hamon. For hereby he was feared,
and none durst oppose him that they held a god. (...) (says he) (...). The
Barbarians observed me with reverence and amazement, and none durst with-stand
me, thinking they should war against the gods, whose confirmed son they
held me. (b) Numitors daughter,] Numitor was son to Procas the Albian King,
and elder brother to Amulius, But Numitor and his children
being thrust by his brother from his crown, he lived privately, Amulius
enjoying the crown by force and fraud. Numitor had Lausus to his son, and
Rhea or Ilia Syluia to his daughter: the boy was killed, the daughter made
Abbess of the Vestals by Amulius, meaning by color of religion to keep her
from children-bearing: who not-with-standing had two sons, Romulus and Remus,
by an unknown father as is aforesaid.

That it is altogether unlikely that the gods revenged Paris his fornication,
since they permitted Rhea's to pass unpunished. CHAP. 5.
WHerefore now let us argue both the causes in one. If it be certain that we
read of Aeneas and Romulus their mothers, how can it be that the gods should
disallow of the adulteries of mortal men, tollerating it so fully and freely
in these particulars? If it be not certain, howsoever, yet cannot they
distaste the dishonesties of men, that are truly acted, seeing they take
pleasure in their own, though they be but feigned: Besides, if that of Mars
with Rhea be of no credit, why then no more is this of Venus with Anchises.
Then let not Rhea's cause be covered with any pretense of the like in the gods.
She was a virgin Priest of Vesta, and therefore with far more justice should
the gods have scourged the Romans for her offense, then the Trojans for that
of Paris: for the (a) ancient Romans themselves did punish such vestalls as
they took in this offense, by burying them quick: (b) never censuring others
yt were faulty in this kind with death, (but ever with some smaller penalty,)
so great was their study to correct the offenses of persons appertaining to
religion, with all severity above others.

L. VIVES.
THE (a) ancient] If a virgin vestall offended but lightly, the high Priest did
beat her: but being convicted of neglect of chastity, or whoredom, she was
carried in a coffin to The punishment of the offending vestall.
the gate Collina, as if she went to burial, all her friends and kinsfolks
bewailing her, the Priests and other religious following the hearse with a
sad silence. Near to the gate was a cave, to which they went down by a
ladder, there they let down the guilty person, alone, took away the ladder,
and shut the cave close up: and least she should starve to death, they set by
her, bread, milk, and oil, of each a quantity, together with a lighted
lamp: all this finished, the Priests departed: and on that day was no cause
heard in law; but it was as a vacation, mixed with great sorrow and fear: all
men thinking that some great mischief was presaged to befall the weal public
by this punishment of the Vestall. The vows and duties of those Vestals,
Gellius (amongst others) relates at large. (Noct. Atticarum lib. 1.) (b) Never
censuring others] Before Augustus, there was no law made against adulterers,
nor was ever No law against adultery before Augustus.
cause heard (that I know of) concerning this offense. Clodius indeed was
accused for polluting the sacrifices of Bona Dea, but not for adultery, which
his foes would not have omitted, had it lain within the compass of law.
Augustus first of all instituted the law Julian against men adulterers, it
contained somewhat against unchaste women also, but with no capital
punishment: though afterward they were censured more sharply, as we read in
the Caesar's answers The law Iuliana.
in Iustintans Code, and the 47. of the Pandects. Dionysius writes, that at
Romes first original Romulus made a law against adultery, but I think he
speaks it Graecanice, as he does prettily well in many others matters.

Of Romulus his murder of his brother, which the gods never revenged. CHAP. 6.
NOw I will say more: If those Deities took such grievous and heinous
displeasure at the enormities of men, that for Paris his misdemeanour they
would needs utterly subvert the city of Troy by fire and sword: much more
then ought the murder of Romulus his brother to incense their furies against
the Romans, then the rape of Menelaus his wife against the Trojans: Parricide
(a) in the first original of a City, is far more odious then adultery in the
wealth and height of it. Nor is it at all pertinent unto our purpose (b)
whether this murder were commanded or committed by Romulus, which many
impudently deny, many do doubt, and many do dissemble. We will not entangle
our selves in the Laborinth of History, upon so laborious a quest: Once, sure
it is, Romulus his brother was murdered: and that neither by open enemies, nor
by strangers. If Romulus either willed it, or wrought it, so it is: Romulus was
rather the chief of Rome then Paris of Troy. Why should the one then set all
his gods against his country for but rauishing another man's wife, and the
other obtain the protection of (c) the same gods for murdering of his own
brother? If Romulus be clear of this imputation, then is the whole city
guilty of the same crime howsoever, in giving so total an assent unto such a
supposition: and in steed of killing a brother, has done worse in killing a
father. For both the brethren were fathers and founders to it alike, though
villainy bard the one from dominion. There is small reason to be shown (in mine
opinion) why the Trojans deserved so ill, that their gods should leave them to
destruction, and the Romans so well, that they would stay with them to their
augmentation; unless it be this, that being so overthrown and ruined in one
place, they were glad to fly away to practice their illusions in another; nay
they were cunninger then so; they both stayed still at Troy to deceive (after
their old custom) such as afterward were to inhabit there; and likewise
departed unto Rome that having a greater scope to use their impostures there
they might have more glorious honors assigned them to feed their
vainglorious desires.

L. VIVES.
PArricide (a) in] Parricide is not only the murder of the parent, but of any
other equal: Parricide.
some say 'Parricidium, quasi patratio caedis, committing of slaughter. It is
an old law of Num's: He that willingly does to death a freeman shall be
counted a Parricide (b) Whether this murther] Numa's. ^aw Remus his death.
There be that affirm, that Remus being in contention for the Kingdom, when
both the factions had saluted the leaders with the name of King, was slain in
the by^kerng between them: but whether by Romulus or some other, none can
certainly affirm. Others and more in number, say that he was slain by
Fabius, Tribune of the light horsemen of Romulus, because he leaped in scorn
over the newly founded walls of Rome; and that Fabius did this by Romulus his
charge: Which fact Cicero terms wicked and inhumaine. For thus in his fourth
book of Offices he discourses of it. But in that King that built the city it
was not so. The gloss of commodity dazeled his spirits: and since it seemed
fitter for his profit to rule without a partner then with one, he murdered his
own brother. Here did he leap over piety, nay and humanity also: to reach the
end he aimed at, profit: though his pretense and coullour, about the wall, was
neither probale, nor sufficient wherefore be it spoken with reverence to
Quirinus or to Romulus Romulus in this did well. (c) The same godds] Which were
first brought to Aeneas to I auiniun, and from thence to Alba by Ascanius, and
from Alba the Romans had them by Romulus, with the Assent of Num^tor: and so
lastly were by Tullus transported all unto Rome.

Of the subversion of Ilium by Fimbria, a Captain of Marius his faction. CHAP.
7.
IN the first (a) heat of the (b) civil wars, what had poor Ilium done
that (c) Fimbria, they veriest villain of all (d) Marius his set, should
raize it down with more fury and (e) cruelty then ever the Grecians had showed
upon it before? For in their conquest, many escaped captivity by flight, and
many avoided death by captivity: But Fimbria charged in an express edicte,
that not a life should be spared: and made one fire of the City and all the
creatures within it. Thus was Ilium requited, not by the Greeks whom her
wrongs had provoked, but by the Romans whom her ruins had propagated: their
gods in this case (a like adored of both sides) doing just nothing; or rather
being able to do just nothing: what, were the gods gone from their shrines,
that protected this town since the repayring of it after the Grecian victory?
If they were, show me why? but still the better citizens I find, the worse
gods. They shut out Fimbria, to keep all for Sylla; he set the town and them
on fire, and burned them both into dust and ashes. And yet in meane-time (f)
Sylla's side was stronger, and even now was he working out his power by force
of arms: his good beginnings as yet felt no crosses. How then could the Ilians
have dealt more honestly Sylla's side stronger then Marius his.
or justly? or more worthy of the protection of Rome? then to save a city of
Romes, for better ends, and to keep out a Parricide of his countries common
good? But how they sped, let the defenders of these gods observe. They
for-sooke the Ilians being adulterers, and left their city to the fires of
the Greeks: that from her ashes, Chaster Rome might arise: But why did they
leave her the second time, being Romes allied, not rebelling against her Noble
daughter, but keeping her faith sincerely unto Romes best parts and powers? why
did they let her be demolished so utterly, not by the valorous Grecians, but by
a barbarous Roman? Or, if the gods favored not Sylla's endeauours, for whom
this city kept her self, why did they attend his fortunes with such happy
success elsewhere? does not this prove them rather flatterers of the
fortunat, then favorers of the wretched? And therefore they had not forsaken
Illium utterly when it was utterly destroyed: no, no, the devils will still
keep a watchful eye for advantage to deceive. For (g) when all the Images
were burned together with the The devils car^ to deceive.
town, only Mineruas was found under all the ruins of her Temple, as Liuy
writes, untouched: not that it should be said, You Patron gods that always
Troy protect: but that it should not be said. The gods were gone and left their
altars bare: in their defense they were permitted to save that Image, not that
they might thereby prove themselves powrefull, but that we might thereby prove
them to have been present.

L. VIVES.
IN the (a) first] Marius dying in his seventh Consulship, Cinna joined
Valerius Flaccus with him in office, committing Asia to his rule, (which Sylla
then governed) and strengthening him with two legions. This Flaccus by his
couetise (the souldiour-hated vice) and other crimes growing very odious, was
killed by C. Fimbria, Ambassador at Nicomedia: which Fimbria by the soldiers
assent, entered upon his place, and warred against Mithridates with good
fortune: having almost taken him prisoner in the siege of Pergamus: leading his
army into Phrygia, and hearing that the Ilians were of Sylla's faction, he
entered the city cunningly (says Appian) forcibly (says Liuy) and killed all
the Citizens, man, woman, and child, without all mercy, sparing nothing
neither hallowed nor profane: after the Greeks had destroyed it before M. L.
years. (b) civil warres] After the first Marian war, before Sylla came into
Italy to the utter subversion of that faction, this fell out. (c) Fimbria] This
was a most audatious and impudent fellow, most prompt unto all villainy. He
killed Crassus, and in the funeral of Marius, made Q. Scaeuola a noble and
honest man to be sore hurt. But seeing that the wound was not C. Fimbria.
mortal, he cited him to answer an accusation. The whole city wondering that
the chief priest should accuse the most honest man of the whole state, and
flocking to hear the crime: he said he accused him for not taking the thrust
of the weapon deep enough into his body. This Tully relates in his Oration
for Roscius Amerinus. (d) Marius his] Rather Cynna's but all the faction
against Sylla was called Marian. (e) cruelty.] Appianus in Mithridato, says
that the day after the burning of Ilium, Fimbria himself went all over the
ruins, prying and searching whether ought was left standing, intending to raze
that down also, so that he left no house, no temple, no nor no statue
standing in all Ilium. (f) Sylla's side] Saluste. Sylla of late, being victor,
when he commanded Damasippus and others that had patched up their estate by the
miseries of the weale-publike to be slain who did not applaud him? every man
said that such wicked creatures as had kept the fires of sedition still burning
in the commonwealth, were now well rewarded. But indeed this was the root
whence sprung a wood of miseries. Thus far Saluste in his Catilines
conspiracy: and a little before, Lucius Sylla having recovered the sway of the
state by arms, began well, but ended badly enough: Which saying, S. Augustine
here touches. (g) when all the Images] Appian, and Julius Obsequens also say
that the Palladium remained still unburned. Seruius (in 2. The Palladium.
Aeneid.) says that Fimbria showed it, and brought it unto Rome. Truly I
wonder if that were the old Palladium that Aeneas (they say) brought from Troy
into Italy, with the other Great Gods, which was placed by Hostilius in the
Temple of Vesta after Alba was destroyed: which Temple being fired, Metellus
the Priest fetched the Palladium from forth the greatest flames, for which
deed the Romans assigned him ample honors: which fell out soon after the
peace concluded betwixt Rome and Carthage, after the end of the first African
war, before Fimbrias time, C. L. years. Some think that Aeneas leaving the
Latin Kingdom to his fellows, returned unto Phrigia with the Palladium: but
this we have elsewhere disallowed of. The Lacaedemonians indeed believed that
they had the Troyan Palladium, near the temple of the Leucippidae: which one
Temon stole from Ergiaeus a kinsman of Diomedes at Argos, and brought it to
Lacedemon. Whose Citizens being warned by oracle to keep it, they erected it
unto Ulisses, one of the Heroes. But that is the Palladium which Ulisses and
Diomedes bore away as we said before in the Troyan war. Seruius says that
Mamurrius the Smith made many figures of this Palladium, least the true one
indeed should be known. Wherein no doubt but Seruius forgot himself and
took the Palladium for the Ancylia.

Whether it was convenient to commit Rome to the custody of the Troyan gods.
CHAP. 8.
Wherefore seeing Troy had left so plain a lesson for all posterity to
observe; what discretion was there shown in the commending of Rome to the
protection of the Troyan gods? O but, will some say, they were settled at Rome
when Fimbria spoiled Ilium: were they so? whence comes the Image of Minera
then? But well: it may be they were at Rome when Fimbria razed Ilium, and at
Ilium when the Galls sacked Rome. And being quick of hearing, and swift in
motion, as soon as ever the geese called them, they came all on a cluster, to
defend what was left, the Capitol. But they were not called soon enough to
look to the rest, or else it should not have been as it was.

Whether it be credible, that the gods procured the peace that lasted all
Numa's reign. CHAP. 9.
IT is thought also that these are they that helped Numa Pompilius, Romulus his
successor, to preserve that continual peace that lasted all the time of his
reign, and to shut the gates of Ianus his (a) temple; and that because he
deserved it at their hands, in instituting so many sacrifices for the Romans
to offer unto their honor. In earnest, the peace that this Prince procured was
thankeworthy, could he have applied it accordingly, and (by avoiding so
penicious a curiosity,) have taken more pains in enquitie after the true
divinity. But being as it was, the gods never gave him that quiet leisure:
but it may be they had not deluded him so fowlely, had they not found him so
idle. For the less that his business was, the more time had they to entrappe
him: for Varro records all his courses, and endeauours to associate himself
and his City with those imaginary gods: all which (if it please God) shall be
rehearsed in their due place. But now, since we are to speak of the benefits
which are pretended to come from those fained deities: peace is a good benefit:
but it is a benefit given by the (b) true God only, as the rain, the sun
and all other helps of man's transitory life are; which are common even to the
Peace bestovved on the unworthy.
ungracious, and ungrateful persons as well as the most thankful. But if
these Roman gods had any power to bestow such a benefit as peace is upon
Numa, or upon Rome, why did they never do it after, when the Roman Empire was
in greater majesty and magnificence? was their sacrifices more powrefull at
their first institution, then at any time after? Nay, many of them then were
not as yet instituted, but remained vnspoaken of until afterward, and then
they were instituted indeed, and kept for commodity sake. How comes it then
to pass that Numa's 43. Or as some say 39. years were passed in such full
peace? and yet those sacrifices being neither instituted nor celebrated until
afterward; Numa's peace of 43. or 39. years.
and the gods whom these sollemnities invited, being but now become the
gardians and patrons of the state, after so many hundred years from Romes
foundation until the reign of Augustus, there is but (c) one year reckned,
and that is held as wholly miraculous, which falling after the first African
war, gave the Romans just leave to shut up the gates of wars Temple?

L. VIVES.
IAnus (a) his temple] Ianus was a god, whose temple-dore being opened, was a
sign of wars, and being shut, of peace unto Rome on all parts. This was
erected by Numa, nere Argiletus Ianus.
his Sepulcher, as a monument of the fight against the Sabines, wherein a great
deal of water bursting in at that gate, gave the Romans much furtherance to
the victory. And thereupon, it was decreed that that gate should be opened as
it were to give assistance in all designs of war. He (that is, Numa) was the
first that shut the gate that he builded, as says Macrobius, Saturnal. 1.) and
Manlius the second time, after the first Punike war. Augustus thirdly. Liu.
lib. 1. (b) true God] Therefore Christ our Savior gave his disciples that
peace which the world cannot give (c) One year reckned] T. Manlius Torquatus
etc. C. Attilius were Consulls this year, if we shall believe Eutropius, who
is no bad historian. These Consulls having triumphed over the Sardes, and
having procured a settled peace both by sea and land, shut the gates of Ianus
Quirinus, which not many months after was opened again: A. L Posthumus
Albinus, and Cn. Fuluius Centimalus being Consulls: or as others say, Sp:
Carbilius was in Fuluius his place: In the Illirian war:

Whether the Romans might justly desire that their Cities estate should
arise to pre-eminence by such furious wars, when it might have rested firm,
and quiet, in such a peace as Numa procured. CHAP. 10.
Will they reply (think you) that the Imperial state of Rome had no other
means of augmentation but by continuance of wars, nor any fitter course to
diffuse the honor thereof then this? A fit course surely! why should any
Empire make disquiet the scale unto greatness? In this little world of man's
body, is it not better to have a mean stature with an unmoved health, then a
huge bigness with intolerable sickness? to take no rest at the point where
thou should rest, the end? but still to confound the greater grouth with the
greater grief? what evil had there been, nay what good had there not been
if those times had lasted that Salust so applawded, saying: Kings in the
beginning (for this (a) was first Imperial name on earth) were diverse in their
goodness: some exercised The first Kings practices.
their corporal powers, some their spiritual, and men's lives in those times
were without all exorbitance of habit or affect, each one keeping in his own
compass: why should the Empire be advanced by those practices that Virgil so
detesteth? saying. Deterior donec paulatim and d^color aetas
Et belli rabi^s, and amor successit habendi.
(b) Until perverse declining times succeed:
World-frighting wars, and ^ll-pretended need.


But indeed the Romans as yet had a just defense for their so continued
contentions and wars: because, their foes engirting them with such universal
invasions, it was very necessity to save themselves, and not their endeavor
to become powrefull over others that put weapons into their hands. Well be it
so. For, (as Saluste writes) when they had well settled their estate by laws,
customs and possessions, and seemed sufficiently potent, then, as it is in
most affairs of mortality, out of their eminence arose envy in others, which
armed many of their neighbor Kings against them, and withheld most of their
reputed friends from assisting them; they rest standing afraid, and a far
off. But the Romans themselves, sticking to wars tackling, cheered up one
another, to encounter the foe with courage, standing in their arms as the
bulwarks of their freedom, their country, and their kindred. And having made
their virtue break through all mistes of opposed dangers, they aided those
that affected them, returning more gain of friend-shippe to their estate by
being the agents of bounty then the objects, rather by doing good turns to
others, then by receiving such of others. In these forms of augmenting her
self, Rome kept a good Decorum. But now, in Numa's reign, was there any
injuries of enemy or invasions, concurring to disturb this peace of his time,
or was there not? If Rome were as then molested with wars, and yet did not
oppose hostility with hostility; then those means that kept the foe from
being overthrown in fight, and yet without strokes compelled them to
composition; those very means alone should be still of power to shut Ianus
his gates, and keep this peace continually in Rome. Which if it were not in
their power to do, then verily the Romans had not their peace as long as it
pleased the gods to allow it them, but as long as the neighbor Princes listed
not to invade and trouble them; (c) unless those gods had farmed that which
lies not in theirs but others power, unto each one at their pleasure, as it it
were by the letter pattent. There is much difference truly in these devils
working upon men's proper infirmities, whether they work with terrors, or with
incitations. But howsoever, were they of this power always, and were not
controuled by a superior sovereignty, they would still be practicing their
authorities in wars and slaughters: which (as they fall out in truth)
ordinarily, are rather the effects of mortal men's peculiar passions and
affections, then direct practices of the damned spirits.

L. VIVES.
FOr this (a) was] So says Iustine lib. 1. Herodotus, and Pliny. This
institution derived from Aegipt, where they say that Menes was the first King:
though Diodorus affirm that Osyris, The first Kings.
Horus, and diverse others of the gods reigned before him. Our scriptures say
that Nembroth was the first King, and reigned at Babylon. (b) Until peruerse]
Hesiod in his Opera and Dies, saigneth five ages of mortality, which place he
begins thus. -- (...) etc.
-- The gods did first of all
Make men in golden moldes: celestial
Their habitations were: In Saturnes reign Five ages of men.

The world afforded such. --


This, Uirgil, Ovid, and others did immitate. The first age the Golden one,
they say was under Saturn: without wars, or will to wars, humanity was
locked in unity; neither were men contentious nor clamorous. These were called
Saturnian days. The next age Silver, under Jove, then war began to buffle:
so did her daughter, care, hate, and deceit. The third, Brazen war hurles all
upon heaps, and quasseth lives and blood. The fourth of the Halfe-Gods,
Heroes, who thought they loved justice, yet their bosoms harbored an eager
thirst of wars. The first, Iron, wherein mischief goes beyond bound and
limit, and all miseries, breaking their prisons, assault man's fortunes; open
deceit, open hate, open wars, slaughters, vastations, burnings, rapes, and
rapines, all open violent and common (e) vnlesse] unless the gods be so
impudent, that they will sell that unto men, as a benefit from them, which has
the original from another man's will, and so require thanks of them as though it
were there gift when it is rather the gift of another. [One interpreter
understanding not the figure, rappeth [Paris copy leaves out this entirely.]
out what came first on his tongues end, and upon that, as upon a marble
foundation, Lord what a goodly building he raises, concerning selling, and the
powers of devils, man's affects, and many good morrowes: even such like as this
in foundation is much of our Philosophers and Schoole-diuines trattle for all
the world, what wounderfull matters do they wring out of such or such places of
Aristotle or the scriptures, as (indeed) they never could truly understand. O
happy builders, that upon no foundation but only a mere smoke, can raise such
goodly buildings, as are held absolutely sky-towring, so elegant, and so
durable!]

Of the statue of Apollo at Cumae, that shed tears (as men thought) for the
Grecians miseries though he could not help them. CHAP. 11.
NOtwithstanding, that there are many of these wars and conquests that fall
out quite against those gods likings, the Roman history it self (to omit
those fables that do not tell one truth for a thousand lies) shall give clear
proof, for therein we read that the statue of Apollo (a) Cumane, in the time of
the Romans wars again the Achaians and (b) King Aristonicus, did persist
four days together in contiunall weeping: which prodigy amazing the
South-sayers, they held it fit to cast the statue into the sea, but the
ancients of Cumae dissuaded it, and showed them that it had done so likewise
in the wars both against (c) Antiochus, and (d) Pers^us, testifying also,
that both these wars succeeding fortunarly unto Rome, the senate sent there
gifts and oblations unto the statue of Apollo And then, the South-sayers
having learned wit, answered, that the weeping of Apollo was lucky to the
Romans, because that (e) Cuma was a Greek collony, and that the statues
tears did but portend mishap unto the country from whence it came, namely unto
Greece. And soon after, they heard how Aristonicus was taken prisoner, and
this was the cause of Apollos woes, shown in his tears. And as touching this
point, not unfitly, though fabulously, are the devils tricks plainly
discovered in the fictions of the Poets: Diana was sorry for Camilla in Virgill:
And Hercules wept for the death of Pallas. And it may be that upon this ground
Numa in his great peace given him, he neither knew nor sought to know by
whom, bethinking himself in his idleness unto what gods he should commit
the preservation of the Romans fortunes, (never dreaming that it is only the
great and almighty God that has regard of these inferior things) and
remembering himself, that the gods that Aeneas brought from Troy, could neither
preserve the estate of the Trojans, nor that of the Lauinians erected by
Aeneas, into any good continuance, he thought fit to seek out some others, to
join with the former were gone with Romulus to Rome and that were afterward
to go, at the destruction of Alba either to keep them from running away, or to
help them when they saw them too weak.

L. VIVES.
APollo (a) Cumane] King Attalus at his death, made the people of Rome heirs
to his Kingdom: of which, Aristonicus his brothers bastard son, got
possession before them: Aristonicus.
hence grew there wars, in which, Licinius Consul and Priest, was sent as
General, whom Aristonicus ouer-came. M. Perpenna the next years Consul
hearing of Crassus his fortune, came with speed into Asia, and having
ouer-throwne Aristonicus, and forced him into Stratonica, through famine he
forced him to yield, and so sent him to Rome. In this war Nicomedes,
Mithridates, Ariarathes and Pylemanes, Kings of Bythinia, Pontus, Cappadocia,
and Paphlagonia favored the Romans: Achaia only, assisted Aristonicus. (b)
King Aristonicus] Cra^us death.
This weeping of Apollo happened in the Consulshippe of Appius Claudius, and M.
Perpenna, as Julius Obsequens (Fragm lib. de prodigiis) in these words
affirms App. Claudius and M. Perpenna being Consulls, P. Crassus was slain
in battle against Aristonicus. Apollo's statue wept four days. The prophets
presaged the destruction of Greece, from whence it came. The Romans The gods
in a sweat.
offered it sacrifice and brought gifts unto the temple. Thus far Obsequens.
The weeping of a statue portended misfortune to those that it favored, as
upon the weeping of Juno Sospita at Lauinium (Consulls, L. Aemilius Paulus, and
Cn. Bebius Pamphilus:) followed a great pestilence. So says Lucane of the
prodigies in the civil wars. Indig^tes fl^uisse d^os, v^bisque laborem
Testatos sudore Lares: --
The Patron gods did weep: the cities pains,
The swea^ng Lars recorded. --


(c) Antiochus] King of Syria, conquered by L. Cornelius Scipio, brother to
Africanus: Liuie Antiochu^.
at large Decad. 4. (d) Perseus] Some write Xerxes, but it is better, Perseus,
son to Philip King of Macedon, whom. L: Aemilius Paulus conquered in a few
hours, in the second Macedonian war. Plutarch in Aemilius his life: and
others. (e) Cumae] The Chalcidians, and the Cumaeans (Strabo. lib. 5:) being
people of Greece, sailed into Italy with a great navy, and landing in Campania
there built a city: The Cumaeans captain was Hippocles, the Chalcidians
Megasthenes: these agreed amongst themselves that the one people should
inhabit the town, and the others should name it: and so they did: It was
called Cumae, and the inhabitants were Chalcidians. Of this Cumae, Virgil has
this verse. Aenead. 6. Cumae.
Chalcidicaque leuis tandem superastitit ar^:
And light at last on the Chalcidian tower.


This City (says Strabo) is the most ancient City both of all Italy and
Sicily.

How fruitless their multitude of gods was unto the Romans, who induced
them, beyond the institution of Numa. CHAP. 12.
NOr could Rome be content with those sacrifices which Numa had in such
plentiful measure prescribed, for it had not as yet the great temple of
Jupiter. For it was Tarquin that (a) built the Capitol a good while after. And
(b) Aesculapius came afterward from Epidaurus unto Rome: because he being a
(c) most expert Physician, might practice in so famous a City with the
greater credit. The Mother of the gods also (of (d) whence, who can tell) came
thither from (e) Pessinuns, It being a thing unmeet for the son to be the
chief God of the Capitol, and the mother to ly obscured I know not where: But
if she be the mother of all the gods, she did not follow all her children
unto Rome, but left some to follow her thither. I wonder whether she were dam
unto Cynocephalus, that (f) came out of Aegipt long after or no. Whether the
goddess. (g) Febris be one of her Children or no, (h) let Aesculapius, (i)
her Nephew look to that. But wheresoever she was borne, I hope the stranger
gods dare not call a goddess base, that is (k) a Roman Citizen. Well,
Rome being placed under the protection of so many gods (as who can reckon
up?) both of Italians, and Forreyners, both of Heaven, Earth, Hell, Seas,
Fountains, and Rivers, and as Varro says, both (l) certain and uncertain,
and as it is in creatures, both male and female of all these several kinds: me
thinks that Rome having all these to be her Tutors, should never have tasted
of such intolerable troubles as I mean to relate briefly out of their huger
multitude. The great (m) smoke she sent'vp was like (n) a beacon, and called
to many gods to her defense: unto all which the Priests erecting several
monuments, and several mysteries, enflamed the fury of the true God in far
greater measure, to whom only all these institutions and rights were
belonging. Truly, Rome thriued a great deal better, when she had far fewer
protectors: But growing greater, like as a ship calls in more sailors, so
called she in more gods: doubting (I think) that those few, (under whom she
had passed a peaceable revolution before, in comparison of that that followed)
were not now of sufficiency to defend her greatness, it was so much
augmented. For at first, under the Kings themselves, (excepting Numa, of whom
we spoke before) what a mischievous beginning of dissension was that, wherein
Romulus killed his own and only brother?

L. VIVES.
TArquin (a) built] The proud. (Liui. lib. 1.) (b) Aesculapius] In the war of
the Samnites he was brought from Epidaurus to Rome, by Ogolnius the Legate, in
the shape of a Aesculapius.
tame Snake, and he swamme over into the I Will of Tyber, where his temple was
built, and a feast instituted to him in the Calends of January. Epidaurus (once
called Epitaurus: Strab.) is a town in Achaia, above Corinthe, on the Eastern
shore, which Pliny called Saronium, and is named at this day Golfo di Engia: it
was famous for the Temple of Aesculapius which stood in that territory, some
five miles from the City. (c) A most expert Phisitian] Cicero holds there
were three Aesculapii. First Apollo's son, worshipped in Arcadia. Second
brother to the second Mercury, who was son to Valens and Phoronis: he was
struck with thunder, and it is said he is buried at Cynosurae. The third,
son to Arsippus and Arsinoe, first inuentor of purging, and tooth-drawing:
his sepulcher and his grave is to be seen in Arcadia, not far from the
river Lusius. Tarquinius speaking of the famous men (this we have from
Lactantius) says that Aesculapius was borne of unknown parents, and being
cast out, and found by hunters, was fed with bitches milk, and afterward
committed to Chyron, of whom he learned Physic: that by birthe he was a
Messenian, but dwelt at Epidaurus. Hippocrates says, that he wrote the book
called Nauicula (as we have said in our principles of Philosophy) Corn. Celsus
says, he was numbered amongst the gods, for giving excellence and luster unto
Physic, which before was but rude and unpolished. (d) Of whence,] She was of
ignoble and obscure descent, as Saturn her brother also was. For she they say
was Ops: and therefore they held them as the children of Caelus, knowing not
indeed of whence they were, who not-withstanding proved so famous and admired.
Such as these were, the people thought to come But best of all by Liuie h^
leave to say with the text, Pessinus, for Pessinus was a town in in Phrygia,
where Cybel had a temple, before she had any at Rome.
down from heaven. (e) Pessinus,] Some write Mount Prenestine: this place is
faulty in all the copies that ever I could find. Others write Mount
Pessinunt, but it were better to say, Mount Palatine, for there was the mother
of the gods placed, at her first coming to Rome. (Liu. lib. 36.) and Victor de
Regionibus vrbis. (f) Came out of Egipt] Apuleius in his Ass says, that the
Deities of Egypt were brought thence unto Rome about Sylla's time, that is,
above an hundred years after the mother of the gods came to Rome. But L. Piso,
and A. Gabinius being Consuls, decreed by edict, that they should not come in
the Capitol, though afterward they did. Tertull. Apologetic. (g) Febris,]
Some read, the god Februus, which cannot be good: for Februus is Pluto, unto
whom they sacrificed in February, called so because of Purgation: this is not
doubted of. But that it must be Febris here, that which follows of
Aesculapius, does approve, and other subsequences. (h) Let Aesculapius,]
Wittily applied, because he is a Physician. (i) Nephew] Or grandchild: he
was son to Apollo, he to Jupiter, and he unto Ops. (k) A Roman Cittizen]
This is conceited also: for the Romans made Febris a goddess. (l) Certain
and uncertain,] For some of their Deities were doubtful: as Pans, the
Syluans, and the Nimphs. Ovid brings in Jupiter speaking thus: Sunt mihi
semidei, sunt rustica Nomina, Faumi,
Et Nymphae, Satyrique and monticolae Syluani,
Quos quoniam caeli nondum dignamur honor,
Quas dedimus certe terras habitare sinamus. Metamorph.

We have of Semy-gods, and Syluanes, store:
Nymphs, Fawnes, and Satyrs, and many more:
Whom since as yet we have debard the skies,
We needs must guard on earth from injuries.
Such also are Corybantes, Hyppolitus, Atys and Sabbazius, whom Lucian calls
(...), aliens and doubtful gods, (m) Smoake] Of the sacrifices: or meaning
their vanity, is an allusion unto smoke, for smoke is often taken for a
vain and frivolous thing, as to sell smoke. (n) As a Beacon] In time of
war, or suspicion, the watchmen Sellers of smoke.
placed bundels of dry small sticks, upon their high watch-stands, that when
the enemy approached on a sudden, they might fire the sticks, and so give
notice unto their own soldiers and the neighboring towns: The Greeks
called those bundels (...), and by these fires within less then half an
hour, notice might be given unto the country an hundred mile about, to come
betimes to the preventing of their danger. It may also be understood of the
sign given in battles.

By what right the Romans attained their first wives. CHAP. 13.
IN like manner, neither Juno (for all that she was now as her husband was,
good friends with the Romans) nor Venus, could help her sons progeny to
honest and honorable marriages, but suffered this want to grow so hurtful unto
them, that they were driven to get them wives by force, and soon after were
compelled to go into the field against their wives own fathers, and the
wretched women being yet scarcely reconciled to their husbands for this wrong
offered them, were now endowed with their fathers murders and kindreds blood:
but in this conflict the Romans had the luck to be conquerors. But O what
worlds of wounds, what numbers of funerals, what Oceans of bloodshed did those
victories cost! for one only father (a) in law Caesar, and for one only
son in law Pompey; (the wife of Pompey, and daughter to Caesar being dead)
with what true feeling, and just cause of sorrow does Lucane cry out. Bella
per Emathios plus quam ciuilia campos,
^usque datum sceleri canimus: --
Wars worse then civil in the (b) Emathian plains,
And right left spoil to rage we sing: --
Thus then the Romans conquered, that they might now return and embrace the
daughters with arms embrued in the blood of the fathers: nor du^st the poor
creatures weep for their slaughtered parents, for fear to offend their
conquering husbands: but all the time of the battle, stood with their vows in
their mouths (c) and knew not for which side to offer them. Such marriages
Bellona, (and not Venus) bestowed upon the Romans: or perhaps (d) Alecto that
filthy hellish fury, now that Juno was agreed with them, had more power upon
their bosoms now, then she had then, when Juno entreated her help against
Aeneas. Truly (e) Andromacha's captivity was far more tolerable then these
Roman marriages; for though she lived servile, yet Pyrrhus after he had once
embraced her, would never kill Trojan more. But the Romans slaughtered their
own step fathers in the field, whose daughters they had already enjoyed in
their beds. Andromacha's estate secured her from further fears, though it
freed her not from precedent sorrows: But these poor souls being matched to
these stern warriors, could not but fear at their husbands going to battle,
and wept, at their return, having no way to freedom either by their fears or
tears. For they must either (in piety) bewail the death of their friends and
kinsfolks, or (in cruelty) rejoice at the victories of their husbands.
Besides, (as wars chance is variable) some lost their husbands by their
fathers swords; and some lost both, by the hand of each other. For it was no
small war that Rome at that time waged. It came to the besieging of the city
it self, and the Romans were forced to rely upon the strength of their
walls and gates which (f) being gotten open by a wile, and the foe being entered
within the walls (g) even in the very marketplace was there a most woeful and
wicked battle, struck betwixt the fathers in law and the sons. And here were
the rauishers conquered maugre their beards, and driven to fly into their own
houses, to the great stain of all their precedent (though badly and bloudily
gotten) (h) conquests: for here Romulus himself dispairing of his soldiors
valors, (i) praid unto Jupiter to make them stand, and (k) here-vpon got
Jupiter his sur-name of Stator) (l) Nor would these butcheries have ever been
brought unto any end, but that the silly ravished women came running forth,
with torn and disheueled hair, and falling at their parents feet, with
passionate entreaties, instead of hostile arms, appeased their justly enraged
valors. And then was Romulus that could not endure to share with his brother,
compelled to divide his Kingdom with Tatius, the King of the Sabines: but (m)
how long would he away with him, that misliked the fellowship of his own
twin-borne brother? So Tatius being slain, he to become the greater Deity,
took possession of the whole kingdom. O what rights of marriage were these,
what firebrands of war; what leagues of brotherhood, affinity, union, or
Deity! And ah what (n) lives the citizens lastly led, under so huge a bed-roll
of gods Guardians! You see what copious matter this place affords, but that
our intention bids us remember what is to follow, and falls on discourse to
other particulars.

L. VIVES.
FAther in law (a) Caesar] Iulia the only daughter of C. Caesar was married
unto Cn. Pompeius the great. She died in childbed, whilst her father warred
in France. And after that Aemathia.
he and his son in law waged ciuils wars one against another: (b) Emathian]
That which is called Macedonia now, was called once Emathia. (Plin. lib. 4.)
There did Pompey and Caesar fight a set field. (c) And knew not.] Ovid (Fastor.
3.) has these words of the Sabine women when the Romans battle and theirs
were to join: Mars speaks. Conueniunt nuptae dictam Iunonis in aedem,
Quas inter mea sic est nurus ausa loqui:
O pariter raptae, quoniam hoc commune tenemus,
Non vltra lentae possumus essepiae.
Stant acies: sed vtradij sunt pro part rogandi?
Eligite, hinc coniunx, hinc pater arma tenet.
Querendum est, viduae fieri malitis, an orbae? etc.
The wives in Iunoes church a meeting make,
Where met, my daughter thus them all be spoke:
Poor ravished souls, since all our plights are one,
Our zeal has now no mean to think upon.
The batails join: whom shall we pray for rather?
Choose: here a husband fights, and there a father:
Would you be spouselesse (wives) or fatherless. etc.


(e) Or perhaps Alecto] The 3. furies, Alecto, Magera, and Tisiphone, are
called the daughters of night and Acheron. Alecto affects y^ heart with ire,
hate, tumult, sedition, clamors, war, slaughters. T^ p^es una^s ar^re in pr^lia
^ratres,
(...) ^is ver^re d^s --
It Is thou can make sworn brethren mortal foes,
Confounding hate with hate --
Says Juno to Alecto, stirring her up against the Trojans. Aeneid. 7. (e)
Andromache] Hectors Andromache.
wife, daughter to Tetion King of Thebes in Cilicia: Pyrrhus married her after
the destruction of Troy. (f) Being got open] Sp. Tarpeius was Lieutenant of
the Tower, whose daughter Tarpeia, Tatius the Sabine King with great promises
allured to let in his soldiers when she went out to fetch water. She
assented, upon condition that she might have that which each of his soldiers
wore upon his left arm. Tatius agreed, and being let in, the Soldiers Tarpeia.
smothered the maid to death with their bucklers: for them they wore on their
left arms also, whereas she dreamed only of their golden bracelets which
they bore on that arm. Plutarch (out of Aristides Milesius) says, that this
happened to the Albanes, not to the Sabines. In Parallelis. But I do rather
agree with Liuie, Fabius, Piso, and Cincius, of the Latin writers, and
Dionysius of the Greeks. (g) In the very market place] Between the Capitol
and Mount Palatine. (h) Conquests] Not of the Sabines, but of the Ceninensians,
the Crustumerians, and the Attennates. (i) Praid unto Iupiter] In these words:
But O thou father of Gods and men, keep but the foes from hence, take away the
Romans terror, and stay their flight. Unto thee O Jupiter Stator, do I vow
to build a temple in this place, as a monument unto all posterity, that by
thine only help the city was saved. Liuius lib. 1. (k) Herevpon] stato a
sistendo, of staying, or a stando, of stablishing, that is, erecting the
Roman spirits that were dejected. Cicero calls this Jupiter, the preserver
of the Empire, in many places. I think it is because his Stator.
house was near this temple. Saint Hierome says, that this Jupiter was formed
standing: not that he thinks he was called Stator, because he stands so
upright, but because Jupiter Tonans (as Hermolaus Barbarus has noted) was
always stamped and engraven upon ancient coins sitting: and Stator, standing,
as being in readiness to help and assist men: Seneca gives a deeper reason of
his name. He is not called stator (says he) because (as history reports)
he stayed the Roman army after the vow of Romulus, but because by his
benefits all things consist, and are established. De benefic. lib. 4. And Tully
likewise: When we call Jupiter, Almighty, Salutaris, Hospitalis, and Stator,
we mean, that all men's health, and stabilitie is consisting of him and from
him, being under his protection. But both these authors do here speak
Stoically. For Tully makes Cato the Stoike speak these fore-alledged words.
De finib. lib. 3. For all these assertions of the gods the Stoikes reduced to a
more Metaphysicall or Theological sense. (l) Nor would these Butcheries] In
the midst of the fight the women gave in betwixt the battles all bareheaded
and loose haired: and calling on their parents on this side, and their husbands
on that, with tears besought them both to fall to agreement. So the battle
ceased, a league was made, the Sabines became citizens, and Tatius was joined
King with Romulus. (m) But how long] The Laurentians of Lauinium slew Tatius
the fifth year of his reign with Romulus, because his friends had injured
their Ambassadors. Hereof was Romulus very glad. (n) Liues] some read Iura,
laws. But in the old manuscripts, some have vita, and some vitae, lives, both
better then Iura.

How impious that war was, which the Romans began with the Albans, and of
the nature of those victories which ambition seeks to obtain. CHAP. 14.
BUT when Numa was gone, what did the succeeding Kings? O how tragical (as
well on the Romans side as on the Albanes) was that war between Rome and
Alba? Because (forsooth) the peace of Numa was grown loathsome, therefore must
the Romans and the Albanes begin alternate massacres, to so great an
endamaging of both their estates: And Alba (a) the daughter of Ascanius, Aeneas
his son, (a more appropiate mother unto Rome then Troy) must by Tullus
Hostilius his provocation, be compelled to fight with Rome it self, her own
daughter. And fighting with her, was afflicted, and did afflict, until the
continual conflicts had utterly tired both the parties. And then they were
feign to put the final ending of the whole war (b) to six brethren, three
Horatij on Romes sides, and three Curiatij on Albas. So two of the Horatij fell
by the three other: and the three other fell by the third only of the Horatij.
Thus got Rome the upper hand, yet so hardly, as of six combattants, only
one suruiued. Now who were they that lost on both sides? who were they that
lamented but Aeneas his progeny, Ascanius his posterity, Venus of spring, and
Jupiters children? for this war was worse then civil, where the daughter
city bore arms against the mother. (c) Besides, this brethrens fight was
closed with an horrid and an abominable mischief. For in the time of the
league between both cities, a sister of the Horatij, was espoused to one of
the Curiatij, who seeing her brother return with the spoils of her dead
spouse, and bursting into tears at this heavy sight, was run through the body
by her own brother in his heat and fury. There was more true affection in
this one poor woman (in my judgment) then in all the whole Roman nation
besides. She did not deserve to be blamed for bewailing that he was slain to
whom she ought her faith (or that her brother had slain him to whom he
himself perhaps had promised her his sister.) For Pious Aeneas is commended
in Virgill for bewailing (d) him whom he had slain as an enemy. And
Marcellus, viewing the fair city Syracusa, being then to be made a prey to
ruin by the arms of his conduct, reuoluing the inconstancy of mortal
affairs, pitied it, and bewailed it: I pray you then give thus much leave to
a poor woman, in tender affection, faultlesly to bewail her spouse, slain by
her brother, since that warlike men have been praised for deploring their
enemies estate in their own conquests. But when this one wretched soul
lamented thus, that her love had lost his life by her brothers hand,
contrariwise did all Rome rejoice, that she had given their mother so mighty a
foil, and exulted in the plenty of the allied blood that she had drawn. What
face then have you to talk of your victories and your glories hereby gotten?
Cast but aside the mask of mad opinion, and all these villainies will appear
naked, to view, peruse, and censure: weigh but Alba's cause and Troyes
together, and you shall find a full difference. Tullus began these wars,
only to renew the discontinued Rome had no just cause of war against Alba.
valors and triumphs of his countrymen. From this ground, arose these horrid
wars, between kindred and kindred, which not-withstanding Saluste does but
ouer-run, sicco pede: for having briefly recollected the precedent times, when
men lived, without aspiring or other affects, each man contenting himself with
his own. But after that (e) Cyrus (quoth he) in Asia, and the Lacedaemonians
and Athenians in Greece, began to subdue the countries and cities within their
reaches, th^n desire of sovereignty grew a common cause of war, and opinion
placed the greatest glory in the largest Empire, etc. Thus far he. This
desire of sovereignty is a deadly corrasiue to human spirits. This made the
Romans triumph over Alba, and gave the happy success of their mischiefs,
the style of glories. Because, as out Scripture says; The wicked makes boast
of his hearts desire, and the unjust dealer blesses himself. Take off then
these deluding vayles from things, and let them Psalm. 10. 3.
appear as they are indeed Let none tell me, He, or He is great, because he
has coped with and conquered such and such an one. Fencers can fight and
conquer, and those bloody acts of theirs in their combat (f) do never pass
vngraced. But I hold it rather fit to expose a man's name to all taint of
idleness, then to purchase renown from such bad emploiment. But if two
Fencers or sword-plaiers should come upon the stage, one being the father, and
another the son, who could endure As they did in Rome to fight for their
lines.
such a spectacle? how then can glory attend the arms of the daughter city
against the mother? do ye make a difference in that their field was larger
the^ the fencers stage, and yt they fought not in view of the theater but the
whole world, presenting a spectacle of eternal impiety both to the present
times, and to all posterity? But your great guardian-gods bore all this
unmoved, sitting as spectators of this tragedy, whilst for the three Curiatij
that were flaine, the sister of the Horatij must be stabbed by the hand of her
own brother, to make even the number with her two other brethren, that Romes
conquest might cost no less blood then Alba's loss did: which, as the fruit
of the victory (h) was utterly subverted: even this place, which the gods
(after Ilium, which the Greeks destroyed, and Lauinium, where Latinus placed
fugitive Aeneas as King) had chosen to be their third place of habitation. But
it may be they were gone hence also, and so it came to be razed: yes sure, all
they that kept the state of it up, were departed from their shrines. Then they
left Alba where Amulius had reigned, having thrust out his brother, and went to
dwell at Rome, where Romulus had reigned, having killed his brother. Nay, but
before this demolition (say they) the people of Alba were all transported unto
Rome, to make one City of both. Well be it so, yet the City, that was the
seat Royal of Ascanius, and the third habitacle of the Trojan gods, was
utterly demolished. And much blood was spilt, before they came to make this
miserable confusion of both these peoples together. Why should I particularize
the often renouation of these wars under so many several kings; which when
they seemed to be ended in victory, began so often again in slaughters, and
after combination and league, brake out so fresh between kindred and kindred,
both in the predecessors and their posterity? No vain Emblem of their misery
was that continual standing open of Ianus his gate: so that for all the help
of these gods-guardians, there was not one King of them that continued his
reign in peace.

L. VIVES.
(a) ALba,] There were many Alba's: one in Spain, called also Virgao. Another
in that part of France called Prouence, a town of the Heluii. A third in
Italy, by the Lake Alba.
Fucinus, now called Lago di Marso, or Lago di Celaeno, etc. A fourth in
Lombardy called Pompeia. The fifth upon Mount Albanus, called Alba Longa. And
Rome (not only that which Romulus built) was a collony of the Albanes brought
out by Romulus and Remus: but many think that the old Rome also, that was long
before, was built by Romulus, Aeneas his son: which being at length through
pestilence and often invasion left desolate, was by the Albans (pitying the
inhabitants cases) restored, and diverse of them sent to repair and people it.
(b) Three brethren,] (Liu lib. 1.) It is commonly known that Metius Suffetius
the Dictator of Alba, counseled and agreed with Tullus the King of Rome, to
take a course to save the lives of so many innocent people on both sides, and
to have the controversy decided by a few only: so making a league, six men
were appointed to fight for both the states soueraignties. Now there were three
brethren in either army, these were turned together into the lists, and whose
side conquered, that people should be sovereign. (c) Besides,] Saint
Augustine may be his own comment herein, he tells it so plain. (d) Bewayling
him] Lau^us, Mezentius his son, Aeneid 10. (e) Cyrus] There were two Cyri the
greater, meant here, Conqueror of Asiae, Scythia, and all the East, reigning in
the time of Tarquin the proud. He took Craesus The two Cyri.
the rich King of Lydia: but by Tomiris Queen of Scythia, himself was taken,
beheaded, and his head souced in a tubbe of blood, to satisfy his cruel
thirst. Plutarch, Strabo, Trogus, Herodotus, etc. Herodotus calls him (...),
the great King. And there-vpon the other Persian Kings are usually so styled.
The other was Cyrus the lesser, son to Darius, brother Magnus Rex.
to Artaxerxes, whose journey into Persia, Xenophon wrote. (f) Do never passe]
With crowns hung all with labells and pendants. (g) Amphitheater] The Theater
was like half a circle, the Amphitheater like a full circle: it was strowed
with Sand, and there the Fencers The Theater and Amphitheater.
fought. (h) Was vtterly] Liu. In the first Veian war, when Metius of Alba
stood as neuter with his army, and would not help Tullus according to the
conditions of the league, Tullus made him be drawn in pieces with horses,
destroyed Alba, and removed all the Albans to Rome.

Of the lives and deaths of the Roman Kings. CHAP. 15.
But how ended their Kings still? for Romulus, let that flattering fable look
to him, which has sent him up into heaven. Let'some of their own (a) writers
judge, that affirm him torn in pieces by the Senate for his pride, and that
(b) I know not whom, one Julius Proculus, was suborned to say, that he appeared
unto him, commanding him to bid Rome give him divine honor, and so was the
fury The suns natural Eclipse at Romulus his death.
of the people surprised. Besides, an Eclipse of the sun falling out at the
same time, wrought so upon the (c) ignorance of the rude vulgar, that they
ascribed all this unto Romulus his worth and glories. As though that if the
sun had mourned, as they thought it did, (d) they should not rather imagine
that it was because Romulus was murdered, and therefore that the sun turned
his light from such a villainy; as it did indeed when our Lord and Savior was
crucified by the bloody and reprobate Jews. (e) That the Eclipse which befell
at our Saviors death, was quite against the regular course of the stars, is
hence most plain, Luc. 13.
because it was the Jews Easter: which is continually kept at the full of the
Moon. But (f) the regular eclipse of the Sun never happens but in the
changing of the Moon. Now Cicero intimates plainly that this admission of
Romulus into heaven, was rather imagined then performed; there where in
Scipio's words (De repub.) speaking of his praises, He attained so much (says
he) that being not to be found after the suns Eclipse, he was accounted as
admitted into the number of the gods: which opinion, there is no man without
admirable merit of virtue can purchase. Now whereas he says, that he was not
to be found, he glanceth doubtless either at the secrecy of the murder, or
intimates the violence of the tempest. For other writers (g) add unto this
Eclipse a sudden storm, which either was the agent or the occasion of Romulus
his murder. Now Tully in the same books, speaking of (h) Hostilius (third
King after Romulus) who was stricken to death with thunder, says, that he was
not reckoned amongst the gods, because that which was proved true (that is,
that which they believed was so) in Romulus the Romans would not (i) embase,
by making it too common, in giving it to the one as well as the other. And in
his Inuectiues he says plainly. It is our good will and fame, that has made
Romulus (this Cities founder) a God. To show that it was not so indeed, but
only spread into a report by their good will to him for his worth and
virtues. But in his Dialogue called (k) Hortensius, disputing of regular
Eclipses, he says more plainly: To produce such a darkness as was made by
the Eclipse of the Sun at Romulus his death. Here he feared not to say
directly his death, by reason he sus^ained the person of a disputant, rather
then a Panegyricke. But now for the other Kings of Rome, excepting Numa, and
Ancus Martius, that dyed of infirmities, what horrible ends did they all come
to? Hostilius, the subuerter of Alba, as I said, was consumed, together with
his whole house by lightning. (l) Tarquinius Priscus was murdered by his
predecessors sons: And Seruius Tullius, by the villainy of his son in law
Tarquin the proud, who succeeded him in his kingdom. Nor yet were any of the
gods gone from their shrines, for all this so heinous a parricide, committed
upon this so good a King, though it be affirmed that they served wretched
Troy in worse manner, in leaving it to the licentious fury of the Greeks,
only for Paris his adultery. Nay, Tarquin having shed his father in laws
blood, seized on his estate himself. This parricide got his crown by his
step fathers murder, and after-wards glorying in monstrous wars and
massacres, and even building the Capitol up, with hence-got spoils: This
wicked man, the gods were so far from ^or saking, that they sat and looked on
him, nay and would have Jupiter their principal to sit, and sway all things in
that stately temple, namely in that black monument of parricide, for Tarquin
was not innocent, when he built (m) the Capitol, and for his after-guilt,
incurred expulsion: No, foul and inhumaine murder was his very ladder to that
state whereby he had his means to build the Capitol. And (n) whereas the
Romans expelled him the state and City afterward, the cause of that (namely
Lucresses rape) grew from his son and not from him, who was both ignorant and
absent when that was done: for then was he at the siege of Ardea, and a
fighting for the Romans good: nor know we what he woold have done had he
known of this fact of his son, yet without all trial or judgment, the
people expelled him from his Empire: and having charged his army to abandon
him, took them in at the gates, and shut him out. But he himself after he had
plagued the Romans (by their borderers means) with eztreame wars, and yet
at length being not able to recover his estate, by reason his friends failed
him: retired himself (as it is reported) unto (o) Tusculum, a town fourteen
miles from Rome, and there enjoying a quiet and private estate, lived peaceably
with his wife, and died far more happily then his Father in law did, who fell
so bloudily by his means, and (p) his own daughters consent, as it is
credibly affirmed, and yet this Taquin was never surnamed cruel nor wicked by
the Romans, but the Proud; it may be (q) because their own pride would not
let them bear with his: As for the crime of killing that good King his
Step-father, they showed how light they made of that, in making him murder the
King, wherein I make a question whether the gods were not guilty in a deeper
manner then he, by rewarding so highly a guilt so horrid, and not leaving their
shrines all at that instant when it was done, unless some will say for them,
that they staid still at Rome, to take a deeper revenge upon the Romans,
rather then to assist them, seducing them with vain victories, and tossing
them in vnceasing turmoiles. Thus lived the Romans in those so happy times,
under their Kings, even until the expelling of Tarquine the proud, which was
about two hundred forty and three years together, paying so much blood, and so
many lives for every victory they got, and yet hardly enlarging their Empire
the distance of (r) twenty miles compass without the walls: How far then
have they to conquer, and what store of stroks to share, until they come to
conquer a City of the (s) Getulians?

L. VIVES.
THeir own (a) writers] Dionisius (lib. 2) says that the senators tore him in
pieces and every Romulu his dea^.
one bore away a piece wrapped in his gown: keeping it by this means from the
notice of the vulgar (b) I know not whome] this he adds either because the
author is obscure, or because the lie that Proculus told was vile and perjured.
(c) Ignorance] Before that their Philosopers showed men the causes of eclipses,
men when they saw them, feared indeed either some great mischief, or the death
of the planets themselves, nor was this fear only vulgar, even the learned
shared in it, as Stefichorus, and Pindarus, two lyrick Poets (d) They should
not rather] not Eclipses.
is put into the reformed copies otherwise the sense is inuerted, (e) that that
eclipse] the partly meeting of the Sun and Moon depriues us of the Suns light,
and this is the Eclypse of the Sun but the shade of the earth falling from ye
suns place lineally upon the moon, makes the moons eclipse. So that neither
can the Sun be Eclipsed but in the Moons change, and partile conjunction
with him; neither can the Moon be eclipsed but at her full, and in her farthest
posture from the sun: then is she prostitute to obnubilation. (f) The
regular] Regular and Canonical is all one: of Canon the Greek word: well was
this waighed of the Augustine Monks, who holding the one insufficient, would
be called by them both. (g) Add unto this] Liuie, A tempest suddenly arose,
with great thunder and lightning: (h) Of Hostilius] Some write that he and his
whole house was burnt with lightning. Some, that it was fired by Martius Tullus
Hostilius.
Ancus his successor. (i) Embase] Vilefacere says Saint Augustine, but this is
not well, nor learnedly: no, if any of our fine Ciceronians correct it, it must
be Uilificare: for this is their usual phrase: Hominificare, animalificare,
accidentificare, asinificare. (k) Hortensius] We have lost it: that which some
take to be it, is the fourth of the Tusculanes. Marcellus. (l) Tarquinius
Priscus] The fifth Roman King, Demaratus his son of Corinth, he was
Tarquinius Priscus.
slain by shephards suborned by the sons of Martius Ancus. After him came
Seruius Tullus his step-sonne, powrefull in peace, and war: who adorned his
City with many good institutions. He was slain by the means of Tarquin the
proud. This Tarquin was brutish and cruel to his people: but exceeding
valourous in war and peace. (m) The Capitol] On The Capitol.
the hill Saturnius, afterward called Tarpeius, did he dedicate the Capitol
to almighty Jove. (n) And whereas] The seventh and last King of the Romans,
he was expelled by Brutus, Collatinus, Lucretius, Valerius, Horatius etc.
Partly because of many old injuries, but chiefly for his son Sextus his Rape
of Lucresse. He was befieging Ardea when the people began this deprivation,
and when he came to the City, Brutus, that came into the camp another way,
withdrew all his army from him. (o) Tusculum] It is more commonly believed
that he died at Cumae with King Aristodemus, living near at the age of 90.
years: I do not deny his stay some years at Tusculum with Octauius Mamilius
his son in law, until at that memorable filed at Lake Regillus (now called
Lago. di. S. Prassede) Mamilius was slain by T. Herminius, Legate of Rome.
Which perhaps is cause of Saint Augustines forgetfulness in a matter of so
small a moment, caring not whether it be reported thus or thus, (p) His own
daughters consent] Nay, furtherance it is said, and continual urging her
husband to the fact. (q) There own pride] A pithy and elegant saying. (r)
twenty miles] Eighteen, says Ruffus, won by Ancus from Rome to Ostia by the
sea. Eutropius has but sixteen. (s) Getulians] Getulia is a part of Affrike,
near the inhabitable Zone, as Mela says. Salust writes thus of Getulia.
them. The rude and barbarous Getulians dwelt at first in Africa: the flesh of
wild beasts and grass was their meat, as beasts, have also their apparel.
Law had they none, nor government, nor place of aboade. This and more has
Salust of the Getulians. Mela says they are a great and populous country.

Of the first Roman Consulls; how the one expelled the other out of his
country, and he himself, after many bloody murders, fell by a wound, given
him by his wounded foe. CHAP. 16.
Unto these times, add the other, wherein (as Salust says) things were
modestly and justly carried, until the fear of Tarquin and the Hetrurian war
were both ended. For whilst the Hetrurians assisted Tarquins endeauours of
re-instalment, Rome quaked under so burthenous a war. And therefore (says
Salust) were things carried modestly and justly, fear being the cause here of
by restraint, not justice, by persuasion. In which short space, O how cruel a
course had the year of the two first Consulls! The time being yet vnexpired,
Brutus debased Collatine, and banished him the City: And soon after, perished
he himself, having (a) enterchanged a many wounds with his foe, (b) having
first slain his own sons, and his wives brothers, because he found them
actors in a plot to recall Tarquin. Which deed, Virgill having laudably
recited, presently does in gentle manner deplore it: for having said. --
Natosque Pater mala bella mouentes
Ad panam pulcra pro liberate vocabit.
His sons, convict of turbulent transgression
He kills, to quit his country from oppression.


Presently in lamenting manner he adds. Infaelix, vtcunque ferent ea fact a
minores
Hapless, how ere succeeding times shall ringe.


Howsoever his posterity shall ring of the praise of such an act, yet hapless
is he, that gives deaths summons to his own sons: But to give some solace
to his sorrows, he adds after all. Vi^t amor patriae laudumque immensa
cupido,
Conquered by countries love, and lawds high thirst.


Now in Brutus his killing of his own sons, and (c) in being killed by
Tarquins son, whom he had hurt, and Tarquin himself suruiuing him, is not
(d) Collatines wrong well revenged, who being so good a citizen was banished
(only because his name was but Tarq^n) as well as Tarquin the tyrant: (e) It
was the name (you say) that was the cause of this: well, he should have been
For it is said Brutus was ^arquins ki^man.
made to change his name then and not to abandon his country. Again (f) this
word would have been but little missed in his name, if he had been called L.
Collatine only: This therefore was no sufficient cause, why he, being one of
the first Consulls, should be forced to abjure both his honors and his City.
But is this injustice being so detestable, and so vse-lesse to the state fit to
be the foundation of Brutus his glory? Did he these things, being Conqu^r'a by
our countries loves, and lauds high thirst? Tarquin being expelled, L.
^arquin Collatine, Lucraetia's-husband was joined Consul with Iunius Brutus:
how justly did the people respect the conditions of the man and not the name?
But how unjustly did Brutus (having power to deprive him only of the cause of
the offense, his name) in depriving him both of his country, and place of
honor? Thus these evils, thus these thwart effects fell out even then when
things were said to be carried so modestly and so justly. And (g) Lucraetius,
that had Br^tus his place, died ere this year ended: So that P. Valerius that
succeeded Collatine, and M. Horatius that had Lucraetius his place, ended that
Hellish and murderous year, which saw it self pass by five Consulls. This
was the year, wherein Rome devised her platform of new government, their
fears now beginning to surcease, not because they had no wars, but because
those they had were but light ones: But the time being expired wherein things
were modestly and justly carried, then followed those which Salust does thus
breeflie deliniate. Then b^ganne the Patriots to oppress the people with
servile conditions, to judge of life and death as Imperiously as the Kings had
done before, to thrust men from their possessions, to put by all others, and to
s^are all themselves; with which outrages, and chiefly with their extorted
taxes, the people being to much vexed, (being bound both to maintain an
army and also to par contributions besid^s) they rusht up to arms, and
entrenched themselves upon Mount Sacer, and Auentine: and there they made them
Tribunes, and diverse laws; but these discords and tumultuous contentions ended
not till the second African war.

L. VIVES.
Having (a) ent^rchanged] With Arnus, King Tarquinius sonne^ being slain, the
matrons mourned a whole year for him, and his Coll^ague, Valerius made an
oration in his praise, the first of that kind in Rome. (b) Having first
slaine] The Vite^, Brutus his wives brethren, conspired with certain secret
messengers of Tarquin, to bring him secretly in again, and made Titus and
Tiberius, Brutus the Consul sons, privy and pertakers in this affair. Brutus
discovering the plot, put them all to death (c) In being killed] The
manuscripts have this diversely: we have it the best. (d) Collatines wrong] I
noted before, That those that deprived their fellows in Consull-ship lived not
a year after. (e) For it is sayd] He was son to M. Iunius, and Tarquins
sister. (f) This name would] Some hereof transpose the word if, but
erroneously. (g) Lucraetius] This first year had five Consulls: first Brutus
and Collatine: then P. Valerius Poplicola in Collatines place, Then Sp:
Lucraetius (after the death of Brutus in war,) had Brutus his place: and he
dying ere the end of the year, M. Horatius Puluillu: succeeded him.

Of the Vexations of the Roman estate, after the first beginning of the the
Consulls rule: And of the little good that their gods all this while did them
CHAP. 17.
But why should I spend so much time in writing of these things, or make others
spend it in reading them? How miserable the state of Rome stood all that long
time until the second Punike war, how sorely shaken by foreign wars, and
intestine discord, Salust has already made a succinct demonstration. So that
their victories never brought any true felicity to the good, but only vain
solaces to the wretched, and inductions and inticements to the turbulent, to
continue disquiets progress. Let no wise Roman then be angry with us for
saying this: but we need not entreat, we are already assured, they will not.
For we use but the words of their own writers, and that with far less
gall, then themselves meant it, and in less gloss then they spoake it. Yet
those do they learn, and those they make their children learn: Then why
stomach they me for saying as Salust says: Many troubles, seditions, and
lastly civil wars burst out, whilst a few (a) of the greatest, under the
honest style of fathers, used the license of tyrants, nor did the Citizens
attain the titles of good and bad, according to their (b) deserts in the state
(all being foul a like) but he that had most wealth and power to iniure,
because he defended the present government (as fittest for his turn) he was
the only good man. If these writers now held it as pertinent to an honest man's
liberty to be so free tongued against their own cities corruptions, which
other-wise they have been often enforced to commend, in that they had no
knowledge of any better state, wherein they might become denizens eternal;
what then shall we do, whose trust in God by how much it is firmer, so much
ought our tongues to be the freer, in repelling the scandal they cast upon
our Savior Christ, with intent to seduce unsettled and unsound minds from
that city, where happiness is man's possession unto all eternity? Neither do
we load their gods with any more horrid guilt, then their own writers do,
whom they read and reverence: what we say, we say it from them, being unable
to recite all, or all that they have of this kind. (c) where then were these
gods, (which men hold so venerable for the attayning of worldly vanities) when
the Romans, whose services they angled for so cunningly, were afflicted so
extremely? where were they when Consul Valerius was slain in defense of the
Capitol, when it (d) was scalled by slaves and exiles? It was rather in his
power to protect the temple of Jupiter, then in the powers of all that kennell
of gods, and their great King, to yield him any help at all. Where were they
when the city being so ouer-borne with seditions, was feign to send to Athens
to borrow laws, and in that little expectation of quietness, was unpeopled by
such a sore famine and pestilence? Where were they besides, when the people in
this great famine, elected their first Prefect of the provision, and when that
in the increase of this dearth, (e) Sp: Aemilius, for distributing of corn
over bountifully amongst the starued people, was brought in suspicion of
affecting Monarchy, and at the instance of the said prefect, by the means of
L Quintius, Dictator, an aged weak man, he was slain by the hand of Q.
Seruilius the General of the horsemen, not without a most dreadful and
dangerous tumult in the whole City. where were they when at the beginning of a
wastefull pestilence, the people being wholly tired with frustrat inuocations,
thought it fit to appease them with new (f) Bed-spreadings, a thing never
done before? Then were there beds brought into the Temples and spread in
honor of the gods, and hence this sacrifice (nay sacrilege) took the name.
Where were they when for ten full years together the Romans never fought
against the Veians but they had the worse, until Furius Camillus was feign to
help them, whom they kindly banished afterward for his good service? Where
were they when the Galls took Rome, sacked it, spoiled it, burned it, and
made a very shambles of it? Where were they when that great plague destroyed
almost all the City, and Camillus amongst the rest, who had saved his
thanklesse country from the Veians and after from the Galls? In this
pestilence they first brought up their Stage Plays, a greater plague then
the other, to their conditions though not to their carcasses. Where were they,
when (g) another sad contagion arose (as it is said) from the poisoning
tricks of the Matrons, yea of the most and Noblest, whose conditions herein
proved worse then all those pestilent airs? Or when the two Consuls with their
army being shut in the Caudine Straites by the Samnites, were glad to
make a base composition with them? And delivering six hundred Gentlemen for
hostages, went away with all the rest, without arms, without baggage, without
any thing but their very upper garments? Or when the army perished almost
wholly, part by the plague, and part by thunders? Or when in another great
mortallity the City was forced to fetch Aesculapius (as a Physician for her)
from Epidaurus, because Jupiter the King of the Capitol, had ever been so
employed in his youth in rapes and adulteries, that these exercises gave him no
time to learn Physic. Or when the Brutians, Lucans, Samnites, Hetrurians and
Senonian Galls, conspiring altogether, first flew their Ambassadors, and then
a whole army with the Praetor, ten tribunes, and thirteen thousand soldiers?
Or then when the long and fatal sedition in the City, wherein the people at
last encamped themselves on Ianiculus, having booty-haled all the whole
City? Which mischief grew to such a lamentable pass, that they were glad
(for the last refuge in all desperate cases) to create a Dictator: Hortensus,
who having reunited the people, and recalled them, died in his office, as no
Dictator had done before, which was a great shame to the gods, now that
Aesculapius was come to make one. And (h) then grew wars so fast upon the^,
that their Proletarii their Brood-men, those that they always forbear for
getting of children, being so needy they could not follow the wars themselves,
were now for want of soldiars, compelled to serve themselves? For now did (i)
Pyrrhus that famous and warlike Epirot (being called in by the Tarentines)
become Romes heavy foe: (k) And asking the Oracle of his success, truly
Apollo answered him very neatly, in such ambiguous manner, that which way so
ere it happened, his deity might stand unblemished: Aio te Aeacida Romanos
vincere posse: says he: So that whether Pyrrhus or the Romans had the
upper hand, the Oracle need not care, for Apollo speaks true how ever. After
this, followed a sore and bloody fight, wherein notwithstanding (l) Pyrrhus was
conqueror, so that now he might justly esteem Phoebus a true fore-teller, as
he understood him; but that in the next conflict the Romans had the better
(m) and in this great hostility, arose as great a plague amongst the women:
For, ere they could be delivered, being big with child, still they dyed.
Now here Aesculapus had an excuse, he professed himself (n) the Prince of
Physic and not of Mid-wifery. Cattle dyed also so sore, that one would have
thought the worlds utter vastation was entered. And then there was a winter
how strangely unseasonable! The snow lying in the Marketplace forty days
together in a monstrous depth; all Tiber being frozen quite over: If this
had hapened in our times, Lord how it would have been scanned upon. And
then for that (o) great pestilence, how many thousand took it hence: (which
maugre all Aesculapius his druggs) lasting till the next year, they were feign
to betake themselves to the books of the Sybils: (p) In which kind of Oracles
(as Tully says well in his book De diuinat.) the expounders of them are
oftener trusted, then otherwise; guess they never so unlikely: and then it was
said that the pestilence raged so because that (q) many of the Temples were put
unto private men's uses: Hereby freeing Aesculapius either from great ignorance,
or negligence. But why were these Temples turned unto private habitations
without prohibition, but only because they saw they had lost too much labor
in praying to such a crew of gods so long: and so becoming wiser by degrees,
had left haunting of those places by little and little, and at length abandoned
them wholly, for the private uses of such as would inhabit them. For those
houses that as then, for avoiding of this pestilence, were so dilligently
repared if they were not afterward utterly neglected, and so incroched upon
by private men as before; Varro should be too blame to say (speaking of
Temples) that many of them were unknown. But in the mean time this fetch was
a pretty excuse for the gods, but no cure at all for the Pestilence.

L. VIVES.
A Few (a) of the greatest] The Plebeians, either through hate to the Nobles,
or ambition in themselves, disturbed the common state exceedingly, to assure
and augment their own: pretending the defense of the peoples freedom,
notwithstanding in all their courses the Patriots opposed them, abstracting
from the peoples means to share amongst themselves, pretending the defense of
the Senates dignity, which the state would have most eminent: but indeed they
did nothing but contend and bandy factions, each with other, according to his
power. (b) deserts] Some books put in incesserant, but it hurts the sense.
(c) Where then were] All this relation of Augustines is out of Liuie: read it
in him least our repitition becomme both tedious and troublesome. (d) It was
scaled] Incensum scaled, and not incensum fired: (e) SP. Aemilius] This must be
Melius assuredly, by the history. (f) Bed-spreadings] It was an old fashion to
banquet upon beds. But in their appeasiue, and sacrifical banquets, in the
Temples, and in the night orgies, they made beds in the place, for the gods to
lie and revel upon, and this was called Lectisterium, Bed-spreading. the City
being sore infected with the plague (says Liuie lib. 5.) a few years ere it
was taken by the Galls, the Sybils books directed the first Bed-spreading,
Bed-spreading.
to last eight days: three beds were fitted: one for Apollo and Latona, one
for Diana and Hercules, one for Mercury and Neptune. But how this can be the
first Bed-spreading I cannot see, seeing that in the secular games yt
Poplicola, Brutus his Colleague ordained, there were three nights
Bed-spreadings: Valor lib. 2. Censorin de die Natall. (g) Another] In y^
Consulship of C L. Marcellus and T. Ualerius, was a great question in the Court
about poisons because many great men had been killed by their wives using such
means. (h) Then grew wars] Against (...) used at Rome.
the Samnites, Galls, Tarentines, Lucans, Brutians, and Hetrurians: after al
which, followed Pyrrhus the King of Epirus his war. But now a word or two of
the Proletarij, the Brood-men here named: Seruius Tullus the sixth King of Rome,
divided the people into six companies or forms, in the first was those that
were censured worth C. M. Asses; or more, but under that King the greatest
Censure was but C X M. (Plin: lib. 33.) the second contained all of an estate
between C. and LXXV Asses. the third, them under L. the fourth them under XXXV.
the fifth, them under XI. the last was a Century of men freed from warre-fare,
Proletarii or Brood-men, and Capiti-censi. A Brood-man was he that was rated
ML. Asses in the Censors book more or A Brood-man.
less, and such were ever forborne from all offices and uses in the City,
being reserved only to begette children, and therefore were styled
Proletarii, of Proles, brood or offspring. The Capite Censi were poorer and
valued but at CCCLXXV. asses. Who because they were not censured by their
states, were counted by the poll, as augmenting the number of the Citizens.
These two last sorts did Seru. Tullius exempt from all service in war, not
that they were unfit themselves, or had not pledges to leave for their
fealty, but because they could not bear the charges of war; for the soldiers
in those days maintained themselves. It may be this old custom remained
after the institution of tribute, and the people of Rome thought it not fit
that such men should go to war, because that they accounted all by the purse.
This reason is given by Valerius and Gellius. But these Brood-men were diverse
times led forth to the wars Capitae censi
afterward, mary the Capite Censi never, until Marius his time, and the war
of Iugurthe: Salust. Valor. Quintillian also touches this In milite mariano.
And here-vppon Marius their General was called Capite Census. (i) Pyrrhus]
Descended by his mother from Achilles, by his father from Hercules, by both
from Jove: This man dreaming on the worlds Monarchy, went Pyrrhus.
with speed at the Tarentines entreaty against the Romans: hence hoping to
subdue Italy, and then the whole world, as Alexander had done a while before
him. (k) Who asking] Cicero de diuinat. (lib. 2) says that it is a verse in
Ennius: Aio and as in the text. Which the Poet affirms that the Oracle
returned as answer to Pyrrhus in his inquiry hereof. Whence Tully writes thus.
But now to thee Apollo, thou that sit upon the earths navel, from whence
this cruel and superstitious voice first brake. Chrysippus filled a book with
thine Oracles, but partly fained (I think) and partly casual, as is often
seen in ordinary discourses: and partly equivocal, that the interpreter shall
need an interpreter, and the lotte must abide the try all by lotte: and partly
doutful, and requiring the skill of Logike. Thus far he: seeming to tax Poets
verse with falsehood: Pyrrhus is called Aeacides, for Achilles was son to
Peleus, and Peleus unto Aacus. Virgill. ipsumque Aeacidem etc. meaning Pyrrhus.
(l) Pyrrhus was conqueror] Pyrrhus at Heraclea He^aclear. victory.
overthrew Valerius, Consul, but got a bloody victory: whence the Heraclean
victory grew to a proverb; but after Sulpitius and Decius foiled him, and
Curious Dentatus at length overthrew him and chased him out of Italy. (m) And in
this] This is out of Orosius (lib. 4.) happening in the Consulship of Gurges and
Genutiu^, in Pyrrhus his war. (n) Prince of physic (...): Iatros is a
Physician, Obstetrix, a midwife: and Archiatri were also the Princes
Physicians: Justin. Archiatri.
Codic. Of the Comites, and Archiatri which the Spaniards call Protomedici,
etc. (o) Great pestilence] (Oros. lib. 4.) In the entrance of the first
Affrican war. (p) In which] Cice. de diuini: (lib. 2) at large, of the Sybils
and their books. (q) Many of the temples] The Sooth saiers answer in Tullies
time concerning the prodigies, was y^ very same. Cic. Orat. de Aruspic. respons.

The miseries of the Romans in the Affrican wars and the small stead their
gods stood them therein. CHAP. 18.
But now in the wars of Africa, victory still houering doubtfully betwixt both
sides, and two mighty and powerful nations using all their might and power to
reciprocrall ruin, how many petty Kingdoms perished herein? How many fair
cities were demolished, or afflicted, or utterly lost? How sar did this
disastrous contention spread, to the ruin of so many Realms and great
Estates? How often were the conquerors on either side conquered? What store of
men (armed and naked) was there that perished? How many ships were sunk at
^eas by fight and tempest? Should we particularize, we should become a direct
Historiographer. Then Rome being in these deep plunges, ran headlong under
those vain and rediculous remedies: for then (a) were the Secular plays
renewed by the admonition of the Sibils books: which institution had bin
ordained an hundred years before, but was now worn out of al memory, in those
so happy times. The high priests also (b) renewed the sacred plays to the
hel-gods with the better times had in like manner abolished before: nor was it
any wonder to see the^ now revenged, for the hel-gods desired now to become
reuellers, being enriched by this continual vncesing world of men: who (like
wretches) in following those blody and unrelenting wars, did nothing but act
the devils revels, and prepare banquets for the infernal spirits. Nor was there
a more laudable accident in all this whole war, then that Regulus should be
taken prisoner: a worthy man, and before that mishap a scourge to the
Carthaginians: who had ended the Affrican war long before, but that he would
have bound the Carthaginians to stricter conditions then they could bear. The
most sudden captivity, and the most faithful oath of this man, and his most
cruel death, if the gods do not blush at (c) surely they are brazen-faced, and
have no blood in them. Nay for all this, Romes walls stood not safe, but tasted
of some mischief, and all those within them, for the river Tiber (d)
ouer-flowing, drowned almost all the leuel parts Tibers inundation.
of the city: turning some places as it were into torrents, and other some
into fens or lakes: this plague vshered in a worse of fire, (e) which beginning
in the marketplace, burned all the higher buildings therabouts, sparing not the
own (f) harbor Fire in the City.
and temple of Vesta, where it was so duly kept in, by those (g) not so
honorable as damnable Votaresses. Now it did not only continue here burning but
raging: with the fury whereof the virgins being amazed (h) Metcllus the high
Priest ran into the fire, and was half burned in fetching out of those fatal
relics which had bin the ruin of (i) three cities, where they had bin
resident. (k) The fire never spared him for all he was the Priest. Or else the
true Deity was not there, but was fled before though the fire were there still:
but here you see how a mortal man could do Vests more good then she could do
him: for if these gods could not guard themselves from the fire, how could
they guard their city wc they were thought to guard from burnings and
inundations? Truly not a whit, as the thing showed it self: Herein we would
not object these calamities against the Romans, if they would affirm that al
these their sacred observations only aim at eternity, and not at the goods of
this transitory world; and that therefore when those corporal things perished,
there was yet no loss by that, unto the ends for which they were ordained,
because that they might soon be made fit for the same uses again. But now
such is their miserable blindness, that they think y^ those idols that might
have perished in this fiery extremity, had power to preserve the temporal
happiness of the city: but now seeing that they remained unconsumed, and yet
were able to show how such ruins of their safeties and such great mischiefs
has befalne the city, this makes them ashamed to change that opinion which
they see they cannot possibly defend.

L. VIVES.
THen were (a) the secular plaies] I think it will not be amiss if I say
somewhat of those plays, from their first original. Ualesius Sabinus, a
rustic, as the best were then, praying for his three sick children, heard a
voice y^ said they should recover, if he would carry them over Tiber The
secular plays.
to Terentum, and there recreate them with the warm water of Dis and
Proserpina. Valesius dreaming of the city Terentum, though it were far off,
and no such river as Tiber near it, yet hiring a ship, sailed with his sons to
Ostia, and setting them on shore to refresh themselves in Mars his field, he
asked y^ ship-master where he might have some fire: he replied at the adioining
Terentu^, for there he saw some that ye sheapheards had made: (it was called
Terentum of Tero to wear, because the river ware away the shore: or because
Dis his alter was there inhumed) Ualesius hearing the name commanded the ship
to put over thither, thinking this was the place mean^ by the Oracle: and
departing to the city, to buy an altar, he bad his servants mean while to
dig a place for it. They dug 20. foot deep, and there they found an old
altar inscribed, To Dis and Proserpina. (This the Romans had inhumed after
their infernal sacrifices, being to fight with the Albasnes, for so the devil
bad them do ere they joined battle.) Ualesius returns, and finding the
altar, offers black offerings to Dis and Proserp. and spreading beds for the
gods, stayed there three nights (for so long after were they sick) with
reuells and dances, that these children had escaped this sickness. This
custom. P. V. Poplicola, one of Valesius his progeny brought into the City,
in the first year of the freedom. Three days and nights the people watched
at the altars of Jove and Apollo, offering a white bull, and certain children
whose parents were living sung a song to Apollo. Then watched they at Juno's:
offering a white Heifer; this was in the day time: on the night at Dianas,
Proserpina's, Terra's and the Destenies, offering black creatures, and burning
of tapers: and then were Stageplaies presented to Apollo, and Diana, and the
Circian Games: and those stately and famous spectacles were called ye Secular
plays, because they were acted once every age, taking an age here for the
longest space of man's life: Some give it more years, some less, as it is in
Censorinus. The Romans called an C years, an age: as Valerius, Antias,
Varro, and Liuie lib. 136. An Age.
do report. But by the Quindecimvirs commentaries, and Augustus his Edict,
together with Horace his verse, it includes a space of ten years more, and
every C. X. year, those plays were kept. Though this verse of Horace, Certus
vndenos decies per annos, which Censorinus and others trust to, I cannot see
but may be read Certus vt denos decies per annos, and so diverse do read it.
But there is another Greek verse cited by Zosimus, cut of the Sybills books,
he says, wherein is (...) without point or accent. Besides, the crier called
the people inthese words Come to those plays that none of you ever saw, nor
hereafter ever shall see. Hence came Vitellius flattery to Claudius, presenting
those plays: May you do it often. Poplicola, as we said, first presented
them: Ab vrbe cond. CCXLIIII. years: they were renewed Ab. vr. Con. D. I.
Consulls, P. CL. Pulcher and L. Iuni. Brutus, the XI. year of the first
African war: acted again, the third year of the second Punick war:
Consulls, M. Manlius M. Censorinus. Fourthly, before their time, L. Aem.
Lepidus, and L. Aurel. Orestes, Consulls, the fifth: Augustus and Arippa
presented, having brought them to the just time: Consulls, Furnius and
Sillanus: the sixth, C L. Caesar, too soon for the time: Himself and L.
Vitellius, the third Consulls. The seventh, Domitian, after a true
computation, Himself and L. Minutius Ruffus being Consulls: the eight
Septimius Severus, at their just time: Conss. Chilo, and Vibo. the ninth
Phillip Vostrensis ab vrbe Cond. a M. years: Aemilianus and Aquilinus being
Conss. Cassiodore. Thus much of the Secular plays from Varro, Valor. Horat. L.
Florus, Festus, The Tau^ian games.
Zosimus, Herodian, Suetonius, Censorinus, Cassiodorus, Porphiry, Aeron, and
Politian, now to the rest. (b) Renewed] Here seems a difference between the
plays of Dis and Proserpina, and the Secular plays, but indeed there is
none, unless Augustine divide the infernal Orgies, from the sacrifices
offered at the same time to other gods: and truly the Infernal Orgies and the
Secular plays seem to differ in their original: for Festus says thus: The
Tauri were games made in honor of the infernal gods, upon this occasion. In
the reign of Tarquin the proud, there falling a great death amongst the
childbearing women, arising out of the too great plenty of bulls-flesh, that
was sold to the people, hereupon they ordained games in honor of the
Infernalls, calling them Tauri. Thus far Festus. Besides, the Secular plays
were kept unto Apollo on the day, and Diana on the night, but the Tauri were
kept to the Infernal powers. (c) Surely brasse] Some put Aerei, ayry, for
arei, brazen, and more fitting to Augustines opinion: for the Platonists say
the devils are ayrie creatures, whose doctrine Augustine does often approve in
some things, as we will show hereafter. In blushing the blood adornes the face
with red-nesse. (d) Ouer-flowing] Oros. L. 4. (e) Fire] Ib. Liu. lib. 19. Ovid.
Fast. 6. Sencca's declamers dispute whether Metellus should be deprived of his
Priesthood or no being blind; the law commanding them to have a perfect man to
their Priest. (f) Harbor and temple] Because there was the fire worshipped as
is immediately declared. (g) Honoured] Their honor was universal great, their
very Magistrates gave the way unto V^stas Priests. (h) Metellus] L. Caecilius
Metellus was High Priest, twice Consul, Dictator, Master of the Horse,
Quindecemvir in the sharing of the lands, and he was the first that led
Elephants in. Triumph in the first African war, of whom Q. Metellus his son
left recorded Mettellus.
in his funeral oration, that he attained the ten things so powrefull and so
admirable that the wisest have spent all their time in their quest. That is, to
be a singular warrior, an excellent orator, a dreadlesse commander, a
fortunate undertaker, a especial aduancer of honor, an absolute man of
wisdom, a worthy commonwealths man, a man of a great estate well gotten, a
father to a fair progeny, and the most illustrious of the whole city. Plin.
lib. 7. cap. 4. (i) Three citties] Ilium, Lauinium, Alba. (k) The fire neuer]
This place is extremely depraved, we have given it the best sense befitting it.

Of the sad accidents that befell in the second African war, wherein the
powers on both sides were wholly consumed. CHAP. 19.
But all too tedious were it to relate the slaughters of both nations in the
second African war, they had so many fightes both far and near, that by
(a) their own confessions who were rather Romes commenders then true
Chroniclers, the conquerours were ever more like to the conquered then
otherwise. For when Hannibal arose out of Spain, and brake over the Pirenean
hills, all France, and the very Alps, gathering huge powers, and doing
horrible mischieues in all this long tract, rushing like an inondation into the
face of Italy, O what bloody fields were there pitched, what battles struck!
how often did the Romans abandon the field, how man's cities fell to the foe,
how many were taken, how many were razed? what victories did that Hanniball
win, and what glories did he build himself upon the ruined Romans. In
vain should I speak of (b) Cannas horrible ouer-throwe, where Hanniballs own
excessive thirst of blood was so fully glutted upon his foes, that he (c)
himself bad hold: (a) whence he sent three bushells of rings unto Carthage,
to show how huge a company had fallen at that fight, that, they were easier to
be measured the^ numbered: and hence might they conjecture, what a massacre
there was of the meaner sort, that had no rings to wear, and that the poorer
they were the more of them perished. Finally, such a defect of souldiars
followed this ouer-throw, that the Romans were feign to get (e) malefactors
to go to war for quittance of their guilt; (f) to set all their slaves free,
and out of this graceless crew, not to supply their defective regiments, but
even to (g) make up a whole army. Nay these slaves, (O (h) let us not wrong
them, they are free men now) wanted even weapons to fight for Rome withal:
that they were feign to fetch them out of the temples, as if they should say to
their gods, come, pray let these weapons go, you have kept them long enough to
no end: we will see whether our bondslaues can do more good for us with them,
then your gods could yet do: And then the treasury failing, the private estate
of each man became public, so that each one giving what he was able, their
rings, nay their very Bosses, (the wretched marks of their dignities) being al
bestowed, the senate themselves (much more the other companies and (i) Tribes)
left not themselves any money in the world: who could have endured the rages of
those men, if they had bin driven to this poverty in these our times? seeing we
can very hardly endure them as y^ world goes now, although they have store now
to bestow upon stage-plaiers, which as then, they were full feign of, for their
uttermost means of safety, to spend upon the soldiars?

L. VIVES.
BY (a) their owne] Liu. Proaem. 3. Decad. The victors were the nearer unto
ruin, continually. Sil. Ital. 1. This Poet, and Liuy, the first in verse, and
later in prose, have recorded these wars at large. Besides others, read
them. (b) Cannas] There Haniball gave the Romans a^ore ouer-throw in the
third year of the war. L. Aem. Paulus, and L. Terent. Varro, The mas^cre of
C^.
Consulls. Liu. lib. 12. Cannas is not the town Canusium, but a town in
Apulia, nere the river Aufidus now Cannella. Sabbellic. Annot. (c) Himself
badde hold] Perhaps Augustine means of the words that Hanniball said to
Maharball, that willed him to march straight unto Rome: no says he, Let our
foes lead the way, all is well, we will follow them at leisure. For I read
not that Hanniball ever spared the Romans, either in the fight or after it.
Unless it be their that Liuie says, that after the fight at Cannas, Hannibal
called the Romans to him (which he never did before) and gently told them,
that it was not for blood, but for Empire and dignity that he warred with them,
allowing them leave to redeem the prisoners, rating an horse-mans ransom at
five hundred pieces, a footmans at three hundred, a servants at a hundred. (d)
Three bushels] some add half a bushel, some diminish two bushels, which
Liuie says is most likely. The Ring was the Gentleman's The Ring.
mark or cognizance, distinguishing them from the common sort: the Senate also
and the Nobility wore them. But they were generally used about this time.
(Plin. lib. 33.) Else (says he) they could not have sent three bushels of them
to Carthage. A bushel what it is Budaeus declares, in his book De Ass,
amongst other measures the discourse is long, look it there. (e) Malefactors]
Iunius Bubulcus his device, in imitation of Romulus, that made his city
populus by allowing sanctuary to male factors. Oros. lib. 4. Iunius (says
Liuie) allighted from his horse and proclaimed, that all such as were capital
offenders, or desperate oebters, should go with him to war, upon condition to
be freed of all their affections. (f) To set all the slaues] eight thousand of
slaves were freed, imbanded, and called Volones: because being asked if they
The volons
would fight, each one said Volo, I will. Liuie. (g) Make a whole] For there
were eight thousand of these, and six thousand of them Malefactors, whom they
armed with French spoils of C Flaminius his triumph. (h) Nay let us not]
Though they were not free until they had ouerthrown Hanno at Beneuentum, and
were therefore freed by the General Gracchus, under whom they fought most
stoutly. (i) And tribes] Whether this word be added by some other or no, I I^s.
know not. Truly the Senate themselves were of the tribes, which were three in
the whole, as Romulus appointed them at first, but in time increased to thirty
five. The Senators, Gentlemen and Plebeyans were parts of each of these: nor
was there any Roman citizen but he was of some tribe. Is there any of you
(says Cicero Antonian. 6. ad Pop. Rom.) that has no tribe? none. They have
made him Patron of thirty five tribes. Wherefore what should this mean? The
Senate was as well divided from the tribes, as it was from the Gentlemen and
Plebeyans; or it may be spoken as this is: The Senate and people of Rome, or,
the Senate People and commonty of Rome: both, or all three, being all included
one in another: This hold (...) the most likely.

Of the ruin of the Saguntines, who perished for their confederacy with Rome;
the Roman gods never helping them. CHAP. 20.
But in all the disasters of the second Affrican war, there was none more
lamentable then the dissolution of the (a) Saguntines: these inhabiting in a
city in Spain being sworn friends to the Romans, were destroyed for
keeping their faith to them. For Haniball breaking the league with Rome, gave
here the first occasion of war, inguirting the city of Saguntum with a
cruel and straight siege: Whereof the Romans having intelligence, sent an
Embassage to wish Haniball to raize his siege: but the Legates being despised by
him, went to Carthage, whence (having done nothing) they returned without any
redress for the breach of the league, and in the mean time, this city
(whilom so stately) was now brought to that misery, that about eight or nine
months after the beginning of the siege, the Affricans took it and raized it
to the very ground. To read how it perished were a horror; much more to write
it: yet I will run over it briefly, seeing it is very pertinent to the argument
we prosecute: first it was eaten down with famine: for some say it was driven
to feed upon the carcasses which it harbored. And then being in this
laborinth of languors, yet rather then it would take in Haniball as a
conqueror, the citizens made a huge fire in the Marketplace, and therein
intombed all their parents, wives, children and friends (after they had slain
them first) and lastly themselves (b) Here now these gluttenous, treacherous,
wastefull, cousening, dancing gods should have done somew-hat: here they
should have done somewhat to help these distressed faithful friends of the
Romans, and to save them from perishing, for their loyalties sake. They were
called as witnesses between both, when the league was made between Rome and
these poor men; who keeping that faith which they had willingly passed,
sollemnely sworn, and sacredly observed, under their protections, were
besieged, afflicted, and subverted by one that had broken all faith, all
religion. (c) If the gods with thunder and lightning could fright Hanniball
from Romes walls, and make him keep aloof from them, they should first have
practiced this here: For I dare auerre, that with far more honesty might they
have helped the Romans friends, being in extremes, for keeping their faith
to them, and having then no means nor power, then they did the Romans
themselves, that fought for themselves, and had very good forces, and purses
able to repel Hannibals powers. If they had been careful guardians of
Romes glory, they would never have left it stained with the sufferance of this
sad calamity of the Saguntines. But now how sottish is their belief that
think these gods kept Rome from perishing by the hand of victorious
Hanniball and the Carthaginians, that could not save Saguntum from perishing
for keeping her faith sworn so sollemnly to the Romans? If Saguntum had
been Christian and had suffered such an extremity for the Gospel, (though it
ought not as then to have wrackt it self by fire nor sword) yet had it endured
such for the Gospel, it would have borne it stoutly, by reason of that hope
which it would have held in Christ to have been after all crowned by him with
an eternal guerdon. But as for these false gods, that desire to be and are
worshipped only for the assurance of this transitory term of our
mortallitie, what can their Atturneies, their Orators, say for them in this
ruin of the Saguntines, more then they said in that of Regulus? only he was
one man, this a whole city, but perseverance in faith was cause of both
calamities. For this faith would he return to his foes, and for this would not
they turn to their foes. Does loyalty then grieve the gods? Or may
ungrateful cities (as well as men) be destroyed, and yet stand in their gods
liking still? Let them choose whether they like: If the gods be angry at
men's keeping of their faith, let them seek faithless wretches to serve
them. But if they that serve them and have their favors, be neuer-the-lesse
afflicted and spoiled; then to what end are they adored? Wherefore let them
hold their tongues that think they lost their City because they lost their
gods: for though they had them all, they might neuer-the-les not only complain
of misery, but feel it at full, as Regulus and the Saguntines did.

L. VIVES.
THe dissolution (a) of the Saguntines] (Liu. lib 21.) Saguntum is a city of
that part of Spain Saguntus.
which is called Arragon. a mile from our sea, built and inhabited by the
Zacynthi and the Ardeates (says Silius) people that came into Spain before
the destruction of Troy. It was made famous by the fall, and true faith kept to
the Romans. The ruins at this day do show the models of diverse ancient, and
most magnifical houses and diverse inscriptions and monuments are to be seen
there as yet. It is called now in Spanish Moruedre; the old wall, belonging to
the County and jurisdiction of Valencia. There is a piece of the Tower yet
standing upon the mountain that diuides almost all Spain. Polib. (lib. 3.)
says that it excelled all the cities in Spain, both for plenty, populousnes,
and arts military. Hanibal hated it, for sticking so to ye Romans: for it had
done much hurt to the Carthaginian consederats in Spain: so he made war upon
it, both to revenge the wrongs it had done others, and also to turn the whole
aim of the war upon the Romans, which he had desired most fervently ever
since he was 9. years old. (b) Here now] some copies want Dii, gods, but
they are imperfect. Glutton is used by Tully in an honest sense, calling Cato a
Glutton of Books. (De fin. lib 3.) (c) If the goddes] Liuie, lib. 26.
Hanniball standing before the walls of Rome, being now to throw wars dice at
the city it self, a great tempest arose, and parted the armies, who were no
sooner retired, the one to their tents, and the other into the City, but
immediately it grew admirably fair and clear: And this happened the second day
also, both armies being in the field, and staying but for the signal to join
battles. Which Hanniball observing, grew superstitious, doubting the gods
displeasure with him for staying there, and so commanded the camp to remove
from thence.

Of Romes ingratitude to Scipio, that freed it from imminent danger, and of the
conditions of the Citizens in those times that Saluste commends to have
been so virtuous. CHAP. 21.
FVrthermore, in the space between the first and second Carthaginian war
when as Saluste says the Romans lived in all concord and content (the
remembrance of my theme makes me omit much): In those times of concord and
content, Scipio, (a) that protector and raiser of his country, the rare,
admirable ender of that so extreme, so dangerous and so fatal a war as that
of Carthage was, the conqueror of Hanniball, the tamer of Carthage, whose very
youth is graced with all praises of (b) religiousnesse, and divine
conversation: this man so great and so gracious, was forced to give place to
the (e) accusations of his enemies, to leave his country, which but for him had
been left to destruction, and after his high heroical triumph, to bequeath
the remainder of his days to the poor town of (d) Linternum: banishing all
affect of his country so far from him, that it is said that he (e) gave
express charge at his death, that his body should not in any case be buried
in that so ungrateful soil of Rome. (f) Afterward, in the triumph of Cn.
Manlius (vice-Consull) over the Gallogrecians, the (g) luxury of Asia entered,
the worst foe Rome ever felt. Gilded beds, and precious couerings got then
their first ingresse. Then began they to have wenches to sing at their
banquets, and many other licentious disorders. But I am to speak of the
calamities that they suffered so unwillingly, not of the offenses that they
committed so lauishly. And therefore what I spo^e of Scipio, that left his
country for his enemies (having first preserved it from utter ruin) and died a
willing exile, that was to our purpose, to show that the Roman gods, from
whose temples he d^aue Hanniball, did never require him with any the least
touch of temporal felicity, for which only they are adored. But because
Saluste says that Rome was so well mannered in those days, I thought good to
touch at this Asian luxury, that you might understand that Saluste spoake in
comparison of the aftertimes, wherein discord was at the highest flood, and
good manners at their lowest ebb. For then, (that is between the second and
last African war, the (h) Voconian law was promulgate, that none should make
a woman his heir, no were she his (i) only daughter; then which decree, I
can see nothing more barbarous and unjust. But indeed the mischieues that the
city suffered were not so many nor so violent in the space betwixt the two
Punicke wars, as they were at other times: for though they felt the smarte of
war abroad, yet they enjoyed the sweet of victory; and at home they agreed
better then they did in the times of security.

But in the last African war, by the only valor of that Scipio, that
therefore was surnamed African, that City, that compared and contended with
Rome, was utterly razed to duste and ruined; And then brake in such an
inundation of depraved conditions drawn into the state by security and
prosperity, that Carthage might justly be said to have been a more dangerous
enemy to Rome in her dissolution, then she was in her opposition. And this
continued until Augustus his time, who (me thinks) did not abridge the
Romans of their liberty, as of a thing which they loved and prised, but as
though they had utterly despised it, and left it for the taking: Then reduced
be all things unto an imperial command, renewing and repairing the
commonweal, that was become all moth-eaten and rusty with age, vice and
negligence. I omit the diverse and diversely arising contentions and battles
of all this whole time: that league of (k) Numance, stained with so foul an
ignominy, where the (l) chickens flew out of their cages, as presaging some
great ill luck (they say) unto Mancinus then Consul: so tha^ it seemed (m)
that little city that had plagued the Roman army that besieged it so many
years, did now begin to be a (n) terror to the Romans whole estate, and
boded misfortune unto those her powers that came against it.

L. VIVES.
SCipio (a) that protector] P. Cornelius Scipio African, who passing over into
Afric, fetched Hanniball out of Italy, sixteen years after his first
entry, ouer-threw him in ^frick, Scipio. African.
chased him thence, and gave end to this most dangerous war. (b)
Religiousnesse] Liu. lib. ^6. Besides from the time that he took on his gown
of man-slate, he would never meddle in any matter public or private, before
he had been in the temple, in the Capitol, and had meditated there awhile
alone. This he used all his life time. (c) Accusations] Liu. lib. 38. Plut. in
his life. (d) Linternum] It is in Campania, called now Torre della Patria. (e)
Gave charge] Liuie recites diverse opinions of the place of his death. For it
is uncertain whether he died at Rome, or no. (f) Afterwards] Liu. lib. 39. The
Gallo-grecians were a people of the lesser The Gallogrecians.
Asia, called in Greek Galatae, of the Galls that went thither under Brenne,
and inhabited there. (g) Luxury of As^] the lesser: whereof hereafter. (h)
Voconian] preferred by Q. Voconius Saxa, tribune. Approved by Cato the elder,
a little before Perseus war. Liu. lib. 41. The law Uoconian.
where Voluminous is read for Uoconius. (i) Only daughter] Though he had no
other children but her. (k) League of Numance] Hostilius Mancinus Consul with
an army of 30000. was ouer-throwne by the Numantines, being but 4000. and
forced to make a shameful peace with them. (l) Chickins flew] The Romans in
their wars used to carry chickens about with them in Cages, and he that kept
them was called Pullarius, the chickin-keeper. If they fead greedily it was a
good sign, if so greedily that part of their victuales fell to the earth, it
was the best of all. For that was called Tripudium Solistimum, and once it was
called Terripanium, Tripudium Solistimum.
a pauiendo, of striking the earth in the fall of it. And Solistimum of Solum,
the ground. For thus it was written in the Augurs books, that if any of the
Chickens meat fell from them, it was Tripudium. But an vnluckly sign it was,
if they fed not, as happened to P. Claudius, Caecus his son. But a worse if
they flew out of their cages. The Soothsayers (as Festus says) observed the
signs of five several things: the heavens, birds, these Tripudia, beasts, and
curses. (m) Little city,] Without walls or Fortes, keeping but an army of
4000. men. The war began, because they received the Sedigenses (people that
the Romans hated, and had ouer-throwne) into their city and houses. (n)
Terror] Cicero calls Carthage and Numance, the two terrors of the Roman
Empire. Pro Muraena.

Of the Edict of Mithridates, commanding every Roman that was to be found in
Asia, to be put to death. CHAP. 22.
But as I said, these shall pass: marry not that of Mithridates, (a) King of
Asia who gave direct command, that what ever Roman was to be found
traffiquing or traveling any where in all Asia, upon one certain day he should
be immediately slain: and it was effected. How dolorous a sight was this, to
see men slain in such numbers, wheresoever they were taken, in field, way,
town, house, street, court, temple, bed or table, or wheresoever, so suddenly
and so wickedly? what sorrows would possess the standers by, and perhaps the
very doers of the deeds themselves, to hear the sad groans of the dying men?
unto what extremity were the hosts of lodgings brought now, when they must not
only behold those murders committed in their houses, but even help to
perform them themselves. To turn so suddenly from gentle humanity unto
barbarous cruelty? to do the act of an enemy in peace, and that on his friend,
enterchanging indeed wounds with the murdered, the murdered being stricken in
the body, and the murderer in the mind? and did al these that were thus
slain, neglect Auguries? Had they no gods public nor private to ask counsel
of ere they betook them unto this travel from whence they were never to
return? If this be true, then have they of our times no cause to complain of
us, for the neglect of those things, the Romans of old contemned them as
vanities. But if they did not, but used to ask counsel of them, then tell me
(I pray) to what end was it when other men's powers fell so heavy upon these
wretches without all prohibition, or means to avoid them?

L. VIVES.
MIthridates (a) King.] The first Mithridates was of the blood of the seven
Persians that Diverse Mithridates
took the kingdom from the Magi. Antigonus King of Syria was his foe and
chaced him into Cappadocia, where he was afterward King: and so left his
crown to his son, he to his, and so down to the sixth of his descent, the
sixth was the Mithridates that warred with the Romans, a man of a strong body,
and of as stout a spirit, he guyded six horses in his chariot, he spoke two
and twenty several languages, and was surnamed the great. First he was friend
to Rome, for he sent Crassus aid against Aristonicus, but by reason of the
war he had with Nicomedes King of Bythynia, he fell from affecting the
Romans; invaded the Roman Provinces in Phrigia, expelled the legate
Aquilius, and soon after imprisoned both him and Q. Oppius, viceconsuls
together: and sent his letters forth through out all Asia, that upon one set
day, what ever Roman were resident, in all his dominions, should be forthwith
slain without all respect of dignity, age, sex or place that he should fly
into. And it was done as he commanded.

Of the more private and interior mischieues, that Rome endured, which were
presaged by that prodigious madness of all the creatures that served the use
of man. CHAP. 23.
But now let us do what we can to recite those evils which the more domestique
they were to Rome, the more miserable they made it: I mean the civil or
rather uncivil discordes, being now no more seditions but plain wars, and
those in the very bowels of the City, wherein so much blood was spilt: where
the Senators powers were now no more bent to altercations (a) and wranglings,
but directly to arms and weapons. O what rivers of Romans blood flowed from
the Sociall, Servile, and Civil wars? how sore a wast fell upon the breast of
all Italy from hence? For before that (b) Latium, (being associate and
confederate with the rest) arose against Rome (c) all the creatures that were
useful unto Man, dogs, horses, asses, oxen, and all others besides, that
served humane occasions, Prodigies in the catle.
growing suddenly stark mad, and losing all their meekness, run wild out of
the towns into the deserts, fields and forests, flying the company not only
of all others, but even of their own masters, and endangering any man that
offered to come near them. What (d) a prodigious sign was hear? but if this,
being so great a mischief of it self, were but the presage of another, what a
mischief must that be then, that was vshered in by such a mischievous presage.
If this had befallen in our times, we should be sure to have had these
faithless miscreants a great deal madder then the others dogs were.

L. VIVES.
ALtercations (a) and [For before, they did but wrangle, revile, and rail,
their fights were only in words, no weapons. (b) Latium being associate] when
as the Senate had set up M. Liuius drusus tribune against the power of the
Gentlemen, who had as then the judging of all causes, through Gracchus his law,
Drusus to strengthen the senates part the more, drew all the several nations
of Italy to take part with him, upon hope of the possessing the city, which
hope the Italians catching hold upon, and being frustrate of it by Drusus his
sudden death, first the Picenians took arms, and after them the Vestines,
Marsians, Latins, Pelignians, Marucians Lucanes, and Samnits Sext. Iul.
Caesar, and L. Marcius Philippus being consulls: in the year of the city,
DCLXII. They fought often with diverse fortunes. At last, by several generals,
The confederats ^rre.
the people of Italy were all subdued. The history is written by Liuy, Florus,
Plutarch, Orosius, Velleius, Appian (b) asociats] the Latins begun the stir
resolving to kill the consulls, Caesar and Philip upon the Latin feast days,
(c) all the creatures] Orosi. lib. 5. The herds about this time fell into such
a madness that the hostility following was here-vpon coniectured, and many
with tears foretold the ensuing calamities. (d) a prodigious sign* Here the
text is diversely written in copies, but all to one purpose.

Of the civil discord that arose from the seditions of the Gracchi. CHAP. 24.
THe sedition (a) of the Gracchi about the law Agrarian, gave the first vent
unto all the civil wars; for the lands that the nobility wrongfully
possessed, they would needs have shared amongst the people, but it was a
dangerous thing for them to undertake the righting of a wrong of such
continuance, and in the end, it proved indeed their destruction: what a
slaughter was there, when Tiberius Gracchus was slain? and when his brother
followed him within a while after? the noble and the base were butchered
together in tumults and vproars of the people, not in formal justice nor by
order of law but al in huggermugger. After the latter Gracchus his slaughter,
followed that of L. Opimius consul, who taking arms in the City against this
Gracchus and killing him and all his fellows, had made a huge slaughter of
Citizens, by this means having caused three thousand to be executed, that he
had condemned by law. By which one may guess, what a massacre there was of all
in that tumultuous conflict, since that 3. thousand were marked out by the law,
as orderly condemned, and justly slain. He that (b) killed Gracchus, had the
weight of his head in gould, for that was his bargain before And in this fray
was (c) M. Fuluius slain, and all his children.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Gracchi] we have spoken of them before, Tiberius was the elder and
Caius the younger, Tiberius was slain nine year before Caius: read of them in
Plutarch, Appian. Ualerius, Cicero, Orosius, Saluste, Pliny and others (b)
killed Gracchus] C. Gracchus seeing his band expelled by the Consul and the
Senate, he fled into the wood of Furnia, Opimius proclaiming the weight of his
head in gold, for a reward for him that brought it. So Septimuleius Anagninus
a familiar friend of Gracchus his, came into the wood quietly, and having
talked a Septimuleius Anagninus.
while friendly with him, on a sudden stabbeth him to the heart, cuts off his
head, and to make it weigh heavier, takes out the brains and filles the place
with lead. Opimius was Consul with Q. Fabius Maximus, nephew to Paulus, and
kinsman to Gracchus. (c) M. Fuluius] one that had been Consul with Marcus
Tlautius but five years before.

Of the temple of Concord, built by the Senate in the place where these
seditions and slaughters were effected. CHAP. 25.
A Fine decree surely was it of the Senate, to give charge for the building of
Concords (a) temple, just (b) in the place where those outrages were acted:
that the monument of Gracchus his punishment might be still in the eye of the
(c) pleaders, and stand fresh in their memory. But what was this but a direct
scoffing of their gods? They built a goddess a temple, who had she been
amongst them, would never have suffered such gross breaches of her laws as
these were; unless Concord being guilty of this crime, by leaving the hearts
of the citizens, deserved therefore to be imprisoned in this temple. Otherwise,
to keep formality with their deeds, they should have built Discord a Temple
in that place. Is there any reason that Concord should be a goddess and not
Discord? or that (according to Labeo his division) she should not be a good
goddess and Discord an evil one? He spoake upon grounds, because he saw
that Fever had a Temple built her, as well as Health. By the same reason should
Discord have Discord a goddess.
had one as well as Concord. Wherefore the Romans were not wise, to live in
the displeasure of so shrewd a goddess: they have forgotten that (d) she was
the destruction of Troy, by setting the three goddesses together by the ears
for the golden Apple because she was not bidden to their feast: Whereupon the
goddesses fell a scolding; Venus she got the Apple, Paris, Hellen and Troy
utter destruction. Wherefore if it were through her anger because she had no
Temple there with the rest, that she set the Romans at such variance, how
much more angrye would she be to see her chiefest enemy have a Temple built
in that place, where she had shown such absolute power? Now their greatest
Scholars do stomach us, for deriding these vanities, and yet worshipping
those promiscuall gods, they cannot for their lives clear themselves of this
question of Concord and Discord, whether they let them alone vnworshipped, and
prefer Febris and Bellona before them (to whom their most ancient Temples
were dedicated) or that they do worship them both as well as the rest.
How-so-euer, they are in the briars, seeing that Concord got her gone, and
left Discord to play hauock amongst them by her self.

L. VIVES.
COncords (a) Temple] There were many Temples of Concord in Rome: the most
ancient, Concords Temple.
built by Camillus, for the acquittance of the Galls from Rome. I know not
whether it was that which Flauius dedicated in Vulcans court, which the Nobles
did so envy him for, P. Sulpitius and P. Sempronius being Consulls. I think
it is not that. Another was vowed by L. Manlius Praetor, for the ending of the
Soldiers sedition in France. It was letten forth to be built by the Duum-viri
Gn. Puppius Caeso, and Quintius Flaminius were for this end made Duum-virs. It
was dedicated in the tower by M. and Gn. Attilii. Liu. lib. 22. and 23. A third
was in the Roman court near to the Greek monuments, built by Opimius
Consul, having dissolved Gracchi his faction, and there also is the Opimian
Palace. Varro. de Ling. Lat. lib. 3. The building of this temple vexed the
Romans extremely: and at the building, there was written in it, Opus
vecordiae: the work of sloth. A fourth was built by Liuia Augusta, unless it
were but Camillus his old one which she repared. Ovid. fast. 1. Concords
feasts were in Februaries Calends the xviii. (b) In the place] Appian says in
the pleading place, and so does Varro and Victor de region. vrb. puts it in the
eight Region, that is, in the Roman court, the fight ending in Auentinus
though it began in the Capitol. (c) Pleaders] Tribunes, and such as spoke to
the people in Couenticles: that they should speak nothing but well of the
Senate, taking example by Gracchus, whose memory that monument still
remembered. (d) She was] Discord alone being not bidden to the marriage of
Peleus and Thetis being angry hereat, sent a golden ball into the feasters,
with this inscription, (...), let the The cause of Troyes destruction
fairest have it. Hereupon grew a strife between Pallas, Juno, and Venus. So
they came to Paris to have judgment, whence arose all that deluge of
destruction that ouer-whelmed Troy.

Of the diverse wars that followed after the building of Concords temple.
CHAP. 26.
NOw they all thought that this new temple of Concord, and testimony of
Gracchus, would be an excellent restraint unto all seditious spirits. But how
far they shot wide, let the subsequent times give aim. For from that time
forth, the Pleaders never went about to avoid the examples of the Gracchi, but
labored to exceed them in their pretenses. L. (a) Saturninus Tribune, (b) C.
Caesar, Seruillius Praetor, and (c) not long after that, (d) M. Drusus, all
these began more bloody seditions, whence there arose not only civil
slaughters, but at last they brake openly out into the Confederates war,
which brought all Italy unto most miserable and desperate extremities. Then
followed the (e) Slaves war, and other civil wars, wherein it is strange
to record what fields were pitched, what bloodshed and what murder stuck
upon the face of all Italy, as far as the Romans had any power or signorie.
And how small a company, less then seventy Fencers, began this Slaves war,
which mounted to that terror and danger. What multitudes of Generals did this
rascal crew ouer-throw? what numbers of Roman cities and Provinces they
destroyed, it is more then work enough for a professed Historian to declare?
For the war held out not only in Italy, but these slaves ouer-ranne all
Macedonia, Sicily, and the sea coasts. And then what out-ragious robberies at
first, and what terrible wars afterward were managed by the (f) Pirates,
what pen is them sufficient to recapitulate?

L. VIVES.
L. (a) Saturninus,] This man being Tribune, and troubling the state with the
Agrarian law, was killed by C. Marius, and L. Ualer. Flaccus, Consuls, to whom
the Senate had committed the protection of the state: yet did Saturninus
prefer this law to do Marius a pleasure. (b) C. Caesar.] This name is not in
the old copyes, but only C. Seruilius Glaucia, Praetor, of Saturninus his
faction: Of the Seditious, Lucius Apuleius Saturninus came nearest the Gracchi
in eloquence, for he attracted all men's affections by his gesture and apparel,
more then by his tongue or discourse. But C. Sext^lius Glaucia was the most
wicked villain that ever was, and yet most subtle and quick witted, but yet
he was very ridiculous. He had been Consul for all his filthiness of means
and manners, if it had been held fit he should have stood for it: For he had
the people sure for him, and had won the Gentlemen by pleasuring them. But
being Praetor he was publicly slain on the same day with Saturnine, Marius
and Flaccus being Consuls. All this is out of Tullies Orator

But if some will have it Caesar, they are not much amiss; excepting for the
times: mary he that was L. Caesar's brother, moved the Romans against
Sulpitius the Tribune, which contention gave beginning to the war of Marius,
as Pedianus has recorded. This Caesar says Tully, being Aedile, made every
day an Oration. In Bruto. (c) Not long after* Seven years passed just
between the Tribuneships of Saturnine and Drusus: and from the Consulships of
Marius and Flaccus, to Flaccus and Herennius. (d) M Drusus] he was of good
birth but the proudest man in Rome: quick to speak: and being called to the
Senate, he sent the Senate word to come to him: and so they did. The Senate
called his father their Patron (e) Slaves war.] It began in Cicilie before
the Confederates war, by one Eunus a Syrrian that fained himself to be
inspired with the Cibels spirit. He got together sixty thousand The slaves
war.
men: overthrew four Praetors and took their tents. At length Perpenna
besieged and conquered them. A little after Cleon a Cicilian, began such
another war in the same Island, getting huge powers, overthrowing the Praetors
as before, and spoiling the Tents. This war M. Aequilius ended. In Italy
Spartacus and Chrysus began it, who broke out of the school of Lentulus, when
he was at Capua, and got forth to the number of seauenty-foure, to whom a
great many slaves adioined themselves soon after. P. Varenus Praetor, and
Claudius Pulcher Legate, that met them first in arms, they overcame. Afterward
Chrysus and his bands were defeated by Q. Uarius Praetor. Spartacus continued
the war with great good fortune, against Lentullus the Consul first, and
then against L. Gellius and Q. Arius Praetor, and afterward with Cassius
Vice-Consull, and Cn. Manlius Praetor. Lastly M. Crassus being Praetor overcame
him, and put his army to the sword. (f) Pirates.] The Cilician Pirates troubling
the sea P. Seruilius Vice-Consul was sent against them, who took Isaurum and
The pirate war.
diverse of their Cities: but he retyring home, they rose with greater powers,
and boote-hal'd all the Coast unto Caieta, Missenum and Ostia, to the great
terror and reproach of the Roman name. At length Cn. Pompey being made
Admiral by the Gabinian Law, quitte the sea of them in forty days. (Liu.
lib. 99.) Cicero pro leg. Manil. L. Florus, and others.

Of the civil wars between Sylla and Marius CHAP. 27.
When Marius being now imbrued with his countrymens blood, and having slain
many of his adversaries, was at length foiled and forced to fly the city,
that now got time to take a little breath; presently (to use (a) Tullies
words) upon the sudden Cinna and Marius began to be conquerours again. And
then out went the heart bloods of the most worthy men, and the lights of all
the city. But soon after came (b) Sylla, and revenged this barbarous
massacre; but with what damage to the state and city, it is not my purpose to
utter; For that this revenge was worse, then if all the offenses that were
punished, had been left unpunished. Let Lucan testify: (c) in these words.
Excessit medicina modum, nimiumque secuta est
Qua morbi duxere manus: periere nocentes
Sed cum iam soli possent superesse nocentes
Tunc data libertas odijs resolutaque legum
Frenis ira ruit --
The medicine wrought too sore, making the cure
Too cruel for the patient to endure:
The guilty fell: but none yet such remaining,
Hate rises at full height, and wrath disdaining
Laws reins brake out --
For in that war of Sylla and Marius, (besides those that fell in the field,)
the whole city, streets, Marketplaces, Theaters, and Temples were filled
with dead bodies: that it was a question whether the conquerors slaughtered so
many to attain the conquest, or because they had already attained it. In
Marius his first victory, at his return from exile, besides infinite other
slaughters, Octauius his head (the Consuls) was polled up in the
pleading-place: Caesar and (d) Fimbra were slain in their houses, the two (e)
Crassi, father and son, killed in one another sight, (f) Bebius and Numitorius
trailed about upon hooks till death: (g) Catulus poisoned himself to escape
his enemies, and (h) Menula the Iouial Flamine cut his own veins and so
bled himself out of their danger, Marius having given order for the killing
of all them whom he did not (i) re-salute, or profer his hand unto.

L. VIVES.
TO use (a) Tullies words] For the following words are Tullyes in his 3.
Inuectiue against Cateline: Where men were slain by Cinna and Marius (says
he) we have already rehearsed in our third Oration for Sylla: namely the two
brethren C. and L. Iulij, Caesar's, Attillius Soranus, P. Lentulus, L. Crassus,
M. Anthony the Orator, Gn. Octauius, L. Cornelius, Merula the Dial Flamine:
Consuls, L. Catulus, Q. Arcarius, M. Bebius, Numitorius, Sext. Licinius. (b)
^ylla, and reuenged] Tullyes words also ibid. (c) In these wordes] Lib. 2.
Nobles slain. by Cynna and Marius.
Sylla quoque immensis acce^sit cladibus vltor,
Ille quod exiguum restabat sanguinis vrbi
Hausit: damque minis iam putrida membra recidit,
Excessit medicina modum --
Then Sylla came to avenge the worthi's slain
And that small Roman blood that did remain
He drew: but clean sing still the parts impure
The medicine wrought to sure --


(d) Fimbria] There was one C. Fimbria, whom Velleius calls Flauius, he was a
Marian, and the razer of Ilium. There was an other C. Fimbria, sur-named
Licinius, who lived with the C. Fimbria Licinius.
Gracchi, and entering inro the civil wars, was slain in his own house, as
Caesar was: of this Fimbria speaks Tully de clar. orator. And he it was (I
think) that would not give his judgment in the contention about a good man.
(Cic. offic. lib 3. Valor. lib. 7.) e) Crassi.] The son fell by the hands of the
soldiors of Fimbria, Cinna's Lieutenant: the father stabbed himself. (f)
Bebius] He was torn in pieces by the executioners like a beast, without any
use of iron upon him. (Lucan. lib. 2.) Bebius.
-- Vix te sparsum per viscera Bebi
Innumeras inter carpentis membra coronae,
Discerpsisse manus --
-- Nor thee poor Bebius, torn,
And scattered through a thousand bloody hands,
Renting them in a ring --


(g) Catulus] L. Luctatius Catulus was joint Consul with Marius in his 4.
Consulship in the Cimbrian war, and tryumphed with him over them: The whole
Senate entreating Mar^ Catulus.
for him, he answered he must die, which Catulus hearing of, stifeled himself
with coals: whether swallowing them as Portia did, or enclosing the smoke
close in his chamber, having newly limed it so he died, it is not certain:
(for this later is a present way to death, unless remedies be forthwith
gotten) Some think he died of poison, as Augustine says here. (h) Merula] He
cut his veins in Jove's shrine. (i) Re-salute] That was the sign that Marius
gave for life and death.

How Sylla revenged Marius his murders. CHAP. 28.
NOw as for Sylla's victory, ye revenger of all this cruelty, it was not got
with much store of citizens blood, and yet the wars only having ended and n^
the grudges: this victory brake out into a far more cruel wast, in ye midst of
all the peace. For after the butcheries that the elder Marius had made (being
yet b^ fresh and bleeding, there followed worse by the hands of the younger
Marius and Carbo, both of the old faction of Marius. These two perceiving Sylla
to come upon them, being desperate both of safety and victory, filled all with
slaughters, both of themselves and others: For besides the massacre they made
elsewhere in the city, they besieged the Senate in the very Court, and from
thence as from a prison, dragged them out by the heads to execution. (b)
Mutius Seaeuola, the Priest was slain just as he had hold of the altar of
Vesta, the most reverend relic of all the city (c) almost quenching that
fire with his blood, which the Virgins care kept always burning. Then entered
victorious Sylla into the city (d) and in the common street, (wars cruelty
now done, and peaces beginning) put seven thousand unarmed men to the sword,
not in fight, but by an express command. And after that he put even whom he
list to death, throughout the whole city, in so much that the slaughters grew
so inumerable (e) that one was glad to put Sylla in mind that he must either
let some live, or else he should have none to be Lord over. And then indeed
this ravenous murderer began to be restrained by degrees; and a (f) table was
set up (with great applause) with proscribed but 2000. of the Patriots and
Gentlemen, appointing them all to be presently killed. The number made all men
sad, but the manner cheered them again: nor were they so sad, that so many
should perish, as they rejoiced, that the rest should escape. Nevertheless,
this cruel carelessness of theirs groned at the exquisite torments, that some
of the condemned persons suffered in their deaths. For (g) one of them was torn
in pieces by men's hands without touch of iron, where the executio^ers showed far
more cruelly in rending this living man thus, then they use ordinarily upon a
dead beast. (h) Another having first his eyes plucked out, and then all the
parts of his body cut away joint by joint, was forced to live, or rather to
die, thus long in such intolerable torment. Many also of the noblest cities
and towns were put unto the sack: and as one guilty man is used to be led out
to death, so was one whole City as then laid out and appointed for execution.
These were the fruits of their peace after their wars, wherein they hasted not
to get the conquest, but were swift to abuse it being got. Thus this peace
bandied in blood with that war, and quite exceeded it. for then war killed but
the armed, but this peace never spared the naked. In the war he that was
stricken, if he could might strike again: but in this peace, he that escaped
the war, must not live, but took his death with patience perforce.

L. VIVES. Marius his Son.

THe younger (a) Marius] Son to the elder: joined Consul with Carbo ere he were
25. years old by forced means. He commanded his man Damasippus to kill all
the Patriots in the city, who (being military Praetor) like a good servant did
all that his master bad him, and under show of calling a Senate, killed them
every one. (b) Mutius Scaeuola] (Liu. lib. 87.) But Lucan (lib 2.) seems to
hold that Scaeuola was slain by the elder Marius: mary so do not the
Historiagrahers; but by the younger. (c) Almost quenshing] In imitation of
Lucan. -- Parum sed fessa senectus Scaeuola.

Sanguinis effudit iugulo; flammisque pepercit.
-- Nor did the aged sire
Bleed much: but spared the profaned fire.


(d) In the common streete] Liuie says, eight thousand, and the author of the
book De viris illustribus, says nine thousand. (e) One was] This Eutropius
and Oros. think was Q. Catulus. Others say that C. Metellus trusting to his
kindred with Sylla spoke this in a youthful forwardness: Plutarch and Florus
say it was Fusidius (though Plutarch call him Offidius that is but a falt as a
great many more are in him either through himself, his translators, or the
copiers.) Orosius says Fursidus. This Fusidius, Salust remembers in his
oration of Lepidus the Consul. (f) A table] The table of proscription, showing
the certain number of such as should be slain, that each might know what
should become of him. Such as were proscribed it Tables of proscription.
was lawful to kill, their goods were shared, part to Sylla, part to the
executioner. Their children were deprived of honors and forbidden by Sylla's
law to sue for any. This was the first proscription table, that Rome ever saw.
(g) One] This was Bebius, a Marian, the other was for Sylla: and they died both
one death. For the Syllans returning like cruelty for like upon the Marians,
used their Bebius after the same sort as the other was used by them. Florus
names The Bebii.
them both. (h) Another] M. Marius Gratidianus, Caius his kinsman. This deed
was Catilines, at the Grave of L. Caculus, upon this Marius, a most gracious
and honest man, having been twice tribune, and twice Praetor. Q. Cicero in
Paraenes. ad. M. Fratr. He first cut off his arms and legs, then his ears,
tongue, and nose: then pulled out his eyes, and lastly cut off Marius Gra^idianus
his death.
his head. (i) Put to the sacke] Subhastatae, does Laurinus read it, most
congruently to the history. The fairest holds of Italy (says Florus)
Subhastatae sunt, came to the soldiers spoiling: Spoletum, Interamna,
Praeneste, Fluentia. But Sulmo, an ancient friend of Romes, (Oh unworthy deed)
being vnbesieged, even as wars pledges being condemned to die, are led
forth to execution, so was this City by Sylla, singled out and appointed for a
direct spoil and slaughter. Flor. lib. 3. Liuie lib. 88. Says that Sylla
commanded all the Prenestines, being disarmed to be slain, Sulmo.
Subhastate was a word of use in Augustines time, for Theodosius, and Archadius
Emperors do both use it. C. de rescind. vend.

A comparison of the Goths coruptions, with the calamities that the Romans
endured either by the Galls, or by the authors of their civil wars. CHAP.
29.
What barbarousnesse of other foreign nations, what cruelty of strangers is
comparable to this conquest of one of their Citizens? What foe did Rome ever
feel, more fatal, inhumane and outrageous? Whether in the irruptions first of
the Galls, and since of the Goths, or the inundations that Sylla, Marius, and
other great Romans made with the blood of their own citizens, more horrible,
or more detestable? The Galls indeed killed the Senate, and spoiled all but
the Capitol, that was defended against them. But they notwithstanding sold the
besieged their freedom for gold, where as they might have extorted it from
them by famine, though not by force. But as for the Goths, they spared so many
of the Senate, that it was a marvel that they killed any. But (a) Sylla, when
as Marius was yet alive, sat on the very Capitol, (which the Galls entered not)
to behold from thence, the slaughters which he commanded to be performed. And
Marius, being but fled, to return with more power and fury, he, keeping
still in the Capitol, deprived numbers of their lives and states, coloring all
this villainy by the decrees of the Senate. And when he was gone, what did the
Marian faction respect or spare, when they would not for-beare to kill old
Seaeuola, a citizen, a Senator, the chief Priest, embracing that very alter,
where on they say the fate of Rome it self was adored? And for that (b) last
table of Sylla's, (to omit the inumerable deaths besides) it cut the throats
of more Senators, then the Goths whole army could find in their hearts but to
offer, ransacke, or spoil.

L. VIVES.
But (a) Sylla] In his first victory against Marius, proclaming Sulpitius, the
Marii, and diverse others his foes, enemies to the state by a decree of the
Senate. (b) Last table] Plutarch says, the as then in a little space, were
diverse proscription tables hung up.

Of the great and pernicious multitude of the Romans wars a little before
the coming of Christ, CHAP. 30.
WIth what face then, with what heart, with what impudency, folly, nay madness,
do they impute these later calamities unto our Savior, and yet will not impose
the former upon their Idols? Their civil discords by their own writers
confessions have been ever more extremely bloody then their foreign wars.
The means which did not afflict, but utterly subvert: their state arose long
before Christ, by the combination of these wicked causes arising from the war
of Sylla and Marius, unto that of (a) Sertorius and (b) Cateline, the one of
whom, Sylla proscribed, and the other he nourished: and then downe-wards to
the wars of (c) Lepidus and Catulus, whereof the one would confirm Syllas
ordinances, and the other would disanull them: Then to the war of (d) Pompey
and Caesar: whereof Pompey was a follower of Sylla, and either equalled, or at
least exceeded him in state and power; And (e) Caesar was one that could not
bear the greatness of Pompey because he lackt it himself: which
notwithstanding, after he had overthrown him and made him away, he went
far beyond. From hence they come down to the other Caesar, called (f)
Augustus, in whose reign our Savior Christ was born. This Augustus had much
civil wars, wherein were lost (g) many excellent men, and (h) Tully that
excellent common-wealths-man was one amongst the rest For C. (i) Caesar, the
conqueror of Pompey though he used his victory with mercy, restoring the
states and dignities to al his adversaries: notwirstanding all this, by a
conspiracy of the noblest Senators he was stabbed to death in the court, for
the defense of their liberty, who held him to affect a Monarchy. After this (k)
Antonie (a man neither like him in means, nor manners, but given over to al
sensuality) seemed to affect his power: Whom Tully did stoutly with. stand
in defense of the said liberty. And then (l) stepped up that younger Coesar, the
other Caesar's adopted son, afterward styled (as I said) Augustus: Him did
Tully favor and confirm against Anthony, hoping that he would be the man,
who having demolished Anthonies pretenses and powers, would re-erect the
liberty of his country. But (m) far mistaken was he and mole-eid in this
matter, for his young man whose power he had augmented, first of all suffered
Anthony to cut of Ciceroes head, as if it had been a bargain between them,
and then brought that liberty which the other wrought so for, unto his own
sole command, and under his own particular subjection.

L. VIVES.
OF (a) Sertorius] Q. Sertorius Mirsinius, seeing the faction of Marius (which
he favored) to go down the wind, by the leaders follies, got away with the
forces he led, through Sertorius.
all the ragged and difficult passages into Spain, and there warred valiantly
against the Syllans. At last being put to the worst by Pompey, he was stabbed
at supper by the treason of Perpenna, Antonius, and others his fellows: A
worthy Captain he was, had he had a worthier mean to have showed
himself in. (b) Cateline] He was for Sylla, and cut many throats at his
command. Afterward rebelling and taking arms against his country, he was
overthrown Cateline.
and slain by Cicero and C. Antony Consuls. (c) Lepidus] In his, and Q.
Luctatius Lepidus. Catulus.
Catulus his Consulship Sylla dyed and was buried in Mars his field. At his
burial the two Consuls were at great words about the reformation of the
state, Lepidus desiring to recall Sylla's proscripts, and to restore them their
gods, and Catulus contradicting him together with the Senate: not that it was
not just, but because it would be the original of a new tumult, the most
dangerous of all in that little breathing time of the state. from words they
fell to weapons. G. Pompey and Q. Catulus joined battle with Lepidus,
overthrew him with ease, and despoyling him of his whole strength returned to
Rome without any more stir or other subsequence of war. The victory was
moderately used, and arms presently laid aside. (d) Pompey.] Cn. Pompey the
great, C. Pompey Strabo's son met Sylla Cn. Pompey.
coming out of Asia, with three legions which he had taken up amongst the
Pisenes: hereby furthering Sylla greatly in his victory, who used him as one of
his chief friends, and surest Captains in ending the civil war in
Cicilie, Afrike, Italy and Spain. He tryumphed twice being but agent of
Rome, no Senator. He had great good fortune in subduing the Pirates. He
conquered Mithridates and all the East, getting great and glorious triumph
thereby, and wondrous wealth. He was of mighty power and authority in the State,
all which I have more at large recorded in my Pompeius fugiens. Lastly, warring
against Caesar for the Commonwealth he was foiled, fled away to Ptolomey
the young King of Aegipt, where to do Caesar a pleasure, he was murdered. (e)
Caesar.] This man was son to L. Caesar, whose Aunt Iulia was wife unto
Marius; being Consul, by Pompeys means, Iul. Caesar.
he got the Province of France for five years: and those expired, for five
more, of the Consuls, Pompey and Crassus. In which ten years he conquered
all France: and fretting that Pompey could do more in the state then he,
pretending other causes, he brought his forces against his country. Lucan. Nec
quenquam iam far potest Caesarue priorem
Pompeiusue parem --
Caesar indureth no superior,
Pompey no equal --


Suetonius in Caesar's life writes a Chapter of the causes of these wars. But
Pompey being dead, Caesar got to be perpetual Dictator and then governed
all the state like a King.

Of this civil war wrote he himself, Plutarch, Appian, Florus, Eutropius,
and Cicero who was present, and pertaker in the whole business. (h) Augustus]
C. Octauius, Cneius his son (a Praetorian) and Actia's, the daughter of
Actius Balbus and Iulia, Caesar's sister. C. Octauius.
Caesar made him heir of the nineth part of his estate, and called him by his
name. Sueton. Many of the old soldiers after Caesar's death came unto him for
his Uncles sake, by whose means (as Tully says) he defended the causes of
the Senate against Anthony when he was but a youth: ouer-threw him, chased him
into France unto Lepidus: at whose return, he made a league trium-virate with
them, which was the direct ruin of the Commonwealth. The Trium-viri were
Anthony, Lepidus and he himself. The conditions were, that Anthony should
suffer his Uncle Sext. Iul. Caesar to be proscribed: Lepidus his brother
Lucius, and The Triumviri.
Octauius, Cicero; whom he held as a father. This was Anthonies request,
because Cicero in his Orations had proclaimed him an enemy to the
Commonweal: Of these three, Tully was killed by Anthonies men, the other two
escaped. The Octauians warred with Brutus and Cassius, and at Phillippi by
Anthonies help overthrew them. Then he warred with L. Anthony, the Tryumvirs
brother, and at Perusia made him yield the Town himself: Afterward with
Pompey the greats son, and took the Navy from him: and then with Lepidus
depriving him of the Triumvirship: Lastly with Mark Anthony the Tryumvir whom
he conquered, and so remained sole Emperor of Rome, having ended all the
civil wars, and being saluted Augustus by Ualerius Messala in the name of the
whole Senate and people of Rome.

In the four and fortith year of his reign ab V. C. DCCLI. an happy peace
breathing on the bosom of all the earth both by Sea and Land, mankind being
in absolute quiet from contention, THE PRINCE OF NATVRE, THE CREATOR, THE KING
OF KINGS, AND THE LORD OF LORDS, JESUS CHRIST was borne in Bethelem Christ
borne. Luc. 2.
a city in Judah. (g) Many excellent] The Triumviri proscribed far more of
every sort then Sylla did. Those three Iun^nal calls (bitterly) Sylla's
Shollers, and faith they excelled their men in the art of proscription.

(h) Cicero] He was slain being 63. years of age: After the reckoning of
Liuie and Aufidius Ciceroes death.
Bassus The diverse opinions of his death are to be read in Seneca. (Suasor.
lib. 1.) Augustine calls him an excellent Common-wealths-man, because his
tongue (like a stern) did turn the Ship of the State which way he would:
which he knowing, used this verse to the great vexation of his enemies. Cedant
arma togae, concedat laurea lingua.
That arms should yield to arts it is fit:
Stoop then the wreath, unto the wit.
Pliny the elder meeting him, Hail thou (quoth he) that first deserved a
triumph by the gown, and a garland by thy tongue. (i) C. Caesar] Brutus,
Cassius, and sixty Senators more Caesar's death.
conspired against Caesar, and in Pompeies court killed him with daggers the
Ides of March.

(k) Anthony] He and Dolabella were then Consuls. Anthony having the command of
the armies, affected the Sovereignty of the state exceedingly, which at first
Tully by his Orations M. Antony.
suppressed: but then (as I said) he became Triumvir. The story of his war is
as well recorded in Tullyes Philipques as can be. (l) Kept up.] Tully by his
eloquence armed him and Hircius and Pansa the Consuls against Anthony. (m) Far
mistaken] Brutus had given Tully Brutus.
sufficient warning of Octauius, not to make him too powerful, nor trust him
too much: that his wit was childish, though good, and better fortunes might
make him insolent. And here are yet two most grave Epistles of Brutus upon his
theme, one to Tully and another to Atticus: wherein Brutus his manlynesse and
judgment is clearly apparent. I think not Tully so foolish, though that he
could not foresee this as well as he did many other events not so apparent:
which he showed in his frequent use of these words, Octauius Caesar is to be
commended, adorned, extolled, Velleius and Brutus in an Epistle to Cicero do
both make mention of this.

That those men that are not suffered as now to worship Idols, do show
themselves fools, in imputing their present miseries unto Christ, seeing that
they endured the like when they did worship the Devils. CHAP. 31.
BVut let them blame their own gods for such mischiefs, that will not
thank our Savior Christ for any of his benefits. For when-soeuer they befell
them before their gods altar steamed with Sabaean perfumes, and fresh
flowers, their Priests were gallant, their Temples shined, plays, sacrifices
and furies were all on foot amongst them. Yea even when there was such an
effusion of civil blood, that the altars of the very gods were besprinkled
with it. (b) Tully choose no Temple for refuge, because he saw it auailed not
Scaeuola. But those that are now so ready with their saucy insultations against
Christianity, of late either fled themselves into such places as were
dedicated to Christ, or else were brought thither by the Barbarians.

This I know, and every impartial judge may know as well as I, that if
mankind had received Christianity before the Affrican wars (to omit the
other that I have rehearsed, and that is too long to rehearse) and withal that
such a desolation should have happened, as fell upon Europe and Afric in the
said wars; there is none of those Infidels that oppose us now, but would have
laid only the cause of it all upon the back of Christendom. But much more
intolerable would their railings be, if that either the irruption of the
Galls, or the inundation of Tiber, and that great spoil by fire had
immediately followed, upon the first preaching and receiving of Christian
religion: but worst of all, if the civil wars, that exceeded all, had
followed thereupon. And those evils which fell out so incredibly, so far
beyond all belief, that the world reputed them as prodigies, had they come to
pass in Christian times, who should have borne the blame thereof, but the
Christians? for those things which were rather strange, then pernicious, as the
(c) speaking of the ox, the exclamations of children in their mothers wombes,
the (d) flying of serpen^s, and the (e) alteration of female creatures, both
hens, and women into masculine forms, and such as these I willingly omit,
those things are recorded in their histories, not in their fables, but be they
true or false, they do not bring so much affliction unto man as admiration. But
when (f) it rained earth, and (g) chalk, and (h) stones, (not concrescences,
that might be called hail, but (i) direct stones) this verily might greatly
endomage the earths inhabitants. In the said authors we read, that the fires
of (k) Aetna brake out so far, that the sea boiled therewith, the rocks were
burned, and the pitch dropped of the ships. This was noe light hurt, but a large
wounder. Again, (l) Sicily was so overwhelmed another time with the ashes
thereof, that the houses of (m) Catina were all turned over into the dust:
whereupon the Romans pitying their calamity, released them of (n) that years
tribute. It is recorded also, that the number of the (o) Locusts in Africa was
most wonderful, Locusts in Africa.
and prodigious, it being as then a province of the Romans: and that having
consumed all the fruits and leaves of the trees, they fell al into the sea like
a most huge and unmeasurable cloud. And being dead, and cast upon the shore
again, arose such a pestilence of their stink that thereof died (p) 80000.
men (q) only in Massi^ssa Pestilence.
his kingdom, and (r) many more in other countries thereabouts, and of the (s)
30000. Roman souldiars that remained at Vtica, there were but only ten that
suruiued. So that this foolery of theirs, which we must both endure and answer,
what wrong would it not offer to the profession of the gospel, had it been
preached before the birth of these prodigious accidents? yet it will not call
the meanest of their gods to account, for any of these misfortunes whatsoever,
and yet (t) these fools will worship them still in hope to be protected by
them from these inconveniences, when they see nevertheless, how those that
worshipped the same gods before have been oppressed, and ouer-borne with the
same burdens of calamity, nay with loades of miseries, far more ponderous and
intolerable then ever these latter times produced.

L. VIVES.
SAbaean (a) perfumes] Saba is the mother of Frankencence lying between Syria,
and Arabia. India mitit ebur, molles sua thura Sabaei, says Virgil: Ebon from
Inde, from Iaua, Frankencense, Sabaea.
Seruius says they are so called of (...), to worship: because frankincense is
an expiation, (b) Tully chose.] He died in his farm Formianum, being kept by
tempest from crossing the sea to Prodigies.
Brutus. (c) speaking of] often falling out, once in the second Punicke war,
in the consulships of Fabius Maximus and Marcellus, the fourth of the firsts
consulshippe and the third of the laters, and in the same year, a woman became
a man at Spoletum and an infant in the mothers womb at Marusia, cried out Io
triumph. Liu. lib. 24.) another time, in the war of Anticchus an Ox cried
Rome look to thy self: and in Antonies civil war, the Master whipping his
Ox to work, the beast told him. There would want no corn but there would
want men to eat (...). And often besides. (d) flying.] The Southwest wind
brings many of those flying Serpents out of Lybia into Egypt, to the great
annoyance of the inhabitants. And therefore Tully says, they adore the Ibis,
for driving away these pestilent creatures from them. So says Herodotus P^ying
ser^.
in his Euterpe. (e) Of females] Changing of sexes, women into men and hens
into cocks. There is no fault in the text: [Our interpreter knew not the force
of the conjunction: and thought that Female, Faemina, had belonged only unto
man, and that homo was only lbis whv worshipped in Egypt.
of the masculine gender. See what sort of men the age before us respected and
reverenced: they would take upon them the interpretation of worthy authors, and
yet knew not that ^mo might belong to a woman, nor faemina to a beast. We do
wonder how we have our [] Paris copy does leave out this between these
marks.]
liberal arts so corrupted, but considering that these men have had the
meddling with them, we have more reason to wonder how we have any spark of
them left us at all.] This alteration, Pliny says, is possible: bringing
confirmation of diverse examples, and his own credit, saying he had seen it
verefied himself: But considering the several natures of the sexes, it is
hard for a male, to become a female: but not so hard for the other change. For
the masculine member to be drawn in, and dilated into the feminine
receptacles, is exceeding hard, mary for the female parts to be excrescent,
and coagulate into the masculine form, may be somewhat, but not near so
difficulte as is thought, though it be seldon seen. (f) It rained] Often, say
authors. Liuius Iul. Obsequ. etc. (g) chalke] Consulls Q. Metellus, and Tul.
Didius. Obsequ. (h) Stones] This is not rare. First it did so in Tullus
Hostilius his time, and then it was strange. But after it grew ordinary, to
perticularize in this were idle. (i) Direct stones] Some read, directly earth,
etc. (k) Aetna] Aetna is a hill in Sicily, sacred to Vulcan, cas^ing out fire
in the night by a vent, ten furlongs about; the vent is called the cauld^on.
Solinus says it has two of them. Aetna, Briareus Ciclops his son, or Aetna,
son to Caelus and Terra otherwise called Thalia, gave it the name. Seruius.
Uirgill describes it in a large Poem, which some say is Ouids: but Seneca
says, Ovid durst not deal with it, because Virgil had done it before him.
Others say Cornelius Seuerus did it. The fire does much harm to the bordering
parts of the Island. This that Augustine declares, happened in the
Consulships Aetna.
of Cn. Seruil. Scipio, and C. Laelius: and in M. Aemilius and L. Aurelius
their Consulships, the flames burst forth with an earthquake, and the sea was
heated therewith, as far as the Island Liparae, so that diverse ships were
burnd, and diverse of the saylours stifled with the sulphurous vapor. It killed
an inumerable company of fish which the Liparians feeding upon, got a pestilent
disease in their bellies, which unpeopled almost all the whole Island. Obseq.
This was a little before Gracchus his sedition, and it was such, that many were
driven to fly from their dwellings into other places. Oros. (l) Sicily] Oros.
lib. 5. and 12. (m) Catina] Or Catana, it is called by both names, though their
be one Catina in Spain, and another in Arcadia. This that Augustine relates
of is recorded by Pliny lib. 3. (n) That yeares] And nine years more, says
Orosius. (o) Locusts] This was in the Consulships of P. Plautius (...) M. Fulu.
Flaccus, before C. Gracchus his sedition. Liu. lib. 9. Oros. Eutrop. Iul.
Obseq. (p) 80000.] So says Orosius, but of Micipsa his Kingdom. Of this
sickness in all, died 800000. men, says Obsequens. 900000. says Eutropius
(who is indeed no good computator) in Numidia, Catina.
about Carthage, 200000. of the Roman souldiars that kept the legion there,
30000. so says Orosius, putting only 80. for 90. (q) Only in Masinyssa's] Or
rather Micipsa's his son. For Masinissa himself was dead. But it might be
called his, because Rome gave it him, for his worthy deserts. (r) Many more]
Our historians write not so; perhaps Augustine followed others, or else like an
Orator, applied the history to his own use and purpose, which Cicero does
allow in his Brutus, and has practiced sometimes himself, as we have
observed in his Orations, and as Pedianus has noted therein also. (s) 30000.]
Being left at Vtica as the Guarison of Afrike. (t) a difference of reading: we
have given it the truest sense.

Finis lib. 3.
THE CONTENTS OF THE fourth book of the City of God.
1. Of the contents of the first book. 2. Of the contents of the second and
third book. 3. Whether happy and wise men should account it as part of their
felicities, to possess an Empire that is enlarged by noe means but war. 4.
Kingdoms without justice, how like they are unto theeuish purchases. 5. Of
those fugitive sword-plaiers whose power grew paralel'd with a royal dignity.
6. Of the couetise of Ninus, who made the first war upon his neighbors,
through the greedy desire he had to increase his kingdom. 7. Whether the Pagan
gods have any power either to further or hinder the progress, increase or
defects of earthly kingdoms. 8. What precious gods those were by whose power
the Romans held their empire to be enlarged and preserved, seeing that they
durst not trust them with the defense of mean and particular matters. 9.
Whether it was Jove, whom the Romans held the chiefest GOD, that was their
protector and enlarger of their empire. 10. What opinions they followed that
set diverse gods to rule in diverse parts of the world. 11. Of the multitude of
gods which the Pagan Doctors avouch to be but one and the same Jupiter. 12. Of
their opinion that held God to be soul and the world the body. 13. Of such as
hold that the reasonable creatures, only are parts of the divine. 14. That the
augmentations of kingdoms are unfitly ascribed to Jove. victory (whom they
call a goddess) being sufficient of herself to give a full dispatch to all
such buisinesses. 15. Whether an honest man ought to entertain any desire to
enlarge his empire. 16. The reason why the Romans in their appointments of
several gods for every thing, and every action, would needs place the Temple of
Rest or Quiet without the gates. 17. Whether if Jove be the chief God of all
victory, and to be accounted as one of the number. 18. Why Fortune and Felicity
were made Goddesses. 19. Of a Goddess, called Fortuna muliebris. 20. Of the
Deification of Virtue and Faith by the Pagans: and of their omission of the
worship that was due to diverse other Gods, if it be true that these were gods.
21. That such as knew not the true and only God had better have bin contented
with Virtue and Felicity. 22. Of the knowledge of these Pagan Gods which Varro
boasts he taught the Romans. 23. Of the absolute sufficiency of Felicity
alone, whom the Romans (who worshipped so many Gods) did for a great while
neglect, and gave no divine honors unto. 24. What reason the Pagans bring for
their worshipping of Gods gifts for Gods themselves. 25. Of the worship of one
God only, whose name although they knew not, yet the took him for the giver
of Felicity. 26. Of the stage plays which the gods exacted of their servants.
27. Of the three kinds of gods whereof Scauola disputed. 28. Whether the
Romans diligence in this worship of those gods did their empire any good
at all. 29. Of the falsenesse of that augury that presaged courage and
stability to the state of Rome. 30. The confessions of such as do worship
those Pagan Gods, from their own mouths. 31. Of Varros rejecting the popular
opinion, and of his belief of one God, though he knew not the true God. 32.
What reasons the kings of the world had for the permitting of those false
religions in such places as they conquered. 33. That God has appointed a time
for the continuance of every state on earth. 34. Of the Jews Kingdom, which
one god alone kept unmoved as long as they kept the truth of religion.
FINIS.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of the Contents of the first Book. CHAP. 1.
AT my first entrance upon this Discourse of the City of God, I held it
convenient, first of all to stop their mouths, who in their extreme desire of
only temporal bliss and greediness after wordly vanities, do make their
exclaim upon Christianity (the Christian Religion.
true and only mean of salvation) whenever it pleases God in his mercy to
correct and admonish them, (rather then in his justice, to punish or afflict
them) with any temporal inconvenience. And because the unlearned, and vulgar
sort of those persons, are incited against us the more, by the endeavors and
examples of those whom they hold learned, thinking (upon their assertions)
that such calamities as have befallen them of late, never befell in times past:
and being confirmed in this error, by such as know it for an error, and yet
dissemble their knowledge; we thought it fi^e to show, how far this their
opinion swarued from the truth, out of such books as their own authors have
left unto posterity, for the better understanding of the estates of precedent
ages: and to make it plain and apparent, that those imaginary gods, which they
either did worship as then in public, or as now in secret, are nothing but
most foul, unclean spirits, and most deceitful and malignant False gods.
devils: so that their only delight was to have most bestiall and abominable
practices, either published as their true exploits, or feigned of them by
poe^icall muentions; these they commanded to be publicly presented in plays
and at solemn feasts: to the end, that man's infirmity presuming upon these
patterns, as upon divine authorities might never be with-drawne from acting
the like wickedness. This we confirmed, not by mere conjectures, but partly
by what of late times our self has beheld in the celebration exhibited unto
such gods: and partly by their own writings, that left those reports recorded,
not as in disgrace, but as in the honor of the gods: So that Varro, (a man of
the greatest learning and authority amongst them of any writing of divinity
and humanity, and giving each varro.
object his proper attribute according to the worth and due respect thereof)
sticks not to affirm, that those stage plays are not matters of human
invention, but merely divine things, whereas if the city were quit of all
but honest men, stage-plaiers should have no room in mere humanity. Nor did
Varro affirm this of himself, but set it down as he had seen the use of
these plays in Rome, being there borne and brought up.

L. VIVES.
NOw must we pass from the historical acts of the Romans, unto their
religion, sacrifices and ceremonies: In the first books we asked no pardon,
because for the Roman acts, though they could not be fully gathered out of
one author (a great part of them being lost with the writings of eloquent
Liuie) yet out of many they might. But in the four books following we must
needs entreat pardon, if the reader find us weak, either in diligence or
ability. For there is no author now extant, that wrote of this theme. Varro's
Antiquities are lost, Varro's antiquities.
with a many more: if we had but them, we might have satisfied Saint
Augustine, that had his assertions thence. But now we must pick y^ up from
several places, which we here produce, least coming without any thing we
should seem both to want ornaments, and bare necessaries. If it have not that
grace that is expected, we are content, in that our want is not wholly to be
shamed at, and our endeavors are to be pardoned in this respect, that many
learned and great Scholars (to omit the vulgar sort) have been willingly
ignorant in a matter of such intricate study, and so little benefit; which
makes our diligence the less faulty. This Varro testifies. Iuuenall seems to
be ignorant whether Money were worshipped in Rome for a goddess or no.
Satyra. 1. -- Et si funesta pecunia templo Lady Pecunia.

Nondum habitas, nullas nummorum ereximus aras.
-- Though fatal money does not sit
Adored in shrine, nor has an altar yet.


Notwithstanding Varro reckons up her with God Gold, and God Silver, amongst
the deities. Who wonders then if we be not so exact (in a thing that the
goodness of Christ has already abolished out of human businesses) as some
of those idolators were, or as Varro himself was, who not-with-standing did
truly object unto the Priests, that there was much in their deities which they
understood not, he being the best read of all that age? Besides, human
learning should sustain no loss, if the memory, as well as the use of those
fooleries were utterly exterminate. For what is one the better scholar, for
knowing Jove's tricks of lust, or Uenus hers? what their sacrifices are? what
prodigies they send? which God owes this ceremony, and which that? I my self
know as much of these dotages as another: yet will I maintain that the
ignorance of these things is more profitable, then in any other kind: and
therefore I have had the less care to particularize of the deities, kinds,
temples, altars, feasts, and ceremonies of every God and Goddess, though I
would not send the reader empty away that desires to have some instruction
herein.

The contents of the second and third book. CHAP. 2.
AND having propounded a method of our discourse in the end of the first
book, whereof we have prosecuted some parcels in the books following, now we
know that we are to proceed in these things, which our order obliges us to
relate. We promised therefore to say somewhat against those that impute the
Romans calamities unto Christianity: and to make a peculiar relation of the
evils that we should find their city, or the provinces thereof, to have
endured ere their sacrifices were prohibited: all which questionless they
would have blamed us for, had they befallen them in the times of our religious
luster and authority: This we performed sufficiently (I think) in the two
last books, in the former of them, reciting the evils which were either the
only ones, or the sorest Ill manners.
and most extreme; I mean those corruptions of manners: In this last of those
which these fools have so maine a fear to suffer, as afflictions (a) of body
and goods, which the best men oftentimes partake of, as well as the worst. But
for the things that make them evil, and deprave their souls, those they
detain, with more then patience, with extremity of desire. Then I touched a
little at the city, and so came down speedily to Augustus. But if I would
have dilated (not upon these reciprocal hurts, that one man does to another,
as was desolations, etc. but) upon the things that befall them by the very
elements, and from nature, which (b) Apuleius briefly speaks of in one place
of his book De Mundo, saying: that all earthly things have their changes, (c)
reuolutions, and dissolutions: for (he says) that by an exceeding earthquake,
the ground opened at a certain time, and swallowed up whole cities, and all
that were in them: showers and inundation^ ouer-whelmed whole countries:
continents were cut into the maine by strange ^ides, and made Islands; and the
sea elsewhere cast up large grounds and left them bare: Storms and tempests
ouer-turned whole cities: lightning consumed many of the Eastern countries,
and deluges as many of the West. Fire sprang from the cauldrons of Aetna, as
from a torrent, and ran down the hills: if I should have collected all of
this kind that I could, which happened long before that the name of Christ
beat down those ruins of salvation, what end should I ever make? I promised
also to make demonstration of the Romans conditions, and why the true God did
vouchsafe them that increase of their Empire, even he, in whose hand are all
kingdoms, when their own puppetries never did them a peny-worth of good, but
cousened them in all that ever they could. Now then am I to discourse of their
cousenage, but chiefly of the Empires increase. For, as for their devils
deceites, the second book opened them reasonable fully. And in all the three
books past, as occasion served, we noted how much aid and comfort the great
God did vouchsafe both the good and bad, in these afflictions of war, only
by the name of CHRIST, which the Barbarians so highly reverenced, beyond all
use and custom of hostility. Even he did this, that makes the sun to shine
both upon good and bad, raineth both upon Mat. 5.
the just and the unjust.

L. VIVES.
AFflictions (a) of body] Bodily goods are threefold, and so are their
contraries. (b) Apuleius] Apuleius (...) Platonist.
He was of Madaura, a Platonist, a great lover and follower of antiquity,
both in learning and language. His Ass he had from Lucian, but added much to
the translation: His book de Mundo, from Aristotle, cunningly dissembling his
author (which I much admire off) though he profess to follow Aristotle and
Theophrastus in this work in a new and civil phraise; for stealing an
imitation is all one herein with him, which is more civil, then to call
flying, giving place: these are new significations, given the words to grace
the style, Iustine Martyr and Themistius (to omit the later writers) say
directly that the work d^ mundo is Aristotle's Euphradae though the phrase
seem to excel his in elegance. But this is no fit argument fot this place.
Surely it is either Aristotle's, or Theophrastus-his, or some of the
Aristotelians of those times: being (as Iustine faith) a compendium of the
Perpatetiques, physiology. Augustines quotation of him here, is not in the
Florentine copy, which Pietro Aegidio, a great scholar and my most kind and
honest friend lent me: nor in the elder Uenice copy, which I saw at Saint
Pietro Apostolio's, nor in the new one which Asulanus, Aldus his father in law
Printed: for in all them it is thus. All earthly things have their changes,
reuolutions, and dissolutions. Lastly, that which the governor is in the ship,
etc. Yet that Apuleius wrote the rest, which Augustine relates, appears by
the very style and phrase, both truly Apuley^: as also because it is in
Aristotle's work it self, beginning at these words, (...). etc. as follows,
which Apuleius has translated, there where he says, (...). The Eastern
regions were consumed and burned. The burning of Phaeton, Aristotle describes
plainly, that he was Apollo's son, and through want of skill Phaeton.
set heaven and hell on fire. But the burning of Aetna, (both mentioned in the
said words of Aristotle) was the first eruption of fire from that mountain,
happening in the second Aetnas burning.
year of the 88. Olympiade, three years before Plato's birth, if Eusebius his
account be true: which is never otherwise, unless the copiers of him be in
fault. In this fire certain godly men were saved from burning by a miracle,
which Aristotle touches at in this his Book de Mundo, and more at large in
his Physickes, but I make a question whether these be his or no. (c)
Reuolutions,] [mine interpreter had been undone, had he not put in
Intensiones and remissiones, that he might make Augustine talk of his forms
and formalities: [This note is left ou^ in Paris copy.]
about which these fellows keep a greater ado, then ever did the Greeks and
the Troya^s about Hellens fair form, for they think their forms are as
worthy to be wrangled for, ^s hers was. But in the old manuscripts are not
guilty of any two such words as intensiones et remissiones, nor Aristotle
neither, in this place (...), he has reuolutione^ and ^ritus, so that the
first must be changes, and not subuersions.]

Whether happy and wise men should accoumpt it as part of their felicity, to
possess an Empire that is enlarged by no means but war. CHAP. 3.
NOw then let us examine the nature of this spaciousness, and continuance of
Empire, which these men give their gods such great thanks for: to whom also
they say they exhibited those plays (that were so filthy both in actors and
the action) without any offense of honesty. But first, I would make a little
inquiry, seeing you cannot show such estates to be any way happy, as are in
continual wars, being still in terror, trouble, and guilt of shedding
human blood, though it be their foes: what reason then, or what wisdom shall
any man show, in glorying in the largeness of Empire, all their joy being but
as a glass, bright and brittle, and euer-more in fear and danger of breaking:
To diue the deeper into this matter, let us not give the ^ailes of our souls
to every air of human breath, nor suffer our understandings eye to be
smoaked up with the fumes of vain words, concerning kingdoms, provinces,
nations, or so: No, let us take two men, (for every particular man is a part of
the greatest city and kingdom The comparison of poor quiet and rich trouble.
of the world, as a letter is a part of a word) and of these two men, let us
imagine the one to be poor, or but of a mean estate, the otherpotent and
wealthy: but with-all, let my wealthy man take with him, fears, sorrows,
couetise, suspect, disquiet, contentions, let these be the hooks for him to
hale in the augmentation of his estate, and with-all the increase of those
cares, together with his estate: and let my poor man take with him,
sufficiency with little, love of kindred, neighbors, friends, joyous peace,
peaceful religion, soundness of body, sincerenesse of heart, abstinence of
diet, chastity of carriage, and security of conscience: where should a man
find any one so sottish, as would make a doubt which of these to prefer in
his choice? Well then, even as we have done with these two men, so let us do
with two families, two nations, or two kingdoms: Lay them both to the line of
equity: which done, and duly considered, when it is done, here does vanity
lie bare to the view, and there shines felicity. Wherefore it is more
convenient, that such as fear and follow the law of the true God, should have
the swaying of such Empires: not so much for themselves, as for those over
whom they are Emperors. For themselves, their piety, and their honesty
(gods admired gifts) will suffice them, both to the enjoying of true felicity
in this life, and the attaining of that eternal and true felicity in the
next. So that here upon earth, the rule, and regalitie that is given to the
good man, does not return him so much good, as it does to those that are under
this his rule and regalitie. But contrariwise, the government of the wicked,
harms themselves far more then their subjects: for it gives themselves
the greater liberty to exercise their lusts: but for their subjects, they have
none but their own iniquities to answer for: for what injury so-euer the
unrighteous master does to the righteous servant, it is no scourge for his
guilt, but a trial of his virtue. And therefore he that is (a) good, is free,
though he be a slave: and he that is evil, a slave though he be a King:
Nor is he slave to one man; but that which is worst of all, unto as many
masters as he affects vices: according to the Scripture speaking thus
hereof: Of what-so-euer a man is overcome, to that he is in bondage. (...).
P^. 2. 19


L. VIVES.
HE that is (a) good] A Stoicall paradoxe mentioned by Tully. In Paradox, and
pro Muren. Stoicisme like to Christianity.
Wherefore Hierome thinks that Stoicisme comes nearer to Christianity, then
any of the Sects besides it.

Kingdoms without justice, how like they are unto theeuish purchases. CHAP. 4.
SET justice aside then, and what are kingdoms but fair theeuish purchases?
because what (a) are thieves purchases but little kingdoms? for in thefts, the
hands of the underlings are directed by the commander, the confederacy of them
is sworn together, and the pillage is shared by the law amongst them. And if
those ragga-muffins grow but up to be able enough to keep forts, build
habitations, possess cities, and conquer adjoining nations, then their
government is no more called theeuish, but graced with the eminent name of a
kingdom, given and gotten, not because they have left their practices, but
because that now they may use them without danger of law: for elegant and
excellent was (b) that Pirates answer to the Great Macedonian Alexander, who
had taken him: the king asking him how he durst molest the seas so, he replied
with a free spirit, How dare thou molest the whole world? But because I do
it with a little ship only, I am called a thief: thou doing it with a great
Navy, art called an Emperor.

L. VIVES.
WHat are (a) theeues] The world (says Cyprian very elegantly to Donatus) is
bathed in floods of mutual blood: when one alone kills a man, it is called a
crime, but when a many together do it, it is called a virtue. Thus, not
respect of innocence, but the greatness of the fact sets it free from
penalty. And truly, fighting belongs neither to good men, nor thieves, nor to
any that are men at all, but is a right bestiall fury, and therefore was it
named Bellum, of Bellua, a beast. Cic. offic. Fest. (b) The Pirates] out of
Tully de Rep. lib. (...). as Nonninus Marcellus says. The King asking him what
wickedness moved him to trouble the Bellum, war: of whence.
whole sea with one only gally-foyst? the same (says he) that makes thee
trouble the whole earth. Lucane calls Alexander a happy thief of earth, and
Terrarum fatale malum, fulmenque quod omnes A pirates words to Alexander.

Percuteret populos, pariterque and sydus iniquum
Gentibus, --
Earths fatal mischief, and a cloud of thunder
Rending the world: a star that struck in sunder
The Nations --


Of those fugitive Sword-players, whose power grew parallel with a regal
dignity. CHAP. 5.
I Will therefore omit to reuiew the crew that Romulus called together, by
proclaming freedom from fear of punishment to all such as would inhabit
Rome; hereby both augmenting his city, and getting a sort of fellows about
him that were fit for any villainous or desperate act what-so-euer. But this
I say, that the very Empire of Rome, albe it was now grown so great and so
powerful by subduing of so many nations, and so become sole terror of all the
rest, was never thelesse extremely danted, and driven into a terrible fear of
an invasion very hardly to be avoided, by a small crew of raskally
sword-players, that had fled from the fence school into Campania, and were now
grown to such a mighty army, that under the conduct of three (a) Captains
they had made a most lamentable and cruel waste and spoil of the most part of
the country. Let them tell me now, what God it was that raised up these men
from a few poor contemptible thieves, to a government so terrible to the
state and strength of Rome it self: will it be answered that they had no help
at all from the Gods, because they continued (b) but a while? As though that
every man's life must of necessity be of long continuance: why then the Gods
help no King to his kingdom, because that most kings dye very soon: nor is
that to be accounted as a benefit which every man loses in so little a
time, and which vanishes (like a vapor) so soon after it is given: for what
is it unto them that worshipped these gods under Romulus, and are now dead,
though the Roman Empire be never so much increased since, seeing they are now
pleading their own particular causes in hell: of what kind, and in what
fashion they are there, belongs not to this place to dispute. And this may be
understood likewise of all that have ended their lives in few years, and bear
the burdens of their deeds with them, how-so-euer their Empire be afterward
augmented, and continued through the lives and deaths of many successors. But
if this be not so, but that those benefits (though of so short space) be to be
ascribed to the gods goodnesses, then assuredly the Sword-players had much to
thank them for, who by their help did cast of their bonds of slavery, and
fled and escaped, and got an army of that strength and good discipline
together, that Rome it self began to be terribly afraid of them, and lost
diverse fields against them. They got the upper hand of diverse generals,
they used what pleasures they would; they did even what they lusted; and vn^ill
their last ouer-throw, which was given them with extreme difficulty, they
lived in all pomp and regalitie. But now unto matter of more consequence.

L. VIVES.
THree (a) Captaines] Spartacus, Chrysus, and Oenomaus: worthy of memory is
that of The leaders of the fugitives.
Pliny, lib. 3. and 30. that Spartacus forbad the use of gold and silver in
his Tents; so that I wonder not that he became so powerful. That law in the
tents of those fugitives, was better then all the other Midas laws in the
Cities of mighty Kings. (h) But a while] In the third year of their rebellion,
M. Licinius Crassus utterly dispersed and killed them.

Of the covetousness of Ninus, who made the first warred upon his neighbors,
through the greedy desire he had to increase his kingdom. CHAP. 6.
IVstine, that wrote the (a) Greek (or rather universal) history after
Torgus Pompeyus, not only in Latin (for so did he) but in a more succinct
manner, begins his book thus. (b) The sway and rule of nations at the first
was in the hands of Kings, who got their heights of Majesty, not by popular
ambition, Just form of kingdom
but by their own moderate carriage, approved by good men. The people had no
law but (c) the Kings will. Their care and custom was the keeping, not the
augmenting of their dominions limmittes. Every man's kingdom was bounded within
his own country. (d) Ninus of Assyria was the first that followed the lust of
Sovereignty in breaking the old hereditary law of Nations. (e) He first
warred on the adjoining countries, subduing the people (as yet unacquainted
with Arts military) as far as Lybia. And a little after: Ninus confirmed his
conquest by continuing possession of it. And having subdued the neighboring
nations, from them he (...) stronger powers, and set farther footing into the
world, until by making one victory the continual means of another, he had
made an entire conquest of all the East. (f) How truly so-euer he or Trogus
wrote this (for I have found them both elsewhere erroneous by true proofs):
yet it is certain by the record of other writers, that Ninus enlarged the
Assyrians Monarchy exceedingly: And that it continued longer then the (g)
Romans has done as yet. For as the Chroniclers do deliver up account, it
was MCCXL. years from Ninus his reign, to the translation of this Monarchy
to the Medians. Now to war upon ones neighbors, and to proceed to the hurt
of such as hurts not you, for greedy desire of rule and sovereignty, what is
this but flat the every in a greater excess and quantity then ordinary?

L. VIVES.
THE (a) Greeke] Tro^s Pompeyus wrote an universal history from the beginning
of the nations unto his own times. This great work did Iustine contract into
an Epitome, calling it so: as Florus did Liuies works: though more at large. I
would Florus had not been Florus.
so brief. Iustine is now read for Trogus. I have heard some say they have
seen Trogus whole in Italy: it may be so, in a dream. (b) The sway] Every
family at first had a King, either The first Kings.
the eldest, wisest, or most just of the household: Afterward, one king began
to rule many families, and sometimes many Kings over one, whom the people were
compelled to receive as guides and governors, or watchmen over the
weale-publike: nor did this election follow chance, nobility, nor ambition;
every man's own private good, and the common good withal, which each man duly
respected, made him choose the best and fittest man. (c) The Kings will] for if
he be good, his will is better then a law, Arist. de Rep. (d) Ninus] Son to
Ninus.
Belus, of him elsewhere. (e) He first] There were wars before him: the
Aegiptians and the Africans warred with staves hardened with fire, which they
called Phalanges, Pliny says, The f^rst war.
that the Phaenicians were the first fighters. lib. 5. Vexores the Egiptian
King, and Tanais the Scithian, says Iustine, did first invade the adjoining
nations, for desire of glory. And Ninus first, for desire of Sovereignty. (f)
How truly,] The Greeks either through desire to flourish in The Greek ly^s.
their styles, or for their countries admiration, or for delighting their
readers, or by some natural gift, have not failed to lie wonderfully in all
their Histories. And the Latins that meddled with their affairs, being forced
to follow them, fell into the same defect, as Trogus and Curtius Ruffus did.
(g) Romans hath] Of the continuance of the Assyrian Monarchy, The Assyrian
Monarchy.
there is no certainty. It lasted MCCXL. years says Eusebius. MCCCLX. says
Diodorus Siculus. Thirty less says Ctesias, whose computation Iustine
follows in the Asian affairs: nor is the number of the Kings known. They
were thirty says Diodorus, thirty six says Eusebius, thirty three
Velleius, successively the son to the father, from Ninus to Sardanapalus.
When Augustine wrote this work.
Augustine wrote this work in the bginning of the reign of Honorius and
Theodosius the younger, about MCLXX. year after Rome was built.

Whether the Pagan Gods have any power either to further or hinder the
progress, increase, or defects of earthly kingdoms. CHAP. 7.
IF this kingdom continued so long, and so spacious, without the assistance
of any of those gods, why are they reputed as the enlargers and preseruers of
Romes Monarchy? There is the like reason for both. But if Assyria were bound
to thank the gods, I demand which gods? for the nations that Ninus conquered
had none. And if the Assyrians had any peculiar ones, that were better
state-wrights, what, were they dead then when the Monarchy was translated to
the Medes? Or were they unpaid, or had the (a) Medians promised them better
wages, that they would needs thither and (b) from them again into Persia at
the inuitation of Cyrus, as promising them somewhat that better liked them?
The (c) Persians ever since, a little after the short (though spacious)
Monarchy of Alexander the great, confirmed their estate in that large country
of the East, and are a Kingdom at this day. If this be so, then either the
gods have no faith, in that they keep this flitting from the friend to the foe
(which Camillus would not do, though Rome were most unthankful to him for his
most auayleable conquest of the Veii, but burying the wrong, freed it the
second time from the Galls) Or else they are not so valiant as gods should
be: but may be conquered and chased away by human strength and cunning. Or
when they do fight, it is the gods on the one side that beat the gods on the
the other, and not the men. Oh then, belike they are foes amongst themselves
as well as human creatures. Good: the city should never give them any more
worship then it held to be due to any other people or nation what-soeuer that
helps the^. But howsoever this flight, or this remoouall, or this killing of
these gods fell out, the name of Christ was not yet known in those times and
places, when and wherein these changes of states did thus follow the effects of
war. For if that (d) after those MCC. years, and the ouer-plus, when the
Aslyrian Monarchy was removed, christian religion had come in, and preached of
another, an eternal Monarchy, and condemned all their gods for false and
feigned, and their sacrifices for sacriligious fooleries. What would the vain
me^ of that nation have replied, but that the Kingdom was ouer-throwne because
they had left their old religion, and received this of ours? In which foolish
answer, let these our later Antagonists behold themselves as in a glass: and
blush (if they be not past grace) to follow so fond a president. (e) Though
indeed the Roman Empire be rather afflicted then altered or translated, as
it was often before Christ's coming: and as it recovered from those afflictions
before, so may it from these, there is no cause of despair. Who knows the
will of God herein.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Medians] By Arbaces prefect of Media who killed Sardanapalus, as
scorning that so many thousand men should obey a beast. Justin. Oros. Plutar.
Eusebius. etc. (b) From them] The Monarchy of Asia remained with the Medians from
Arbaces to Cyrus, Cambyses son, CCCL. years. Astyages was the last King,
whose daughter Mandane, Cambyses wife, was mother to Cyrus. Cyrus being borne,
his grand-sire (through a dream he had) caused him to be Astiages.
cast out to the wild beasts in the woods. But by chance he was saved. And
being become a lusty youth, entering into Persepolis, he commanded the people
to make ready their axes, and cut down a great wood: next day he made them a
delicate banquet, and in the midst thereof asked them whether they liked this
day better then the other. They all replied, this day: well says he, as long
as you serve the Medians, the world shall be as yesterday to you, but be your
own Lords your selves, and it will be this day. Hereupon, leauying an army, he
ouer-threw his uncle, and transferred the Monarchy unto Persia. (c) Persians]
Their Kingdom continued from Cyrus to Alexander, Philips son, CCXXX. years.
Alexander ruled Asia. VI. years. his successors after him unto Seleucus and
Antiochus the two brethren, that is from the 104 Olympiade unto the 134. at
which time Arsaces, a mean but a valorous fellow, set his country free, by
means of the two brethrens discord, and reigned King himself. Thence arose
the The Persian Monarchy.
Parthian Kingdom, lasting unto Alex. Seuerus Caesar's time, at which time
Xerxes the Persian subdued them and annexed them to the Persian crown, and
this Kingdom was during in Augustines time. Whereof read Herodian in
Antoninus. (d) After those] The text of some copies, follows Eusebius, but the
old books do leave out et quadraginta. So that Augustine did not set down
his opinion amongst this diversity of accounts, but only the overplus, to show
only, that it was more then MCC. years, but how much more he knows not;
surely it was not an C. (e) Though] The name of it remains as yet in the
ancient dignity, but with no power.

What precious gods those were by whose power the Romans hela their Empire to
be enlarged and preserved, seeing that they durst not trust them with the
defense of mean and particular matters. CHAP. 8.
LEt us now make inquiry, if you will, which God (or gods) of all this swarm
that Rome worshipped, was it that did enlarge and protect this their Empire. In
a world of such worth, and dignity, they durst not secretly commit any dealing
to the goddess Cloacina (a), nor to the goddess (b) Volupia, the lady of
pleasure, nor to (c) Libentina, the goddess of lust, nor to (d) Vaticanus the
god of childrens crying, nor to (e) Cunina the goddess of their cradles. But
how can this one little book possibly have room to contain the names of all
their gods and goddesses, when as their great volumes will not do it, seeing
they have a several god to see to every particular act they take in hand?
Durst they trust one god with their lands think you? No, Rusina must look to
the country, Iugatinus to the hill-toppes: Collatina to the whole hills
besides, and Vallonia to the valleys. Nor could (f) Segetia alone be
sufficient to protect the corn: but while it was in the ground, Seia must
look to it: when it was up, and ready to mow, Segetia: when it was mowne and
laid up, then (g) Tutilina took charge of it, who did not like that Segetia
alone should have charge of it all the while before it came dried unto her
hand: nor was it sufficient for those wretches, that their poor seduced
souls, that scorned to embrace one true god, should become prostitute unto
this meaner multitude of devils, they must have more: so they made (h)
Proserpina goddess of the corns first leaves, and buddes: the (i) knots
Nodotus looked unto: Volutina to the blades, and when the ear began to look
out, it was Patelena's charge: when the ear began to be even bearded (because
(k) Hostire was taken of old for to make even) Hostilinas work came in; when
the flowers bloomed, (l) Flora was called forth: when they grew (m) white,
Lacturtia; being ripe (n) Matuca, being cut down (o) Runcina. O let them
pass, that which they shame not at, I loath at. These few I have reckoned, to
show that they durst at no hand affirm, that these gods were the ordainers,
adorners, augmenters or preseruers of the Empire of Rome, having each one such
peculiar charges assigned them, as they had no leisure in the world to deal in
any other matter. How should Segetia guard the Empire, that must not meddle but
with the corn? or Cunina look to the wars, that must deal with naught but
childrens cradles? or Nodotus give his aid in the battle, that cannot help
so much as the blade of the corn, but is bound to look to the knot only?
Every (p) house has a porter to the door: and though he be but a single man,
yet he is sufficient for that office: but they must have their three gods,
Forculus for the door, (q) Cardea for the hinge, and Limentius for the
threa-shold. Be-like Forculus could not possibly keep both door, hinges, and
threa-shold.

L. VIVES.
CLoacina (a)] Some read Cluacina, and some Lauacina, but Cloacina is the
best: her statue was found by Tatius (who reigned with Romulus,) in a great
Privy or Iakes of Rome Cloacina.
and knowing not whose it was, named it after the place, Cloacina, of Cloaca.
Lactant. Cipria^ calls it Cluacina, but it is faulty, I think. There was
Uenus surnamed Cluacina, or the fighter: for Cluo is to fight. Her statue stood
where the Romans and Sabines agreed, and ended Venus Cloacina.
the fight for the women. Plin. lib. 15. (b) Uolupia] She had a chapel at the
Theater Nauall near the gate Romanula. Varro de Ling. Lat. lib. 3. Macrob.
Saturn. The 12. Call. of January is Angeronia's feast kept by the Priests in
Volupia's chapel: Verrius Flaccus says she was so Volupia.
called, for easing the angers and troubles of the mind. Masurius says her
statue stood on Volupia's alter, with the mouth sealed up, to show that by the
pacient suppressing of grief, is Angeronia
pleasure attained. (c) Libentina] Varro. lib. 3. of Libet, it lusts, there
was Venus Libentina, and Venus Libitina, but Libithina is another. (d)
Vaticanus] Not Uagitarius as some read. Gell. Libentina. Vaticanus.
lib. 16. out of Varro. As under whom (says he) the childs first cry is,
which is va, the firstsyllable of Vaticanus, whence Vagire also is derived; and
in old books it is Uatiganus not Uagitanus. (e) Cunina] The cradle-keeper and
wich-chaser. (f) Segetia] Or Segesta. Plin. lib. Cunina.
18. for those gods were then best known. Seia to be the goddess of Sowing
and Segetia of the corn; their statues were in the Theater. (g) Tutilina] And
Tutanus, he and she, guarders Tutanus. Tutilina.
of all things. Non. Marcell. They were called upon, in sudden charms; as
Hercules was, surnamed Alexicacus, the euill-driuer. Varro. It was a sin to
invoke Tutilina in an unfortunate thing. (h) Proserpina] Daughter to Ceres
and Jove, ravished by Pluto her uncle. Cicero Proserpina.
de not. deor. lib. 2. She is Proserpina, which the Greeks call Persephone,
and will have her to be nothing but the seed of harvest, which being hid in
the earth, was sought by her mother. Varro will have her the moon, with Ennius
and Epicharmus. (i) The knots] Plin. lib. 18. Some grain begins to put forth
the ear at the third joint, and some at the fourth, wheat has 4. joints, rye
six, barley eight: but they that have those, never bud the ear, until all the
joints be grown out. Varr, de re rust. lib. 1. The husk of the ear, ere it
open is called vagina, in the care, is the grain, and the ear is in the
husk: the own, or beard, is as a rough needle, sticking forth from the ear,
which ere it be died is called Mutica. (k) Because Hostire] Hostire, is to
suppress, and so give back, and hereof comes Hostis. Non. or to strike:
Festus, also to Hostire.
do justice, to recompense, whereof comes redostire, and hostimentum: both
used by Plautus. Flora. Chloris.
(l) Flora] Some take her for Acca Laurentia, the Courtizan, some for Melibaea,
Niobes daughter, called Chloris, for changing her color through fear of
Apollo and Diana. Hence she was called Flora, whom with her sister Amicla,
Niobe having preserved, and pleased Latona, she bore Nestor unto Neleus,
Neptunes son. Homer, Odyss. 11. who says that the other perished with her
brethren. Ovid makes her wife to Zephirus, because she is goddess of flowers.
(m) White] Some read Lacticina. There was also Lactans, the god that whitned
the corn with milk. Seru. Geor. 1. (n) Matuta] Daughter to Cadmus, wife to
Athamas; casting her Lacturcia.
self down headlong from a rock into the sea, she changed her name from
Ino, into Leu^the, Matuca.
the white goddess, called by the Latins Mother Matuta, who say she is
Aurora, whereof comes tempus matutinam, the morning time. Melecerta her son
was also made a sea-god, and called Palaemon. Ovid. Lact. etc. her temple was
in the eight region of Rome. (o) Runcina] Varro de ling. lat. Runcare is to
pull up. Auerruncus, the god that pulls away evils from men. (p) Every one]
One man suffices, when three gods cannot. (q) Cardea] Carna rather: first
Runcina.
called Carne, Ianus lay with her, and then made her the goddess of hinges.
She rules in man's vital parts, her feast is in Iunes Calends. Ovid. Fast. 5.
Brutus having expelled Tarquin, kept Carna.
her feast at the foresaid time, with beane-flowre, and bacon. Macrob. Satur.

Whether it was Jove, whom the Romans held the chiefest god, that was this
protector and enlarger of their Empire. CHAR. 9.
Wherefore setting aside this nest of inferior gods (for a while) let us look
into the offices of the greater; and which of them brought Rome to such a
praeeminence over the other nations. This same surely was Jove's work. For, him
they made the King over all their gods besides, as his scepter, and his seat
on the highest (a) part of all the Capitol do sufficiently testify. And of
him, they have a very convenient saying (though it be from a Poet) (b) All is
full of Jove. And Varro (c) is of opinion, that those that worship but one God,
and that without any statue, do mean this Jove, though they call him by
another name. Which being so, why is he so evil used at Rome, and by others
also in other places, as to have a statue made him? This evil use so disliked
Varro, that although he were ouer-borne with the custom of so great a city,
yet he doubted not both to affirm, and record, that in making those statues,
they both banished all fear, and brought in much error?

L. VIVES.
HIghest (a) part] On Tarpeius. (b) Al is full of Ioue] Virgil out of Aratus
(...) and Lucane in his eight book. (...) deisedes v^ i terra, vbi Pontus, and
acr,
Et Caelum and virtus: Superos quid quaerimus vl^ra:
Io^e sits where earth, where ai^e, where sea and shore
Where heaven, and virtue is, why ask we more.


(c) Is of opinion] The Greeks call Jove, (...), and (...), both of Living,
because he was held to give all things life. Orpheus in Cratere. Plato deriues
them both of (...), to live by himself. Jupiter why so called.
In Cratylo. The Romans called him Jove, a Iunando of helping. The old
Philosophers called that same Men's that Intellect that created all things,
Jove. And therefore the wise men worshipped this, who otherwise held no mortal
creature for any God, but only that immortal, almighty Prince of nature,
having diverse names, one amongst the Greeks, another with the Persians, a
third with the Phaenicians, a fourth in Egypt etc. Plutarch. Saturnes son of
Crete was called Z^, because he was the first of Saturnes male children that
lived. Lactantius.

What opinion they followed, that set diverse gods to rule in di^ers parts of
the world. CHAP. 10.
But why had he Juno added to him, both as his sister and wife? because (a) we
place Jupiter in the sky (say they) and Juno in the air, and these two are
contiguall, one immediately next above the other. Very well, then all is not
full of Jove as you said but now, if Juno do fill a part. Does the one fill
the other, (being man and wise) and are they distinct in their several
elements, and yet conjoined in them both? why then has Jove the sky assigned
him and Juno the air? Again, if only these two sufficed for all, what should
(b) Neptune do with the sea, and Pluto with the earth? Nay, and for fear of
want of broods Neptune must have a (c) Salacia, and Pluto (d) a Proscrpina for
wives to breed upon. For as Juno possesses the heavens inmost part the air
(say they:) so does Salacia the inner parts of the sea* and Proserpina the
bowels of the earth. Alas good men, they would feign stitch up their lies
hand-somely, and cannot find which way. For if this were true, the world
should have but three elements, (and not (e) 4. as their ancient writers have
recorded) if every couple of gods should have their element. But they
themselves have there affirmed, that the (f) sky is one thing and the air
another. But the water, within and without is all but water, (there may be
some diversity to the diet, but never any alteration of the essential form:)
and earth is earth, how ever it be severally qualified: Now the world being
complete in these four, where is (g) Minerua's share? she has a share (h) in
the Capitol though she be not daughter to Jove and Juno both. If she dwell in
the highest part of the sky, and that therefore the Poets feigned her to be
the birth of Jove's own brain, why is not she then made the absolut Empress
of heaven, seeing y^ she sits above Jove? Because it is not meet to make the
child Lord over the parent? why then was not that equity kept between Saturn
and Jupiter? because Saturn was conquered? why then belike they fought! no y^
gods forbid, say they; y^ is but a poetical fiction, a fable: well, thus you
see they will trust no fables, they do think better of their gods then so, but
how chances it then that Saturn (seeing he might not sit above his son
I^ue) had not a seat equal with him? Because (i) Saturn (say they) is
nothing but the length of time, well then, they that worship Saturn, worship
Time and Jove, the King of all the gods is said to be borne of Time, and what
wrong do we to Jove and Juno in saying they are borne of Time seeing that by
the Paganes own confessions they signify Heaven and Earth, both which were
created in time, for this the greatest scholars and (k) wisest of them all
commend to our memory, nor did Virgill speak out of fiction, but out of
Philosophy, when he said. Tum pater ommi^otens saecundis imbribus Ether
Coniugis in gremium lae^ae descendit. --
Almighty Ether in a fatning shower.
Dropped in the lap of his glad spouse --
That was, the Earth. In which they make a difference also, for herein (l)
Terra, and Tellus and Tellumon are al several things, they say. And all these
they have as gods, Juno and Terra the earth al one Va^, de ling la^.
distinct in name, office, and ceremonial rites. Terra (m) is also called the
mother of the Gods besides, that the poets may now faigne with far more
toleration, seeing that their very books of religion affirm, that Juno is not
only wife and sister but ((...)) mother also unto Jove. The same Earth they
style both (o) Ceres, and Vesta, yet (p) Vesta they say most commonly is the
fire, and guardeth that which the city cannot want? And therefore the Virgins
kept it, because fire, and Virginity do never bring forth any thing. All which
vanity, it was fit he only should abolish that was borne of a Virgin. But who
can endure to hear them ascribe so much honor and chastity to the fire, and
yet not shame to call (q) Vesta, Venus, that her Virgins might have the less
care of the honor of virginity for if Venus were Vesta (r) how should the
Virgins do her good service in abstayning from venery? or (s) are there two
Ven^sses, the one a Virgin, the other a wanton? or three rather, one of the
virgins (Vesta) one of the wives, and one of the whores, to such an one as this
last is, the (t) Phaenicans consecrated the prostitution of their daughters,
before that they married them: now which of these, is Vulcans wife? not the
Virgin, she never had husband, not the whore, oh no, not (v) Iunos son, and
(x) Mineruas forge^, be wronged. Well then, it was Venus the wife: yet we would
have her to stand as a pattern to be imitated for her tricks that she played
with Mars, oh now (say they) you run to the fables again, why what reason is
there that you should grieve to here those things at our tongues and yet explaud
them on your own stages? why does it vex you that we should say (a thing
utterly incredible but that it is so fully proved) that those foul and open
crimes of their gods instituted and celebrated in their public honors, and by
their own commands.

L. VIVES.
BEcause (a) we place.] Cir. 2. de not, deor. The Sky as Ennius, Euripides,
the South-sayers and the whole world affirm, is Jove: the Air, between that
and the Sea, (as the Stoics hold) is Juno sister and wife to Jove by reason of
the airs likeness, and nearenesse to Heaven, now they made the air a woman,
because it is the softest thing that (b) is. Neptune Saturnes three sons
shared the world: Jove had Heaven, Neptune the Sea: Pluto the Earth. Juno Sa^es
Son.
married Jove, and was made Lady of the Air, this fable arose from thence,
because that in the dividing of the fathers kingdom, Jove got the East,
resembling Heaven, (wherein also mount Olimpus stood, whose likelihood of name
added to the fiction.) Neptune had the navy: Dis or Pluto the west part of the
realm fained to be hell: Saturn was said to be banished into Hell because he
fled from the East, into Italy, lying in the West: (c) Salacia of Salum (...).
the salt foam, varro: the water old of (faith fest.) was called Salacia, a
salum ciendo, of moving the froth, so the Poet Pacuuius uses it. Neptune was a
cunning seaman, and made Admiral by Jove, for which posterity deified him. (d)
Proserpina. Of her, before. Her mother finding her in Hell, begged and obtained
of Jove that she might be half the year with her on earth and half a year
with Pluto. She had her name A proserpendo, because she crept some while this
way and some while that, being all one with the Moon and the earth. Uarro: you
may read of her rape almost every where. (e) foure] First fire, then air, then
water and lastly earth. (f skie] Heaven it self and the upper region of the
air, they called Ethaer or the sky. the lower parts, air only, though the
Poets confound them. (g) Minerua] daughter of Jove and Themis, says Euhemerus,
Hist. sacr. There were five Mineruas, but the Poets confound them all. Tull. de
not deor. One was borne (they say) of Jove's brain and is the Goddess of all
wisdom, and therefore was held so borne and a Virgin: and her throne was
counted the highest in heaven. Martian, Nupt. lib. 6. Virgo armata deceas rerum
sapientia Pallas,
Aetherius fomes, men's and solertia f^ti,
Ingenium mundi, prudentia sacra tonantis,
A^dor doctificus, nostraeque industria sortis.
Quae fa^is arbi^ium sapientis praeuia curae,
A^ rationis apex, diuumque hom numque sacer (...).
Vl^a terga means rapidi ac splendentis Olympi,
Celsior vna Jove flammantis circulus aet^rae.
Paslas, thou armed Virgin, wisdoms wonder,
Fate judging fair, fount of Aethereall light:
Worlds understanding, and arbritre^e of thunder,
Ar^s ardor, spring, wherein man cleares his sight,
Discretions arch, which reason reigns under,
Essence, in gods, and men, su^ mounting bright:
Towr^ng beyond the Spheres, and all in fire,
Throned above Jove, far brighter, and far higher.
(h) in the capitol] Now Jove almighty (says Tully) that rulest all, and then
Juno his fellow, and thou Pallas Minerua, and all you gods that inhabit the
capitol. etc. Pro equit in exil. Tarqui^ Priscus in the Sabine war vowed a
temple to Jove, Juno, and Minerua, and playned the top of Mount Tarpeius to
make a place for it to stand in, but was slain ^e he had laid the foundation,
so it was renewed and finished by Tarquin the proud, and called the capitol
because of a man's head that was found in digging the foundation. Before this,
there was a temple to Jove, Juno, and Minerua, on Floras cliffe. Diodor. Sicul.
(i) Because.] Saturn was son to Caelus and Terra, a most ungracious flellow,
but quitted by his Son Jove, who expelled him, as he Saturn.
had expelled his father, and so made the proverb true. Do as as you would be
done unto. Hereafter he was called the god of time. Hesiod, Euhem, Diod,
Cicero. Saturn, is he (they say) that diuides and distinguishes the times: and
therefore the Greeks call him (...), which is, (...).
sp^ce of time. He was called Saturnus, quasi Satur annis, full of years, and
was faygned by the Poets to devour his children, because time deuoures all
things. He was imprisoned by Jove, that is limited by the stars from running
too wild a course. (k) their wisest] Uarro de ling. lat. lib. 3. calls Juno
both Terra and Tellus. Plutarch interprets Juno the earth, and the nuptial
conjunction of man and wife. Eusebius, de prep. Euang, Seruius says that Jove is
put for the Terra Tellus,
sky, and the air; Juno for earth and water

(l) ^Herein Terra] Terra, is the earth it self Tellus, a diminutiue, the
goddess of the earth, though the Poets confound them, yet they always said
Tellus her temple and not Terra's. Pluto also and Proserp, were called Tellumo,
and Tellus, also Altor, and Runsor were both his names, and he had charge of
all earths business: so that some say he was Ceres Son Diodor. lib. 6.
Porpheryus calls one part of the earth, Uizy the fat and fertile, Ceres, and
the craggy, hilly and stony, Ops, or Rhea. Eusebius. de praep Euang, where he
says much of these things. lib. 3. (m) is also] namely Rhea. (n) Mother] for
as she was Juno she was his wife and sister; and as she was Ops his mother. (o)
Ceres] the earth is called Ceres, a Gerendo, of bearing corn, or of Ceres.
Cereo to create. Varro! Tully. out of Chrisppus, for the earth is mother to
all. Pluto in Cratyl. She was daughter unto Saturn and Ops, Sister to Uesta
and Juno, all these sisters and mothers they say is but only earth. Ovid.
Fast. 6. Ves^ eadem est, and terra subest, subit ignis vtrique,
Significat sed^ terra socusque suam,
Vaesta is earth, and fire: earth undergoes,
The name, and so does fire: Vaesta's both.


And a little after. Sta^ v^ (...) sud, vi stando Vesta vocatur:
Earth stands alone, and therefore Vesta hight.
To this does Orpheus and Plato both assent (p) yet Vesta] Cic. de not deor.
for Uesta is derived Vesta.
from the Greeks being called with them Hestia; her power is over fires and
altars. de legib. 2 Vesta is a^ the cities fire, in Greek, which word we use
almost unchanged. Ovid East. 6. Nec in (...) Uestam quam viuam intellige
flammam,
Nataque de flamma corp^ra nulla vides,
Think Vesta is the fire that burns still,
That nere brought creature forth, nor ever will,


And being a fire, and called a Virgin, therefore did virgins attend it, and
all virginity was sacred unto it, first for the congruence of society and then
of nature which was alike in both: this custom arose in Aegipt, and spread
far, through the Greeks, and the Barbarian countries. Diodor. It was kept so
at Athens, and at Delphos, Plutar. Strabo, Uaestas sacrifices and rites came
from Ilium to Latium, and so to Rome by Romulus his means, and therefore
Virgill calls her often times, the Phrigian vesta. Sic ait et manibus vittas,
vestamque potenten,
Aeternumque adytis effert penetralibus ignem.
This said, he brings forth eternal Fire,
Almighty Vaesta, and her pure attire:


Speaking of Panthus the Troyan Priest. There was then for every Curia, a
Vaesta, Dionis. but Numa built the temple of the first public Vesta, In the
year of the city, X L. as Ovid accompteth. (q) Uesta Venus] naturally, for
the naturalists call the upper hemisphere of the earth Uenus, and Vesta also:
the nether, Proserpina, Plotinus calls the earths virtue, arising from the
influence of Venus, Uesta. Besides, Vesta being the worlds fire, and the
fatness coming from Venns, there is little difference, in respect of the
benefit of the universe, so that Vesta was every where worshipped, not as
barren, but as fruitful and augmentatiue, making the cities and nations happy
in eternal and continual increase. (r) How should.] The punishment of an
unchaste Uestall was great: but after thirty years, they might leave the
profession and Two (...).
marry.

(s) is there two] so says Plato In Conuiuio. Heavenly, procuring excellence
of conditions, earthly, provoking unto lust; the first, daughter to Caelus, the
later to Jove and Dione, much younger then the first. There was also a Uenus
that stirred up chaste thoughts. And therefore when the Roman women ran
almost mad with lust, they consecrated a statue of Uenus verticordia, out of
the Sibills books, which might turn the hearts from that soul heat unto
honesty. The Ciprian virgins custom.
Ualer. lib. 8. Ovid. Fast, 4. (t) Phaenicians] This Justin reports of the
Cipprians, lib. 18. It was their custom (says he) at certain set days to bring
their daughters to the sea shore ere they were married, and there to prostitute
them for getting of their dowries, offering to Venus for the willing loss of
their chastities. I think this was Uenus her law left unto the Ciprians whom
she taught first to play the mercenary whores. Lactant. The Armenians had such
anther custom Strabo. and the Babilonians being poor, did so, with their
daughters for gain. The Phenicians honored Uenus much for Adonis his sake who
was their countryman, they kept her feasts with tears, and presented her
mourning for him, Macrob. She had a Statue on Mount Libanus, which leaned the
head upon the hand and was of a very sad aspect: so that one would have thought
that true tears had fallen from her eyes. That the devils brought mankind to
this, will be more apparent (says Eusebius) if you consider but the adulteries
of the Phaenicians, at this day in Heliopolis and elsewhere they offer those
filthy acts as first fruits unto their gods. Eusebius. de. praeparat. Euang:
which I have set down that men might see what his opinion was hereof, though
my copy of this work of his be exceeding falsely transcribed. This custom of
prostitution, the Augilares of Afric did also use, that married in the night.
Herodot. Solin. Mela.

The Sicae also (of the same country') practiced the same in the Temple of
Uenus the matron, Ualer. The Locrians being to fight, vowed if they conquered,
to prostitute all their daughters Mars.
at Uenus feast. (v) Iunos Son.] It may be Mars that lay with Uenus, and
begot Harmonias, (for he was Iunos son, borne (they feigned) without a
father, because they knew not who was his father) It may be Mars, by that which
follows, cooperarius Mineru^, Vulcan.
for both are gods of war: but, It is rather meant of Vulcan, son to Jove
and Juno, (though usually called Iunos son and Apator) who was a Smith in
Lemnos, and husband unto Venus that lay with Mars. So it were Vulcans wrong to
call her whore, for to be a cuckold is a disgraceful thing. (x) Minerua's
forger] Or fellow workers, for they both have charge of Jove's thunder, and
sometimes through his bolts. Virgil Ipsa Iouis rapidum iaculata e nubibus ignem.
Quite through the cloud she threw Jove's thundering fire.


Which there are but three may do (says Seruius) Jupiter, Minerua and Uulcan,
though Pliny be of another mind. De discipline. Etrusc. and Rom (lib. 2.)
Minerua looks unto I^ues Aegis, which was indeed his apparel; made by
Minerua's wisdom and Vulcans labor: And though Jove's bonnet be fire, yet
Pallas made it. Mart. Nupt. Or is Vulcan her fellow forger, because he begat
Apollo on her, that has the tuition of Athens? Cic. de not. (lib. 3.) But
Augustines mind I think rather is this, that Uulcan is Minerua's fellow
forger. Because she is called the goddess of all arts, even the mechanical:
and he is godde of the Instruments used in all these mechanical arts. Fire is
the instrument of all arts (says Plutarch) if one knew how to use it. De
vtilit. inimic. Besides Vulcan is said to govern arts himself. The warlike
arts (says Eusebius) were Minerua's charge, the pyrotecknical, or such as
work in fire, Vulcans: Theodoret says that the Greeks used the word Vulcan
for arts, because few arts can be practiced without fire. Phurnutus says
that all arts are under Minerua and Vulcan, because she is the Theory, and he
the Instrument of practice. And therefore Homer says of a worke-man thus:
(...), Whom Vulcan taught and Minerua.

Of the multitude of Gods which the Pagan Doctors avouch to be but one and
the same Jupiter CHAP. 11.
WHerefore let them flourish with their physics as long as they like. Let
Jupiter be one while the (a) soul of this terrene world, filling the whole
fabrike of the four Elements, more, or less, as they please; and another
while but a quarter-ruler with his brethren and sisters: let him be the sky
now, embracing Juno which is the air under him, and let him by and by be sky
and air both, filling the lap of the earth, his wife and mother with fertile
showers and seeds; (b) This is no absurdity in their Divinity; And (to omit
the long and tedious catalogue of his remooues and strange transmutations)
let him forthwith be but one, and that only God, of whom the famous Poet
was thought to say: -- Deumque namque ire per omnes,
Terrasque tractusque maris caelumque profundum.
-- (c) For God his spirit imparts,
To the earths, the seas, and heavens profoundest parts.


(d) Let him be Jupiter in the sky, Juno in the Air, Neptune in the Sea,
Salacia in the seas depth, Pluto in the earth, Proserpina in the earths lowest
part, Vesta in ye households fire, Vulcan in the Smiths shop, Sol, Luna and the
stars in the spears, (e) Apollo in divination (f) Mercury in traffic, in (g)
Ianus (h) the Porter, in the Bounds Terminus, in time Saturn, in war, Mars and
(i) Bellona, in the vineyards, Bacchus, in the Corn, Ceres, in the Woods, (k)
Diana, in men's wits, Minerua, let him rule the (l) seed of man as Liber, and of
women, as Libera, as he is father of the day, let him be (m) Diespiter, as
ruler of the monthly disease of women, let him be the goddess Mena: and (n)
Lucina that helps in their childbirth. And helping the fruits which increase,
let him take the name of Ops. Let him be (o) Vaticanus, that opens the childs
mouth first, to cry, and Leuana, that takes up from the mother: and Cunina,
that guards the Cradle. Let none but him sing the destinies of the newborn
child, and be called (p) Carmentes, let him sway chance, and be styled
Fortune, or women's dugges, and be called (q) Rumina, (because the ancients
called a dugge Rum^) let him be (r) Potina and suckle the hog-babes: or
Educa and feed them: Or Pauentia, for frighting them, or (t) Venilia for
sudden hope: Volupia for pleasure, Agenoria for action, Stimula for
provocation, Strenua for confirming man's courage, Numeria for teaching children
to tell twenty (u) and Camaena for singing. Nay let us make him (x) Consus,
for his counsel, (y) Sentia for his sententious inspirations, (z) Inuentas
for the guiding of our (a) egresse from youth, to fuller age. For our chins
sake (which if he love us, he clothes in hair) let him be (b) Fortuna Barbata:
Nay free, because he is a male-Godde, let him either be Barbatus, as Nodotus
is, or because he has a beard, let him not be Fortuna, but Fortunius.
Well, on, let him be Iugatine, to look to the Hills, and at the loosing of
a virgins nuptial guirdle let him be inuoked by the name of Virginensis:
let him be (c) Mutinus: which amongst the Greeks was Priapus, but that (it
may be) he will be ashamed off. Let Jupiter alone be all these that I
have reckoned, and that I have not reckoned (for I have thought fit to omit a
great many,) or as those hold, which make him the soul of the world (many of
whom are learned men) let all these be but as parts and virtues of him: If it
be so, as I do not yet inquire how it is, what should they loose if they took
a shorter course, and adore but one God? what one thing belonging unto his
power were despised, if himself entirely were duly worshipped? If they fear
that some of his parts would be angry for being neglected, why then it is not
as they say, that all this is but as the life of one soul, containing all those
gods as the parts, powers, virtues and faculties thereof: but every part has a
life, really and distinctly separate from the other: This must needs be true,
if one of them may be offended, and another be pleased, and both with one act.
And to say that whole Jove would be offended, if al his parts were not
severally worshipped, this were foolish? for there were not one of them left
out, if the person were adored in whom they are al jointly included. For to
permit the rest, (being inumerable) whereas they say that the stars are al and
every one real parts of Jove, and live, have reasonable souls, and therefore
are absolute gods; they say they know not what, and see not how many of them
they leave without Altars and without worship, both which not-withstanding they
have exhibited themselves and commanded others to exhibit unto a certain small
number of them: Wherefore if they doubt the anger of the rest, why are not they
afraid to live in the displeasure of the most part of heaven, having given
content but unto so few? Now if they worshipped al ye stars inclusiuely in
Jupiters particular person, they might satisfy them all by this means in the
adoration of him alone: for so, none of them would think much, seeing they all
were worshipped in him: nor should any have cause to think they were contemned:
Whereas otherwise the greater part may conceive just anger for being thus
omitted by those that give all the honor unto a very few: And their anger may
well be the greater in that they shine above as vn-regarded, and behold filthy
Priapus stand naked below, in great respect and credit.

L. VIVES.
THe soul (a) of this] The opinion of Thales, and Democritus. The Stoics held
with Pl^ that God was a spirit, but that ^ee used not the World as a body. That
the World was: GOD, and had a soul, and an intellect, but that it was not
the foresaid GOD. The old writers, (as Tully and Pliny, following Homer)
thought that the Sun was the soul (...) the world. Phurnutus says the world
has a soul called Jupiter, that rules it even as our Jupiter.
soul does us. (b) This is no] Earth (says Hesiod) bore Caelus and then lay
with him, and bore him eleven children whereof Saturn was one. (c) For God]
Most of the old writers held God to be a power diffused through the universe.
(d) Let him] The wisest Gentiles held that there was but one God, diversely
styled, by his diverse qualities. Arist. de mundo. Plut. de placit. Philos.
Macrobius puttes the son for all the gods. Saturnal. (e) Apollo] Holding him
to be the Apollo.
worlds eye, they might easily think he could see al things, past, present
and future. So was he sought unto, far and near, but gave answers especially
at Delphos. Diodor. Which Oracle had this original. There was a deep and
obscure cave, there where the shrine in Delphos was first: whereunto a Goat
coming by chance to feed, was inspired with an extraordinary spirit, The (...)
(...) (...).
and began to leap and dance beyond measure. Which the sheap-heard wondering
at, and coming to the mouth of the Cave, he grew rapt himself, and began to
prophecy. And others upon trial, did so also: where-upon it grew to that pass
that such as would know things to come, would but bring one to lean his head
into the Cave and he should answer them the truth to all that they would ask.
Which afterward they finding to be dangerous (for it had been the death of
diverse) they built a Temple there unto Apollo, and ordained a Virgin to receive
the inspiration, upon a frame a good height from the Cave, and so to give
answers to the inquirers, which frame they named a Tripos, of three feet,
having the same shape that the brazen The Tripos. The Pythia.
Tripodes had afterward. This Virgin Priest was called the Pythia, at first a
Virgin, like Dianes Priest. Afterward Echechratus lying with y^ Pythia, they
ordained that the Priest should be under 50. years of age: meddling no more
with Virgins at any hand: only she went virgin-like, to keep some memory of
the ancient custom. Diodor. (f) Mercury] Accounted the God of Mercury.
eloquence, of bargains and contracts, because words do al these. The
Merchants feast was in the Ides of May, that day that Mercuries Temple was
dedicated: The Greeks called him (...) that is a Market-man, and he had a
statue in the marketplace: Plautus describes his office in his Amphitruo:
whereof here-after. (g) In Ianus] being the eldest god of all, he ruled the
beginning of things. He was indeed King of Latium in Saturnes time. Some (as
Ovid and Festus) took him for the the old Chaos, and that his name Ianus was
thence derived. Others ab eundo, of going. Cic. de Not. de. whereof comes Ianua
gates. Cornificius says that Tully called Ianus.
him Eanus, and not Ianus. The hill Ianiculus bare his name, some say because
he was buried there, others because they went over it into Hetruria, He had
two faces, as the lord of beginnings Ianiculus.
and ends, of him read Ouids Fastorum, and Macrobius. (h) Proter] To look to
the gate, for which Ianus is put in the text. (i) Bellona] Of Bellum war, and
Duellona also. She was thought to be Pallas, because Pallas ruled war also.
The Greeks called him Ennuo, Hesich: her face was full of terror and
contention. Homer calls her (...); as he does Mars, and the Poets fained her to
be Mars his mother, and therefore calls him (...). She was called Ennuo, quasi
(...), etc. Of putting spirit and fury into those that were to fight, or of
being furious her self. Her Temple stood in the ninth region, and before it a
pillar, from which the sign of war was ever given, by putting forth a spear.
Ovid. (k) Diana] The Moon had many names: Lucina, Proserpina Hecate and Diana.
She was fained to be a virgin, given all to hunt much in the Woods, and
shooting. Wher-vpon Aeneas meeting his mother in the Woods thought it had
been Diana, Aeneid. 1. I have read these two verses of the Moon, but I know
not where. Terret, Lustrat, agit, Proscrpina, Luna, Diana,
Ima, superua, feras, sceptro, fulgore, sagita.
Diana, Luna, Proserpine, does strike, does spread, does fight,
The beasts, the Deities and devils, with scepter, shafts and light.


They are none of the grossest: Prudentius in his third book against
Symmachus, has these verses. -- Terque suas eadem variare figuras.
De^ique dum Luna est, sublustri splendet Amictu,
(...) succ^cta iacit calamos, Latonia virg^ est.
(...) Subni^a sedet solio Plutonia coninx
I^peritat ^ijs and dictat ^ura Megae^ae.
-- Three times she turns her shape,
She is the Moon, when bright her sphere does show*
Laton as daughter when she hunts below
But thronde in hell, shee^' Pluto^s wife, and awes
The furies, giving stern Megaera laws.


(l) Seed of] Liber and Libera were Ceres children, says Tully de not. deor.
(lib. 2.) Many think they are Sol and Luna, who have power over generation.
Liber of the men and therefore the Satyrs were said to accompany him, and
Pyrapus was worshipped in his Temple: Libera Diespiter. Lucina.
for the women. (m) Diespiter] Quasi Dios Pater, or the father of the day.
Varro. (n) Lucina.] This was Luna, Diana or Juno, Cicero. Juno Lucina help me,
cries Glycerium in Terences Andria. She was also called Opigena, of her help
in the women's travels, and worshipped at Rome of the Matrons. F^stus. Tym^us
says that the night that Alexander the great was Opigena.
borne, Diana's Temple at Ephesus was burned, because she would not be absent
from Olympi^s his mother in her labor, and so was far from her Temple when it
was fired. The Romans worshipped Ilythia also for this end, who was a fate or
fayry (says Pausanias) and came from Ilythia.
the North to Delos to help Latona in her travel: and was placed at Athens
amongst her Gen^tullides, the gods that looked unto natiuities: They used to
place kneeling Images before them, because Nauplius his daughter was born in
that manner. Such also were the three Nexid^ in the Capitol before Minerua's
shrine, whereunto the Matrons offered, as the protectors of Childe-birth. M.
Attill. Glabrio brought them from the conquest of Antiochus. They were kneeling
statues. (o) Vaticanus] Of him before. (p) Carmentes] Called first Nicostratae,
daughter Carmentes.
to Ionis the King of Arcadia, who had Euander by Mercury, and had the spirit
of prophecy: She was called in Greek Thespiodon, in Latin, Carmente:. Dionys.
Of her Ovid says Ipsa Moan, quae nom^n habes de carmine dictum,
Qu^ simul ^thereos animo conc^perat ignes*
Ore dab^ pleno carmina vera Dei.
And thou that from the verse deriues thy name. And again
And being filled with aeth^iall fire,
She spoke, as Phoebus did her breast inspire.
There was the gate Carmentall in Rome, called afterward Scelerata, and near
to it an Altar in the Capitol, where she was placed. There were also the
Carmenae which told the destiuies of Port Scelera^a.
newborn children, whence Nicostrata had her name. Varro. They were also
called (...), and Camaenae without S. and they that honored them were called
Prophets, of their prophecies. There was also Faunus and Fauna, brother and
sister, he-mens fortune tellers* and she-womens: (q) Rumina] goddess of dugs.
Plin. Fest. There-was the fig tree Ruminall, where the Rumina.
she-wolfe gave Romulus and Remus suck. They offered milk and sprinkled the
sacrifices with milk that were offered to this goddess. (r) Potina] Or
Potica. Donat. in Terentii Phormio. The children were consecrated to Educa,
Potica, and Cuba, goddesses of meat, drink, and Educa and Potina.
sleep. Virg. Nec Deus hunc M^nsa, dea nec dignata cubili est.
Nor would the god give meat, nor goddess sleep.
(s) Educa] Not Edulica. (t) Venilia] Turnus his mother, sister to Latinus his
wife Amat^. Venilia of Ventus, wind, or of Venio to come. Varro. (u) Cumanae]
Cumanae were the Muses, of Venilia.
Cano, to sing. Seru. or Cumaenae, of Casta men's, a chaste mind says Festus.
Their Temple was at Port Capena in the first ward or region of the city.
Camaena in Latin, is Musa in Greek. They ruled humanity, and learning as well
as song: (Cic. Tus. quaest. 1.) They were called Cumaena.
Muses, of inquiring (...), and of Philosophy. (x) Consus] This was
Hippoposeidon. Li^. The Muses
Dion. Plut. The Arcadians built him a Temple before Romulus and Remus, calling
him y^ god Consu^.
of Counsels. Wherefore his Altar never came out of the earth where it lay
hid, but only at his feast. He directed Romulus in the rape of the Sabines:
the Greeks say he struck the earth with his mase, and it brought forth the
first horse, and thence has he his name. True it is that he first tamed horses
in those parts, add made them fit for man's use. (y) Sentia] Or Senta, or Fauna,
o^ Fatua sister and wife to Faunus, daughter to Picus. So called a Fando,
because she helped children to speak: Senta, because we speak our thoughts:
But this is but coniecturall: we leave it with the rest. (z) Iuuaentas] Of her
hereafter. (a) Degrees from youth* The text is, Post praetexta^* Pr^texta was a
vesture of dignity and magistracy brought from Hetruria to Rome: not wo^e S^a.
The pretexta.
by boys until Tarquinius Priscus his son had the wearing of that, and the
golden Bosse, for being valorous in the wars: from that time all free children
wore it: mary the Bosse was only theirs whose fathers had bin Head-Officers,
Curules. Macrob. At fourteen years they laid it by an^ took y^ man's gown,
Toga virilis, and the Senators sons, the Latus clauus, which some say Augustus
first put on at y^ age: the Latus Clauus was a purple coat, but not a gown. (b)
Fortuna ba^bata] The men of old offered y^ first shauings of their chins unto
Apollo: as Theseus did for one going to Delos. Plutarch* (c) Mutinus] Some ad
Tutinus, but it has bin the falt of some copier (...) La^s (...) that.
old; and so he has passed vn-obserued. I do not think it was Augustins: for
in his 6. book, he vs^ but Priapus for both these: Lactantius reads it well,
Mutinus, though some of his (...) (...)
have Futinus. (d) One soul.] Plato, Cicero and the Stoics held the world to
be but one creature: and to live one life, as a man lives.

Of their opinion that held God to be the soul. and the world to be the
body. CHAP. 12.
WHat of this? Ought not this to move the sharpest wits, nay all in general?

For indeed there is no great sharpness of wit required to the laying aside of
all wrangling, and to attend but whether God be the worlds soul or no and
whether the world his body or no, both making one creature, whether he be
natures (a) storehouse containing all things in himself? whether that out of
his (b) soul, that animateth all this whole mass* the lives and beings of all
living creatures be taken or no, each one according to their natures? and
whether that there be nothing on earth which is not part of God? If this were
true, mark but the irreligious consequence hereof: A man, if it were so,
should not tread, but still he treades part of God under his feet; and in
every creature that he killed he should kill a part of the Deity. I will not
relate what others may think upon. I cannot speak it without exceeding shame.

L. VIVES.
NAtures Store-house] Lucan. Placido natura receptat. Cuncta finu. (b) Soule] A
Pythagoricall sentence which Virgill expresses. Principio calum and terras
composque liquentes,
Lucen^ ^bum lunae, Titaniaque astra,
Spiritus ^lit, totamque infu^a per artus,
M^s agitat ^olem, and magno se corpore miscet.
Heaven, Earth and Sea, each in his proper bound,
The moons bright globe, and all the spangled round,
A spirit within does feed, does move, and pass,
Through every parcel of this spacious mass Aeneid. 6.



And likewise in his Georgikes, lib. 4. His quidam signis, atque haec exempla
secu^i,
Esse apibus partem diuinae mentis and ha^stus
Ethereo^ dixere: Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque (...) maris, Caelumque profundum.
Hinc pecud^s, armenta, viros, genus omne seraru^,
Quem que sibi tenu^s nascentem arescere vitas,
Scilicet huc reddi deinde and resoluta referri,
Omni^ ^orti esse locum, sed vi^a volare
Sider is i^ numerum, atque alto succedere caelo, etc.
These signs made some affirm that in a Be,
Was part of that celestial Deity*
For Gods diffused essence does appear,
Regent, in earth, air, sea, and every sphere,
To which for life, beasts, birds, and men do run,
And when their slender vital threed^s are spunne,
To this they all return, death has no right,
To ought of this, but to the starry height
They t^wre, and there sit ranckt in heavens high frame, etc.


(c) According to] Some more, some less, and some lesser: The nearer him, the
more, the farther the less. This is the opinion of many, and amongst others of
Aristotle de mundo.

Of such as hold that the reasonable creatures only are parts of the divine
essence. CHAP. 13.
IF they say indeed, that all things in the whole world do not participate
essence with God, but yet all reasonable creatures do truly, I cannot see how
that can stand. Then all the world is not God; for otherwise how can they keep
brute beasts from being part of him? But what needs all this? Let us go
but unto this reasonable creature, man; can there be a more damnable absurdity,
then to believe that part of Gods essence is beaten, when an offending childis
beaten? To make the subsistence of almighty God, be so lascivious, unjust,
wicked and damnable, as diverse men are: What man can endure to hear it but he
that is absolutely mad: lastly how can God be justly angry with those that
do not worship him, when as they are parts of his own self that are
guilty? So then, they are forced to say that every particular godde has his
life and subsistence by himself, and that they are not pieces of one another,
but each one that is particularly known, must have his peculiar worship:
that is known I say, because they cannot all be known. Over all whom,
Jupiter being King, thence it comes (as I imagine) that they believe him to
be the sole erecter and protector of Romes Monarchy. For if it were not he
that did it, whom should they think able to perform so great a work? each
one having his peculiar task already so distinctty assigned, that one must by
no means meddle with that which was under the charge of another. So then the
conclusion is, it must needs be only the King of gods, that erected and
preserved this Kingdom of men.

That the augmentations of Kingdoms are unfitly ascribed to Jove. Victory
(whom they call a goddess) being sufficient of her self to give a full
dispatch to all such businesses. CHAP. 14.
NOw heree is a question; why may not Sovereignty it self be a God? What
should hinder it more then (a) hinders Victory? Or what need men trouble I^e,
if Victory be but favorable enough, and will stay with such as she means to
make conquerors? If she be but propitious, let Jove mind his own business, the
nations shall come under. (b) Yea but it may be they are good men and loath to
wrong their neighbors that wrong not them, or to provoke them to war,
witho^t a iuster cause then mere desire to enlarge their Kingdom. Nay be
they of that mind, I commend them with all mine heart.

L. VIVES.
THen (a) Victory] Cato the elder built her a little Temple by the Market
place. She had also a greater Temple by that little one: which P Posth.
Megellus being Aedile built with Victoria a Goddess,
the mulot-money he had gathered; and dedicated it in his Consulship, with
M. Attill. Regulns, in the Samnites war. Sylla ordained plays for her in the
civil wars. Ascon. P^d. Cicer. in Verr. Actio. 1. She was daughter to Styx
and Pallas. (Hesiod.) and had Zeal, Power and Force to her brethren, which
always sit by Jove, nor reigns he nor any King without them. (b) It may
be] There are some copyes that differ from us here, but they are corrupted.

Whether an honest man ought to intertaine any desire to enlarge his Empire.
CHAP. 15.
VVWherefore let them observe, whether it befitte a good and upright man to
rejoice in the enlarging of his dominions. For it was the badnesse of those
against whom just wars were whilome undertaken, that has advanced earthly
soueraignties to that port they now hold: which would have been little still,
if no enemy had given cause nor provocation to war by offering his neighbor
wrong. If men had always been thus conditioned, the Kingdoms of the earth
would have continued little in quantity, and peaceful in neighbourly
agreement. And then a many Kingdoms would have been in the world, as a many
families are now in a city. So that the waging war, and the augmentation of
dominions by conquest may seem to the badde as a great felicity, but the good
must needs hold it a mere necessity. But because it would be worse if the
badde should get all the Sovereignty, and so overrule the good, therefore in
that respect, the honest men may esteem their own soueraingty a felicity. But
doubtless, he is far more happy that has a good neighbor by him in quiet,
then he that must be forced to subdue an evil neighbor by contention. It is
an evil wish, to wish for one that thou hate, or fear, or for one to
trouble thee that thou might have one to conquer. Wherefore if the Romans
attained to so great an Empire by honest, upright and just wars, why should
they not reverence their enemies iniquity, and take itfor their goddesses good?
For we see that Iniquity has given good assistance to the increase of this
Empire by setting on others upon unjust provocation to just war, that so the
Romans might have just cause to subdue them, and so consequently to enlarge
their own dominions. And why should not Iniquity be a goddess (at least among
forreyne Nations) as well as Fear and Palenesse and Fever was at Rome? So that
by these two Deities, Iniquity and Victory, the first beginning the wars, and
the latter ending them with the conquest, Romes Empire was enlarged infinitely,
whilst Jove kept holyday in the Capitol. For what has Jupiter to do here
wh^e those (which they may say are but merely his benefits) are worshipped,
i^ed and accoumpted for direct deities and parts of his essence? Indeed (...)
should have had a fair good hand in this business, if that he were called
^eraignty as well as she is called Victory. But if that (a) Sovereignty be
but a mere gift of Jove's, then why may not Victory be so too? Both would be
(...) to be so if the Romans did not worship a dead stone in the
Capitol, b^ the true King of Kings and Lord of all domination both in earth
and Heaven.

L. VIVES.
I^ (a) Kingdome] So says Homer in diverse places.

The reason why the Romans, in their appointments of several Gods for
every thing and every action, would needs place the Temple of Rest or Quiet
without the Gates. CHAP. 16.
But I wonder much that the Romans appointing particular gods over every
thing, and almost every motion, Agenoria, that stirred men to action, Stimula
(a) that forced them forward, (b) Murcia that never went out of her pace: And
as (c) Pomponius says, made men slothful, and disabled them from action,
Strenua that made men resolute: Unto all which gods and goddesses they
offered public sacrifices, and kept sollemne feasts, Being to dispose (d) of
Quiet, the goddess of Rest, her they only vouchsafed a Temple without Port
Collina, but allowed her no public honors at all in the city. Whether was
this a sign of their unquiet and turbulent spirits, or that those who had
such a rabble of diuell-gods. No worship and reverence, should never come to
enjoy that Rest, whereunto the true Phsition inuiteth us, Saying: Learn of me
that I am meek, Math. 11. 29. and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest unto
your souls. Math. 11. 29.


L. VIVES.
STimula (a) This may be Horta, that in her lifetime was called Hersilia,
Romulus his wife; called Horta of exhorting men to action. Labeo. Her Temple
was never shut, to signify Stimula.
that she would never have men idle: She was after called Hora, goddess of
Providence, of the Greek word (...), to enforce. Plut. Of this goddess, Ovid,
Gellius and diverse others do speak. Murcia.] Hereof read Hermolaus Barbarus
his note upon Plinies 15. book. Pliny. There was an old altar unto Venus
Myrta, now called Myrtia. (c) Hermolaus] I read it Murcia, Hora.
out of Festus, Liuy, Plutarch, Varro and Cornelius Nepos. For Murcia is the
goddess of sloth as Agenorea, Strenua and Stimula are of industry: Pomponius,
Augustinus and Apuleius speaking of the Murcian bounds, mean those that were
dedicated unto Venus. Some say that Auentine was ^urcia.
called Murtius, because it was like a wall, Murus, not of Murcia the goddess,
nor the potters. Ammianus says, there was some in Italy, that because they
would not go to the war, cut of their thumbes, and were called Murci. Murcide,
says Plautus to a sluggish fellow. Thus far Hermolaus, the most dilligent
Author of our times. So that whereas Festus says there was a Chapel at
Auentines foot sacred unto Murcia, it is better to read Murciae. (Liu. lib.
1.) Then many thousand of the Latins were received into the city and for the
ioining of the two hills Palatine and Auentine, were appointed to build the^
houses by Murcias Chapel, Venus Murcia: there was also one called Myrtea.
Plut. Problem. (c) Pompeius] Hermolaus, Beroaldus, and others cite Pomponius
herein, but show not plainly which Pomponius it is, for there were many of
that name, that were writers; as namely Atticus, and the Author of Atelanae,
and the Orator (all of Tullies time) Mel^, and Julius the Tragedian, whom
Quintilian names, and the Lawyer, all Pompon^. (d) Quiet] I think this Quiet
belonged to the dead, for Hell of old was called Quietalis, and therefore was
this godde dis-worshipped without the city. Her Temple was in the way to
Labicana. (Liuie in his 4. book.)

Whether if Jove being the chief godde of all, Victory be to be accounted as
one of the number. CHAP. 17.
Will they say (think you) that Jupiter sends this goddess Victory,
whether she pleases, and she obeying him, sets up her rest on that side
that he commands? It is trueindeed: but not of that Jove which their fondnes
dreameth is King of the gods; but of him that is the true King of all times
and all things, that can send (not victory, which is no substance, but) his
Angels, and make them conquer whom he pleases; whose counsels may be
unknown, but never unjust. For if Victory be a goddess, why is not Triumph a
God and husband unto her, or her brother, or son, or som-what? For they
believe such absurdities of the gods, as if the Poets should but feign, or we
but cast (a) them in the teeth with, they would presently answer, it were a
ridiculousfigment, not to be attributed to the true gods: and yet they laugh
not at themselves, who did more then read those dotages in the Poets, when
they adored them in their Temples. Wherefore they should worship and adore
only Jupiter indeed and let all this multitude pass. For if (b) Victory be
a goddess and subject unto that King, she dares not resist him, but must be
ready to fulfill his pleasure whither-soeuer he send her.

L. VIVES.
CAst (a) them in the] Some read Epaggerarentur, but not so well. (b) Victory
be] Porphyry says that Jove was pictured holding a scepter in his left hand,
and in his right, sometimes an Eagle, sometimes Victory. The Eagle to show that
he was King of all, as she was of the birds: Victory to show all things to be
subject unto him. Or as Phurnutus says, because none could conquer him. Porph.
Rat. nature. deor.

Why Fortune and Faelicity were made Goddesses. CHAP. 18.
NAy Faelicity (a) is a goddess also now: She has got her an Altar, a
Temple, sacrifices, and every thing fit: Why should not she have all the
worship to her self? VVhere-soeuer she is, there should all good be. But
why is Fortune preferred to the honor of a Deity? Is Faelicity one thing and
Fortune another? Yes, Fortune may be both good and badde, bu if Faelicity once
grow badde, she loses her name. Truly I think we should have all Faelicity
always good but Fortune not so.
the gods, of both sexes (if they have sexes) to be still good ones: and so
thought Plato and diverse other excellent Philosophers and Statesmen. How then
can the goddess Fortune be now good and now evil? Is she no goddess when she
is not good, but is turned imediately into a Devil? Why then how many
goddesses are there? Even as many as there be fortunate men, that is good
fortunes. For many badde fortunes and many good, that is, at one time falling
together; Fortune should be both good and evil at once, if she be all
these: good to these and badde to the other. But she that is the goddess is
always good: Well, suppose, is she Faelicity her-selfe: Why changes she her
name then? Yes, that may be tolerated. For many things have two or three
names. But why then has she (d) diverse Temples, Altars, and ceremonies?
Because (say they) that is Faelicity that does follow a man's deserts: That good
Fortune which lights casually upon good and evil, (c) Fortune.
without any respect of deserts: and is therefore called Fortune. How can she
then be good, coming with no discretion as well to evil men as good? And why
is she adored, being so (e) blind that she commonly ouer-runnes those that
honor her, and stays with those that scorn her? If her servants obtain
grace at her hands, and get her to stay with them, then she follows merits,
and is Fortune no more. Where is her definition then? How then does all go by
chance? If she be Fortune, in vain is all her worship: but if she
discern, and help her servants, then she is Fortune no more. But does not
Jupiter (e) send her also whether his pleasure is? Well if he do, then let
him have all the worship to himself: for she cannot gainsay him, if he
bid her depart to such or such a man. Or it may be that the evil do honor
her, to get themselves some merit whereby they may purchase Faelicitie, and
so enjoy her company in steed of Fortunes.

L. VIVES.
FAelicity (a) is a] Pliny names her Temple often. Archelaus the Statuary sold
her Image to Lucullus for LX. HS. Plin. lib. 53. (b) Diverse Temples] Evil
Fortune had a Temple at Port Esquiline. Valiant Fortune had one upon Tibers
bank: Riding Fortune by the Theater. There was also the Temple of Little
Fortune, and Fortune the Virgin: another of Fortuna Primogenia, another of
Oqsequens, at Port Capena, and there was also Fortuna priuata, Uiscata,
Publica, Uirilis, and Conuertens, all on Mount Palatine: there was also
Hopeful fortune, Saving fortune, Smooth and doubtful fortune in Auentine, and
Fortuna Mammosa in the 12. region of the City: as also Barbata, and Muliebris,
unto all which Seruius Tullus gave Original, partly because that from a slave
he was preferred to the Kingdom, and partly because he saw that Fortune had an
especial hand in the occasions of humain affairs. Plut. Prob. (c) Without any
respect] As far as we know: and therefore she is said to come without cause,
because we cannot perceive them, as Aristotle and Plato says. Speusippus says
that fortune is a motion from one secret cause unto another: Hereof read
Aristotle's Physickes (lib. and de bono Fortunae. lib.) being a part of his
moralty. (d) Blind] This Aristophanes recites very conceitedly of Plutus, who
is godde of gain. Lucian has used the argument in his Misanthropus. (e) Send
her] So says Aristophanes, and that Plutus being sent by Jove unto good men,
goes lamely: but unto the bad, Plutus lame and sound.
with speed.

Of a Goddess called Fortuna Muliebris CHAP. 19
NAy they are in such dotage upon this same Fortune, that they do steadfastly
affirm that the Image (a) which the Matrons dedicated and named Fortuna
Muliebris, the woman's fortune, did speak particular words; and that not
once but often, saying that they had (b) dedicated her in a very good order
and respect: which if it were true, we ought not to wonder at. For the Devils
can use Fortunes Image did speak by the devils means.
this cousenage with ease; which was the more discouerable, in that it was she
that spoke, who follows chance, and not desert. Fortune spoke, but Faelicitie
was silent: unto what other end was this, but only to make men neglect lining
well, seeing that without any desert this Lady Fortune might make them
fortunate? But yet if Fortune did speak, the (c) man's fortune (me thinks)
should have spoken, and not the woman's, because otherwise, (d) the women that
consecrated the statue might be thought to feign that the Image spoke, because
they love so well to be heard speak themselves.

L. VIVES.
THe Image (a) which] After Romes freedom from the Kings, 18. years,
Coriolanus warring inexorably against his country, neither departing for
threats nor tears, the women's lamentations turned him away: and here-vpon
they erected a Temple to Fortuna Muliebris, in Fortuna Muliebris.
the Latin Road, four miles from Rome: In which dedication the Image spoke
twice. First thus, Matrons well have you seen me and dedicated me. Liu.
Valor. Plut. Lactantius says that she foretold a danger to ensue: Which were
questionless the words that she spoke the second time. It was sacrilege for
any but such as had once bin married to touch this Image. Festus. (b)
Dedicated.] Propter in the Latin is superfluous. (c) Man's fortune] Whose
Temple was on Tybers bank: and her feast in Aprils Calends. Ovid fast. 4. (d)
Women [For men would be sooner trusted then women.

Of the Deifiaction of Virtue and Faith by the Pagans, and of their omission of
the worship that was due to diverse other gods, if it be true that these were
gods. CHAP. 20.
THey made a goddess also of (a) Virtue: which if she were such should take
place of a great many of the rest. But being no goddess, but a gift of God,
let it be obtained of him, that alone has power of the gift of it, and
farewell all the buried roll of these counterfeit gods. But why is Faith made a
goddess, and graced with a Temple and an Altar? VVho-soeuer knows faith well,
makes his own bosom her Temple. But how know they what Faith is, when her
chief office is to believe in the true God? And why may not Virtue suffice? is
not Faith Faith.
there where Virtue is? They divide (b) Virtue but into four parts, Prudence,
Virtues Parts.
Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance; and because every one of these has
several sub-diuisions, therefore falls (c) Faith to be a part of Justice,
and is of Habuc. 3.
chief power with us, that know that the Just shall live by faith: But I
wonder of these men that do so thirst after store of gods, that having made
Faith a goddess, they will so neglect a great many goddesses more of her
nature, to whom they should afford Temples and Altars as well as to her? Why
is not Temperance made a goddess, having given such luster to diverse (d)
Roman Princes? Nor Fortitude that held (e) Scaeuolas hand in the fire; and
went with (f) Curtius into the spacious gulf for the love of his country: And
stood by the two Decij (g) the father and (h) the son, when they vowed their
lives to their nation? (i) If by the way, this were true valor in them, as it
is a question, (but not disputable here?) Why are not Prudence and Wisdom
made Deities as well as the rest? Because they are all worshipped under the
general name of Virtue? So might all the supposed parts of one GOD be
intyrely worshipped in his sole and particular worship. But in Virtue, there
is Faith, and (k) Chastity, as parts indeed, and yet those must have peculiar
Altars and Sacrifices. But it is vanity and not verity that turns such
qualyties into Deities.

L. VIVES.
OF (a) Vertue] Mancellus in his first Consulshippe vowed a Temple to her in
Gallia: And his son built it at Port Capena. (Liu. lib. 29.) The next Marius
built to Virtue Virtues. Temple.
and Honor, lower then the other, least the Augurs should pull it down for
hindering of them in beholding the Birds flight. (Cic. de leg. lib. 2.) Let
them worship those things that help men to Heaven: Faith, Wisdom, Piety
and Virtue. Faithes Temple was in the Capitol, (Plin. lib. XXXV. Cic. offic.
3.) near unto Jove's, and was his oath as Tully says out of Ennius, and Cicero
de not. deo. 2. It is said that Attillius Calatine consecrated her: Some say
Aneas did long before Romulus. Festus. Liu. Then were two Diumuirs elected,
for dedicating the Temples. Q. Fab. Maxim. and Attilius Crassus. The Temples
were dedicated to Men's, and Venus Erycina: both in the Capitol, and but a Men's
a Goddess.
gutter between them. Dionisius. Plut. say that Numa dedicated the Image of
Faith, and made her name the greatest oath of all. (b) Virtue but] Plato,
Aristotle etc. (c) Faith to bee] Faith is the foundation of justice: Cic.
offic. 1. Piety is justice toward the gods, whereof Faith is a Faith.
part. (De not. deo. lib. 1.) So says Speusippus. (d) Roman Princes] Here
were a place for Valerius his examples of moderation, profit by foes,
abstinence, continence, necessity, and shamefastness: for all these (says
Tully) depend on Temperance. (e) Scaeuola's] Porsenna besieging Rome, Sc^uola
went disguised into his Tents, and got so near, that he killed the Kings
Secretary Scaeuola.
in stead of the King: and when Porsenna bad torture him, he put his hand
boldly into the fire of sacrifice, being at hand, and held it there, till the
King and all about him were amazed with fear and admiration. (f) Curtius] They
say there was a lake in the Marketplace of Rome, which afterward dried up: it
was called Curtius his lake: some say of Metius Curtius Curtius.
the Sabine, that swamme over it with his horse: Others of M. Curtius the
Gentleman of Rome, that upon the Oracles bidding the Romans cast the thing of
best worth they had into it, cast him-self in thereat. (Liu. lib. 1.) But
Cornelius and Luctatius write that it came by thunder, and that Curtius the
Consul payled it about; he with whom M. Gentius was Consul: Hence it was
named Cursius his lake, says Varro. (g) Father] He was a Plebeian, but a tall
soldior, and Decius.
a dear lover of his country: Being Consul with T. Manl. Torquatus in the
Latin war, and seeing in a vision that the life of one of the Generals must
be lost for the wars conclusion, and the whole army of the other (they being
two Generals for Rome) agreed that on that part of ye Romain army with first gave
back the General should give up himself to death for the safeguard of his
country. The battles join, the Romans left-wing gave back, and Decius seeing
that, sollemnly vowed him-self to death for the soldiers, and putting spurs
to his horse brake forth into the thickest of the adverse troops, and there was
slain. (h) Son] He was the 4. time Consul with Fabius his 5. time, he that in
the Galls wars was first called Maximus, of any Roman. In one of the
battles, Decius his troops shrinking, he follows his fathers example, and
into the midst of his foes he spurreth, dying, a sacrifice to honor and his
country. Liu. (lib. 10.) (i) If by the way] Valla in a declamation of his upon
the pleasures of an Epicure, extols this bravery of the Roman valor highly,
and with arguments both witty and worthy. The book is common: read it. (k)
Chastity] Her shrine was in the Beast-market, near to Hercules his round
Temple. (Liu. lib. 10.) Some took her statue for Fortunes. Fest. There was
also a little Temple Chastities Chapels.
in Long-street, dedicated to Chastity Plebeian by Virgins, but it wore out of
use and memory afterward. Liuie.

That such as knew not the true and only God had better have been contented
with Virtue and Faelicity. CHAP. 21.
FOr these are the gifts of God, not gods themselves. But where Virtue and
Faelicity is, what needs any more? What will satisfy him whom these two
cannot satisfy? Virtue confineth all good acts, and Faelicity all good (a)
desires. If it were for these that Jupiter was worshipped, (and what is the
extente and continuance of dominion, but an appurtenance of faelicity) why
perceived they not that these were but his gifts, and not deities them selves?
But if they were deities, what needs any beside them? For let them cast over
all the sum of their gods and goddesses functions, as their inventions have
distributed them, and find if they can, that he that has Virtue and
Faelicity, needs any of their helps, or has any use of them? What need he
trouble: (b) Mercury or Minerua for learning Virtue what it is.
virtue, including it al in her self? For virtue is but (c) an art of living
well and justly, as all the old writers do define it. And therefore some say
that the word art (d) comes of (...) in greek which is Virtue. But (e) if none
but witty men could be virtuous, what use then is there of father (f) Catius,
a god that makes men accute, when as Faelicity can do all this? For to be born
witty, is a faelicity. Wherefore, though the child being yet unborn could not
merit this faelicity; yet she be stowes wit upon the child as a benefit unto
the parents that honored her. But what need the women in Travel call on
Lucina, Faelicity being able with her presence both to make their labor easy,
and their offspring happy? What need Ops be troubled with the children when they
are newborn, Vaticanus when they cry? Cunina when they sleep, Rumina when
they suck, Statilius when they learn to stand; Adeona and Abeona when they
go, (g) Men's for a good mind for them, Volumnus and Volumna for a good will
for them? The (h) nuptial gods for their marriage, the field gods for their
harvest, and chiefly (i) Fructesia; Mars and Bellona for their fights,
Victoria for their victories, Honor for their honors, (k) Pecunia for their
riches, Aesculanus and his son Argentus for coin enough both of brass and
silver: the (first is the (l) father, because (m) brass money was in use
before silver) I wonder that Argentinus begot not Aurinus, for gold followed
soon after. If they had had Aurinus, sure as death he should have had place of
father and grandfather, as well as Jove had above Saturn: what need men run
unto so many for this good or that; (to such a crew as neither I can reckon nor
themselves dis^, having a god for every little act and accident of men) when as
felicity would have bestowed all, in far less time and with far less
toil; nor need any other be troubled, either for bestowing of good, or
diuerting of bad. Why should ^ssonia be called unto the weary, Pellonio to
chase away the foe, Apollo or ^pius to the sick, or both, and few enough in a
disease of danger? Nor needed Spi^ensis meddle with the thorns, nor any
entreaty to keep away (n) (...): Only Felicities present aid would keep all
mischieues away, and repulse them at their first approach. But now to shut up
this discourse of these two, Virtue and Felicity; if Felicity be the reward of
Virtue, then is it no goddess, but a gift of GOD, but if it be a goddess,
it must needs be the producer of V^, seeing that to attain to Virtue, is the
greatest Felicity.

L. VIVES.
GOod (a) desires] Optanda, not Obtinenda. (b) Mercury] He is Lord of
eloquence, she, of (...) and wits. (c) Virtue is but] The old writers called
all the virtues, arts and sciences Virtue.
of li^ well: and (which is all one) prudences; Plato in Memnon. The habit of
living well and justly is an art, as well as that whereby we play on
Instruments, wrestle, or make swords, apparel, or any thing. [But our
fellows conceive nothing but in schoole-tearmes, [] He louanists like not
this but leave it.] Art whence. Cato. Men's her temple.
them they are beaten to, come with others (though better) and then you gravel
them, then they are to seek, and think all that is spoken is absurdity] (d)
Comes off] Donat. in Andr. Terentii. ^comes of (...) by contraction. (e) If
none] I deny not but a grosse-brained fellow may be (...) man: more such are
so, then otherwise, but the excellent perfection of virtue, is (...) ^itty
alone. Virtue is seldom well laid up in dull brains (says Tully) Tusc.
quest. (f) (...) Cautius. The ancients used Catus for wise, politic and
industrious: and therefore (...) Portius was sur-named Cato. (g) Mens] Her
temple was vowed at the fight by (...) ^ake. Liu. lib. 22. dedicated three
years after by Attilius, being made Duumuir (...) that (...). It stood in the
Capitol next to Venus Ericina's, as I said before: and was conse^ ^y ^milius
Scaurus also, in the Cymbrian war. Her feast was on the seventh of Iunes
(...)) Nuptial gods] They that were to marry, offered to five gods: to Jupiter
adultus, The nuptial gods.
(...), Venus, Lepor, and to Diana chiefly: Hereupon they lighted but five
toarches at wedd^gs, neither more nor less: Leporius not an Epithet of Venus,
as Acron thought it was of S^le, but a goddess by her self, called Peitho,
the goddess of persuasion. Quintil. Hyme^ Peitho. Hymenaeus.
^so was a chief god inuoked at marriages, as in Catullus is plain. Seruius
(in 1. (...) says he was an Athenian, that delivered the Virgins in a most
extreme war: and therefore was invoked at marriages, as the discharger of
Virginity. Martian calls him the (...) of Bacchus and Calliopeia. (i)
Fructesia] Not Fruges. (k) Pecunia] Iuuenall. Sat. (...) ^esta pecunia templo
(...), nullas nummoru ereximus aras.
-- Though fatal money does not ^it,
Adored in shrine, nor has an Altar yet.


Seeing to say she had neither Temple nor Altar. It may be he knew not that
she was a godd^ ^or Varro says that many points of the Romans religion was
unknown even unto the learned. (l) Father] This is diversely read, but all to
one sense. (m) Brass money] Plin. lib. 33. The first stamp was set upon
silver in the year after Rome was built, D. LXXXV. Silver when first coined.
Q. Fabius being Consul, five years before the first African war: where
for D. You must (...) but CCCC. For that war began in the Consulshippes of
Ap. Claudius; brother to (...), and Q. Fuluius, CCCCXC. years after Rome was
founded. Eutropius says it was ^ed (...) that war: but he mistaketh the time
herein, as he does in many things besides. But (...) ^ee have spoken
sufficiently already. The stamp was two horses in a yoke, and four (...)
(...), and thereafter were they named. For the stamp of Victory came not up
until a (...) (...) the Confederates war, being set upon silver, mixed with
Copper. The golden Gold coin first.
pieces were coined in the second African war: LXII. years after the silver
came up. (n) Rubigo] Rubigo, is the putrified dew, eating and cankring the
young plants: in the morning Rubigo.
(says Pliny) and in quiet weather does this fall upon corn, and on clear
nights in va lies and places where the air is not moved: nor is it perceived
until it be done. High hills and windy places are never troubled with this
inconvenience. This feast Numa ordained to be kept on the seventh of Maies
Calends, for then does this canker the most mischief. This time Varro does
appoint to be when the sun is in the tenth degree of Taurus, as the course
went then: but indeed the true cause is, that 29. days after the aequinoctiall
of the spring, for the space of four days, on the 4. of Maies Callends, the
vehement star called the dog-starre sets: to which it is necessary to
offer a dog. This from Varro. A dog indeed was sacrificed unto this Rubigo.
Ovid. Fast. 4. Varro talks of a god called Robigus also, that is joined with
Flora. (Rer. rustic. lib. 1.) making them one of the six pair of gods that
he calls upon, Robigus. quasi. Rodigus, of Rodo, to gnaw or eat away. Rubigo
is properly a sore or ulcer gotten by filthy lust. Rust upon Iron also is
called rubigo, growing upon it (as upon corn) for want of motion.

Of the knowledge of these Pagan gods, which Varro boasts he taught the
Romans. CHAP. 22.
What great good turn then does Varro boast that he has done unto his
Citizens, in the particularizing of the gods, and their worshippes that the
Romans must observe? For what booteth it (says he) to know a Physician by
name and by face, and yet to be ignorant what a Physician is? so likewise it
booteth not (says he) to know Aesculapius unless you know that he cures
diseases: otherwise you know not what to pray to him for. And this he
confirms in another simyly saying: A man cannot live well, nay he cannot live
at all, if he know not the Smith the Painter, the Carpenter etc. distinctly,
where to have this necessary, where that, where to be taught this or that. So
it is plain, that to know what power every god has, and upon what object, is
wonderful useful. For thence may we gather whom to sue unto for every
need we have, and not follow the (a) Mimickes, in begging water of Bacchus,
and wine of the (b) Nymphs. Who would not give this man thanks now, if his
doctrine were true, and did show the worship of the true GOD, of whom alone
we are to ask all things?

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Mimikes] To make sport. (b) The Nymphes] Or Lymphes. Lympha is all
moisture, and over all moisture do the Nymphs rule: The Nereides in the sea,
The Nayades in The sorts of the Nymphs.
fountains, the Napeae in the moisture of flowers and herbs: The Druides and
Hamadryades over the sap of trees: The Oreades over the humid hills. The
Nymphs are in number 3000. all daughters of Oceanus and Tethis. Hesiod. Theog.

Of the absolute sufficiency of Felicity alone, whom the Romans (who
worshipped so many gods) did for a great while neglect, and gave no divine
honors unto. CHAP. 23.
But if their books be true, and that Felicity be a goddess, how comes it
to pass that she has not all the worship unto her self, being of her
self sufficient for all needs? Who wishes any thing bu^ happiness? And why
was it so (a) late, before (b) Lucullus, the first of all the Romans, thought
it fit to erect her a Temple? Why did not Romulus, that wished the city so
well, provide a place for her, seeing that her presence might have saved him
all his labor in praying to the other gods? he had never been King, nor ever
come to have been a god, had not she stuck to him. Why then did he clogge
the Romans with such a noise of gods, Ianus, Jove Mars (c) Picus (d) Faunus
(e) Tiberinus, Hercules; and all the rest. And what did Tatius bringing in
Saturn, Ops, Sol, Luna, Vulcan, (f) Lux, and to close up all, sweet
Cloacina, leaving Felicity in the duste? And what was Numa's mind to gather
such an host of he gods, and she gods, and leave her out? Could he not
find her for the multitude? Verily (g) Hostilius would never have brought
Fear, and Pallor to be templified, if he had had any knowledge of this
Felicity. For had she come there, Fear and Pallor must needs have been a
packing. Again, in all the increase of the Empire, she was not thought of, no
man served her, what was the reason of this? Was the Empire more great then
happy? Perhaps so: For how can true Felicity be their where true Piety is
not? And (h) Piety is the true worship of the Pity.
true GOD, not the adoration of those multitude of false gods, or devils,
whether you will. But afterward, when Felicity was entertained, and had got
a place with the rest, the great infelicitie of the civil wars followed
presently upon it. Was not Felicity angry (think you) that she was letten
pass so long, and then taken in at last, not to her honor but to her
disgrace, being ranked with Priapus, and Cloacina, and Fear, and Pallor, and
Fever, and a sort that were no gods to be worshipped, but defects in the
worshippers? Lastly, seeing she must be feign to share honors with so
unworthy a rabble, at least why had she not a better part of honors then the
others? Who could endure that the goddess Felicity should stand by, and
neither be reckned amongst the gods (i) Consentes, that were of Jove's
Council, nor the Select gods neither? Nor had not a Temple that should have
excelled all the rest in hight of posture? and magnificence of fabric? why
should she not have a better then Jupiter? For she her self gave him his
Kingdom, if ever he were a happy King, that happiness is of better worth
then Sovereignty, is most plain. For many men doubtless may be found, that
would not be Kings, but none that would not be happy. So that if the gods
were asked their minds, by augury, or otherwise, whether they would give place
to Felicity or no, I will undertake, that if all the room besides were filled
with other gods Altares, that Felicity could not have a ^itte place built,
Jupiter himself would give place, and let Felicity have his own seat upon
the top of the Tarpeian hill. Nor is there one of them that would not do as
much, unless (which is impossible) some of them would ^ee so mad as to loose
her favor and grow miserable. Jupiter would never ^se her, as (k) he was
used by Mars, (l) Terminus and (m) Iuuentas, who by ^o means could be
persuaded to give their King place. For (as they write) ^arquin being desirous
to build the Capitol, and seeing the place he thought ^ttest, already taken
up by other strange gods, durst not control them, ^ut thought that good
manners would teach them to give place unto their ^ing: and being that there
was a great sort there, where he meant to build, (...) asked them by augurie
whether they were willing to resign the place to ^ir King or no? All were
content, except Mars, Terminus and Iuuentas: And (...) the Capitol was built,
and they for their sauciness had such small monuments The Capitol.
left, that the Romans greatest divines did scarcely know where they stood.
But Jove would never deal so uncivilly with Faelicity, as Mars, Terminus and
Iuuentas dealt with him. And then those that would not yield to him, assuredly
would yield to her, that made him their King. Or if they would not; why then
it were because they had rather abide in obscurity in Faelicities house, then
to sit in eminence without her company, so that had she but the highest place,
the Citizens would soon learn where to pray for good guiftes, and in time,
by the very persuasion of nature: Put away that swarm of gods, and pray only
to Faelicity, offer only to her, and frequent her Temple only, if they
desired to be happy, as all would do; and so all men would come and beg
herself of her self, for who would beg any thing but Faelicity, of any god?
so that Felicity having power to be abiding with whom she list (as she may
if she be a goddess) what man were so foolish to go and entreat her
company of another god, when he may obtain it of her self? So that the
dignity of place also should of right be hers from all the other gods. For
they write that the ancient Romans did worship one Summanus, one that ruled
the thunder of the night, above Jupiter that ruled the day thunder. But after
that Jupiter had gotten him such a sumptuous Summanus.
house, the company came in so fast unto him, that one could (o) scarce find
one within a while, that had heard, nay more, that had read so much as the
name of Summanus. But now if Felicity be no goddess, being (in truth) but a
gift of GOD, Then is it fit to find out that GOD that can beestowe it, and to
throw aside this dangerous roll of counterfeite deities, which a skull of
fools do run thus headlong after, taking GODS guiftes, for GOD himself,
and by their obstinacy giving him continual cause of offense, whose guiftes
they are; for so shall he never want infelicity that honors Felicity as a
goddess, and neglects him that is the giver of all felicity: even as he
shall never want hunger that licketh the picture of a crust, and never asks
bread of him that has it to give him.

L. VIVES.
SO (a) Late] Lucullus was Consul with Cotta in the Cities DCLXVI. year. (b)
L^cullus] He warred against Mithridates, and Pompey entered (upon his place,
contrary to Lucullus.
the minds of the Nobles. Having sped well in the war with this King and
Tigranes, he built this goddess a Temple. (c) Picus] Saturnes son. Aenei.
7. He reigned in La^ Picus.
in the time of the Aborigines, and was turned by his wife Circe into a pie,
for loving of Pomona: and therefore the Romans held the pie for an holy
bird. (d) Faunus] Son to Faunu^.
Picus, father to the Fawnes and the Satyrs and Field-gods, Virg. ibid.
Plutarch calls him Mercuries son. Parallel. He reigned in Latium in the
Aborigines time, and brought his people from barbarism to a civil manner of
life: and was the first that gave names to places, and dedicated certain
Temples and Groves to the gods, from whom they were called Fana; his Oracle
was in Albunea, a wood of the Laurentes: some offered to him yearly, some
monthly, Val. Probus in 1. Georg. his feast was kept at Rome in the Nones of
December. Horat. Car. (...). (e) Tiberius] Son to Capetus, King of the
Albanes, a notable thief, and being drowned in Tyber, gave it that name by
his death, being ^fore Tiberinus.
called Albula. (f) Lux] The Romans worshipped Jupiter Luceius, as (...)
Salii sung, because he was held Lord of the light, and the cause thereof.
Fest. Ta^ ^la.
brought into Rome these gods: Ops or Flora, Diioue, Saturn, Soll, Luna,
Uulcan, S^manus, Larunda, Terminus, Curinus, Vorrundus, the Lars, Diana, and
Lucina. Varro de (...) lat. 4. (g) Hostilius] In the war between the
Romans and the Veii, Host^ being told that the Albanes were fallen from him,
and seeing the Romans pale and amazed hereat, in this turbulent state vowed a
Temple to Fear and Pallor. (h) Piety is] Piety is justice Fears and Pallors
temple.
toward the gods. Cic. de not. deor. (i) Piety is also reverence unto our
elders, and kindred, when it has reference to the gods, it is called religion.
There was in Rome a chapel of Piety dedicated by Acilius, there where she
dwelt; that fed her mother being in prison, with the milk of her breasts.
Festus. There was also a statue erected that represented this. Valor. lib.
Pieties chapel.
5. Obsequens mentions a temple of Piety that stood in Flaminius his Theater.
(i) Consentes] Twelve of those there were, six of either sex. Their Images
stood gullded in the marketplace. Varrorer. rust. lib. 1. Those were Juno.
Vesta, Minerua, Ceres. Diana, Venus, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Vulcane, Neptune,
Apollo. Enn. They were called Consentes because they all consented what was to
be done. Jupiter using them as counselors in his greatest affairs as
Augustine says here, and Seneca more plainly Nature. quaest. lib. 2.
Pomponius Laetus, an excellent and diligent antiquary observed (they say) and
wrote to Lorenzo Medici, that each of these gods had a peculiar month dedicated
to them. Juno had January, Neptune February, Minerua March, Venus April,
Apollo May, Mercury June, Jupiter Iulie, Ceres August, Vulcan September, Mars
October, Diana November, Uesta December. Diodor says that the Chaldes called
two and thirty stars the gods consulters, and the twelve signs of the
Zodiake which rule over each month, they called the principal gods. The
Aegiptians had also their twelve chief gods, but not them that the Romans
had. (k) He was vsed] Numa dividing the Romans lands both into private
possessions and Commons, set bounders at each one: and thereupon erected a
chapel to god Terminus on the hill ^arpeius: to whom they offered Terminus.
no living thing, but only fourmenty, and the first of the fruits, though
afterward this use was left, with others. This god was a stone, and all the
bounders were stones: which if any man removed out of the place, it was
lawful to kill him forthwith. But ^arquinius Priscus, having vowed to build a
temple to Jove, Juno and Minerua, upon the hill Tapeius, and laying the
foundations of this magnificent work, he found many Altars inhumed there,
which were dedicated by Tatius, and diverse other Kings: which when he would
have removed thence that the place might be free for Jove, he asked the opinion
of Actius Naeuius the augur, who having beheld the birds of each particular
god, all signified willingness of departure, exept the birds of Terminus, and
Iuuentas. So Tarquin the proud his Nephew, building the Capitol after him, was
feign to leave them two there where they were found before. It was a good sign
Accius said and portended stability unto the confines of the Roman Empire,
and that their youth should be invincible. Plut. Dionys. Liuy and Florus say
that this remoouall fell out in Tarquin the Proudes time: though their words
may be reduced unto this we have already said. If not, I had rather trust them
in this matter then the Greeks, that Mars was a third in this obstinacy of the
gods, I have not read: that the other two were, I have. (l) Terminus] Saturn
and his brother Titan agreeing in a league upon the condition that Saturn
should bring up no man-child of his own, and Saturn being again
foretold by Oracle that his son should thrust him from his throne, he
resolved presently to devour and make an end of all his male-children: Jupiter
being borne, and he coming to dispatch him, they had laid a great stone in
the childs place: which stone Jupiter (having attained the Kingdom)
consecrated upon Mount Pernassus, and it was called in greek (...). Hesiod.
Hesychius. Whereupon it grew a proverb upon Gluttons. Thou would swallow
the stone Batylus. Batylus Batylus.
(says Eusebius. out of Sanchoniaton) was son to Caelus and Rhea, brother to
Saturn. He was after called (...), in latin Terminus, and would not yield to
great Jupiter, perhaps (says Lactant.) because he had saved him from his
fathers chaps. He stood always openly at Rome and so was worshipped. Fest.
Lactant. (m) Iuuentas] There is Iuuentas and Iuuenta, but Iuuentas says Acron
is the true name. Horace. et parum comis sinete Iuuentas Mercuriusque. Iuuentas
and Mercury are both rustich without thee. In Horace it stands for youth it
self Iuuentas.
elsewhere. Olim Iuuentas and Patruus Vigor, Once youth and Pristine valor:
and again fugit Iuuentas, and verecundus Color, the youth, and modest red a^e
vanished now, and fled: This goddess is called Hebe in Greek, daughter to Juno
alone, without a father, as Mars was her son: Though the Greeks make Jove
her father, she was Hercules wife, and Jove's cup bearer till Ganymede had her
place (...) properly is vigor of youth. She had a temple in the Great
circuit, dedicated by Lucullus the Duumvir. M. Liuius being Consul had vowed
it, 16. years before for the conquest of Asdrubal. And being Censor, put it to
M. Cornelius and T. Sempronius Consulls to build, and had plays at the
dedication of it. Liu. lib. 36. she had a little oratory in the marketplace
also. (n) Su^manus] Plato, quasi summus manium, the Prince of spirits. His
temple was near to that of Iuuentas. Plin. His sacrifice was round cakes,
Fest. He ruled the night thunder, and Jove the days, which was therefore
called Dia. The thunder that was doubtful, happining at twilight or so, they
called Prouersa: and offerings was brought unto both the gods, at those times.
So the Romans had but these two gods to rule all their thunder, but the
Tuscanes had nine and eleauen kinds of thunder. Plin. lib. 2. Festus, and the
common doctrine of Rome held three kinds of thunder, the Postularian, requiring
some sacrifices. The Perentalian signifying the other to be well and
sufficiently expiated. The Manubian, which were the strokes of the
thunderbolts. Seneca also sets down as many: the first of Thunders of how many
sorts.
Jupiter alone, giving men warning: the 2. from the Consentes, warning, but not
without hurt: the third, from the decree of the superior gods, wholly
mischievous and hurtful. Thus much of thunder out of Cecinna, Volaterranus,
Araldus, Seneca Not. quaest. lib. 2. and some out of Pliny, but briefly and
scattred here and there in him as many other things besides are. (o) Scarce
finde] This god was very base, and few knew him. They knew he was one of the
gods that ruled the night, but his name was unknown. Ovid Fast. 6. Reddita,
quisquis is es, Sunmmano templa feruntur,
Tunc cum Romany Pirrhe timendus eras.
Summanus house (what ere he be) was reared,
When Pirrhus of great Rome so much was feared.


His feast was the 13. Call. of July: his temple near the great Circuit, and
his chapel in the Capitol.

What reasons the Pagans bring, for their worshipping of gods gifts for gods
themselves. CHAP. 24.
LEt us examine their reasons. Do you think (say they) our ancestors were
such fools that they knew not those to be gods gifts, and not gods? no
truly: but because they knew that they could not have them but from some god,
they called their gods which they thought had the gift of them, by the names of
the things themselves: sometimes deriuing words from thence; (as Bellona of
Bellum, war, not Bellum it self, and Cunina of Cunae, needles, not Cuna.
Segetia of Seges corn, not Seges it self, Pomona of Pomum an apple, not
Pomum: and Bubona of Bos an ox, not Bos) and sometimes never altring the word
at all, but calling them just as the thing is called: As Pecunia the goddess,
that gives money, (not holding money it self for a goddess) and virtus, that
gives virtue, (a) Honor for honor, victoria for victory, Concordia for
Concord, and so Felicity being called a goddess, is not meant of the thing
given, but of the power that gives it. Well, out of this reason will we find
an easy way to persuade all such as have not hardened their hearts, to be of
our opinion.

L. VIVES.
Honor (a) for] You see (says Tully) Marcellus has renewed the Temple of
Honor, the which Qu. Maximus built long before in the Ligurian war. De not.
de. lib. 2. Honors temple.
There was one temple in Rome both to Virtue and Honor, which C. Marius built:
but it was in diverse pertitions: for one room might not serve them both, as
the College of Priests answered Marcellus in his eight Consulshippe. The old
Romans sacrificed bare-headed unto Honor, but covered to all besides. Plut.
Prob.

Of the worship of one God only, whose name although they knew not, yet they
took him for the giver of felicity. CHAP. 25.
FOr if man's weakness observed thus much, that felicity could not come but
from some god, and that this was perceived by those that worshipped so many
gods, who therefore would call him that they thought could give it, by the name
of the thing it self, knowing no other name he had; this proves
sufficiently that Jupiter could not give felicity, whom they worshipped
already, but only he whom they worshipped under the name of Felicity. So
then, is it confirmed that they thought Felicity could not be given but by a
God that they knew not well, seek but him out then and give him his due
worship and it suffices. Casheere this return of innumerable and as
unnecessary gods, nay devils: let not that god suffice the worship, whose
gift is not sufficient: hold not (I say) that God for a sufficient giver of
felicity whose felicity is wholly insufficient. But in whom is it sufficient? in
the true and only GOD, the giver of all felicity: serve him. It is not he
that they call Jove. For if it were he, they would never stand seeking this
gift of another, who goes under the name of Felicity: besides they would not
do Jove's honor that wrong, as for to count him as Jove is counted; an
adulterer (a) with other men's wives, and an unchaste lover, and rauisher of (b)
fair boys.

L. VIVES.
AN adulterer (a) which] Jove's foul adultery are the Poets common songs: as
which Alcmena, Jove's adulteries.
Leda etc. (b) Fair boies] As of Ganymede; of whom here-after.

Of the stage-plaies which the gods exacted of their servants. CHAP. 26.
But these were fictions (a) of Homer (quoth Tully,) transferring human
affects unto the gods. I had rather they had transferred divine affects unto
us. This grave man indeed was much displeased with the unseasonable fictions of
those times. I but why then did the wisest and most learned men of all the
Romans, present stage-plaies, writing them, and acting them to the honor of
their gods, and as parts and points of their religion? Here Tully exclaimeth
not against poetike fictions but against the old ordinances. And would not the
ordainers exclaim too, and say, why what do we? our gods entreated us, nay
forced us upon pain of destruction to exhibit them such things as honors:
punishing the neglect thereof with severity, and showing themselves pleased in
the amendment of that neglect. That which I will now relate, is reckoned as
one of their most virtuous, and memorable deeds. (b) Titus Latinus, a rustike
Titus Latinus history.
housekeeper was warned in a dream to bid the Roman Senate restore the
stage-plaies, because upon their first day of presentation an offender carried
out and whipped to death before all the people, had sore displeased the gods
that do not love such sad spectacles, but are all for mirth and iollity:
Well, he neglected to tell the Senate this, but was warned again the next
night. Neglecting it again, suddenly his son died. And the third night he
was warned again upon pain of a greater mischief. He not daring as yet to
reveal it, fell into a sore and horrible disease. And then having imparted it
to his friends, they counseled him to open it to the senate, so he was carried
to them in his coach, and having told his dream, grew wel^ ^an instant, and
went home on his feet. The senate being amazed with his miracle renewed the
plays with treble charges, who sees not now (that sees at al) how
villenously these devils abuse those men that are their slaves, in forcing
these things from them, as honors, which an upright judgment would easily
discern to be obscaenities. (c) From this slavery can nothing deliver man but
the grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord: In those plays, the gods
crimes, that the Poets faigne, are presented: yet by the gods express charge,
were they by the Senate renewed. And there did the stage-plaiers, act, produce
and present Jove, for the veriest whore-maister in the world, had this been
false, he should have been offended at it: but taking deligh (as he did) to
have villains invented upon him, who would serve him that would not serve the
devil? Is this the founder, enlarger, and establisher of the Roman Empire? and
is he not more base and abject then any Roman that beheld him thus presented?
can he give happiness that loved this unhappy worship, and would be more
unhappily angry if it were not afforded him?

L. VIVES.
FIctions (a) of Homer says Tully] I approve not Homer for saying that Jove
did take up Ganymed for his form and person, this was not a just cause to
anger Laomedon. But Homer fained, transferring humane affects unto the gods: I
had rather he had tra^sfered theirs to us: which of theirs? to flourish, to be
wise, witty, and memoratiue. A most grave Sentence, taxing their impious
superstition that proportion gods attributes unto our frailty, supposing him as
testy, crabed, cruel, envious, proud, contentious, arrogant, inconstant,
finally as wicked as our selves, were it not better to eleuate our selves unto
ye height of his divine virtue. Cic. Tusc. quest. (b) Titus Latinus] This
history is mentioned by Cicero, De diuinat. out of Fabius, Gellius, and
Caelius. It is also in Liuy. lib. 2. Val. Max. lib. 4. Aul. Gell. Macrob.
Lactantius. It fell out in the year of the city, CCLII. Consulls, M.
Minutius, and A Sempronius. Some call the man Larinus: Lactantus calls him
Tiberius Arinus (c) from this slauery] Alluding unto that exclamation of Paul
Romans 7. Wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? the grace of GOD through Jesus Christ.

Of the three Kinds of Gods whereof Scaeuola disputed. CHAP. 27.
IT is leaft in memory that Scaeuola, (a) their learned high Priest, disputed
of three kinds of gods that were taught by authors; one by the Poets, one by
the Philosophers; one by the Princes of the City. (b) The first sort, he
says, were but fooleries, much of their doctrine being fictious: the second,
disagreeing from a politic state, having much superfluity, and diverse
inconveniences, for the superfluity: it is no great matter, for it is a saying
amongst men: superfluity hurts not, but what are the inconveniences; to deny
openly that Hercules, Aesculapius, Castor, and Pollux are gods; for the
Philosophers teach that they were men, and died as other men do. To what end is
this, but that the cities should be filled with statues of such as are no
true gods, the true god having neither sex, age nor body; But this, Se^uola
would not have the people to know, because he did not think it was faulse
himself. So that he holds it fit cities should be deluded in religion, which
indeed Varro sticks not plainly to affirm. De. re. vin. A godly religion,
whereto when weak minds going for refuge, and seeking to be freed by the
truth, must be told, that it is fit that they be illuded. Nor does the
same book conceal the cause why Scaeuola rejects the Poets gods. It is
because they do so deforme them with their stories, that they are not fit to
keep good men company, (c) one being described to steal, and another to
commit adultery: as also to do and say so filthily and fondly, as that the
(d) three goddesses, striving for eminence of beauty, the other two being cast
by Venus, destroyed Troy: That Jove was turned to (e) a Bull, or a (f) Swanne,
to have the company of some wench or other: that (g) a goddess married a man,
and that Saturn eat up his sons. No wonder! No vice, but there you have it
set down, quite against the natures of the deities. O Scaeuola, abolish those
plays if it be in thy power! tell the people what absurd honors they offer
the gods, gazing on their guilt, and remembering their prankes, as a license for
their own practice! If they say, you Priests brought them us, entreat the
gods that commanded them, to suffer their abolishment: If they be bad, and
therefore at no hand credible, with reverence to the Gods Majesty's, then the
greater is the injury that is offered unto them, of whom they are so freely
invented. But they are Devils (Scaeuola) teaching guiltiness, and ioying in
filthiness, they will not hear thee. They think it no injury to have such
black crimes imputed unto them, but rather hold themselves wronged if they
be not imputed, and exhibited. Now if thou call on Jove against them, were
there no other cause for it, but the most frequent presenting of his (h)
enormities, (though you call him the God and King of the world) would he not
think himself highly wronged by you, in ranking him in worship with such
filthy companions, and making him governor of them?

L. VIVES.
SCaeuola (a) their] There were many of this name* but this man was priest in
Marius his civil war, and killed by Marius the younger. Tully says he went
often to hear him dispute, after Scaeuola the Augur was dead. (b) The first]
Dionysius writes that the Romans rejected all the factions of the gods
fights, wranglings, adulteries, etc. which were neither to be spoken of gods,
nor good men: and that Romulus made his Quirites use to speak well of the
gods, Antiqu. Romans lib. 2. Eusebius. de praep. Euang. (c) One,] Mercury, that
stole Tyresias Oxen, Mars his sword, Uulcans tongues, Neptunes Mace, Apollos bow
and shafts, Venus her Mercury.
girdle, and Jove's Scepter. (d) Three] every child knows this. (e) A Bull]
for Europa. (f) A Swanne] for Laeda, of these read Ovid. lib. 6. Metamorph. (g)
A goddess married] Ceres to Iasius, Harmonia to Cadmus, Callirrhoe to
Chrysaoras, Aurora to Tython, Thetis to Peleus, Uenus to Anchises, Circe and
Callipso to Ulysses. Read Hesiods Theognia. (h) Enormities,] of letchery,
cruelty, and such like.

Whether the Romans diligence in this worship of those gods, did their Empire
any good at all. CHAP. 28.
BY no means then could these gods preserve the Roman Empire, being so
criminous in their own filthy desiring of such honors as these are, which
rather serve to condemn them, then appease them. For if they could have done
that, the Greeks should have had their helps before, who afforded them far
better store of such sacrifices as these, with far more stageplayes and
shows. For they, seeing the Poets tax their gods so freelye, never thought
shame to let them tax themselves, but allowed them free leave to traduce whom
they pleased, and held the Stage Players worthy of the best honors of their
state. But even as Rome might have had golden coins, yet never worshipped
Aurinus for it, so might they have had silver and brass ones without
Argentinus or his father Aesculanus, and so of all other necessaries. But so
could they not possess their kingdom, against the will of the true God, but
in despite of all the other, let them do what they list, that one unknown God
being well and duly worshipped, would have kept their kingdom on earth in
better estate then ever, and afterward have bestowed a kingdom on each of them
in heaven (had they a kingdom before or had they none) that should endure for
ever.

Of the falsenesse of that Augury that presaged courage and stabilitie to the
state of Rome. CHAP. 29.
FOr what a goodly presage was that which I spoke of but now, of the obstinacy
of Mars, Terminus and Iuuentas, that it should signify that Mars (a) his
nation, the Romans, should yield the place to no man: that no man should
remove the limittes of their Empire, because of Terminus, and that their youth
should yield to none, because of Iuuentas. Now mark but how these gods misused
their King, daring to give these Auguries as in his defiance, and as glorying
in the keeping of their places: though if these antiquities were true, they
need fear nothing. For they confessed not that they must give place to Christ
that would not give place to Jove: and they might give Christ place without
prejudice to the Empires limits, both out of the temples, and the hearts that
they held. But this we write was long before Christ came, or that Augurie was
recorded: notwithstanding after that presage in Tarquins time, the Romans
lost many a battle, and proved Iuuentas a liar in her Prophecy, and Mars his
nation was cut in pieces within the very walls, by the conquering Galls; and
the limits of the Empire were brought to a narrow compass in Hannibals time,
when most of the cities of Italy fell from Rome to him. Thus was this fine
Augurie fulfilled, and the obstinacy of the presagers remained to prove them
rebellious devils. For it is one thing not to give place, and another to give
place and regaine it afterward. Though afterward the bounds of the Empire
were altered in the East by (b) Hadrianus means, who lost Armenia, Mesopotamia
and Syria unto the Persians, to show god Terminus that would not give place to
Jove himself, but The re^all of the Romain Empires (...).
guarded the Roman limits against all men, to let him see, that Hadrian a
King of men, could do more then Jove the King of gods. (c) The said Provinces
being recovered afterward, now almost in our times, god Terminus has given
ground again, (d) Julian (that was given so to the Oracles) desperately
commanding all the ships to be burned that brought the army victuals, so that
the soldiers fainting, and he himself being slain by his foes hands, there
was no means for one man to escape, but by yielding to the foe so much of the
Empire as now to this day they possess: making a bargain not altogether so
bad as Hadrians was, but taking a (e) middle course between two extremes. So
that Terminus his standing out with Jove was but an unlucky sign and foolish
augury, seeing that Hadrians will, Iulians rashness, and (f) Iouians
necessity, all made him give room to them. The Romans that were of
discreation, observed this well, but they could not ouer-turne the inueterate
idolatry wherein the Devils had bound the city so fast: and they themselves,
though holding these things vain, thought not-with-standing Nature should have
that divine worship allowed her, which indeed is the true gods only peculiar,
under whom she is at command. These served the creature, rather then the
Creator (as the Apostle says) who is blessed for euer-more. This Gods help
was needed, to send Romans 1.
some godly men to suffer death for the true religion, and thereby to take away
these erroneous illusions from the world.

L. VIVES.
MArs (a) his nation] The Romans, both for their valors, and their original
from Mars his son. So many of the writers call diverse Romans, Martial
m^nded. (b) Hadria^s] Hadrian.
Fourteenth Emperor of Rome, adopted by Traian, whom he succeeded. But envying
his fathers glory amongst others, he gave the Persians back Armenia,
Mesopotamia and Assyria (which Tr^an had wone from them by conquest) setting
Euphrates as bounder to the Empire, and calling home the army. Eutrop. lib. 8.
The reason I think was because it was an old saying, that that general that
led an army beyond Euphrates and the city Ctesiphon, should never have good
fortune: which happened to Crassus; and Traian himself never came into Italy
from the Parthian conquest. (c) The said] Eutrop. Assyria by the Antoni^ (...),
brethren, Mesopotamia by Galienus, under the conduct of Odenatus: Armenia for
Diocletia^ under Galerius. (d) Iulian] He began his reign in the Cities MCXVI.
year: Consuls, Mamertinus and Ne^tta: A great foe to Christianity, being
ouer-throwne by the Parthians at Ctesiphon, Julian.
by his death he left the whole army and state in a desperate case. (e)
Middle] So that the bounds were not removed by force, but by condition of
peace. (f) Iouianus] A Pannonian, being made Emperor by the soldiers, in this
extremity of Iulians procuring, he was feign to Iouian.
conclude a disgraceful peace with the Parthians; but necessity has no law.
He gave them the town Nisibides, and part of the upper Mesopotamia, and so
came the Empires bounds to be removed.

The confessions of such as do worship those Pagan gods, from their own
mouths. CHAP. 30.
CI^ro (a) being Augur, derideth the Auguries, and (b) blames men for letting
their actions rely upon the voice of a Crow or a Dawe. O but this (c)
Academick says, that all things are uncertain; he is not worthy to be
trusted in any of these mysteries. (d) Q. Lucil. Balbus in Tullies second
book, De ^t. ^eor. disputes hereof, and having proved these superstitions to
be Physical in nature, yet condemns the institution of Images and their
fables, in these words. Perceive you not then that from the useful observation
of these things Tullies dislike of images and fables of the gods.
in nature, the tract was found to bring in those imaginary and forged gods?
hence came all the false opinions, errors and old wives tales: for now are we
acquainted with the shapes, ages, apparel, kinds, marriages, kindreds, and all
are squared out by ^aine fancies: nay they have turbulence of effects also. We
have heard of their des^res, sorrows and passions. Nor wanted they wars, if
all tales be true: They fought in (c) parties, not only in Homer, but all on
a side also against the (f) Ti^ans, The gods war^es.
and Giants: and hence arises a sottish belief of their vanity, and ex^ame
(g) inconstancy. Behold now what they themselves say that worship these
forgeries; he affirms that these things belonged to superstition, but he
teaches of religion as the Stoikes do. For (quoth he) not only the
Philosophers, but all our ancestors made a difference between religion and
superstition. For (h) such as prayed whole days together, and offered for
their childrens lives, (...) were called Superstitious. Who perceiue^h not now
that he, standing (i) in awe of this cities custom, did not-with-standing
commend the religion of his ancestors and would feign have severed it from
superstition, but that he cannot tell how? for if the ancients called those
Superstitious, that prayed and sacrificed whole days together, were not they
worthy of that name also, whom he reprehendeth for inuenting so many distinct
ages, images, and sexes. etc. for the whole number of the gods? if the
institutors of those be culpable, it implies guilt also unto these ancients
that invented and adored such idle fooleries: and unto him also (for all his
eloquent euasions) that must be tied by necessiity to this absurd worship: and
dare not speak in a public oration what he delivers here in a private
disputation. Thanks therefore be given to our Lord Jesus Christ, from all us
Christians, not to (k) Heaven and Earth (as he would have it) but unto him that
made Heaven and Earth, who has ouerturned and abolished those superstitions
(which Balbus durst scarcely mutter at) by his heavenly humility, his Apostles
preaching and his martirs faith, that died for the truth and lived in the
truth, having by these means rooted all errors not only out of the hearts of
the religious, but even out of the Temples of the superstitious.

L. VIVES.
CIcero being (a) Augur.] And of their College: elected by Q. Hortensius the
Orator. (b) Blames.] De diuinat. lib. 2. (c) Academike.] That sect would
affirm nothing, but confute the assertions of others, which Cicero uses in
many of his dialogues, professing himself a defender An accade^.
of that sect, d^ na. de. li. 2. (d) Balbus.] An excellent Stoike. (e) On
sides.] On the one side I^ Pallas, Neptune: against them, Apollo Uenus and Mars
in the Troyan wars. (f) Titans.] Son to Earth and Titan, Saturnes brother:
they claimed the Kingdom of Jupiter, by the agreement The Titan^
of their fathers, first they did but wrangle, but afterward to arms. It was
a great war, yet the Titans were subdued. Buu then followed a greater, the
rest of the Titans reneuing the forces and chasing Jove and all his friends
into Aegipt. The first was called the Titans war, thi^ the Giants. (g)
Inconstancy.] Thus far Tully. (h) Such as] Lactantius disliketh this
deriuation of Superstitious and Religious, deriuing religious of religo to
bind, because they are bound to God* superstitious of superstes, alive, because
they were of the false religion, which was professed in the lives of their
ancestors. lib. 4. of Religions, and read Gellus. lib. 4. But Tully does not
confine the name to those praying fellows, but says it was of large use
afterward in other Religious Superstition.
respects (i) in awe.] In the books. De not. deor, and De diuinat, it is
plain that Tully durst n^ speak his mind freely of those gods, because of the
inueterat custom of his country. (k) heaven and] whom Tully with the Stoics
makes the chief of the gods.

Of Varros rejecting the popular opinion, and of his belief of one God, though
he knew not the true God. CHAP. 31.
ANd what say you to Varro (whom we are sorry should make plays as an honor to
true gods in religion, though not in judgment, seeing he exhorts men to the
adoration of the gods so religiously) does not he confess, that he is not of
the opinion of those that left the Romans their religion, and that if he were
to leave the city any institutions, he would rather give them their gods
after the prescript of nature? But seeing that the former has been of so long
a continuance, he says that it was but his duty to prosecute his discourse
hereof from the eldest antiquities, to the end that the people should ^t be
induced rather to honor then to contemn them, wherein this iuditious writer
shows that the things whereof he writes would be contemptible to the people
as well as to himself, if they were not kept in silence. I should have
thought one might but have coniectured this, but that himself says in many
places that there is much truth, which the people ought not to know: nay and if
it were all falsehood, yet it were fit the people should neuer-the-lesse think
that it were truth* and therefore the Grecians shut up their (a) Teletae, and
their (b) most secret mysteries in walls. Here he has made a discovery of
all the politic government of the world. But the Devils take great delight
in this playing double: making themselves the masters both over the deceivers
and the deceived, from whose dominion nothing freeth us but the grace of God,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. This acute and learned man says further, that
he thinks only those to discern God, who teach that he is a soul,
moving, and swaying the whole world: and here-by, though he yet have no firm
hold of the truth (for God no soul but the souls maker.
God is no soul, but the souls maker) yet if the Cities custom had
permitted him, assuredly he would have taught them the worship of one only
God, and the governor of the world: so that we should but have this only
controversy with him, whether God were a soul, or the souls maker. He says
also that the old Romans were a hundred threescore and ten years without
Idols: and had they been so still (quoth he) religion had been kept the
purer; to prove which, he produces (amongst others) the Jews, and
concludes, that who-so-euer they were that first invented Images, they freed
the city from all awe and added unto error: being well advised that the
sencelesnesse of the Idols would make the gods themselves seem contemptible.
But whereas he ^aith they added unto error, that proves, that there was some
error there, before that Images came in. And therefore his saying, that these
only discerned God which called him a soul governing the world; and his
opinion that the gods honors would have been purer without Images, these
positions declare how near the truth he draws. For could he have done any
good against such an ouer-growne error, he would have showed them how that one
only God should have been adored, even he that governs the world, and the
he is not to be pictured: and the youth of the City being set in so ne^e a
path to the truth, might easily have been persuaded afterward, that God was
an unchangeable nature, creating the soul also. These things being thus, what
ever fooleries those men have discovered of their gods in their Books, they
have been laid open by the immediate hand of God, (compelling them to
confess them) rather then by their own desire to dissuade them: Wherefore
that we allege from them, is to control those that will not see from what a
damned slavery to the Devil, that same singular sacrifice of so holy blood,
and the voutchsafing of the spirit has delivered us.

L. VIVES.
THE (a) Teletae] A sacrifice most secret and most sumptuous: so called,
because it consumed The Telet^
so much, of (...), to end, or to consume, that some think they had their name
from the^ perfection. They belonged to the Sun and Moon, as Porphyry
writes: and were besides, expiations to Bacchus, recorded in Orpheus and
Mus^us (Plat. de Rep. lib. 2.) that t^ght how to purge the sins of the
Cities, the living, the dead, and every private man by sacrifices, plays, and
all delights, and the whole form of it all was called ^eletae. Though Pla^
says the Teletae belonged only to the dead, and freed men from all the evils
in hell. (b) S^cret] Of Ceres and others. (c) The old] Numa forbad the Romans
to think that God had (...) shape of man or woman (Plut. in vit. Number.) Nor had
they any picture at all o^ any God for the first hundred three score and te^e
years: they built only temples and little Oratories, but never an Image in
them, for they held it a sin to liken the better to the worse, or to conceive
GOD in any form but their intelligence: Eusebius, Dyonys. also says, that Numa
built the gods temples but no Images came in them, because he believed that
God had no shape. Tarquinius Priscus following the Greeks foolery and the
Tuscans, Who first brought Images to Rome.
first taught the erection of statues, which Tertullian intimates, saying; Go
to, now religion has profited. For though Numa invented a great deal of
curious superstition, yet neither was there temples nor statues as yet entered
into the Romans religion, but a few poor thrifty ceremonies: no skie-towring
Capitols, but a sort of little altars made of Soddes, earthen dishes, the
perfumes out of them, and the God in no place. For the Greek and Tuscane arts
in Sculpture were not yet entered the City.

What reason the Kings of the world had, for the permitting of those false
religions in such places as they conquered. CHAP. 32.
HE faith also, that in the gods genealogies, the people followed the Poets
more then the Philosophers, and thence the old Romans their ancestors, had
their belief of so many sexes, marriages, and linages of the gods. The reason
of this (I suppose) was, because the politic and wise men did especially
endeavor to nousle their people in this illusiue manner, and to make them not
only worshippers, but even immitators of the devils that delighted to delude
them. For even as the Devils cannot possess any, but such as they have
deceived, so unjust and Deuil-like Princes persuaded their people to their own
vain inventions, under the name of religion, thereby to bind their affections
the firmer to their service, and so to keep them under their soueraignties.
And what ignorant and weak man can avoid both the charms of Princes and
Devils?

That God has appointed a time for the continuance of every state on earth.
CHAP. 33.
WHerefore GOD, that only and true author of felicity, he gives king domes
to good and to bad; not rashly, nor casually, but as the time is appointed,
which is well known to him, though hidden for us, unto which appointment
not-with-standing he does not serve, but as a Lord swayeth it, never giving
true felicity but to the good. For this, both (a) subjects and Kings may
either have or want, and yet be as they are, servants and governors. The
fullness indeed of it shall be in that life where (b) no man shall serve. And
therefore here on earth, he gives kingdoms to the bad as well as to the
good, least his servants, that are but yet proselites should affect them as
great ma^ters. And this is the mystery of his old Testament, wherein the new
was included: that (c) there, all the gifts and promises were of this world,
and of the world to come also, to those that understood them, though the
eternal good that was meant by those temporal ones, were not as yet
manifested: nor in wh^ gifts of God the true felicity was resident.

L. VIVES.
Subjects (a) and] Stoicisme: A slave wise, is a free man: a King foolish, a
(...) (b) No man shall serve,] Some books want the whole sentence which
followe^ And therefore. etc. (c) There all.] The rewards promised to the k^pers
of the law in the old Testament were all temporal, how be it they were
mystical types of the Celestial.

Of the Jews kingdom, which one God alone kept unmoved as long as they kept
the truth of religion. CHAP. 34.
TO show therefore that all those temporal goods which those men gape after,
that can dream of no better, are in Gods hands alone, and in none of their
Idols, therefore multiplied he his people in Aegipt, from (a) a very few and
then delivered them from thence by miraculous wounders. Their women never
called upon Lucina when their children multiplied upon them incredibly; and
when he preserved them from the (b) Aegiptians that persecuted them, and would
have killed all their children. They sucked without Ruminas help; slept without
Cunina, eat and drank without Educa and Potica, and were brought up without
any of these puppy-gods helps: married without the Nuptial gods, begot
children Gen 46.
without Priapus, crossed through the divided sea without calling upon Neptune,
and left al their foes drowned behind them. They dedicated no Goddess Mannia,
when heaven had rained Manna for them: nor worshipped the Nymphs when the
rock was cleft and the waters flowed out? they used no Mars nor Bellona in
their wars, and conquered, not without Victory, but without making Victory a
goddess. They had corn, oxen, honey, apples, without Segetia, Bobona, Mella or
Pomona. And to conclude, all things that the Romans begged of so many false
gods, they received of one true God in far happier measure: and had they not
persisted (...) their impious curiosity in running after strange gods, as if
they had been enchaunted, and lastly in killing of Christ, in the same
kingdom had they lived happily still, if not in a larger. And that they are
now dispersed over the whole earth, is gods especial providence, that what
Alters, Groves, Woods, and The dipe^sion of the Jews.
Temples of the false gods he reproves, and what sacrifices he forbids,
might all be discerned by their books as their fall it self was foretold
them, by their p^phets: And this least the Pagans reading them with ours, might
think we had f^igned them. But now to our next book, to make an end of this
tedious one

L. VIVES.
FRom a very few] The Sons of Israel that went into Aegipt, were 70. Genesis
49. (b) Aegiptians.] Here is a diversity of reading but all one sense: and so
is there often elsewhere, which I forbear to particularize, or to note all
such occurences.

Finis, lib. 4.
THE CONTENTS OF THE fifth book of the City of God.
1. That neither the Roman Empire, nor any other Kingdom had any
establishment from the power of Fortune, nor from the stars. chapter 1. 2. Of
the mutual Sympathy, and dssimillitude of the health of body, and many other
accidents in twins of one birth. 3. Of Nigidius the astrologians argument, in
this question of the twins drawn from the potters wheel. 4. Of Esau and
Jacob two twins, and of the diversity of their conditions and quallities. 5.
How the Mathematicians may be convicted of professing direct vanity. 6. Of
twins of different sexes. 7. Of the election of days of marriage, of
planting, and of sowing. 8. Of their opinion that give not the name of Fate the
position of the stars, but unto the dependence of causes upon the will of
God. 9. Of Gods foreknowledge and man's freedom of election against the opinon
of Cicero. 10. Whether Necessity have any dominion over the will of man. 11. Of
Gods universal providence, ruling all, and comprising all. 12. How the ancient
Romans obtained this increase of their Kingdom at the true Gods hand, being
that they never worshipped him. 13. Of ambition, which being a vice, is
notwithstanding herein held a virtue, that it does restrain vices of worse
natures. 14. That we are to avoid this desire of human honor, the glory of
the righteous being wholly in God. 15. Of the tempor all rewards that God
bestowed upon the Romans virtues, and good conditions. 16. Of the reward of
the eternal Citizens of heaven, to whom the examples of the Romans virtues
were of good use. 17. The fruits of the Romans wars, both to themselves,
and to those with whom they warred. 18. How far the Christians should be
from boasting of their deeds, for their eternal country, the Romans having
done so much for their temporal city, and for human glory. 19. The
difference between the desire of glory and the desire of rule. 20. That virtue
is as much disgraced in serving human glory, as in obeying the pleasures of
the body. 21. That the true God in whose hand and providence all the state of
the world consists, did order and dispose of the Monarchy of the Romans.
22. That the Originalls and conclusions of wars are all at Gods dispose. 23.
Of the battle wherein Radagaisus an idolatrous King of the Goths was slain
with all his army. 24. The state and truth of a christian Emperors felicity.
25. Of the prosperous estate that God bestowed upon Constantine a christian
Emperor. 26. Of the faith and devotion of Theodosius Emperor. 27. Augustines
invectiue against such as wrote against the books already published.
FINIS.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
That neither the Roman Empire nor any other Kingdom had any establishment
from the power of fortune or from the stars. CHAP. 1.
WHereas it is apparent to all men's discretion, that felicity is the hope of al
humane desires, and that she is no goddess, but merely the gift of a god, and
consequently that there is no god worthy of worship, but he in whose power it
lies to bestow this felicity upon men; so that if she were a goddess
herself, the worship of all the rest should be entirely hers; now let us look
in to the reasons why that God that can give those earthly goods, as well to the
good as the evil, (and consequently to such as are not happy) should vouchsafe
the Roman empire so large a dilatation, and so long a contiunance: for we
have already partly proved, and hereafter in convenient place will prove more
fully, that it was not their rabble of false gods that kept it in the state it
was in, wherefore the cause of this was neither (a) Fortune, nor Fate, as they
call them, holding Fortune Fortune and Fate what.
to be an event of things beyond al reason and cause: and Fate, an event from
some necessity of order, excluding the will of god and man. But the god of
Heaven; by his only providence, disposes of the kingdoms of Earth, which if
any man will say is swayd by fate, and mean by that fate (b) the will of God,
he may hold his opinion still, but yet he must amend his phrase of speech, for
why did he not learn this of him that taught him what fate was. The ordinary
custom of this has made men imagine fate to be (c) a power of the stars,
so or so placed, in natiuities or conceptions; which (d) some do separate from
the determination What the vulger hold fate.
of God, and other some do affirm to depend wholly thereupon. But those that
hold that the stars do manage our actions, or our passions, good, or ill,
without gods appointment, are to be silenced and not to be heard, be they of
the true religion, or be they bondslaues to Idolatry, of what sort soever; for
what does this opinion, but flattly exclude alll deity? Against this error, we
profess not any disputation, but only against those that calumniat Christian
religion, in defense of their imaginary gods. As for those that make these
operations of the stars in good or bad to depend upon Gods will, if they say
that they have this power given them from him, to use according to their own
wills they do Heaven much wrong, in imagining that any wicked acts, or
injuries are decreed in so glorious a senate, and such as if any earthly city
had but instituted, the whole generation of man would have conspired the
subversion of it. And what part has GOD left him in this disposing of human
affairs, if they be swayed by a necessity from the stars, whereas he is Lord
both of stars and men? If they do not say that the stars are causes of
these wicked arts, The Astrologian^ necessity of the stars.
through a power that god has given them, but that they effect them by his
express command; is this fit to be imagined for true of God, that is unworthy
to be held true of the stars; (e) But if the stars be said to portend this
only And not to procure it, and that their positions be but signs, not causes
of such effects (for so hold many great scholars, though the Astrologians use
not to say (f) Mars in such an house signifies this, or that: no, but makes
the child-borne an homicide, to (g) grant them this error of speech, which they
must lear^e to reform of the Philosophers in all their presages derived from
the stars positions:) how comes it to pass that they could never show the
reason of that diversity of life, actions, fortune, profession, art, honor,
and such human accidents, that has befallne two twins; nor of such a
great difference, both in those aforesaid courses, and in their death, that in
this case, many strangers have come nearer them in their courses of life, then
the one has done the other, being notwithstanding borne both within a little
space of time the one of the other, and conceived both in one instant and from
one act of generation?

L. VIVES.
FOrtune (a) Nor fate] Seeing Augustine disputes at large in this place
concerning fate, will diue a littlle deeper into the diversity of old opinions
herein, to make the ^est more plain. Plato affirmed there was one GOD, the
Prince and Father of all the rest, at whose beck all the gods, and the whole
world were obedient: that all the other gods, and celestial virtues, were but
ministers to this Creator of the universe: and yt they governed the whole world
in places and orders by his appointment: that the laws of this great God were
unalterable, Fate what it is.
and inevitable, and called by the name of Necessities: No force, art, or
reason, can stop, o^ hinder any of their effects: whereof the proverb
arises: The gods themselves must serve necessity: But for the stars, some of
their effects may be avoided by wisdom, labor or industry, wherein fortune
consists: which, if they followed certain causes, and were unchangeable,
should be called fate, and yet infer no necessity of election. For it is in
our power to choose, begin, or wish, what we will: but having begun, fate
manageth the rest that follows. It was free for Laius (says Euripides) to
have begotten a son, or not: but having begotten him, then Apollo's Oracle
must have the events prove true which it presaged. The and much more does
Plato dispute obscurely upon, in his last de repub. For there he puttes The
destenies 3.
the three fatal sisters; Necessities daughters, in heaven: and says that
Lachesis tells the souls that are to come to live on earth, that the devil
shall not possess them, but they shall rather possess the devil: But the
blame lies wholly upon the choice, if the choice be naught, GOD is acquit of
all blame: and then Lachesis casts the lottes. Epicurus derideth all this,
and affirms all to be casual, without any cause at all why it should be
Epicurus.
thus or thus, or if there be any causes, they are as easy to be avoided, as
a mothe is to be swept by. The Platonists place Fortune in things ambiguous,
and such as may fall out diuersely: also in obscure things, whose true causes,
why they are so o^ otherwise, are unknown: so that Fortune deals not in
things that follow their efficient cause, but either such as may be changed,
or are undiscovered. Now Aristotle (Phys. 2.) and all the Peripatetikes
Fortunes. Casualties what they are as Aphrodyse^ thinks.
after him (Alex. Aphrodisiensis being one) is more plain. Those things
(says he) are casual, whose act is not premeditated by any agent: as if any
man dig his ground up, to make it fat, find a deal of treasure hidden;
this is Fortune, for he came not to dig for that treasure, but to fatten his
earth: and in this, the casual event, followed the not casual intent. So in
things of fortune, the agent intends not the end that they obtain, but it
falls out beyond expectation. The vulgar call fortune, blind, rash,
uncertain, mad, and brutish as Pacuuius says: and join Fate and Necessity
together, holding it to have (...) power both over all the other gods and Jove
their King himself. Which is verified by the Poet, that said, What must be,
passes Jove to hold from being, Quod fore paratum (...), id summum exuperat
Iouem. For in Homer, Jove lamenteth that he could not save his son Sarpedon
from death, the fates constrayning him to die: and Neptune greeues that he
could not hinder Ulysses his return home, and revenge the blindness of his
son Ciclops, Fate having decreede the contrary: and Jupiter in Ovid says. --
Tu sola insuperabile satum
Nate mouere putas. --
-- Daughter'tis only thou
Can move relentlesse fate. --


Says he: And a little after. Quae ^que con^ursum caeli, nec fulmini^ iram,
Nec ^tuunt vllas tuta atque aeterna ruinas.
Which fear nor thunders, gods, nor powers infernal,
But stand vnaw'd, unmoved, and eternal.
There were some that held nothing casual, but all fixed, certain and
immutable: Democritus, Empedocles, and Heraclitus, were all of this opinion,
which many others maintained after them, as others did the positions of
Epicurus. Lucane Phars. lib. 2. declares both the opinions in these words.
Sieve parens rerum primum informia regna,
Materiamque rudem flamma cedente recepit,
Fi^xit in aeternum causas, qua cuncta co^ cet.
Se quoque lege tenens, and secula iussa ^rentem,
Fatorum immoto diuisit limite mundum,
Sieve nihil positum est, sed sors incerta vagatur,
Fertque refertque vices, and habent mortalia casum, etc.
Or natures God (when first he bound the fire,
And wrought this ma^e into one form entire)
Forged eternal causes, all effecting,
Himself, and all the worlds estate subiecting
To destenies inchangeable directing:
O^ been our states in fortunes governance,
To rise, or fall, and all by only chance.
Fortune is often used for destenie, and the events of things: which when they
fall out as we desire, that we call Felicity: if contrary, Infelicitie: Thus
much here, more elsewhere. (b) The will of God] Of this by and by. (c) A power
of the starrrs] wherein the Stoickes, Plato, and almost all the other
Philosophers do place Fate: following the Chaldees and Aegiptians, to whom all
the Mathematitians also do give their voices. (d) Some do seperate] Some say,
the operation of the stars is a distinct power from the will of God: and in
attributing this universal power to them, exclude Gods providence from human
affairs. Besides, there are that affirm, that although God do look to the
state of the world, yet the stars have their peculiar dominion in us
nevertheless. So hold Manilius and Firmicus, and the Poets most The Stars
dominion.
commonly.

Others subject them all unto the will of GOD omnipotent, as Plato and the
Stoikes do, affirming all their operations to be but the praescript laws of
him. (e) But if the starres] Origin upon that place of Genesis. Let them be for
signs, Chapt. 1. verse. 14. Says that the stars do signify, but effect
nothing. They are (says he) as a book opened, wherein may be read all things
to come, which may be proved by this, that they have often signified things
past. But this book cannot be read by any wit of man. Plotine was of
Origens opinion also, denying the Plotine.
stars any act in those things, but only signification. Seneca, speaking of
the Stars, says, they either cause or signify the effects of all things,
but if they do cause them, what avails Seneca.
it us to know, that we cannot alter? and if they but signify them, what good
does it thee, to foresee that thou can not avoid? (f) Mars in such] Mars is
a star, bloody, fiery, and violent. Being in the seventh house (says
Firmicus, lib. 3.) in a partise aspect with the Horoscope Mars a Sta^
(that is, in the West) he portendeth huge mischieues, stayning the natiuities
with murders, and many other villainies. (g) To grant them] He alludeth unto
Tullies Chrysippus (de Fato) that would teach the Mathematicians, how to speak
in their art.

Of the mutual simpathie and dissimilitude of health of body, and many other
accidents in twins of one birth. CHAP. 2.
CIcero (a) says, that Hippocrates that excellent Physician wrote, that two
children that were brethren, falling sick, and the sickness waxing and waning
in both alike, were here-vpon suspected to be twins. (b) And Posidonius a
Stoike, and one much affected to Astrology, labors to prove them to have
bin borne both under one constellation, and (c) conceived both under one. So
that which the Physician ascribes to the similitude of their temperatures of
body, the Astrologian attributes to the power and position of the stars in
their natiuities. But truly in this question, the Physicians conjecture
stands upon more probability, because their parents temperature might be
easily transfused into them both alike at their conception: and their first
growth might participate equally of their mothers disposition of body, and then
being nourished both in one house, with one nourishment, in one air, country,
and other things correspondent, this now might have much power in the
proportionating of both their natures alike, as Physic will testify.
Besides, use of one exercise equally in both, might form their bodies into a
similitude, which might very well admit all alterations of health alike, and
equally in both. But to draw the figure of heaven, and the stars unto this
purity of passions (it being likely that a great company of the greatest
diversity of affects that could be might have original in diverse parts of
the world, at one and the same time) were a presumption unpardonable. For (d)
we have known two twins, that have had both diverse fortunes, and different
sicknesses, both in time, and nature: whereof (me thinks) Hipocrates gives a
very good reason, from the (e) diversity of nourishment, and exercise, which
might be cause of different health in them: yet that diversity was effected
by their wills and elections at first, and not by their temperature of body.
But neither Posidonius, nor any patron of this fate in the stars, can tell
what to say in this case, and do not illude the single and ignorant with a
discourse of that they know not, for that they talk of the space of time,
between that point which they call the (f) Horoscope, in both the twins
natiuities: it is either not so significant as the diversity of will, act,
manners, and fortune of the twins borne does require, or else it is more
significant, then their difference of honors, state, nobility, or meannesse
will permit: both which diversities they place only in the figure of the
nativity. But if they should be both borne ere the Horoscope were fully
varied, then would I require an unity in each particular of their fortunes,
which (g) cannot be found in any two twins that ever yet were borne. But if
the Horoscope be changed ere both be borne, then for this diversity I will
require a (h) difference of parents, which twins cannot possibly have.

L. VIVES.
CIcero (a) saith] I cannot remember where: I believe in his book De fato:
which is wonderfully mutilate, and defective as we have it now, and so shall
any one find that will observe it. (b) Whom Posidonius] A Rhodian, and a
teacher of Rhodes. He was also at Rome Possidonius
a follower of Panaetius. Cicero (c) conceived both] for the conception is of
as much moment as the nativity. (d) We have knowne] Such were Procles and
Cyresteus, Kings of Lacedaemon, Cic. de diuinat. lib. 2. (e) Diversity of]
This is one of the cau^es why an Astrologian cannot judge perfectly of
natiuities, Ptol. Apoteleusmaton. lib. 1. (f) Horoscope] (...) is the looking
Horoscope, what.
upon an hour: and is that part of the Zodiake, which ascends our
Hemisphere, at any event. For the revolution of this Zodiake is perpetual, and
still one part of it arises in our Horison, and the part directly opposite,
sets: all the other are divided amongst the other houses of heaven. (g)
Cannot be found] Nature never bound any one thing to another in such
propriety, but she set some differencs between them: what skilleth it whether
those two had original from one feed? Every man is framed and borne to his
own fortune, and be they two or three brethren borne at once, their destinies
promise no fraternity, but each one must undergo his particular fate.
Quintil. In Geminis Languentibus. (h) Difference of parents] why should not the
rivers be like that flow both from one head?

Of Nigidius the Astrologians argument, in this question of the twins, drawn
from the potters wheel. CHAP. 3.
FRustrate therefore is that notable fiction of the Potters wheel, which
Nigidius (a) (they say) answered to one that plunged him in this controversy,
whereupon he was called (b) Potter. Turning a potters wheel twice or thrice
about as fast as he could, he took ink, and in the turning made two marks
(as it seemed) in one place of the wheels egde: and then, staying the wheel,
the marks were found far a sunder one from another upon the edge of the
wheel, (c) even so (says he) in the swift course of heaven, though one child
be borne after another in as short a time as I gave these two marks, yet in
the heavens will be passed a great space. And that (quoth he) is the cause of
the diversity of conditions, and fortunes betwixt two twins. (d) Here is a
figment now far more brittle then the Pottes that were made by that wheel,
for if there be thu^ much power in Heaven (and yet cannot be comprehended by
the constellations) that one of the twins may be an heir and inherit, and
not the other, how dare those Astrologians give such presages unto others that
are not twins, when as they are included in those secret points in natiuities
which none can comprehend? But if they say they do prognosticate this to
others, because they know that it belongs unto the known and discerned
spaces that pass in natiuities, and that those moments that may come between
the birth of two twins do but concern slight things, and such as the
Astrologian uses not to be troubled with; for no man will ask the calculator
when he should sit, walk, or dine? How can this be said when we show such
diversity in the manners, states, actions, and fortunes of two twins.

L. VIVES.
NIgidius (a) they say] P. Nigidius figulus was borne of a very honest family,
and came to be Praetor: he was of great wit, and exellent both in many other
worthy sciences (so that he Nigidius Figulus.
was compared with Uarro, in whose time, or thereaboutes, he lived) and
especially in the Mathematiques. Tully names him often. Suetonius says that
out of Octauius his figure of nativity, he presaged that he should be Lord of
all the world. Lucane. lib. 1. At Figulus e^i ^ra deos Secretaque caeli,
N^sse fuit, quem non stellarum Aegiptia Memphis,
(...) ^isu numerisque mouentibus as^a. etc.
But Figulus whose study was to scan,
Heavens high presage, whom no Aegiptian,
In Mathematique skill could parallel. etc.
(b) Called Potter.] In latin Figulus. This man was of the Nigidian family;
there were other Figuli of a more honored house, namely the Martians, whereof
one was confull with L. Iul. Caesar, two years before Ciceros consulship.
Another, with Nasica, but was put from his place, because the auguries were
against his election. (c) So (quoth he.)] How much time think you (says
Quintilian) was between the first birth, and the second? but a little truly
in mortal men's judgment, but if you will consider the immensity of this
universe, you shall find much passed between their two productions. In geminis
langu. (d) Here is a figment.] This one answer of Nigidius (which the
Mathematitians think was most acute) does utterly subvert all their presages,
positions and calculations in natiuities, for if so little a space of time be
capable not only of diversities but even of contraries, who can prognosticate
any thing of any child borne, when as the moment both of his conception and
his nativity is so hard to be known? So that were it granted, that the
stars have power in us, yet unto man it is incomprehensible: the moments
whereto the figure must be erected being impossible to be found, and the swift
course of the Heavens ouerrunning our slow consideration. Julius firmicus, a
man idly eloquent, having objected this reason against himself and his
art, and promising to dissolve it, after he has tumbled himself sufficiently
in a multitude of common places, lets it The stars out run ou^ slack thoughts.
alone with silence, and thinks he has done very well, supposing that this
whirle-winde of his eloquence had cast dust enough into the readers eyes to
make him forget the adverse argument. But it is neither he, nor any Chalde of
them all that can answer it. Thomas Aquinas in like manner entangleth himself
exceedingly in circumstances of times, and minuites, and places; for in his
book De fato, he says that twins are of diverse dispositions, because the seed
of generation was not received into the place of conception al at one time, so
that the center of the heart, being not one in both, they must needs have
different egresses and Horizous. But how small a space is their spent in the
full receiving of the ^eede? how little a time passes between the coagulation
of the hearts, that this should be sufficient to t^asmute the whole nature of
man? So that hereby it is not sufficient to tell the Mathematician that such an
one was borne at Pari^ or Ualencia, but he must know in which street, in
which chamber, nay in what part of the chamber, But in another work, I will
handle this theme of another fashion, and prove, that there is no trust to be
put in those vain superstitions, but that all depends upon our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ, whom we are to entreat for them all.

Of Esau and Jacob two twins, and of the diversity of their conditions and
qualities. CHAP. 4.
IN the memory of our forefathers (to speak of men of note) there were two
(a) twins borne, so nere to gether, that the second held the first by the
heel, yet Genesis 25.
in their lives, manners and actions, was such a maine disparity, that that very
difference made them enemies one to another. I mean not this, that the one
sat, when the other stood, nor that the one slept, when the other waked, these
belong to those first marks and moments which they cannot comprehend who erect
those figures of nativity for the Astrologers to judge upon: (b) one of them
bound himself to serve for wages: the other served not at all: the one was
loved by his mother, so was not the other: the one lost his honor and
inheritance (a matter of great moment amongst them) and the other obtained it:
And how great a diversity was there in their marriages, wives, children and
goods? exceeding much.

L. VIVES.
TWo (a) Twins borne] Jacob and Esau, of Isaac and Rebecca Gene. 25. 25. 26.
(b) One of] Jacob he served Laban his father in law, for Rachell: he was
dearly beloved of his mother Rebecca, and got Esau his patrimony from him,
which was a thing in those days of most honor, and use, of all things besides.

How the Mathematicians may be convicted of professing vanity. CHAP. 5.
Wherefore if these things belong to those spaces of time that pass betwixt
the births of twins, and are not wrought upon by the constellations, why then
are they presaged out of the Horoscopes of others. But if they be presaged as
pertinent unto the larger spaces of time that fall under the notice of Artists,
and not Hipocrates his guess.
under these momentary minuits that are indistinguible, then what use is there
of the potters whele, but only to turn leaden heads about till they become
brainesicke, and past discerning those Mathematicians vanities? And those whose
diseases (so simpathizing in all circumstances) made Hypocrates out of the
rules of Phisike, judge them to be twines, do not they sufficietnly put down
those that will needs make that proceed from the stars which arises out of
the temperature of their bodies? For why did they not sicken as they were
borne, one after an other? (for borne together they could not be) or if their
different times of birth be no cause of different times of sickness, why do
they allege it to be the cause of other accidents? why should they travel,
marry, beget children, and do such like at diverse times, only because they
were borne at diverse times, and yet not be sick at diverse times by the same
reason? If their difference of birth changed their Horoscope, and all other
matters thereon depending, why then did that equality remain with the times of
their sickness, that remained in the time of their conception: or if they say
that the course of sickness only follows the conception, and all the rest
the nativity, then ought they not to prognosticate any thing concerning
sickness at natiuities, unless they have the hour of conception, but if the
Astrologian presage sickness without seeing the figure of the conception
because the said presage is included in those interposed moments of the birth,
how would he tell either of those twins when he should be sick, who having
each a diverse Horoscope, yet must nevertheless fall sick both at one time?
Finally, I ask again, if the intermission in the birth of two twins be so
much, that it alters their whole fortunes, because of their Horoscopes: and in
altering of the (a) four angles, (wherein they put all the power,) alters
also their whole destenies, how can this come to pass, when as the time of
their conceptions was both at one instant? Or if two that are both conceived at
one point of time, may fortune to be borne the one before the other, why may
not two that are borne both in one moment of time, have fortune to die the one
before the other? for if that one and the same moment of their conception
hindered not the succession of their birth, why should the same moment that is
one in both the birthes, hinder the successiue time of their death? If their
conceptio^, being in one minut, permit the^ to have diverse fortunes in their
mothers womb, why should not their nativity being of the same state, permit
them to have diverse fortunes while they live upon earth? and to take away all
the fictions of this art, (or rather vanity) of theirs, in this one question,
what is the cause, that such as are conceived both in one moment of time, both
under one constellation, should nevertheless have their destinies in their
mothers womb, to be borne at several times? and yet, that two being borne of
two mothers, both in one moment of time, cannot have diverse destenies, whereby
the one may die before the other, or out-liue the other? did not their desteny
enter upon their conception, or could they not have it unless they were first
borne? why is it said then that if the hour of conception be known, they can
presage many things most oraculously? And here upon it is said of some, that a
certain wise man did make choice of an hour of copulation with his wife,
whereby to beget a son whose after worth should be admired? And lastly,
whereof comes it, that Posidonius the Astrologian gave this reason for the
two brethrens perticipated sickness, that it was because they were borne, and
conceived both together? he added, Conceived, because it should not be
objected to him that it was not certain that such as were conceived together
should be borne both at the same instant: and that he might draw this mutual
affect of theirs, not from their paritie of temperatures, but from the power of
the stars. But if there be such a power of equallizing the desteny of
twins in their conception, then verily the diversity of time in their birth
ought not to alter it. If the destenies of twins be changed by their
several times of birth, why may we not rather conceive that before their
birth, they were appointed by destenie to several births? Shall not then the
will of the man living, change the Fate ofhis nativity, when as his order of
birth does change the fate of his conceptio^?

L. VIVES.
THe 4. (a) Angles] Four chief angles the Astrologers put in every nativity.
1. the Horoscope, the sign of the orient; ascending 2. The opposite to which
is the sign of the West The Angles of heaven.
falling: diametrally distant from the Horoscope 180. degrees. 3. Mid-heauen,
the point between the Horoscope and the west angle. 4. the opposite mid-heauen
under the earth. The Greeks call these four: (...), there are four other
angles also, in the 2. 6. 8. and 12. sign from the Horoscope: the Greeks call
(...), The God the goddess, the good fortune, the good Genius. These angles
are nothing but the signs of heaven, which they consider in their judgments,
counting the Horoscope first and the rest success^ly. The angle of the
Horoscope concerns the life: the 2. money or hope: the 3. brethren, the 4.
parents: the 5. children, the 6. health: the 7. marriage, the 8. death etc.
This Manilius. lib. 2. relates out of the fooleries of Maternus. But we have
angled long enough for any good we have gotten: forward.

Of twins of different sexes. CHAP. 6.
IT often falls out notwithstanding, that in these concurrences and unions of
time, conception and constellation, the children conceived are the one a male
the other a femalle. I know two twins of diverse sexes, both of them alive,
and lusty at this day. They are as like in favor, one to another as their
difference of sex can permit: but in their fashion, and order of life, so
unlike that (besides the actions which must of necessity distinguish between
men and women) he is continually in war in the office of a (a) Count and
never comes home: she continually in her country where she was borne, and
never goes abroad. Nay which is more incredible (respecting the powers of the
stars and not the wills of God and men) he is a married man, and she is a holy
Virgin; he has many children, and she was never married. O but their
Horoscopes had a great sway in all those things: tush, I have showen the power
of that to be just nothing, already: (...) but Man is not conceived after the
first conception, until the birth.
whatsoever it does, it is there, in the nativity, that it must do it. What,
and not in the conception, wherein it is manifest that there was but one
generatiue act concurrent? (for (b) natures power is such that a woman having
once conceived, cannot second any conception, until she be delivered of the
first. and therefore it is necessary that the twins conceptions fall both in
one moment: were their diverse Horoscopes (think you) the cause that in their
birth, he became a manchild, and she a woman? wherefore since it is no such
absurdity to say, that there are some planetary influences that have effect
only upon diversity of forms in bodies, as we see the alteration of the
year, by the suns access and departure, and diverse things to increase, and
decrease, just as the moon does: (crabs for example and all shel-fishes:
besides the wonderful (c) course of the sea:) but that the mind of man is not
subject unto any of these powers of the stars: those artists now desiring to
bind our acts unto this that we see them free from, do show us plainly,
that the effects of the stars have not power so much as upon our bodies. (d)
For what is so pertinent unto the body, as the sex thereof: and yet we see,
that two twins of diverse sexes may be conceived both under one
constellation. Wherefore what fonder affection can there be, then to say that
that figure of Heaven which was one in the conception of them both had not
power to keep the sister from differing in sex from her brother, with whom
she had one constellation, and yet that that figure of heaven which ruled at
their nativity had power to make her differ so far from him in her Virgins
sanctimony.

L. VIVES.
OFfice of a (a) Count] A Count is a name of dignity, used but of these modern
times* (...) (...).
Marcellinus* names it in his 14. book calling Nebridius Count of the Orient,
and Geron^s count of Magnentia, and in his sixteeneth book Ursulus, Count of
the beneuolences, and twenty one Philagrius Count of the Orient. I know not
whether these counts were those that were called in Greek Acolithi, and were
always at the Emperors elbowe, (b) Natures]. Of all Creatures superfaetan^
that is breedi^g upon blood.
creatures, only the Hare and the Cony do conceive double, upon the first
conception, and having young in their bellies, will conceive a fresh. Arist.
Plin. A woman (says Aristotle: Hist. animal. lib. 7. seldom conceiueth upon
her first young: but sometimes she may: if there pass but a (...) space
between the conceptions, as Hercules and Iphyclus (by report) were conceived.
There was an adulteress also, that bore two children at a birth, one like her
husband, and another like her lemman. This out of Aristotle and Plini. lib. 7.
but they are rare examples. And if a man would expose them, he could not be
brought by reason to confess that those children were conceived one after
another: though I know that Erasistratus, a worthy Physician holds, that all
twins are conceived one after another, and so do diverse Stoicall Philosophers
also hold of many twins but not of all. But Hippon and Empedocles held that of
one act Twins both be gotten and borne.
of generation by reason of the abundance of seed, were all twins conceived,
Asclepiades ascribes it to the virtue not the abundance of seed. (c)
Wounderfull course of the sea.] Worthily wounderfull, whereof the true cause is
not fully known unto this day, neither of the double flowing daily, nor double
flowing monthly, which the Sailors call the spring^des, falling out The tide of
the sea.
at the moons full and the change, (d) for what.] The male and female in all
creatures are correspondente in all things but generation, but in that he is
the male that generateth in another What male and female is
and of himself: she the female that can generate of an other and in her
self, therefore they talk of many women that have been chang^d into men.

Of the election of days of marriage of planting and of sowing. CHAP. 7.
But (a) who can endure this foolery of theirs, to invent a new desteny for
every action a man undertakes; That wise man aforesaid it seems, was not
born^ to have an admirable son, but rather a contemptible one, and therefore
elected ^e his hour, wherein to beget a worthy one. So thus did he work
himself a desteny, more then his stars portended, and made that a part of
his fate, which was not signified in his nativity. O ^ondnesse most fatal! A
day must now be chosen for marriage: because otherwise one might light of an
unlucky day, and so make an ill marriage. But (b) where then is the desteny of
your nativity? can a man change what his fate has appointed, by choosing this
day or that and cannot the the fate of that day which he chooses be altered by
another fate? again, if men alone of all the creatures of earth be under this
starry power, why do they (c) choose days to plant, and days to sow, and so
forth; days tame cattle, days to put to the males for increase of oxen, or
horses, and such like? If the election of those days be good, because the
stars have dominion in all earthly bodies, living creatures and plants,
according as the times do change; let them but consider how many creatures have
original from one and the same instant, and yet have such diverse ends, as he
that but notes will deride those observations as childrens toys, for what
sotte will say that all herbs, trees, beasts, birds, serpents, worms, and
fishes, have each one a particular moment of time to be brought forth in? yet
men do use for trying of the mathematicians skill, to bring them the figures of
the births of beasts, which they have for this end deligently observed at home,
and him they hold the most ^kild Mathematician, that can say by the figure,
this protendeth the birth of a beast and not of a man, nay they dare go unto
what beast it is whether fit for bearing woll, for carrages, for the plough, or
the custody of the house, for the are often asked counsel of the destenies of
dogs, and give answers breeding great admiration. Nay men are now grown to
that grosenesse of brain, that they think when a man is borne, creation is
tied to such an order, that not so much as a fly is brought forth in that
region at that time, for if they give us but birth-rome for a fly, we will draw
them by gradation till we come to an elephant. Nor have they wit to consider
this, that in their selected day of sowing corn, it springs and grows up
altogether, and being grown to the height i^ipens altogether, and yet the
canker spoyleth one piece and the birds another, and men cut up the third, of
all this corn, that nevertheless grew up altogether. How will they do with
the constellation of this, that has partaken so many kinds of ending? Or does
it not repent them of electing days for these things, denying them to belong
to heavens disposing, and putting only men under the stars, to whom only
of all the creatures upon earth God has giving free and unconstrained wills.
These being considered, it is no evil belief to think that the Astrologers
(d) do presage many things wonderfully and truly, but that is, by a (e) secret
instinct of evil spirits, (whose care it is, to infect, nousle, and confirm
men's Astrologers how true presagers.
minds in this false and dangerous opinion of fate in the stars) and not by
any art of discerning of the Horoscope, for such is there none.

L. VIVES.
WHo can (a) endure.] The Astrologers, Haly, Abenragel, Messahalach, and others
write of these elections. Haly, Ptolomies interpretor as Picus Mirandula
writes, says, this part of Astrology is frivolous and fruitless. (b) Where
then.] If your natiuities destiny be against your enterprise, it shall never
have good end, as Ptolomy holds: Picus writes much against Astrologers. lib.
2. and of this matter also. But Augustine has the sum of all here. (c)
Choose days.] Hesiod was the first that distinguished the days of the moon,
and the year, for country Hesiod.
businesses: and him did all the writers of husbandry follow, Greeks Latins
and others: Democritus, and Virgill, Cato Senior, Uarro, Columella, Palladius,
Pliny. etc. (d). Do presage.] ^riters of husbandry.
He that often shoots must needs hit sometimes, few of the Mathematicians
false answers are observed, but all their true ones are, as miraculous. (e)
Secret instinct.] The presages from the stars (says Augustine else where)
are, as by bargain from the devils, and instincts of theirs, which Sup Gen
ad. lit. et. 2. de. doct. Chr.
the minds of men feel, but perceive not and he presageth best, that is in
greatest credit with his devil.

Of their opinion that give not the name of Fate the position of the stars,
but unto the dependence of causes upon the will of God. CHAP. 8.
AS for those that do not give the position of the stars in natiuities and
conceptions the name of fate, but reserve it only to that connection of (a)
causes, whereby all things come to pass, we need not use many words to them:
because they conform this coherence of causes to the will of God, who is well
and justly believed, both to foreknow al things before the event, and to leave
no event undisposed of ere it be an event: from whom are all powers, though
from God^ foreknowledge.
him arise not all wills, for that it is the will of that great and
all-disposing God, which they call Fate, these verses (. (b) of Anneus Senecas
I think) will prove. Du^ m^summe pater, ^ltique dominator poli,
(...) placuerit, nulla parenda mora est.
(...) impiger: (...) ^olle, comitab^r gemens:
Malusque patiar facere quod licuit bono.
(...) vol^ntem fat^, uolentem tr^unt.
Le^d me, Great Lord, King of eternity,
Even where thou will, I Will not resist thees.
Chang thou my will yet still I vow subjection,
Being led, to that tha^'s in the good election.
"Fate leads the willing, hales the obstinate.


Thus in the last verse, he directly calls that Fate, which in the former
he called the will of the great Lord, to whom he promises obedience, and to
be le^ willingly, least he be drawn on by force, because, Fate leads the
willing, hales the obstin^te. And (c) Homers verses translated into Latin by
Tully are as these are. (...) (...) hominum (...) qualis ^ater ips^,
^upiter a^fferas (...) lum^ (...)
(...) are the minds of men as lou^ the great
Vouchsafe, that fills the earth wi^h light, and (...).
We would not bring Poetique sentences for confirmation of this question, but
because that Tully says, that the Stoikes, standing for this power of Fate,
use to quote this place of Homer, we now allege them, not as his opinion, but
as theirs, who by these verses of Fate showed in their disputations what they
thought of Fate, because they call upon Jove, whom they held to be that great
God; upon whose directions these causes did depend.

L. VIVES.
Connection (a) of causes] (Cic. de divine. lib. 2.) Reason therefore compels us
to confess that all The Stoiks fate.
things come to pass by fate: by fate I mean the Greeks (...), that is, an
order or course of things and canses, arising one from another: that is the
everlasting truth flowing from a^eternity. Chrysippus in Gellius says, that
Fate is (...), etc. A natural composition of causes and things arising one from
another* from aeleternity being an immutable combination of them all. (b)
Anneas Senecas] Epist. lib. 18.) The verses were Cleanthes his, Seneca but
translated them: they are all Senarian. But the first of them is not perfectly
read: it were better to read it. Duc me parens celsique dominator Poli: Coleyne
copy has it, Duc sum Pater altique dominator Poli. Indifferent well. The
said thing has Seneca in his book de beneficijs, speaking of God: if you call
him Fate (says he) it is not amiss: for he is the first cause whence all the
rest have original: and fate is nothing but a coherence of causes This is the
common opinion of the Stoi^s, to hold one God, calling him Fate, and Men's, and
Jupiter, and many other names. These are the four ancient opinions of Fate,
which Picus (Contra Astrolog. lib. 4.) rehearses. The firstheld Fate to be
nature, Four opinions of Fate.
so that the things which fell out by election, or chance, they excluded from
Fate, as Virgill says of Dido, that killed her-selfe, and dyed not by Fate:
and Cicero: If any thing had befalne me, as many things hung over man's head
besides nature and besides fate: This opinion is Phsiologicall, and embraced by
Alexander, one of Aristotle's interpreters. The second held fate to be an
eternal order and form of causes, as aforesaid. Third put all in the stars.
The fourth held fate to be only the execution of the will of God. (c) Homers]
Odyss. (...), etc.
Such are the minds of men, etc
Ulysses speaks them to Phemius, affirming a mutablity of men's minds, and
that they are not God the changer of the Will,
of power to keep themselves fixed, but alter continually as it pleases the
great Jupiter to inspire and transform them. The later of the latin verses in
the text dot^ not express Homers mind But I suspect it to be wronged in
copying.

Of Gods foreknowledge and man's freedom of election; against the opinion of
Cicero. CHAP. 9.
AGainst those men, Tully thinks he cannot hold argument, unless he
overthrow divination, and therefore he labors to prove that there is no
praescience, nor foreknowledge of things to come, (a) either in God or man;
there is directly no such matter. Thus denies he Gods foreknowledge, and
idely seeks to subvert the radiant luster of true prophecies, by propounding
a sort of ambiguous and fallible oracles, whose truth not-withstanding he does
not confute. But those conjectures of the Mathematiques he lays flat, for
indeed they are the ordinance to batter themselves. But for all that, their
opinion is more tolerable, y^ ascribe a fate (b) unto the stars, then his, yt
reiects al foreknowledge of things to come: For to acknowledge a God, and yet
to deny that, is monstrous madness: which he observing, went about to prove even
that with the fool has said in his heart: there Psalm. 14. 1
is no God: Mary not in his own person, he saw the danger of malice too well;
and therefore making Cotta dispute hand-smooth against the Stoikes upon this
theme, in his books De natura Deorum: there he seems more willing to hold
with (c) Lucilius Balbus, that stood for the Stoikes, then with Cotta, that
argued against the divine essence. But in his books Of divination, he
directly opposes the foreknowledge of things, (d) of himself and in his
own person: all which it seems he did least he should yield unto fate,
and so loose the freedom of election: For he supposed that in yielding to
this fore-know-ledge, fate would follow necessarily there-vpon, without all
denial. But how-soeuer the Philosophers wind themselves in webbes of
disputations, we, as we confess the great and true GOD, so do we acknowledge
his high will, power, and foreknowledge: Nor let us fear that we do not
perform all our actions by our own will, because he, whose foreknowledge
cannot err, knew before that we should do thus or thus: which Tully feared,
and therefore denied foreknowledge; and the Stoiks that held not al things to
be done by necessity, thought that they were done by fate. What then did Tully
fe re in this praescience, that he framed such detestable arguments against it?
Verily this, that if all events were known ere they came to pass, they should
come to pass according to that foreknowledge. And if they come so to pass,
then God knows the certain order of things before hand: and consequently the
certain order of the causes; and if he know a certain order of causes in all
events, then a^e all events disposed by fate: which if it be so, we have
nothing left in our power, nothing in our will: which granted (says he) the
whole course of humanity is ouerturned: law, correction, praise, disgrace,
exhortation, prohibition, al are to no end: nor is there any justice in
punishing the bad, and rewarding the good. For avoiding of which inconveniences
(so absurd and so pernicious) he utterly reiecte^h this foreknowledge of
things, and draws the religious mind into this strait, that either there
must be som-what in the power of our will, or else that there is a
foreknowledge of things to come, but the granting of the one is the subuersio^
of the other: choosing of the foreknowledge, we must loose the freedom of
election, and choosing this, we must deny the other. Now this learned and
provident man, of the two makes choice of freedom of election: and to
confirm it denies the foreknowledge utterly. And so instead of making men
free, makes them blasphemous. But the religious mind chooses them both,
confesses and confirms them both. How (says he?) For granting this
foreknowledge, there follows so many consequents that they quite subvert all
power of our will: and holding thus by the same degrees we ascend, till we find
there is no praescience of future things at all, for thus we retire through
them. If there be any freedom of the will, all things do not follow destiny:
If all things follow not destiny, then is there no set order in the causes of
things: Now if there be (...) set order in the causes of all things, then is
there no set order of the things themselves, in Gods foreknowledge, since
they come from their causes. If there be not a set order of all things in
GODS foreknowledge, then all things fall not out according to the said
knowledge. Now if all things fall not out as he had his foreknowledge of
them, then is there in God no foreknowledge of things to come. To these
sacriligious and wicked opposers, thus we reply: GOD does both know all
things ere they come to pass, and we do all things willingly, which we
do F^te of no f^rce.
not feel our selves and know our selves directly enforced to. We hold not
that all things, but rather that nothing follows fate: and whereas Fate
uses to be taken for a position of the stars in natiuities and conceptions, we
hold this a vain and frivolous assumption: we neither deny an order of causes
wherein the will of God is all in all, nether do we call it by the name of Fate.
(g) unless Fate be derived of fari to speak, for we cannot deny that the
scripture says, God spoke onc^ these two things: I have heard, that power
belongs unto God, and to thee O Lord mercy for thou will reward every man
according to his works. For whereas he says, God spoke once, it is meant
that he spoke vnmooueably, and unchangeably, that all things should fall out
as he spoke, and meant to have them. In this respect we may derive fate from
fari to speak, but we must needs say withal that it is used in another sense
then we would have men to think upon. But it does not follow that nothing
should be left free to our will, because God knows the certain and set
order of all events. For Our very wills are in that order of causes, which God
knows so surely, and has in his praescience, humain wills, being the cause
of human actions: So that he that keeps a knowledge of the causes of all
things, cannot leave men's wills out of that knowledge, knowing them to be the
causes of their actions. (g) For Tullies own words (Nothing comes to pass
without an efficient cause) is sufficient alone to sway down this matter quite
against himself: for what auailes the subsequence: Nothing is without a
cause, but every cause is not fatal, because there are causes of chance,
nature and will? It is sufficient that nothing is done but by precedent cause.
For those causes that are casual, giving original to the name of Fortune, we
deny them not: we say they are secret, and ascribe them either to the will of
the true God, or of any other spirit: The (h) natural causes we do never
divide from his will, who is natures Creator: But the causes voluntary, God,
Angels, Men, and diverse other creatures have often in their will and power: (i)
If we may Voluntary causes.
call that power a will by which the brute beasts fly their own hurt, and
desire their good by Natures instinct. That there is a will in Angels, I do
absolutely affirm; be they good whom we call Gods Angels, or evil whom we
call the devils Angels, fiends, or devils themselves. So men good and bad have
all their wills: and hereby it is apparent, that the efficient causes of all
effects, are nothing but the decrees of that nature, which is The spirit of
life: Air or wind is Genes. 1. Spirit of life.
called a Spirit: But because it is a body, it is not the spirit of life. But
the spirit of life, that quickneth all things, is the Creator of all bodies and
all created spirits: this is God a spirit from eternity uncreated: in his will
there is that height of power, which assisteth the wills of the good spirits,
judges the bad, disposes of al, giving power to whom he pleases, and holding
it from whom he list. For as he is a Creator of all natures, so is he of all
powers: but not the giver of all wills: for wicked wills are not of him, being
against that nature which is of him. So the Evil wills not from God.
bodies are all subject unto diverse wills: some to our own wills (that is the
wills rather of men then of beasts) some to the Angels, but all to the will of
God: unto whom al wills are subject, because they have no power but what he
gives them. The cause then that makes all, and is not made it self is God.
The other causes do both effect and are effected: such are all created spirits,
chiefly the reasonable ones. The corporal causes, which are rather effects
then* otherwise, are not to be counted as efficient causes, because they came
but to do that which the will of the spirit within them does inioine the^: how
then can that set order of causes in Gods foreknowledge deprive our wills of
power, seeing they bear such a sway amongst the very causes themselves? But
(k) let Cicero rangle, and his fellows, that say this Our wills causes.
order is fatal, or rather fate it self; which we abhor, because of the word;
chieflly being used in a false belief: but whereas he denies that God knows
assuredly the set order of those causes, we detest his assertion, worse then
the Stoiks do: for he either denies God (which he indeuoreth under a false
person in his books De Deny gods prae^cience, and deny God.
not. de.) Or if he do acknowledge him, yet in denying him this foreknowledge,
he says but as the fool said in his heart, There is no God: for if God want
the praescience of all future events he is not God. And therefore (l) our
wills are of as much power as God would have them, and knew before that they
should be and the power that they have is theirs free, to do what they shall do
truly and freely: because he fore-knew that they should have this power, and do
these acts, whose foreknowledge cannot be deceived: wherefore if I list to use
the (m) word fate in any thing, I would rather say that it belonged to the
weaker, and that will belonged to the higher, who has the other in his power,
rather then grant that our liberty of will were taken away by that set order,
which the Stoikes (after a peculiar phraze of their own) call fate.

L. VIVES.
EIther (a) in God] De diuinat. lib 2. where in a disputation with his brother
Quintus, he indeauoureth to overthrow divination, for which Q. had stood in the
book before. For he says that. There is nothing so contrary to reason and
constancy as fortune is, so that (me thinks) God himself should have no
foreknowledge of those casual events. For if he have, it must come so to
pass, as he knows, and then it is not casual: but casual events there are,
and therefore there is no foreknowledge of them. This in the said place, and
much more pertaining to the explaining of this chapter, which it suffices us
to have pointed out. (b) A fate to the Stars] They all do so, but some give
fate the original from them, excluding God. (c) Lucilius Balbus] In the end of
the book thus he concludes: This said we departed, Velleius holding Cotta's
disputation for the truer, and I being rather inclined to Balbus suit. (d) Of
him-selfe] For in his 2. book he speaks himself, and confuteth his
brothers assertions for divination. (e) Stoikes] Of this in the next chapter.
(f) Unless fate.] (Var. de Ling. lat. l. 8.) The destinies give a fortune to
the child at the birth, and this is called fate, of fari to speak. Lucan.
lib. 9. -- Non vocibus vllis,
Numen eget: dixitquesem^l nascentibus auctor,
Quicquid scire licet --
-- The Deities never need,
Much language: fate but once (no more) does read,
The fortune of each birth --
It seems he borrowed this out of the Psalm here cited, or out of Job.
chap. 33. v. 14. He has spoke once and has not repeated it again. Both
which places demonstrat the constancy of Gods revealed knowledge by that his
once speaking: as the common interpretation is: the which follows in the
Psalm, these two things etc. some refer to them which follows: That power
belongs, etc. Others, to the two testaments. The Thargum of the Chaldees
comes near this later opinion: saying, God has spoken one law, and we have
heard it twice out of the mouth of Moses the great scribe and virtue is before
our God, and thou Lord that thou would be bountiful unto the just (g) For
Tullies] In his book de fato following Carneades, he sets down three kinds
of causes; natural arising from nature, as for a stone to fall downward, for
the fire to burn: Voluntary consisting in the free wills of men, (wherein it
is necessary there (...) of (...) kind^.
be no precedent causes, but that they be left free:) and Casual, which are
hidden and unknown in diverse events: Herein he is of the N^turalists opinion,
that will have nothing come to pass without a cause. (h) Naturall] Fire has
no other cause of heat, a stone of heaviness, a man of reason, procreation of
like, etc. then the will of natures Creator: who, had he pleased, might (...).
have made the fire cool, the stone mount upwards, the man a brute beast, or
dead or unable to beget his like. (i) If we may cal] Arist, de anima. l. 3.)
Puts will only in reasonable creatures, and appetite (being that instinct
whereby they desire, or refuse any thing) in beasts. Will in creatures of
reason, is led by reason, and accompanied by election, or rather is election it
self. (k) But Cicero] With the Stoikes. (l) Our wills are] God created our
wills free: and that because it was his will: so they may make choice of
contraries, yet cannot go against Gods predestination: not questionless ever
would although they could: for sure it is, that much might be done, which
(...) God (...).
never shall: so that the events of things to come proceed not from Gods
knowledge, but this from them with not-withstanding in him are not to come, but
already present, (wherein a great many are deceived) wherefore he is not rightly
said to foreknow, but only in respect of ou^ actions, but already to know,
see and discern them. But is it seen unfit that this eternal knowledge should
derive from so transitory an object, then we may say that Gods knowledge
arises from his providence and will, that his will decrees what shall be,
and his knowledge conceiueth what his will has appointed. That which is to
come (says Origin upon Genesis) is the cause that God knows it shall come:
so it comes not to pass because God knows it shall come so to pass; but
God fore-knoweth it, because it shall come so to pass. (m) Use the word] So do
most of the latins, Poets, Chroniclers and Orators: referring fate to men, and
will to God: and the same difference that is here between fate and will,
Boethius puts between fate and providence. Apuleius says, that providence is
the divine thought, preserving hi^ for whose cause such a thing is undertaken:
that fate is a divine law fulfilling the unchangeable decrees of the great God.
so that if ought be done by providence, it is done also by fate: and if Fate
perform ought, Providence works with it. But Fortu^ has something to do
about us, whose causes we utterly are ignorant of: for the events run so
uncertain, that they mixing themselves with that which is premeditated and
(we think) well consulted of, never let it come to our expected end: and when
it ends beyond our expectation so well, and yet these impediments have
intermedled, that we call happiness: But when they pe^uert it unto the worst,
it is called misfortune or unhappiness. In Dogmata Platonis.

Whether necessity have any dominion over the will of man. CHAP. X.
NOr need we fear that (a) Necessity which the Stoikes were so afraid off,
that in their distinctions of causes, they put some under Necessity and some
not under it, and in those that did not subject unto it, they g^ our wills also,
that they might be free though they were urged by necessity. But if that be
necessity in us, which is not in our power, but will be done do what we can
against it, as the necessity of death; then is it plain, that our wills are
subject to no such necessity, use we them howsoever, well or badly: For we do
many things which we could not do, against our wills. And first of all to will
it self: if we will a thing, there is our will; If we will not, it is not. For
we cannot will against our wills. Now if necessity be defined to be, that
whereby such a thing musts needs fall out thus, or thus, I see no reason we
should fear, that it could hinder the freedom of our wills in any thing. (b)
For we neither subject Gods being, nor his praesciences unto necessity, when
we say God must needs live eternally, and God must needs foreknow all
things; no more then his honor is diminished, in saying he cannot err, he
cannot die; He cannot do this, why? because his power were less, if he could
do it, then now it is in that he cannot. Justly is he called almighty, yet may
he not God almighty indeed.
dye nor err: He is called almighty because he can do all that is in his will,
not because he can suffer what is not his will; which if he could he were not
almighty. So that he cannot do some things, because he can do all things. So
when we say that if we will any thing of necessity, we must will it with a
freedom of will, tis^ true: yet put we not our will under any such necessity as
depriues it of the freedom. So that our wills are ours, willing what^vve will,
and if we will it not, neither do they will it: and if any man suffer any thing
by the will of another against his own will, his will has the own power still,
and his sufferance comes rather from the power of God then from his own will:
for if he willed that it should be other wise, and yet could not have it so,
his will must needs be hindered by a greater power: yet his will should be
free still, and not in any others power, but his that willed it, though he
could not have his will performeds: wherefore what-soeuer a man suffers
against his will he ought not attribute it unto the wills of Angels, Men, or any
other created spirits, but even to his who gave their wills this power. So then,
(c) our wills are not vse-les, because that God fore-seeth what will be in them:
he yt foresaw it what-euer it be, foresaw somewhat: and if he did fore know
somewhat, then by his foreknowledge there is som-thing in our wills: Wherefore
we are neither compelled to leave our freedom of will by retayning Gods
foreknowledge, nor by holding our wills freedom to deny GODS
foreknowledge; GOD forbid we should: we believe and affirm them both
constantly and truly, ^raescience and freedom of will also.
the later as a part of our good faith, the former as a rule for our good life:
and badly does he live that believes not aright of GOD. So God-forbid that
we should deny his foreknowledge to be free, by whose help we either are or
shall be free. (d) Therefore law, correction, praise, disgrace, exhortation,
and prohibition are not in vain: because he fore-knew that there should be
such: They have that power which he fore-knew they should have: and prayers
are powerful^ ^o attain those things, which he fore-knoweth that he will
give to such as pray for them. Good deeds has he predestined to reward,
and evil to punishment. (e) Nor does man sin because God fore-knew that he
would sin: nay, therefore it is doubtless that he sins, when he does sin,
How man s^neth.
because that God, whose knowledge cannot be mistaken, foresaw that neither
fate nor fortune, nor any thing else, but the man himself would sin, who if he
had not bin willing, he had not sinned: but whether he should be unwilling to
sin, or no, that also did God foreknow.

L. VIVES.
THa^ (a) a necessitie] Me thinks (says Tully) that in the two opinions of
the Philosophers the (...) holding fa^e the doer of all things, by a very law
of necessity (of which opinion Democritus, Heraclitus, Empedocles and Aristotle
were) and the other exempting the motions of the will from this law: Chrysippus
professing to step into a mean, as an honorable arbitrator between them,
inclines rather to those that stand for the minds freedom. De fato. lib.
Therefore did Oenomaus y^ Cynike say, that Democritus had made our minds
slaves, and Chrysippus half slaves, Eusebius. de Democritus. Chrysippus.
praep. Euang. l. 6. Therein is a great disputation about Fate: The Stoikes
bringing all under fate, yet bind not our minds to any necessity, nor let
them compel us to any action. For all things come to pass in fate by causes
precedent, and subsequent, but not principal and perfect: the first of which
do bu^ assist us in things beyond our power, but the later do effect that with
is in our (...). Plutarch relating the Stoikes opinion, says that they hold
the events (...) thin^ to have a diverse original: some, from that great
necessity; some from fate, some from liberty of will some from fortune, and
chance particular. They follow Plato indeed in all their doctrine of fate.
Which ^lutarch both witnesses, and the thing it self shows. But whereas
they say y^ all things comes of fate, and that in fate there is a necessity,
then they speak of the providence and will of God. For as we have shown they
called Jove fate, and that said Pron^, that providence, whereby he rules all
fate like-wise. (b) We neither subiect] The Platonists say the gods must needs
be as they are, and that not by adding any external necessity, but that
natural one; because they cannot be otherwise; being also voluntary, because
they would be no otherwise. Wherefore I wonder at Plinius Secundus his
cauillation against Gods omnipotency, that he cannot do al things, because he
cannot dye, nor give himself, that he can give a man, death. It is unworthy
so learned a man. Nay he held it a great comfort in the troubles of this life,
to think that the gods sometimes were so afflicted, that like men, they would
wish for death and could not have it: he was illuded (bee-like with the fables
that makes Pluto grieve at his delay of death as Lucian says: Et rector
terrae quem longa saecula torquet. Mors dilata deum Pluto.
-- Earths god that grieved sore, his welcome Death should be so long delayed.
-- (c) O^ wills ar^ not] A hard question, and of diverse diversely handled:
Whether Gods fore-knowlede impose a necessity upon things? In the last
chapter I touched at somthings correspondent: Many come out of the new
schools, prepared fully to disputation with their fine art of combinations,
that if you assume, they will not want a piece to defend, and if you have this,
they will have that, so long till the question be left in greater clouds then it
was found in at first: as this p^ case, God knows I will run to morrow,
suppose I will not run, put case that, suppose ye other And what use is there
of these goose-traps? To speak plainly with Augustine here, a man sins not
because God knows that he will sin: for he need not sin unless he list: and if
he do not, God fore-knoweth that also: or as Chrysostom says upon the
Corinthians. Christ indeed says, (...) is necessary that scandal should be,
but herein he neither violateth the will, nor inforceth the life, (...)
fore-telleth what man's badnesse would effect: which comes not so to pass
because God foresaw (...) but because man's will was so bad: for Gods
praescience did not cause those effects, but the corrupti^ Go^ p^science no c^
o^ (...).
of human minds caused his praescience. Thus far Chrysostom interpreted by
learned Donat^ And truly Gods praescience furthereth the event of any thing, no
more then a man's looking o^ furthereth any act: I see you write, but you may
choose whether to write or no; so is it in him: furthermore all future things
are more present unto God, then those things which we call present are to us
for the more capable the soul is, it comprehends more time present. So Gods
essence being infinite, so is the time present before him: he, the only
eternity being only infinite. The supposition of some future things, in respect
of Gods knowledge, as well as ours, has made this question more intricate then
otherwise it were. (d) Therefore law] This was objected unto them that held fate
to be manager of all events: since that some must needs be good, and some bad,
why should these be punished and those rewarded, seeing that their actions
(being necessities and fates) could neither merit praise nor dispraise? Again
should any be animated to good, or dissuaded from vice, when as the fate
being badde, or howsoever, must needs be followed? This Manilius held also
in these words. Ast hominum mentitanto sit gloria mayor,
Quod c^lo gaudente venit, rursusque nocentes,
Odcrimus magis, in cul^am, penasque creatos.
Nec resert scel^s vnde cadat, scelus esse fatendum est
H^c q^que est sic ipsum expendere fa^um: etc.
Man's goodness shines more bright, because glad fate,
And heaven inspires it: So the bad we hate
Far worse, 'cause ^ate has bent their deeds amiss.
Nor skils it whence guilt comes, when guilt it is
Fates deed it is, to hear it self thus sca^. etc.
But we hold that the good have their reward, and the bad their reproach, each
one for his free actions, which he has done by Gods permission, but not by his
direction. (e) Nor does man] His sin arises not from Gods foreknowledge, but
rather our knowledge ^iseth from this sin, For as our will flows from Gods
will, so does our knowledge from his knowledge. Thus much concerning fate, out
of their opinions, to make Augustines the Playner.

Of Gods universal providence, ruling all, and comprising all. CHAP. 11.
WHerefore the great and mighty GOD with his Word and his holy Spirit (which
three are one) God only omnipotent, maker and Creator of every soul^ (...) of
every body, in participation of whom, all such are happy that follow his (...)
and reject vanities: he that made man a reasonable creature of soul and body
^d he that did neither let him pass unpunished for his sin, nor yet excluded
him ^om mercy: he that gave both unto good and bad essence with the stones,
power of production with the trees, senses with the beasts of the field, and
understanding with the Angels; he, from whom is all being, beauty, form and
order, number, weight and measure; he, from whom al nature, mean and
excellent, al seeds of form, all forms of seed, all motion, both of forms
and seeds derive and have being* He that gave flesh the original, beauty,
strength, propagation, form and shape, health and symmetry: He that gave the
unreasonable soul, sense, memory and appetite, the reasonable besides these,
fantasy, understanding and will: He (I say) having left neither heaven, nor
earth, nor Angel, nor man, no nor the most base and contemptible creature,
neither the birds feather, nor the herbs flower, nor the trees leaf, without
the true harmony of their parts, and peaceful concord of composition; It is no
way credible, that he would leave the kingdoms of men, and their bondages and
freedoms loose and vncomprized in the laws of his eternal providence.

How the ancient Romans obtained this increase of their Kingdom, at the true
Gods hand, being that they never worshipped him. CHAP. 12.
NOw let us look what desert of the Romans moved the true God to augment their
dominion, he in whose power all the Kingdoms of the earth are. For the (...)
performance of with we wrote our last book before, to prove y^ their gods whom
they worshipped in such ridiculous manner, had no such power; and thus f^r have
we proceeded in this book, to take away the question of destiny and fate, least
some man being persuaded that it was not the deed of the gods, should rather
ascribe it unto fate then to gods will, so mighty and so omnipotent. The ancient
Romans therefore (as their histories report) though like to all other nations
(exceping the Hebrews) they worshipped Idols and false gods, offering their
sacrifices to the devils, not to the true Deity; yet their desire of praise
made them bountiful of their purses, they loved glory and wealth honestly
gotten: honor they dearly affected and Love of glory.
honestly, offering willingly both their lives, and their states for them The
zealous desire of this one thing suppressed al other inordinate affects: and
hence they desired to keep their country in freedom, and then in soueraingty,
because the saw how baseness went with servitude, and glory with dominion.
Whereupon they Kings.
rejected the imperiousness of their Kings, and set down a yearly government
between two heads, called Consuls a Consulendo, of providing; not Kings, nor
Lords of reig^ and rule: (though Rex do seem rather to come a Regendo, of
governing, and Consuls
regnum; the Kingdom, of Rex, then otherwise:) but they held the state of a
King to consist more in this imperious domination, then either in his
discipline of governance, or his beneuolent providence: so having expelled
Tarquin, and instituted Consuls, then (as (a) Salust says well in their praise)
the city getting their freedom thus memorably, grew up in glory, as much as
it did in power: the desire of with glo ry wrought al these world-admired acts
which they performed: Salust praises also M. Cato and C. Caesar, both worthy
men of his time, saying ye Commonwealth had not had a famous man of a long
time before, but that the^ it had a couple of illustrious virtue, though of
diverse conditions: he praises Caesar, for his desire of Empire, arms and war,
whereby to exemplify his valor: trusting so in the fortune of a great spirit,
that he rouled up the poor Barbarians to war, tossing Bellona's bloody en^igne
about, that the Romans might thereby give proof of their vigors. This
wrought he for desire of praise and glory. Even so in the precedent ages, their
love, first of liberty, and afterward of sovereignty and glory, whetted them to
all hard attem^. Their famous Poet gives testimony for both: saying: Nec non
Tarquinium ei^ctum Porsenna i^bebat
Accipere, inge^tique vrbem obsidiore premeba^
Aenead (...) in serrum pro libertat^ r^bant, etc.
Porsenn^ gui^ts them with a world of men,
Commands that T^rquin be restored. But then
To arms the Romans for their freedom run.
For then was it honor to die bravely, or to live freely, but having got their
freedom, then succeeded such a greedynesse of glory in them, that freedom
alone seemed nothing, without domination, hammering upon that, which the same
Poet makes Jove to speak in prophetique-wise. -- Quin aspera Tuno
Qua ^re nunc, terrasque metu, c^lumque satigat,
(...) in melius reseret, mecumque fouebit
(...), rerum dominos gentemque togatum.
S^ (...) (...) lustris labentibus ^tas,
C^ d^ A^raci Phithiam, charasque Mycenas
(...) pr^et, ac victis dominabitur argis.
-- and Juno though she yet
Fill heaven and earth with her disquiet fit,
Shall turn her mind at length, and join with me,
To guard the Romans (c) go^ned progeny,
It stands, succeeding times shall see the day,
That old (d) Assaracus his stock shall sway
(e) Phithia, Micena and all Argos round etc.
Which Virgill makes Jupiter speak, as prophetically, being fallen out true
before he wrote these verses: But this by the way to show that the Romans
affection of liberty and domination, was a parcel of their most principal
glory and luster. Hence it is, that the same Poet in distributing the arts
amongst the Nations, gives the Romans the art of Domination and sovereignty
over others saying. Ex^ (...) sp^ (...) (...)
Cr^ (...) (...) (...) ^re (...),
(...) (...) ^elius, c^lique meatus
(...) r^dio and surgentia sydera dicent,
T^ere imperio populos, Roman, memento,
(...), (...) ^es, pacique imponere morem
(...) (...) and debellare superbos.
Others c^ better c^ in brass perhaps,
(f) It Is ^ue; or cut the ^one to human shapes:
Others can better practice laws loud iarres,
Or teach the motions of the fulgid stars.
But (Romans) be your arts, to rule, in wars,
To make all knees to sacred peace be bowed,
To spare the lowly and pull down the proud.


Th^se arts they were the more perfect in, through their abstinence from
pleasur^, (...) covetousness after riches, (the corrupters both of body and
mind) from (...) from the poor citizen, bestowing on beastly plaiers. So
that in the dominion of those corruptions which befell afterward, when Virgil
and Sa^ did both write, the Romans used not the foresaid arts, but deceites
and ^es, ^o raise their glories. And therefore Salust says, At first men's
hearts gave (...) (...) ^bition, rather then covetousness, because that was
more near to virtue: for (...) ^rious and the sloathful have both one desire
of honor, glory and souerainty. But (...) (...) (says he) goes the true way
to work, the later by craft and false means, because he h^ ^t the true course.
The true, are these, to come to honor by virtue, not by ambiti^ (...) honor,
Empire, and glory, good and bad wish both alike. But the good goes (...)
(...), that is, by virtue leading him directly to his possession of honor,
glory, soue^. T^t this was the Romans course, their temples showed, virtues
and honors being (...)) close together: (though herein they took Gods gifts
for gods themselu^) Virtues and honors temples.
wherein you might easily see, that their end was, to show that their was no
access to honor but by virtue, whereunto all they that were good referred it:
f^ ^e evil had it not, though they labored for honor by indirect means, namely
by ^ceite and illusion. The praise of Cato excels, of whom he says that the
(...) ^ned glory, the more it pursued him. For this glory that they seek, is
the goo^ ((...)) ^ion of men concerning such or such. And therefore that is the
best virtue, Glory.
that s^h not upon others judgments, but upon ones own conscience, as the Ap^
^h: Our glory is this, the testimony of our conscience: and again: Let every
(...) (...) his own work, and so shall he have glory in himself only, and
not in ano^ 2. Cor. 1. Galat. 6.
^o that glory and honor which they desire so, and aim so after, by good
means, (...) (...) go before virtue, but follow it: for there is no true
virtue, but leuelleth (...) chiefest good. And therefore the honors that Cato
required (i) he should True virtue.
not have required, but the city should have returned him them, as his due
desert. But whereas there were but two famous Romans in that time, Caesar and
Cato, Catoes v^tue seems far nerer the truth of virtue, then Caesar's. And let
us take Cato's (k) opinion of the state of the city, as it was then, and as it
had bin before. Think not (says he) that our ancestry brought the city unto
this hight by arms. If it were so, we ^ld make it far more admirable then
ever. But they had other means which we want: industry at home, equity abroad,
freedom in consultation, and purity of minds in all ^en, free from lust and
error. For these have we gotten riot, and avarice, public beggary and private
wealth: riches we praise, and sloth we follow: good and bad are now
vndisi^guished, ambition devouring all the guerdon due to virtue. Nor wonder at
it, when (...) (...) patcheth up a private estate, when you serve your lusts at
home, and your profit (...) ^ffect here. This is that that lays the state
open to all incursion of others. (l) He that ^deth these words of Cato in
Salust, may think that ye old Romans were al such (...) ^ose, whom we have
shown to be so praiseworthy before: it is not so: for o^wise his words which
we related in our second book should be false, where he says: that the city
grew troubled with the oppressing power of the great ones, and (...) ^he people
grew to a division from their fathers upon this cause: that there we^ di^ers
other dangerous dissentions, and that they agreed in honesty and conco^ longer
then they stood in fear of Tarquin, and of the great war of Hetruria: which
being ended, the Senators began to make slaves of the people, to ^udg Lib. 2.
Cap. 18.
of their lives as imperiously as the Kings had done, to chase men from their
possessions, and only their faction bare the sway of all; unto which discords
(the one desyring to rule, and the other refusing to obey) the second African
war gave end because a fear began then to return upon them, and called
their turbulent spirits ^om those alterations to look to the maine, and
establish a concord: But all the great affairs were managed by a few that were
as honest as the times afforded, and so by tolerating those evils, the state
grew well up, through the providence of a few good governors: for as this
writer says, that having heard and read of many memorable military deeds of
the Romans by sea and land, he had a great desire to know what it was that
supported those great busynesses, wherein the Romans very often with a
handful of men (to count of) have held out war with most powreful, rich and
victorious Kings: and having looked well into it, he finds, that the egregious
virtue of a very few citizens has bin cause of this happy success of all the
rest: surmou^ting wealth by poverty, and multitude by scarcity. But after that
corruption had eaten through the City (says he) then the greatness of the
commonwealth supported the viciousness of her magistrates. So the virtue of a
few, aiming at glory, honor, and sovereignty, by a true line: that same virtue,
is that which Cato, so prefers: This was the industry at home, that he so
commended, which made their public treasury rich, though the private were but
mean (m) And the corruption of manners he brings in as the just contrary,
producing public beggary through private wealth. Wherefore, whereas the
Monarchies of the East had bin along time glorious, God resolved to erect one
now in the West also, which although it were after the^ in time, yet should be
before them in greatness and dignity. And this he left in the hands of such
men as swaied it, especially to punish the vicious states of other nations: and
those men were such, as for honor and dominations sa^e would have an absolut
care of their country, whence they received this honor: and would not stick to
lay down their own lives for their fellows, suppressing covetousness, and al
other vices, only with the desire of honor.

L. VIVES.
CAlled (a) Consulls] That Consul comes of Consulo, this all do acknowledge:
but Consulo signifies many things, and here arises the doubt in what sense
Consul is derived from it. Consulls.
Quintil. lib. 1. Whether Consul come of Providing for, or of Judging, for the
old writers used Consulo to judge, and it is yet a phrase, boni consulas, judge
well. Liuy and Quintil. say that the Consul was once called Judge. But I rather
hold with Varro, that the Consul is a name of ministry, implying that he has
no power nor authority in the state, but only to be the warner of the Senate,
and to ask the peoples counsel, what they would have done. For the Senate of
old, never did any thing* but the Conful first asked the peoples minds, and
brought them word how it passed, whence this ordinary phrase arises: He
entreated the Consul to bring word back how this or this passed: Caesar's
letters being brought by Fabius to the Consuls, The Trib^s could very hardly
with much contention obtain that they should be read in the Senate, but the
their contents should be related to the Senate, they could not be persuaded.
Caes. (...). de bello Pompei. lib. 1. Whereby it appears that the Senate gave
not their verdits upon any thing, but what was related to the^ by the Consuls
which custom was duly observed in old times. But afterward some of the
magistrates got power to enforce the senates voices to any thing what they
listed prefer. Uarro's words are these (de ling. lat. lib. 4.) He was called y^
Cons^l for (...) with the people and senate. Unless it be as Actius says in
Brutus he that Judges right [Q^i recte consulat,] Let him be Consul. (b)
Saluste] In bello Catilin. (c) Gowned] Rightly go^d (^ith Ser^) for all ages and
sexes there ware g^nes. (d) Assaracus] Grandsire to Anchises, father to (...),
of whom came Aeneas, of him Iulus, of him the Alban King and of (...).
them Ro^lus. (e) (...)] This is touching the revenge of Troy, that their
countries that bur^ed Troy should be subdued by a progeny of Troyans. So says
the Aeneads. (...) ille Argos, Agamemnoniasque, Mycenas,
(...) A^cidem genus (...) Ac^li
(...) (...) Troi^, and templa (...) Mineruae
The towers of Argos he shall undermine,
And wrack (Pelides) that great son of thine,
Revenging ^roy and Pallas wronged shrine.


Phthia was Achilles his native soil, a town in Phtheias a part of
Macedoniae. He was Phthia. Larissa.
bro^ght up tho at Larissa, and therefore called Larissaeus: though Phithia and
Larissa be both in Achaia, as else where I will make plain, as also that the
Argiue tower was called Larissa. Phthia in Macedonea was subdued by L.
Aemilius, after he had overthrown Pers^ Micaenae.
^nae, is in Argolis, as Mela testifies, and from thence the Kingdom was
transferred to ^gos. L. Mummius conquered it, together with all Achaia: Argos
is near Mycenae says Argos.
M^. The Kingdom was the Argiues from Inachus to Pelops DXLIIII. years.
Eusebius. Iu^ Higi^us says that Uirgill erreth in these verses, for he that
conquered Argos did not (...)-^hrow Pyrrhus, so that he would have the middle
verse taken out. But Seruius says (...) is, Illeque, and he, to be
understood, it being understood of Curious. (f) It Is true] Nay all (...): Marius
built them after the Cymbrian war: but because there was a gutter betwixt
them, they seemed a couple. (h) Opinion of men] This is glory in general: but
the true glory Glory.
is a so^d and express thing (says Tully) no shadow: and that is the uniform
praise of them that are goo^, (...) uncorrupted voice of such as judge aright
of virtues exellence: which answers vert^ (...) Echo, and follows it like a
shadow. Tusc. quaest. lib. 3. (i) Should not* This Cato of Utica (of whom he
speaks) sued for the tribuneshippe, and got it: the praetorship, and (after
Cato of vtica.
one repulse, Vatinius (a fellow hated of GOD and man) being preferred before
him) got that too: the consulship, and there had a final repulse. He was a
man (says Plutarch) fit to be ^ought for a magistrate, and more fit to be
forced unto dignities, then to sue for them. (k) Opinion] In his oration which
(being Tribune) he made in the Senate, against the C^spiratours. Salust,
Catilin. (l) He that hears* The later Romans were always a talking of the
virtues of their ancestry, extolling them to heaven: either because all things
declined from better to worse, or because they thought still that the times
past were best. (m) And (...) ^ption] A diversity of reading, vitium esse
contrarium and e contrario, all to one sense: (...) ^ter is in all the old
manuscripts.

O^ ^bition, which being a vice, is notwithstanding herein held a virtue that
it does restrain vices of worse natures. CHAP. 13.
B^t he is better sighted, that can see this desire of glory to be a vice:
Horace (...) it, and therefore said, (...) (...) t^es, sunt certa piacula quae
te,
(b) (...) lecto poterunt recreare libello.
You swell with thirst of praise: but I can tell
A medecin: read this book thrice over (b) well. Epist lib. (...).



(...) (...) his Odes he sung this, to the same purpose of suppressing
ambitious thou^. (...) (...) auidum domando
(...) (...) si Lybiam remotis
(...) (...) (...), and vterque Paenus,
-- Seruiat vni.
He that can conquer his affects rebelling,
Has larger Monarchy, then he that swa^s Car. lib. 2

The Lybians, (c) Gades, and both Africas,
-- And more excelling.


(...) notwithstanding, those that do not bridle their exorbitant affects by
(...), by the power of the holy spirit, and the love of that intellectual
beauty, (...) they cannot be happy, yet they may be less unhappy, in
avoiding this (...) of human glory howsoever: Tully could not (f) dissemble
this, in his (...) Of the Commonwealth, where speaking of the instruction of a
Prince, for (...) (...), he says he must be (g) nourished with glory: and
so there-vpon infer^ Glory a Princes nourishment.
what worthy deeds this glory had drawn from his ancestors. So that (...) ^e
so far from resisting this vice, that they did wholly give themselves (...)
^nt and excite each one, thinking it useful to the state: Though in (...) b^s
of Philosophy, Tully never dissembles (h) this contagion, but confes^th (...)
(...) clear as day. For speaking of studies, aiming at the true good, and
contemning the vain blasts of human praises, he infers this axione, (i)
Honor nourishes arts, and glory keeps all men on work in studies, and
what men approve not, lies unregarded.

L. VIVES.
Said (a)] Epist. lib. 1. to Maecenas. ter pure: thrice over (b) well] The
Philosophers books of manners are to be read purely, diligently, not against
the will, but desirously, that we may reap profit thereby, for so doing, we
shall. Prophyry says we must come with clean Philosophy to be well read.
hands, as unto a sacrifice. (c) Latius] Carm. lib. 2. ad Salust. (d) Gades]
An Island of Spain, famous for Hercules his trauells and pillars. (e) Both
Africa's] Acron and Porphy^y think that by the one, he means Lybeans, and
by the other the Gadetanes whom the Africans first placed there: as if the Poet
intended a conjunction of Empire in lands divided by seas, as he says in the
said place, before. (f) Dissemble] Some read Silere, conceal, but the old
Copies ^ead it as we have set it down. (g) Nourished] Stoicisme. A wise man
is a creature of glory; Symonides, (quoted by Xenophon in his Hieron)
distinguishes a man from all other creatures in this especial thing, that he
is touched by glory and honor. (h) This contagion] The proposition [ab] in the
Latin text is superfluous: our reading is in the better. (i) Honour] Prooem.
Tusc. quaest.

That we are to avoid this desire of human honor: the glory of the
righteous being wholly in GOD. CHAP. 14.
Wherefore without doubt, we had better resist this desire then (a) yield to
it. For much the nearer are we to GOD, as we are purer from this impurity:
which although in this life, it be not fully rooted out of the heart, because
it is a temptation that troubles even the best proficients in religion, yet
let The love of justice should excel the love of glory.
the love of righteousness suppress the thirst of ambitiousnesse. And thus:
if some things lie unrespected, because men approve them not, and yet be good
and honest, then let the love of human praise blush, and give place to the
love of truth. For this is a great enemy to our faith, if that the affect of
glory have more room in our hearts then the fear or love of our GOD: and
therefore he says: How can you believe, that expect honor one from another,
and seek not the honor the ^o. 5. 43.
comes of GOD? And likewise it is said of some that believed in him and yet
durst not profess it; They loved the praise of men more then the praise of
GOD. ^o. 12. 43.
Which the holy Apostles did not: for they preached the name of Christ, where
it was (b) not only not approved of, (as Tully says, and what men approve
not, lies unregarded) but where it was even detested, holding the rule that
their master (the minds physician) had taught them. Whosoever shall deny me
before men, him will I also deny (c) before my Father which is in Heaven, and
(d) before the M^t. 10. 33 Luc. 12. 9
Angels of GOD: So that all their reproaches, by their cruel persecutions,
their extreme pains, could not drive them from preaching this salvation, let
the madness of man oppose what it could. And whereas this divine life,
conversation, and doctrine of theirs, having suppressed all hardness of heart,
and erected the peace of righteousness, was crowned with an unbounded glory in
Christ (...) church: this did not they rest, as in the expected guerdon of
their virtues, but referred it all unto Christ his glory, by whose grace they
were what they we^. And the same did they trans-fuse into such, as they
converted unto the (...) of him, whereby they might become such as they were
before them: (...) to keep them from touch of human ambition their Master
taught the this, Take heed that you do not your good deeds before men, to be
seen of them, or else ye shall have no reward of your father which is in
heaven. But least they should misconceiue Mat. 6. 1.
this, and fear to do well before men: and so become less profitable by
striving to keep their virtuous acts in secret, then other-wise; he says
again, Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good works
and glorify your Mat. 5. 16.
father which is in heaven. Do not well with an intent that men should see you
do so, and so turn to behold you, who are not what you are by them: but do
so that they may glorify your father in heaven, unto whom if they turn they
may be such as you are. Thus did the Martirs, that excelled the Scaeuola's,
C^rtij and Decij, (not by punishing themselves, but by learning the
inflictions of others) in true virtue, piety, and innumerable multitude. But
the others, living in an earthly city, wherein the end of all their endeavors
was by themselves propounded to themselves, the fame (namely) and domination
of this world, and not the eternity of heaven, not in the everlasting life,
but in their own ends, and the mouths of their posterity: what should they
Jove, but glory, whereby they desired to survive after death in the (e)
memories and mouths of such as commended them.

L. VIVES.
THen yield (a) to it] So must the sense be: we must resist the desire of
glory, and not yield to it. (b) Not only not] we have given it the best
reading of all I think and the nearest to likelihood. (c) Before my father]
Matt. 10. 33. (d) Before the Angels of God] Luc. 12. 9. (e) Memories and
mouthes] I fly, as living, through the mouths of men, ^aith Ennius.

Of the temporal rewards that God bestowed upon the Romans virtues and good
conditions. CHAP. 15.
SVch therefore as we have spoken of, if God did neither mean to bless them
with eternity in his heavenly city, amongst his Angels (to which society
that true piety brings men, which affords that true divine worship (which
the True piety.
Greeks call (a) (...)) to none but only the true God) nor to vouchsafe them
an earthly glory or excellence of Imperial dignity; then should their virtues,
the good acts whereby they endeavored to ascend to this glory, pass
unrewarded. But the Lord says even of such as do good for human glory;
Verily I say unto you they have their reward: These therefore that neglected
their private estates for the commonwealth and public treasury, opposing
couetise, having a full care of their countries freedom, and living according
to their laws, without touch of lust or guilt, these seemed to go the right
way to get themselves honor, and did so: honored they are almost all the
world over, all nations very near, received their laws, honored were they
then in all men's mouths, and now in most men's writings through the world: Thus
have they no reason to complain of Gods justice; they have their reward.

L. VIVES.
Call (a) (...)] of (...), to worship, or to serve. Latria.


Of the reward of the eternal citizens of heaven, to whom the examples of the
Romans virtues were of good use. CHAP. 16.
But as for their reward that endure reproaches here on earth for the city of
GOD, (which the lovers of the world do hate and deride) that is of another
nature. That City is eternal: No man (a) is borne in it, because no man The
eternal city.
dies in it. Felicity is there fully, yet no goddess, but a Gods gift: of
this habitation have we a promise by faith, as long as we are here in
pilgrimage on earth, and long for that rest above. The Sun arises not there
both upon good and bad, but the Son of righteousness shines only over the
good. Romans 8. Mat. 5.
There shall be no need to respect the common treasury more then the private,
truth is all the treasure that lies there. And therefore the Roman Empire
had that glorious increase, not only to be a fit guerdon to the virtues of
such worthies as we forenamed, but also that the citizens of heaven in their
pilgrimages upon earth, might observe those examples with a sober diligence,
and thence gather how great care, love, and respect ought to be carried to the
heavenly country for life eternal, if those men had such a dear affect to
their earthly country for glory so temporal. 2. Cor. 5.


L. VIVES.
NO man (a) is borne] That is, their is no increase of them, no more then there
is decease, the^ just number being predestinate and fore-knowne by the eternal
GOD himself.

The fruits of the Romans wars, both to themselves and to those with whom
they warred. CHAP. 17.
FOr what skilleth it in respect of this short and transitory life, under whose
dominion a mortal man does live, so he be not compelled to acts of impiety
or injustice. But did the Romans ever hurt any of the nations whom they
conquered and gave laws unto, but in the very fury and war of the conquest?
If they could have given those laws by agreement, it had been better (but
then had been no place for triumph) for the Romans lived under the same
laws themselves that they gave to others. This (a) had been sufficient for
the state, but that Mars, Bellona and Victory should then have been
displeased, and displaced also, if they had had no wars, nor no victories.
Would not then the states of Rome, and other nations have been all one?
especially, that being done, which was most gravely and worthyly performed
afterward, (b) every man that belonged to the Roman Empire, being made
free of the city, as though they were now all citizens of Rome, whereas
before there was but a very few, so that such as had no lands, should live of
the common? this would have been granted unto good governors by other
nations, sooner by entreaty then force. For what does conquering, or being
conquered hurt, or profit men's lives, manners, or dignities either? I see no
good it does, but only adds unto their intolerable vainglory, who aim at
such matters, and war for them, and lastly receive them as their labors
reward. Does not their land pay tribute to the state as well as others? Yes.
May they learn any thing that others may not? No. (c) And are there not many
Senators that never saw: Rome? True. Take away vainglory and what are men but
men? An^ if the perverseness of the age would permit the very best means for
(...) bear away the greatest honors, then should not this human honor b^
so prize-worthy howsoever, being but a breath and a light fume? But yet (...)
us use these things, to do our selves good toward GOD. Let us consider what
obstacles these men have scorn^d, what pains they have tak^ what affects they
have suppressed, and only for this human glory which afterward they
received as the reward of their virtues; and let this serve to suppress our
pride also, that seeing the city wherein we have promised habitation and
Kingdom, is as far diffrent from this in excellence, as Heaven from earth,
life eternal from mirth temporal, firm glory from fuming vaineglory, angels
company from men's, and his light that made the Sun and Moon, from the light
of the Sun and Moon: then have the citizens of this heavenly region done
just nothing, in doing any thing for attaining this celestial dwelling, seeing
that the other have taken such pains in that habitation of earth, which they
had already attained: especially, the remission of sins, calling us as
Remission of sins.
citizens, to that eternal dwelling; and having a kind of resemblance with
Romulus his sanctuary, by which he gathered a multitude of people into his
city Romulus his sanctuary.
through hope of impunity.

L. VIVES.
THis had been (a)] The old books read Hoc si fieret sine Mart etc. if
this could have been done without Mars, making it run in one sentence unto
the interogation. All the Roman subjects made free of the city.
(b) Every man] The Latins were made free denizens of old: and from them it
spread further into Italy, over Po, over the Alps, and the sea. Claudius
Caesar made many Barbarians free of Rome: affirming, that it was the ruin of
Athens and Lacedaemon, that they made not such as they conquered free of their
Cities. Afterward, under Emperors that were Spaniardes, Africans, and
Thracians, whole P^ouinces at first, and afterward the whole Empire was made
free of Rome. And whereas before, all were called Barbarians Barbarians who
they are.
but the Greeks, now the Romans being Lords, exempted themselves, and
afterward the Latins, and all the Italians from that name: but after that, all
the Provinces being made free of the City, only they were called Barbarians
which were not under the Empire of Rome: And thus does Herodian, Spartianus,
Eutropius, and later Historiographers use it. So the river Rhine had two banks
the neither of them was Roman, the further, Rhines banks.
Barbarian, Claudianus. O (...) doluit Rh^nus qua Barbarus ibat,
Quod ^e non geminis frueretur iudice ripis.
O how Rhine wept, on the Barbarian shore,
I ha^ both his banks were not within thy power.


(c) And are there not] Many nations being made free of the City, many of the
chief men of those nations were made Senators, though they never saw Rome, no
more then a many that were Citizens.

How far the Christians should be from boasting of their deeds for their
eternal country, the Romans having done so much for their temporal City,
and for human glory. CHAP. 18.
WHy is it then so much to despise all this worlds vanities for eternity when
as Brutus could kill his sons (being not enforced to it) for fear his
country should loose the bare liberty? Truly it is a more difficult matter to
kill ones children, then to let go those things which we do but gather for
our children, or to give them to the poor, when faith or righteousness bids
us. Earthly riches can neither bless us nor our children with happiness; we
must either loose them in this life or lea^e them to be enjoyed after our
death, by one, we cannot tell whom, perhaps by those we would not should have
them. No, it is GOD, the minds true wealth, that makes us happy. The Poet
reares Brutus a God the minde^ ^rue wealth.
monument of unhappiness for killing his sons, though otherwise he praise him.
-- Natosque pater fera bella mouentes,
Ad paenam patria pro liberate vocabit
Infaelix, vtcumque ferent ea fata minores.
His sons, convict of turbulent transgression,
He kills, to free his country from oppression,
Hapless how ere succeeding times shall ringe.


But in the next verse he gives him comfort: Vicit amor patriae laudumque
immensa cupido. Conquered by's countries love, and thirst of prey. (e) The two
things that set all the Romans upon admirable action. So then if the Father
could kill his own sons, for mortal freedom, and thirst of praise, (both
transitory affects) what a great matter is it, if we do not kill our sons,
but count the poor of Christ our sons, and for that eternal liberty, which
freeth us from sin, death and hell; not for human cupidity, but for
Christian charity; to free men, not from Tarquin, but from the devils, and
their King? And if Torquatus, another Roman, slew his own son, not for
fighting against his country, but for going only against his command; being
general, (he being Torquatus.
a valorous youth and provoked by his enemy, yea and yet getting the victory):
because there was more hurt in his contempt of authority, then good in his
conquest: why should they boast, who for the laws of that neuer-ending country
do forsake only those things which are never so dear as children; namely
earthly goods and possessions? If Furius Camillus, after his banishment,
Camillus.
by his ^ngratefull country, which he had saved from being oppressed by the
valourous Veians yet would daigne to come to free it the second time, because
he had no better place to show his glory in: why is he extolled (as having
done great matters) who having (perhaps suffered some great disgrace and injury
in the church by his carnal enemies) has not departed to the churches
enemies, the Here^es or invented some heresy against it him self, but rather
has guarded it, (...) far as in him lay, from all the pernicious invasions
of heresy, because their is no (a) other place to live in unto eternal life,
though there be others ^gh to attain human glory in? If Scaeuola, when he
saw he had failed to ki^ (...) (...), (a sore foe to Rome,) and killed another
for him, to make a peace Scaenola.
with him, ^t his hand into the fire that burned on the Altar, saying that Rome
had a multitude such as he that had conspired his destruction, and by this
speech so terrified him that he made a present peace with them and got him
packing) why shall any man talk of his merits in respect of the Kingdom of
Heaven, if he loose, (not his hand but) his whole body in the fire for it, (not
by his own choice but) by the power of the persecutor? If Curtius, (to
satisfy the Oracle Curtius.
that commanded Rome to cast the best Jewel it had into a great gulf, and the
Romans being resolved that valor and men of arms were their best Jewels)
took his horse and armor, and willingly leaped into that gaping gulf; why
shall a man say he has done much for heaven that shall (not cast himself to
death but) endure death at the hands of some enemy of his faith, seeing that
GOD, his Lord, and the King of his country, has given him this rule as a
certain Oracle: Fear not them that kill the body, but are not able to kill
the soul. If Mat. 10. 28 The Decii.
the two Decii consecrated themselves to their countries good and sacrificed
their blood (as with prayers) unto the angry gods for the deliverance of the
Roman army, let not the holy Martires be proud of doing any thing for the
pertaking of their eternal possessions, where felicity has neither error nor
end, if they do contend in charitable faith and faithful charity, even unto
the shedding of their blood both for their brethren, for whom and also for
their enemies by whom it is shed. (k) If Marcus Puluillus in his dedication
of the Temple to Jove, Juno and Min^ false news being brought (c) (by those
that envied his honor) of his sons death, that so he might leave all the
dedication to his fellow, and go perturbed away, did nevertheless so
contemn the news, that (d) he bad them cast him forth unburned, his desire
of glory utterly conquering his grief of being childlesse: why should that
man say he has done much for the preaching of the gospel, (which freeth and
gathers Gods citizens out of so many errors) to whom being careful of his
Fathers funeral, the LORD said. Follow me, Regulu^.
and let the dead bury their dead? If M. Regulus* not to deal falsely with his
most cruel enemies, returned back to them from Rome it self, because (as he
answered the Romans that would have staid him) he could not live in the
dignity of an honest citizen in Rome, since he had been a slave in Afric:
and that the Carthaginians put him to an horrible death for speaking against
them in Romes Senate: What torments are not be scorned, for the faith of the
country, unto whose eternal happiness faith it self conducteth us? Or what
reward had GOD for all his benefits, if, for the faith which every one owes to
him, he should suffer as much torment as Regulus suffered for the faith which
he ought to his bloudiest foes? Or how dare any Christian boast of voluntary
poverty (the (f) means to make his travel unto his country, where GOD, the
true riches The praise of voluntary poverty.
dwells more light and easy) when he shall hear or read of (g) L. Valerius,
who dying consul, was so poor, that his burial was paid for out of the
common Valerius Poplicola. Q. ^incinatus.
purse; or of Q. (h) Cincinatus, who having but 4. acres of land, and tilling
it himself with his own hands, was fetched from the plough to be Dictator?
an office (i) more honorable then the Consulls? and having (k) conquered his
foes, and gotten great honor, returned to his old state of poverty? Or why
should any man think it a great matter, not to be seduced from the fellowship
of celestial powers, by this worlds vanities, when as he reads how (l)
Fabricius could not be drawn from the Romans by all Pyrrhus the King of
Epirus his promises, Fabricius.
though extended even to the 4. part of his Kingdom, but would live there
still in his accustomed poverty? for whereas they had a rich and powrefull
wealepublike, and yet were so poor themselves, that (m) one that had been
twice Cons^ was put out of that Senate of (n) poor men by the Censors decree,
because he was found to be worth ten pound in silver; if those men that
inritched the treasury by their triumphs were so poor themselves, then much
more ought the christians, whose riches are (for a better intent) all in
common, as the Apostles acts record: to be distributed to every man according
to his need: neither any of them said that any thing he possessed was his
own, but all was in common: much more Act 4
I say ought they to know that this is no just thing to boast upon, seeing that
they do but that for gayning the society of the Angels, which the other did
(or near did) for their preserving of the glory of the Romans. These now,
and other such like, in their books, how should they have been so known, and
so famous, had not Romes Empire had this great and magnificent exaltation and
dilatation? Wherefore that Empire, so spacious, and so contin^ant and renowned
by the virtues of those illustrious men was given, both to stand as a reward
for their merrites, and to produce examples for our uses. That if we observe
not the laws of those virtues for attaining the celestial Kingdom, which
they did for preserving one but terrestrial, we might be ashamed: but if we
do, then that we be not exalted, for as the Apostle says. The afflictions
of this present time are not worthy of the glory which shall be Romans 8. ve^. 18.
showed unto us. But their lives seemed worthy of that present temporal glory.
And therefore the Jews, that executed Christ, (the New testament revealing what
the old co^ceiled, that God was not be worshipped for the earthly benefits
which he bestows upon bad as well as good, but for life eternal, and the
perpetual blessing of that supernall city) were justly given to be the slaves
and instruments of their glory: that those that sought earthly glory by any
virtue soever, might overcome and subdue those that refused and murdered the
giver of true glory and eternal felicity.

L. VIVES.
NO other (a) place.] Some texts want the second negative, but erroneously, I^
must be read as we have placed it. (a) M. Puluillus.] Liu. lib. 2. Ualer.
lib. 5. Plut. in Poplicol. Dionys, and others. This temple to Jove, Juno and
Minerua, Tarquin. Priscus vowed, Tarquin the proud built, and the dedication
falling to the Consulls, Puluillus had it, and was informed (as Augustine
says) that his son etc. (c) by those that] by M. Ualerius, brother to P.
Valerius Consul, who grieved that that magnifi^nt temple should not be
dedicated by one of his family and so brought that news of Puluillus his sons
death that the grief of his family, might make him give over the dedication.
(d) He bad them cast him.] Plutarch, Liuy says he bad them bury him then.
(e) Let the dead] Living to the world, but dead i^ deed, since dead to God, let
them bury such as they think are dead. (f) the means.] In ones life, as in
ones travel, the less Burden he has about or upon him, the lighter he goes
on his iourny. (g) L. Ualerius Liu, Plutarch and Ualerius write yt this
Ualerius Poplicola was so poor that they were feign to bury him at the charge
of the city. So does Eutropius and others. It is said each one gave somewhat
to his burial: Plut, farthings a piece says Apuleius, Apolog. de. Magia.
Augustine does but touch at the story, respecting neither his surname not the
year of his death, for he was called Publius not Lucius and died a year after
his 4. consulship, Uerginius and Cassius being Conss. the sixth year after the
expulsion of the Kings Liu. D^. The dictatorship.
(h) Q. Cincinatus. Liu. lib. 3. Ualer. lib. 4. (i) More honorable.] The
dictatorshippe was a regal office, from it was no apeale, to it were consulls
and all obedient, it continued by the law but six months; and was in use
only in dangerous times, the election was made always in Italy, and in the
night: He was called the master of the People, and had the Master of the
horsemen joined with him. This office had original in the CCLII. year of the
City after Caesar's death, by the law of Antony the consul; and for envy of
Caesar perpetual dictatoriship was abolished for ever (k) conquered.] The
Aequi, and triumped over the^ (l) Fabritius.] One not rich, but a scorner of
riches. Being sent Ambassador to Pyrrhus King of Epirus abut the rans^ming of
the prisoners, he asked him if he would go to Epirus with him and he would give
him the forth part Fabricius a scorner of riches.
of his kingdom, he replied it was not fit, for all the people would wish rather
to be under his command then Pirrhus his. Pirrhus, content with this answer
admired the plain magnanimity of the man, offered him money as a friend, he
would none. (m) One that.] Cornelius Ruffinus this was: Corn. Silla.
Fabritius the Censor put him off the Senate for being worth ten pound in coined
silver. Liu. lib^ nay he had been Dictator says Gellius. lib. 4. this was the
first Cornelius that was called Sybi^ and then Silla, of all the Cornelian
family. Macrob, he was first consul with Manl. Cur. denatus, and thirteen
years after, with C. Iunius. (n poor men] Rome was never more fertile of
continent honest men then in the war of Pirrhus.

The difference between the desire of glory, and the desire of rule. CHAP. 19.
THere is a difference between desire of glory and desire of rule: for though
the first do incline to the second, yet such as affect the true humane glory,
have a desire to be pleasing unto good judgments, for there is much good in
manners, Desire of rule without love of glory.
whereof many can judge well although many again have not this good, not go
that honest way to glory, honor and sovereignty that Salust says of: He goes
the true way. But whosoever desires to rule without that desire of glory which
keeps men in awe of good judgments, he cares not by what villainy he compass
affect, and so his going about it will show. And therefore the hunter of glory
either follows the true tract or couers his courses so well, that he is held
to be Desire of rule without love of glory.
still in the true tract, and thought to be good when he is not so, wherefore
to the virtuous, contempt of glory is a great virtue: because God beholds it,
and not the judgment of man, for whatsoever he does before men, to show this
contempt, Contempt of glory.
he has no reason to think they suspect him amiss, that think he does it
for his more glory. But he that contemns their opinatiue praise, contemns
also with it, their unadvised suspect: yet not their salvation (if he be good)
because he that has his goodness from God, is of that justice, that he loves
his very enemies, and so loves them that he wishes his slanderers and
backe-bit^rs reformed, and to become his companions, not here but in his
eternal country, for his commenders, as he respects not their praises, so
he neglects not their, loves, desiring neither to falsefie their praises,
nor delude their loves: and therefore urges the^ to the praise of him, from
whom every one has al his praiseworthy endowments. But yt man that despising
glory, doteth on dominatio^, is worse then a beast, both in (a) manners
barbarism, and lusts extremity. Such men Rome has had: for though it had
lost the care of credit, yet it retained still the affect of souerainty: nay
Rome (says History) had many such. But (b) Nero Caesar was he that got first
of all Gods providence is it yt rais^h the wicked. Pro. 8, 15.
to the top-turret of all this enormity: whose luxury was such that one would
not have feared any manly act of his: and yet was his cruelty such, as one
ignorant of him would not have thought any effeminat spark reside^t in him,
yet even such as this man was have no dominion but from the great Gods
providence, holding man's vices so^etimes worthy of such plagues. The scripture
of him is plain: By me kings reign, and Princes: Tyrans by me govern the
earth. But (c) least Tyrannus here should be taken only for vild and wicked
kings, and not (as it it meant) for all the old worthies, hear. Vir. Pars mihi
pacis crit dextra^ tetigisse T^ranni, (d) Some peace I hope, by touching your
kings hands.

But elsewhere it is more plainly spoken of God, that he makes an hipocrite
to reign, because the people are snared in perverseness. Wherefore though I
have Job 34.
done what I can to show the cause why the true and just God gave the Romans
such assistance in erecting their Empires and Cities earthly glory upon such a
frame of Monarchy, yet there may be a more secret cause then yet we see; namely
the diverse deserts of the world, open to God, though not to us: it being True
virtue serves not glory.
plain to all godly men, that no man can have true virtue without true piety,
that is, the true adoration of the one and true God: nor is that virtue true
neither, when it serves but for humane ostentation. But those that are not of
the etereternall city called in the scriptures the city of God, they are more
useful to their earthly city (e) in possessing of that world-respecting
virtue, then if they wanted that also. But if (f) those that are truly Godly,
and vp-right of life, come to have the government of estates, there can no
greater happiness befall the world then through the mercy of God to be governed
by such men. And they do attribute all their virtues (be they never so admired)
unto the grace of God only, (g) who gave them, to their desires, their faith
and prayers: besides, they know how far they are from true perfection of
justice; I mean such as is in the angelical powers, for whose fellowship they
make themselves fit. But let that virtue that serves human glory without
piety be never so much extolled, it is not comparable so much as with the
imperfect beginnings of the Saints virtues, whose assured hope stands fixed
in the grace and mercy of the true God.

L. VIVES.
MAnners (a) Barbarisme] or vices barbarism, read whether you will (b) Nero]
Son to Domitius Aenobarbus and Agrippina, daughter to Germanicus: adopted by
Cl. Caesar, his Stepfather, and named Nero ^aesar, after him he succeeded him,
and was the last of Caesar's blood that was emperor: a man of strange cruelty
and beastliness, and for these vices left noted to all posterity: otherwise,
as Suetonius says, he was desirous of eternity of same. He called Apr^, after
himself Neroneus, and meant to have named Rome Neropolis. (c) Least Tirans.]
Of Tyrannus.
this before, the King and the tyran, diffred not of old, the word comes of
(...), to command or sway. Uirgill. Te propter lybicae gentis Nomadumque
Tyranni Odere incensi: for thee, the Libians Anea^.
and Numidian Kings, hated him fore. etc. and Horace carm. 3. Princeps et
innantem Maricae Littoribus tenuisse Lyrim, late Tyrannus. etc. Tyrannus is
sometimes Lord and sometimes a cruel Prince, sometimes a Potent Prince.
Acron. So Augustine here puts worthy, for Potent, (...) in Greek being both
power, and fortitude: as Homer and Pindarus, often use it: In Nemeis de
Hercule. (...), my sons valor. (d) Some peace.] Latinus his words of Aeneas,
whom he held to be a good man. (e) In possessing.] A falty place, the sense is:
when they have that desire of human glory they are of more use in an ea thly
state, the^ when they want it. (f) Those that.] They are the true Philosopers
and if they should rule, or the rulers were like them, happy should the states
be, says Plato. (g) Who gave.] James. 1. 5, 6. If any of you lack wisdom,
let him ask of God, which gives, to all men liberally and reprocheth no man,
and he shall give it him. But let him ask in faith and waver not. etc.

That virtue is as much disgraced in serving human glory as in obeying the
pleasures of the body. CHAP. 20.
THe Philosophers that (a) make virtue the scope of all human good, do use in
disgrace of such as approved virtue and yet applied it all to bodily delight
(holding this to be desired for it self, and virtue to be sought only for
respect to this pleasure) to deliniate a Picture (as it were with their
tongues) wherein The picture of pleasure.
pleasure sits on a throne, like a delicate Queen, and all the Virtues
about her, ready at a beck to do her command. There she commands prudence to
seek out a way whereby pleasure may reign in safety: Justice must go do good
turns, to attain friends, for the use of corporal delights, and injury none:
fortitudes task is, that if any hurt (not mortal) invade the body, she must
hold pleasure so fast in the mind, that the remembrance of delights past, may
dull the touch of the pain present. Temperance must so temper the norishment,
that immoderation come not to trouble the health, and so offend Lady pleasure,
whom the Epicures do say is chiefly resident in the bodies soundness. Thus
the virtues being in their own dignities absolute commanders, must put all
their glories under the feet of pleasure: and submit themselves to an
imperious and dishonest woman. Then this picture, there cannot be a sight more
vild deformed, and abominable to a good man, say the Philosophers, and it is
true. Nor think I that the picture would be so fair as it should be, if
human glory were painted in the throne of pleasure: for though it be not a
(b) nice piece, as the other is, yet it is turgid, and full of empty air* so
that ill should it beseem the substantial virtues, to be subject to such a
shadow, that prudence should foresee nothing, justice distribute nothing,
fortitude endure n^thing, temperance moderate nothing, but that which aymeth at
the pleasing of men and serving of windy glory. Nor are they quite from this
blot, who contemning the judgments of others (as scorners of glory) yet in
their own conceit hold their wisdom at a high prise, for their virtue (have
they any) serves human glory in another manner, for he that pleases
himself is (c) but a man, but he that builds and believes truly and piously
upon God, whom he loves, applies his thoughts more upon that which he
displeases himself in, then upon those things, which if they be in him, do
rather please the truth, then him: nor does he ascribe the power he has to
please, unto other, but unto his mercy, whom he fears to displease: giving
thanks for the cure of this, and praying for the cure of that.

L. VIVES.
PHilosophers that (a) make] The Stoikes, as Cleanthes. This picture Tully
talks of, De finib. l. 2. (b) Nice.] For glory is got by sweat and pains.
(c) But a man] bends his affects no further then man's present being.

That the true God in whose hand and providence all the state of the world
consists, did order and dispose of the Monarchy of the Romans. CHAP. 21.
THis being thus, the true God (a) that gives the heavenly kingdom only to
the godly, but the earthly ones both to good and bad, as himself likes, whose
pleasure is all justice; he is to have all power of giving or taking away
sovereignty, ascribed unto himself alone, and no other, for though we have
shown somethings that he pleased to manifest unto us, yet far, far is it
beyond our powers to penetrate into men's merits, or scan the deserts of
kingdoms aright. This one God therefore, that neither staieth from judging, nor
favoring of mankind, when his pleasure was, and whilst it was his pleasure,
let Rome have sovereignty: so did he with Assyria and Persia (b) who (as their
books say) worshipped only two gods, a good and a bad.) to omit the Hebrews,
of whom (I think) sufficient is already spoken, both of their worship of one
God, and of their kingdom. But he that gave Persia corn without Sigetia's
help, and so many gifts of the earth, without any of those many gods (that had
each one a share in them, o^ rather were three or four to a share,) he also
gave them their kingdom, without their helps, by whose adoration they thought
they kept their kingdom. And so for the men: he that gave (c) Marius rule,
gave Caesar rule, he that gave Augustus it, gave Nero it: he that gave
Vespatian rule or Titus his son (d) both sweet natured men, gave it also to
Domitian, that cruel blood-sucker. And to be brief, he that gave it to
Constantine the Christian, gave it also to Julian (e) the Apostata, whose
worthy towardness was wholly blinded by sacriligious curiosity, and all through
the desire of rule: whose heart wandered after the vanity of false oracles, as
he found, when upon their promise of victory he burned all his ships that
victualed his army: and then being slain in one of his many rash adventures,
he left his poor army in the ^awes of their enemies, without all means of
escape, but that God Terminus (of whom we spoke before) was feign to yield, and
to remove the bounds of the Empire. Thus did he give place to necessity that
would not give place to Jupiter. All these did the True, sacred and only God
dispose and direct as he pleased, and if the causes be unknown why he did
thus, or thus, is he therefore unjust?

L. VIVES.
GOd that (a) giueth] Here is a diversity of reading in the text: but all comes
to one sense. (b) Who as their] The Persian Magi (whose chief Zoroafter was)
held two beginnings Zoroafter.
a good and a bad: that the God of heauen^, this the god of hell. This they
called Pluto and Ari^anius, the evil Demon: that Jove and Horosmades, the
good Demon, Hermipp. Eudox. Theo^p. apud Two kinds of souls in Plato's world.
Pythagoras his numbers. The Manichees.
Laert. Those Plato seems to follow (de leg. l. 10.) putting two sorts of
souls in the world, originalls of good and original of bad: unless he do
rather Pythagorize: who held, that the unity was God, the mind, the nature,
and the good of every thing: the number of two, infinite, material,
multiplicable, the Genius and evil. The Manichees also (Aug. de here is.) held
two beginnings, contrary, and coeternall: and two natures and substances of
good and of evil: wherein they followed the old heretics. (c) Marius] He
coupleth a good and a bad together. Marius most cruel, Caesar most courteous,
Augustus the best Emperor, Nero ye worst that could be. (d) Both sweetly] T.
Vespatian had two sons, Titus and Domitian. Their father was conceited and
full of delicate mirth: and Titus the son so gentle, and indeed so full a
man, that he was Vespasian.
called Man-kindes Delicacy: Sueton. I have resolved (says Pliny the second in
his prefa^ of his natural History to Titus the son) to declare unto you
(most mirthfull Emper^, for that style is the fittest, as being your old
inheritance from your Father. etc.

Domitian was neither like father nor brother, but bloody and hated of all men.
(e) The Apostata] a fugitive, or turne-coate: for being first a Christian,
Libanius the Sophister perverted Domitian.
him, and from that time he was all for oracles, lottes, with crafts and
promises of Magitians, where-by he came to destruction, being otherwise a man
of a great spirit, and one as fit for Julian.
Empire as the world afforded.

That the originalls and conclusions of wars are all at Gods dispose. CHAP.
22.
SO likewise does he with the times and ends of war, be it his pleasure
justly to correct, or mercifully to pity mankind ending them sooner or later,
as he wills. Pompeyes (a) Pirate war, and Scipio his (b) third African
war, were ended Wars soon ended.
with incredible celeritie. The Slaves was also, (c) though it cost Rome two
Consuls and many Captains, making all Italy feel the smart of it, yet in the
third year after it was begun, it was finished. The Picenes, Martians,
Pelignians, (Italians all) sought to pluck their necks from their long and
strickt servitude unto Rome, though it now had subdued huge dominions, and
razed Carthage. In this war the Romans were sorely foiled (d) two Consulls
killed, and many a tall souldior and worthy Senator left dead: yet this war
had continuance but unto the 5. year: mary the second African war lasted a
great while, eighteen years: to the great weakening of the commonweal, and
almost the utter ruin Wars hardly ended.
thereof, 70000. soldiors falling in (e) two battles. The first Afr^can war
held three and twenty years: Mithridates war (f) forty years. And least any
one should think that in the ancient lawdable times the Romans had any
better rules to dispatch war sooner then the rest, the Samnites war lasted
(g) almost fifty years, wherein the Romans were conquered, even unto
slavery. But because they loved not glory for justice, but justice for glory,
they (h) broake the peace and league which they had made. These I write,
because some being ignorant in antiquities, and other-some being dissemblers of
what they know, might other-wise upon discovery of a long war since the time
of Christianity, fly in the face of our religion, and say if it were not so
potent, and if the old adorations were restored, that war would have been
ended by the Romans virtues, and the assistance of Mars and Bellona, as soon
as the rest were. Let them that reads of their wars, recollect but what (i)
uncertain fortune the ancient Romans had in the wars with the whole world,
being tossed like a tempestuous sea, with thousand storms of invasions and
arms: and then let them needs confess, what so feign they would conceal,
and cease in this opposition against Gods power, to possess others with
errors, and be the butchers of their own souls.

L. VIVES.
POmpeys (a) Pirates warre] Ended in forty days after Pompeys departure from
Brund^. Flor. Cic. pro leg. Manl. (b) Third African] Begun and ended in three
years. (c) Although] Arius the Pr^tor and two Consuls, Cn. Lentulus and L.
Gellius were overthrown by Spartacus. (d) Two Consuls] L. ^ul Caesar, and P.
Rutilius. L^uie. (e) Two battles*] At Thrasy^ne* and at Cannas. (f) Forty
yeares] Florus, but it was first stayed by a peace made with Sylla: then
renewed by L. Lucullus, and lastly ended by Pompey the great. (g) Almost
fifty.] forty nine* as Eutropius and Orosius account. Florus says fifty,
Appian eighty, and he is nearest Li^es account, that says the Romans war
with the S^nites lasted near an hundred years, in uncertainty of fortune.
lib. 23. But if Fabius Gurges ended it in his Consulship, it is but fifty
years from the Consulships of M. Val. Coruinus and Cornelius Cossus. But
indeed the Samnites joined with Pyrrhus, and had had a conflict before with
D^ntatus* between Gurges his Consulship and Pyrrhus his coming into Italy.
(h) Broake the peace] This Li^ie she weth crookedly enough. lib. 9. wherein he
says, that the Romans childishly deluded the faith, league, and oath, which
they had passed to Pontius Captain of the Sam^tes: it was true. For they
sought forth childish euasions for their own profit. (i) Vncerta^ (...)] some
have Euentus here for Fortune, I will not dispute whether Euentus may have
Euentus.
the plural number: Ualla says it is rare, but yet sometimes it is so used,
he does not deny it.

Of the battle wherein Rhadagaisus, an idolatrous King of the Goths was
slain, with all his army. CHAP. 23.
NAy that wonderful mercy of Gods, in an act done with in our memories, they
will not so much as mention with thanksgiving, but endeavor as much as in them
lies, to smother it in eternal oblivion; which should we do, we should be
as graceless and ungrateful as they. Rhadagaisus (a) King of the G^es* having
brought a huge army even before the walls of Rome, and holding his sword even
over their necks (as it were) upon one day was ouer-throwne so sudde^ly, that
not so much as one Roman being slain; slain? no nor yet woun^, his whole
army consisting of above ten thousand men, was utterly defeated* ^ee himself
and his sons taken and justly beheaded. If this wicked Bar^ had entered Rome
with those forces, whom would he have spared? what places would he have
honored, what God would he have feared? whose blood, whose chastity should
have escaped him? But o how these wretches boasted of his precedent conquests,
that he had been so victorious, that he had gotten such and such fields,
only because he was a daily sacrificer to those gods which Christianity had
chased from Rome! For at his approach thither, where by the b^ck of Gods
Majesty he was crushed to nothing, his fame was so spacious that it was told
us here at Carthage, that the Pagans believed, reported, and boasted that he
could not be conquered by any of those that would not suff^ the Romans to
adore those gods, whose good favors he had obtained by the daily sacrifices
he offered. Thus they never gave thanks for the merciful goodness of God,
who having resolved to chasti^e the worlds corruption with a greater Barbarian
irruption, yet did moderate his justice with such mercy, that at first he gave
their leader into the hands of his enemies, because the Devils whom he served
should gain no souls by the persuasion of the glory of his conquests. And
then when such Barbarians had taken Rome, as against all custom of hostili^
defended* such as fled into the holy places* only in reverence of
Christianity, pro^ing them selves far greater enemies for the name of Christ,
unto the D^ls and sacrilegions sacrifices, (in which the other reposed his
trust) then unto the opposed soldiers themselves: Thus God did give the
Romans this merciful correction, and yet by destroying the Devils adorer,
showed them that there was neither any help in those sacrifices for the state
of this present life (as they may see that will be attentive and not
obstinate) nor that the true religion is to be refused for earthly
necessities, but rather held fast, in hope and expectation of the heavenly
gloryes.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) King, [This was in Honorius his time, of whom read the preface.

The state and truth of a Christian Emperors felicity. CHAP. 24.
FOr we Christians do not say, that Christian Emperors are happy, because
they have a long reign, or die leaving their sons in quiet possession of
their Empires, or have been ever victorious, or powerful against all their
opposers. These are but gifts and solaces of this laborious, ioylesse life;
Idolaters, and such as belong not to God (as these Emperors do) may enjoy
them: Because God in his mercy will not have these that know him, to believe
that such things are the best goods he gives. But happy they are (say we) if
they reign justly, free from being puffed up with the glozing exaltations of
their attendance, or the cringes of their subjects, if they know themselves to
be but men, and remember that: if they make their power their trumpetter, to
diuulge the true adoration of Gods Majesty, if they love, fear and honor him:
if they long the most for that Empire (a) where they need not fear to have
partners: if they be slack to avenge, quick to forgive: if they use correction
for the public good, and not for private hate: if their pardons promise not
liberality of offending, but indeed only hope of reformation: if they
counterpoyse their enforced acts of severity, with the like weight of bounty
and clemency, (b) if their lusts be the lesser because they have the larger
license: if they desires to rule their own affects, rather then others
estates: and if they do all things, not for glory, but for charity, and with
all, and before all, give God the due sacrifice of prayer, for their
imperfections; Such Christian Emperors we call happy, here in hope, and
hereafter, when the time we look for, comes indeed.

L. VIVES.
EMpire (a) where] On earth Kings love no consorts: power is impatient of
participation, says Lucan, but in heavens joys, the more fellows, rather the
more joy then the less. (b) If their] A proverb, the more leave, the less
lust should follow.

Of the prosperous estate that God bestowed upon Constantine a Christian
Emperor. CHAP. 25.
FOr the good God, least those that worship him for the life of eternity,
should think that no man can attain to this earthly glory, but such as adore
the Devils, (whose (a) power in those things bears a great swaye) bestowed
such store of those earthly benefits as no other man durst wish for, upon (b)
Constantine the Emperor, one that worshipped no Devils, but only the said
true God. To him did he grant the building of (c) a new City, pertaker of
the (d) Roman Empire, as the Daughter of Rome her self; but (e) excluding
all diabolical temples, or idols. Long did he reign therein, and alone sway
de (f) the whole Roman world: he was in war most victorious: in
suppressing (g) tyrants most fortunate. He dyed an aged man, and left his (h)
sons all Emperors; But least any Emperor after him, should turn Christian
for hope of attaining Constantines felicity, (the scope of Christianity being
not that, but life eternal.) He cut off (i) Iouinian far sooner then he did
Julian, and suffered (k) Gratia^ to be slain by his enemies sword: yet with far
more respect, then (l) Pompey was Christian Emperors dying unfortunately.
killed, that worshipped the Roman gods. For Cato, whom he left as his
successor in the war he waged, could never revenge his death; But Gratianus
(though the souls of the godly regard not such solaces) was fully revenged by
(m) Theodosius, with whom he shared the Empire, though he had (n) a younger
brother: being more respective of a faithful friend then of a too awful power.

L. VIVES.
Whose (a) power] In the earth there is none like Behemoth, says Job. Chap.
41. verse. 24. for he knows indeed where all treasure lies, which is the
means to height, and the ruining of foes. (b) Constantine] son to
Constantius and Hellen: borne in Britain, first Christian Emperor of Rome,
after Phillip: he ouer-threw his opposers, and lived and dyed an Constantine.
happy old Emperor, at Nicomedia, the 31. year of his Empire. (c) A new Citie]
Uirgill. O regina nouam cui condere Jupiter vrbem, etc.
O Queen, whom Jove voutchsafes to build a new, etc.
Constantine having gotten an universal peace, and rid himself of troubles,
began to think of building a new city, to be called by his name: first he
began one at Sardis in Asia, then at Sigeum in Troas: thirdly at Chalcedon,
and there he erected walls. But as they wrought, the birds took the lines of
the Masons, and carried them to Bizantium in Thrace, Pyzance. Constantinople.
and so by Gods appointment (as it were) they built it up there, naming it
Constantinople, as it is called yet: and Byzantium also, because of the other
town that Pausanias the Spart^ King built there: which Seuerus almost, and
Galienus soldiers utterly subverted. (d) For thither did Constantine
transport many Senators, and noble families; and the Emperors lay more at
Constantinople then at Rome: so contended it with Rome in state and dignity.
(e) Excluding] He dedicated it to the Blessed Virgin Mary. (f) Roman world,]
The Roman world.
World, for that part of the world that the Romans had under them: so say we
the Christian world, for that part we hold. Lucane uses the Iberean world,
for Spain, and the (...) world for France and Germany: And when Caesar was to
remove out of Spain into Italy, and so into Greece: Uictrices aquilas aliam
laturus in orbem,
Bending his Eagles to another world: says he.


The phrase Marcellinus uses often: and Aurelian to Zenobia wrote himself
Emperor of the Roman world, Trebell. Pollio. Now it is foolish to call them
Emperors of that part of the world that they never conquered: or of that which
they once had conquered, and now have lost, because they lost it by the same
law they got it, by war and bloodshed. But these vain titles make Princes
go mad, whereas in-deede they are nothing but the worlds firebrarnds, and
man-kindes destructions. Shame on the doltish Lawyers, for iangling so about
them. (g) Tyrants] Maxentius and Licinius. (h) Sonnes] Constantius,
Constantine, and Constans: It is not certain whether he himself shared the
Empire amongst them, or they amongst themselves after his death. (i) Iouinian]
he dyed at Dadastan in Iouinian.
Asia, of a pain in the stomach, the seventh month of his Empire.
Uarromanus and he being Consulls. He was a Christian, and cannonized a Saint
by Valentinian. (k) Gratian] Gratian.
Valentinians son. The Roman bands conspired against him whilst he lived
at Tre^ers, and elected one Maximus for their leader, who slew him as he was
upon going into Italy, He was a religious Christian Prince. This of him, and
the rest here mentioned, I have from Eutropius, Paulus Diaconus, Oros. and
Pomp. Laetus, (l) Pompey] Ptolomyes guard Pompey.
flew him in a boat before all the people of Alexandria, looking on them. An
un worthy death for so worthy a man. Liu. Flor. Plutarch, Lucane, Appian. (m)
Theodosius] He was Theodosiu^
a Spaniard, Gratian at Syrmium made him his fellow Emperor, with the peoples
great applause, being a man both virtuous and valiant, descended from Traian,
and (they say) like him in person. He took Maximus at Aquileia, and beheaded
him. (n) A yonger] Valentinian.

Of the faith and devotion of Theodosius Emperor. CHAP. 26.
SO he did not only keep the faith which he ought him in his life time, but
like a Christian indeed, received his little brother Valentinian into his
protection and defense, when Maximus his murderer had chased him from his
state: and held the care of a father over him, which he needed not have done,
but might easilyly have taken all to himself, had his ambition ouerpoysed his
religion. But he preserved his state imperial for him, and gave him all the
comfort, honest courtesy could bestow. And when as the good fortune of
Maximus begot him a terrible name, Theodosius did not creep into a corner of
his Palace, with wizards and coniurers, but sent to (b) John, that lived in a
wild ernesse of Aegipt, whom John an Hermit and a Prophet.
he had hard was graced from God by the spirit of prophecy: to him sent he and
received a true promise of victory. So soon after having killed the tyrant
Maximus he restored the (c) child Valentinian to this empire, from whence he
was driven showing him all the reverend love that could be: and when this child
was slain, (as he was soon after, either by treachery, or by some other
casualty) and that Eugenius another tyrant was unlawfully stepped up in his
place, receiving another answer from the prophet, his faith being firm, he
fetched him down from his usurped place, rather by prayer then power, for the
soldiors that were in the battle on the usurpers side told it unto us, that
there came such a violent wind from Theodosius his side, that it smote their
darts forth of their hands, and A great wind aided Theodosius
if any were thrown, it took them presently in an instant, and forced them
upon the faces of those that threw them. And therefore (d) Claudian (though no
Christian) sings this well of his praise. O nimiu^ dil^cte deo cui militat
aethaer,
^t coniurati veniunt ad cl^ssica venti.
O god's beloved, whom^ powers aereall,
And winds come armed to help, when thou do call^


And being victor (according to his faith and presage) he threw down certaiue
Images of Jupiter which had been consecrated (I know not with what ceremonies)
against him, and mirthfully and kindly (e) gave his footmen their
thunderboults, who (as they well might) iested upon them: because they were
glad, and said they would abide their flashes well enough: for the sons of
his foe, some of them fell in the fight (not by his command:) others being not
yet Christians, but flying into the Church, by this means he made Christians,
and loved them with a Christian charyty: nor diminishing their honors a whit,
but adding more to them. He suffered no private grudges to be held against any
one after the victory. He used not these civil wars, like as Cynna, Marius,
and Sy^ did, that would not have them ended, (f) when they were ended; but he
rather sorrowed that they were begun, then ended then, to any man's hurt. And in
all these troubles, from his reigns beginning, he forgot not to assist and
succou^ the laboring Church, by all the wholesome laws which he could
promulgate against the faithless: (g) Valens an Arrian heretic having done
much hurt therein whereof he rejoiced more to be a member then an earthly
Emperor. He commanded the demolition of all Idols of the Gentiles, knowing
that not so much as earthly blessings are in the devils power, but all and
each particular in Gods. And what was there ever more memorable then that
religious (h) humility of his, when being even forced by his attendants to
revenge the i^iury offered him by the Thessalonicans, (unto whom
notwithstanding at the Bishops entreaties he had promised pardon) he was
excommunica^ (...) h^s humi^y.
and showed such repentance, that the people entreating for him, rather did
lament to see the imperial Majesty so dejected, then their feared his war^
when they had offended. These good works, and a tedious roll of such like, did
he bear away with him out of this transitory smoke of all kind of human
glory: their reward is eternal felicity, given by the true God, only to the
good. For the rest, be they honors, or helps of this life, as the world it
self, light, air, water, earth, soul, sense, and spirit of life, this he
gives promilcually to good and bad: and so he does also with the greatness
and continuance of the temporal Empires of all men, whith he bestows on
either sort, as he pleases.

L. VIVES.
WHen (a) as] Andragathius one of Maximus his Countes, an excellent souldior,
and a cunning leader, managed all the war, and with his tricks brought
Theodosius to many shrewd plunges. (b) Iohn] An Anchorite, that had the spirit
of prophecy presaging many John the Anchorite.
things, and this victory of Theodosius amongst others. Prosper Aquitan.
Theodosius sent often to him for counsel in difficult matters. Diacon. (c) The
childe] He made him, being Gratians brother, Emperor of the West, but
Arbogastes, Count of Uienna slew him by treachery, set up Eugenius, and with a
mighty power of Barbarians stopped the passage of the Alps, to keep Theodo^s
back. The godly Prince fasted and prayed all the night before the battle, and
the next day fought with them, though being far their inferior in number,
and yet by gods great and miraculous power, got a famous victory. Eugenius
was taken and put to death. Arbogastes slew himself. (d) Claudian] Most men
hold him an Aegiptian, and so Posidonius Claudian.
that lived with him, and was his familiar affirms. Not Posidonius the
Rhodian, but a certain Prelate of Africa. He was borne to Poetry, elegantly
wittied, but a little superstitious, There is a Poem of Christ under his name,
perhaps he made it to please Honorius, for he was a great flatterer. The verses
here cited, are in his Panegyrike upon Honorius his third Consulship, written
rather in his praise then upon Theodosius, though he speak of this victory at
the Alps, which like a scurrilous flatterer, he rather ascribes to Honorius
his fate and felicity, then to Theodosius his piety. For thus he says: --
Victoria velox
Auspiciis effecta tuis: pugnastis vterque,
Tu fatis, genitorque manu: te propter and Alpe^
Inuadi faciles: cauto nec profuit hosti
Munitis haesisse l^cis: spes irrita valli
Concid^ and scopulis patuerunt claustra reuulsis.
Te propter gelidis Aquilo de monte procellis
Obruit aduersas aci^s, reuolutaque tela
Vertit in auctores, and turbine repulit have as.
O nimium dilecte deo cui fundit ab antris
Aeolus armatas hyemes, cui mi^itat ether,
Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti!
-- Swift victory needs not be sought,
She Is thine: this fight, thou and ^hy father fought;
Their native strength: nor did it boot the foe
To man his fortes: the trench and rocks fell flat,
And left away for thee to enter at.
For thee, the North-winde from the heights descended,
In whi^le-windes raining all the darts they bended
At thee, on their own breasts, in pointed showers:
O Gods beloved! to whom the stormy powers
Raisd from the deep in arms ethercall,
And winds are pressed to help, when thou do call.
T^ Claudi^n has it, differing somewhat from Augustines quotation. It may be
the vers^s were spread at first as Augustine has them, for he lived in
Claudians time. In the copy of Col^ it is r^d, lust as it is in the text. O
nimium dilecte deo cui militet ^ther! etc. And so in Orosius and (...). (e)
Footemen] An office in court, that was belonging to the speedy dispatch of the
Foo^.
Princes message: not much unlike our Lackeys at this day: Footmen they were
called both of old by Tully, and of late times by Martial. Suetonius
mentions them in his Nero: He never traveled ^r made a journey (says he of
Nero) without a thousand Caroches, their mules shodde all with sil^r, his
muletours all in silken raiments, and all his coatch-men and foote-men in their
brac^lets and rich coats. And in his Titus: Presently he sent his foote-men
to the others mother, who was a far off, to tell her very carefully that her
son was well. The Roman Emperor remoouing into Greece, gave Greek names to
all the offices about them: and amongst others, these footmen were called
(...), runners. Such they had of old also, as Alexander the great had
Philonides, that ran 1200. furlongs in one day: Pliny. (f) When they were]
They would not be quiet when the wars were finished: but having no foes left
to kill, made themselves some continually to practice murder upon. (g)
Valens] A chief Arrian, he did extreme Valens.
harm to the Bishops and religious men in the Church, and put many of them to
death, and sent Arian Bishops to the Goths, that desired to be instructed in
the Christian faith. (h) Humilitie] The Thessalonicans (citizens of a town of
Macedonia so called) having by a tumult The massacr^ (...) Thessalonica.
begun in the Theater, expelled the Magistrates out of the town, Theodosius
being here-at grievously offended, intended to punish this injurious act most
severely: yet by the Bishops entreaties, pardoned them. Not-with-standing, the
wronged parties having many friends in court that ceased not daily to animate
and urge Theodosius to this revenge, at length being overcome by their
entreaties, he sent an army, and put a many thousands of the citizens to
death. For which deed, Ambrose Bishop of Millaine, on Good Friday,
excommunicated him, ^arring him the Church, until he had satisfied for his
crime by a public repentance. He obeyed Th^odosius (...).
and prostrating himself humbly before the world (as the old custom was)
professed himself repentant, and sorry for his offense, entreated pardon first
of God and the whole host of heaven, next of the Bishop, and lastly of all the
whole church, and being thus purged, was restored to the use of Church and
Sacraments.

Augustines inuectiue against such as wrote against the Books already
published. CHAP. 27.
But now I see I must take those in hand, that seeing they are convicted by
just plain arguments in this, that these false gods have no power in the
distribution of temporal goods, (which fools desire only) now go to affirm
that they are worshipped, not for the helps of this life present, but of that
which is to come. For in these five books past, we have said enough to such
as (like little babyes) cry out that they would feign worship them for those
earthly helps, but cannot be suffered. The first three Books I had no sooner
finished, and let them pass abroad unto some men's hands, but I heard of some
that prepared to make (I know not what) an answer to them, or a reply upon
them. Afterward I heard, that they had written them, and did but watch (a) a
time when to publish it securely. But I advise them not to wish a thing so
inexpedient: (b) It is an easy (...).
thing for any man to seem to have made an answer, that is not altogether
silent; but what is more talkatiue then vanity, which cannot have the power of
truth, by reason it has more tongue then truth? But let these fellows mark
each (...) (...) more (...) ^hen truth
thing well: and if their impartial judgments tell them, that their
tongue-ripe Satyrisme may more easily disturb the truth of this world, then
subvert it, let them keep in their trumperies, and learn rather to be
reformed by the wise, then applauded by the foolish. For if they expect a time
(not for the freedom of truth but) for the licensing of reproach, God forbid
that that should be true of them, which Tully spoake of a certain man, that
was called happy, in having free lea^e to ^ffend. (c) O wretched he that has
free liberty to offend! And therefore what ever he be, that thinks himself
happy in his freedom of repro^hing others, I give him to understand that far
happyer should he be in the lack of that license, seeing that as now, he may
in form of consultation contradict or oppose what he will, setting aside the
affecting of vain applause: and hear what he will, and what is fit in
honest, grave, free, and friendly disputation.

L. VIVES.
WAtch (a) a time] Many write against others, and watch a time for the
publication, to the hurt of the adversary and their own profit. Such men
writing only to do mischief, are to be hated as the execrable enemies of all
good judgments. For who cannot do injury? And what a mind has he that
thinks his gifts and learning must serve him to use unto others ruin? If
they seek to do good by writing, let them publish them then, when they may
do^ others the most good, and their opponents the least hurt. Let them set them
forth while (...) adversary lives, is lusty, and can reply upon them, and
defend his own cause. In pr^at. h^stor not.
Pl^ ^tes that Asinius Pollio had Orations against Plancus, which he meant to
publish (...) (...) death, least he should come upon him with a reply. Plancus
hearing of it, tush says (...), (...) is none but ghosts will contend with the
dead: which answer so cut the combs of the ^ions, that all Scholars made
ieasts and mockes of them. (b) It is easye] The (...) (...), (the voluntary
censurer of the contentions between the greatest Scholars) if (...) silent,
presently condemn him, and give him for conquered, without any other trial:
and holding him the sufficient answerer, that does not hold his peace. If both
write (...); O ^en (say they) it is a hard controversy, and so leave it: never
looking, (nor if they wo^ld could they discern) whose cause is better
defended; because they do not understand it: (...) even as Augustine says
here, Uanity having more words then verity; those fools often ^on that side,
that kept the most coil. (c) O wretched] Tusc. l. 5. speaking of Cin^: Is
(...) ^appy that slew those men: no, I rather think him wretched, not only
for doing it, but (...) (...) ^ied himself so to get the license to do it:
Though to offend is unlawful, and li^ ^o man, we abuse the world: for that is
lawful which each man's good has left (...) ^o perform or follow.

Finis, lib. 5.
THE CONTENTS OF THE sixth book of the City of God.
1. Of those that affirm they do worship these Gods for eternal life, and not
for temporal respects. 2. What may be thought of Varroes opinion of the gods,
who deals so with them in his discovery of them and their ceremonies, that
with more reverence unto them he might have held his peace. 3. The division of
Varroes books which (...) styles. The Antiquities of Divine and Human
affairs. 4. That by Varroes disputations the affairs of those men that
worshipped the gods, are of far more antiquity then those of the Gods
themselves. 5. Of Varroes three kinds of Divinity: Fabulous, Natural and
Politic. 6. Of the Fabulous and Politic Divinity against Varro. 7. The
coherence and similitude between the fabulous Divinity and the civil. 8. Of
the natural interpretations which the Paynim Doctors pretend for their Gods.
9. Of the offices of each peculiar God. 10. Of Senecaes freer reprehension of
the civil Theology then Varroes was of the Fabulous. 11. Senecaes opinion of
the Jews. 12. That it is plain, by this discovery of the Pagan Gods vanity,
that they cannot give eternal life, having no power to help in the temporal.
FINIS.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of those that affirm they do worship these gods for eternal life and not for
temporal respects. CHAP. 1.
IN the five precedent books I think they be sufficiently confounded that
hold that worship justly given unto these false gods, which is peculiar only
to one true GOD, and in greek is called (...), and that this worship ought
to be offered unto them for temporal commodities, all which Gods,
Christianity conuinceth either to be friuilous and unprofitable Images, and
damned spirits, or at least, and at best no Creators, but Creatures. But who
knows not that neither those five books, nor all that a man could make,
would stay and satisfy excess of obstinacy? for it is some men's glory (vain
indeed) never to yield to the truth, but oppose it to their own perdition, in
whose bosoms sin has so large an Empire, for their disease exceedth all
cure, not through the Physicians want of skill, but the patients impatient
frowardness. But as for such as read the said books without any obstinate
intent, or with little, and ponder the things they read in an impartial
discretion, those shall approve, that our labor in their satisfaction, has
rather performed more then the question required then otherwise: and that all
the malice, wherein they ^ke Christianity the cause of all the afflictions
falling upon this transitory world, (the best learned of them dissembling their
knowledge against their o^ ^sciences) is not only void of all reason and
honesty, but frought (...) rashness and pernicious impudence. Now therefore
(as our method (...)) are they to be dealt withal that make eternity the end
of this erroni^ worship, which Christian religion so rejects: let us take our
beginning from the holy and oraculous Psalmist, that says (a) Blessed is the
man that makes Psam. 40. 4.
the ^rd his trust, and regards not the proud nor such as turn aside to
lies. But of al such as do go astray in those errors, the Philosophers are
least falty, that could never abide the fond opinions of the vulgar, who made
their gods images, and fabled diverse things of them, most false and unworthy
the Deities, or else believed them from the reports of others, and from that
belief intruded them into the ceremonies, and made them parts of their
worships. Wherefore with such as (b) though they durst not openly, yet secretly
disliked those things, this question may be^lty disputed of: Whether it be fit
to worship one God the maker of al bodies and spirits, for the life to come, or
many gods (c) being all (by their best Philosophers confessions,) both created
and advanced. But who can endure to hear it said that the gods which I reckned
up in part, in the 4. book, and have peculiar charges can give one life
eternal. And those sharp witted men that (...) of the good they do by
writing of these things, in instructing the people what to entreat at each of
their hands, would they commit such a gross absurdity as that which the
Mimickes do in jest, asking water of Bacchus and (...) of the Nymphs? As
thus: would they teach a man that prayed un^ the Nymphs for wine, if they
answered him, we have no wine, go to ^hus for that: Then to reply, if you
have no wine I pray you then give me life eternal? what grosser foolery
could there be then this? would not the Nymphs fall a laughing (for they are
(d) prone to laughter when they do not affect deceit as the devils use to do)
and say to him, why fond man do thou think we have life eternal at command,
that have not a cup of wine at command as thou hear? Such fruitless
absurdity should it be to ask eternal life or hope for it of such Gods as
are so bound to peculiar charges in things respecting Life eternal in vai^
asked of the gods.
this frail and transitory life, that it were like mymicall scurrility to
demand any thing of any one of them which rests under the disposing of
another. Which when the Mimikes do, men do very worthily laugh at them in the
Theater, and when ignorant fools do it, they are far more worthyly derided
in the world. Wherefore the peculiar positions that we ought to make unto
every god, by the governors of cities, their learned men have compiled, and
left unto memory: which must be made to Bacchus, which to the Nymphs, Vulcan
etc. part whereof I recited in the fourth book, and part I willingly omitted.
Now then if it be an error to ask wine of Ceres, bread of Bacchus, water of
Vulcan, and sire of the Nymphs: how much more were it an error to ask life
eternal of any one of them? wherefore if that in our disputation about the
earthly Kingdoms, and in whose power they should be, we showed that it was
directly false to believe that they consisted in the power of any one of those
imaginary gods, were it not outrageous madness then to believe that the life
eternal; with which the Kingdoms of the earth are no way worthy to be
compared, should be in the gift of any of them? Nor can their state, and
hight, compared with the baseness of an earthly Kingdom in respect of them,
be a sufficient cloak for their defect in not being able to give it: because
(forsooth) they do not respect it. No, what ever he be that considering the
frailty of man's nature makes a scorn of the momentary state of earthly
dominion, he will think it a^ unworthy injury to the gods to have the giving
and guarding of such vanities imposed upon them. And by this, if that
(according as we proved sufficiently in the two books last past) no one god
of all this catalogue of noble and ignoble god^ were fit to behold the bestower
of earthly states, how much less fit were they all to make a mortal man
pertaker of immortality? Besides (because now we dispute against those that
stand for their worship in respect of the life to come) they are not to be
worshipped for those things which these men's erroneous opinion (far from all
truth) have put as their proprieties, and things peculiarly in their power: as
they believe that hold the honoring of them very useful in things of this
present life, against whom I have spoken to my power in the (...) precedent
volumes. Which being thus, if such as adore Iuuentas, flourish in v^or of
youth, and those that do not, either die under age, or pass it with the ^fes
of decrepite sickness: If the chinnes of Fortuna Barbata her servants (...)
^ll of hair, and all others be beardlesse: then justly might we say that thus
(...) ^ese goddesses are limited in their offices: and therefore it were no
asking li^ ^nall of Iuuentas, that could not give one a beard, nor were any
good to (...) ^cted of Fortuna Barbata after this life, that had not power to
make one (...) (...) he had a beard. But now, their worship being of no use
for those things in their power, seeing many have worshipped Iuuentas that
lived not to be (...); and as many honored Fortuna Barbata that never had
good beards: and many without beardes that worshipped her were mocked by them
that had be^ds and scor^ ^r; is any man then so mad, that knowing the
worshipping ^f them to be (...) in those things whereto their pretended power
extends, yet will believe it to be effectual in the obtaining life eternal?
Nay even those that did share out their authority for them, (least being so
many, there should some sit idle,) and so taught their worship to the rude
vulgar; nor these themselves durst affirm that the life eternal was a gift
comprised in any of their powers.

L. VIVES.
BLessed (a) is the man] The Septuagints translate it (...). That makes the
(...), of the LORD his hope. But the Hebrew, original has it as Augustine
cites it. Indeed; the difference is not of any moment. (b) Though they durst
not] They feared the laws, as they did the Areopagites at Athens: as Tully
says of Epicurus. (c) Being all] Plato in Ti^. (d) Pr^ to laughter] Alluding
to Virgill in his Palaemon. Et quo, sed faciles Nymphae risere, sacello etc.
The shrine wherein the pleasant Nymphs were merry.


(...) not call them Faciles, pleasant, or kind, because they were soon moved
to laughter, but be^use they were soon appeased, and easy to be entreated.
-- Faciles venerare Nap^s, (...) (...) in his Georgikes; to adore the gentle
Napaeae. And in the same sense are men called Ge^ ^iles.

What may be thought of Varro's opinion of the gods, who deals so with them
in his discovery of them and their ceremonies, that with more reverence unto
them he might have held his peace. CHAP* 2.
VV^ was ever a more curious inquisitor of these matters then Varro? a ^re
learned inuentor, a more diligent judge, a more elegant diuider, or a ^act
recorder? And though he be not eloquent yet is he so documenta^* (...)
sententious, that to read his universal learning will delight one that (...)
matter, as much as T^lly will one that loves words. Yea Tully (a) him^e
leaves this testimony of him, that the same disputation, that he handles in
his Academicke dialogues, he had (he says) with Marcus Varro, a man the most
^ute, and (d) doub^lesse the most learned of his time. (c) He says no^ the
mo^ ^quent, because herein he had his betters: but, most acute: and in his
A^kes where he makes doubts of all things, he calls him Doutlesse the ^st
learned: being so assured hereof that he would take away all doubt which he
^ed to induce into all questions, only in this Academicall disputation
forgetting himself to be an Academike. And in his first book, having com^ed
his works, (d) We says ^ee in the City were but as wandering p^lgrimes,
(...) ^kes brought us home, and taught us to know what, and whom we were. Thy
(...) age, time, religious and politic discipline, habitations, order, all
the forms, causes (...) kinds of divine and civil discipline, by these are
fully discovered. So great was his learning, as (e) Terentius also testifies
of him in the verse. Vir doctissi^ v^decunque Varro: Varro, a man of universal
skill: Who has read so much ^t ^ee wonder how he has had time to write, and
(f) has written so much that we (...) how any man should read so much. This
man (I say) so learned and so witty, (...) he bin a direct opposer of that
religion he wrote for, and held the ceremonies, (...) ^ay religious, but wholly
superstitious, could not (I imagine) have recorded (...) ^testable absurdities
thereof, then he has already. But being a worshippe^ (...) ^ame gods, and a
teacher of that worship, that he proffesseth he fears that his work should
be lost, not by the enemies incursion, but by the citizens negligence, and
affirms that with a more worthy and commodious care were they to be
preserved, then that wherewith Metellus fetched the Palladium from the slaves,
and Aeneas his household gods from the sack of Troy: yet for all this, does he
leave such things to memory, as all, both learned and ignorant do judge most
absurd and unworthy to be mentioned in religion? What ought we then to
gather, but that this depely Skild man (being not freed by the holy spirit)
was ouer-pressed with the custom of his city and yet under show of commending
their religion gave the world notice of his opinion.

L. VIVES.
TUlly (a) himselfe] What Tully meant to handle in his Academikes, his
thirteeneth Epistle of his first book to Atticus opens fully: being rather
indeed a whole volume, then an Epistle. He writes also (de diuinat. lib. 2.)
that he wrote fourth books of Academicall questions. And though he certify
Atticus that he has drawn them into two, yet wants there much: and of the
two that we have extant, Nonius Marcellus quoteth the second diverse times by
the name of the fourth. The place Augustine cites, is not extant in the books
we have. (b) Doutbtlesse the most] Uarro in his life time (when envy stir
most) was called the most learned of the Gowned men, and (which never man had
besides him) in his life had his Varro while he lived had his Sea^e ^p.
statue set up in the library which Asinius Pollio made public at Rome. (c) He
says not] Varro (as by his books left us does appear) either regarded not,
or else attained not any pleasing formality of style. (d) We says hee] Academ.
quest. lib. 1, and the like is in Philippic. 2. (e) Terentianus] A
Carthaginian, living in Diocletians time, he wrote a work of letters,
syllables Terentianus.
and meeters, in verse, which is yet extant. Seruius and Priscian cite him very
often. The verse Augustine quoteth is in the chapter of Phaleuciakes. (f) has
written] Gellius. lib. 3. relates out of Varro his first book Hebdomarum,
that being foure-score and four years of age, he had written 490. books of
which some were lost at the ransacking of his library when he was proscribed.

The division of Varro's books which he styles, The antiquity of divine and
human affairs. CHAP. 3.
HE wrote one and forty books of antiquities: dividing them into affairs
diuineand human: these he handled in five and twenty of them, the divine in
sixteen, so following the division, that every six books of humanity he
divided into (a) four parts: prosecuting the persons, place, time, and nature
of them all; in his first six he wrote of the men, in the second six of the
places, in his third six of the times, in his last six of the actions: One
singular book, as the argument of them all, he placed before them all: In his
(d) divinity also he follows the same method touching the gods, (for their
rites are performed by men in time and place). The four heads I rehearsed he
compriseth in three books peculiar. In the first three of the men, the next
three of places, the third of the times, the last of the sacrifices, herein
also handling who offered, where, when, and what they offered with acuity and
judgment. But because the chief expectation was to know to whom they offered,
of this followed a full discourse in his three last books, which made them up
fifteen. But in all 16. because a book went as an argument by it self before
all that followed: which being ended, consequently out of that fiue-fold
division the three first books did follow of the men, so sub-diuided that the
first was of the Priests, the second of the 3. of the fifteen (d)
rite-obseruers. His second three books of the places, ^dled. 1. the Chapels,
second the Temples: 3. the religious places. The ^hree books of the times,
handled first their holydaies. 2. the Circensian gam^s: 3. the Stage Plays. Of
the three concerning the sacrifices* the 1. handled ^tions: 2. the private
offerings: 3. the public. All these as the parts of the ^recedent pomp, the
gods themselves follow in the three last, they (...) (...) all this cost is
bestowed: In the 1. the gods known. 2. the gods ^ine: 3. the whole company
of them: 4. the selected principals of them. (...) in this goodly frame and
fabri^e of a well distinguished work, it is appa^ t^ all that are not
obstinately blind, that vain and impudent are they that beg or expect
eternal life of any of these gods: both by that we have spoken (...) ^at we
will speak. These are but the institutions of men, or of devils: not go^ ^ells
as he says, but to be plain wicked spirits, that out of their (...)
malice, instill such pernicious opinions into men's fantasies, by abu^ (...)
senses, and illuding their weak capacities, thereby to draw their (...) ^to
vanity more deep, and unloose the hold they have, or might have (...) (...)
changeable and eternal verity. Varro professes himself to write of (...)
before Divinity, because first (says he) there were Cities and soci^* ^ich
afterward gave being to these institutions. But the true religion (...)
^riginall from earthly societies: God the giver of eternal comfort inspi^ i^to
the hearts of such as honor him.

L. VIVES.
(...)* (...)* parts] divided them into four sections, not inducing parts of
contrarieties of (...) (b) In his Divinity also] Identidem the old books read,
but it may be an error in the (...) ^m is better: In like manner. (c) Augurs]
Their order is of great Antiquity, deri^ (...) to Greece, thence to Hetruria
and the Latin Aborigines, and so to Rome. Romu^ Augur, and made 3. others.
Dionisius. He set an Augur in every Tribe. Liu. In pro^ ^me they added a
fourth: and afterward five more which made up nine: And so they (...) (...)
Priests: Consuls M. Valerius; and Q. Apuleius. (d) Fifteen rite-obseruers.]
Tar^ ^he proud having bought the books of the Sybils, appointed two men to
look in them (...) (...) need was: those were called the Duumvirs of the
sacrifices. Afterward these two were (...) ^enne; by the Sextian Licinian law
in the contention of the orders, two years before the ^ians were made capable
of the Consulship: and a great while after, five more added, w^ ^mber stood
firm ever after.

That by Varro's disputations, the affairs of those men that worshipped the
gods, are of far more Antiquitity then those of the gods themselves.
CHAP. 4.
T^is therefore is the reason Varro gives why he writes first of the men
(...) (...) ^ter of the gods who had their ceremonious institutions from men:
(...) (says he) the Painter is elder then the picture, and the Carpenter then
the (...) ^re Cities before their ordinances But yet he says if he were to
write of (...) ^ll nature of the gods, he would have begun with them, and
have dealt (...) men afterward: As though here he writ but of part of their
natures, (...) of all: Or that (a) some part of the gods nature (though not
all) should (...) ^lwaies be preferred before men? Nay what say you to his
discourse in his (...) l^st books of gods certain, gods uncertain, and
gods selected? (...) he seems to omit no nature of the gods. Why then
should he say if we (...) ^o write of all the nature of gods and men, we
would have done with the gods ore we would begin with the men? Either he
writes of the gods natures in whole, in part, or not all: if in whole, then
should the discourse have had first place in his work: if in part, why
should it not be first nevertheless? Is it unfit to prefer part of the gods
nature before whole man's? If it be much to prefer it before all the worlds,
yet it is not so to prefer it before all the Romans. And the Books were
written only in Romes respect, not in the worlds, yet (says he) the men are
fittest before, as the Painter to the picture, and the Carpenter to the
building: plainly intimating that the Deities affairs had (as pictures and
buildings have) their original directly from man. So then remains; that he
wrote not all of the gods natures, which he would not speak plainly out,
but leave to the readers collection. For where he says, (b) not all,
Ordinarily it is understood (Some) but may be taken for (None) For none
neither all nor some. For as he says (c) If it were all the gods nature
that he wrote of, he would have handled it before the men's. But truth (hold
he his peace) cries out, it should nevertheless have the place of the
Romans particular, though it be but particular it self. But it is rightly
placed as it is, the last of all, therefore it is none at all. His desire
therefore was not to prefer Humanity before Divinity, but truth before
falsehood. For in his process of humanity he follows history: but in his
divinity nothing but vain relations and idle opinions. This is the aim of his
subtle intimation, in preferring the first, and giving the reason why he does
so: Which had he not given, some other means perhaps might have been
invented for the defense of his method. But giving it himself, he neither
leaves others place for other suspicions, nor fayles to show that he does but
prefer men before men's institutions, not man's nature before the Deities:
Heerin confessing that his books of Divinity are not of the truth pertaining
to their nature, but of their falsehood effecting others error: which (as we
said in our 4. book) he professed that he would form nearer to the rule of
nature if he were to build a City: but finding one established already, he
could not choose but follow the grounded customs.

L. VIVES.
THat (a) some part] There is no part of the gods nature were it never so
small but is to be preferred before man's whole. (b) Not all] It is a wonder
that our Commentators missed to make a large discourse of aequipalences in this
place, and of the Logicians axioms and dignities out of their fellow Petrus
Hispanus: nor nothing of mobilities, and immobilities. Augustine in this place
speaks of the Logitians precepts, of, not all men dispute, and some men do
not dispute, which run contrary: But not all affirms nothing: so that
whether some men do not dispute, or none dispute, not all is truly said of
either. For if it be true that no man do this, then true it is that not all
men do it, because some do it not, if it be false to say al men do it: These
arise out of the repugnances of contraries and contradictories: for if it be
true that no man is, and false that some man is not such, then shall it be true
that [al men are such] all is being contradictory to [some is not] and so
should [all] and [none] light true in one sense, which cannot be; these
precepts of inquiring truth and falsehood, Aristotle taught, and the Greek
Logitians after him, as likewise Apuleius Perihermenias, Martian Capella and
Seuerinus Boethius, whom we may call Latins, (c) If it were] Augustine
taking away the adiunct takes that also away to which it is an adiunct: Our
Logitians say that rejecting the conditional conclusion, the precedent is
rejected, so if he wrote of any nature of the gods, it were to come before
human affairs: but that which he does write is not to come before them:
Therefore he writes not of Gods nature: Otherwise the consequence were were
false if the antecedent were true and the consequent false. For the repugnance
of the consequent should concur with the antecedent. Now this discourse of
mine were logical if the terms were such, that is schoole-termes, filled with
barbarism and absurdity, but because they are grammar, that is something
nearer the latin, though not fully latin, yet they are Gr^rian, not Logical.

Of Varro his three kinds of divinity, fabulous, natural, and politic.
CHAP. 5.
Again, what means his threefold distinction of the doctrine concerning the
gods, into mythicall, Physical, and civil? and (to give him a latin tongue)
That is the first, (a) fabulare, but we will call it fabulous, for (...) in
greek, it is a fable or tale. The second Natural as the use of the word
teaches plain. The third he names in latin, Civil: And then proceeds:
Mythicall the Poets use principally: Physical the Philosophers: Civil the
vulgar. For the first (...) he) it is fraught with fictions most disgraceful
to the Deities: As thi^ (...) ^his godde is borne of ones head, that of ones
thigh, that of drops o^ (...) And this, that the gods were thieves,
adulterers and servants to man: And finally they attribute such things to the
gods, as cannot be residen^ (...) in the most contemptible wretch of all
mortality, nor happen but unto (...) slavish natures. Here now as far as
fear permitted, he makes a fair discovery of the injury offered to the
gods by such ungodly fables: And h^e he might, seeing he speaks not of the
natural nor civil philosophy, but of (...) ^bulous which he thought he
might reprehend freely. But now to the nex^ (...) (b) second, says he is that
wherewith the Philosophers have filled their vo^mes: Wherein they dispute
what, whence, and when the gods we^ ^her from eternity of fire, as (c)
Heraclitus held, or of (d) numbers as (...) ^aught: Or of (e) Atoms as
Epicurus believed: and such like as are far (...) ^able within the schools
then without, in the place of orations. Here (...) ^th nothing in this kind,
but only relates the controversies which di^em into sexes and factions. Yet
this kind he excludes from the peoples e^, but not the other, which was so
filthy and so frivolous. O the religious (...) of the people, and even with
them, of Rome! The Philosophers discourses o^ ^ddes they cannot any way endure:
but the Poets fictions, and the Players (...), being so much dishonorable to
the divine essences, and fit to be spok^ of none but the most abject
persons, those they abide and behold with (...): Nay, with pleasure. Nay these
the gods themselves do like, and therefore ^e them decreed as expiations. I
but say some, we make a difference of these two kinds, the mythicall and the
physical, from the Civil, whereof you now (...) to speak: and so does he
distinguish them also. Well let us see what ^e says to that: I see good
cause why the fabulous should be separate from (...) because it is false,
foul and unworthy. But in dividing the natural and (...) civil what does he
but approve that the civil is faulty also? For i^ i^ be natural, why is it
excluded? And if it be not natural why is it ad^ted? This is that that makes
him handle the human things before the di^, because in the later he followed
that which men had ordained, not (...) which the truth exacted. But let us
see his civil divinity: The third kind (s^h he) is that which men of the
City, cheefely the priests ought to be c^g in: as, which gods to worship in
public, and with what peculiar sort of s^s each one must be served: But let
us go on with him. The first of those ki^ says he was adapted to the Stage.
The 2. to the World. The 3. to the City. Who sees not which he prefers?
Even his second Philosophical kind. This belongs (he says) to the World,
(f) then which they hold nothing more excellent. But the other two, the first
and the third, them he distinguishes and confineth to the Stage and the City:
for we see that that the pertinence of them to the City has no consequence
why they should pertain to the World, though there be Cities in the World;
for false opinion may get that a belief of truth in a City which has not
any nature nor place in any part of the World. And for the Stage, where is
that but in the City? There ordained by the City, and for what end but
Stage Plays? And what Stage Plays but of their gods, of whom these books
are penned with so much pains?

L. VIVES.
FIrst (a) fabulare The word Snetonius uses: He loved (says he of Tiberius)
the reading of Fabular History, even were it ridiculous and foolish. (b)
Second] The Platonist^, (chiefly the Stoikes) reduced all these gods fables
unto natural causes and natures self, as their heads. (Plato in Cratylo Cic.
de not. deor. Phurnut. and others.) But this they do wring for sometimes in
such manner that one may see they do but dally. (c) Heraclitus] an Ephesian: he
wrote a book that needed an Oedipus or the Delian Swimmer, and therefore he was
called Scotinus, dark. He held fire the beginning, and end of all things, and
that was full of souls and daemones, spirits. His opinion of the fire,
Hippasus of Metapontus followed. (d) Numbers Pithagoras held that God, our
souls, and all things in the world consisted upon numbers and that from their
harmonies were all things produced. These numbers Plato learning of the Italian
Pythagoreans, explained them and made them more intelligible: yet not so but
that the r^ader must let a great part of them alone: This Cicero to Atticus
calls an obscure thing, Plato his numbers. (c) Or of Atomes] Epicurus in
emulation of Democritus taught that all things consisted of little indivisible
bodies, called therefore (...), from which notwithstanding he excluded neither
form, magnitude, nor weight. (f) Then which they hold] Nature knows nothing
more fair, or more spacious. Seneca. Plato in Timeo. Tull. de not. deor. 2.
and other Philosophers hold this.

Of the fabulous and pollitike divinity against Varro. CHAP. 6.
VArro, seeing thou art most acute, and doubtless most learned, yet but a man,
neither God, nor assisted by Gods spirit in the discovery of truth in divinity,
thou see this that the divine affairs are to be excluded from human
vanities; and yet thou fear to offend the peoples vicious opinions and
customs in these public superstitions, being notwithstanding such, as both
thy self held, and thy written works affirm to be directly opposite to the
nature of the Deiti^s, or such as men's infirmity surmized was included in the
Elements. What does this human (though excelling) wit of thine in this place?
what help does thy great reading afford thee in these straits? Thou art
desirous to honor the natural gods, and forced to worship the civil: thou
have found some fabulous ones whom thou dare speak thy mind against: giving
(a) the civil some part of their disgrace whether thou will or no: for thou
say the fabulous are for the Theater, the natural for the world, the civil
for the city: the world being the work of God, the Theater and City of men
nor are they other gods that you laugh at, then those you worship: Nor be your
plays exhibited to any but those you sacrifice unto: how much more subtle
were they divided into some natural, and some instituted by men? And of these
later, the Poets books taught one part, and the priests another: yet
notwithstanding with such a cohaerence in untruth y^ the diue^ that like no
truth approve the^ both: but setting aside your natural divinity (whereof
hereafter) pleases it you to ask or hope for life eternal of your Poetique
ridiculous Stage-goddes? No at no hand. GOD forbid such sacriligious madness!
Will you expect them of those gods whom these presentations do please and
appease, though their crimes be the things presented: I think no man so
brainlessly sottish. Therefore neither your fabulous divinity nor your
politic can give you everlasting life. For the first sows the gods
turpitude, and the later by favoring it, moweth it. The first spread lies, the
later collect them. The first hanteth the deities with outrageous fixions, and
the later imputes these fixions to the honor of the deities. The first makes
songs of the gods lascivious pranks, and the later sings them on the gods
feast days. The first records the wickednesses of the gods, and the later
loves the rehearsal of those records. The first either shameth the gods,
or fayneth of them: The later either witnesses the truth or delights in the
fixion. Both are filthy and both are damnable. But the fabulous professes
turpitude openly, and the politic makes that turpitude her ornament. Is
there any hope of life eternal where the temporal suffers such pollution? Or
does wicked company and acts of dishonest men pollute our lives, and not the
society of those false-adorned, and filthyly adored fiendes? If their faults
be true, how vile are they worshipped? If false, how wicked the worshippers?
But some ignorant person may gather from this discourse that it is the
poetical fixions only and Stage-presentments that are derogatory from the
Deities glory, but not the Doctrine of the Priests, at any hand; that is pure
and holy. Is it so? No, if it were, they would never have given order to erect
plays for the gods honor, nor the gods would never have demanded it. But
the Priests feared not to present such things as the gods honors in the
Theaters, when as they had practiced the like in the Temples. Lastly our said
Author indeauoring to make Politic Divinity of a third nature from the
natural and fabulous, makes it rather to be produced from them both, then
several from either. For he says that the Poets write not so much as the
people observe, and the Philosophers write too much for them to observe: both
with notwithstanding they do so eschew that they extract no small part of their
civil religion from either of them: Wherefore we will write of such things
as the Poetique and the politic diuinities do communicate: Indeed we should
acknowledge a greater share from the Philosophers, yet some we must thank the
Poets for. Yet in anotherplace of the gods generations, he says the people
rather followed the Poets then the Philosophers, for he teaches what should be
don, there what was done: that the Philosophers wrote for use, the Poets for
delight: and therefore the poesies that the people must not follow, describe the
gods crimes, yet delight both gods and men: for the Poets (as he said) write
for delight, and not for use, yet write such things as the gods effect, and
the people present them with.

L. VIVES.
Giving (a) the ciuill] The Coleine reads Perfundas [which we translate.]
Varro's reproaches of the fabulous gods must needs light in part upon the
politic gods, who derive from the other, and indeed are the very same.

The Cohaerence and similitude between the fabulous divinity and the civil.
CHAP. 7.
THerefore this fabulous, scaenicall, filthy, and ridiculous divinity has al
reference unto the civil. And all that which all condemn, is but part of this
which al must be bound to reverence: Nor is it a part incongruent, (as I mean
to show) or slightly depending upon the body of the other, but as conformed and
consonant as a member is unto the fabrike of the whole body. For what are al
these Images, forms, ages, sexes and habits of the gods? The Poets have Jove
with a beard, and Mercury with none, have not the Priests so? Have the Mimikes
made Pryapus with such huge priuities, and not the Priests? Does the Temples
expose him to be honored in one form, and the Stage to be laughed at in an
other? Do (a) not the statues in the Temples as well as the Players on the
Stage present Saturn old, and Apollo youthful? Why are Forculus and
Limentinus (gods of doors and thresholds) of the masculine sex, and Cardea
goddess of hinges, of the feminine? Because those are found so in the book of
Priests which the grave Poets held too base to have places in their Poems. Why
is the Stage- Diana (b) armed, and the cities a weaponlesse Virgin? Why is
the Stage- Apollo a harper, and Apollo of Delphos none? But these are honest in
respect of worse: what held they of Jove, when they placed his Nurse in the
Capitol? Did they not confirm (c) Euemerus that wrote truly (not idely) that
all these gods were mortal men? And those that placed asort of (d) glutton
parasite gods at Jove's table, what intended they but to make the sacrifices
(e) ridiculous? If the Mimike had said that Jove badde his Parasites to a
feast, the people would have laughed at it. But Varro spoke it not in the gods
derision but their commendation, as his divinity, not his human works do
keep the record: He spoke it not in explayning the Stage-lawes, but the
Capitols: These and such like conuinceth him to this confession, that as they
made the gods of human shapes, so they believed them prone to human
pleasures: For the wicked spirits lost no time in instilling those illusions
into their fantasies: And thence it came that Hercules his Sexten being idle
fell to dice with himself, making one of his hands stand for Hercules and
another for himself: and played for this: that if he got the victory of
Hercules, he would provide himself a rich supper, and a (f) wench of the
Temple stock: and if Hercules ouer-came, he would provide such another supper
for him of his own purse: having there-vpon won of himself by the hand of
Hercules, he provided a rich supper, and a delicate curtizan called (g)
Larentina. Laurentina Hercules who^e deified.
Now she lying all night in the Temple, in a vision had the carnal company of
Hercules, who told her that the first man she met in the morning after her
departure should pay her for the sport that Hercules ought her for. She
departing accordingly met with one Tarutius a rich young man, who falling
acquainted with her and using her company long, at last dyed and left her his
heir. She having got this great estate, not to be ungrateful to the
Deities whose reward she held this to be, made the people of Rome her heir:
and then being gone (none knew how,) a writing was found that affirmed that for
these deeds she was deified. If Poets or Players had given first life to this
sable, it would quickly have been packt up among fabulous divinity, and
quite secluded from the politic society. But since the people not the Poets,
the Ministers not the Mimikes, the Temples not the Theaters are by this author
taxed of such turpitude, The Players do not vainly present the gods
beastiality, it being so vile, but the Priests do in vain to stand so
earnestly for their honesty, which is none at all. There are the sacrifices of
Juno, kept in her beloved Island (h) Samos, where Jove married her. There are
sacrifices to Ceres, where she sought her daughter Proserpina when Pluto had
ravished her: To Venus (i) where h^: sweet delicate Adonis was killed by a
bore: To Cibele, where her sweet heart Atis, a ^aire and delicate youth being
gelded by chaste fury, was bewailed by the rest of the wretched gelded Galli.
These sacrifices being more beastly then all Stage-absurdities (yet by them
professed and practiced) why do they seek to exclude the Poets figments from
their politic Divinity, as unworthy to be ranked with such an honest kind?
They are rather beholding to the Players that do not present all their secret
sacriledges unto the peoples view. What may we think of their sacrifices done
in covert, when the public ones are so detestably profane? How they use the
Eunuchs, and their G^ynimedes in holes and corners, look they to that: yet can
they not conceal the bestiall hurt done unto such by forcing them. Let them
persuade any man that they can use such Ministers to any good end: Yet are such
men part of their sacred persons. What their acts are we know not, their
instruments we know; But what the Stage presents we know, and what the whores
present: Yet there is no use of Eunuch nor Pathike: Yet of obscaene and filthy
persons there is: For honest men ought not to act them. But what sacrifices are
these (think you) that require such ministers for the more sanctity as are not
admitted, no not even in (k) Thymelian bawdery.

L. VIVES.
DO (a) not] Interrogatiuely, not to inquire, but to fix the intention of the
speech more firmly in the auditors ear. (Quintill. lib. 9.) The matter is,
Saturn is figured with a beard in Temples, and Apollo without one: And there
is Dionisius of Syracusa's jest of taking away Aesculapius his beard of gold,
saying it is not fit the son have a beard and the father none. Apollo's statue
at Delos held in the right hand a bow, on the left the three graces, one with a
harp, another with a pipe, the third with a flute. (b) Armed] With bow and
quiver. (c) Euemerus] Euemerus.
Of Mess^a in Sicilie: he wrote the true story of Jove and the other gods out
of old records, mysteries and Hieroglyphikes called by the Greeks the holy
story. Ennius interpreted. it Cicero. He is mentioned by ye Greek authors, by
Cicero, Varro, Lactantius, Macrobius, Seruius, and many more. Sextus Empericus
calls him Atheist, for writing the truth of the gods. So does Theodoricus of
Cyrene; and numbers him with ye Diagorae and the Theodori: tymon in Syllis
calls him (...), an insolent old fellow, and an unjust writer. (d) Glutton.]
To the Priests College, three were added to look to the gods banquets, and
called the Triumviri Epulones. Afterward they were made two more, five: Lastly
ambition added two more to these, and this number stood of ye Septenvirs
Epulons, that looked to y^ providing of Jove's banquet, before whose Image they
banquetted also themselves. Cicero. (in aruspic. respons.) calls the^
Parasites, because such ever feed at other men's tables, as ye greek word
intimates: Varro calls them so by the nature of the word, Parasites, quasi,
Jove's guests (...) of (...), to seek his meat abroad. (e) Ridiculous] Mimical.
(f) Awench] Flora some say, others Acca Laurentia, whose feasts are called
Larentinalia. Thereof read Macrob. Saturnall. (...). Lactantius glanceth at it.
Her sur-name (says Verrius Flaccus) was Flaua: of this also read Plutarch.
Probl. (g) Larentina] Laurentia Commonly Larentia: for Acca Laurentia they say
was nurse to Romulus, and the Laurentalia are hi^ feasts: but his curtizans are
the Floralia. (b) Samos] An I Will in the Aegean sea, so called for the height and
cragginesse thereof. Varro writes that it was first called Parthenia, Juno
being there brought up, and married to Jove: wherefore she has a most worthy and
ancient Temple there erected: a statue like a bride and yearly feasts kept in
honor of her marriage. This (Lactant. lib. 1.) Samos was dear to Juno, for
there she was borne. Virg. Aeneid. (i) Where her sweet] Cynara Adonis his death.
begotte Adonis upon his daughter Myrrha, by the deceit of her Nurse: Adonis
reigned in Cyprus. Ual. Probus upon Virgils Eglogue called Gallus following
Hesiod, says that he was Phaenix his son, and that Jove begot him of
Philostephanus without use of woman. Venus loved him dearly: but he being
given all to hunting, was killed by a Boar. They fable that Mars being
jealous, sent the Boar to do it, and that Venus bewailed him long, and turned
him into a flower, called by his name. Macrobius: tells of Venus her statue on
mount L^banus, Venus her statue on mount Libanus.
with a sad shape of sorrow, her head veiled, and her face covered with her hand:
yet so as o^e would think the tears trickled down from her eyes. The
Phaenicians called Ado^ (...)* (Pollux. lib. 4.) and so were the pipes called
that were used at his yearly funeral fea^, though Festus say they were named
so because the goose is said to gingrire, when she creaketh. Bes^es, Ging^e
what it i^.
because Adonis was slain in his prime, therefore they dedicated such gardens
to Uenus as made a fair show of flowers and leaves without fruit: Whence the
proverb came of Ado^ gardens, which Erasmus with many other things explaineth
in his Adagies, or as Budaeus calls the work in his Mercuries seller, or
Minerua's warehouse. (k) Thymelian.] A word the Greeks use often: and of the
Latins Vitruuius (Architect. lib. 5.) but obscurely in ^ine opinion, which I
will set down that others may set down better, if such there be. The Stage
stood in the Theater between the two points farthest extended, and there the
Players acted comedy and tragedy: The Senators had their seat between that and
the common galleries, wherein there was a place five foot high which the
Greeks called Thymele and Logeus, whereon the tragedian Chorus danced; and the
comedians too, when they had one, sometimes to the Players, sometimes to the
people when the Players were within; there also stood the music, and all such
as belonged to the Play and yet were no actors and the place got the name of
Orchestra, from the greek (...) to dance: and the Greeks call Thymele (...),
belonging to the pipes: and all the Musicians there playing were called
Thymelic^. They think it took the name Thymele, of the Altars therein erected
to Bacchus and Apollo, for (...) is taken for an Altar. Donate applies Terence
his words in Andria, take veruin from the Altar: unto this Apuleius uses
Thymelicum Choragium for the Players apparel. (In Apolog. 1.) Thymele was also
the wife of Latinus a Mimike, Thi^le wi^ to ^atinus a Mimike actor.
and fellow-actor with him in his momery. Domitian delighted much in them both
as Martial shows in his Epigram to him. Qua Thymelem spes^s (...) latinum
Illa (...) precor carmina (...).
A^ Thymele and Latinus ^ere in place,
(Good) read our ver^es with the self-same face.


Of the natural interpretations which the Paynim Doctors pretend for their
gods. CHAP. 8.
I But these things (say they) are all to be interpreted naturally and
Phisiologically. Good, as though we were in quest of Physiology and not of
Theology, as (...) we sought nature and set God aside. For though the true God
be God in nature and not in opinion only, yet is not all nature God; for men,
beasts, birds, trees and stones, have each a nature that is no deity. But if
your interpretation of the mother of the gods, be, that she is the earth, what
need we seek further? what do they say more that say al your gods were mortal
men? For as the earth is the mother, so are they earths children: but refer his
sacrifices to what nature you can, for men to suffer (a) women's affects is not
according but contrary to nature. Thus this crime, this disease, this shame is
professed in her sacrifices, that the vildest wretch living would scarcely
confess by tortures. Again if these ceremonies, so much fouler then all
Stage-obscaenity, have their natural interpretations for their defense; why
should not the like pretended excuse be sufficient for the fictions Poetical?
They interpret much in the same manner: so that in that it is counted so horrid
a thing to say that Saturn devoured his sons: they have expounded it thus, that
(b) length of time, signified by Saturns name, consumes all things it
produces: Saturn a deuourer of his sons.
or as Varro interprets it that Saturn belongs to the seeds, which being
produced by the earth, are intombed in it again: others give other senses and
so of the rest. Yet is this called fabulous Theology, and cast out, scorned and
excluded for all the expositions; and because of the unworthy fictions,
expelled both from cohaerence with the natural and Phylosophycall kind, as
also with the civil and politic. Because indeed, the judicious and learned
compilers hereof, saw both the fabulous and the politic worthy reprehension;
but they durst not reprove this as they might do the other. That, they made
culpable, and this they made comparable with that, not to prefer either
before other, but to show them both fit to be rejected alike: and so having
turned them both out of credit without incurring the danger of openly
condemning the later: the third the natural kind might get the less place
in men's opinions. For the civil and the fabulous are both fabulous and both
civil, both fabulous, witness he that observes their obscaenities, both
civil, witness he that observes their confusing them together in plays and
sacrifices. How then can the power of eternity ly in their hands whom their
own statues and sacrifices do prove to be like those fabulous rejected gods,
in form, age, sex, habit, descent, ceremonies, etc. In all which they either
are convicted of mortallity, and attaining those erroneous honors by the
devils assistance, in or after their life or death, or else that they were true
devils themselves that could catch all occasions of filling men's hearts with
errors contagion.

L. VIVES.
Women's (a) affects] The Priests of Cibele, the Galli, who not being able to
do like men, suffered like women. (b) Length of Time] Cicero de not. Deo. lib.
2. Saturn is called (...) in greek and time. (...). Of this hereafter.

Of the offices of each peculiar God. CHAP. 9.
What say you to the obsurd Numitary division of the gods charges-where each
one must have prayers made to him for that which he com, maundeth? (Of these
we have recited part but not all): Is it not more like a scaene of scurrillity
then a lecture of Divinity? If a man should set two Nurses to look to his
child, one for the meat, and another for the drink, as they do two
goddesses, Educa and Potica, he should be taken for a Cumane ass, or a
Mimicall fool. And then they have a Liber, that lets loose the masculine
sperme in men, at carnal copulation, and one Libera for the women, whom they
hold Venus (for ((...)) women, they say, do let forth sperme also) and
therefore they dedicate a man's privy member to Liber, and a woman's to Libera:
Besides (b) wine and women they subject unto Liber, as the prouokers of lust:
and in such mad manner keep they their Bacchanalian feasts: where Varro
confesses that the Bacchae women could not possibly do such such things
unless (c) they were mad (d) yet the Senate being grown wiser, disliked
and abolished these sacrifices. It may be here they discryed the power of the
devils in such men's minds as held them to be gods. Truly this could not have
been upon the Stage: there the players are never mad, though it be a kind
of madness to honor the gods that delight in such gracelessnesse. But what
a strange distinction has he of the religious and the superstitious, that the
later do stand in fear of the gods, and the first do but reverence them as
parents, not fearing them as foes: and to call all the gods so good that they
will far sooner spare the guilty then hurt the guiltles: and yet for all this
the woman in childe-bed must have three gods to look to her after her
deliverance, least Syluanus come in the night and torment her: in signification
whereof three men must go about the house in the night, and first strike y^
thresholds with an hatchet, then with a pestle, and then sweep the^ with
beesomes, that by these signs of worship, they may keep Syluanus out: because
the trees are not pruned without iron, nor corn is not made into meal without
pestles; nor the fruits swept up together without beesoms: from these three
acts, three gods got names: (e) Inter^, of the hatchets cutting, Intercisio:
(f) Pilumnus, of Pilu^ the pestle or mortar. Deuerra, of Verro to sweep: And
these kept Syluanus from the woman in bed. Thus were they feign to have three
good against one bad, or all had been too little: and these three must with
their handsome neat culture, oppose his rough, savage brutishness Is this
your gods innocence? is this their concord? Are these your saving City
Deities, far more ridiulous then your Stage-goddes? When man and woman are
wedde together, godde Iugatinus has to do: Nay that is tolerable. When the
bride must be led home, godde (g) Domiducus look to your charge: now who
must keep her at home? godde Domitius: I but who must make her stay with her
husband? why that can goddess Manturna do. Oh why proceed we further! spare,
spare man's chaster ears: let carnal affect and shamefast secrecy give end to
the rest! What does all that crew of gods in the Bride-hall chamber upon the
departure of the (h) Paranymphs, the feast masters? Oh sir, not to make the
woman more shamefast by their being present but because she is weak and
timorous, to help her to loose her virginity with less difficulty. For there
is goddess Virginensis, Godde Subigus, goddess Prema, goddess Partunda, and
Venus, and Priapus. If the man stood in need of help in this business, why
were not one of them sufficient to help him? Would not Venus her power serve,
who they said was so called because virginity could not be lost without her
help? If there be any shame in man, that is not in the gods, when the married
couple shall think that so many gods of both sexes to stand by at their
carnal conjunction, and have their hands in this business, will not he be
less forward and she more froward? If (i) Virginensis be there to loose the
Virgin girdle, Sub^gus to subject her under the man, and Prema to press her
down from moving after the act, what shall It signifies the enabling of the
woman to bring ^th a child.
Partunda have to do but blush and get her out of doors, and leave the
husband to do his business. For it were very dishonest for any one to fulfill
her name upon the bride, but he. But perhaps they allow her presence because
she is a female. If she were a male and called Partundus, the husband would
call more protectors of his wives honesty against him, then the childe-bearing
woman does against Syluanus. But what talk I of this, when (k) Priapus (that
unreasonable male) is there upon whose (l) huge and beastly member: the new
bride was commanded (after a most honest, old and religious order observed by
the Matrons) to get up and sit? Now, now let them go, and casheere
their fabulous theology from the political, the Theater from the City, the
Stage from the Temple, the Poets verses from the Priests Documents, as
turpitude from honesty, falsehood from truth, lightness from gravity, foolery
from seriousness! Now let them use all the subtle art they can in it! We
know what they do that understand the dependence of the fabulous theology
upon the civil, and that from the Poets verses it redoundes to the City
again as an Image from a glass, and therefore they, not daring to condemn
the civil kind, present the Image thereof and that they spare not to spit true
disgrace upon, that as many as can conceive them, may loathe the thing that
shape presents and resembles: Which the gods notwithstanding behold with
such pleasure, that that very delight of theirs bewrayes their damned essences;
and therefore by terrible means have they wrung these Stage-honours from their
servants in the sacrifices: Manifesting hereby that themselves were most
unclean spirits, and making that abject, reprobate, and absurd Stage-diuinity
a part of this civil kind that was held selected and approved, that all of it
being naught but a lump of absurdity framed of such false gods, as never
were, one part of it might be preserved in the Priests writings, and another
in the Poets. Now whether it have more parts is another question. As for
Varro's division, I think I have made it plain enough that the divinity of
the Stage and the City belong both to that one politic kind: And seeing they
are both markeable with the like brandes of foul, false and unworthy impiety,
far be it from religious men to expect eternal life from either of them.
Lastly Varro himself reckons his gods from man's original, beginning with
Ianus, and so proceeds through man's life to his age, and death, ending with
(m) Naenia, a goddess whose verses were sung at old men's funerals. And then
he mentions gods that concerns not man, but his accidents, as apparel,
meat, and such necessaries of life, showing what each only could, and
consequently what one should ask of each one. In which universal diligence
of his he never showed whom to ask eternal life of, for which only it is
that we are Christians. Who is therefore so dull, that he conceiueth not that
this man in his dilligent discovery of politic Divinity, and his direct and
apparent comparison of it with the fabulous kind, and his plain affirmation
that this fabulous kind was a part of the civil, desired only ((...)) to
get a place for the natural kind (which he called the Philosophers kind)
in the minds of men? Fully reprehending the fabulous kind, but not daring
meddle with the civil, only show it subject to reprehension, so that it
being excluded together with the fabulous, the natural kind might have sole
place in the elections of all good understandings. Of which kind GOD willing I
mean to speak more peculiarly and fully in place convenient.

L. VIVES.
FOr (a) women] ipsam, or ipsas. It is a great question in Philosophy. Plato
and Aristole say no, only they let down in copulation a certain humor like unto
sweat, which has no use in generation: Pythagoras and Democritus say they are
spermatique: and Epicurus also after them, as he uses to follow Democritus.
Hipponax as a mean between them both, says it is sperm, but not useful in
generation, because it remains not in the vessel of conception. (b) Wine and
(...)] The Satyrs and mad-women called the Howling-Bacchae followed Bacchus.
Here-vpon Bacchus!
Eustathius says he had his name from that confused cry. ((...) is to be mad)
and that a [c] more was added to help the sound. The women were also called
Mimallonides, of a hill in Asia minor called minans, and Bassarides, and
Thyiades of Thyia where Bacchus his rites had first institution. Plutarch
describes their pomp thus: First, was carried a flag on of wine, and a sprig
of a vinet then one led a goat: after a box, a pine apple, and a vine-prop:
all which afterward grew out of use, and gave place to better. De cupid. opum.
There was also the vanne (Virgill.) which is otherwise called the creele.
Seruius. Varro names the vine-prop and the pineapple, with were like the Iuy
lauelins y^ the Bacchae bore, which followed Bacchus into India. These Iauelins
were all guirt ro^nd with branches of the vine and Iuy, this Iuy they added
because one kind of it procures madness, and makes men drunk (says Plutarch)
without wine, and appeaseth the^ that are ready to fall into fury: indeed al Iuy
is called (...) of (...), to provoke lust: the Thirse is also the nuptial
crown: also the lamp that they bore in honor of Dionysius: but when it strives
for ye crown it is written (...): the last syllable acute. In those
sacrifices, the offers were rapt with fury, and thence came the name of
Bacchus. Val. Prob. Bacchari, is to rage, and the Bacchae were those raging
bedlem women that performed this sacrifice to Liber Pater: they were called
Maenades, and Maenades.
He Menoles quasi all mad as Clement says. Eusebius. (c) They were mad] Quiet
minds would not have committed such fooleries, filthynesse and butcheries; for
many slaughters were committed in those sacrifices. Pentheus, Minus King of
India, Lycurgus of Thrace, and Orpheus, were all thus murdered. (d) Yet the
Senate] of the expulsion by a decree, read Liuy lib. 39. (e) Intercidona] So it
is in most of the old copyes. (f) Pilumnus] Pilumnus and Picumnus Pilumnus.
were brethren gods. Picamnus found out the mannuring of grounds, and
therefore ^as called Sterquidinus* Pilumnus ^ound out the manner of braying or
grinding of corn and th^fore was worshipped by the Bakers, and, the pestle
called Pilum after him. (Seru* in Ae^* 9* Italy (says Capella) ascribes the
grinding of corn to Pilumnus. (lib. 2.) Pilum was also a (...) weapon with a
three square iron head^, nine nches long, the staff five foot (...): and also
an instrument wherewith they beat any thing to poulder in a mortar. iMod^stus.
The ancient Heturians and Latins made all their meal by morters with
hand-labour. Afterward were Milles invented for fit use: which had also plain
and wodden pestles. (Plin. l. 18.) Marcellus says that Pilumnus and Picumnus
were rulers of marriage fortunes. Varro de vita pop. Romans l. 2.) If the child
lived, that the Midwife placed it upon the earth, for to be straight and
lucky, and then was there a bed made in the house for Pilumnus and Picumnus.
(d) Domiducus] Capella calls Juno so: Interduca, Domiduca, Vnxia, and Cynthia
(says he) thou art to be inuoked at marriages by ye virgins, to protect their
Journey. (l. 2.) he speaks to Juno: thou must lead them to fortunate houses,
and at the anointing of the posts, stick down al good luck there, Para* (...).
and when they put of their girdle in their beds, then do not fail them: all this Capella) (h) Paranymps] Hierome called them the pronubi, such as brought
the Bride to her husbands bed: the Latins also called them auspices, because
(as Tully says) they hand-fisted them and presaged good luck to the marriage:
these came from the Bridegroom to the Bride, and returned fromhi^ to him for
the veil. Tacitus has these words of Nero: he was obscaene in all things
lawful, and lawless, and left no villainy unpracticed, but for more
filthiness, made a sollemne marriage with one of his kennell of his unnatural
letchers called Pythagoras: he wore his veil, sent two auspices to him,
ordained the brid-bed and the nuptial tapers. (i) Virginensis] Capella seems
to call her Cinthi^ Juno. The virgins of old wore a Virgin fillet. Hom. Odyss.
11. which custom Rome got up, and kept it until the ruin of the Empire.
Martia. Qui zona soluit diu Ligatam: who loosed ye long knit-fillet, etc. In
(...) they use them yet. (k) Priapus] he was expelled from Lamps^ Priapus.
where he was borne, for the hugeness of his pre-pendent. Seruius. Lactantius
writes that he and Silenus his ass, being al in Bacchus his company, strove
who bore the better tool: and that the Ass ouer-came him, and therefore
Pryapus killed him. Collumnella calls him the terrible-memberd-god. Ovid in
his Priap^ia has much hereof, which for shames-sake I omit. (l) Hvg^ and
beast-like] Ovid confirms this. (...) (...) (...) (...) grauis (...), etc.
Since (Pryapus) thou have so huge a tool.


And a little after. (...) (...) (...) (...) pampi^o caput,
Ruber (...) (...) (...).
Thou cro^n'd in vines with fiery face do fit*
Yet looks thy tool as fiery every whitte.
Horace also uses fascinum in the same sense: because (says Porphyry) that
the witches often practiced their crafts upon this member: but I think rather
because it kept away witch-crafts: for in Dionysius his feasts, Pryapus being
rightly consecrated and crowned with a garland by the most honest Matron of the
town, this was an auoidance of al witchcraft from the corn, as Augustine
shows in the next book, out of Varro: and for the auoidance of witchcraft
was the Bride bidden to ^it upon it: for Pompeius Festus says that the
fescenine verses that were sung at marriages seem to derive their name from
driving away this fascinum: so was Pryapus the god of seed in marriages as well
as the fields, and worshipped that witchcraft should not hinder their
fruitfulness, Unless it be as Lactantius says (l. 1.) y^ Mutinus was a god
upon whose privy part the bride used to ^it, in sign that he had first tasted
their chastity: that this was Priapus we showed in the (...)* book, his office
was to^ make the man more active and the woman more patient in the first
cop^ion, as Augustine here implies. Festus ^aith also that the bride used to
sit on (...) sheep-skin, to show either that the old attire was such, or that
her chief office now was spinning of wool: Plutarch says that when they
brought the bride they laid a sheep-skin under her, and she bore home a dista^e
and a spindle. (m) Naenia] It was indeed a funeral song, sung to the flu^ in
praise of the dead, by the hired mourner, all the rest weeping: Simonides his
invention. N^.
H^. she was also a goddess, having a Chapel without Port Viminall: her name
was derived from the voice of the mourners: some it signifies the end: other
think it is drawn from the coll^ (...) which is called (...) the out-most and
treble string in Instruments is called (...) and hereof (...) the last song
sung to one, called Naenia. (Fest. lib. 12. (n) Get a place.] The sense is
Va^s; (...) underhand is to work out both the poetique and politic Di^ity
out of men's hearts, and leave place only for the natural.

Of Seneca's freer reprehension of the civil Theology then Varro's was of the
fabulous. CHAP. 10.
But the liberty that this man wanted in reprehending that civil divinity
which was so like to the stages, Anneus Seneca (whom some proofs confirm to
(...) lived in the (a) Apostles times) wan^ed it not fully, though in part he
did: In his works written he had it, but in his life he lackt it. For in his
(b) book against superstitions, far more free is he in beating down the
political kind of Theology, then Varro was against the poetical. For
speaking of Images, the Immortal and sacred gods (says he) do they
consecrate in a vile, dead, and dejected Seneca's reprehension of the gods
altars.
substance, confining them to shapes of men, beasts, fishes and ambiguous
monster-like creatures: calling them deities; which if one should meet alive
w^ ^sters and prodigies. And a little after, speaking of natural divinity,
(...) rejected some opinions proposes himself a question thus: shall I bele^
(^aith one) that Heaven and Earth are Gods, that their are some under the
(...), and some above it? shall I respect Plato, or (c) Strato the
Peripatetique while this makes God without a soul, and that, without a body?
Answering then to the question: what then says he? do thou think there is
more truth in the d^eams of Romulus, Tatius, or Tullus Hostilius? Tatius
dedicated goddess Cloacinia, (...), Picus and Tiberinus: Hostilius, Fear and
Palenes, two extreme affects of (...): the one being a perturbation of an
affrighted mind, the other of the body: not a disease but a color. Are these
more like Gods, inhabitants of heaven? A^ of their cruel and obscaene
ceremonies, how freely did he strike at them? One geldeth himself, another
cuts off his torn parts: and this is their propitiation for the gods anger:
but no worship at all ought they to have that delight in such as this is. The
fury and disturbance of mind in some is raised to that hight by seekeing to
appease the gods, that (d) not the most barbarous and (e) recorded tyrants
would desire to behold it. Tyrants indeed have (...) off the parts of some men,
but never made them their own tormentors. (f) (...) have been gelded for
t^eir Princes lust: but never commanded to be their own gelders. But these,
kill themselves in the temples, offering their vows in (...) and wounds. If one
had time to take enterview of their actions, he (...) ^ee them do things so
unbeseeming honesty, so unworthy of freedom, and ^like to soberness, that
none would make question of their madness, if they (...) fewer: but now their
multitude is their privilege. And then the capitol (...) that he records,
and fearelessly inueigheth at, who would not hold (...) mad ones, or mockeries?
For first in the loosing of (g) Osyris in the Aegiptian sacrifices, and then in
the finding him again, first the sorrow and then ^eir great joy, all this is
a puppettry and a fiction, yet the fond people ^ugh they find nor loose not
any thing, weep, for all that, and rejoice again (...) heartily as if they
had: I but this madness has his time. It is tolerable ((...) he) to be but
once a year mad. But come into the Capitol, and you (...) shame at the mad
acts of public furor. One sets the gods under their King* mother tells Jove
what a clock it is, another is his serieant, and another (...) (...) rubbing
of him as if he anointed him. Others dress Juno and Minerua thaire, standing
a far off the temple, not only of the Image, and tricking wi^ ^ir fingers as
if they were a combing and crisping it: another holds the glass, and another
bids the gods to (h) be his advocates. Some present them with scrolles, and
propound their causes to them. One old (i) arch-plaier played the Mimike
continually in the Capitol, as if the gods had found great sport in him whom
the world had rejected. Nay there ye have all trades work to the gods, and a
little after: But these though they be idle before the gods, yet they are not
bawdy, or offensive. But some sit there, that think Jove is in love with them:
never respecting Juno's poetically supposed (k) terrible aspect. This freedom
Varro durst not assume, he durst go no farther then Theology poetical: but
not to the civil which this man crusheth in sunder. But if we mark the truth,
the temples where these things are done, are worse then the Theaters where they
are but fained. And therefore Seneca selecteth those parts of this civil
Theology for a wise man to observe in his actions, but not to make a religion
of. A wise man (says he) will observe these as commands of the laws, not as
the pleasures of the gods, and again: We can make marriages, nay and those
unlawful ones* amongst the gods, joining brother and sister: Mars and (l)
Bellona, Vulcan and Venus: Neptune and Salacia: Yet some we leave single, as
wanting (m) means of the bargain, chiefly some being widows, as Populonia,
Fulgura, and Rumina, nor wonder if these want suitors. But this rabble of base
gods forged by inueterate superstition, we will adore (says he) rather for
laws sake then for religions, or any other respect. So that neither law nor
custom gave induction to those things either as grateful to the gods or
useful unto men. But this man whom the Philosophers as (n) free, yet being a
great (o) Senator of Rome, worshipped that he disauowed, professed that he
condemned and adored that he accused: because his philosophy had taught him
this great matter, not to be superstitious in the world, but for law and
customs sake to imitate those things in the Temple, but not act them in the
Theater: so much the more damnably, because that which he counterfeited, he did
it so, that the (p) people thought he had not counterfeited: But the plaier
rather delighted them with sport, then wronged them with deceit.

L. VIVES.
APostles (a) times] It may be the proofs are the Epistles that are dispersed
under the name of him to Paul, and Paul unto him: but I think there was no
such matter. But sure it is, that he lived in Nero's time, and was Consul
then: and that Peter and Paul suffered martyrdom about the same time. For they,
and he left this life both within two years: it may be both in one year,
when Silius Nerua, and Atticus Vestinus were Consulls. (b) Book against
superstitions] These, and other works of his are lost: one of matrimony,
quoted by Hierome against Iouinian: of timely death: Lactant, of earthquakes
mentioned by himself. Johannes and ^eas Scraneus.
These, and other losses of old authors Andrew Straneo my countriman in his
notes upon Seneca, deploreth: a taste of which he sent me in his Epistle, that
united us in friendship. He is one highly learned, and honest as highly,
furthering good studies with all his power himself, and favoring all good
enterprises in others. (c) Strato] Son to Archelaus of Lanpsacus: who was
Strato.
called the Physical because it was his most delightful study, he was
Theophrastus his scholar, his executor, his successor in his school, and
master to Ptolomy Philadelphus: There were eight Strato's. Laert. in Uit. (d)
That not the] The grammarians cannot endure N^ and quidem to come together: but
we read it so in six hundred places of Tully, Pliny, L^ and others: unless
they answer unto all these places that the copiers did falsify them. I do not
think but an interposition does better: this I say. (e) Recorded] As
Dyonisius, Phalaris, Mezentius, Tarquin the Proud, Sylla, C^a, Marius,
Tiberius, Cla^, and Caligula. (f) Some haue] The Persian Kings had their
Eunuchs, in whom they put especial trust. [So had Nero] (g) Osyris] He
being cut in pieces by his brother (...)
Typhon, and that Isis and Orus Apollo had revenged his death upon Typhon, they
went to seek the body of Osyris with great lamentation, and to Isis her great
joy, found it, though it were disparkled in diverse places: and hereupon a
yearly feast was instituted on the seeking of Osyris with tears, and finding
him with joy. Lucane says hereupon Nunquam satis qua^us Osyris: the never
wel-sought Osyris. (h) Be his aduocates] Uadaeri is to bring one to the judge
at a day appointed, Vadimonium, the promise to be there. So the phrase is used
in Tully, to come into the Court, and the contrary of it is, non obire, not to
appear, Pliny in the preface of his history, and many other authors use it:
the sense here is, they made the gods their advocates like men, when they went
to try their causes. (i) Arch-plaier] Archimimus, co^ of (...), to imitate
because they imitated their gestures whom they would make ridiculous, as also
their conditions, and then they were called Ethopaei, and Ethologi whereof
comes Ethopeia. Quintil. Pantomimi were universal imitators; Archimimi, the
chief of all the Mimikes, as Fano was in Vespasians time. Who this was that
Seneca mentions, I know not. (k) Terrible] She was jealous and maligned all her
step-sons and Jove's harlots, so that she would not forbear that same
Daedalian statue which Jove being angry threatened to marry in (...). For being
reconciled to him, she made it be burnt. Plut. Hence was Numa's old law. No
(...) touch Juno's altar. Sacrifice a female lamb to Juno, with disheueled
hair. (l) Bellona] Some ^ke her his mother, and Nerione (or as Varro says,
Neriene) his wife: which is (as Gel^) a Sabine word, and signifies virtue and
valor, and thence came the Nero's surname. ^es had it from the Greeks: who
call the sinews (...), and thence comes our [Ner^] and the Latin Neruus.
Plaut. Trucul. Mars returning from a journey salutes his wife Ne^ (...) Noct.
At. lib. 10. (m) Means of the bargaine] That is one to be coupled with: hen^
^es the Latin phrase Quaerere condicionem filiae, to seek a match for his
daughter (...) lib. 4. Cic. Philipp. It was used also of the Lawiers in
diuorses. Condition tua (...) (...). I Will not use thy company. (n) As free] We
must seem Philosophy (says Seneca) to be free: using free, as with a respect,
not simply. (o) Seneca] He was banished by Claudius: but (...) being executed,
and Agrippina made Empress, she got his reuocation, and senatorship ^torship
of the Emperor, that he might bring up her son Nero. So afterward Tr^ ^ximus
and he were Consulls. Ulp. Pandect. 36. He was won derfull rich. Tranquil
Tatius. The gardens of rich Seneca. (p) People] His example did the harm,
which Ele^ ^ed to avoid Macchab. 2. 6. with far more holiness and
Philosophical truth.

Seneca his opinion of the Jews. CHAP. 11.
THis man amongst his other inuectiues against the superstitions of politic
(...) Theology condemns also the Jews sacrifices, chiefly their saboaths:
say^ (...) by their seventh day interposed, they spend the seventh part of
their (...) idleness, and hurt themselves by not taking diverse things in their
time ^et dares he not meddle with the Christians (though then the Jews deadly
(...) upon either hand, least he should praise them against his countries old
cus^ or dispraise them perhaps against (a) his own conscience. Speaking of the
(...), he says: The custom of that wicked nation getting head through all the
world, the vanquished gave laws to the vanquishers. This he admired, not ^ing
the work of the godhead. But his opinion of their sacraments he subscribeth.
They know the cause of their ceremonies (says he) but most of the people do
they know not what. But of the Jewish sacrifices how far gods institutions
first directed them, and then how by the men of God that had the mystery of
eternity revealed to them, they were by the same authority abolished, we have
both els-where spoken chiefly against the (b) Manichees, and in this work in
convenient place mean to say somewhat more.

L. VIVES.
AGainst (a) his owne] Nero having fired Rome, many were blamed for the fact by
the villens of his Court, and amongst the rest the Christians whom Nero was
assured should smart for all, because they were of a new religion: so they did
indeed and were so extremely tortured that their pangs drew tears from their
seuerest spectators. Seneca mean while begged leave to retire into the contrie
for his healths sake: which not obtaining, he kept himself close in his
chamber for diverse months: Tacitus says, it was because he would not partake
in the malice that Nero's sacrilege procured: but I think rather, it was for
that he could not endure to see those massacres of innocents. (b) Manichees]
They reviled the old Testament and the Jews law. August, de Haeres. ad
Quodvultdeum, Them scriptures they said GOD did not give, but one of the
princes of darkness. Against those Augustine wrote many books.

That it is plain by this discovery of the Pagan gods vanity, that they cannot
give eternal life, having not power to help in the temporal. CHAP. 12.
NOw for the three Theologies, mythycall, physical and political: or
fabulous, natural and civil: That the life eternal is neither to be expected
from the fabulous, for that the Pagans themselves reject and reprehend, nor
from the civil, for that is proved but a part of the other: if this be not
sufficient to prove, let that be added which the fore-passed books contain,
chiefly the 4. concerning the giver of happiness: for if Felicity were a
goddess, to whom should one go for eternal life but to her? But being none,
but a gift of GOD, to what god must we offer our selves, but to the giver of
that felicity, for that eternal and true happiness which we so entirely
affect? But let no man doubt that none of those filth-adored gods can give it:
those that are more filthyly angry unless that worship be given them in that
manner, and herein proouing themselves direct devils: what is said I think is
sufficient to convince this. Now he that cannot give felicity how can he give
eternal life? eternal life, we call endless felicity, for if the soul live
eternally in pains, as the devils do, that is rather Eternal life.
eternal death. For there is no death so sore nor sure, as that which never
ends. But the soul being of that immortal nature, that it cannot but live
some way, therefore the greatest death it can endure is the deprivation of it
from glory, and constitution in endless punishment. So he only gives
eternal life (that is endlessely happy) that gives true felicity. Which since
the politic gods cannot give, as is proved: they are not to be adored for
their benefits of this life as we showed in our first five precedent books:
and much less for life eternal, as this last book of all, by their own
helps has convinced. But if any man think (because old customs keep fast
roots) that we have not shown cause sufficient for the rejecting of their
politic Theology, let him peruse the next book, which by the assistance of
GOD I intend shall immediately follow this former.

Finis lib. 6.
THE CONTENTS OF THE seventh book of the City of God.
1. Whether divinity be to be found in the select gods, since it is not extant
in the politic Theology. chapter. 1. 2. The selected gods, and whither they
be excepted from the baser gods functions. 3. That these gods elections are
without all reason, since that baser gods have nobler charges. 4. That the
meaner gods being buried in silence more better used then the select, whose
(...) were so shamefully traduced. (...). Of the Pagans more abstruse
Phisiologicall doctrine. 6. Of ^rro his opinion that GOD was the soul (...)
world, and yet had many souls under (...) on his parts, al which were of the
divine nature. 7. Whether it stand with reason that Ianus and Terminus should
be two gods. 8. (...) the worshippers of Ianus made him two (...) yet would
have him set forth with (...) (...) (...) ^es power, and Ianus his compared
(...) (...) ^ther Ianus and Jove be rightly di^ (...) or no. (...) Of Jove's
surnames, referred all unto (...) (...) God, not as to many. (...) (...)
Jupiter is called Pecunia also. (...) (...) the interpretation of Saturn and
(...) ^roue them both to be Jupiter. (...) (...) the functions of Mars and
Mercury. (...) Of certain stars that the Pagans call (...). (...) Of Apollo,
Diana and other select gods, (...) ^ts of the world. (...) That Varro himself
held his opinions of (...) (...) be ambiguous. 18. The likeliest cause of the
propagation of Paganism. 19. The interpretations of the worship of Saturn.
20. Of the sacrifices of Ceres Elusyna. 21. Of the obscaenity of Bacchus
sacrifice. 22. Of Neptune, Salacia and Venillia. 23. Of the earth held by Varro
to be a goddess, because the worlds soul (his God) does penetrate his lowest
part and communicates his essence therewith. 24. Of Earths surnames and
significations which though they arose of diverse originalls, yet should they
not be accounted diverse gods. 25. What exposition the Greek wisemen give of
the gelding of Atys. 26. Of the filthiness of this great Mothers sacrifice.
27. Of the Naturallists figments, that neither adore the true Diety, nor use
the adoration thereto belonging. 28. That Varro's doctrine of Theology hangs
no way together. 29. That all that the Naturalists refer to the worlds parts,
should be referred to GOD. 30. The means to discern the Creator from the
Creatures, and to avoid the worshipping of so many gods for one, because their
are so many powers in one. 31. The peculiar benefits (besides his common
bounty) that GOD bestows upon his servants. 32. That the mystery of our
redemption by Christ was not obscure in the precedent times, but continually
intimated in diverse significations. 33. That Christianity only is of power to
lay open the diuills subtly and delight in illuding of ignorant men. 34. Of
Numa his books which the Senate for keeping their mysteries in secret, did
command should be burned. 35. Of Hydromancy whereby Numa was mocked with
apparitions.
FINIS.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Whether divinity be to be found in the select Gods, since it is not extant in
the Politic Theology. CHAP. 1.
Whereas I employ my most diligent endeavor about the extirpation of
inueterate and depraved opinions, which the continuance of error has deeply
rooted in the hearts of mortal men: and whereas I work by that grace of GOD
(who as the true GOD is able to bring this work to effect) according to my
poor talent: The quick and apprehensiue spirits that have drawn full
satisfaction from the works precedent, must bear my proceedings with pardon,
and patience: and not think my subsequent discourse to be superfluous unto
others because it is needless unto them. The affirmation that divinity is not
to be sought for terrestrial vies (though thence we must desire all Divinity
wherefore to be sought.
earthly supplies that we need) but for the celestial glory which is never
not eternal, is a great matter. This divinity, or, let me say deity; for this
(a) word our Christians have now in use as expressly traduced from the Greek
(...). This divinity therefore or deity is not in that politic Theology which
M. Varro discourses of in his 16. books: that is, the worship of any god
there expressed will not yield to man eternal life: he that will not be
persuaded this is true, out of our sixth book last finished, when he has
read this, I believe shall not find any point of this question left
undiscussed: for some perhaps may think that the selected gods of Varro's last
book (whereof we said some what) and none but they are to be honored for
this eternal beatitude. I say not herein as (b) Tertullian said, with more
conceit prehaps then truth: if the gods be chosen like (c) scallions, then the
rest are counted wicked. This I say not, for I see that out of an elected sort,
another particular election may be made: as out of a company of elected
souldiars one is elected for this office in arms and another for one not so
weighty: and in the church, when the elders are elected, the others are not
held reprobate: being all GODS good faithful elect. In architecture, corner
and foundation stones are chosen, yet the rest are not refused but will fit
other places. Grapes are chosen to eat: but they are not worth naught which we
leave for wine. The matter is plain and needs no farther process. Wherefore
neither the gods nor their servants are falty, in that they are selected from
many: but let us rather look what the selected are, and what is the end of
their selection.

L. VIVES.
THis (a) word] Used by Hierome, Lactantius and Fulgentius: the Greeks derived
the substantive (...), divinity, from (...), divine: which substantive the
Christians took in as large a sense as the word it self Divine: and when the
would express Gods nature with the fittest term, they used (...). So does
Athanas. both the Gregory's and other Grecians: which they might rather do
(says Quintillian) then the Latins. But yet all the strict rules of art could
not keep the latins from using Deitas, the deity in expressing Gods proper
nature: nor is it extended so far as Divine, is, or divinity: for they are
spoken of books, deeds, men, etc. But neither Deitas, or Deus are praedicates
for them, though they be divine. And therefore methinkes Ualla does blame the
Christian writers undeservedly, to say they use a new word, not heard of
before. (In Dialectica.) For to take away the Greeks authority of framing
themselves words, is to cancel their old privileges. (b) Tertullian.] Of him
read Hierome de scriptor. Eccl. He was a Priest of Carthage Son to a vice
consul: quick witted and vehement: he lived in the times of Seuerus and
Caracalla, and wrote much: which being recorded I surcease (...) ^count. Ciprian
the Martyr passed not a day without reading a piece of his works: but called
him his Master, yet fell he to be a Montanist, through the envy and malice
of the clergy of Rome. All this has Hierome. His books, lay many ages lost,
at last this very year when this book came forth, Beatus Rhenanus of
Sletstad, a learned scoller found them in Germany, and set them forth at
Frobenius his press. (c) Scallions.] Bulbus is a name to all roots that are
like onions. Palladius uses it for the lilly root: but the proper Bulbi are
they Mergarides perhaps our English potatoes.
that t^ Arabians all Mergarides, and provoke lust as Martial shows. Plinny.
lib. 1. says the chief of those Bulbi are the squillae or sea unions, of
which sort the root called Epimenidia is only fit to eat. Theophrast. lib.
7. The rest are not for meat.

The selected gods, and whether they be exempted from the baser gods functions.
CHAP. 2.
THose (a) selected gods, Varro commends in one whole book, and these they
are Ianus Jove, Saturn, Genius, Mercury, Appollo, Mars; Vulcan, Neptune, Sol,
Orcus, Liber Pater, Tellus, Ceres, Juno, Luna, Diana Minerua; Venus, and Vesta.
In these 20 are (...) males and 8. females. Now (b) whether are they called
select, for their princi^ ^arges in the world, or for that they were more
known and adored then ^he (...) (...) because of their greater charges, then
may they not come to meddle (...) ^ty businesses of the baser gods. But at the
conception of the child, (...) those petty gods charges arise, Ianus is making
fit receipt for the seed: (...) has business in the seed also; (d) Liber is
making the man's seed flow ^ly: and Libera whom they say is Venus, she is
working the like in the (...): all these are of your selected gods. But then
there is Mena, the god^ ^he female flux, a daughter of Jove but yet a base
one. And (f) this sway (...), he gives to Juno also, in his book of the
select ones amongst whom (...) ^eene: and here is Juno Lucina together with her
stepdaughter Mena, rule (...) (...) blood. And then there are two obscure
fellows (of gods) Vitumnus (...) ^us, one gives vital breath, and another
sense to the child be^ These two base gods do more service here then all the
other great (...) gods, for what is all that the heap together in the woman's
womb, (...) life and sense, but as a lump of (g) clay and dust.

L. VIVES.
THose. (a) Selected.] To the twelve counselor gods (before remembered) were
twelve other added, as Nobles but not Senators: yet such as had great charge
in the world, and gre^ share in diverse consultations, as others of other meaner
sort have sometimes. Seneca (...) that Jove made Ianus one of the Conscript
fathers and consul of the afternoon: but (...) ^ee scoffeth, though indeed
all these god-stories are but mere fopperies. And (...) the couples Jupiter
and Juno, Saturn and Tellus, Mercury and Minerua (but not ^d, but both of one
science) as Bacchus and Ceres, Apollo, Diana and, are) then Mars and Venus the
two lovers, Uulcan and Vesta the two fires: Sol and Luna the worlds two lights:
marry Ianus, Neptune, Genius and Orcus the goddess vnchosen, are all too base
for them. (b) Whether] A problematique form of argument. (c) Saturne] coming
of Satu^, a thing sown. Var. de Lin. lat. l. 4. (d) Liber] Cicero (de not.
deor. 2.) says that Liber Bacchus, son to Jove and Semele, is one, and Liber
that the Romans worship so reverently with Libera and Ceres is another. That
these two later were Ceres children, and so called Liberi: Libera was daughter
to Ceres, and called Proserpina, says he. In Uerr. Actio. 6. These three had a
temple near the great Circuit, vowed by A. Posthumus Dictator, and renewed by
Tiber^ Caesar. Tacit. lib. 2. (e) Mena] the Moon: (...) in the Greek, because
the women's flux follows her motion. Arist. de anima. she was the daughter of
Jove and Latona: and therefore he calls her Juno's step-daughter: But by this
name she is unknown to the Latins. (f) This sway] The women adored Juno
Fluona, for stopping this flux at conceptions. Festus. (g) Cl^ and dust,]
alluding to man's beginning and end. Genesis 1. In claye he began, and in dust
be shall end.

That these gods elections are without all reason since that baser gods have
nobler charges. CHAP. 3.
But why does he call so many of the selected gods to this charge, and the^
Vitumnus and Bentinus get the principal offices of all the rest? Select Ianus,
he makes way for the seed: select Saturn he brings it: select Liber, he
puts it freely forth: and so does Libera (a) be she Ceres or Venus, to the
women, select Juno with her daughter Mena's help, brings flux of blood to (b)
nourish the birth. But base Vitumnus, he brings life to it: obscure Sentinus,
he gives it sense. Which two gifts are as far above the rest, as they are
short of reason. For as the reasonable creature excels that which is but
only sensitive, as the beast: so the sensitive must needs excel that which
has neither sense nor life. So that Vitumnus the quickner, and Sentinus the
sence-giuer had more reason to be selected, then either Ianus the seed-guider,
Saturn the giver, or Liber and Libera the loosers* which seed it were
unworthy to imagine, unless it were animated and made sensitive: which select
gifts the select gods give not, but only a couple of poor obscure fellows
that must stand at the door when these are let in. If they reply, Ianus is god
of all beginnings, and therefore justly opens the womb: Saturn of all
seed, and therefore justly works in the man's sowing of it: Liber and Libera
of the distillation of seed in all spermaticall creatures, and therefore must
work in this dispersing of man's: Juno of all births and purgations, and
therefore justly must have a hand in the woman's at this time: W^ what of
Vitumnus and Sentinus, have they dominion over all things living and sensitive?
If it be granted, then see how these two are advanced. For seeds to grow on
earth is earths nature: but to live and have sense, that comes from the gods of
the stars, they say. But if they say that these two have swaye only over
fleshly sensitiues; why then could not he that gives sense to fishes and all
things else, give flesh sense also, and extend his general power through each
peculiar? what need then of Vitumnus and Sentinus? If he that rules life and
sense, rule all things else, and gave the charge of fleshly sensitiues to these
his two servants, as a place of no credit: Kept these selected gods so few
attendants, that they could not commit the said base offices to some of their
followers, but must debase all (their cause of selection) their nobility to be
joined fellow-worke-men with such a base couple? Nay Juno the selected Queen
of all the selected (c) Jove's wife and sister, yet is Interduca to the
children, and works with a couple of base goddesses Adeona and Abeona. And
there is goddess Men's, that sends the child a good mind, she is no select,
and yet (d) how can a greater gift be given to man? Now Juno plays Iterduta,
and Domiduca, as though it were such a matter to make a journey or to come well
home, if one be not in his right mind: yet the goddess of this good gift
was none of the select. Truly she deserved it before Minerua (e) that had
charge of the childs memory A good mind better then memory.
in this quartering of duties. For who doubts that it is better to have a
good mind, then a memory never so capable? for he that has a good mind is
never evil. But (f) many wicked men have admirable memories, and are so much
worse because they cannot forget their evil cogitations. Yet is Minerua
selected. And for Virtue and Felicity, (of whom our fourth book treats)
those goddesses they had, but never selected them, whilst Mars and Orcus, the
one the causer of death, and the other the receiver, these were selected.
Seeing therefore that in these worthless affairs, shared amongst so many, the
Patritian and Plebeian God, work all together in huggermugger: and that some
gods that were not held worthy of selection, had more honorable charges in the
businesses, then the selected: it rests to believe, that their being known
to the vulgar more then the other, and not their bearing charge above the
other, put in their names (...) this bill of selection. And therefore Varro
himself says, that (g) many father-gods and mother-goddesses, were grown
ignoble, like mortal men. If therefore felicity be not to be placed amongst
those selects, because they got their places rather by chance then desert:
yet surely fortune should be one amongst them, or rather above them, who
gives not her gifts by reason, but ever casualty, as it falls out. She of
right should have been their chief, as showing (...) ^er chiefly upon them;
when as we see it was no virtue nor reasonable (...) of theirs but only the
power of fortune (as all their adorers do be^ (...) made them be selected.
For witty Salust it may be excluded not (...) ^hen he said. Fortune rules in
every thing: disposing them rather accord^ ^ill then unto truth. For they can
show no reason why Venus should be (...) Virtue obscure, seeing both are made
goddesses, and their merits are ^parable. If Venus deserved her enhansement in
this, that more affect her (...) ^ue, why then is Minerua famous, and Lady
Money obscure, seeing that (...) of men there is (h) more loves coin then
knowledge? and even in the (...), you shall not find one but it is set to
sale, and still there is more respect (...) which respects other ends (i)
then to that which other ends do most (...) If therefore the fond vulgar were
the selectors, why was not Money pu^ (...) Minerua, since all their trades aim
at Money? But the wisemen selected (...) ^hy was Venus preferred before
Virtue, which all reason will of right (...) Certainly (as I said) if fortune
(who as they think, that think her (...) ^ull) rules in every thing
(disposing them rather according to her lust (...) then to right or reason) had
so much power over the gods, that she (...) ^nce and obscure whom she list,
then should the first place of the (...) (...) right have been hers, that had
such authority over the state of the (...). But may we not think that
Fortune was Fortunes own foe, and so kept (...) (...) the place? Sure it was
so: she was her own foe, that could give ad^ments to others, and took none
her self.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) be shee] We said she was sister to Dionysius, and that they two
betoken the Sun and Moon, that rule in natural seeds of all sorts, we will
show that Luna is also Uenus and Ceres. Apulei. Metamorph. lib. 11. Macrob.
Saturn. 1. Val. Prob. Seruius in Georg. 1. Prophyry says the Moons generatiue
virtue is called Ceres. Uirgill, following Varro, ioynes liber and Ceres:
whence it is plain that Ceres was also called libera. (b) To norish.] Hereof
Plin. lib. 7. It is the matter or substance fitted for generation the masculine
seed congealing in it, and so growing to perfection, when it flows in women
with child, their burden is dead, or corrupted. Nigidius. Then this blood
menstruall there cannot be a more filthy, nor venomous thing: which alone is
enough to curb and dash the proud heart of man. (c) Wife and sister.] Uirgill:
It is common. (d) How can.] This is all the Philosophers saying: a man is the
wonder of the world, and the mind the wonder of the man. (e) That had charge.]
In Mineruas feasts the children carried new yeares-gifts to their masters and
made a play day of that, to do service to Minerua that ruled the memory, the
storehouse of discipline, and the especial sign of wit in little children as
Quintilian says; she rules the wit also and was called the birth of Jove's
brain. Ovid. fastor. Pallada nunc puri tener (...) ornate puellae:
Qui been pl^arit Pallada doctus erit.
Now Pallas temple (youths and damsells) fill.
He that can please her shall have wit at will,


And so he proceeds. (f) Many wicked.] Plato in his Thaetetus, says that the
choleric person is the best memoried: gessing doubtless by the hot and dry
brain. (g) Many father gods.] Jove is above Saturn, and he above Caelus,
whose parents are unknown, though Phurnutus calls his father by the name of
Aemon, Juno also is more famous then Ops, and she then her mother. (h) More
loves coin.] Querenda Pecunia primum est: vertus post nummos
Haec Ianus summus ab imo Perdocet:
Haec recinunt iuuenes dictata, senesque.
First coin, then virtue: this does Ianus sing,
And this through mouths of youth and age does ring.


Euripides presents one in a humor neglecting althings, all reproaches for
wealth: his reason is: why what? do they ask how good one is? how honest? no,
how rich? each one is that which he possesses. (i) Then to that which.] A
difference of reading, but it is reformed, the Axi^ is Aristotle's, Poster. 1.
That, whose end respects another is not so good as the end it respects, and
principles are both plainer and before their conclusions, in precedence, though
here he speak not so much of the final cause as of the efficient. But in his
Ethickes he teaches that the things respected are better then the things
respecting.

That the meaner gods being buried in silence were better used then the select,
whose falts were so shamefully traduced. CHAP. 4.
NOw any one that longed after honor might gratulate those selected gods and
say their selection had bin good if it had not rather been used to their
disgrace then their honors, for the baseness of the meaner sort kept them from
scorns. Indeed we do laugh when we see how fond opinion has parted them into
squadrons, and set them to work upon trifles like (a) spittle men, or the (b)
goldsmiths in the siluer-streete, where the cup goes through so many hands ere
it (...) done, when as one good worke-man might do all himself. But I think
they had each such little shares, to learn their work the sooner, least the
whole should have been too long in learning. But we can scasely find one of
the vnselected gods that is be come infamous by any foul act doing: but
scarcely one of the select, but on the contrary. The latter came down belike
to the base works of the first, but the first ascended not to the high crimes
of the later. In (c) deed of Ia^s I find nothing blameworthy: perhaps he
lived honestly and out of the (d) rank of villains, he received Saturn
courteously, being expelled his kingdom, and shared his state with him, and
they built two cities, the one Ianiculum, the other Saturnia. But those
senseless adorers of Idolatry and filthiness, have made him a very monster:
sometimes with two faces, sometimes with four. Did they desire that since
the other gods had lost all (e) honesty of face by their foul acts, his
innocence should be the more apparent by his many foreheads?

L. VIVES.
I ((...)) Spittle-men] A diverse reading: ours is the best as I think. He
does mean such (...) as had the gathering of some abject pence, of little or
no use to the state: some fragments of collections. (b) Goldsmiths] One carues,
one guildes one sets on an ear, or a corner (...) like, though the plate
sellers are not Goldsmiths, but put their work out to the goldsmiths
themselves or rather bankers, or exchangers: the workmen kept shops about the
great market place. Uitru. l. 5. Liu. lib. 26. To get thee out of the market
place, is Plautus phrase in his (...) Augustine uses the Syluer-streete here,
for a place where the goldsmiths wrought. (c) (...)] He was borne in Italy,
and reigned there with Cameses borne there also: the (...) as called Camesena,
the City Ianiculum: but he dying, Ianus ruled all, and entertained Ianus.
Saturn in his flight from Crete: learned husbandry of him, and shared his
kingdom with (...) giving him Mount Tarpeius, whereon there stood a tower and
a little town which Aeneas would have Saturnia called Aeneopolis.
he called Saturnia: Aeneas would have called it Aeneopolis afterward, but it
kept the old name Saturnia still: there were some monuments of it remained
long after: the Saturnian gate called afterward Padana, as the writing on the
wall testifies; and the temple of Saturn in the entrance. Tarquin the proud
afterward building Iunos temple, and Saturn being as it were expelled from
thence also by his son, the whole Capitol was dedicated in the name of Great
omnipotent Jupiter. Uirg. Aeneid. 8. Seru. ibid. Ovid. fast. 1. Eutrop. Solin.
Macrob. Diony. and Pru^. There is a book under Berosus the Chaldaeans name
that says Ianus was Noah: I hold the ^ke nothing but mere fables, worthy of
the Anian Commentaries. Of Ianus, Berosus the Chaldean.
(...) (...) shall hear more. (d) Rank of villains.] Ovid. (fast. 6.) says
he ravished (...) who was afterward called Carna, and made goddess of
hinges: But Augustine The nymph Crane.
either (...) forgot it, or else held it but a false fiction. (e) Honesty of
face] the face and the fore^ ^en for shame. Hence is Plinies Perfricare faciem,
and frontem in Quintilianum, to (...) ashamed. Lucan. Nec color imperii, nec
frons erit vlla senatus:
The Court will want all shame, the state all shape.


And Persius. Exclamet Melicerta perisse -- Frontem de rebus --
Let Melicerta cry -- All shame is fled.


Of the Pagans more abstruse Physiologicall doctrine. CHAP. 5.
(...) let us rather hear their natural expositions, wherewith they would
(...) ^ne to cloak their pitious errors as in cloudy mysteries. First Varro so
^nds them, that he says the pictures, shapes and vestures of the gods were
(...) of old for the devout, therein to contemplate the worlds soul, and the
parts thereof, that is the true Gods in their minds: whereof such as erected
hu^e shapes, seemed to compare the immortal essence unto the soul in man, and
(...) (...) vessel should be put for the thing it self, and a flaggon (a)
set in Libers (...), to signify wine, taking the continent for the contained;
so by that hu^ shape, the reasonable soul in the like included might be
expressed, of (...) ^ure they say that God, or the gods are. These are the
mystical doctrines (...) ^is sharp wit went deep into, and so delivered.
But tell me thou acc^n, have thou lost that judgment in these mysteries that
made thee say, that they that first made Images, freed the City from all awe,
and added error to error, and that the old Romans served the gods in better
order without any statues at all? They were thy authors for that thou spokest
against their successors. For had they had statues also, perhaps fear would
have made thee have suppressed thy opinion of abolishing Images, and have made
thee have sought further for these vain Mythologies and figments: for thy
soul, so learned and so ingenious (which we much bewail in thee) by being so
ungrateful to that God (by whom, not with whom it was made: nor was a part of
him but a thing made by him, who is not the life of all things, but all life's
maker) could never come to his knowledge by these mysteries. But of what nature
and worth they are, let us see. Mean time this learned man affirms, the
worlds soul entirely to be truly God, so that all his Theology being
natural, extends it self even to the nature of the reasonable soul. Of
this natural kind he speaks briefly in his book whence we have this:
wherein we must see whether all his mystical wrestings can bring the natural
to the civil, of which he discourses in his last book of the select Gods: if
he can, all shall be natural. And then what need he be so careful in their
distinction? But if they be rightly divided, seeing that the natural that he
likes so of is not true, (for he comes but to the soul, not to God that made
the soul:) how much more is the civil kind untrue and subject, that is, all
corporal and conversant about the body as his own interpretations being
dilligently called out, shall (by my rehearsal) make most apparent.

L. VIVES.
FLaggon (a) Oenophorum, of (...), wine, and (...) to carry, Iuuenall uses the
word. Sat. 6. and Apuleius Asin. l. 2. and 8. and Martial. Pliny says, it was
a work of the rare painter Praxitales: but he means a boy bearing wine.
Beroaldus out of this place gathers that they used to set a flaggon of wine
in Bacchus temple: It is more then he can gather hence, though it may be there
was such an use.

Of Varro his opinion that God was the soul of the world, and yet had many
souls under him in his parts, all which were of the divine nature. CHAP. 6.
THe same Varro speaking further of this Physical Theology (a) says, that he
holds God to be the soul of the world, which the Greeks call (...), and (b)
that this world is God. But as a whole man, body and soul, is called wise of
the soul only, so is the world called God in respect of the soul only,
being both soul and body. Here (seemingly) he confesses one God, but it is to
bring in more, for so he diuides the world into heaven and earth: heaven into
the air and the sky, earth into land and water: all which four parts he
filles with souls, the sky (c) highest, the air next, then the water, and
then the earth: the souls of the first two he makes immortal, the latter
mortal. The space between the highest heaven and the Moon he fills with
souls ethereall and stars, affirming that they both are and seem celestial
Gods: (d) Between the Moon and the tops of the winds he bestows ayry
souls, but invisible (save to the mind) calling them Heroes Lares, and Genij.
This he briefly records in his prologue to his natural Theology, which
pleased not him alone, but many Philosophers more: whereof with Gods help we
will discourse at full, when we handle the civil Theology as it respects
the select gods.

L. VIVES.
THeology (a) saith] The Platonists, Stoiks, Pythagorians and the Ionikes
before them all, held God to be a soul: but diversely: Plato gave the world a
soul, and made them conjoined, god. But his other god, his Men's, he puts
before this later, as father to him. The Stoikes and he agree, that agree at
all. Thales and Democritus held the worlds soul the highest god. (b) That
this] Plato, the Stoikes and many Philosophers held this. (c) Sky the highest]
Aristotle puts the fire above the air and the heaven: the Platonists held the
heaven to be fiery, and therefore called Ether. And that the air next it was
a hurtlesse fire, kindled by it. This many say that Plato held^ following
Pythagoras, who made the universal globe of 4. bodies. But Uarro here makes
air to be next heaven, as the Stoikes did especially, and others also. Though
the Plato^ and they differ not much, nor the Peripatetiques, if they speak as
they mean, and be rightly understood. But ether is the air as well as the
sky and fire, as caelum is in latin. Virgil. Illa leuem fugiens raptim secat
aethera pennis:
With swift-wing'd speed she cuts the yielding air.


(a) (...) the moone] The first region of the Air (Aristotle in his Physics)
ending at the top of the clouds; the second containing the clouds, thunder,
rain, hayle and snow^ the (...) from thence to the Element of fire.

Whether it stand with reason that Ianus and Terminus should be two godees.
CHAP. 7.
I (...) therefore whom I begun with, what is he? The (a) world. Why this is a
plain and brief answer: but why has (b) he the rule and beginnings then, and
another (one Terminus) of the ends? For therefore they have two (c) months
dedicated to them January to Ianus, and February to Terminus. And so the (d)
Termina^ then kept, when the (e) purgatory sacrifice called (f) Februm was also
kept, (...) the month has the name: Does then the beginning of things belong
to the ^ld, to Ianus and not the end but unto another? Is not al things
beginning (...) world to have their end also therein? What fondness is this,
to give him (...) ^se a power, and yet a double face? were it not better (g) to
call that double-faced statue both Ianus and Terminus, and to give the
beginnings one face and the (...) another, because he that does an act must
respect both? For in all actions (...) that regards not the beginning
fore-seeth not the end. So that a respective memory and a memoratiue providence
must of force go together. But if they imagine that blessedness of life is but
begun and not ended in this world, and that therefore the world (Ianus) is to
have but power of the beginnings: why then they should put Terminus amongst the
selected gods before him: For though they were both employed about one subject,
yet Terminus should have the better place; for the glory is in the conclusion
of every act, and the beginnings are full of doubt and fear till they be
brought to perfection, which every one at his beginning of an act does desire,
intend and expect, nor ioyeth he in the beginning, but in the consummation of
his intents.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) world] Macrob Saturn. 1. (b) The rule of] Xenon says, because he did
first induce religion into Italy; therefore he deserved to be ruler of the
beginnings of sacrifices: he that would know moreof this, let him read
Macrobius, a known author. (c) Months] The Roman ye^ before Numa had but 10.
months with the Albanes. Numa added the 2. last, January and February. Varro.
Plutarch. Ovid thinks that January of old began the year. (Fast. 2.) and
February ended it, the last day whereof was Terminus his feast, and that
afterward the Decemuirs in the 12. tables joined January and February
together. (d) Terminalia] the last feast of February, before the expulsion of
Tarquin: but after they kept the kings-flight feast after the other. The
Terminalia (says Bid) were the 23. of February. De not* rerum. (e) The
purgatory) The Terminalia were no purgations, but the Februa were, which were
kept that month also. (f) Febr^] Ovid fastoru^. 2. Februa Romani dixere pia
mina Patres.
Our fathers said the Februa were purgations.
And a little after. Denique quocumque est quo corpora nostra piantur,
Hoc apud intonsos nomen habebat auos.
What ever washed the bodies guilt away,
Unkempt antiquity called Februa.
And hence carne our February. (g] To call that double-faced] Cicero seems to
make Ianus God both of beginnings and ends. De not. deor. 2. Macrob. does the
like, following ye opinion of many.

Why the worshippers of Ianus made him two faces, and yet would have him set
forthwith four also. CHAP. 8.
But now to the meaning of Ianus (a) his two faces. Two he had (say they) one
before, another behind, because when we gape, our mouth is like the world (and
therefore the Greek called them (b) palate, (...), heaven. And some Latin
poets have called the palate Coelum, heaven also: from whence is a way
out-ward, to the teeth, and inward to the throat. See now to what a pass the
world is come, for your Greek or poetical name of the palate. What is all
this to life eternal? or the soul? here is gods worship all bestowed, for a
little spittle to spit out, or swallow down, as the gates shall open or shut.
But who is so foolish that cannot find in the world two contrary passages,
whereat one may enter in or out? but of our mouth and throat (whose like is not
in the world) must frame the similitude of the world in Ianus, only for the
palate, (c) whose similitude is not in Ianus. And whereas they make him 4.
faces, calling his statue double Ianus, these they attribute to the 4. corners
of the world, as if the worlds four corners looked all forward, as his 4.
faces do. Again if Ianus be the world, and the world consist of 4. parts then
the picture of two faced (d) Ianus is false (for though he be foure-faced
sometimes yet he never has four gates). Or if the two-faced picture be true,
because east and west includes usually all the world, will any man when we
name the north and the south, call the world double, as they do Ianus with his
4. faces? nor have they any similitude in the world correspondent to their
four gates of ingresse and egresse; as they have found for the 2-faces in the
mouth of a man: (e) unless Neptune come with a fish, there indeed in his mouth
is a passage in and a passage out, and ways forth on either side his chaps.
But of all these ways there is none leads any soul from vanity, but such as
hear the truth say; I am the way. John. 10.


L. VIVES.
IAnus (a) his] Some say his wisdom and providence procured him this double
fronted statue, as Homer says of a valia nt fellow: (...), he looked both
before and behind at once. Plutarch gave two reasons for this statue. First
because he was first a Grecian called Per^bus (as is recorded) and then coming
into Italy, changed both name, language, and conditions. Secondly because he
taught the Italians both husbandry and policy, Problem. Others (as Ovid, which
reason Augustine here touches) say he signifies the world, one face being
the east, and another the west. Some say he had reference to the rising and
sett^ng of the sun, and signified the sun. Nigidius he also says that the
Greeks worshipped Apollo Thyanues, and (...): the Porter, and the
^ourney-guider. But I think not in that shape that the Romans worshipped
Ianus: for Ovid says: Quem tamen esse deum dic am te Jane biformis?
Na^ tibi par nullum Gr^cia numen habet.
In English the What god (two-fronted Ianus) should thou be?
Of all the gods of (...) is none like thee.
He was framed with four faces also. C. Bass* de diis apud Macrob. Ianus has
two faces as the doore-keeper of heaven and hell: four faces, because in his
Majesty he compriseth all the earths climates. This is yt Ianus who in their
ceremonies they called double Ianus: the two faced one was called Ianus the
simple: the others Temple was open in war and shut in peace (b) Palate, (...)]
Arist. de part. Animal. And Pliny imitating him, uses caelum for the palate
(l. 11.) speaking of the brain: this (quoth he) is the most excellent of the
spermatiue parts nearest to the [heauen of the head,] palate. (c) Whose
similitude] or, from whose similitude Ianus has his name. (d) Ianus is false]
Some hold the rest, unto [Or if the two faced picture] to be ^oisted in. It is
not very unlikely by the subsequence. (e) Unless Neptune] for in men it cannot
be found.

Of Jove's power, and Ianus his compared together. CHAP. 9.
But let them tell us now whom they mean by Jove (a) or Jupiter. He is a God
(quoth they) that rules the causes of all effects in the world. This is a great
charge. Ask (b) Virgils excellent verse else. Foelix qui potuit rerum
cognoscer^ causas.
O blessed he, and excellent* that kens the cause of each event.
But why then is Ianus preferred before him? let the great absolute scholar
speak. Because says he, Ianus rules the first things, and Jove the greatest.
Why then Jove is still worthy of the superiority: the greatest things
control the first: and excel them in dignity though they be short of them in
time. If the beginnings, and the excellencies of all acts be compared together
this is true: To go is the beginning of an act; but to finish the journey is
the perfection. To begin to learn, is another, but the habit of learning is
the excellence, and so in all things, the beginning* is the first, and the end
the best. But the cause of Ianus and Terminus is already heard. But the causes
that Jove swayeth are not effects, but efficients: nor can the facts begun or
ended be before them, for the agent is always before the act. Wherefore let
Ianus have sway in beginnings of acts, Jove yet has dominion in things before
his. For nothing is either ended or begun without a precedent efficient cause
Now as for this great natures master, and cause-disposing God, if the vulgar
call him Jove, and adore him with such horrible imputations of villainy as they
do, they had better and with less sacrilege, believe no God at all. They had
better call any one Jove that were worthy of these horred and hateful horrors,
or set a stock before them and call it Jove, with intent to blaspheme him (as
Saturn had a stone laid him, to devour in his sons stead) then to call him
both thunderer, and letcher, the worlds ruler, and the women's rauisher, the
giver of all good causes to nature, and the receiver of all bad in himself.
Again if Ia^s be the world, I ask where Jove's seat is is? our author has
said that the true Gods are but parts of the worlds soul, and the soul it
self: well then he that is not such, is no true God. How then? Is Jove the
worlds soul, and Ianus the body, this visible world? If it be so, Ianus is no
god, for the worlds body is none: but the soul and his parts only, witness
themselves. So Varro says plainly, he holds that God is the worlds soul,
and this soul is god. But as a wise man has body and soul, and yet his name
of [^ise] is only in respect of his soul. So the world has soul and body,
yet is called God only in reference to the soul. So then the worlds body
alone is no god: but the soul, either separate or combined with the body, yet
so that the godhead rest only in it self: if I^ then be the world and a god;
how can Jove be a part of Ianus only, and yet so great a god? for they give
more to Jove then Ianus, Iouis omnia plena; all is full of Io^e, say they.
Therefore if Jove be a god, and the king of gods, they cannot make any but him
to be the world, because he must reign over the rest, as over his own
parts. To this purpose Varro in his book of the worship of the gods which he
published several from these other, set down a distich of Valerius (c)
Sor^nus his making: it is this; Jupiter omnipotens regum, rex ipse deusque,
Progenitor, genitrixque deum, deus v^us and omnis.
High Jove, Kings King, and Parent General,
To all the gods: God only, and God all.


These verses Varro exp^undeth, and calling the giver of seed, the male, and
the receiver the female, accounted Jove the world, that both gives all seed it
self, and receives it into it self. And therefore Soranus (says he) called
Jove, Progenitor, genitrixque, father and mother, Full Parent general, to all
etc. and by the same reason is it that he was called, one and the same, all:
for the (f) world is one, and all things are in that one.

L. VIVES.
Jove (a) or Iupiter] For they are both declinable nominatiues: Genetiuo, Iouis
and Iup^ris: though we use the nominative only of the later, and the other
cases of the first, as the Greeks do (...) and (...) (b) Uirgils] Georgic. 2.
calling the inuestigators of causes happy, as the Philosophers did, of the
Peripatetiques and Academikes, Arist. Ethic. 10. Cicero de finib. 5. (c)
Soranus] Mentioned by Cicero, de Oratore. 1. Plin. lib. 3. Solin. Polihist.
Plut. Probl. Macrob. Saturn. Seru. in Georg. 1. He was a learned Latin,
counted the best scholar of the Gowned professors. Cic. de orat. 1. Varro was
so held also but Soranus before him, as Ennius the best Poet before Uirgill.
He had honors at Rome, and the tribuneship for one: and because he spoake the
secret name of Rome which no man might utter, he lost his life. Pli^. Solin.
Macrob. and Plutarch, though in Pompeyes life Plutarch says that Q. Valeri^
the Philosopher (which most understood to be Soranus) was put to death by
Pompey. But this is but at the second hand (says he) from Oppius: let us
beware how we trust a friend to Caesar in a stori^ of Pompey. Some say he
died suddenly: Others, that he was crucified. Seru. (d) Iupiter] The old
copies read Jupiter omnipotens, regum rerumque, deumque, for the first verse.
(e) G^uer of seede] Orph. Hymn. (...) etc.
God as a man begets, as woman, breeds.


(f) World is] So held all the best Philosophers against Anaximander,
Anaximenes, Aristarchus, Xenophan^s, Diogenes, Leucippus, Democritus and
Epicurus, all which held many worlds.

Whether Ianus and Jove be rightly distinguished or no. CHAP. 10.
WHerefore Ianus being the world, and Jove the world also, and yet the world
but one, why then are not Ianus and Jove one? Why have the several Temples,
several altars, rites and statues all several? Because the original is one
thing and the cause another, and therefore their names and natures are distinct
herein? Why how can this be? If one man have two authorities, or two sciences,
because they are distinct, is he therefore two officers, or two tradesmen* So
then if one GOD have two powers over causes, and over originalls, must he
needs therefore be two Gods, because they are two things? If this may be faith
then let Jove be as many gods as he has surnames for his several authorities,
for all his powers, whence they are derived are truly distinct: let us look in
a few of them, and see if this be not true.

Of Jove's surnames, referred all unto him, as one god, not as to many. CHAP. 11.
THey called him (a) Victor, In^incible, Helper, Impulsor, Stator, (b) Hundred
foote^, the R^fter, (c) the Nourisher, Ruminus, and inunmerable other names too
long (d) to rehearse. All the names they gave one God for diverse respect and
powers, yet did they not make him a god for each peculiar, because he
conquered, was unconquered, helped the needy, had power to enforce, to stay, to
establish, to ouerturne, because he bore up the world like a (e) rafter,
because he nourished all, and as it were gave all the world suck. Mark these
powers conferred with the epithites: Some are of worth, some idle: yet one gods
work they are (f) all, as they say. I think there is more neerenesse of
nature between the causes and the beginnings of things, for which they make
one world two gods, Ianus and Jove, who (they say) both contains all, and yet
gives creatures suck: yet for these two works of such different qualities, is
not Jove compelled to become two gods, but plays the one part as he is
Tigillus The Rafter, and the other as he in Ruminus, the Dugg-bearer. I will
not say that it were fitter for Juno to suckle the words creatures then
Jupiter, especially having power to make a waiting maid of goddess Rumin^:
for it may be they will reply: why Juno is nothing but Jupiter, as Soranus
says. Jupiter omnipotens regum, rerumque deumque
Progenitor, genetrixque deorum, --


He is god only and god all: but why is he called Ruminus then, whenif you
look a little farther into him, you shall find him to be Rumina the goddess,
for if it seem (g) justly unworthy of the majesty of the gods, to set one to
look to the knot of the corn, and another to the blade, how much more is it
irreverently ridiculus to put a base office, the suckling of whelps, lambs,
calves or so, unto the performance of two gods, the one whereof is Lord of the
whole universe: I, and not this neither with his wife, but with a base
goddess, I cannot tell whom Rumina, unless he be both Ruminus and Rumina,
this for the females, and that for the males, For I dare say that they (h)
would not have given Jove a female name, but that he is called a father and a
mother, or a full parent general in the said verses. Nay I find him also named
Pecunia, a name of one of the shake-rag goddesses in our forth book. But since
men and women both have money, why is he not Pecuni^s and Pecunia as well as
Ruminus and Rumina, but let them look to that.

L. VIVES.
HIm (a) Uictor.] Jove had many surnames both greek and latin, which Orpheus
purposely collecteth in his Himnes, and Homer dispersedly in both his Poemes
and Himnes, as that he is (...) friendships Lord: (...), Hospitable: (...),
sociable, (...) god of others and other like more natural to him then useful
to men. Besides there was Jupiter Anxur, and Terracina, quasi (...),
beardlesse: and here-vpon was Terracina called Anxur. S^ru. There was also
Jupiter, Ap^y as in Olympia consecrated by Hercules, to chase away the flies,
(...) which troubled his sacrifices, and (...), at Athens, the kinsman: his
feast was the second day of the (...), that is the deceitful days, and it was
called Anarrhysis, of the blood that ran from the slaughtered offerings. There
was (...) the Hatchet bearer, in Caeria with an axe in his hand in stead of a
thunderboult, called by the Lidians, (...). Plat. Prob. In Greece there was
(...), the deliverer, that freed them from Persian armies. Dodo^ i^ Ch^onia,
Milesius in Asia Minor, Hammon in Afryca, (...) at Athens, that had no
sacrifice, but fruit, and apples. Thucydides. There was also (...), the
Pardoner, at Argos, (...), the cuckoo, and (...), dedicated by Phrix^s, as the
fellow of his flight: and there was the golden fleece that Appolonius speaks
of.

Aratrius also amongst the Phaenicians, Caelus his son, Saturnes brother,
called Dagon, the first inuentor of plowes, and therefore called Jupiter
Aratrius, of Aratrum, a plough: there was (...) common to all Greece. Agoraeus,
the Courtier in Sicily, for in the Court he had a statue. Herodot. There was
in Rome besides those that Augustine reckeneth, Jupiter Feretrius, of the rich
spoils that Romulus bore [Ferebat] from the foe: he dedicated him Capitolinus,
of the place: Elicius, dedicated by Numa on Auentine, for getting knowledge of
[Eliciendis] the gods pleasures for the expiation of thunder. Pistor, the Baker
of the bread the besieged threw down from the Capitol when Rome was taken: his
feast was the sixth of Iunes Ides. Uiminius of the Hill Viminall: Praedator,
the preygetter, to whom a part of every prey was due. Seru. Ultor, the
Revenger, dedicated by Agrippa. The thunderer, which Augustus dedicated after
the Spanish war: The keeper, Domitian erected in the Capitol, The Latin,
Tarquin the Proud on mount Alba. The Invincible, his feast, Id. Iunii. The
finder, dedicated by Hercules for finding his oxen. His altar was near Port
Tergemina, and his offering was a heifer. Adultus, honored at marriages. Liu.
Dionys. Plut. Sueton. Lactantius writes that Jove got the surnames of all his
hosts, or friends, as of Athabyrius, and Lapriandus, that aided him in war,
as also Laprius, Molion, and Cassius. Theseus dedicated a Temple to Jove
Hecalesius, and ordained him sacrifices in Athens territory, because of his
old Hostess Hecalesia, Aristotle says that GOD being but one, is called by
many names, the Lightner, the thunderer, the Ethereall, the Celestial, the
Thunder-striker, the Rayne-sender and the Fruite-sender, the Citty-guide, and
the Birth-ruler, the Fortifier, the Homogeniall, Fatherly: as also all Fate,
and all that belongs to Fate, Necessity, Revenge, and Adrasteian.

(b) Hundred-footed] For his stability, as Augustine expounds it standing on
many feet: There is a worm called Cenotupes, [wee call her a Palmer.] (c)
Nourisher] Alimum, of Alo to nourish, Not Alienum. Venus was called Alma, so
was Ceres and the earth, as the nourisher of all. Some read it Alumnus, but
they mistake the meaning exceedingly. (d) To reherse] The Commentators not
understanding the Latin so well as they might took out [Persequi, to reherse]
and depraved the place, with Perseprosequi, thinking persequi was only to
persecute. (e) Rafter] A piece of wood whereon the frame of the house rests:
Aristotle compares the knotte where the arche is joined in the midst, unto
GOD in the world, who were he absente but one minute (says he) the whole
frame of nature must needs fall, as the whole arche must upon the least of
their joint. Nor far from this purpose is the verse of Orpheus in his hymns,
concerning Jove. (...) GOD is the link, of the earth and starry Heavens: and
afterward, (...). God is the seas root. (f) All] Great and little, worthy and
idle. (g) Justly vnworthy] The crew of gods about the corn, was derided in the
fourth book. (h) Would not] The copies that leave out [not] are depraved.

That Jupiter is called Pecunia also. CHAP. 12.
But do you hear their reason for this name? He is called Pecunia (say they)
coin, because he can do all things. O fine reason for a name of a god! Nay
he that does all things is basely injured that is called Pecunia, coin. For
what is that which all (a) mortal men possess under the name of coin, or
money, in respect of the things contained in heaven and earth? But avarice gave
him this name, that he that loved money might say his god was not every
body, but the King of all the rest. Far more reason therefore had they to
call him Riches: for Riches and Money are to several things. (b) wise, just
and honestmen we call rich, though they have little or no money, for they are
the richer in virtues: which makes little suffice them for necessaries,
whereas the greedy covetous man that always gapeth after money, him we count
ever poor and needy.

Such may have store of money, but there in they shall never lack store of
want. And God, we say well, is rich, not in money, but in omnipotency. So
likewise, monied men are called rich, but be they greedy, they are ever needy,
and monylesse men are called poor, but be they contented, they are ever
wealthy. What stuff then shall a man have of that divinity, whose scope and
chief God (c) no wise man in the world would make choice of? How much likelier
were it (if their religion in any point concerned eternal life) to call their
chief universal God (d) Wisdom, the love of which cleanses one from the
stains of avarice, that is the love of money.

L. VIVES.
ALL (a) mortall] All men's possessions, have reference to money: so that it is
said, that Peculium, gain, comes of Pecudes, sheep (Columell. Seru.
Festus.) because these were all the wealth of antiquity: for they were almost
all sheepheards, and from them this word came first, and afterward signified
cittie-wealth also. Uar. de ling. lat. lib. 4. (b) Wise, just,] a Stoicall
Paradoxe. (...), only the wise are ritche. Tully proves it strongly: and many
Philosophers have confirmed it, all whose minds were against money. (c) No
wise man] Avarice (says Salust) is the love of Money, which no wise man ever
affected: it is a poison that infecteth all the manliness of the mind, and
makes it effeminate: being ever infinite and insatiable, neither contented
with want, mean nor excess. (d) Wisdome] as well call our God.

That the interpretations of Saturn and Genius, prove them both to be
Jupiter. CHAP. 13.
But what should we do saying more of Jupiter; to whom all the other gods have
such relation, that the opinion of many gods will by and by prove a babble, and
Jove stand for them all, whether they be taken as his parts and powers, or
that the soul that they hold is diffused through all the world: got it self
so many diverse names by the manifold operations which it effected in the parts
of this huge mass, whereof the visible universe has the fabrike and
composition? for what is this same Saturn? A chief God (says he) and one
that is Lord of all seeds and sowing. What? but does not the exposition of
Soranus his verses say that Jove is the world, and both creator and conceiuer
of all seeds? He therefore must needs rule the sowing of them. And what is (a)
Genius? God of generation (says he.) Why tell me, has any one that power, but
the world, to whom it was said, High Jove, full parent general of all?
Besides, he says in another place, that the Genius (b) is the reasonable
soul, peculiar in each peculiar man. And that the soul of the world is a God
of the same nature, drawing it to this, that that soul is the universal
Genius to all those particulars. Why then it is the same that they call Jove.
(c) For if each Genius be a god, and each soul reasonable a Genius, then is
each soul reasonable a god by all consequence, which such absurdity urges
them to deny, it rests that they make the worlds singular soul their
selected Genius, and consequently make their Genius directly Jove.

L. VIVES.
WHAT (a) is Genius?] The Lord of all generation. Fest. Pompey. The son of
the gods and the father of men, begetting them: and so it is called my genius.
For it begot me. Aufustius. The learned have had much a do about this Genius,
and find it manifoldly used. Natures Genius is the god that produced her: the
Heavens have many Genii, read them in Capella his Nuptiae. Melicerta is the
seas Genius. Parthen: the four elements, fire, air, water, and earth are the
genii of all things corporal. The Greeks call them (...), and (...) geniall
gods. Such like has Macrobius of natures Penates: Jupiter and Juno are the
air, lowest, and mean: Minerua the highest, or the aethereall sky: to which
three Tarquinius Priscus erected one Temple under one roof. Some call the
moon and the 12. signs Genii: and chief Genii too. (for they will have no
place without a predominant Genius:) Every man* also has his Genius, either
that guardeth him in his life, or that looks to his generation, or that has
original with him, both at one time. Censorin. Genius, and Lar, some say are
all one. C. Flaccus de Indigitaments. The Lars (says Ovid) were twins to
Mercury and Nymph Lara, or Larunda. Wherefore many Philosophers and Euclide for
one, gives each man two Lars, a good and a bad: such was that which came to
Brutus in the night, as he was thinking of his wars he had in hand.
Plutarch. Flor. Appian. (b) Genius is] Of this more at large in the book
following. (c) For if each] A true Syllogism in the first form of the first
mood, usually called Barbara.

Of the functions of Mars and Mercury. CHAP. 14.
But in all the worlds parts they could find never a corner for Mars and
Mercury to practice in the elements, and therefore, they gave them power in
men's actions, this of eloquence, and the other of war. Now for Mercury (a) if
he have power of the gods language also, then is he their King, if Jupiter
borrow all his phrase from him: but this were absurd. But his power stretches
but unto man's only, it is unlikely that Jove would take such a base charge in
hand as suckling of not only children, but cattle also, calves or foales, as
thence he has his name Romulus, and leave the rule of our speech (so glorious
a thing and that wherein we excel the beasts) unto the sway of another, his
inferior. I but how if Mercury be (b) the speech only it self, for so they
interpret him: and therefore he is called Mercurius, (c) quasi Medius currens,
the mean current, because to speak is the only current mean for one man to
express his mind to another by, and his greek name (d) (...), is nothing but
interpreter and speech, or, interpretation which is called in greek also
(...), and thence is he (e) Lord of merchants, because buying and selling is
all by words and discourses. Hereupon they (f) wing his head and his feet, to
signify the swift passage of speech, and call him (g) the messenger, because
all messages, and thoughts whatsoever are transported from man to man by the
speech. Why very well. If Mercury then be but the speech, I hope he is no god
then, by their own confessions. But they make gods of no gods, and offering to
unclean spirits, in stead of being inspired with gods, are possessed with
devils. And because the world and elements had no room for Mars to work in
nature, they made him god of war, which is a work of man not to be desired
after. But if Mars be war as Mercury is speech, I would it were as sure that
there were no war to be falsely called god, as it is plain that Mars is no
god.

L. VIVES.
MErcury (a)] There were five Mercuries (Cicero.) The first, son to Caelus
and Dies, the second to Valens, and Pheronis, this is he that is under the
carth calls otherwise Tryphonius, third son to Jove and Maia, fourth father
to Nilus, him the Egiptian held it sacrilege to name. 5. He that the
Pheneates worshipped he killed Argus, they say, and therefore governed Egypt,
and taught the Egiptians laws and letters. They call him Theut. Thus far
Tully. Theut is named by Plato in his Phaedon, and Eusebius. de praeparat. Euang.
lib. 1. who says the Egiptians called him Thoyth, the Alexandrians, Thot, the
Greeks (...) and that he first taught letters and looked into the secrets of
Theology. Diodorus says he first invented spelling of words, and giving of
names to things, as also rites and ceremonies. Lib. 1. for the words, Horace
d^ testify it out of Alcaeus: and therefore the Egiptians thought him the
inuentor and god of languages, calling him the interpreter of God and men: both
because he brought religion as it were from the gods to men, and also because
the speech, and prayer passes from men to the gods, with which is no commerce.
Thence comes Aristides his fable, there was no commerce nor concord between man
and man, until Mercury had sprinkled them with language; and the inuenting of
letters missiue was a fit occasion to make them think that he was a god,
having power by their secrecy to dispatch things with such celerity. (b) The
speech onely] Mercury (they say) is the power of speech, and is feigned to be
straight, seeing the tongue runs so smoothe, but in a set speech some will
have a solar virtue, which is Mercury, others a Lunary, that is Hecate, other a
power universal called Her^is, Porph, Physiologus. One of the causes of his
being named Cyllenius is (says Festus P^s (because; the tongue does all
without hands, and them that want hands are called (...) though this is a name
common to all lame persons. Others hold that he had it from some place. (c)
Mercurius quasi] Of Merx, merchandise, says Festus, and I think truly it
comes of Mercor, to buy or sell, whence our word Merchant also comes. (d)
(...)] Of (...), to interpret. This it is to be the gods messenger: not to
interpret their sayings, but faithfully to discharge their commands, which
the speech can do, transferring things from soul to soul, which naught but
speech can do: and since souls were taken for gods thence was he counted the
gods interpreter. Plato in Cratylo: (...) etc. They that does (...), (says he)
that is speak, we justly call Ironies. But now having gotten, as we think,
a better word, we call it Hermes. Iris also may be derived (...), to speak,
for she is a messenger also. He that deals in any other man's affair, is
called an interpreter, a mean; and an arbitrator. Ser. in Aeneid. 4. and
Cicero in diverse places. Urigil also, In Dido's words to Juno, the mean of
atonement between her and Aeneas, says thus. Tu harum interpres curarum et
conscia Juno.
Thou Juno art the mean, and knows my grieves.


(e) Lord of Merchants] Without language farewell traffic. Diodorus says
that some (...) Mercury to have found out weights, and measures: and the way to
gain by trading. There is a Greek proverb (...), common gain. (f) Winged]
His feet wings are called Zalaria, and in Homere, (...): he had head-wings
also behind each of his ears. Apuleius. Apologus, his wings were above his
hat, as he says in Plautus his Amphitruo. I wear these feathers in my hat.
Beroald. Sueton in August. (g) Messenger] Diodor. Sicul. lib. 6. Acron in
Horat. Car. lib. 1.

Of certain stars that the Pagans call their gods. CHAP. 15.
PErhaps these (a) stars are their gods that they call by their gods names.
For one they call Mercury, another Mars: nay and there is one Jove also, though
all the world be but Jove. So is there a Saturn, yet Saturn has no small
place besides, being the ruler of all seed. But then there is the brightest
of all, Venus, though they will needs make her (b) the Moon also: though she
and Juno contend as much for that glorious star, in their opinion, as they did
for the (c) golden apple. For some say that Lucifer is Venus: others, Juno, but
Venus (as she does ever) gets it from Juno. For many more call it Venus, then
Juno, there are few or none of the later opinion. But who will not laugh to have
Jove named the King of gods and yet see Venus have a far brighter star then
his? His fulgor should have been as super-eminent as his power: but it seems
less (they reply) and hirs more, because one is nearer the earth then another.
Why but if the highest place deserve the honor why has not Saturn the grace
from Jupiter? O^ could not the vanity that made Jove King, mount so high as the
stars? So the Saturn obtains that in heaven which he could neither
attain (d) in his Kingdom nor in the Capitol? But why has not Ianus a
star as well as Io^* being all the world, and comprehending all as well as
(e) Jove? Did he fall to composition for fear of law, and for one star in
heaven was content to take many faces upon earth? And if two stars only made
them count Mars and Mercury for deities, being notwithstanding nothing but
speech and war, no parts of the world, but acts of men: why has not Aries,
Taurus, Cancer, Scorpio etc. the are in the (f) highest heaven, and have more.
(g) certain motions, why ha^ not they Temples, Altars and sacrifices? nor any
place either amongst the popular gods or the selected?

L. VIVES.
THese starres] Plato says that the Greeks (and many Barbarians) whilom used
to ad^ no gods, but the Sun, Moon and Stars, calling them natural gods
(as Beritius wrote to Sanchaniates) affirming that of the ancient, men the
Phaenicians and Egiptians first began to erect temples and sacrifices for their
friends and benefactors: naming them by the stars nam^ one Heaven, another
Saturn, a third the Sun, and so forth. Thus far Plato. Doubtless the gods
themselves being cunning Astrologians either gave themselves those names, or
such as held those great powers of theirs to be in the stars, gave the
Inuentors of star-skil those names. For the star Mercury they say makes men
witty, eloquent, and fitting to the planet he is joined with: and Seneca
likes this cause of his name of the gods interpretor. For with Jupiter and the
Sun, he is good, with Mars and Mercury, maleuolent. Mars is violent, a
war-breeder, and as Porphyry says, the Lo: of wrath, because of fiery ardor,
arises fury and war. Hence is the Stoikes Theology referring all the gods
natures to the worlds: and consequently so obscure that the truth is not
possibly to be extracted: as Eusebius says both out of Sanchoniato, and
proves also by argument: De praeparat. Euang. lib. 1. As Augustine does also
here. (b) The moo^ also] Mac. Sat. 1. alleging Philochorus in Atis: that Uenus
is the Moon, and that men in women's apparel sacrificed to her, and women in
men's, because she was held both: Thou heavenly Venus (says Apuleius) to the
Moon, yt caused all copulation in the beginning, propagating humane original,
thou art now adored in the sacred oratory of Paphos. Transform. lib. 11. (c)
Golden apple] The goddesses contention about the golden apple is plainer then
that it needs my rehersall: of Lucifer, Pliny says thus. Under the Sun is the
bright star Venus moving diurnally, and planetarily: called both Uenus and
Luna, in the morning being Sols harbinger, she is called Lucifer: as the
pety-sun, and light-giuer of the day: at night following the sun, she is styled
Uesper, as the light continuer and the moons vicegerent. lib. 2. Pithagoras
first of all found her nature, magnitude, and motion. Olympiad. 4^. about the
year of Rome 142. she is bigger then all the other stars, and so clear
that (sometimes) her beams make a shadow. That makes her have such variety
of names, as, Juno, Isis, Berecynthia, etc. (d) In his Kingdome] Whence he was
driven by his son Jove, as also from the Capitol that before was called
Saturnia, until it was dedicated to Jupiter Capitolinus. (e) Ioue] Using Iouis
the Latin nominative, as Tully does in 6. De republ. that happy star called
Jove. (f) Highest] The Zodiake in the 8. Sphere, so called of (...), a
creature: every sign whereof conteyneth diverse bright stars. (g) Certain
motion] Perpetually and diurnally once about from East to West in 24. hours:
making night and day, and ever keeping place: whereas the Planets are now
joined, now opposite, now swift, now retrograde, which change gave them the
greek name Planet of (...), error: though they keep a certain motion
nevertheless: yet seemingly they err and wander through their alteration in
motion, which the Zodiake never alters, as situate in the 8. Sphere called
(...).

Of Apollo, Diana, and other select gods, called parts of the world. CHAP. 16.
ANd though they make (a) Apollo, a (b) wizard and a (c) physician, yet to
making him a part of the world, they say he is the Sun, and Diana his sister
is the Moon, and (d) goddess of iourneyes. So is she (e) a Virgin also,
untouched, and they both bear shafts, (f) because these 2. stars only do send
to the earth. Vulcan they say, is the worlds fire. Neptune the water: father
Dis, the earths foundation and depth, Bacchus and Ceres seed-gods, he to the
masculine, she of the feminine: or he of the moisture and she of the dry
part of the seed. All this now has reference to the world, to Jove, who is
called the full parent general, because he both begets and brings forth all
things seminall. And Ceres the great mother, her they make the earth, and Juno
besides. Thus the second cause of things are in her power, though Jove be
called the full parent, as they affirm him to be all the world. And Minerua
because they had made her the arts goddess, and had never a star for her,
they made her also the sky, or (g) the Moon, Vesta they accounted the chief
of all the goddesses, being taken for the earth: and yet gave her the
protection of the (h) worlds fire, more light and not so violent as that of
Vulcans was. And thus by all these select gods they intend but the world: in
some total, and in others partial: to all, as Jove is: partial, as Genius,
the great mother, Soll and Luna, or rather Apollo and Diana, sometimes one god
stands for many things, and sometimes one thing presents many gods, the first
is true in Jupiter, he is all the world, he but only (i) Heaven, and he is
only a star in Heaven: So is Juno, goddess of all second causes, yet only
the air, and yet the earth, though she might (k) get the star from Venus.
So is Minerua the highest sky, and the Moon in the lowest sky as they hold.
The second is true in the world, which is both Jove and Ianus: and in the earth
which is both Juno, the Great mother, and Ceres.

L. VIVES.
APollo. (a)] Tully de. dat deor. lib. 3. makes 4. Apollos, and 3. Dianas. The
3. Apollo. and the 2. Diana were the children of Jove and Latona. (b) Wizard.]
Commonly affirmed in all authors of this subject, Greek and Latin. Plato
says the Thessalonians called him not (...), but (...) simple, because of his
divination, wherein was required, (...): truth, and simplicity, which are all
one. In Cratilo. Glaucus taught him his divination, he that was afterward made
a Sea-god and called Melicerta. Nicand in A^tolicis. (c) Physician.] Macrob.
Satur. They counted the vestalls thus. Apollo phisiti^n, Apollo Paean, etc. He
proves him to be Aesculapius, that is a strength of health, a rising soly from
the substance of animated creatures. Much of Apollo yea may read in the said
place. (d) Goddess of.] Her statues were cut all youthful, because that age
bears travel lest Festus lib. 9. for Diana was held a goddess of ways and
iournies: she ruled also mountains and groves, and used the ^hes often in her
hunting, as shall be showed hereafter. (e) Virgin.] So it is reported, that it
was not lawful for men to come in her temple at Rome, because one ravished a
woman there once that came to salute the goddess, and the dogs tare him in
pieces immediately. Plato calls her (...). etc. because of the integrity and
modesty that she professed in her love of virginity: or, (...) etc. because she
has the copulation of man and woman. Though the fables go that she lay with
Endymyon: and that Pan, Mercuries son, gave her a white sheep for (...).
Uirg. 3. Georg. Munere sic niueo lanae si credere digum est,
Pandeus Archadiae captam te Luna fefellit,
In Nemora alta vocans, nec tu aspernata voca^tem es. etc.
Arcadian Pans white fleece (it is said) so blinded,
Thine eyes (fair Phaebe:) he being breefely minded,
Called the, thou yeeldest, and to the thick you went, etc.
(f). Shaftes.] Apollo bears those that he killed the serpent Python
withal: and therefore Homer calls him oftentimes (...), that is far-darting,
(...), that is shooting high: and (...), eternal archer: Now Diana, vowed a
perpetual virgin, haunteth the woods and hills, hunting as Virgill describes
Uenus when Aeneas saw her buskind, and tucked round, and a quiver at her back,
as ready for the pursuit. These shaftes are nothing (all say) but the beams of
those stars as Lactantius says of the Son. Armatus radiis elementa
liquentia lustrans,
Armed with rays he vewes the watery playnes.


(g) The Moon.] Porph. Natural. deor interpretat. That in the Sun (says
he) is (...), that in the Moon Miuerua, signifiyng wisdom. (h) Worlds fire.]
Ours that we use on earth, belonging (as I say) to generation: Though herein,
as in all fictions is great diversity of opi^ons. Phurnutus says Vulan is the
grosser fire, that we use, and Jupiter the more pure fire, and Prudentius
says. -- Ipse ignis qui nostrum seruit ad usum.
Vulcanus, ac perhibetur, et in virtute superna,
Fingitur ac delubra deus, ac nomine et ore,
Assimulatus habet, nec non regnare caminis,
Fertur, and Aeoliae summus faber esse vel Aetna.
-- The fire that serves our use,
Hight Vulcan, and is held a thing divine,
Graced with a style, a statue and a shrine,
The chimeys god he is, and keeps they say.
Great shops in Aetna and Aeolia.


(i) only Heaven.] Ennius: Aspice hoc sublime candens quem inuocant omnes,
Iouem -- behold yond flaming light, which each call Jove.
(k) Get the star.] In the contention for Lucifier or the day star.

That Varro himself held his opinions of the Gods to be ambiguous. CHAP. 17.
But even as these cited examples do, so all the rest, rather make the matte^
intricate then plain: and following the force of opiniatiue error, sway this
way, and that way, that Varro himself likes better to doubt of them, then to
deliver this or that positiuely, for of his three last books having first
ended that of the certain gods, then he came into that of the (a) uncertain
ones, and there he says: If I set down ambiguities of these gods, I am not
blame worthy. He that thinks I ought to judge of them, or might, let him
judge when he reads them. I had rather call all my former assertions into
question then propound all that I am to handle in this book, positiuely. Thus
does he make doubts of his doctrine of the certain gods as well as the rest.
Besides in his book of the select ones having made his preface out of natural
theology, entering into these politic fooleries, and mad fictions, where truth
both opposed him, and antiquity oppressed him, here (quoth he) I will write of the
gods to whom the Romans have built temples, and diversity of statues, b^ I
will write so as xenophanes (b) Colophonus writes: what I think, not what I
will defend, for man may think but God is he that knows. Thus timerously he
promises to speak of things not known nor firmly believed, but only
opinatiue, and doubted of being to speak of men's institutions. He knew that
there was the world, heaven, and earth, stars, and al those together with the
whole universe subject unto one powerful and invisible king: this he firmly
believed, but he durst not say that Ianus was the world, or that Saturn was
Jove's father and yet his subject, nor of the rest of this nature durst he
affirm any thing confidently.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Uncertain.] Of these I have spoken before: now a little of the
unknown, for it is an error to hold them both one: The territories of Athens
had altars to many vokowne gods: Acts. 17. and Pausanias in Attic. (...), the
altars of the vn^ gods: These Epimenides of Creete found: for the pestilence,
being sore in that country, (...) ^d them to expiate their fields, yet not
declaring what god they should invo^, (...) (...) expiation, Epimenides being
then at Athens, bad them turn the cattle that they would off^ into the
fields, and the priests to follow them, and where they stayed, there kill them
and ^er them to the unknown propiciatory God. Thereupon arose the erection of
(...) (...) which continued even unto Laertius his time. This I have been the
willinger to (...), ^cause of that in the Acts. (b) Xenophanes] Son to
Orthomenes of Ionia where (...) the Poet was borne. Apolodorus, out of
Colophon. He held all things incompre^, ^nst the opinion of Laertius Sotion.
Eusebius following Sotion, says he did hold (...) (...) senses salfe and our
reason, for company: he wrote of the gods against Homer, and He^. There was
another Zenophanes, a lesbian, and a Poet.

The likeliest cause of the propagation of paganism. CHAP. 18.
OF all these the most credible reason is this: that these gods were men that
by the means of such as were their flatterers, (a) had each of them rites and
sacrifices ordained for them correspondent unto some of their deeds, manners,
wits, fortunes and so forth: and that other men (rather devils) sucking in
these errors, and delighting in their ceremonies, novelties, so gave them their
propagation, being furthered with poetiall fictions, and diabolical
illusions. For it were a likelier matter that an ungracious son did fear
killing by as ungracious a father, and so expelled him from his kingdom, then
that which he says, that Jove is above Saturn because the efficient cause
which i^ ^es, is before the material which is Saturnes. For were this (...)
(...) should never have been before Jove, nor consequently his fa^ ^or the
cause goes always before the seed, but the seed never ge^ the cause. But in
this endeavor to honor the vain fables, or impi^ of men with natural
interpretations, their most learned men are (...) into such quandaries, that
we cannot choose but pity their vanity as^ (...) the others.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) each] In this place the Copies differ, but our reading is the most
authen^, and most ancient. Some Copies leave out [By the means of such as were
their (...)] But it is not left out in the old manuscripts, we read it as
antiquity leau^ (...).

The interpretations of the worship of Saturn. CHAP. 19.
S^ (say they) devoured all his children, that is all seeds return to (...)
earth from whence they came: and a clod of earth was laid in steed of (...)
for him to devour, by which is meant that men did use to bury their (...) in
the earth before that plowing was invented. So then should Saturn b^ called
the earth it self, and not the seeds, for it is the earth that does as (...)
(...) devour the own offspring, when as the seeds it produces are all
returned into it again. But what correspondence has men's covering of corn
with cloddes, unto the laying of Saturn a clod in steed of Jove? is not the
corn which is covered with the clod, returned into the earthes womb as well
as the rest? For this is spoken as if he that laid the clod, took away the
seed. Thus say they, by the laying of this clod was Jove taken from Saturn,
when as the laying of the clod upon a seed makes the earth to devour it the
sooner. Again, being so, Jove is the seed, not the seeds cause as was said
but now. But these men's brains run so far a stray with those fond
interpretations, that they know not well what to say. A sickle he bears for
his husbandry they say: Now in (a) his reign was not husbandry invented, and
therefore (as our author interprets) the first times were called his, because
as then men did live upon the earthes voluntary increase and fruits. Whether
(b) took he the sickle upon the loss of his scepter as one that having been
an idle King in his own reign would become a painful laborer in his sons?
Then he proceeds, and says that (c) some people, as the Carthaginians
offered infants in sacrifice to him, and others, as the (d) Galls, offered men,
because mankind is Sacrifices of men.
chief of all things produced of seed. But needs more of this bloody vanity
This is the observation of it all, that none of these interpretations have
reference to the true, living, incorporeall, changelesse nature, whereof the
eternal life is to be craved: but all their ends are in things corporal,
temporal, mutable and mortal, and whereas Saturn they say did (e) geld his
Father Caelus, that is (quoth he) to be understood thus, that the divine
seed, is in Saturnes power and not in Heavens: that is, nothing in heaven has
original from seed. Behold here is Saturn made Heavens son, that is Jove's.
For they affirm steadfastly that Jove is heaven. Thus does falsehood without any
opposer overthrow it self: He says further, that he was called (f) (...)
that is, space of time, without the which no seed Falsehood overthrows it self.
can come to perfection. This and much like is spoken of Saturn in reference
to the seed: Surely Saturn with all this power should have been sufficient
alone to have governed the seed: why should they call any more gods to this
charge, as Liber, and Libera, or Ceres? of whose power over seed he speaks
as if he had not spoken at all of Saturn.

L. VIVES.
IN (a) his raigne] Who first invented husbandry, it is uncertain. Some (as
the common sort hold) take it to be Ceres: other, Triptolemus (at least for
him that first put it in practice,) is Iustine, and Ovid: Some, Dionysius, as
Tibullus, Diodorus calls him Osyris, and therefore Virgil faith. Ante Iouem
nulli subigebant arua coloni,
Until Jove's time there were no husbandmen.


Some think that Saturn taught it unto Ianus and the Italians: being driven
to invent somewhat of necessity after he was chased from Crete. So that still
husbandry was not invented Saturn.
in his reign but after. The poets will have no husbandry in the golden age,
the days of Saturn: Uirgill says, the earth brought fruits Nullo poscente,
no man taking pains for The golden age.
them: and Ovid, fruges tellus inarata faerebat, the earth bore corn vnplowed.
Hesiod. (...) (...) etc. The earth brought fruit unforced, both good and in
abundance. (b) Took (...) His sickle was found at Zancle a city in Sicily and
thence the town had that name. Sil. Ital^. 14. For (...) in the Sicilian
tongue, was a sickle. They did, (c) Some people] Oros. lib. 4. cap. 6. Trogus,
Lact. lib. 1. and Posce^inus Festus. Some say the Carthaginians offered children
to Hercules. Plin. li. 36. but others say it was to Saturn. Plato in Mino^.
Dionys. Halicarn. The odoritus C^s. in Sacrific. Eusebius. and Tertullian who
adds that at the beginning of Tiberius his reign he forbad it them, and
crucified their priests: yet they did continue it secretly even at the time he
wrote this. Some refer the cause of this cruelty unto Iunos hate. But Eusebi^
(...) of Sanchoniato reciting the Phaenicians theology says that Saturn King
of Palestine dying, ^rned into the star we call Saturn, and that soon after
Nymph Anobreth having but ^e (...) son by Saturn who was therefore called
Lewd (for that is one only son in the (...) tongue) was compelled to
sacrifice him for to deliver her contry from a dangerous (...) and that it was
an old custom in such perils to pacify the wrath of the revenging (...)
with the blood of the Princes dearest son. But the Carthagians (being come of
(...) ^cians) sacrificed a man unto Saturn, whose son had been so
sacrificed: either of their own first institution in Africa, or else traducing
it from their ancestry. De prae. Euan. How these children were sacrificed
Diodorus tells: Biblioth. lib. 20. They had (says he) a brazen (...) of
Saturn, of monstrous bigness, whose hand hung down to the Earth so knit one
within an^r, that the children that were put in them, fell into a hole full of
fire. Thus far he. When we ^ed this book first, our seamen discovered an
Island calling it after our Princes name, (...), wherein were many statues of
devils, hollow within, brazen all; and their hands (...), wherein the
Idolaters used to lay their children they sacrificed, and there were they (...)
^ned by the extreme heat of the brass caused by the fire that they made
within (...) ((...)) The Gauls.] Not unto Saturn, but to Esus, and
Theutantes. Plin. lib. 30. Solin. Mela, C^ane, and Lactantius. To Mercury says
Tertullian: but that is Theutantes. Plin, men^ ^erius his prohibition of so
damnable a superstition. Claudius farbad them as Sueto^ (...): Indeed Augustus
first forbad it but that was but for the city only. A decree was (...) (...)
the year of Rome. DCLVII. consulls, P. Licinius Crassus. and Cn. Cornelius
Lantu^, forbidding humane sacrifices all the Empire through: and in Hadrians
time it ceased al^ (...) over the world, Jupiter Latialis was worshipped with
ablation of man's blood in Ter^ ^y and Eusebius and Lactantius his time. And
before Herc^es was Saturn so wor^ Latium, which sacrifice Faunus brought up
for his grandsire Saturn, because of (...) (...) was (as Lactantius and
Macrobius recite out of Varro) this: (...), etc. bring (...) (...); and lights
for Dis his father: Dis his father was Saturn. Lactantius reads (...) (...)
is a word doubtful (...) circumflexe is light and (...) acute is a man Homer
(...) (...), etc.
Straight against the suitors went this heavenly man.
(...) often elsewhere. Plutarch in his book entitled (...), live in private,
gives the (...) why (...) should be both light and a man. But Hercules
coming into Italy and see^ (...) Aborigines that dwelt there continually take
of the Greeks for sacrifice that were (...) ^her to inhabit, and asking the
cause, they told him this oracle, which he did (...) light, not man: and so
they decreed that yearly each Ides of May the Priests and (...) should cast
thirty men's images made of osiers or wickers into Tyber, from of the (...)
Miluius: calling them Argaei, (for the old latins held all the Gretians
Argiues) and (...) (...) should have lights offered to him. Dionis. Plutarch.
Uarro. Festus, Gel. Macrob. (...) Lactant. Ovid. yet Ovid tells this tale of
another fashion Fastor. 5. Manethon says, the A^tians used to sacrifice three
men to Juno in the city of the sun, but King Amasis changed the sacrifice
into three lights. (e) Geld his father.] Eusebius discoursing of the Phani^
^ity says thus: after Caelus had reigned. 32. years, his Son Saturn lay in
wait (...) (...) about floods and fountains and having gotten him, guelded
him: his holy blood (...) into the spring and the place is to be seen at this
day. He was (says Diodorus) an (...) Astrologian, and distinguished the
year, and by this skill got his name, he (...) the rude ciuility and
sciences, and reigned in the northwest of Africa, having 45. chil^ by several
wives. (f) (...)] Quasi. (...), time. Cicero gives another interpretation
(...) (...) I^e, and Saturn, de not. deor. lib. 2. But Saturn is (...), and
time (...). The Ro^ called Saturn the father of verity because truth will out
in time. Plutarch.

Of the sacrifices of Ceres Eleusina. CHAP. 20.
O^ Ceres (a) her sacrifices, them of Eleusina, used at Athens were the most
noble. Of them does Varro say little or nothing only he talks a little of the
corn that Cere's found out, and of her loss of Proserpina that was ravished
by Pluto. And she (he says) does signify fruitfulnes of seed, which one time
failing, and the earth seeming to be wail that want of fertility, it grew to
an opinion that Hell, or Pluto had taken away the daughter of Ceres, the said
fruitfulness, which Proserpina.
of creeping forward, is called Proserpina, which thing they deploring in
public manner, because that fertility came again, all their joy returned at
the return of Proserpina, and so had Ceres feasts institution, furthermore he
says this, that she has many things in her sacrifices which have no
reference but to the corn.

L. VIVES.
CEres (a) her sacrifices] To have a little discourse hereof more then is
vulgar, will neither be unpleasing nor unprofitable. Ceres had Proserpina by
Jove, Pluto ravished her out of Ceres sacrifices.
Sicily and her mother sought her almost all the world over. At last coming to
Eleufis, one of the twelve towns in the Athenian territory, one Celus the King
thereof took her to harbor and let her have the education of Triptolemus, his
(or as Strabo says) I^inus his son by Hyona. What ever he was, he loved
Ceres well, ordered her a sollemne yearly sacrifice Triptolemus.
calling the feast Eleusina, and Ceres and Proserpina the second Eleusina
goddesses: Some say that Erictheus brought them out of Egypt, I do not
disprove them, for thence came the most of the worlds Idolatry. These
sacrifices none might see but votaries, the crier badde avoid all prophaine:
and hence had Virgil his verse. Procul o procul este prophani, Fly, fly far
hence, prophaine: Seru, and Alcibi^s was sore troubled for being at Ceres her
sacrifices before he was initiate. The first that ^ished them was the
Philosopher Numerius, to whom afterward the goddesses (they say) in a dream
appeared, in whores habit and complained that he had made them common. Which
certainly proved their ceremonies whorish: for had they been honest, they
would have feared divulgation. Socrates in Plato glanceth at this and much
more: commanding the gods turpitudes to be kept in all taciturnity, and
threatening that he would discover the secrets of Isis, which is all one with
Ceres. In which words he makes Isis acknowledge plain enough that they are
filthy. Here of says Nazianzene thus, We have no ravished Proserpina, nor
wandering Ceres, nor Triptolemus, nor Dragons, nor such as partly do The
filthiness, of the (...) sacirfices.
and partly suffer: I shame to lay the night-sacrifices in the light, and to
turn a mystery into a turpitude. Eleusine, knows and such as look upon
these concealed matters, fit indeed for concealment. Thus he in his
Epiphaniae, beginning at these words: (...). etc. And happy Jason (says
Theocritus) that attained more than men prophaine believe, (...) etc. Wherein
he closely girdeth at the adultery of Ceres and Jason. What these sacrifices
did contain, Eusebius shows thus out of Clement: Some say (quoth he) that
Mela^ Amythaons son brought the sollemnities of Ceres from Egypt into Greece.
Ceres was delivered, the daughter was brought up: some called her Perephatte:
Jove begot her in Perephatte.
form of a Dragon, and so comes the Dragon to be shown roulled up in the
Sauati^ Mysteries, as a memorial of the gods; or I should say of so foul a
turpitude. Perephatte also brought forth a son like a Bull: whereupon some
poets have sung of the Bull, the Dragons father, and the Dragon, the Bulls
father: Those memorial secrets they bear up unto a hill, and they
celebrated the shepards goade, yes I think the shepards goade, a kind of rod
that the Bacchanalianes did bear. Further of these secrets I cannot relate, of
the basket, the rape, the Idonerian gulf, Euboleus his son, all whom
together with the two goddesses that one gulte did swallow up, and thereupon
they have a hogsty in their ceremonies: which the women in the cities
there-aboutes observe in diverse fashions: there is the Thesmophoria, the
Scirophoria, and the I^ephabiliphoria, in all which was there diverse laments
for Ceres her loss and Periphattes rape. This Eusebius, as Trapezuntius
interprets him, for the greek book I have not. The women priests carried
baskets also covered, one full of flowers, portending the spring, another with
ears of corn, for autumn. These Virgins were called, (...), basket-bearers:
Tully mentions them against Varro, though Porp^y upon Horace affirm that the
Ca^phere were Juno's servants at her sacrifices at At^. (...).
These we speak of, Clement says were called orgies, of the anger that was
between Ceres ^d I^. Catullus. Pars obscura cauis celebrabant Orgia cistis:
Orgia qu^ frustra cupiunt audire prophani. Orgie^.

Part keeping the Orgies, hollow baskets bare:
The Orgies, which none unhallowed must come near.
But all the Greek sacrifices almost, were called Orgies. Strab. lib. 10. Ser.
in 4. Aeneid. Therein were t^s many images. 1. The creators, borne by the
chiefe-priests, the mysteries expounder. 2. the sons, borne by the
taper-bearer. 3. the Moons, by the altar-seruant, or sacrificer. 4. Mercuries,
by the crier: and 5. a woman's. () as Priapus was borne in Dionysius his
sacrifices, as Theodoritus witnesses: who affirms that Jove lay both with
Ceres the mother and P^serpina the daughter: And to those sacrifices might none
but the invited be admitted, not any whose conscience accused him of any
crime, for so the crier proclaimed. Nero durst not come there, for his guilt:
and Antoninus would needs be invited, to prove himself innocent. Yet
whether it were at the great sacrifices or no, I know not, for at Athens it was
a ^aw (...) no stranger should be admitted them. Aristoph. Commentator. So
Hercules desiring (...), though he were a friend, and Jove's son, yet it being
against the law, they ordain the ^aller sacrifices Elensiuae, where any
stranger might have access, calling the former, Ceres her sacrifices, the
later Proserpina's: which he says were but (...) etc. As a purgation and
preparation to the greater. The coat which they put on at their initiation
must never come of vnti^ i^ be so ragged, that it be past wearing: Some say
they kept them to make childrens s^g clothes off. And thus for Greece. Rome
had a great yearly feast of Ceres, which mou^ers might not be present at. Liu.
They had also the marriages of Ceres or Orcus, wherein it was an offense to
bring wine, but frankincence only and tapers, whereof Plautus says, I (...)
you are about Ceres feasts, for I see no wine: Aulular. Of this sacrifice read
Macrob. (...) and Seruius upon Virgils Georgikes lib. 1. upon this place.
Cuncta tibi Cerem pubes agrestis adoret,
Cui tu lacte fauos, and miti dilue Baccho.
Call all the youth unto these rites divine,
And offer Ceres honey, milk, or wine.


^re were also the Cerealia games in Ceres honor, whereof Politian a great
scholar has Cerealia.
(...) in his Miscellanea: whose judgment least some be mistaken by, I will
write mine (...) hereof. First the old Circian games that Romulus ordained to
Hipposeidon and these (...) are not al one: these are far later in original:
Again these later were kept long (...) Memmius his time. Liu. namely the
sixteenth year of the second African war by (...) ^ates decree. Gn.
Seruillus Geminus being dictator, and Aaelius Paetus Master of the (...). Nor
do Tacitus or Ovid comptroll this, in saying the Cerealia were kept in the
great (...). The Cereal Aediles were made for the corns provision not for the
plays though (...) made some to Ceres. But I marvel that Politian thinks
that that Memmius whom (...) made Aedile, was he to whom Lucretius dedicated
his book or (if it shall please you) Politian.
(...) son, when as Lucretius died in the second consulships of Pompey and
Crassus, and the work was written in Memmius his youthful days. True it is
one error begets many. I would not have any man think this spoken in
derogation from the glory of so great a scholar; for (...) is not to be
rejected for being deceived, he was but a man. My words aim at the ^fit of
the most, not at detraction from him or any. If any man think otherwise (which
is (...)) know he, that it is no injury to reprehend either Politian or any
man else of the cunning^ in matter of antiquity: But of the Cerealia let this
suffice.

Of the obscaenity of Bacchus sacrifices. CHAP. 21.
But now for Libers (a) sacrifices, who rules not only all moisture of seeds
and fruits whereof wine seems principal, but of creatures also: To ^ibe
their full turpitude, It irkes me for loss of time, but not for these men's
^ish pride. Amongst a great deal of necessary omission, let this go, whereas
he says that Libers sacrifices were kept with such license in the highways
in Italy, that they adored men's priuities in his honor: their beastliness
exulting, and scorning any more secrecy. This beastly sight upon his feast
days was honorably mounted upon a (b) wagon, and first rode thus through the
country, and then was brought into the city in this pomp. But at (c) Lauinium
they kept a whole month holy to Liber, using that space all the beastly words
they could devise, until the beastly spectacle had passed through the market
place, and was placed, where it used to stand. And then must the most honest
matron of the town crown it with a garland. Thus for the seeds success was
Liber adored: and to expel witchcraft from the fields, an honest matron must
do that in public, which an whore should not do upon the stage if the matrons
looked on. For this was Saturn accounted insufficient in this charge, that the
unclean soul finding occasion to multiply the gods, and by this uncleanness
being kept from the true GOD, and prostitute unto the false, through more
unclean desires, might give holy names to these sacriledges, and entangle it
self in eternal pollution with the devils.

L. VIVES.
LIbers (a) sacrifices] Kept by the Thebans on mount Cythaeron every third
year: in the Bacchus his sacrifices.
nights and called therefore Nyctilena. Seru. and of the years, Trieretica, or
Triennalia. Herein were the Phally, (that is huge privy members) used. Herodot.
Plutarch, de cupid. op. The Agiptians used little statues with such huge
perpendents: the other nations carried the Phallus.
members only about, for fertility sake. The feasts were called Phallogogia.
Theodoret. lib. 3. Why Priapus and Bacchus have feasts together, there be
diverse reasons. 1. Because they Philagogia.
were companions. 2. because without Bacchus', Priapus can do naught, and
therefore was held the son of Bacchus and Uenus. 3. because Bacchus is Lord
of seed, whereof Priapus is the chiese instrument, and therefore god of
gardens, and has his feasts kept by the husbandmen with great joy. Now
Diodorus says that Osyris (whom he counts Bacchus) being cut in pieces by
Typhon, and every friend bearing part away, none would take the privy member,
so it was cast into Nyle. Afterward Isis having revenged his murder, got all
his body again, only that she wanted, and so consecrated an Image thereof,
and for her comfort honored it more then all the other parts, making feasts to
it, and calling it Phallus at the Priests first institution; Nazianzene
reckneth both Phalli and Ithyphalli: but I think they Ithyphall^.
differ not, but that for the more erection it was called Ithyphallus, of the
greek. (b) Waggons] To yoke mise in wagons says Horace in his Satyrs. lib.
2. It is adiminutiue of waynes: Plaustra: much difference is about Plaustra and
Plostra, U. Probus is for Plostra: Florius Plostelum.
told Vespasian he must say plaustra, so the next day he called him Flaurus,
for Florus. Suctonius. (c) At Lauinium] A town in Latinum, built by Aeneas and
named after his wife. Alba longa was a colony of this: of Alba, before is
sufficient spoken. Lauinium.


Of Neptune, Salacia, and Venilia. CHAP. 22.
NOw Neptune had one Salacia to wife, gouernesse (they say) of the lowest parts
of the sea, why is Venilia joined with her, but to keep the poor soul
prostitute to a multitude of devils? But what says this rare Theology to
stop our Venilia. Salacia.
mouths with reason? Venilia is the flowing tide. Salacia the ebbing: What?
two goddesses, when the watter ebbing, and the water flowing is al one? See how
the souls lust (a) flows to damnation! Though this water going be the same
returning, yet by this vanity are two more devils invited, to whom the soul
(b) goes, and never returns. I pray the Varro, or you that have read so
much, and boast what you have learned, explayne me this, not by the eternal
unchanging nature which is only god, but by the worlds soul, and the parts,
which you hold true gods. The error wherein you make Neptune to be that part
of the worlds soul that is in the sea, that is somewhat tolerable: but is the
water ebbing and the water flowing two parts of the world, or of the worlds
soul? which of all your wits contains this unwise credence? But why did your
ancestors ordain ye those two goddesses, but that they would provide that you
should not be ruled by any more gods, but by many more devils, that delighted
in such vanities: But why has Salacia, that you call the inmost sea, being
there under her husband, lost her place? for you bring her up above when she
is the ebbing tide: Has she thrust her husband down into the bottom for
entertaining Venilia to his harlot.

L. VIVES.
LUst (a) flowes] Alluding to the sea. (b) Goes and never returneth] Spoken of
the damned, that neither have ease nor hope at all. He alludeth to Job. 10.
verse. 21. Before I go and Hell.
shall not return to the land of darkness and shadow of death, even the land
of misery and darkness, which both the words themselves show, and the learned
comments affirm is meant of hell.

Of the earth, held by Varro to be a goddess, because the worlds soul (his
god) does penetrate his lowest part, and communicates his essence therewith.
CHAP. 23.
WE see one earth, filled with creatures: yet being a mass of elemental bodies
and the worlds lowest part, why call they it a goddess? because it is
fruitful? why are not men gods then that make it so with labor, not with
worship? No, the part of the worlds soul (say they) contained in her, ma^eth
her divine: good: as though that soul were not more apparent in man: without
all question, yet men are no gods: and yet which is most lamentable, are
subjected so that they adore the inferiors as gods, such is their miserable
error. Varro in his book of Varro his degrees of souls.
the select gods, puts (a) three degrees of the soul in all nature. One,
living in all bodies vnsensitiue, only having life: this he says we have in
our bones, nails and hair: and so have trees living without sense. Secondly,
the power of sense diffused through our eyes, ears, nose, mouth and touch.
Thirdly, the highest degree of the soul, called the mind, or intellect:
confined (b) only unto The intellect.
man's fruition: wherein because men are like gods, that part in the world he
calls a god, and in use a Genius. So divides he the worlds soul into three
degrees. First stones and wood, and this earth insensible which we tread on.
Secondly the worlds sense, the heavens, or Ether: thirdly, her soul set in
the stars (his believed gods) and by them descending through the earth,
goddesie Tellus: and when it comes in the sea, it is Neptune: stay, now back a
little from this moral theology, whether he went to refresh himself after
his toil in these straites: back again I say to the civil, let us plead in
this court a little. I say not yet, that if the earth and stones, be like our
nails and bones, they have no more intellect, then sense. Or if our bones and
nails be said to have intellect, because we have it, he is as very a fool
that calls them gods in the world, as he that should ^me them men in us. But
this perhaps is for Philosophers, let us to our civil theme: For it may be
though he lift up his head a little to the freedom of (...) natural
theology, yet coming to this book and knowing what he had to ^oe, he looks
now and then back, and says this, least his ancestors and others should be
held to have adored Tellus and Neptune to no end. But this I say, seeing ^th
only is that part of the worlds soul that penetrateth earth: why is it not
(...) entirely one goddess, and so called Tellus? which done, where is Orcus,
(...) and Neptunes brother, father Dis? and where is Proserpina his wife that
some opinions there recorded, hold to be the earths depth not her fertility? If
they say the soul of the world that passes in the upper part is Dis, and that
in the lo^er, Proserpina, what shall then become of Tellus? for thus is she
entirely divided into halfes: that where she should be third, there is no
place, unless some will say that Orcus and Proserpina together are Tellus; and
so make not three but one or two of them: yet 3. they are held, and worshipped
by 3. several sorts of rites, by their altars, priests and statues, and are
indeed three devils that do draw the deceived soul to damnable whoredom. But
one other question: what part of the worlds soul is Tellumo? No, says he, the
earth has two powers, a masculine to produce, and a feminine to receive, this
is Tellus and that Tellumo: But why then do the Priests (as he shows) add
other two and make them four? Tellumo, Tellus, (c) Altor Rusor? for the two
first, you are answered: why Altor? of Alo, to nourish, earth nourishes all
things. Why Rusor? of Rursus, again, all things turn again to earth.

L. VIVES.
Puts three (a) degrees] Pythagoras and Plato say the soul is of three
kinds, vegetable, The souls two parts.
sensitive, reasonable. Man's soul (say they is twofold): rational and
irrational: the later twofold, affectionate to ire and to desire: all these
they do locally separate. Plat. de Rep. l. 4. Aristotle to the first three
adds a fourth, locally motive. But he distinguishes those parts of the
reasonable soul in use only, not in place nor essence, calling them but
powers, referred unto actions. Ethic. Alez. Aphrodiseus shows how powers are
in the soul. But this is not a fit theme for this place. But this is all: it
is but one soul that augmenteth the hair and bones, profits the senses, and
replenisheth the heart and brain. (b) Only vnto] This place has diversities
of reading, some leave out part, and some do alter: but the sense being
unaltered, a note were further frivolous. (c) Altor] Father Dis and Proserpina
had many names in the ancient ceremonies. He, Dis, Tellumo, Altor, Rusor,
Cocytus: she Uerra, Orca and N^se Dis, Proserpina, Romulus called Altellus
Tellus. Thus have the priests books them. Romulus was also called Altellus,
of nourishing his subjects so admirably against their envious borderers.
Jupiter Plutonius (says Trismegistus) rules sea and land, and is the nourisher
of all fruitful and mortal fowls. In Asclepio.

Of earths surnames and significations, which though they arose of diverse
originals, yet should they not be accounted diverse Gods. CHAP. 24.
THerefore earth for her four qualities ought to have four names, yet not to
make four gods. One Jove serves to many surnames, and so does one Juno: in all
which the multitude of their powers constitute but one God and one goddess,
not producing multitude of gods. But as the vilest women are sometimes ashamed
of the company that their lust calls them into, so the polluted soul,
prostitute unto all hell, though it loved multitude of false gods, yet it
som-times lothed them. For Varro, as shaming at this crew, would have Tellus to
be but one goddess. They (a) call her (says he) the Great mother, and her
Tymbrell is a sign of the earths roundnesse: the turrets on her head, of the
towns: the seats about her, of her eternal stability when all things else
are moved: her (...) Priests signify that such as want seed must follow the
earth that contains all: their violent motions about her do advise the
tille^s of earth not to sit idle, for there is still work for them. The
Cymballs signify the noyses with plough irons, etc. in husbandry, they are of
brass, for so were these instruments (b) before Iron was found out. The tame
Lion signified that the roughest land might by tillage be made fertile. And
then he adds, that she was called Mother earth, and many other names, which
made them think her several gods. They held earth to be Ops (says he)
because help, (Opis) makes her more fruitful: Mother, for hi^ general
production. Great for giving meat. Proserpina, because the fruit do creep
(Proserpunt) out of her. Vesta, for that the herbs are her vesture: Earths
surnames.
and so says he are other deities fitly reduced unto her by several respects.
But if she be one goddess, (as in truth she is not) why run ye to so many?
Let one have all these names, and not be many goddesses. But errors power
prevailed to draw Varro fearfully after it: for he says; neither does this
control their opinions that take these for many gods. There may be one thing
(says he) and many things therein. Well suppose that many things are in a man:
therefore many men? many things are in a goddess, therefore many goddesses?
But let them divide, combine, multiply, reply and imply what they will. These
are the mysteries of great Mother-earth, all referred to seed and husbandry.
But does your tymbrell, turrets, eunuchs, rauings, cymballs and Lions in all
this reference, promise eternal life? do your gelded Galli serve her to show
that seed-wanters must follow the earth, and not rather that the following of
her brought them to this want? for whether does the service of this goddess
supply their want or bring them to want? is this to explain, or to explode
rather? Nor is the devils power herein ever a iotte observed, that could exact
such cruelties, and yet promise naught worth the wishing. If earth were held no
goddess, men would lay their hands upon her and strengthen themselves by her,
and not upon themselves, to eneruate themselves for her: If she were no
goddess, she would be made so fertaile by others hands, that she should
never make men barren by their own hands. And whereas in Libers sacrifices an
honest Matron must crown that Libers sacri^ces.
beastly member, her husband perhaps standing by blushing and sweating (if he
have any shame) and whereas in marriages the bride must ride upon (c) Priapus
his ^llstaffe, these are far more (d) lighter and contemptible then that
cruel obscaenity, and obscaene cruelty: for here the devils illude both sexes,
but makes neither of them their own murderers. There they fear the
bewitching of their corn, here they fear not the vn-manning of themselves.
There the bride (e) is not so shamed that she either loses chastity or
virginity, here the massacre of manhood is such the gelded person is left
neither man nor woman.

L. VIVES.
THey (a) call her] Ovid Fast. 4. gives another reason of the Great mothers
worship. The Cybeles sacrifyces.
Cymballs and Tymbrils were imitations of the Corybantes, that kept Jove with
the noise of their shields and helmes: the tymbrels stand for the bucklers
being lether, and the Cymbals for the helmes being brass. The turrets are for
that she built first towers in Cities, the Eunu^s she likes for Atys his
sake: she is borne by Lions because she tameth them. (b) Before I^,] This is
left out by some. (c) Priapus his Colestaffe] A Metaphor, Scapus is the stalk
of any herb, but used in Uarro and Pliny for a man's privy member, that is
erected like a stake or stalk: Scapus is also a beam or iuncture in building.
Vitr. (d) Lighter] so is the old ma^scripts, Scapus.
(e) Is not so] Priapus was used to help the husband in taking away the
maiden^ad of the wife, and the wife in fruitfulness of offspring.

What exposition the Greek wise men give of the gelding of Atys. CHAP. 25.
But we have forgotten Atys and his meaning all this while, in memory of whose
love the (a) Galli are gelded. But the wise Greeks forget not this goodly
matter. Because of the earths front in the spring, being fairer than, then
ever. (b) Por^ a famous Philosopher says Atys signifies the flowers, and was
therefore guel^, because the flower falls off before the fruit. So then, not
(c) Atys, man, or manlike, but his privy parts only were compared to the
flowers, for they fe^l of in his spring: nay many fell not of, were cut of; nor
followed any fruit upon this, but rather lasting sterility, what then does all
that which remained of him after his gelding signify? whether is that
referred? the meaning of that now? or because they could find no reference for
this remainder, do they think that he became that which the fable shows,
and as is recorded? Nay Varro is ours against them in that justly, and will not
affirm it, for his learning told him it was false.

L. VIVES.
THe Galli (a) are] Cybele's priest: of these we have spoken. Festus says
they gelded themselves, Why the Gall^ geld themselves.
because having violated their parents name they would never be parents.
Bardesanes the Syrian says that King Abgarus made all their hands to be cut
off that had used themselves so: and so this ceremony ceased: Macrobius
interprets the passages of Cybele and Atys, Ve^s and Adonis, Isys and Osyris,
all one way: calling the women the earth, and the men the sun. (b) Porphiry]
Of him elsewhere: this place is in his book De rational. n^. Deor. Atys and
Adonis (says he) are the fruits, but Atys especially the flowers that fall
e^e the fruit be ^ipe, and so they say he was gelded, because the fading
flowers bear no fruit. ((...)) Atys man or man's like] Alluding to Plato's
riddle. De rep. 5. A man and no man, having sight and no sight, smote and smote
not, a bird and no bird, with a stone and no stone, upon a tree and no tree:
that is, An eunuch, purblinde, threw and but touched a Batte with a pumyce
stone, ^ittng Plato hi^ ^iddle.
in an Elderne tree.

Of the filthiness of this Great Mothers sacrifices. CHAP. 26.
NO more would Varro speak of the Ganymedes that were consecrated unto the
said Great mother, against all shame of man and woman: who with anointed heads,
painted faces, loose bodies and lascivious paces, went even until yester-day
up and down the streets of Carthage, basely begging (a) of the people
where-withall to sustain themselves. Of these have not I (to my knowledge)
(b) read any thing: their expositions, tongues and reasons were all ashamed and
to seek. Thus the Great mother exceeded all her sonne-gods, not in greatness
of deity, but of obscaenity. Ianus himself was not so monstrous as this (c)
monster: he was but deformed in his statue: but this was both bloody and
deformed in her sacrifices. He had members of stone given him, but she takes
members of flesh from all her attendance. This shame, all Jove's letcheries come
short of: he besides his female rapes, defamed heaven but with one (d)
Ganimede, but she has both shamed heaven, and polluted earth with multitudes
of (e) professed and public Sodomites. It may be thought that Saturn that
gelded his father comes near, or exceedes this filthiness: O but in his
religion men are rather killed by others then guelded by themselves. He eat
up his sons say the Poets, let the Physical say what they will: history
says he killed them: yet did not the Romans learn to sacrifice their sons
to him from the Africans. But this Great mother brought her Eunuchs even into
the Roman temple, keeping her bestiall reakes of cruelty even there: thinking
to help the Romans to strength, by cutting away their strengths fountains.
What is Mercuries theft, Venus her lust, the whoredom and the turpitude of the
rest (which were they not commonly sung upon stages, we would relate) what are
they all to this foul evil, that the Mother of the gods only had as her
peculiar? chiefly the rest being held but poetical fictions, as if the Poets
had invented this too, that they were pleasing to the gods? So the^ it was the
Poets audatiousnesse that recorded them, but whose is it to exhibit them at
the gods urgent exacting them, but the gods direct obscaenity, the devils
confessions, and the wretched souls illusions? But this adoration of Cibele by
gelding ones self the Poets never invented, but did rather abhor it then
mention i^: Is any one to be dedicated to these select Gods for blessedness
of life hereafter, that cannot live honestly under them here, but lies in
bondage to such unclean filthiness; and so many dammed devils? but all this
(say they) has reference to the world: nay look if it be not to the wicked.
(f) that cannot be referred to the world that is found to be in the world?
But we do seek a mind that trusting in the true religion does not worship
the world as his God, but commends it for his sake, as his admired work, and
being expiate from all the stains of the world, so approaches to him that made
the world: we see these selected gods more notified then the rest: not to the
advancement of their merits, but the diuul ging of their shames; this proves
them men, as not only Po^es but histories also do explain: for that which
Virgill says Aen. 8. Primus ab aethereo venit Saturnus Olympo,
Arma Iouis fugiens, and regnis exul ademptis.
An (g) Whence Saturn came Olimpus was the place,
Flying Jove's arms, exiled in wretched case.


d so as follows, the same has (h) Euemerus written in a continuate history,
translated into latin by Ennius: whence because much may be taken both in
Greek and also in Latin that has bin spoken against these error, by others
before us, I cease to urge them further.

L. VIVES.
B^g. (a) Of.] These Galli were allowed to beg of the people by a law that
Metellus made O^id, shows the reason in these verses. Dic inquam, parua cur
stipe quaerat opes?
Contulit aes populus de quo delubra Metellus
Fecit, ait, dandae mos stipis inde manet.
Tell me (quoth I) why beg they basely still?
Metellus, built the shrine of the towns expense,
(quoth he) and so the begging law came thence.


Cicero in his sacred and seuerest laws (of those times) charged that None but
the Idaean goddesses Priests should beg: his reason is because it fills the
mind with folly and empties [The Louanists omit this.] Ganimede*
the purse of money. [But what if Augustine or Cicero saw now how large and
rich societies go a begging to those on whom they might better bestow
something? whilst he (mean time) that gives it sits with a piece of
brown bread, and a few herbs, drinking out of an earthen put full of nothing
but water, and a great sort of children about him for whose sustenance he
toyleth day and night: and he that beggeth of him is a rich beggar, fed with
white and purest bread, patrridge and capons: and soaked in spiritfull and
delicious wines?] (b) Red any thing.] Of their interpretation. (c) Monsters.]
He seems to mean Priapus. (d) Ganimede.] Son to Troos King of Phrigia, a
delicate boy: Tantalus in hunting forced him away, and gave him to Jove in
Crete: Jove abused his body: The Poets fable how Jove caught him up in the
shape of an eagle, and made him his chief cupbearer, in place of Hebe and
Vulcan Juno's children, and turned him into the sign Aquary. (e) Professed.]
Openly avowing their bestiall obsc^ity. (f) What cannot.] There is not any
other reading true but this. (g) Whence Saturn.] E^r to Aeneas. Uirg. Aenead.
(h) Euemerus.] Some read Homerus, falsely: for it was Eue^rus as I said that
wrote the History called Sacred.

Of the Naturalists figments that neither adore the true deity, nor use the
adoration thereto belonging. CHAP. 27.
WHen I consider the Physiologies which learned and quick witted men have
endeavored to turn into divine matters, I discover as plain as day that they
cannot have reference to ought but natural and terrestrial (though invisible)
objects, all which are far from the true God: If this extended no further
then the congruence which true religion permitted, then were their want of the
knowledge of the true God, to be deplored, and yet their abstinence from acting
or authorizing obscaenity, to be in part approved. But since that it is
wickedness to worship either body or soul for the true God (whose only
dwelling in the soul makes it happy) how much more vile is it to adore these
things with a worship neither attaining salvation nor temporal renown? and
therefore if any worldly element be set up for adoration with temple, priest or
sacrifice, which are the true Gods peculiar, or any created spirit, all were it
good and pure: it is not so ill a thing because the things used in the worship
are evil, as because they are such as are due only to his worship, to whom
all worship is due. But if any one say he worshippeth the true God in
monstrous statues, sacrifices of men, crowning of priuities, gelding, paiments
for sodomy, wounds, filthy and obscaene festival games, he does not offend
because he that he worshippeth is to be worshipped, but because he is not to
be worshipped so as he does worship him. But he that with these filthinesses,
worshippeth not God the creator of all, but a creature, be it harmless or no,
animate or dead; double is his offense to God: once for adoring that for him
which is not he; and once for adoring him with such rites as is (a) not to be
afforded unto either. But the foulness of these men's worship is plain: but
what or whom they worship, is not so, were it not for their own history that
records the gods that exacted those bestialities so terribly: so therefore
doubtless they were devils, called by their politic Theology into Idols,
and passing from thence into men's hearts.

L. VIVES.
IS (a) not to be] Nothing is to be worshipped in that manner, neither God, nor
that which is not God; for the worship of it self is wicked.

That Varro his doctrine of Theology hangs no way together. CHAP. 28.
THerefore what is it to the purpose, that so learned a man as Varro has
endeavored to reduce all these gods to heaven and earth, and cannot? they slip
from his fingers and fall away do what he can: for being to speak of the
goddesses: seeing that as I said (quoth he) in my first book of the places,
there are observed two beginnin^s of the gods, producing deities celestial and
terrestrial, as before being to speak of the masculine gods, we began with
heaven, concerning Ianus called heaven or the world: so now of the feminine
beginning with the earth, Tellus. I see how sore so good a wit is already
plunged. He is drawn by a likelihood to make heaven the agent and earth the
pacient, and therefore gives the first the masculine form, and the latter the
feminine: and yet understands not that he that gives those unto both these
two, made them both. And here-vpon he interprets (a) the Samothratians noble
mysteries so, saying that he will lay open such things thereof to his nation
as it never knew: this he promises most religiously. For he says be has
observed in Images that one thing signifies earth, another heaven, another the
abstracts of forms, (b) Plato's Ideae: he will have Jove to be heaven, Juno
earth, Minerua the Ideas: Heaven the efficient, earth the substance, Idea the
form of each effect: Now here I omit to say that Plato ascribed so much to
these forms, that he says heaven does nothing without them, but it self was
made by them. This I say, that Varro in his book of the Select gods, has
utterly overthrown this distinction of those three: Heaven he places for the
masculine, for the feminine, earth: amongst which he puts Minerua, that but
now was above heaven. And Neptune a masculine God, is in the sea, therefore
rather in earth then heaven. Father Dis, or (c) Pluto a male-god, and their
brother, he is also in earth vpmost, and Proserpina his wife under him. How can
those heauen-gods now be earth-gods, or these earth-gods have rooms above or
reference to heaven? what sobriety, soliditie, or certainty is in this
discourse? And earth is all their mother, that is served with nothing but
sodomy, cutting and gelding. Why then does he say, Ianus the gods chief, and
Tellus the goddesses, where error neither allows one head, nor fury a like
time? why go they vainly about to refer these to the world, (e) as if it
could be adored for the true God, the work for the maker? That these can have
no reference thither, the truth has convinced: refer them but unto dead men,
and devils, and the controversy is at an end.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Samothracians] Of these gods I have already spoken. They are Heaven
and earth, The Samothracian gods.
I^e and Juno that are the great Samothracian gods. Uarro de ling. lat. l. 4
And Minerua also. To these three the stately temple of the Capitol was
dedicated. In Greek it is not well known who these Samothracian gods were.
Apollonius his interpretor has these words. they call the Samothracian gods,
Cahiri, Nnaseas says that their names are Axierus, that is, Ceres. (...),
Proserpina, Aziocersus, father Dis and Mercury their attendant as Dionysodorus
says. A^n says that Jove begotte Iasion and Dardanus upon Electra: The name
Cabeiri serves to derive from the mountains Caberi in Phrygia, whence these
gods were brought. S^e s^y these gods were but two, Jove the elder and
Dionysius the younger. Thus far he: He that will read the Greek, it
begins at these words: (...), etc. Now Iasion they say was Ceres son, and
called Caberus the brother of Dardanus: others say la^ loved and lay with Ceres
and was therefore slain by thunder. He that will read more of the Cabeiri,
let him go to Strabo. lib. 10. (b) Plato's Idaea,) So called of (...), a form
or Cabeiri.
shape, for he that will make a thing, first contemplateth of the form, and
fitteth his work therein: A Painter draws one picture by another: this is his
Idaea, and therefore it is defined, Platos Idea.
a form of a future act. The Ideae of all things are in God, which in framing
of the world and cach part thereof, he did work after: and therefore Plato
makes three beginnings of all: the mind; that is God the worker: the matter
or substance of the world: and the form that it is framed after: And God
(says he in his Tymeus) had an Idea or form which he followed in his whole
fabric of nature. So that not only the particular spaces of the world, but
the (...), heaven and the whole universe ((...)) had the beginning from an
Idea. They are e^all, vncorporall, and simple forms of things (says Apuleius
Dogmat. Platon) and from hence had God the figures of all things present and
future, nor can more the one Idea be and in one whole kind of creature,
according to which all of that kind are wrought as (...) of w^e. Where these
Idea's are, is a deeper question and diversely held of the Platonists: of that
here-after. (c) Pluto] Of (...), gain. Dis in Latin, quasi dives, ritche: for
out of the (...) bowels, (his treasury) do men fetch up stones of worth, and
mettalls. And therefore was Pluto.
^e said to dwell under the land of Spain, as Strabo says: because there was
such store of mettal^es, corn, cattle, and means of commodity. (d) One head]
for Ianus had two heads, and Cybels Prie^s were mad. (e) As if it) or, which if
they could no godly person would worship ye world.

That all that the Naturalists refer to the worlds parts, should be referred
to God. CHAP. 29.
FOr this their natural theology refers all these things to the world,
which (would they avoid scruple of sacrilege) they should of right refer to
the true God the worlds maker and creator of all souls and bodies. Observe but
this, we worship God, not heaven, nor earth (of which (a) two parts of the
world con^h:) nor a soul or souls diffused through all the parts thereof. but
a God that made heaven and earth and all therein, he made all creatures that
live, brutish, and senseless, sensitive, and reasonable: (b) And now to run
through the operations of this true and high GOD, briefly, which they reducing
to absurd and obscene The works of the ^ue God.
mysteries, induced many devils by. We worship that God that has given
motion, existence, and limits to each created nature, that knows, conteines
and disposes of all causes, that gave power to the seeds, and reason to such
as he vouchsafed: that has bestowed the use of speech upon us, that has
given knowledge of future things to such spirits as he pleases: and
prophecieth by whom he please; that for man's due correction, orders and
ends all wars and worldly tribulations: that created the violent and
vehement fire of this world, for the temperature of this great and huge mass:
that framed and guides all the waters: that set up the sun as the worlds
clearest light, and gave it congruent act and motion: (c) that takes not all
power from the spirits infernal: that afforded nourishment moist or dry unto
every creature according to the temperature: that founded the earth and makes
it fertile: that gives the fruits thereof to men and beasts: that knows and
orders all causes, principal and secondary: that gives the moon her motion:
and has set down ways in heaven and earth to direct our change of place:
that has graced the wit he created, with arts and sciences, as ornaments to
nature: that instituted copulation for propagation sake: that gave men the use
of the earthly fire to meet by and use in their conuentions. T^se ^re the
things that learned Varro either from others doctrine or his own (...)
strives to ascribe unto the selected Gods by a sort of (I wotte nere (...))
^aiurall interpretations.

L. VIVES.
WH^ (a) two parts] Genesis 1. 1. In the beginning God created heaven, and earth.
Which (...) make the whole world, including in heaven all things celestial, in
earth all things mortal (b) And now] An Epilogue of all the gods powers which
he has disputed of. (c) That taketh] Read. Job. 40. and 41. of the devils
power from God.

The means to discern the Creator from the creatures, and to avoid the
worshipping of so many gods for one, because there are so many powers in one.
CHAP. 30.
But these are the operation of one only and true God: yet as one and the sa^e
god in all pla^, all in all, not included in place, not confined to local
qua^tie, ^sible and immutable, filling heaven and earth with his present power,
His nature (a) needing no help. So does he dispose of all his works of
creation, ^t each one has the peculiar motion permitted it. For though it can
do no^ without him, yet is not any thing that which he is. He does much by his
Ange^ Angels.
(...) only he makes them also blessed. So that imagine he do send his Angel^
^o (...) for some causes, yet he makes not the men blessed by his Angels, b^
by hi^ self he does the angels* from this true and everlasting God, and from
no^ ^ther hope we for life eternal.

L. VIVES.
((...). N^ding] as the other gods do, that must be feign to have assistance in
their faculty and power

The Pee^r benefits (besides his co^on bounty) that God bestows upon his
servants. CHAP. 26.
FOr of him, besides these benefits whereof we have spoken partly, such as
(...) left to the administration of nature and bestowed both upon good and bad,
we (...) a particular bounty of his love particular only to the good: for
although we (...) never yield him sufficient thanks for our being, life,
sense, and understanding of him. yet for that he has not forsaken us when we
were inuolued in sin, tur^d away from his contemplation, and blinded with
love of black iniquity, for that (...) has sent us his Word, his only Son,
by whose incarnation and extr^ passion for us we might conceive how (a) dearly
god esteemed us, and (...) singular sacrifice be purged from our guilt, and by
the illumination of (...) spirit in our hears, tread down all difficulties,
and ascend to that eternal (...) ineffable sweetness of his contemplation: what
heart, how many tounges (...) to return sufficient thanks for this last
benefit?

L. VIVES.
(...) (...) dearly.] Romans 8. 32. Who spared not his own son but gave him
for us all to death. etc.

(...) That the Mystery of our redemption by Christ was not obscure in the
precedent times, but continually intimated in diverse significations. CHAP. 32.
(...) Mystery of Eternal life, even from the first original of mankind, was
(...) the angels declared unto such as God voutchsafed, by diverse signs (...)
^all shadows congruent to the times wherein they were showed. And (...)
^ebrewes being gathered into a common wealth to keep the memory (...) ^ty, had
diverse that prophesied the things that should fall out from the (...) of Christ
unto (a) this very day: some of which Prophets (b) understood (...) ^cies, and
some did not. Afterward they were pispersed amongst the (...) leave them (c)
the testimony of the scriptures which promised e^ernal (...) Jesus Christ: for
not only all the Prophecies, which were in words, and (...) ^epts which had
reference to actions and manners, were therein con^ but all their sacrifices
also, the Priesthoods, temple or tabernacle, altars, ^ies, feasts, and what
ever has reference to that divine worship of God, All things fulfilled in
Christ.
(...) presages, and prophetical significations of that eternal life bestowed
by (...) all which we now believe either are fulfilled, or see are now in
fulfilling, (...) shall be fulfilled hereafter in him.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) this very day.] For the Prophecies are not yet at an end: and though
the sum (...) (...) all were fu^filled in Christ, yet by him diverse things
since are to come to pass (...) particularly been intimated in the
prophecies: as that (not in one prophet only) (...) ^ring together of the
dispersed Israel, at the end of the world. (b) Understood.] All How the
Prophets understood the prophecy both Heathen and others.
(...) ^phets understood not their prophecies, nor did those that understood
part vnder^ (...) they spoake not themselves but by Gods inspira^ion, whose
counselles they (...) fully acquainted with: nor did God use them as men
skillful in future events, but (...) as he meant to speak to the poeple by:
yet deny we not but that the sum of all their (...), th^ing of the Messiah
was revealed to them by God almighty. The gentiles (...) of opinion that the
Sybills and the other Prophets understood not all their presages, (...) ^ey
spoke them at such times as they were rapt beyond their reason, and having put
(...) proper minds, were filled with the deity. And therefore Iamblicus says
that the (...) and sober that the Sibilles and prophets are in their
prophesying, the dasker and obscurer their prophecies are: and then they speak
plainly and clearly when they are wholly Enthusiasticall. In mysteriis. (c) The
testimonie] That the scriptures might be dispersed throughout the world,
wherein the consequents of Christ's coming and suffering were so plainly
described, that none that had seen or heard of Christ's life and doings, could
deny that he it wa^of whom they were prophesied.

That Christianity only is of power to lay open the Devils subtilty and
delight, in illuding of ignorant men. CHAP. 33.
THis only true religion is of power to lay open that the Gentiles gods are
Who were the Gntiles gods.
most unclean spirits, desiring upon the occasion of some departed souls, or
under the shapes of some earthly creatures, to be accounted gods, and in their
proud impurity taking pleasure in those obscaenities as in divine honors,
maligning the conversion of all men's souls unto the true God. From whose
beastly and abominable tyranny a man then gets free, when he lays his
belief upon him, who by his rare example of humillity declared from what
height and for what pride those wicked fiendes had their fall. Hence arose
those routes of gods, whereof partly we have spoken, and others of other
nations, as well as those we now are in hand with, the Senate of selected
gods: selected indeed, but for villainy, not for virtue. Whose rites Varro
seeking by reason to reduce to nature, and to cover turpitude with an honest
cloak, can by no means make them square together: because indeed the causes
that he held (or would have others hold) for their worship, are no such as he
takes them, nor causes of their worship. For if they, or their like were so,
though they should not concern the true God, nor life eternal which true
religion must afford, yet their color of reason would be some mitigation for
the absurd acts of Ignorance: which Varro did endeavor to bring about in
diverse their theater-fables, or temple-mysteries: wherein he freed not the
theaters for their correspondence with the temples, but condemned the temples
for their correspondence with the theaters: yet endeavoring with natural
reasons to wipe away the filthy shapes that those presentiments imprinted in the
senses.

Of Numa his books, which the Senate for keeping their mysteries in secret,
did command should be burned. CHAP. 34.
But contrariwise, we do find (as Varro himself said of Numa his books) that
these natural reasons given for these ceremonies could no way be allowed of:
nor worthy of their priests reading, no not so much as their secret reserving.
For now I will tell ye what I promised in my third book to relate in
convenient place: One (a) Terentius (as Varro has it in his book de Cultu
deorum.) had some ground near to mount Ianiculus, and his servants plowing
near to N^ his tomb, the plough turned up some books, containing the
ceremonies institutions: (b) Terentius brought them into the city to the
Praetor, who having looked in them, brought this so weighty an affair before
the Senate: where having read some of the first causes why he had instituted
this and that in their religion; The Senate agreed with dead Numa, and like (c)
religious fathers, gave order to the Praetor for the burning of them.

Every one here may believe as he list: nay let any contentious mad patron of
absurd vanity say here what he list. Suffices it, I show that the causes that
N^ their King gave for his own institutions, ought neither to be showed to
people senate, no nor to the Priests themselves: and that Numa by his
unlawful (...) came to the knowledge of such deuillish secrets as he was
worthy to be Numa, founder of the Roman religion.
(...) ^ded for writing of. Yet though he were a King that feared no man, he
du^ for all that either publish them, or abolish them: publish them he would
no^ ^are of teaching wickedness: burn them he durst not for fear of offendi^
devils: so he buried them where he thought they would be safe, (d) not (...)
^he turning up of his grave by a plough. But the Senate fearing to re^ their
ancestors religion, and so agreeing with Numa's doctrine, yet held (...) ^kes
too pernicious either to be buried again (least men's madder cu^ should seek
them out) or to be put to any use but burning: to the end (...) seei^g they
must needs stick to their old superstition, they might do it with ^ame by
concealing the causes of it, whose knowledge would have distur^ whole city.

L. VIVES.
(...) Terentius] The story is written by Liuy, Ualerius, Plutarch and
Lactantius. Liuy (...) ^erius his ordinary follower, say that Q. Petilius found
the books. Pliny, (out of (...)) that Gn. Terentius found them in one chest,
not two. Liuy calls that years (...) C. Bebius Pamphilus, and M. Amilius.
Lepidus: for whom Hemina puts P. Cor^ ^gus: after Numa his reign DXXXV of
the books, the several opinions are (...). 13. cap. 13. (b) Terentius]
Petilius they said: some say he desired the Praetor they (...) ^ead: others that
he brought a Scriuener to read them. The history in Liuy lib. 40. (...) and
Pliny lib. 1. It Is sufficient to show the places: He says he brought them
in^, for though Numa's tomb were in the city (namely in the foureteenth
region, (...)) yet being beyond Tyber, such as came to the Senate house seemed
to come out (...) ^bes, or country. (c) Religious fathers] as touched with
fear that religion should (...) by the publication of those books. Some read
religious in reference unto books: (...) ^ng scruples of religion in men's
minds, for that is the signification of the Latin (...) any man will read it
irreligious. (d) Not fearing] It was a great and religious (...) ^as had over
Sepulchers of old: none might violate or pull them down, it was a The re^rence
of Sepulchers.
(...) twelve tables, and also one of Solons and Numa's, and of most old
law-giuers, Greeks ^es: belonging rather to their religion then their civil
law, for they held Sepulchers (...) ^les of The Infernal gods, and therefore
they wrote upon them these letters: D. M. S. (...) ^anibus sacrum: A place
sacred to the gods of Hell: and their sollemnities were (...) ^cia. Cicero de
legib. lib. 2.

Of Hydromancie, whereby Numa was mocked with apparitions. CHAP. 35.
(...) N^ma himself, being not instructed by any Prophet or Angel of God,
(...) feign to fall to (d) Hydromancie: making his gods (or rather his devils)
to Hydr^mancie.
(...) in water, and instruct him in his religious institutions. Which kind of
(...) ^n says Varro, came from Persia, and was used by Numa, and afterward
(...) ^thagoras, wherein they used blood also, and called forth spirits
infernal, (...) ^ncie the greeks call it, but Necromancie or Hydromancie,
whether ye like, (...) it is that the dead seem to speak. How they do these
things, look they Necromancie.
(...): for I will not say that their laws prohibited the use of such things
in (...) cities before the coming of our Savior, I do not say so, perhaps
they (...) allowed it. But hence did Numa learn his ordinances which he
published (...) publishing their causes: so afraid was he of that which he had
learned. (...) which afterward the Senate burned. But why then does Varro give
them such a sort of other natural reasons, which had they been in Numa's
books, they had (...) been burned, or else Varro's that were dedicated to (c)
Caesar the priest should have been burned for company? So that, Numa's having
nymph (a) ^ia to his wife was (as Varro says) nothing but his use of water in
Hydrom^cy. For so use actions to be spiced with falsehood and turned into
fables. So by that Hydromancy did this curious King learn his religious laws
that he gave the Romans, and which the Priests have in their books: marry
for their causes them he learned also, but kept to himself: and after a sort
entoumbed them in death with himself, such was his desire to conceal them
from the world. So then either were these books filled with the devils best
all desires, and thereby all the politic Theology that presents them such
filthynesses, made altogether execrable, or else the gods were shown by them,
to be none but men departed whom worm-eaten antiquity persuaded the world to
be gods, whereas they were devils that delighted in those obscaene
mynisteries, and under their names whom the people held divine, got place to
play their impostures, and by illusiue miracles to captiuate all their souls.
But it was Gods pro^dence.
by gods eternal secret providence, that they were permitted to confess all
to N^a who by his Hydromancy was become their friend, and yet not to warn him
rather to burn them at his death, then to bury them: for they could neither
withstand the plough that found them, nor Varro's pen, that unto all memory
has recorded them. For the devils cannot exceed their direct permission,
which GOD allows them for their merits that unto his justice seem either
worthy to be only afflicted, or wholly seduced by them. But the horrible danger
of these books, and their distance from true divinity may by this be
gathered, that the senate chose rather to burn them that Numa had but hidden,
then (e) to fear what he feared that durst not burn them. Wherefore he that
will neither have happiness in the future life, nor godliness in the present,
let him use these means for eternity. But he that will have no society with
the devil, let him not fear the superstition that their adoration exacteth,
but let T^ religi^ (...) the de^.
him stick to the true religion which conuinceth and confounds all their
villainies and abominations.

L. VIVES.
TO (a) Hydromancy] Divination by water. Divination generally was done by
diverse means: The kinds of D^.
either by Earth, G^mancy: or by fire, Pyromancy (or Ignispicina, found by
Amphiarans as Pliny says:) or by smoke, Cap^mancy: or by birds, Augury: or by
intrailes, Aruspicina: (used much by the Hetrurians, and by Ianus, Apollo's
son, amongst the Heleans, and after him by Thrasibulus who beheld a dog
holding the cut liver) or by a sieve, called Coscinomancy, o^ by hatchets,
Axinomancy, or by Herbs, Botinomancy, the witches magike, or by dead bodies,
N^mancy, or by the stars, Astrology (wherein the most excellent are called
Chaldees, though never borne in Caldaea): or by lottes, Cleromancy: or by lines
in the hand, Chiromancy, or by the face and body, Physiogn^my: or by fishes,
Icthyomancy (this Apuleius was charged with:) or by the twinkling and motion
of the eyes called Saliatio, and the Palmique augury. Then was there
interpretation of dreams, and visions, or sights of thunder or lightning,
noyses, sneezings, voices, and a thousand such arts of inuoking the devils,
which are far better unnamed. Hydromancy I have kept unto the last: because it
is my theme: It is many-fold: done either in a gl^sse bottle full of water,
wherein a Child must look, (and this is called, Gastromancy of the glasses
belly) or in a basen of water, which is called Lecanomancie, in which Strabo
says the Asians are singular. Psellus de damonibus, affirms this also and
shows how it is done: that the devils creep in the bottom, and send sorth
a still confused found, which cannot be fully understood, that they may be
held to say what ever (...) to pass, and not to lie. Many also in springs did
see apparitions of future things. (...) ^aith, that in Aegina (a part of
Achaia) there is a temple of Ceres, and a fountain (...) (...), wherein sick
persons after their offering sacrifice behold the end or continuance of (...)
^ses. Iamblichus tells of a cave at Colophon wherein was a Well that the Priest
ha^ ^ifice certain set nights, tasted of, and presently became invisible, and
gave an^ ^at asked of him. And a woman in Branchis (says he) sat upon an
Axle-tree, and (...) (...) a rod that one of the goddesses gave her, or dipping
her foot or skirt in the water, so (...) ^d prophesied. Apulcius writes out
of Uarro, that the Trallians inquiring by (...) of the end of the war of
Mithridates, one appeared in the water like Mercury (...) that looked in it,
and sung the future success of the war in 360. verses: but because of ^tion of
the boy, I think he means Gastromancie. Apolog. de Magia. This last (...)
N^a use in a fountain: Plutarch says, that there were women in Germany that
(...) events by the courses, noise and whirle-pittes of rivers. In his life of
Caesar. (...) Pythagoras] A careful respect of the times: for Numa was dead
long before (...) was borne. Some say that he was Pythagoras his scholar, and
Ovid for one: they all (...) ^ror is lighter in a Poet then in an
Historiographer. (c) Caesar] Dictator and Priest, (...) dedicates his
Antiquities. (d) Aegeria] Some held her to be one of the Muses, (...) called
the wood where she used Lucus Camaenarum, the Muses wood. Some (...) but a
water-nimphe, and that after Numa his death Diana turned her into a (...) (...)
says she was called Aegeria, ab egerendo, of putting forth, because the great
(...) s^rificed unto her for the aid she was thought to give them in the
deliue^ (...) ^estus. (e) To feare] For Numa durst not burn them for fear of
proo^ ^nger against him.

Finis lib. 7.
THE CONTENTS OF THE eight book of the City of God.
1. Of the questions of natural theology to be handled with the most excellent
Philosophers. chapter. 1. 2. Of the two kinds of Philosophers, Italian and
Ionian. 3. Of the Socraticall discipline. 4. Of Plato the chief of Socrates
his scholars, who d^d philosophy into three kinds. 5. That the chief
controversy with the Pl^sts is about theology, and that all the P^rs opinions
hereof are inferior to the^y. 6. How the Platonists conceived of the natural
part of Philosophy. 7. The excellency of the Platonists above the rest in
logic. 8. That the Platonists are to be preferred in Morallity also. 9. Of the
Philosophy that comes nearest chrtianity. 10. What the excellence of a
religions christian is in these philosophical arts. 11. Whence Plato might
have that knowledge that brought hi^ so near the christian doctrine. 12. That
the Platonists for all their good op^ of the true GOD, yet nevertheless held
tha^ worship was to be given to many. 13. Of Platoes affirmation that the gods
were all good, and lovers of virtue. 14. Of such as hold three kinds of
reasonable souls: In the gods, In ayery spirits, and in Men. 15. That neither
the ayry spirits bodies, (...) hight of place make them excel men. 16. What
Apuleius the Platonist held concerning the qualities of those ayry spirits. 17.
Whether it becomes a Man to wors^ those spirits from whose guilt he should be
p^e. 18. Of that religion that teaches that those spirits must be men's
Advocates to the good Gods. 19. Of the wickedness of art magic, depending on
these wicked spirits ministry. 20. Whether it be credible that good Gods had
rather converse with those spirits then wi^h Men. 21. Whether the Gods use the
diuills as their messengers, and be willing that they should. 22. The
renouncing of the worship of those spirits against Apuleius. 23. Hermes
Trismegistus his opinion of Idolatry, and how he might come to know the the
Aegiptian superstitions were to be abrogated. 24. How Hermes openly confessed
his progenitors error, and yet bewailed the destruction of it. 25. Of such
things as may be common in Angels and Men. 26. That all paganism was fully
contai^d in dead men. 27. Of the honor that Christians give to ^he Martirs.
FINIS.
THE EIGHTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD. Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of the questions of natural Theology to be handled with the most excellent
Philosophers. CHAP. 1.
NOw had we need to call our wits together in far more exact manner then
we used in our precedent discourses; for now we are to have to do with the
Theology called natural, nor deal we against each fellow (for this is
neither the civil, nor stage-theology, the one of which records the gods
filthy crimes, and the other their more filthy desires, and both show ^lls and
not gods) but against Philosophers whose very name (a) truly i^ed, professes
a love of wisdom. Now if GOD (b) be wisdom as Wisdom. 7. 10. Heb. 1.
(...) scripture testifies, then a true Philosopher is a lover of GOD. But
((...)) the thing thus called, is not in all men that boast of that name (for
(...) (...) are called Philosophers are not lovers of the true wisdom,) we
must (...) as we know how they stand affected by their writings, and with ^te
of this question in due fashion. I undertake not here to refute all ^ophers
assertions that concern other matters, but such only as per^ Theology, (which
(e) word in greek signifies speech of divinity) (...) that kind either. but
only such as holding a deity respecting mat^ ^iall, yet affirm that the
adoration of one unchangeable GOD suf^ unto eternal life, but that many such
are made and ordained by him, (...) ^red also for this respect. For these do
surpass Varro his opinion in (...) at the truth: for he could carry his
natural Theology no farther (...) world and the worlds soul: but these
beyond all nature living, ac^ a GOD, creator not only of this visible world,
(usually called Heaven (...) (...).) but of every living soul also: and one
that does make the reason^ blessed, by the perticipation of his incorporeall
and unchangeable (...) that these Philosophers were called Platonists, of their
first founder Plato, (...) that none that has heard of these opinions but
knows.

L. VIVES.
V^y (a) name] (...) wisdoms love: (...), wisdoms lover whose contrary is
(...), opposition to wisdom, as Speusippus says. (b) Be wisdome] Wisdom the
7. Philosophy.
P^o the Hebrews chapter 1. Do call the son, the wisdom of the father, by
which he ^de the world. c. The thing] Lactantius holds this point strongly
against the Philosophers: (...) ^eins has an elegant saying. I hate (says
he) the men that are idle indeed and Phi^all in word. But many have handled
this theme. (d) All that] A different reading, all (...) (...) p^rpose. (e)
Word in greek^] (...), speech, or discourse, or reason concerning GOD (...) is
all these.

Of the two kinds of Philosophers Italian, and Ionian, and of their authors.
CHAP. 2.
Wherefore concerning this Plato, as much as shall concern our purpose, I
will speak in brief, with a remembrance of such as before him held the same
positions. The greek monuments (a language the most famous of all the nations)
do record (a) two kinds of Philosophers: the Italian, (b) out of that part of
Italy which was whilom called Magna Grecia: and the (c) Ionian, in the The
Italian Philosophy.
country now called Greece. The Italian had their original from (d) Pythagoras
of Samos, (e) who also was the first author (they say) of the name of
Philosophers. For whereas they were before called wise men, that professed a
reformed course of life above the rest, he being asked what he professed
answered, he was a Philosopher, that is a lover and a longer after wisdom:
but to call himself, The Io^nike Philosophy.
a wise man, he held a part of too great arrogance. But the Ionikes were they
whose chie^fe was (f) Thales Milesius, (g) one of the seven Sages. But the (h)
other six were distinguished by their several courses of life, and the rules
they gave for order of life But Thales, to propagate his doctrine to
succession, searched into the secrets of nature, and committing his positions
unto monuments and letters, grew famous: but most admired he was, because he
got the knowledge of (k) Astrologicall computations, and was able to
prognosticate the eclipses of Sun and Moon, yet did he think that all the
world was made of (l) water: that it was the beginning of all the elements, and
all thereof composed. (m) Nor did he teach that this fair admired universe,
was governed by any divine or mental power. After him came (n) Anaximander his
scholar, but he changed his opinion concerning the natures of things: holding
that the whole world was not created of one thing (as Thales held of water) but
that every thing had original from his proper beginnings, which singular
beginnings he held to be infinite, and that infinite worlds were thereby
gotten, all which had their successiue original, continuance and end: (o) nor
did he mention any divine mind as rector of any part hereof. This man left (p)
Anaximenes his scholar and successor, who held all things to have their causes
from the (q) infinite air: but he professed their was gods: yet made them
creatures of the air not creators thereof. But (r) Anaxagoras his scholar
first held the divine mind to be the efficient cause of all things visible,
out of an infinite matter consisting of (s) unlike parts in themselves, and
that every kind of thing was produced according to the Species, but all by the
work of the divine essence. And (t) Diogenes another of Anaximenes his
followers held that the (u) air was the substance producing all things, but
that it was aided by the divine essence without which of it self it could do
nothing. To Anaxagoras succeeded (x) Archelaus, and (y) he also held all
things to consist of this dissimilitude of parts, yet so, as there was a
divine essence wrought in them, by dispersing and compacting of this (z)
consonance and dissonance. This man's scholar was (a) Socrates, Plato his
Master, for whose sake I have made this short recapitulation of these other.

L. VIVES.
TWo (a) kindes] The sects of Philosophers at first were so great in Greece,
that they were distinguished by the names of the Seigniories they lived in: One
of Italy, the country where Phythagoras the first Master of one opinion,
taught: another of Ionia, Thales his native soil, wherein Miletum stands,
called also (says Mela) Ionia, because it was the chief City of that
country. So did Plato and Aristotle distinguish such as were of more antiquity
then these. (b) Out of that part] At Locris (says Pliny) begins the coast
of that part of Italy called Magna Grecia: it is extended into three bares: and
confronteth the Hadriatique sea (now called Golfo De Venetia) which the
Grecians used oftentimes to cross over. I wonder that s^e have held al Italy
to be called so, because Pliny does write thus: What have the Grecia^s (a most
vanie-glorious nation) shown of themselves, in calling such a part of Italy,
Magna Grecia, Great Greece? Whereby he shows that it was but a little part
of Italy, that they (...) thus. Of the 3. baies I spoke of, one of them
contains these five Cities, Tarentum Me^us, Heraclea, Croto, and Turii: and
lies between the promontories of Sales, and La^. Mela. It is called now,
Golfo di Taranto. Here it is said Pythagoras did teach. (c) Io^ Ionia.
Ionia is a country in Asia Minor, between the Lydians, the Lycaonians, and
our sea ^ing Aeolia and Caria on the sides: this on the South Side that on the
North: Miletus is the ^se City (says Mela) both for all arts of war and
peace: the native soil of Thales the ^sopher, Tymotheus, the Musician,
Anaximander the Naturalist, and diverse other whose was have made it famous.
Thales taught his fellow citizen, Anaximander, he his fellow citizen also
Anaximenes: he, Anaxagoras of Clazomene, Pericles, Archelaus and Socrates of
Athens: and Socrates almost all Athens. (d) Pythagoras] Aristoxenus says he
was of Tyrrhe^, Phythagoras.
in ^e that the Greeks took from the Italians, he went into Egypt with King
Amasis, and r^ng back, disliking the tyrannous rule of Polycrates of Samos he
passed over to Italy. (^y who also] Cicero (Tnsc. 5. out of Heraclides of
Pontus) relates that Pythagoras being ^ked of Leontes the Phliasian King what
he professed, he answered that whereas the rest of his pros^ had called
themselves wise men, Sophi he would be called, But a lover of wisdom, a
P^pher; with a more modest respect of his glory: And hereupon the name Sophi
grew quite ^of custom, as ambitious and arrogant: and all were called
Philosophers after that, for inde^ the name of wise, is Gods peculiar only.
(f) Thales] The first Naturalist of Greece Thales of Miletus.
(...) first year of the 35. Olympiad, after Apollodorus his account in
Laertius. (g) (...)] A sort of youths having bought (at a venture) a draught
of the Milesian fishers, (...) ^awne up a tablet of gold, they fell to strife
about it, each would have had it, so unto (...) his oracle they went, who bad
them give it unto the wise. So first they gave it vn^ (...), whom the Ionians
held wise: he sent it unto another of the seven, and he to an^ and so till it
came to Solon, who dedicated it to Apollo, as the wisest indeed. And these
(...) had the same of wisdom over all Greece, and were called the seven
Sages. (h) The ot^ Chilo of Lecedaemon, Pittacus of Mitilene. Bias of Priene,
Cleobulus o^ Lindus, Peri^ The 7. Greek Sages.
^orynthe, and Solon of Athens: of these at large in the eighteenth book. (i)
Com^ (...)] Some say that the Astrology of the Sailors was his work: others
ascribe it unto R^ ^f Samos, Laban the Argiue says he wrote 200. verses of
Astrology. (k) Astrologi^] End^s says he presaged the eclipses. Hist.
Astrolog. Amongst the Greeks (says Pliny lib. (...).) Thales, in the fourth
year of the 48. Olympiade, was the first that found their (...) of eclipses,
and prognosticated, that which fell out in King Halliattes time, in the ^XX.
year after the building of Rome. So says Eusebius, and Cicero de diuinat.
lib. 1. Wh^e for Haliattes, he writes Astiages. But they lived both at one
time, and had wars one ^ith another. (l) Water] As Homere calls the sea;
father of all: Plutarch (in Placit. Philos:) and o^e give Thales his reason,
because the seed of all creatures animate is moist: and so is all ^nt: Nay
they held that the seas moisture nourishes and increases the stars. (m) Nor
did (...) Velleius in Tully, affirms that Thales thought all things to be
made of water, and (...) the essence that was the cause of all their
production, is God: and Laertius says that he (...) all things full of
Daemones: and being asked whether the gods knew not a man's evil ^ds: Yes
(said he) and thoughts too: But this proves Gods knowledge only, and no^ his
operation to be avouched by him. (n) Anaximander] A Milesian also, but not he
that wrote the Anaxima^der.
Histories. He held an infinite element was the substance of the production of
all things: but ^er showed whether it was fiery, ayry, earthly or watery: He
held besides that the parts of (...) infinite thin^g were successively
changed, but that the whole was im^utable. Aristot. Plu^. (...) Eusebius. (o) Nor
did he] Herein Plutarch reprehendeth him for finding the matt^, and ^t the
efficient cause. For that infinite element is the matter, but without some
efficient cause it can do nothing.

But Tully says that he affirmed that there were natural gods far distance
East and West and that these were their inumerable worlds; De not. deor. lib.
1. So that these contraries, their original and there efficient are all one,
namely that eternal cold and heat: as Eusebius ^e pr^par. Euang. says, and
Aristotle intymateth Phys. lib. 1. (p) Anaximenes] Son to Eurystratus, a
M^lesian also: borne, Olympiad. 64. He died in the year of Craesus his
overthrow, as Anaximenes.
Apollodorus counts. (q) Infinite ayre] Infinite (says Eusebius) in kind,
but not in qualities: of whose condensation, and rarefaction all things have
their generation. He held the air god, generated, infinite and eternally
moving: The stars, the Sun and the Moon were created (he held) of the
earth. Cicero. (r) Anaxagoras] Borne at Clazomene, a town in Ionia, he died,
Olymp. 88. being 62. years of age. His work (says Plutarch and Laertius)
began thus: There was one universal mass: an essence came, and disioyned it
and disposed it:] For he Anaxagoras.
held a matter or mass including infinite forms of creation and parcells of
contraries and others, all confused together, which the divine essence did
compose, and separate: and so made flesh, of many parcells of flesh, of bones,
bone, and so of the rest: yet are these other parcells formally extant in the
whole, as in their bones there is parcells of flesh, and fire, and sinews,
etc. For should bread or meat give increase to a bone, or the blood unless
there were seeds or little parcells of bone and blood in the bread though from
their smallenesse they be inuifible? Arist. Plutarch, Laertius. (s) Vnlike] Or
like: either is right. For as Aristotle says, Anaxagoras held infinite parts
in every body, both contrary, and correspondent, which he called Homogenia, or
(...): similaria, like: Symilarities Gaza translateth it. For in bodies they
are parts that are similare, as in fire water, flesh, bone etc. and here the
name of each part is the name of the whole: each drop of water is water, and
each bit of flesh is flesh, and so of the rest: then are there also parts
dissimilar, as in a man, an horse and so forth: wherein are parts severally
called, as bones, nerves, blood, skin, and such: likewise in artificial
things: as a table, a book, or so: every leaf is not a book, nor every part
of the table a table. These parts are called Heterogenea, or, Of diverse kinds:
multigenae, Agricola calls them. The Symilar parts Anaxagoras held to be in
all things infinite, either different, as of wood, blood, air, fire, bone and
such: or congruent as of water, infinite parcells all of one nature, and so of
fire. etc for though bodies be generate by this separation, yet cannot these
parts be so distinguished but infinite will still remain: that evermore is
best means for one thing to be progenerate of another, and nourished, so that
this communication continues everlastingly, of nature, place, and nutriment.
But of the Heterogeneall parts he did not put infinite in nature, for he did
not hold that there were infinite men in the fire, nor infinite bones in a man.
(t) Diogenes] There were many of this name one of Synope called the Cynike: one
of Sicyon, Diogenes.
an Historiographer: one a stoike, fellow Ambassador to Rome which Carneades
borne at Seleucia, but called the Babilonian, or Tharsian: one that writ of
poetical questions, and Diogenes Laertius from whom we have this our
Philosophy, elder then them all: one also called Apolloniata, mentioned here by
Augustine. Our commentator like a good plaisterer daubed the Cynike and this,
into one, as he made one Thomas, of Thomas Valois and Thomas Aquinas in his
Commentaries upon Boethius. (u) Ayre] Cic. de not. de. What is that air that
Diogenes Apolloniata calls God* He affirmed also inumerable worlds, in
infinite spaces, and that the air thickning it self into a globous body,
produces a world. (x) Archelaus] Archel^ the Naturalist.
Some say, of Myletus, some of Athens. He first brought Physiologie from Ionia
to Athens: and therefore was called Physicus, also because his scholar
Socrates brought in the Morality. (y) He also] Plutarch says he put the
infinite air for the worlds general principle, and that the r^ity and density
thereof made fire and water. (z) Consonance] Eternity, say the manuscripts. (a)
Socrates] This is he that none can sufficiently commend: the wisest Pagan that
ever was: An Athenian begot by Sophroniscus a stone-cutter, and Phanareta, a
midwife: A man, temperare, chaste, just, modest, pacient, scorning wealth
pleasure and glory: for he never wrote any thing: he was the first that when
others said he knew all, affirmed himself he knew nothing.

Of the Socratical^ discipline. CHAP. 3.
SOcrates therefore was (a) the first that reduced Philosophy to the refor^tion
of manres for all before him aimed at natural speculation rather then practice
morality: I cannot surely tell whether the tediousness (b) of these obscurities
moved Socrates to apply his mind unto some more set and certain invention,
for an assistance unto beatitude: which was the scope of all the other
Philosophers intents, and labors: or (as some do favorably surmise) he (c)
was unwilling that men's minds being suppressed with corrupt and earthly
affects, should ofter to crowd unto the height of these Physical causes whose
total, and whose original relied soly (as he held) upon the will of God
omnipotent, only and true: wherefore he held that (d) no mind but a purified
one, could comprehend them: and therefore first urged a reformed course of life,
which effected, the mind unladen of terrestrial distractions might tower up to
eternity, and with the own intelectuall purity, stick firm in contemplation
of the nature of that incorporeal, and unchanged and incomprehensible light,
which (e) conteyneth the causes of all creation. Yet sure it is that in his
moral disputations, (f) he did with most elegant and acute vrbanity tax and
detect the ignorance of these ouer-weening fellows that build Castles on their
own knowledge, either in this, confessing his own ignorance, or dissembling
his understanding. (g) wher-vpon envy taking hold, he was wrackt by a (h)
callumnious accusation, and so put to death (i) Yet did Athens that condemned
him, afterward publicly lament for him, and the wrath of the commonty fell so
sore upon his two accusers that one of them was trodden to death by the
multitude, and another forced to avoid the like by a voluntary banishment. This
Socrates (so famous in his life and death) left many of his scholars behind
him, whose (l) study and emulation was about moralyty ever, and that summum
bonum that The final good. The Socratists of diverse opinions.
greatest good which no man wanting can attain beatitude. (m) Which being not
evident in Socrates his controuersiall questions, each man followed his own
opinion, and made that the final good: (n) The final good is that which
attained, makes man happy. But Socrates his scholars were so divided,
(strange, having all onemaister) that some (o) Aristippus) made pleasure this
final good: others (p) Antisthenes) virtue. So (q) each of the rest had his
choice: too long to particularize.

L. VIVES.
WAs the (a) first] Cicero. Acad. Quest. I think (and so do all) that Socrates
first called Philosophy out of the mists of natural speculations, wherein all
the Philosophers before Socrates.
had been busied, and apllyed it to the institution of life and manners,
making it y^ mean to inquire out virtue and vice, good and evil: holding
things celestial, too abstruse for natural powers to investigate, and far
separate from things natural: which if they could be known, were not useful in
the reformation of life. (b) Tediousnesse] Xenophon. Comment. rer. Socratic. 1.
writes that Socrates was wont to wonder, that these daily and nightly
inuestigators, could never find that their labor was still rewarded with
uncertainties: and this he explaneth at large (c) Was vnwilling] Lactantius his
words in his first book, are these. I deny not but that Socrates has more
wit then the rest that thought they could comprehend all natures courses,
wherein I think them not only unwise, but impious also, to dare to advance
their curious eyes to view the altitude of the divine providence. And after:
Much guiltter are they that lay their impious disputation upon quest of the
worlds secrets profaning the celestial temple thereby, then either they that
enter the Temples of Ceres, Bona Dea, Vesta. (d) No minde] Socrates disputes
this at large in Plato's P^adon, at his death: Showing that none can be a true
Philosopher that is not abstracted in spirit from all the affects of the body:
which then is affected when in this life the soul is looseed from, all
perturbations, and so truly contemplated the true good, that is the true God:
And therefore Philosophy is defined a meditation of death, that is, there is a
separation or divorce between soul and body: the soul avoiding the bodies
impurities, and so becoming pure of it self: For it is sin for any impure
thought to be present at the speculation The true Philosopher.
of that most pure essence: and therefore (he thought) men attoned unto God
have far more knowledge then the impure that know him not. In Plato's Cratylus,
he says good men are only wise: and that none can be skillful in matters
celestial, without Gods assistance. In Epinomede. There may be other
beginnings found, either known to God or his f^es, says Apulcius out of
Plato. (e) Which conteyneth] This is Plato's opinion related by Augustine, not
his own. [This I add because our truth-hunter sets it as Augustines, and then
[The Louanists leave this.]
comes in with his realityes and formalities, such as Augustine never dreamed
of.] For Plato says, God is the minds light, like as the sun we see is the
light of the body, whereby we see, So is God the cause of our understanding,
whose sacred light infuseth things, and the knowledge of truth into us. De Rep.
6. The sun is the light of the world visible, and God of the invisible.
Nazanz. (f) He did with most] Plato, Xenophon, Aeschines, Xenocrates and other
reduced Socrates his words into Dialogues, wherein he most elegantly
reprehendeth their ignorance that persuaded both themselves and the multitude
that they knew all things: Such were Protogoras, Gorgias, Euthydemus,
Dionysodorus, and others. (g) Wher-vpon] His disputation (says Plato)
overthrew him. Three (says Laertius) accused him, Anytus, Melitus and Lycon,
an Orator in Anytus his defense of the trades-mens tumultuous crew and the
other Citizens, whom Socrates had often derided. Melitus defended the Poets,
whom Socrates would have expelled the City. Of these things read Plato and
Xenophon in their Apologies for Socrates: But the playnest of all is Laertius
in his life of Socartes. He was condemned by two hundred eighty one sentences.
(h) Callumnious] My accusers (says Socrates) nor my crimes, can kill me: but
envy only which both has destroyed and will destroy the worthyest ever. (i)
Yet did Athens] They did so grieve for his death, that they shut up all the
schools: and made a sad vacation all over the City, put Melitus to death,
banished Anitus and erected Socrates a brazen statue of Lysippus his
workmanship. (k) Many] All the sects almost, derived from Socrates; Socrates
his statue.
the Platonists, Academikes, Cyrenaikes, Cynikes, Peripatetiques, Megarians and
Stoikes. (t) Study and emulation] This only question made all the sects. (m)
Which being not] For his disputations rather were confutations of others, then
doctrines of his own. For professing himself to know nothing, he thought it
unfit to affirm any thing. Plato's Thaeatetus. (n) The final good] To which
all things have reference. Cic. de finib. For this (says he lib. 3.) being
the utmost (you know I interpret the greek (...), so) We may call it the
last, or the end, for which all things are desired, and it self only for it
self: as Plato, Aristotle and the rest affirm. (o) Aristippus] A Cyrenian,
the first Socratist that taught for money, as he would have also paid for his
learning: (But Socrates never took pay, saying his Genius forbad him)
Aristippus.
He suffered also Dionysius of Syracusa the younger, to deride him, and
flattered him for gain. He made bodily pleasure the greatest good. Diog.
Laert. Of them the Cyrenaikes Philosophers had their original. An end of this
with a brief note out of Hierome upon Ecclesiastes, speaking of pleasure. Let
this (quoth he) Be affirmed by some Epicurus, or Aristippus, or the Cynikes, or
such Phylosophicall cattle: it must be the Cyrenaikes, for what had the
Cynikes to do with bodily pleasures? (p) Antisthenes] The author of the
Cynikes, or Dogsect, Antisthenes.
master to Diogines of Synope the Cynike: he held virtue the greatest good.
(q) Each of] The diversity of opinions herein, you may read in Cicero his 2. de
finibus. And we have touched them briefly in the preface to his work de
legibus.

Of Plato the chief of Socrates his scholars, who divided. Philosophy into
three kinds. CHAP. 4.
But of all Socrates his scholars, there was one whose glory worthily obscured
all the rest: Plato: (a) He was an Athenian, borne of honest parentage, and
endowed with perfection of understanding far more then all his fellows. So
he thinking that his invention and (b) Socrates his instructions were all too
short of the true aim of Philosophy, and therefore would needs go travel to
any place where Fame told him he might drink of the fount of noble sapience.
So went he into (c) Aegipt, and there learnt all that he held worth learning,
and from thence into (d) Italy, where the Pythagoreans were famous, and there
did he drayne from the most eminent teachers, all the Philosophy of Italy.
And because he dearly affected his master Socrat^s, he makes him in all
his Dialogues to temperate that which (a) either he had learned of others, or
invented of himself, with his delicate vrbanity and motality. So whereas the
study of (f) wisdom is either concerning action The stu^y of wisdom and what
^t concerns.
or contemplation, and thence assumeth two several names, active and
contemplative, the active consisting in the practice of morality in ones life,
and the contemplative in penetrating into the abstruse causes of nature, and
the nature of Divinity. (g) Socrates is said to excel in the active:
Pythagoras in the contemplative. But Plato conjoined them into one perfect
kind, which (h) he subdivided into three sorts: The Moral: consisting
chiefly in action: The Natural in contemplation: The Rational, in (i)
distinction of true and false: (k) which though it be useful in both the
other, yet it pertains more particularly to contemplation. And therefore this
Trichotomy or triple division does not contradict the other Dichotomy that
includes all in action and contemplation. But as for Plato's opinion herein,
what should be the end of all actions, the cause of all natures, and the light
of all reasons, is both tedious to follow, and may not be rashly affirmed. For
(l) delighting in his master Socrates his dissembling of his knowledge (whom
he makes disputant in all his dialogues) and affecting that, he left his own
opinions in these great questions as ambiguous (very near) as his masters?
yet do we intend out of his own discourses, and his relations (m) from others,
to repeat some of his positions, either such as do square with truth of that
religion, which our faith professes and defends, or such as oppose it: as
far as shall concern the singularity or multititude of gods, whom the
Catholic religion says we must worship for the obtaining of eternal felicity
in the life to come. For it may be that such as knew Plato to excel all the
other Phlosophers of al nations, and understood him far bettter then others, do
think that in God is the cause of natures, ye light of reason and the rule of
life: which have reference to the three Phylosophies, Natural, Rational and
Moral. (n) For if a man were created, by his excelling part to aspire to that
which excels all, that is, the One, True, almighty God, without whom
nothing has being, no reason instructs and no use assisteth: (o) then let
him be searched out, in whom we have all security: let him be beheld, in whom
is al our certainty, let him be beloved, in whom is all our morality.

L. VIVES.
PLato (a)] His parents were Aristo and Perictione: He came from Codrus by the
father, Plato.
the last King of Athens: by the mother from Solon, one of the seven sages;
the famous Lawgiver of Athens. Both his pedigrees claim from Neptune. He was
born at Athens: Olym^iad. 88. His life and actions are recorded by many; who
extol him for wisdom and conversation above al earthly men. But indeed their
love is so far from doing him more then right, yt but that I know them stand
dearly affected unto him, I should suspect they did somewhat envy his praise
for he erreth in my judgment that holds not Plato to have bin somewhat more
then man, at least of that same rare, and singular race and stamp of men. (b)
Socrates his] A diverse reading. (c) Aegipt] Laertius (says Euripides) and he
went thither together, after his return from Italy. (d) Italy] Into Magna
graecia, where Pythagoras had left many of his sect: of whom Ar^as the elder
read unto Plato at Tarentum, and Euritus, Timaeus at Locris, Phylolaus at
Croto. Tully in his Cato Mayor, says he came thither in the Consulships of L.
Aemilius, and Appius Cla^dius: though Liuy at that time (that was twenty four
years after the Candine foil) puts Furius Camillus in Appius his place.
Plato went also to Megara to Euclide the Mathematitian, and to Theodorus
another of Cyrene: and but for the wars meant to have vis^ed ^he Persian
Magies. (e) Either he had] All this learning he said was Socrates his (Epist ad
Dyo^s) Ascribing all his Philosophy both moral and natural to him. (f)
Wisdom is] ^lato and Aris^e reckon some disciplines that are neither active
nor contemplative, but effectual, as Architecture and al mechanike trades. So
that some they say are speculatiue, as Theology: some act^ue wherein Effecting
disciplines, Plato.
no effect remains after the act, as music and all rhetorike: some affecting
materially as all the trades, building, cobling, caruing, etc. But this last is
impertinent in this place. (g) Socra^ said] Active, that is in morality and
virtuous rule of the actions, wherein he is said to be wh^ly employed: yet did
he speculate much in this kind: for Adymantus says to him (Pl to Derepub.
lib. 2.) Thou have spent thy time in nothing but speculation: And what pains
he took in the inuestigation of the means to attain the summum bonum,
himself shows in his Apology in Plato: but he directed all to action: but
Pythagoras his aims being at matters only pertaining to themselves, had their
full limitation in themselves. (h) He sub-diuided] This diu si^ (says
Eusebius de praep. Euang.) he had from the Hebrews, alleging Atticus the
Philosophers opinion, who describes them plainly, and that he conjoined the
parts of Philosophy that was in pieces before, as the torn members of
Pentheus: for Thales and his followe^s were all Physical: The other sages all
Moral: Zeno and the Eleans, all Logical. All these Plato combined and
diuulged, publishing his Philosophy perfect, not by peece-meale as Aristotle
confirms (Phys. lib, 7.) Philosophy at first (says Laertius in his Plato)
meddled but with nature: then came Socrates and made it Moral. then Plato with
his rational made it absolute and had the last hand upon it. Apuleius speaking
of him says that he filled al his books with the most admirable and extracted
things that Zeno and Parmenides had taught, so conioyning the tripar^ite
Philosophy, and so reconcyling each, that he avoided all dissonance of parts,
and made each acknowledge a dependence upon other. (Dogmat. Platon) Some of his
Dialogues all Logical, as his ^orgias and his Euthydemus: some privately
Moral, as his Memnon, Eutiphyro, Phylebus and Crito: some publicly Moral, as
his Laws, and his Respublica: Some Natural, as his Timaeus: Some
Supernatural, as his Parmenides, and his Sophista: yet all these are Logically
composed. (i) distinction of true] terminat or disterminat, all is but to
distinguish, so does Lucane use disterminat. ab auson^s disterminat arua
Colonis, diuides the fields. And Mela uses it so also, Bosphorus disterminat
Europam ab Asia, Bosphorus diuides etc. (k) Which though it be] It is a great
question in our Schools whether Logic be speculatiue or practike: A fond
question truly I think, [This note the Louanists have left out wholly.
and fellow with most of our Phylosophycall theames of these times, where the
dreams of practice and speculation do naught but dull young apprehensions. And
now at last the cause goes on the Practikes sides, because it teaches to
dispute: as though we argue not more in our contemplation of nature, then in
our morality. But these Schoolmen neither know how to speculate in nature,
nor action, nor how the life's actions are to be ordered: Not that I think
these must belong only to speculation, but Augustine says here, That it is
necessary to them both: but especially it is employed about seeking truth,
falsehood, and probability.] (l) Delighting (...) his maister] Plato (as I said)
confessed that Socrates was author of all his works, and in all his Dialogues,
the words that Plato gives him, are by his author only to be held his
opinions, Plato.] [And this also for company.]
though he speak his own opinion by the mouth of Timaus, and the Arthemian
stranger, and Zeno the Elean. (m) From others] Or from him: For Socoates and
he were still of one opinion, though others were so also. (n) For if a man]
[What need such a turmoyle whether this be the intellect, or will, since
Aristotle to omit others, says that the mind is man's most excelling part, in
that it is both intellect, will and memory: But they are so hard, that being
not understood by these fellows, they admire them: mary these being plain,
and almost palpable, they neglect] (o) Then let] Alluding to the division of
Philosophy into three parts: The old books for security, read certainty, and
for certainty, truth.

That the chief Controversy with the Platonists is about Theology, and that
all the Philosophers opinions hereof are inferior unto theirs. CHAP. 5.
IF Plato then affirm that a wise man is an immitator, a knower and a belouer
of this GOD: Whose participation makes a man blessed, what need we meddle
with the rest, whereof none come so near us as he? Away therefore with this
same fabulous theology, pleasing reprobate affections with the crimes of the
gods: Away with the civil, wherein the devils working upon the willingness
of the ignorant to impure acts, cause them to celebrate mortal errors for
divine honors: In the beholding of which, they (a) make their servants the
vshers of their vain villainies, both by the example of these dishonest sports
alluring others to their worship, and making themselves also better sport
with the guilt of the spectators of these impurities. Wherein also, if there be
any honesty left in the Temples, it is polluted by attraction of turpitude from
the Stages and if any filth be presented on the Stages, it is graced with the
cohaerence it has with that of the Temples. The pertinents whereof Varro
interpreting by references to heaven, nature and causes of production, failed
wholly of his purpose because the things themselves signified no such matters
as he interpreted them by. And though they did, the reasonable souls, which
are parts in that order of nature, are not to be held for gods: Nor ought it
to be subject to those things over which God has given it superiority: Away
with those things also which Numa buried, being pertinent to these religious
ordinances: and being afterward turned up by a plough, were by the Senate
buried. And those also (to favor our suspicion of Numa.) Which Alexander the
great wrote (b) to his Mother, that he had learned of Leon an Aegiptian
Priest: Where not only Picus, Faunus Aeneas, Romulus, Hercules, A^sculapius,
Bacchus, Castor and Pollux, and other mortal men, whom they had for their
gods, but even the (c) gods of the greater families, whom Tully (not naming
them though) seems to touch at in his Tusculane Questions: Jupiter, Juno,
Saturn, Vulcan, Vesta, and many other which Varro would make nothing but
Elements and parts of the world, there are they all shown to have been but
men. For the Priest fearing the revealing of these mysteries, warned Alexander
that as soon as his Mother had read them, he should burn them. So not all
this fabulous and civil Theology shall give place to the Platonists, (who held
a true God the author of all things, the clearer of all doubts, and the giver
of all goodness) but even the other Philosophers also, whose gross bodily
inventions held the worlds beginning to be bodily: let al these give place All
the philosophers short of^lato.
to those good god-conceiuing men: let Thales depart with his water, Anaximenes
with the air; the Stoikes with their (d) fire, Epicurus with his Atoms, his
indivisible and in sensible bodies and all other (that now are not for us to
recount) who placed natures original, in bodies either simple, compound,
quick or dead, for there were (e) some, and the Epicureans were they, that
held a possibility of producing the quick out of the dead: (f) others would
produce out of the quick, some things quick and some dead: yet all bodily, as
of a body produced. But the Stoikes held (g) the fire one of this visible
worlds four elements, to be wise, living, the The Stoikes sire.
Creator of the world whole and part, yea even God himself. Now these and
their fellows, followed even the bare surmises of their own fleshly opinions,
in these assertions. For (h) they had that in them which they saw not, and
thought that to be in them which they saw externally: nay which they saw not,
but imagined only: now this in the sight of such a thought, is no body, but a
bodies likeness. But that wherewith our mind sees sees this bodies
likeness, is neither body nor likeness, and that which discerns the other,
judging of the deformity or beauty of it, is more beauteous then that which it
judges of: This is the nature of man's mind and reasonable soul, which is no
body; nor is the bodies likeness, revolued in the mind a body either. So then
it is neither fire, air, water nor The corporcal world
earth, of which four bodies which we call Elements, this visible World is
composed. Now if our soul be no body, how can God that made it be a body? So
then let these give place to the Platonists and (i) those also that shamed to
say God was a body, and yet would make him of the same essence that our s^es
ar: being not moved by the souls mutability, which it were vile to ascribe
unto God. I but (say they) (k) the body it is yt alters the soul: of it self
it is immutable. So might they say that it is a body that wounds the body:
for of it self it is invulnerable. That which is immutable, nothing external
can change: But that that any body alters is not unchangeable: because it is
externally alterable.

L. VIVES.
THey (a) make] A difference of reading, but not worthy the noting. (b) Wrote
this] Cyprian, affirming al y^ Pagan gods were men, says: that this is so,
Alexander writes in a famous volume to hi^ mother, that the fear of his power
made such secrets of the gods to be revealed unto him by that Pries^ that they
were (he saw now) nothing else but ancient kings, whose memories used to be
kept at first, and afterward grew to sacrifices. De Idol. Vanitate. (c) Gods
of the] Tarquinius Pris^s, fist King of Rome added 100. Senators to the ancient
Senate, and these were called the fathers of the lesser families: the former of
the greater, which phraze Tully uses metaphorically, for the ancient confirmed
gods. If we should seek the truth of Greek authors, (says Tully) even these
gods of the greater families would be found to have gone from us here ^n
earth, up into heaven. Thus far he: Tusc. Quaest. 1. Teaching the souls
immortallity, The gods of the higher house.
which being loosed from the body, shall be such as they who are adored for
gods. Such were Romulus Hercules, Bacchus, etc. And thus is heaven filled
almost full with men. Tully also elsewhere calls such gods of the greater
families, as have always been held celestial. In Legib. Those that merit
heaven he calls Gods ascript. (d) Fire] Cic. de not. deor. The Stoikes hold
al active power, fire: following (it seems) Heraclitus. And Zeno their chief
defines the nature Scoikes Ep^s.
that he held for god, to be a fire artificial, generatiue, and moving. (e)
Some] The Epicureans held all men and each thing else to come out of Atoms,
flying about at random and knitting together by chance. (f) Others] So the old
Manuscripts do read it. (g) Held the fire] Cic. de ^t, de^ (h) They had that]
They could not conceive the soul to be incorporeall, but corporal only, nor
universally that, but sensible only. And it is triuiall in the Shooles.
Nothing is in the ^derstanding that was not first in the sense. That is, our
mind conceiueth but what is circumscribed with a body sensible, or an object
of our sense. So we conceit incorporeall things, corporally, and corporal
things never seen, by imagination and cogitation of such or such forms as we
have seen: As one that never saw Rome, but thinks of it, he imagines it has
walls, churches, buildings, or suchlike, as he has seen at Paris, Louvaine,
Valencia, or elsewhere. Further, Augustine teaches that the thoughts are
incorporeall, and that the minds internal senses which produce thoughts, are
both before thoughts, and things themselves: which senses internal, God being
the Creator of, must needs be no body, but a power more excellent then al other
bodies or souls. (i) Those also] Cic. de not. deor. l. 1. for Pythagoras that
held God to be a soul continuate and diffused through al nature, never marked
the perturbations our souls are subject to, by which (were God such) he should
be distracted, and disturbed, and when Py^.
the souls were wretched (as many are) so should god be also: which is
impossible: but Plato derived our souls from the substance of the stars, and
if they died young, he affirmed their return theth^, again, each to the star
whence it came: and that as the stars were composed of the 4. Ele^, so we^e the
souls, but in a far different manner then that composition of the bodies. (k)
The body] V^gil (Georg. 4. and Aeneid. 6.) recites Pythagoras his opinion
singing of God, that is the worlds soul, whence each one draws a life at his
original, and returns it at his death. But because it may be doubted how all
souls have one original sense, one understands better then another, and
uses reason more perfectly: this difference he held did proceed from the body
and not from the souls. For these are his words. Princip^ Calum at Terras
Camposque liquentes,
^temque Globune terrae, Titaniaque astra:
Sp^s intus alit totamque infusa per artus,
Men's agi^at mole^, and magno se corpore miscet. etc.
Heaven, Earth, and Sea each in his proper bound,
The Moons bright globe, and all the spangled round,
A spirit within does feed, does move, and pass
Through every parcel of this spacious mass.


All which is explayned at full by Seruius the Gramarian. Porphyry confesses
with Pythagoras (...) the soul suffers with the body: whose affects, good or
bad, redound in part unto the (...), yet denies he that they alter the souls
nature. De sacrificijs. lib. 4.

How the platonists conceived of the natural part of Philosophy CHAP. 6.
WHerefore' these Philosophers whom fame (we see) has worthily preferred (...)
before ye rest, did well perceive that God was (a) no bodily thing: and therefore
pa^ ^rther then al bodies in this inuestigatio^: they saw that no (b) mutable
thing (...), and therefore went further then al mutable spirits, and souls to
seek for (...) ^gain they saw that (c) al forms of mutable things, whereby
they are what (...) (of what nature soever they be) have original from none
but him, that is (...) unchangeable. Consequently, neither the body of this
universe, the fi^ ^alities, motions and Elements, nor the bodies in them all,
from heaven to (...) ^her vegetative, as trees, or sensitive also as beasts or
reasonable also, as (...) those that need no nutriment but subsist by
themselves as the Angels, God only has true essence, all the rest depend
upon him.
(...) being, but from him who has only simple being. For in him (d) to be,
and (...) ^ffer not: as if he might have being without life: neither to live,
and to (...) ^d: as if he could have life without intellect: nor to understand
and to be (...) ^s if he could have the one and not the other. But his life,
vnderstan^ beatitude are all but his being. From this invariable and simple
essence (...) they gathered him to be the uncreated Creator of all existence.
For they (...) ^ed that all things are either body, or life: that the (e) life
excels the (...) that sensibility is but a species of the body; but
understanding of the life: (...) ^fore they preferred intellect before sense:
Sensible things are those (...) to be seen or touched. Intelligible can only be
understood by the mind. Things sensible and intelligible.
(...) is no bodily sweetness, be it in the body, as beauty, or in motion, as
(...) ^ll song, but the mind does judge thereof: which it could not do if this
(...) ^ere not in it more excellent, then either in that quantity of body, or
(...) ^se of voices and keeping of tones and times. Yet if it were not mutable
(...) ^ld not judge better then another of these sensible species, nor one be
witti^ ^inger, or more exercised then another, but he that began after should
(...) much as he that learned before: and he that profited after should be vn^
from his ignorance before: but that which admits maiority or minori^
angeable doubtless. And therefore these learned men did well observe Mutable
what.
(...) first form of things could not have existence in a subject mutable. And
(...) (...) beholding degrees of diversity in the forms of souls and bodies,
and (...) the separation of al form from the^ directly destroyed the^, this
infered ane^ty of some unchangeable and consequently an all-excelling form:
this they (...) the beginning of all things, uncreated, all creating,
exceeding right. This (...) they knew of God he did manifest unto them by
teaching them the gradu^ ^emplation Rom 1. 19. 20.
of his parts invisible by his works visible: as also his eternity ^inity, who
created all things both visible and temporary. Thus much of (...) Physiology,
or natural Philosophy.

L. VIVES.
GOD (a) was no body] This Alcinous in Plato's doctrine argues thus. If God
were a (...) God is no body.
he should have substance and form: for so have all bodies, being like the
Idea's, wherein they have a secret resemblance. But to say God has substance
and form is absurd: for he should ^thor be the beginning, nor uncompounded:
Therefore he has no body. Besides, every body is of some substance: What then
shall GOD be of fire or air? earth or water? Nor of these are beginnings: but
rather have a later being then the substance whereof they consist. ^ut these
are blasphemies, the truth is, GOD is incorporeall. If he were a body, he were
generated, and therefore corruptible. But far are those things from GOD.
Thus far Alcinous. (b) No mutable] Plato (in Timaeus) calls God (...) etc,
one, the same, and always like himself, as Tully translates it. Alcinous
says he must needs be an intelligible substance. Of which kind the soul is
better, the^ what is not the soul, but the power that is perpetually actual,
excels that which is potentiall, such therefore is God. (c) All formes] In
Greek (...), so Tully and others interpret it, (d) To be and to liue]
Alcinous says that God is supreme, eternal, ineffable, selfe-perfect, needing
nothing, eternally absolute, Deity, cause of all b^ing, truth, harmony, good,
and all these, in one, and one. For I count them not as dis-ioyned, but
coessentiall. And a little ^ter he says that God is incomprehensible, only
apparent to the thought: but contained under no kind what-soeuer: not
definable, nor specificall, nor subject to any accident: to say he is evil
were wickedness, and to say he is good is insufficient, for then he should
participate of goodness, but he has neither difference nor accident. This
opinion did Dionisius the Divine follow, denying wisdom, life, or
understanding to be in god. For Die^s the Divine.
these are the names of particular perfections which are not in God: This
seems to be grounded on Plato's words in Phadon that all good is such by
participation of good: but there he excepteth true good, that is doubtless
God the Idea and essence of all beautiful goodness. (e) Life excelleth] He
calls the soul life, as Aristotle does (...), perfection or (...), any thing
eternally actual both may be said of the soul. But Plato speaking of souls,
means (it seems) only the rational.

The excellency of the Platonists above the rest, in logic. CHAP. 7.
NOw as concerning the other part of their (a) doctrine, called logic, far
be it from us to join them in comparison with those fellows that fetched the
judgment of truth from the bodily senses, and held all things to be swayed by
their false and frivolous positions, as (b) Epicurus held, yea and even the
Stoikes. (c) These men standing only affected to the art of disputation called
Logike, thought it was to be derived from the senses: affirming that from them
the mind does receive definable notions (d) (...) and thence the whole method
of learning and teaching has the propagation. Now (e) here do I wonder how
these men (f) affirming a wiseman only to be beautiful, had any notion of
this beauty from their sense: and how their carnal eyes could behold the fair
form of wisdom. (g) But those whom we do worthyly preferr^ have
distinguished the conceits of the mind conceived from the forms received by
the sense: Giving them no more then their due, nor taking ought of their due
from them. But (h) the light of the mind giving power to conceive all, this
they hold is God, that created all.

L. VIVES.
THeir (a) Doctri^] Plato divided speech into five parts. 1. civil, used in
politic affairs, counsels and such like. 2. rethoricall, which is
demonstratiue, or judicial, containing praise or dispraise, accusation or
defense. 3. ordinary discourse of one man with another. 4. worke-mens
conference in matters mechanical: 5. Logical, consisting of dialogismes,
questions and answers. This last is by some ascribed to be Plato's invention;
as Phauorinus: others gi^e it to Alexamenes Teius, Aristotle: Some also to Zeno
the Elean: certain it is that Plato g^e much ornament unto discourse,
replenishing it with all parts of learning, gravity and elegance: Wherein
though the Logical forms be not expressly taught, yet they are laid dow^
(...) practice, and their use fully expressed: And particularly demonstration
is practi^d (...) his Timaus S^phismes, in Euthydemus, whence Aristotle had
many of his fallacians: (...) ^tes his induction is of most power of all, and
seems to take the original from him: (...) ^ates used it more nimbly then any
man living. And from him Quintilian biddes his (...) fetch it. (b) Epicurus]
He held the Sun to be no bigger then it seemed: And the if the sense once
mistake, one should never trust it after. Cicero, (Plutarc, Placit. lib. 4.)
The Stoikes held the senses true, but their objects now true, and now false.
But Epicu^ held sense an object all true, mary opinion he said erred
sometimes; and Cicero says (...) (...), That unto the forms received by our
senses he adjoined the assent of the mind, w^ch he will have fixed, and
voluntary in every one of us. He did not affirm all that we saw was true:
But only such as brought with them certain peculiar declarations (...) which
they pretended. (c) These men] The Stoikes; for the Epicures rejected Logike,
(...) and unprofitable. The Stoikes used it exceedingly. And Chrysippus,
Cleanthes and (...) ^saisters of that sect, wrote much in that kind: but all
concerning the later part: (...) the first, Invention they commonly meddle not
with as Cicero says in his To^d) (...)] The first apprehensions, (...), or
understanding of things. These ^th given man, whence the knowledge of many
great seueralties arise, which mo^se from visible and palpable objects,
producing either knowledge, ignorance ^n, the mean between both. Cicero
calls them begun conceits, and says (...) first named the (...), as if one
should say, a premeditate apprehension of a thing (...), without which we can
neither understand, inquire nor dispute. Mary the Stoikes (...) used this word
also, which Tully translateth anticipationes: And Chrysippus (...) to be a
natural understanding of universalities. Laert. (e) Here do I] He pro^ the
affirmers of these positions rather trusted understanding then sense. (f)
affirming (...)] A Stoicall Paradoxe. (g) But those whome] Plato so dealt that
he debarred the (...) power to judge the truth, allowing that only to the
mind, proving the authority of (...) fit to be trusted, because it beholds
alone the simple truth, uniform and (...), in that manner as it is. (h) The
light] This sun they held was the light (...), and that the prince of the
World was the light of the soul to understanding, ^ge wisdom, and judgment;
and therefore he is the father of all light: For from Cie^r. Acad. Quest. lib.
1.
(...) invisible, the light visible has his original, as I showed before out
of Plato. The (...) ^noes teaches. In Doctrina Platonis.

That the Platonists are to be preferred in Morality also. CHAP. 8
^ere remains the Moral, in Greek (...) which inquireth after the great
good whereto all our actions have reference: and which is desired for it (...)
only, for no other end, but to make us blessed in attaining it only: and
therefore (...) it the end: as referring all the rest unto it. But desiring it
only for it (...) This blesse-affording good some would derive from the (a)
body, (...) ^om the (b) mind, some (c) from both: For seeing that a man con^
but of soul and body, they believed that his chief good must (...) original
from one of the two, and therein subsist; as the final end standing (...) the
shot-marke of all their actions, which being once attained, their labors (...)
crowned with perfection. So that they (d) that added a third kind of good to
these two namely, consisting of honor, riches and such goods of Fortune,
^wise called extrinsecal: did not propose it as a final good, that is, to be
desi^ in respect of it self, but referred it to another: being of it self
good to the (...) and badde to the bad. So this good then, that some derived
from the body, and some from the soul, and some from both, all derived from
the man's self. But they that took the bodies part had the worse side, the
soul had the The Philosophers co^^tion about the greatest good.
better: mary they that took both, expected this good from the whole man. So
then, part or whole, it is from man, howsoever. These three differences made
above three several sects of Philosophers: each man construing diversely both
of the bodies good, and the souls good, and both their goods. But let all
those stand by and make them place that say that he is not happy that inioyes a
body, nor he that inioyes a mind, but he that inioyes God: Not as the soul
inioyes the body, or it self, nor as one friend inioyes another, but (e) as
the eye inioyes the light. If the rest can say any thing for the other
similies, or against this last, what it is, God willing we shall in due season
discover.

L. VIVES.
FRom the (a) body] So did Epicurus, Aristippus, and all their followers. (b)
The minde] The Stoikes. (c) From both] As Calipho, Polemon and Diodorus. (d)
That added] This triple division of goods, into the bodies, the minds, and
fortunes Augustine often uses. It is Aristotle's and the Peripatetiques: taken
from diverse places of Plato, as I will show in the next book. (e) Knowledge of
the truth.
At the eye] Plato says that the knowledge of the truth is the greatest good,
which being hardly to be attained in this life gives us cause to think that
scarcely any one living is truly happy: mary there is great hope of partaking
it in the life to come, when we are freed from the bodies bounds, the sole
impediment of the souls perfection. But when we die (so we die pure) then in
the sight of that it that truly existent truth, God, we shall enjoy the height
of our desires, that is, truth and universal knowledge. Wherefore as the eye
wanting the light is vselesse, and sets the owner sadly affected in
darkness, and perpetually sorrowful: but when the Sun, the light comes, it
rises with vigor to the function, and uses the office with cheerfulness and
alacrity: so our intellect being vngiued from the body, if it want the light
of Gods truth, it must needs lament and languish, but if it have it, it
exulteth, and joyfully uses that light which presents the forms of all the
creation. Whence it comes that in our pleasures and felicities wherein we
fulfill our affections, and as it were enjoy our selves, we d^ot reap that
delectable comfort that we draw from the internal contemplation of that
eternal good, and from that attayning the pure light of so perfect a wisdom.
So that the soul that is absolutely blessed, inioyeth not God in his beauty,
and love, which concern pleasure, an act of the will: but in his truth which
is an act of the intellect: though then follows his beauty, and his love,
entirely delectable, nor can these be separated. For none knows God, but
admireth him: none admireth him, but ioines love to his admiration and
delights in them all. Thus much out of Plato in diverse places of his Respub.
leges Phadon and Philaebus, who still prefers the inquiry and contemplation
of truth, and that to men of pure life, exhorting and exciting all thereunto.
And this all the Academicks and Peripatetiques profess after him, as Tully
teaches De finib. lib. 5.

Of that Philosophy that comes nearest to Christianity. CHAP. 9.
LEt it suffice now to remember that Plato (a) did determine that the end of al
good was the attayning a virtuous life, which none could but he that knew and
followed God: nor is any man happy by any other means. And therefore Platos^
Philosopher a lover of God.
he affirms, that to be a Philosopher is to love God, whose nature is
incorporeal: And consequently that wisdoms student, the Philosopher, is then
blessed when he inioyeth God. For though the inioying of each thing a man
loves does not forthwith make him happy: (for many by placing their love on
hateful objects are wretched, and more wretched in inioying them) yet is no man
happy that inioyeth not that he loves. For (b) even those that love what they
should not, think not themselves happy in loving, but in inioying. But he
that inioyes what he loves, and loves the true and greatest good. Who (but a
wretch) will deny him to be happy? This true and greatest good, is GOD says
Plato, and therefore he will have a Philosopher a lover of GOD, that because
Philosophy aims at beatitude, the lover of God might be blessed by inioying
GOD. Wherefore what ever Philosophers they were that held this of the high and
true (...) that he was the worlds Creator, the light of understanding, and the
good of all action: that he is the beginning of nature, the truth of doctrine,
and the happine^ life: whether they be called Platonists (as fittest) or by any
other sect: (c) ^er the Ionian teacher held as this Plato did, and understood
him well; Or th^e Italians held it from Pythagoras and his followers, or any
other of the same ^ine, of what nation so ever they were, and were counted
Philosophers (d) ^tes, Lybians, (e) Egiptians, (f) Indians, (g) Persians, (h)
Chaldees, (i) Scythi^) Galls, (l) Spaniards, or others that observed and
taught this doctrine, t^ we prefer before all others, and confess their
propinquity with our ^e. For though a Christian, used only to the Scriptures,
never heard of (...) ^nists, nor knows whether Greece held two sects of
Philosophers, the (...) and the Italian, yet is he not so ignorant in
humanity, but he knows (...) Philosophers profess either the study of
wisdom or wisdom (...). But let him beware of those that dispute (m) of
the Elements of this (...) ^ely, and reach not up to God that made them
Elements. The Apostle (...) good warning of this: Beware (says he) least any
deceive you by Philosophy (...) deceit, according to the worlds Elements. But
least you should think Colo^. 28.
(...) held all Philosophers to be such, he says elsewhere: (n) For that
(...) ^ich is known of God, is manifest in them, for God has showed it unto
(...) For his invisible powers from the beginning of the world are manifested
by Romans 1. 19. 20.
(...), and so is his (p) eternal. virtue. And having spoken a great matter
con^ God unto the Athenians which few of them understood (q) In him we live,
(...) and have our being: he added as some also of your writers have said: He
Act. 17. 18.
(...) to beware of their errors. For he said that GOD had by his works,
(...) his invisible power to their understanding, there also he said that they
(...) worship him aright, but gave the divine honors with were his pecuriarly,
(...) ^her things the^ was lawful: because that when they knew God, they
glorified him Romans 1. 21. 22. 23.
(...) ^d, neither were thankful: but became vain in their own
imaginations: O (...) ^sh heart was full of darkness! For professing
themselves wise, they proved (...) ^d turned the glory of the incorruptible
God, into the similitude of the Image of (...) ^ible man, and of birds, and
beasts, and serpents. (r) In this place the Romans, (...) ^ns, Egiptians, and
all that gloryed in their wisdom, are justly taxed. But (...) ^d we will
argue this hereafter: as for those things wherein we and they con^ of one God
the Creator of this universe, who is not only incorporeall, (...) all bodies,
but also incorruptible above all spirits, our beginning, our light (...)
goodness, in these we prefer them before all others.

L. VIVES.
(...) did determine] That venerable, and holy-teaching Plato, surmounting all
Phylo^ ^rs in almost all other matters, in defining man's greatest good,
out-stript Plato's opinion of the greatest good.
^m-selfe, in his first book De Legib. He deuides good, into divine and
human: (...) is quite separate from virtue, the first conjoined therewith.
Socrates in Plato's Gor^ ^es that beatitude consists in learning and virtue,
calling only the good, happy, (...) wretched. And in Menexenus, in six
hundred places, (and so all Plato through) (...) only honest and beauteous. As
for other gods, without virtue they are the de^ of him that possesses them.
But these are but Plato's common sayings: in these (...) ^th with his fellows:
But when he list, he rises in spirit, and leaves all to other (...) of
wisdom beneath him. His Philebus is a dialogue of the greatest good, or as
some entitle it, (...), of pleasure. Therein he makes six ranks of goods,
in the second stands the things proportionate, fair, perfect sufficient, and
such like. In the third understanding, and sapience. In the fourth, the goods
of the soul, sciences, arts and good opinions. But in the first, he puts
measure, moderation and opportunity. All which (as he writes to Dionysius)
import that GOD is the proportion, cause, measure, author and moderator of all
goodness. And in his 2. de Repub. he calls GOD, the greatest good and the
Idea of good. And therefore Apuleius defines GOD to be the professor and
bestower of Beatitude: Dogm: Plat. And Speusippus defines him to be, A living
immortal and supernatural essence, sufficing to beatitude, and cause of
nature and all goodness.

The contemplation of this good did Plato say, made a man happy. For in his
Banquet; Diotima, a most wise woman bids Socrates to mark her speech well.
And then falling into a discourse that our love concerned beauty, at last she
drew to a deeper theme, affirming a beauty that was eternal, immutable and
undiminished, nor increased, nor fair in one part and not in another, nor
being subject to any vicissitude, or alteration of times: Nor beautyfull in
one respect and not in all: Whose beauty is neither altered by place, nor
opinion, nor is as a part, or an accident of that essence wherein it is. But it
is ever existem in one and the same form, and from thence flows all the
Worlds beauty: yet so, as neither the original of any thing decreaseth it,
nor the decay augmenteth it, or gives any effect, or change to it. This holy
and venerable beauty when a man begins to behold truly, that is being
dislinked from the love of other beauties, then is not he far from the top
of his perfection. For that is the way to things truly worth desiring: Thus
must we be truly led vn^ it, when a man ascends by degrees from these
inferior beauties unto that supreme one, transporting himself from one fair
object unto two, and so unto all the rest of all beautyfull desires,
where-vppon the like disciplines must needs follow, of which the only chief
and chiefly to be followed, is the contemplation of that supreme beauty, and
from thence to draw this lesson, thus must a man internally beauteous, direct
his life. Saw you, but this once clear, you would scorn riches, honors and
exterior forms. Tell me now (says she) how great a happiness should he
give thee that should show thee this sincere, this purest beauty, not
circumscript with a form of mortality, nor with coullors nor metals, or such
like trash, but in it self merely divine, and one and the same to all
eternity? I pray thee would thou not admire his life that should have his
wisnes so full as to behold and enjoy this glorious beauty? O glorious pertaker
of unchanged solid virtue! Friend of the all powerful God, and above all other
Divine and immortal. These are the words of wise Diotyma unto Socrates to
which he replyeth that he believed her, and that he labors to persuade
mankind that there is no such mean to attain the possession of this
pulchritude, as the love of it: and that no man should think it were enough to
dispute of it in words, or to contemplate there-vppon with an unpurged heart.
Which things is hard, nay near impossible says Plato: yet teaches he that
beatitude is attained by imitation of GOD (De leg. 4.) where speaking of GODS
friends and enemies, he says, That it must be a wise man's continual
meditation how to follow God, and make him the rule of his courses before all
mortal men, to whose likeness his chief study must be to ^old himself.
what it is to be like GOD he shows in his Thaeatetus, it is to be just,
wise and holy. And in his Epistle to Hermeas and his fellows, he says, That
if any man be a Philosopher, he aymeth at the knowledge of God, and his
father, as far as happy men can attain it. And in his Epinomis, speaking of
GOD, he says: Him does each man especially admire, and consequently is
inflamed with the power of human wit to labor for this beatitude in this
life present, and expecting a place after death with those that have served
virtue. This says Plato, who placed the greatest beatitude in the life to
come. For he says in the same book, That none (or very few) can attayn
happiness in this life, but great hope there is after this life to enjoy the
happiness for which we have been so careful to keep and continue our
courses in goodness and honesty. And toward the end he says: It is
wickedness to neglect God, the reason of all being so fully already discovered.
He that can make use of all this, I c^t him truly wise, and firmly avow that
when he dies, he shall not be any longer in the common fashion of this life,
but have a certain peculiar excellence alloted him, to be both most wise and
most happy? And live a man so, where he will, in Island or continent, he shall
partake this faelicity: and so shall he that uses these directions
wheresoever, in government of others, or in private estate referring all to
God. But as we said before, so say we still, very few attain this perfection
(...) this life: this life: this is most true, and no way rashly spoken. Thus
much out of his (...). In the end of his De Repub. thus. Behold now the
rewards, stable and glorious which (...) shall receive both of god and man
besides the particular benefits that his justice does re^ (...). But all these
are nothing, neither in number nor quantity in respect of those after death.
(...) (...) Phaedon: wherefore (says Socrates) while we live here on earth,
let us have as little (...) (...) ^h the body as may be, for so we shall get
to some knowledge, and keeping a good watch (...) (...) that God set us free
from it, we shall pass away pure from contagion, to converse with (...) ^ies,
and by our selves have full understanding of that sincere and pure truth, which
(...) (...) that is a going my way, has a great hope to be there crowned with
the fruition of (...) ^ch in his life he suffered so many afflictions. And
after: If he be a true Philosopher, that (...) Gods must needs bear a great
stroke with him, namely that he cannot attain the pure (...) ^ill after this
life. Thus much out of Plato, in diverse places, partly the words, and (...)
^te: which being assumed (to show his opinion) out of his own works, makes
(...) ^s to ad any quotations out of other Platonists. (b) Even those that
love.] I wounder Valla. Love. Delight. Toenioy.
(...) his logike says that their is no love but delight: the world controules
him. I (...) ^ent friend, yet my delight departed with him. But this is not the
least nor the last (...) that book. To enjoy, is to take delight of in any
thing: as Augustine writes in his (...) We enjoy that we take pleasure in:
of the use and the fruit, hereafter in the (...) ^ke. (c) Whether the Ionian.]
Though Plato had much from Pythagoras, yet was (...) Philosopher for he
followed Socrates more then either Architas or Timeus. (d) (...)] Africans,
bordring on the Ocean: Atlas was the first King, brother to Sa^ (...)
Atlantikes. Atlas. Egiptians.
to Caelus: A great Astronomer. He taught his Son Hesperus and many (...)
(...); for he had seven daughters all married to the Heroes, that had Sons
(...) ^ous then the Parents. He taught diverse of the vulgar also, whence the
(...) Libia where Hercules learnt it and disputed of it. (e) Egiptians.] Their
Philosophy (...), but most part from Chaldea, chiefly from Abraham: though
they (as Diodo^ ^ibe it to Isis and Osiris, Uulcan, Mercury, and Hercules. How
ever, sure it is (...) Philosophy was divine, and much false and filthy. (f)
Indians.] There Philoso^ ^ed Brachmans. Persians. Chaldees. Scithians.
Brachmans: of whom read Philostratus his Uita Apollon. Thyan. and Stra^ (...)
of Alexander the Macedonian his conquests. (g) Persians.] They had the (...)
Zoroaster taught. (h) Cladaees.] The chief Astrologians and diuinators of the
(...) ^e read Diodorus. lib. 3. (i) Scythians.] Their Philosophers whilom,
contended (...) ^tians for antiquity: a nation valiant, plain, just,
harmless, doing more by na^ ^en Greece with all her laborious discipline. (k)
Galls.] or Frenchmen. They had (...) (...): Caesar Comment. Gallic, Bell. and
Poets also which were both Philosophers and Druides.
(...) Saronidae. Dio. l. 6. they had also the wisards that ye people came unto
for trifles. No (...) ^gst them might be offered without a Philosopher, that
was, a Naturalist divine (...) (...): and these ruled all, in all places. Their
Druides) as Strabo says lib. 4.) were both (...) ^d Moralists. (l) Spaniards.]
In Spain, before silver and gold were found, there was (...) any Philosophers,
and the people lived wounderfull religiously: every society had Spain.
(...) ^y the year, chosen out of the most learned and judicious rank of men,
equity (...) ^or of justice then, without laws clangor: (yet the Turdetani now
called the (...) had certain wounderfull old laws written) few or no
controversies were (...): and those that were did either concern virtuous
emulation, the reasons of (...) gods, of good manners, or of some such theames,
which the learned disputed of (...) and called the women to be auditors.
Afterward, certain mountains that (...) ^all within brake out and burned,
and the melted gould and silver, left ad^ such fine ^uffes, in men's minds, so
showing this to the Phaenicians, who were (...) ^erall merchants of the world,
they bartered of their mettalls away to them for (...) ^o value. The
Phaenicians spying this gain, acquainted diverse of the Asians and (...)
therewith, and so came often thither with a multitude of men, sometimes with
(...) and otherwhiles with but two or three Merchants ships: Now many either
(...) ^e and the soil, or else loving gold better then their gods, set up
their rests in (...) ^d by one trick or other found means to contract
alliance with others: and then (...) ^y to send Colonyes into Spain out of all
Asia, and the Isles adjacent, and (...) (...) their villenies amongst the filly
ignorant souls. Then began the Spaniards to (...) ^ir own wealth: to fight,
to prey one upon another, first privately, and soon after in whole armies:
afterward to flat nations war, waged under alien leaders: the Ph^nicians a^
first, the authors both of their present and future misfortunes: Then good
manners got them gone, equity was sent packing away, and laws came up,
together with digging of metta^s, and other traffiques, so that farewell
Philosophy, and all arts grew almost to utter ruin: (...) they were not
written but only passed by tradition from mouth to ear. But that which
remained of thee^ was renewed by some wel-wishing wits, in the time of the
Roman peace: b^ first the Goths, and afterward the Saracins rooted them
utterly from amongst the vulga^. There is an old memorial extant of the ancient
times, written in greek and Latin: I hope by (...) to illustrate the original
of any native country. (m) Of the elements] That is, such as conceive to
further the^ the elements: such as think them the orignalls of al, and never
leave GOD any thing to do, whose will disposes all things. (n) For that which
is knowne] (...) sath the greek. (o) His inuisible] (...), says the Greek
(...) is both Creation, and the thing created. V^ thinks that this
inuisibility is meant of the foam and fabrik of heaven and earth, according to
that of the Psalm. The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament
shows the works of his hands. And we find Aristotle and many more to gather
by the world external shape of Psalm. 19. 1.
the world, that there is a God, that has a providence and care of the world:
and the same they gather by the course and motion of times, by the order of our
life, and of the whole universe, wherein such things could not be done, but by
that most wise and glorious governor o^ the said universe. Augustine
translateth (...), constitutions, to make it imply that men may conceive the
secrets of GOD, by his works, even from the worlds first constitution, to
persuade us that this knowledge had existence before Christ his coming, or
Moses law, eue^ from the first creation of the world. And this me thinks is
nearest unto Paul's mind, whom this place disputes against the Philosophers,
telling them that when or where ever they live, they may find a god the
governor and father of all university: and that (for so follows the sequel)
and that, by the works which he has made, may his inuisibility be certainly
gathered. (p) Eternal vertue] Not only his secret wisdom, and justice, but
his illustrious deity and power: unless you take away [And so] and let the
rest depend upon the former: for the greek [(...)] signifying conjunction, was
the cause that [qoqque] was thrust into the Latin interpretatation. (q) In him
we liue] The ancients called GOD the life yt is diffused throughout the
universe: and the air also: so that this is true howsoever: that in him we
live, we move and have our being. Aratus also said, that al ways, courts,
havens, and all places and things were full of Jove: which his interpretor
attributes to the air. (r) In which place] The Romans and Greeks
worshipped men's statues for gods, the Egiptians beasts.

What the excellence of a religious Christian is in these Philosophical arts.
CHAP. 10.
NOw if a christian for want of reading, cannot use such of their words as fits
disputations, because he never heard them: or cannot call that part tha^
treates of nature, either natural in Latin, or physical in Greek: nor that
tha^ inquires the truth, rational or Logical: nor that which concerns
rectifying of manners, and goodness of ends Moral; or Ethicall: yet thence it
follows not that he knows not, that from the true God is both Nature, whereby
he made us like his Image, Reason, whereby we know him and Grace whereby we are
blessed in being united to him. This then is the cause why we prefer these
before the other: the other spent their wits in seeking out of the causes of
things, the means of learning, and order of life: these knowing GOD, found the
their was both the cause of the whole creation, the light of all true learning,
and the fount of all felicity. So that what Platonists or others soever held
th^s of GOD, they held as we do. But we choose rather to deal with the (a)
Pl^tonists then others, because their works are most famous; for both the
Greeks (whose language is very greatly' esteemed of the nations) do^ preserve
and extol them, and the Latins, moved by their excelle^ and glory learning
them more willingly themselves, and by recordi^ them in their tongues also,
left them the more illustrious and plain to us, and to all posterity.

L. VIVES.
[This is no good doctrine inthe Louanists opinion, for it is left out, as
distastefull to the schoolmen, though not to the direct truth.]
With the (a) Platonists] From Plato and Aristotle's time, unto Aphrodiseus,
that lived under Seuerus and his son. Aristotle was rather named amongst the
learned then either read, or understood: Aprodiseus first adventured to
explain him, and did set many on to search farther into the author, by that
light he gave: yet did Plato keep above him still, until the erection of
public schools in France and Italy, that is, as long as the Greek and Latin
tongues were in account: [but when learning grew Mercenary, and Mimicall, all
their aim was gain, and contention, and verbosity, and sond subtility, with
vile fained words of art, and frivolous quillets, then was Aristotle's logike
and physikes held fit for their purpose, and many better books of his thrown
aside. But as for Plato because they understood him not, (nay and Aristotle
much less, yet) because he teaches no tricks, oh never name him? I speak
not this to imply Aristotle's learning more insufficient then Plato's, but it is
a shame that Plato, a holy Philosopher should be thrust by, and Aristotle's
best part also, and the rest so read, that he must speak their pleasures,
being such fooleries, as not Aristotle, no, not any mad man of his time would
have held or divulged.]

Whence Plato might have that knowledge that brought him so near the Christian
doctrine. CHAP. 11.
NOw some of our Christians admire at these assertions of Plato coming soneere
to our belief of God: So that some think that at his going to Egypt, h^e
heard the Prophet (a) Hieremye, or got to read some of the prophets books in
his travel: these opinions I have (b) elsewhere related. But by all true
chronicles Plato heard not Hieremy.
supputation, Plato was borne an 100. years after Jeremy prophesied. Plato
lived 81. years, and from his death to the time that Ptolomy King of Egypt
demanded the Hebrew prophecies, and had them translated by the 70. Jews that
understood the greek also, is reckned almost 60. years. So that Plato in his
travel, could neither see Hieremy, being dead, nor read the scriptures being
not as yet translated into the greek, which he understood (c) unless (as he
was of an infatigable study) he had had them read by an interpretor, yet so as
he might not translate them, or copy them (which Ptolomy as a friend might
entreat, or as a King, command) but only carry away what he could in his
memory. Some reason there is for this, because Genesis begins thus. In the
beginning GOD Gen 1. 1. 2
treated heaven and earth, and the earth was without form and void, and
darkness ^as upon the deep, and the Spirit of GOD moved upon the wate^s.
And Plato in his (d) Platos grownd^ out of divinity.
Ti^s says that GOD first (e) joined the earth and the fire. Now it is
certain that (f) he means heaven by fire: so that here is a correspondence
with the other: In the beginning GOD created heaven and earth. Again he says
that the two (g) means conioyning these extremities, are water and air, this
some may think he had from the other, The spirit of GOD moved upon the
waters: not minding in what sense the scripture uses the word Spirit, and
because (h) air is a spirit, therefore it may be he gathered that he
collected 4. elements from this place. And whereas he says a Philosopher is a
lover of God, th^re is nothing better squareth with the holy scriptures: but
that especially (which makes me almost confess that Plato wanted not these
books) that whereas the Angel that brought Gods word to Moses, being asked
what his name was that bad him go free the Israelites out of Egypt, answered
his name was (i) I am that I am: And thus shall thou say to the children of
Israel, I am has sent me to you: as if that in Exodus 3. 14.
comparison of that which truly is, being immutable, the things that are
immutable, are not. Plato stuck hard upon this, and commended it highly: And I
ma^e a doubt whether the like be to be found in any one that ever wrote before
Plate, except in that book when it was first written, so, I am that I am, and
thou shall tell them that I am sent me to you. But wheresoever he had it, out
of others books before him, or as the Apostle says: Because that which is
known of God, is manifest unto them: for God has showed it them. For the
invisible things of him that i^, his eternal power and godhead, are seen by
the creation of the world, being considered Romans 1. 19, 20.
in his works. This makes me chose to deal with the Platonists, in our
intended question of natural Theology, namely, whether the service of one GOD,
or many, suffice for the felicity of the life to come. For as touching the
service of one or many for the helps of this temporal life, I think I have
said already sufficient.

L. VIVES.
PRophet (a) Hieremy] He went with the two Tribes Benjamin and Judah into
Egypt, and Hi^emy.
was there stoned at Tanis: there the inhabitants honor him, for the present
help his tomb gives the^ against the stinging of serpents. b) Else-where] De
Doctr. xpian. 2. Euseb^ says Hieremy began to prophecy the 36. Olympiade: and
Plato was borne the 88. of the Septuagines hereafter. (c) Unless (as he was]
Justin Martyr. in Paracl. ad gent Eusebius. de pr^p. Theodor. de Graec. affect.
all affi^me that Plato had much doctrine from the Hebrew books. Hereupon
Numenius the Philosopher said (...)? what is Plato but Moyfes made Athenian?
And Aristobulus the Jew writting to Philometo^, says, as Eusebius cites
Plato an Attike Moses.
it: Plato did follow our law in many things, for his diverse allegations have
proved him an obseruer of it in particular things, and that in many. For the
Pentate^ch was translated before Alexanders time, yea before the Persian
Monarchy, whence he and Pythagoras had both very much. (d) Timaeus] So because
Timaeus the Locrian is induced as disputing of the world, h^ had Plato heard in
Italy, and he wrote of the world in the dorike tongue, out of which book Plato
has much of his doctrine. (e) Joined the earth] The words are translated by
Tully thus: Corporeum and aspectabilem itemque tractabilem esse, necessarium
est: nihil porro igni vacuum videri, aut tangi, quod careat solido. Solidum
autem nihil, quod terrae sit expers: quamobrem mund^ efficere moliens deus,
terram primam, ignemque iungebat. The same is Tymaeus his opinion in his work
De Mundo and anima. (f) He meaneth] Plato said heaven was of fire, the stars of
the ^oure Plato held heaven, fire.
elements, because they seem^d more solid. But he held not heaven of the nature
of our fire, for he held fires of diverse nature. (g) Two meanes] Water and fire
must needs have a mean of coherence. But solid bodies are hardly reconciled by
one mean but must have two, which may of themselves and their accidents,
compose a convenient third, such is water and air, between fire and earth: for
water to earth, and air to fire, bear the same proportion, and so does water
and air between themselves which combination rules so in the elements, that
in the ascending and descending innumerable and imperceptible variations of
nature all seems but one body, either rarefied unto fire, or condensate unto
earth. (h) Air is a spirit] But not of God: of this hereafter. (i) I am]
(...), this (...) is a perticiple: as one should say, I am he that is. For we
can not transtate it by one word, as Seneca affirms Epist. lib. 8. But we
may call it Ens, of s^ (as Caesar did,) being, of, to be, as potent, of possum
So did Sergius. Quintil. GOD means, the he has being: whereas as nothing
else has properly any being: but are as Isayas says: of nothing: and Job
has it often, GOD only has being, the rest have not their existenc^ (says
Seneca) because they are eternal themselves, but because their maker guardeth
them, and should he disist, they would all vanish into nothing. Plato also
says that corporal things never have true being, but spiritual have. In
Timeo and Sophista. And there, and i^ his Parmenides he says that GOD is one,
and Ens, of whom all things depend: that nature has not a fit expressiue
name for his Excellence, nor can he be defined, (...) ascribed, nor known,
nor comprehended, that he begotte all these lesser go^ whom in his Tymaeus he
says are immortal only by their fathers will, not by their own power Him he
calls (...) which is: as he says of a true Philosopher in his Phaedon (...)
he conceiueth him which is: and a little after: (...) partake of them which is,
and in his Timaeus (...) the eternal being, unbegotten. And all the
Platonists agree that the title of his Parmenides, De ente and vno rerum
prinoipio, and of his Sophista (...) are both meant of GOD, which is the true
being, and the beginning of all things: and (...) being a perticile is of the
presentence, s^gnifying that GOD has no time past nor to come, but with him
all is present, and so his being is. That he says in his Tymeus. Time has
par^es, past, present and to come: and these times of our dividing are by our
error falsely ascribed to the divine essence, and vnmeetely. For we use to
say, he was, is and will be: but ind^ed he only is, properly and truly; was
and will be belong to things that arise and proceed according to the times and
with them. For they are two motions: but the only Lord of etern^ty has no
motion, nor is elder, nor has been younger, nor has not been hitherto, or
shall not be hereafter, nor feels any affect of a corporal body, but those
parts, past and to come are belonging to time that follows eternity, and are
species of that which moves it self One God.
according to number and space. Thus much out of Timaeus: he that will read
the author, let him look till he find these words, (...) etc. there this
sentence begins. Gregory used part of it in his Sermon of the birth of
Christ, and handled it largely in that place. GOD was always, and is, and
shall be (says he) nay rather God is always: was, and shall be are parts of our
time, and defects in nature. But he is eternally being: and so he told Moses
when he asked him his name. (...) etc. Then he begins to mount, and with
divine eloquence to spread the luster of GODS eternity and inmutability: but
this worthy man is feign to yield under so huge a burden, and shut his eyes,
dazeled wi^h so fiery a splendour. Plutarch tells that on one post of the
Temples door at Delphos was written (...), know thy self, and on the other
(...), thou art: the first having reference to our preparation in matters of
divinity, and the later unto GODS nature, which is always sixth and firm,
whereas ours is flux and mutable. Wherefore, it may well be said of him whose
nature is not subject to any alteration of time, but al^aies fixed and
unalterable. thou art. Thou art, may also be referred unto the immovable
eternity, without any respect of the time, as Plato says in his Parmenides,
who will not have the time present made an attribute of GOD, because it is a
time, nor will have him called an essence, but rather somewhat inexplicable
above all essence, to know what it is not, is easy, but what it is,
impossible. Some think that Parmenides himself in his Philosophical poem,
means of GOD there where he says, all things are but one: and so thought
Symplicius: for it is unlike that so sharp a wit as Parmenides, found not the
difference and multitude of things which he sets plainly down in his
poemes. For having spoken largely of that only Ens, he concludes thus: Thus
much of the true high things, now concerning the confused and mortal thing in
which is much error. Aristotle through desire to reprehend e^roniously
traduceth his opinion in his Physikes, which Themistius touches at: Parmenides
(says he) did not think an accident, that has existence but from another, to
be the Ens he meant of, but he spoke of the Ens which is properly,
especially and truly so, which is indeed no other but Plato his very Ens. Nay
what say you to Aristotle, that says himself that Parmenides meant of that one
Ens which was the original of all: The other Platonists opinions I have
already related: Now as for that sentence (so common against them) that the
things intelligible only, not the sensible, have existence: Alcymus in his
work to Amynthas declar^th that Plato had both it, and Epicharmus.
that of the Idea's, out of Epicharmus his books, and alleges the words of
Epicharmus himself, who was a Philosopher of Coos, a Phythagorean, who held
that learning made a man as far more excellent then others, as the su^ne
excells the stars and all other light, and the sea the rivers. Plato himself
in his Sophista auerreth the antiquity of that opinion that affirmed the
essence of intelligibilities only, and that thereupon arose a great contention
with those the held the world to consist of only bodies: Tymaeus also the
Locrian in his book de mundo, wrote of these Idea's. But Plato refined all
these things, and brought in a more polite, eleg^t form, adding besides
altitude and divinity of doctrine, admirable and excellent. I make no question
that Pythagoras did learn those mysteries out of the Scriptures in Egypt. And
it i^ more likely that he talked with Hieremy there, then that Plato did.

That the Platonists for all their good opinion of the true GOD, yet
neuerthethelesse held that worship was to be given to many. CHAP. 12.
THerefore have I chosen these before the rest, because their good opinion of
the true and only GOD, made them more illustrious then the rest, and so far
preferred by posterity, that whereas (a) Aristotle, Plato's scholar, an
excellent witted man, (b) Plato's inferior indeed, but far above the rest;
who instituted the Peripatetique sect, that taught walking, and had many famous
scholars of his (c) sect in his (d) masters life time, and after Plato's
death (e) Speusippus his sisters son and Xenocrates his beloved scholar
succeeded in his school, called the (f) Academy, and their followers (g)
thereupon, Academikes: yet the later Philosophers that liked to follow Plato
would not be called Peripatetiques, nor Academi^es, but Platonists: Of which
sort there were these famous Gretians (h) Plotine, (i) Iamblychus, Pla^onists.
(k) and Porphiry: and Apulcius an African was famous both for his writtings in
the Greek and Latin tongues. But all these, and their followers, yea even (l)
Plato himself, held it fit to adore many gods.

L. VIVES.
Whereas (a) Aristotle] Borne at Stagyra, son to Nicomachus and Phaestis
both descended Aristotle.
from Aesculapius: borne the 99. Olympiade. He came to Plato at 15. years old,
and heard him till he was 35. when as Plato died: and then began he to teach
himself, walking in the Lycium, whence his followers were called
Peripatetiques of (...), to walk. He was an admirable, singular witted man,
inferior to none: Plato's better in variety of knowledge, and all the worlds
better in disputation of all arts. Nor are these great gifts of his to be
evil taken, or maligned: we must confess indeed that he was an affectator of
glory, and too curious a condemner of others, but withal, modest and
abstinent: nor in doctrine of arts had he ever his fellow. I wish he had dealt
more uprightly in his confutations of others. (b) Plato and Aristotle compared.
Plato's inferior] comparision between Plato and Aristotle is odious, because
of their diversity of studies. Doubtless they were both admirable examples for
all to imitate. The greeks call Plato, (...), divine, and Arystotle (...),
which is as much: Plato's eloquence was such that it was a common saying, if
Jove would speak greek, he would speak Plato's greek: But Aristotle's
knowledge in Rhetoric (I had almost said) excelled Plato's: mary in use he
was far short of him. For Aristotle affected a succinct phrase: least being
ted^ous, and drawing each thing at length the discourse might become to
profuse, and the rules of art too long to bear away. So his enduour was not
to admit an idle word, which made him attain unto a great perfection in the
proper use of the greek language and figures. (c) Sect] (...) in Greek, a
word of indifference, but ordinaryly taken in the worst sense, for all opinions
private, or other, without the Church, we call Heresies. (d) His Masters
life] Aristotle (says Plato in Laertius) has kiekt against us, as foles do
at their dammes. Yet some say he did not teach whilst Plato lived. (e)
Speusippus] Eurymedo^s son, Plato's successor, he taught 8. years, and
Speusippus.
took pay, for which Dionysius mocked him: he went also as far as Macedon to
sing the Epithalamion at Cassanders marriage, for money: which Philostratus
says he had written in bald and Xenocrates
rugged verse. Growing diseased Xenocrates of Chaledon succeeded him at his
own request, one that Plato loved dearly well and traveled with him into
Sycily: he was but dull of wit, but of a severe and sacred carriage. ^lato
says Aristotle ^ackt the bit and he the spurs: but loved him so well that
when men swore he spoke ill of him, he would not credit them, think it
impossible that one whom he loved so well, should not love him again. In
controversies of law, the Judges never put him to his oath: thinking it sin not
to trust so just a man though be swore not. (f) Academy A fan was indeed
nere Athens, al woods and fennes, and therefore vnhealthful and had bin says
La^rtius) the habitation of Academus, one of the Heroes: Eupolis the Academy
what and ^ence.
Co^median calls him a god: but Plutarch in his life of Theseus, shows what
he was. It was he y^ told Castor and Pollux y^ Theseus after his rape of
Hellen, kept her secretly at Aphidna: and therefore was ever after respected
both by them and all the other Lacedaemonians: for in all their roades made into
ye Athenia^ territories, they never meddled with Academia: but Dicaearchus
says y^: first was called Ecedemia of one Ecedemus, a soldiour under Castor
and Pollux: and so after, came to be called Academia: This Laertius touches
at. Apuleius says that Plato left all his patrimony, in a little garden near
this Academie, two servants, a cup for sacrificing in, and as much gold as
would make an eare-ring. In vita Platon. Laertius says he was honorably
buried in the Academy, and that Mithridates king of Pontus, having taken
Athens, erected Plato a statue, dedicating it to the Muses. In Athens (this we
may not pass) were these schools. First the Academy, secondly Liceum, thirdly
Prytaneum, fourthly Canopum, fifthly Stoa, sixthly The sch^les of Athens.
Tempe, seventhly Cynosarges. (g) Therevpon] This is the old Academy, taught to
Archesilas, by ^lemon Senocrates his scholar, and he endeavored to reduce all
to Socrates his form of disputation, to affirm nothing, but confute all, and
this was called the new Acame^, which Tully in Uarro's person affirms was
like the old one: But henceforth those that had positive grounds for any
thing, and held a truth to be in things, as Plato did, were not called
Academicks but Platonists, I think because the name of Academicks was so
proper to A^chesilas schools. (h) Plotine] Borne (says Suidas) at Lycopolis
in Egypt: he wrote four and fifty books, obscure ones, to keep the custom
of his sect. He lived in The Emperor Galie^us time, Plotine.
until Probus entered, he of whose desteny Firmicus does so lie and prate.
Porphyry, Plotines scholar wrote his life at large. (i) Iamblichus] Of
Calchis, Porphyries scholar, a Pythagorist rather Iamblichus
then a Platonist as Hierom testifies: yet in all divine matters, the
Platonists are Pythagorians. His wit and manners were better then his
masters. (k) Porphyry] A Tyrian, one neither Porphyry.
sound in body nor mind, of wavering judgment, unmanly inueterate malice and
cruelty: a professed Plotinist: Suidas says he was Amelius scholar also.
Porphiry (says he, was properly called Basileus, a Tyrian philosopher,
Aemelius his scholar whom Plotine taught. He lived in A^lians time and
continued until Diocletians. Thus far Suidas. Why he was called Basileus he
shows in his master Plotines life. Amelius (quoth he) dedicated this book
to me, and in the title called me Basileus, for that was my name: in the
language of my country, I was called after my father, Malcus: which translated
is king. Thus he of himself. (l) Plato himselfe] In his Timaeus he calls
Saturn, Ops, and Juno gods, and all the rest brethren and kinsfolks amongst
themselves, and elsewhere, he commands sacrifices unto their gods, Demones
and Heroes: saying it is these to whom the Cities good estate is to be
commended. De legib. and de repub. in diverse places.

Of Plato's affirmation, that the gods were all good, and lovers of virtue.
CHAP. 13.
WHerefore though in other points they and we do differ, yet to ouer-passe
them in this great controversy now in hand, I ask them what gods we must
worship? the good, the bad, or both? nay herein we must take Plato's (a)
assertion, that holds all the good to be good, no bad ones of them: Why then
this worship is the gods, ^or then it is the gods, and if they be bad their
godhead is gone. This being true, (and what else should we believe:) then
down goes the (b) opinion that affirms a necessity of appeasing the bad gods
by sacrifices, and inuoking the good. For there are no bad gods: and the good
only (if there were) must have the worship, without any other pertakers. What
are they then that love stage-plaies, and to see their own crimes, thrust into
their honors and religion? their power proves them something, but their
affects convince them wicked, Plato's opinion of plays was shown in his
judgment of the expulsion of Poets, as pernicious and balefull to an honest
state. What gods are they now that oppose Plato in defense of those plays? he
cannot endure that the gods should be slandered, they cannot endure unless
they be openly defaced. Nay they added malicious cruelty to their bestiall
desires, depriving T. Latinus of his son, and striking him Desires.
with a disease, mary when they had done as they pleased, then they freed him
from his malady. But Plato very wisely for bad all fear of the evil powers,
and confirming himself in his opinion, feared not to avow the expulsion of al
these politic absurdities, from a firm state, all those filthinesses y^
those gods delighted in. And this Plato does Labeo make a Semy-god: even that
(c) Labeo that holds that sad, black Labeo.
and bloody sacrifices do fit the evil gods, and mirthfull orgies the good:
why then dares Plato, but a semigod, boldly debar the gods themselves, the
very good ones, from those delights which he held obscaence and unlawful?
These gods nevertheless confute Labeo, for they showed themselves cruel and
barbarous against Latinus, not mirthfull nor game-some. Let the Platonists,
that hold all the gods to be good and in virtue the fellows of the wise, and
affirm it a sacrilege to believe other of them, let them expound us this
mystery, we will, say they: mark us well we do so.

L. VIVES.
PLato's. (a) Assertion.) Deleg. 10. he says the gods are good, full of
virtue, providence and justice: but yet that they have all this from him that
has the true being, the Prince of nature, as from the fountain of all
goodness. This argument Socrates (in their banquet) uses to prove Love no
god: all the gods are good, and blessed: so is not Love: ergo. Porphyry de
sacrific. 3. GOD is neither hurtful, nor needful of any thing. So held the
Stokes, as Tully says, Offic. 2 but we are all for Plato now; whereof
Agustine speaks: if we should recite all, what end should we make. (b) The
opinion.] Apuleius says some of the Daemones love day offerings, some the
nights, some mirthfull rites, some sad and melancholy. De deo socrat Porpherio
upon Horace his Carmen seculare says it, was a common opinion that some gods
were worshipped Why the evil gods are worshipped.
least they should hurt, and others from protection. Plutarch says that kings
and princes did offer sacrifices to these great Daemones, to auert their wrath
which was always most perilous. Porphery says that states need sometimes
offer to the devils to appease them from hurting their corn, cattle or
horses, for sure it is (quoth he) that if they be neglected they will become
angry, and do men much mischief: but lawful worship they have none, and this
the divines (not the vulgar only) do hold, allowing sacrifices to be offered
them, but that they must not be tasted of. De abstinent animat. The supernall
gods have no creatures living offered to them
lib. 2. (c) Labeo.] Porphery in the said book, allows no living creature,
but fruits flowers honey and meal to be offered to the gods above: So used the
ancients, and so should it be says Theophrastus, and Pithagoras would never
suffer creature to be killed for sacrifice. But blood and slaughter are
expiations for the devils. And Porphery elsewhere says that the lower the
gods are, the sadder sacrifies they require: the earth-gods, and hell-gods love
black cattle: the first upon alltars, the latter in graves and pits.

Of such as held. 3. Kinds of reasonable souls: in the gods, in airy spirits,
and in men CHAP. 14.
ALL reasonable (a) creatures (say they) are threefold: gods, men, devils the
gods the heighest, then the devils, lastly, men: the first having place in
heaven, the second in the air, the third on the earth: each with his change of
The devils community with gods and men.
place, has difference in nature: the gods are of more power then the spirits,
or men: and men are under the spirits and gods, both by place of nature and
worth of merit, (b) the spirits, in the midst, are under the gods and so
their inferiors: a^oue men in place, and therefore in power with the gods,
they are immortal: with men passionate, and therefore lovers of loose sports,
and poetical figments and are subject to all human affects, which the gods
by no means can be: So Plato's prohibition of Poetry, did not deprive the
gods of their delights, but only the ayry spirits. Well, of this question
diverse, but Apuleius a Platonist of Madaura, chiefly in one whole work,
disputes, calling it De deo Socratis, of Socrates his god: where he disputes
what kind of god (c) this power that Socrates had attendant upon him, was: It
was as his friend, and forbad him to proceed in any action which it knew would
not end prosperously. Now there he plainly affirms, that this was no god, but
only an ayry spirit, handling Plato's doctrine rarely, concerning the height
of the gods, man's meannesse, and the devils middle interposition. But this
being thus, how durst Plato deprive (not the gods, for them he acquitted from
all touch of human affects) but then the ayry spirits of their stage
pleasures, by expelling of Poets? unless by this act he meant to warn man's
soul how ever here encheyned in corruption, yet to detest the vnpure, and
impious foulness of these devils, even for honesties sake? for if Plato's
prohibition, and proof be just, then is their demand and desire most damnable.
So either Apulcius mistook the kind of Socrates his Genius, or Plato
contradicts himself, now (d) honoring those spirits and straight after
abridging them their pleasures, and expelling their delights from an honest
state; or else Socrates his spirit was not worth the approving, wherein
Apuleius offended in being not ashamed to st^le his book (e) De deo Socratis,
of his god, and yet proves by his own distinction of Dij and daemones, that
he should have called it De daemone Socratis, of his devil. But this he had
rather profess in the body of his discourse then in his ti^le, for the name of
a Demon was by good doctrine brought into such hate, that (f) whosoever had
^ead Demon in the title, ere he had read the Demons commendations in the
book, would have thought Apuleius (g) mad. And what found he praiseworthy
in them, but their subtle, durable bodies, and elevation of place; when he
came to their conditions in general, he found no good, but spoke much evil
of them: so that he that reads that book, will never marvel at their
desiring plays, and that Iuch gods as they should be delighted with crime^,
beastly shows, barbarous cruelty, and what ever else is horrible or
ridiculous, that all this should square with their affects, is no wonder.

L. VIVES.
REasonable. (a) Creatures.] Plato reckons three sorts of gods: the Dei^yes,
the Daemones, and the Heroes: but these last have reference to men, whence they
arise. De leg 4. Epinom. Plutarch The orders of the gods
highly commends those that placed the spirits betwixt gods and men: were it
Orpheus, some Phirgian or Aegiptian, for both their sacrifices professes it.
De defect oracul. for they found the means (says he) wherein gods and men
concur. Homer (says he* uses the names at ^don: how calling them gods, and
now demones: Hesiod; fire made reasonable nature quadripartite: into gods,
spirits, Heroes, and mortalles: who living well arise both to Heroes and
Daemones. (b) The spirits.) Socrates in Platos Conuiuium, mentions a
disputation with Diotyma, where he affirms the spirits nature to be mean
between gods and man's. (c) This power.] Socrates (they say) had a spirit that
forbad him all acts whose events it knew should not be successful: but never
incited him to any thing whatsoever. (d) Honoring.] Teaching it also Epinom.
(e) De deo.] All that handled this before Apuleius, called this spirit a Demon
not a deity: himself in above six hundredth places in Plato, in Plato Zenophon
also, Cicero and Plutarch, Maximus of Tire who ^rot a double demonstration
hereof: So did many other ca lit, both Platonists and Philosophers of other
nations, ^ecitall were tedious. (f) Whosoever.] Whosoever reads the title
before the book ere he read the book. (g) Mad.] For the gentiles as then
called the Demonyaks and such as were possessed with the devil, mad men.

That neither the ayry spirits bodies, nor height of place, make them excel
men. CHAP. 15.
Wherefore God forbad that a soul that fears God should think those spirits
to excel it because they have more (a) perfect bodies: So should beasts excel
us also, many of which go beyond us in quicknes of sense, nimblenes,
swiftness, strength and long life, what man sees like the Eagle, or Vultur?
smells like to the dog? is swifter then stags, hares, and birds? strong as a
lion or an elephant, or lines with the serpent (b) that with his skin put of
his ears and becomes young again; But as we excel these in understanding, so
do we the ayrie spirits in just living; or should do at least. For therefore
has the high providence given them bodies in some sort excelling ours, that we
might have the greater care to preserve, and augment that wherein we excel
them, rather then our bodies: and learn to cont^ne that bodily perfection
which we know they have, in respect of the goodness of life, whereby we are
before them, and shall obtain immortality of body also, not for the eternity
of plagues to afflict, but which purity of soul shall effect. And for the (c)
higher place, they having the air, and we the earth, it were a ridiculous
consequence to make them our betters in that: for so should birds be by the
same reason. (d) I but birds being tired, or lacking meat come down to earth
to rest or to feed, so do not the spirits: Well then, will you prefer them
before us, and the spirits before them? if this be a mad position, as mad a
consequence it is to make them excel us by place, whom we can, nay must excel
by pyety. For as the birds of the air are not preferred before us, but
subjected to us for the equity of our reason: so though the devils being
higher then we, are not our betters because air is above earth: but we are
their betters, because our says far surmounteth their despair. For Plato's
reason dividing the elements Man's hope above the devils despair.
into four, and parting mooueable fire and immooueable earth by interposition
of air and water, giving each an equal place above the other, this proves
that the worth of creatures depends not upon the placing of the elements. And
Apuleius making a man an earthly creature, yet prefers him before the
water-creatures, whereas Plato puts the water above the earth, to show that the
worth of creatures is to be discerned by another method then the posture of
natural bodies: the meaner body may include the better soul, and the
perfecter the worse.

L. VIVES.
MOre (a) perfect] Apuleius makes them of a mean temperature between earthly
and aethereall, more pure and transparent then a cloud, coagulate of the most
subtle parts of air, The devils bodies.
and void of all solidity, invisible unless they please to form themselves a
groser shape. (b) That with his skinne] Casting his skin, he begins at his
eyes, that one ignorant thereof would think him blind. Then gettes he his head
bare, and in 24. hours puts it of his whole body. The serpents renouation.
Look Aristot. de genesis anim. lib. 8. (c) Higher place] Which Apuleius gathers
thus: No element is void of creatures. Earth has men and beasts: the water,
fishes: fire some living things also, witness Aristotle: Ergo the air must
have some also: but unless those spirits be they, Lib. 8. Apul de Do^
Socratis. Olympus.
none can tell what they be. So that the spirits are under the gods, and above
us: their inferiors our betters. (d) I but birds] Apuleius his answer: thus:
Some give the air to the birds to dwell in: falsely: For they never go higher
then Olympus top: which being the highest mount of the world, yet
perpendicularly measured is not two furlongs high: whereas the air reaches up
to the concaue of the Moons sphere, and there the skies begin. What is then
in all that ayrie space between the Moon and Olympus top? has it no
creatures? is it a dead vselesse part of nature? And-againe, birds (if one
consider them well) are rather creatures earthly then a^reall: on earth they
feed, rest, breed, and fly as near it as may be: and when they are weary,
earth is their port of retirement. This from an imperfect copy of Apuleius:
yet Augustines reason of the place must stand: for though the spirits be above
the birds, yet the birds are ^ill above us: but I mean not hear to play the
disputant.

What Apuleius the Platonist held concerning the qualities of those ayrie
spirits. CHAP. 16.
THis same Platonist speaking of their qualities says, that they are (as men)
subject to passions; of anger, delight, glory, inconstancy in their
ceremonies, and fury upon neglect. Besides, to them belong diuinations,
dreams, auguries, prophesies, and all ^gicians miraculous works. Briefly he
defines them, things created, passive, reaso^le, ^reall, eternal: In the
three first they perticipate with us: in the fourth with ^ne, in the fifth with
the gods: and two of the first the gods share with them Plato's devils.
also (...) the (a) gods (says he) are creatures: and giving each element to
his pro^habitants, he gives earth to men, and the other creatures: water to
the (...) etc. air to these spirits, and Ether to the gods. Now in that the
spirits are cre^res, they communicate both with men and beasts, in reason with
gods and ^in eternity with gods only; in passion with men only, in ayrie
essence with (...). So that they are creatures is nothing; for so are beasts:
in that they are reaso^able, so are we, equally: in that they are eternal,
what is that without felicity: (b) Temporal happiness excells eternal
misery. In that they are passive, what ge^ by that? so are we, and were we not
wretched we should not be so: in t^ ^ir bodies are ayrie, what of that,
seeing a soul of any nature is preferr^ (...) a body of what perfection so
ever? And therefore the honor given by t^ ^le, is not due to the souls
inferior. But if that amongst these spirits qualiti^ (...) had reckoned
wisdom, virtue and felicity, and have made them commun^ these with the gods,
then had he spoake somewhat, worth noting, yet o^ we not to worship them as
God, for these ends, but rather we should know him of whom they had these good
gifts. But as they are, how far are they from wo^h of worship, being
reasonable to be wretched, passive to be wretched, eternal (...) ever
wretched? wherefore to leave all and insist on this only which I said (...)
spirits shared with us, that is passion, if every element have his crea^ and
air immortalls, earth and water mortals, why are these spirits (...) ^o
perturbations? (to that which the Greeks call (c) (...), whence our (...)
passion deriueth: word (d) of word, (...), and passion, being (e) a motion of
(...) ^e against reason). Why are these in these spirits that are not in
beasts? (...) appearance of such in beasts, is (f) no perturbation, because it
is not against (...) which the beast wants. And that it is a perturbation in
men, (g) their ^esse, or their (h) wretchedness is cause. For we cannot have
that perfec^ wisdom in this life that is promised us after our acquittance from
mortal^ (...) the gods they say cannot suffer those perturbations, because that
their (...) is conjoined wi^h felicity: and this they affirm the reasonable
soul (...) absolutely pure, enjoys also. So then if the gods be free from
passion, be^ they are (i) creatures blessed, and not wretched: and the beasts,
because ^e creatures, neither capable of blessedness nor wretchedness: it
romai^ ^t these spirits be perturbed like men, only because they are creatures
not ^d but wretched.

L. VIVES.
THE (a) Gods] Plato also in his Timaeus says, that they are invisible
creatures. Apuleius de deo S^cr. makes some vncorporall Daemones, viz. Love and
Sleep. (b) Temporal* It is said that Chyron (...) son refused immortality,
and that Ulysses chose rather to live and die at home with his ^er and friends,
then to live immortal amongst the goddesses. Plato says it is better to live a
(...) little while, then to be eternally possessed of all bodily pleasures
without justice and the other Immortality worse then mortality.
(...). de legib: the Philosophers have a saying, it is better to be then not
to be: of that hereafter. (...)] So Tull. Tus. qu. translateth it: and Quintil.
l. 6. terms it affects, and holds y^ most proper. (...) ^ly of their
ancients, uses passion for it: but I make doubt that the copy is faulty li.
20. (...) ^ds are. It helps the passions of the belly, being (...) thervpo^.
(d) Word of word] as (...) (...); and passio of p^tior, to suffer. (e) A
motion] Tully has it from Z^no. (f) No perturbation] Tully Tusc. quaest. The
affections of the body may be inculpable, but not the minds: all which arise
out of the neglect of reason, and therefore are existent only in men: for that
which we see by accident in beasts, is no perturbation. (g) Their
foolishnesse] For we are ouer-borne with false opinions: and our selves rather
work our affects then receive them ab extra, and as S^a says, we are ever
worse afraid then hurt. The Stoikes held all perturbations to have their
source from deprauation of opinion. For desire is an opinion of a future good:
and fear an opinion of future evil, sorrow, of present evil, joy of present
good, all which we measuring by the fondness of our thoughts, and not by the
nature of things, thence it comes that we are rapt with so many violent
thoughts, (h) Their wretchednesse] This is man's misery, that the very wisest
is subject to sorrow, joy, and other affects, do he what he can. (i)
Creatures] Socrates durst not confess that these spirits were bad, or
wretched: but he boldly affirms they are neither good nor happy. Plato.
Conuiuio.

Whether it becomes a man to worship those spirits from whose guilt he should
be pure. CHAP. 17.
WHat fondness then, nay what madness subjects us unto that religion of
devils, when as by the truth of religion we should be saved from participation
of their vices? for they are moved with wrath (as Apuleius for all his adoring
and sparing them affirms): but true religion bids us not to yield to wrath,
but rather (a) resist it. (b) They are won with gifts, we are forbidden to
take bribes of any. They love honors, we are (c) prohibited all honors
affectation. They are haters of some, and lovers of some, as their affects
transport them: truth teaches us to love all, even (d) our very enemies.
Briefly all the intemperance of mind, (e) passions and perturbations, which
the truth affirms of Mat. 5. 44.
them, it forbids us. What cause is then, but thine own lamentable error
for thee to humble thy self to them in worship, whom thou seek to oppose in
uprightness of conversation? and to adore those thou hate to imitate, when
as all religion teaches us to imitate those we adore?

L. VIVES.
RAther (a) resist] Christ in Mathewes Gospels utterly forbids anger. Abbot
Agatho said that an angry man could never please GOD, though he should raise
the dead to life. Abbot Agatho.
(b) They] They take willingly, and beg impudently. Apollos oracle did
always bid his clients remember him with a gift to make themselves more
fortunate by: yet the crafty devil desires not their money (he needed not)
but their minds that was his aim. (c) Prohibited] Christ forbids his Apostles
to assume the name of Masters, to sit high at table, or love salutes in the
streets: and commands that the chief should be but as a minister. For honor
arose with Heathenisme, and should fall therewith, and not survive in the
Church: nor is it magnanimous to affect but to contemn it. (d) Our very
enemies] Mat. 5. 44. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, etc. It
suffices not, to bear them no hate, we must love them: which is not
impossible. For first Christ did it, and then Steven. Hierom. (e) Passions and
perturbations] or passionate perturbations.

Of that religion that teaches, that those spirits must be men's advocates to
the good gods. CHAP. 18.
IN vain therefore did Apuleius and all of his opinion, honor them so as to
place them in the air, and because God and man (as Plato (a) says) have no
immediate commerce, these are the carriers of men's prayers to the gods, and
their answers to men. For those men thought it unfit to join the gods with
men: but held the spirits fit means for both sides, to (b) to take the prayers
hence, and bring answers thence: that a chaste man, and one pure from Magical
superstition, (...) ^se them as his patrons, by whom he might send to the
gods that love (...) things as if he for bear to use it, makes him far
more fit ^o be heard of (...) ^ies: for they love stage-filthe; which
chastity l^heth: they love all the (...) of witch-crafts which innocence
abhors. Thus chastity and innoce^ ^hey would any thing with God, must make
their enemies their (...) ^r else go empty away He may save his breath in
defense of stage-plaies: (...) (...) highly-admired master gives them too
sore a blow: if any man be so ^se, as to delight in obscaenity himself, and
think it accepted also of the ^ds.

L. VIVES.
PL^ (a) saith] In Socrates person in his Conuiuium. Diotyma having put love as
mean (...) mortality and immortality: Socrates asked her, What that love
was? (...), (...) the great Demon: (Socrates) for all those Daemones are
betwixt gods and men. So^ ^et conceiving her, asked the nature of this Demon.
He carries (says she) messages (...) ^he gods and men: theirs to us, ours to
them: our prayers, their bounties. Such as (...) (...) middle place of the
universe: thither descend prophecies thither aims all cere^ ^es of the
Priests, charms, Teletae, and all the parts of Magic. And she adds;
(...), God has no conjunction with man, but uses these Daemones in all his
(...) with men, sleeping or waking. (b) Take them] Apuleius calls them
Saluti-geruli, (...) ^ers; and administri, ministers: the first in our respect,
the second in the gods. Ca^ (...) them Angeli, messengers, that tell the gods
what we do, and Praestites, because their (...) (...) ^e in all actions.

Of the wickedness of art Magic, depending on these wicked Spirits
ministry. CHAP. 19.
(...) ^ill I out of the public (b) light of all the world, bring ouer-throwes
(...) ^rtes Magic, whereof some wicked and some wretched do make (...) ^he
devils name: why if they be the works of the gods, are they so (...)
punished by the laws? or have Christians diuulged these laws against (...)
any other intent then to suppress a thing so generally pernicious unto (...)
kind? what says that worthy Poet? Testor chara deos, and te germana, tuumque
Ancid. 4.

Dulce caput, Magieas inuitam accingier arts.
(b) Sister, by heaven, and thee that hearst my vows,
I would not use art Magic, could I choose.


(...) which he says elsewhere. (c) Atque satas alio vidi traducere messes.
Virg. A^g. log. 8.

I saw the witch transport whole fields of corn,


(...) these diabolical arts were reported of power to remove whole har^
(...) corn and fruits whether they pleased: was not this (as Tully says)
recor^ ^e xii. tables of Romes ancient laws, and a punishment proclaimed for
all (...) (...) used it? Nay (d) was not Apuleius himself brought before
Christian (...) for such practices? If he had known them to be divine, he
should have Apuleius accused of Magic.
^ed them at his accusation, as congruent with the divine powers, and have ^ed
the opposite laws of absurd impiety, in condemning so admirable (...) the
deities. For so might he either have made the Judges of his mind, (...) had
been refract^rie, and following their unjust laws put him to (...) the
spirits would have done his soul as good a turn as he had de^ in dying
fearelesly, for the due auouching of their powerful operations. Our martyrs
when Christianity was laid to their charge, knowing it was the tract of
eternal glory, denied it not to avoid a temporal torment, but auerred it
constantly, bore all tortures vndantedly, and dying securely, struck shame upon
the laws foreheads that condemned it as unlawful. But this Platonist wrote a
large and eloquent oration (c) now extant, wherein he purges himself of all
touch of using these arts, and sees no means to prove his own innocence but
by denying that which indeed no innocent can commit. But (f) for all these
magic miracles, he rightly condemns them, as done by the works and
operations of the devils: wherefore let him look how he can justly give them
divine honors, as mediators between the gods and us, when he shows their
works to be wicked: and such indeed as we must avoid if we will have our
prayers come near to the true God. And then what are the prayers that he
affirms they do bear unto the gods? Magical or lawful? If magical, the
gods will receive no such prayers: if lawful, then use they no such ministers.
But if a sinnet (chiefly one that has sinned in Magic) repent and pray; will
they carry up his prayers, or obtain his pardon that were the causers of his
guilt, and whom he does accuse? Or do these devils (to obtain his pardon)
first repent themselves for deceiving him, and receive a pardon themselves
also afterward. Nay, none will say so: for they that hope to get pardon by
repentance, are far from being worthy of divine honors: for if they were
desirous of them, and yet penitents also, their pride were to be detested in
the first, though their humility were to be pitied in the latter.

L. VIVES.
LIght (a) of the] Some read law. (b) Sister] Dido unto her sister Anna, when
Aeneas was departed: This Virgill grounds upon the Romans laws, who for all
their superstion, yet condemned Magic. Seruius. (d) Atque satas] Uirg.
Pharmaceute. Plin. l. 18. Duod. Tab. He that Enchants the corn, etc. and so
in diverse places. Pliny says, that Uectius Marcellus, Magike forbidden.
Nero's Harbinger had an Oliue-yeard in the Marucine fields, that removed
quite over the highway, and that the whole farms went out of their places and
seated themselves elsewhere. Magic (says Apuleius) was forbidden of old by
the twelve tables because of the incredible bewitching of the corn. (d) Was
not] So were many, by the Roman laws: Apollonius Tyaneus by Domitian, and
Apuleius by Claud. Maximus Prefect of Africa not the C^stian. (e) Now extant]
His two Apologies concerning Magic: wherein he leaves all his luxurious
phrase, and his fustian terms, and goes to it like a plain lawyer: yet not
so well but he flies out here and there and must be Apuleius still. (f) For
all these] How could men know (says Eusebius) how to call and compel the
Devils, but by the devils own teaching them? This Porphyry confesses, and
alleges Hecates prescription how she should be called out. De Orac.

Whether it be credible that good Gods had rather converse with those spirits
then with men. CHAP. 20.
O But there is a necessity binds these spirits in this place between the
gods and men, to carry and recarry messages and answers from the one to the
other. Well, and what necessity? why because no god has commerce immediately
with man. Very good! Oh (a) that is a glorious holiness of GOD surely, that
conuerseth not with a penitent, humble man, and yet will converse with a proud
spirit! He has no commerce with a man that flies from succor to his death,
but with a spirit that counterfeits his deity, he has: he medleth not with
him that asks pardon, but with the spirit that imagines mischief he does he
deals not with a Philosopher y^ expels stage plays, out of an honest
city. he deals with a devil that forces stage plays from the priests and
Senators, as part of the religion of a city, he likes not the men's company
that forbid slanders of the gods, but the devils that delight in them, theirs
he li^eth of. He conuerseth not with the man that executes just laws upon
Magitians, but with the devils that teach Magic, and give it effect those
he con^uerseth with: nor is joined with a man that flies the example of the
devil, yet ioynes with the devil that hunteth for the wrack of man: This is
likely sure.

L. VIVES.
O (a) that is a glorious] The Bruges copy has a little alteration,
transferring [penitent] into a following sentence: but the sense is all one: it
were curiosity to stand upon such small trifles.

Whether the gods use the Devils as their Messengers, and be willing that they
should deceive them, or ignorant that they do it. CHAP. 21.
But there is a great necessity of this so vile an inconvenience, because the
Aethereall gods, (but that these spirits being upward) other-wise could not
know the affairs of earth: heaven (ye know) being far from earth, and air
adjoining to both. O rare wisdom! This is their opinion, that their good gods
have a care of humane businesses, else were they not worth worship, and yet the
distance of place debarres them from notice how things pass, but that the
spirits help them: so there are they necessary: and consequently
worship-worthy, as the means that the gods have to know men's cases, and to
send them help in time: If this then be so, the devils contiguous body is
better known to the gods then a man's good mind. O lamentable necessity! nay
rediculous detestable vanity, to keep vanity from divinity. If the gods by
their freedom from the bodies obstacles, can behold our minds, what need they
any spirits help? And if the gods have corporal means, as sight, speech,
motion, or so, in bodies, by which they receive the spirits messages, then may
the spirits lie, and deceive them also. So that if the deyties be not ignorant
of the devils deceits, no more are they bard the knowledge of our actions. But
I would they would tell me whether the spirits told the gods that Plato
disliked the slanders that the Poets laid upon them, and yet concealed that
they did like well of them, or concealed all, that the gods never knew it: or
revealed all, Plato's religious zeal, and their own vile affection? or did
they suppress Plato's opinion that would have such impious liberty abrogated
as by Poetique fables did iniure the gods, and yet shamed not to lay open their
own wickedness in affecting such plays as contained the gods disgraces:
Choose of these four which they will, and mark the sequel. How vilely they
thought of these good gods. If they choose the first, then it is granted that
the gods might not converse with good Plato that restrained their shames; and
yet conuersed with those evil spirits that rejoiced at these injuries of the
gods, who could not know a good man being a far but by these devils, because
they could not know these devils that were so near them. If they take the
second, and say the spirits concealed both, that the gods should neither know
Plato's religious law, and the devils sacriligious practice, what use can the
gods have of these messengers for any knowledge, seeing they could not have
knowledge of the good laws that honest men promulgated in their honor against
the lust of those vile spirits! If they choose the third and make these spirits
both to celebrate Plato's prohibition of the gods injuries, and their own
affectation of their continuance: why were not this rather to ouer-crow them,
then to interpret to them? And so should the gods hear and iud^e of both
these relations, that they neither should casheere these spirits of their
service, that oppo^ed Plato his good zeal, nor for bear to send Plato rewards
by them, for his honest intent. For so are they placed in the chain of natures
(a) elements, that they may have the company of those that injury them, but
not of those that defend them: both they may know, but the states of (b) air
and earth they cannot alter, nor transmute. Now if they choose the fourth, it
is worse then all. For who can endure the devils should tell the gods how they
are abused by players and Poets, and of the height of pleasure themselves take
in these shows, and yet be silent of Plato's grave decree that abrogated all
such obscenities? that so the good gods might have intelligence of the
wickedness of the worst: their own messengers; and yet none of the
Philosophers goodnesses, that aimed all at their honor whereas the other
professed their extreme disgrace.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) chain of* for the elements are cheined together as it were: the lower
to the higher, The elements chai^ed.
so coherent, that the parts contiguous seem both of one nature and so it is
in the sphe^es that are all contained one within another. (b) Air and earth*
That we can neither ascend (not in thought) unto them, nor they descend to us,
to hear and help us without interpretours.

The renouncing of the worship of those spirits against Apuleius. CHAP. 22.
TO avoid therefore all evil thoughts concerning the gods, all the four are
to be avoided: nor must we at all believe what Apuleius would have us, and
others with him, that the Daemones are so placed between the gods and men,
that they bear up men's prayers, and bring down the gods helps: but that they
are spirits most thirsty of mischief, wholly unjust, proud, envious,
treacherous, (a) inhabiting the air in deed, as thrust out of the glorious
heaven for their unpardonable guilt, and condemned eternally to that prison.
Nor are they above man in merit because air is above earth, for men do
easily excel them, not in The devils hab^ion.
quality of body, but in the faith and favor of the true God. Indeed they rule
over many that are not worthy of the perticipation of gods truth: such are
their subjects, won to them by false miracles, and by illusions persuading
them that they are gods. But others that looked more narrowly into them and
their qualities, would not believe this that they were gods, only they got
this place in their opinion, to be held the gods messengers, and bringers of
men's good fortunes. Yet those that held them not gods, would not give them the
honor of gods because they saw them evil, and held all gods to be good: yet
durst they not deny them all divine honors, for fear of offending the people,
whose inueterate superstition preserved them in so many temples, altars, and
sacrifices.

L. VIVES.
INhabiting (a) the air,] The old writers placed all their fable of hell in
the air: and there was (...), Proserpina, the Man^s, and the Furies* Capella,
Chalc^ says* the air was justly called (...), dark: Peter also and Jude
affirm that the devils (...) bound in darkness in the air, and some in the
lowest parts of the earth. Empedocles in Pl^ (...) faith that Heaven rejected
them, earth expels them, the sea cannot abide them, thus are they ^ed by being
tossed from place to place.

Hermes Trismegistus his opinion of Idolatry, and how he might come to know
that the Egiptian superstitions were to be abrogated. CHAP. 23.
FOr Hermes (a) the Aegiptian, called Trismegistus, wrote contrary to these. A^
indeed holds them no gods: but middle agents between gods and men, that being
so necessary, he conioynes their adoration with the divine worship. But
Trismegistus says, that the high God made some gods, and men other some. These
words as I write them, may be understood of Images, because they are the
works of men. But he calls visible and palpable bodies, the bodies of the
gods: wherein are spirits (invited in thereto) that have power to hurt or
pleasure such as give them divine honors. So then, to combine such a spirit
invisible, by arts unto a visible image of some certain substance, which it
must use as the soul does the body, this is, to make a god, says he, and
this wonderful power of making gods, is in the hands of man. His (b) words are
these: And whereas (...) discourse (says he) concerns the affinity between
gods and men, mark (Asclepius) this power of man: Our God the Lord and Father,
is the creator of the celestial gods, so (...) (...) of the terrestrial,
which are in the temples. And a little after: So does humanity remember the
original, and ever strives to imitate the deity: making gods like the o^ne
Image, as God the father has done like his. Do you mean statues replied
Asclepius? statues, quoth he: do you not see them animate full of spirits and
sense, (d) (trust your eyes) doing such wonders? see you not statues that
presage future events (far perhaps (e) beyond all prophetical inspiration to
foretell) that cure diseases and c^se them, giving men mirth or sadness, as
they deserve? Know you not (Asclepius) that Eg^pt (...) heavens Image, or
rather the place whereinto all the celestial graces des^end, the very temple
of the whole world. And since wisdom should foreknow all, I (...) not have
you ignorant herein. The time shall come that all the zeal of Egypt shall be
^gated, and all the religious observations held idle and vain. Then goes he
forward, prophesying (by all likelihood) of christianity, whose true sanctity
is the ^tter subversion of all fictions and superstitions: that the Saviors
true grace might free us from those human gods, those handy-workes of man,
and place us to gods service, man's maker. But Hermes presageth these things as
the devils confederate, suppressing the evidence of the Christian name, and
yet foretelling with a sorrowful intimation, that from it should proceed the
wrack of all their Idolatrous superstitions: for Hermes was one of those, who
(as the Apostle says) K^ing GOD, glorified him not as GOD, nor were thankful,
but became vain in Rom 1. 21. 22. 23.
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of darkness: when they
professed themselves wise, they became fools. For they turned the glory of
the incorruptible God into the symilitude of the Image of a corruptible man,
and birds, and foore-footed beasts, and Serpents (f) For this, Hermes says
much of God according to truth; But how blindness of heart draws him to
affirm this, I know not, that these gods should be always subject, whom man
has made: and yet to bewail their abrogations to come. As if man could be
more miserable any way, then in living slave to his own handy-worke: (g) it
being easier for him to put off all humanity in adoring these pieces he has
made, then for them to put on deity by being made by him. For it comes oftene^
to pass that a man being set in honor, be not understood to be like to the
beasts, then that his handy-worke should be preferred before the work that
God made like his own Image, to wit, man's self. Worthily then does he fall
from his grace that made him, that makes that his Lord which he has made
himself. Those vain, deceitful, pernicious sacriledges, Hermes foreseeing
should perish, deploreth, but as impudently as he had known it foolishly. For
the spirit of GOD had not spoken to him as it did to the Prophets, that spoke
this with gladness. If a man make gods behold they are no gods: and in another
place: At that day (says the LORD) I will Isay 19 1
take the names of their Idols from the earth, and there shall be no remembrance
thereof. And to the purpose, of Egypt hear Isaias. The Idols of Egypt shall be
moved at his Luc. 1. Luc. 1. Mat 16. ^6 Mat 8. 29
presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of her, and so
forward. Such were they also that rejoiced for the fulfilling (h) of that which
they knew should come to pass: as Simeon, Anna and Elizabeth, the first
knowing Christ at his birth, the second at his conception: and (i) Peter, that
by Gods inspiration said Thou art that Christ the Son of the living GOD. But
Hermes had his knowledge from those devils, that trembling in the flesh said
to Christ: Why art thou come to undo us before the time: Either (k) because
that came suddenly upon them which they expected not until afterward, or that
they called it their undoing to be known, and so despised: and this was
before the time, that is, the judgment wherein they, and all men their
sectaries are to be cast into eternal torments: as that (l) truth says, that
neither deceives nor is deceived; not as he says that following the puffes
of Philosophy flies here and there, mixing truth and falsehood, greeuing at the
overthrow of that religion which afterward he affirms is all error.

L. VIVES.
HErmes (a)] Of him by and by. (b) His words] We have seen of his books,
greek and latin. This is out of his Asclepius, translated by Apuleius. (c) So
does humanity] So humanity adapting it self to the nature and original (says
Hermes his book) (d) Trust] So has Hermes it: Bruges copy has. Mistrust not
your self. (e) Beyond Apuleius and the Cole^ne copy have it both in this
manner, only Mirth, the Coleynists have more then he. (f) For Hermes] I would
have cited some of his places, but his books are common, and so it is
needelesse ((...)) It being easier] A diversity of reading, but of no moment,
nor alteration of sense. (h) Of that which] Rejoicing that Christ is come, whom
the law and Prophets had promised. So John bad his disciples ask, art thou he
that should come or shall we look for an other? (i) Peter] This confession is
the Churches corner stone, never decaying, to believe and affirm THAT JESUS IS
CHRIST THE SON OF THE LIVING GOD. This is no Philosophical revelation, no
invention, no quirke, no worldly wisdom, but revealed by GOD the father of all
to such as he does love, and vouchsafe it. (k) Because] He shows why the
devils thought that Christ undid them before the time. (l) Truth] Mat. 25. 41.
Depart from me^ ye cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for the
devil and his angels.

How Hermes openly confessed his progenitors error, and yet bewailed the
destruction of it. CHAP. 24.
FOr after much discourse, he comes again to speak of the gods men made but
of these sufficient (says he): let us return again to man, and to reason by
which divine gift man has the name of reasonable. For we have yet spoken no
wonderful thing of man: the (a) wonder of all wonders is that man could fi^e
out the divine nature, and give it effect. Wherefore our fathers erring
exceedinly in incredulity (b) concerning the deities, and never penetrating
into the depth of divine religion, they inverted an art, to make gods, whereunto
they joined a virtue out of some part of the worlds nature, like to the other:
and conioyning these two, because they could make no souls, they framed
certain Images whereinto they called either Angels, or devils, and so by
these mysteries gave Spirits and devils called into Images.
these Idols power to hurt or help them. I know not whether the devils being
admited would say as much as this man says. Our fathers exceedingly erring
(says he) in incredulity concerning the deities, and not penetrating into the
depth of divine religion, invented an art to make gods. Was he content to say
they but erred, in this invention? no, he adds. Exceedingly, thus this
exceeding error and incredulity of those that looked not into matters divine,
gave life to this invention of making gods. And yet though it were so, though
this was but an invention of error, incredulity, and irreligiousnes, yet this
wise man lamenteth that future times should abolish it. Mark now whether Gods
power compel him to confess his progenitors error, and the diuills to be
made the future wrack of the said error. If it were their exceeding error,
incredulity and negligence in matters divine that give first life to this
god-making invention, what wonder if this art be detestable, and all that it
did against the truth cast out from the truth, this truth correcting that
error, this faith that incredulity, this conversion that neglect? If he
conceal the cause, and yet confess that rite to be their invention, we (if we
have any wit) cannot but gather that had they bin in the right way, they would
never have fallen to that folly: had they either thought worthily, or meditated
seriously of religion yet should we a ffirme that their great, incredulous,
contemptuous error in the cause of divinity, was the cause of this invention,
we should nevertheless stand in need to prepare our selves to endure the
impudence of the truths obstinate oppone^ts. But since he that admires y^ power
of this art above all other things in man, and greeues that the time should
come wherein al those illusions should claspe with ruin, through the power of
legal authority: since he confesses the causes that gave this art first
original, namely the exceeding error, incredulity and negligence of his
ancestor in matters divine: what should we do but think GOD has overthrown
these institutions by their just contrary causes? that which errors multitude
ordained, has truths tract abolished: faith has subverted the work of
incredulity, and conversion unto Gods truth has suppressed the effects of true
Gods neglect: not in Egypt only, (where only the diabolical spirit bewaileth)
but in all the world, which hears a new song sung unto the Lord, as the holy
scripture says. Sing unto the Lord a new song: Sing Psalm. 96. 1.
unto the Lord, all the earth: for the (c) title of this Psalm is, when the
house was built after the captivity: the City of God, the Lords house is built,
that is the holy Church all the earth over: after captivity wherein the devils
held those men slaves, who after by their faith in God became principal stones
in the building: for man's making of these gods, did not acquit him from being
slave to these works of his, but by his willing worship he was drawn into their
society: a society of subtle diuills, not of stupid Idols: for what are Idols
but as the Scripture says, have eyes and see not, and all the other properties
that may be said of a dead senseless Image, how well soever carved. But the
unclean spirits, therein by that truly black art, bound their souls that
adored the^, in their society, and most horrid captivity: therefore says the
Apostle: We know that an Idol is nothing in the world: But the Gentiles offer
to deuilis and not unto God: I will not have them to have society with the Cor.
1. 8. 4.
devils. So then after this captivity that bound men slave to the devils, Gods
house began to be built through the earth: thence had the Psalm the beginning.
Sing unto the Lord a new song: sing unto the Lord, all the earth. Sing unto the
Lord and praise his name (d) declare his salvation (e) from day to day. Declare
his glory amongst all nations, and his wonders amongst all people. For the
Lord is great and much to be praised: he is to be feared above all gods. For
all the gods of the people are Idols, but the Lord made the heavens. He then
that bewailed the abolishment of these Idols in the time to come, and of the
slavery wherein the devils held men captive, did it out of an evil spirits
inspiration, and from that did desire the continuance of that captivity which
being dissanulled, the Psalmist sung that gods house was built up through the
earth. Hermes presaged it with tears; the Prophet with joy, and because that
spirit that the Prophet spoke by is ever victor: Hermes himself that bewailed
their future ruin, and wished their eternity is by a strange power compelled to
confess their original from error, incredulity and contempt of GOD, not from
prudence, faith, and devotion. And though he call them gods, that in saying yet
men did make them (and such men as we should not imitate) what does he
(despite his heart) but teach us that they are not to be worshipped of such men,
as are not like the^ that made them: namely of those that be wise, faithful and
religious: showing also that those men that made them, bound themselves to
adore such gods as were no gods at al. So true is that of the Prophet: If a man
make gods, behold, they are no gods. Now Hermes in calling those gods that are
made by such means, that is, devils bound in Idols, by an art, or rather, by
their own elections, and affirming them the handy-workes of How man does make
the devil god.
men, gives them not so much as Apuleius the Platonist does (but we have
shown already how grosely and absurdly) who makes them the messengers
between the gods, that God made, and the men that he made also; to carry up
prayers and bring down benefits: for it were fondness to think that a god
of man's making could do more with the gods of Gods making then a man whom he
made also could. For because, a devil bound in a statue by this damned art,
is made a god: not to each man, but to his binder (g) such as he is. Is not
this a sweet god now, whom none but an erroneous, incredulous, irreligious
man would go about to make? furthermore if the Temple-deuills, being bound by
art (forsooth) in those Idols by them that made them gods at such time as they
themselves were wanderers, unbelievers, and contemners of gods true religion,
are no messengers, between the gods and them; and if by reason of their
damnable conditions, those men that do so wander, believe so little, and
despise religion so much, be nevertheless their betters, as they must needs
be, being their godheads makers: then remains but this, that which they
do, they do as devils only, either doing good, for the more mischief, as
most deceitful, or doing open mischi^fe: yet neither of these can they do
without the high inscrutable The devils benef^es hurtful.
providence of God: nothing is in their power as they are the gods friends, and
messenger to and from men: for such they are not: for the good divine powers,
whom we call the holy angels, and the reasonable creature inhabiting heaven,
whether they be Thrones, Dominations, Principalities, or Powers, can hold no
frindship at all with these spirits: from whom they differ as much in affection
as virtue differs from vice, or (h) malice from goodness.

L. VIVES.
THE wonder (a)] There also he calls man a great miracle, a venerable,
honorable creature. (b) Concerning the] Or, against the deities. (c) The title]
The greek says: A pray ^g song of David, that the house was built after the
captivity. Hieromes translation from the Hebrew has no title, and therefore
the Greeks call it (...), Vntitled. (d) Declare] (...), and afterward (...),
Annunciate, declare, tell. (e) From day] A Greek phraise De Philosoph. Orac.
(...). (f) An arte] Porphyry says the gods do not only afford men their
familiar company but show them what allureth them, what binds them, what they
love, which days to avoid, which to observe, and what forms to make them, as
Hecate shows in the Oracle, saying, she cannot neglect a statue of brass,
gold or silver: and shows further, the use of wormwood, a Mouses blood, Mirrh,
Frankincense, and stirax. (g) Such as he] An evil man, for such an one Hermes
describes. (h) Malice] Malice is here used for all evil: as the Greeks use
Malice.
(...), but Tully says he had rather interpret (...), by vice, then by
malice: for malice is a Species of vice, opposite to honest simplicity, and
mother to all fraud and deceit.

Of such things as may be common to Angels and Men. CHAP. 25.
WHerefore the devils are no means for man to receive the gods benefits by, or
rather good Angels: but it is our good wills, imitating theirs, making us line
in one community with them and in honor of that one God that they honor (though
we see not them with our earthly eyes) that is the means to their society: and
whereas our miserable frailty of will, and infirmity of spirit does effect a
difference between them and us, therein we are far short of them, in merit
of life not in habit of body. It is not our earthly, bodily habitation, but
our unclean carnal affection, that causes separation between them and us.
But when we are purified, we become as they: drawing near them nevertheless
before, by our faith, if we believe that (by their good favors also) he that
blessed them, will make us also blessed.

That all Paganism was fully contained in dead men. CHAP. 26.
But mark what Hermes in his bewayling of the expulsion of those Idols out of
Egypt, which had such an erroneous incredulity and irreligious institutors,
faith amongst the rest^, then (says he) that holy seat of temples shall
become a sepulcher of dead bodies. As if men should not die unless these
things were demolished, or being dead, should be buried any where save in the
earth? Truly the more time that passes, the more carcasses shall still be buried
and more graves made. But this (it seems) is his grief, that the memories of
our Martires should have place in The Martires memory succeeded the Idols.
their Temples: that the misunderstanding reader hereof might imagine that the
Pagans worshipped gods in the Temples, and we, dead men in their tombs. For
men's blindness does so carry them headlong against (a) Mountains letting
them not see till they be struck, that they do not consider that in all
paganism, there cannot be a god found but has bin a man: but on will they,
and (b) honor them as eternally pure from all humanity. Let Varro pass, that
said, all that died were held gods infernal, (c) proouing it by the sacrifices
done at all burialls, (d) there also he reckneth the (e) funeral plays, as
the greatest token of their divinity, plays being never presented but to the
gods. Hermes himself (now mentioned) in his deploratiue presage, saying: Then
that holy seat of Temples shall become a sepulcher of dead bodies, does
plainly auerre, that the Egiptian gods were all dead men: for having said that
his fathers in their exceeding error, incredulity and neglect of religion, had
found a mean to make gods; her evnto (says he) they added a virtue out of
some part of the worlds nature, and conioyning these two, because they could
make no souls, they framed certain Images, into which they called either
Angels or devils, and so by these mysteries gave those Idols power to hurt or
help them. Then he proceeds to examples. Thy (e) grandfather (Asclepius)
says he the first inuentor of Physic, has a temple (f) on mount Lybia,
near the (g) Cracodile shore: there lies his worldly man, his body, but his
residue or his whole (if man be whole life) is gone up to heaven, helping all
sick persons now by his deity as he did before by his Physic. Lo hear he
confesses a dead man worrshipped for a god, there Mercuries tomb.
where his grave was: erring, and making others err, in saying, that he w^
ascended to heaven, and helps all sick persons by his deity. Nay he
proceeds to another. My grandfather (h) Hermes (says he) lying in the town
of (i) his Sur-name, does he not assist and preserve all that implore his
help, This was Hermes the elder Mercury, buried (they say) in Hermopolis, the
town of his surname. Behold now, here are two men gods already, Aesculapius
and Mercury (k) for the first, the opinion both of Greeks and Latins confirm
it. But the (l) second many think was never mortal: yet he says here, that
he was his grandfather, for (m) this is one and that another though both have
one name. But this I stand not upon: he and Aesculapius were both made gods of
men, by this great testimony of his nephew (n) Trismgiestus, who proceeds, and
says (o) Isis, the wise of Osiris does much good (we see) being pleased, and
being offended, much evil. And then to show that these are of that kind of
gods that men make by this art, he gives us to understand, that he thinks
those devils to be souls of dead men, which he says those erring,
incredulous irreligious fellows called by art into statues: because these
could make no souls: and when he has spoken that of Isis, being offended,
much hurt, he adds: for earthly and worldly gods are soon offended, and
moved to anger by reason they consist (p) of men, in both their natures: Both
their natures, (says he) taking the devil for the soul and the image for the
body, whereupon it came to pass (says he) that such and such creatures
became holy in Egypt, and their souls were (q) adored in all the cities, that
consecrated them in their lives, so far that they have part of their worship
assigned them, and are called by their names. Where is now that sad complaint
that Egypt the seat of temples should become a grave for carcasses? see, the
false spirit that made Hermes speak it, made him also confess that it was
already filled with their carcasses whom they held as gods. But in his
complaint he was but the vent of the devils woe, because their eternal
plagues were in preparing by the martyrs holy memories, for in such places are
they often tormented, and forced to confess themselves, and to avoid the
bodies possessed.

L. VIVES.
AGainst. (a) Mountains.] And such things as all men else could see and
shun. (b) Honor them.] A diversity of reading: the old books have the
sentence shorter, but the sense is The Necia pla^es.
not altered at all. (c) Proving it.] The Necia (says Tully) or funeral
sports, should not be called feasts as well as the other gods holy days are,
but that men would have their dead ancestors accounted as gods, De leg. lib. 2.
(d) Funeral.] Wherein were commedies acted. Terrences Adelphus was acted at
Paulus Aemilius his funerals. P. Corn. Scipio, and Q. Fabius (two of his sons)
being Ediles. They had also sword-plaies: brought in by M. and D. Iunius
Brutus, his sons at their fathers funerals. App. Claud. Caudax, and M.
Fuluius being Consulls. They fought in the beast market. Liu. lib. 11. Ualer.
lib-2 Auson. in Gryph. Tresprimas Thracum pugnas, trihus ordine sell^s
Iuniadae Patri inferias misere sepulcro.
Three chaires three fights, wherein the Thracians straue,
Attended Iunius Brutus to his grave.


They had also a banquetand a dole. (c) Grandfather (Asclepius).] Asclepius in
greek is Esculapius: to this Asclepius, Augustine makes the Physician
Aesculapius grandfather, which Three Aesculapi^.
o^ ^lly his (...). desculapii this was, I know not: one of them (they say) was
thunderstrucke, and buried at Cynosura in Achaia, Another near the river
Lusius in Arcadia, the third was the second Mercuries brother, son to Ualens
and Pheronis, and him the Arcadians have in much honor. Tacitus says Osiris
was called Aesculapius: it may be this. It is liker that Hermes speaks The
Crocodile.
of him, then any other. (f) Mount Libia.] It runs along from the lowest part
of Egypt vn^ (...). Ptolomy takes it for many mountains, and calls it the
Libian coast. (g) Crocodile] A serpent that lays eges, foure-footed, growing
to seauenteene cubits lenght, or more: he moves his upper chappe, and so
does no creature living besides him: deuoureth man and beast, and lives part in
the water and part on the dry. land. Herodot. Arist, and Plin. Senec. says
that it fears one courageous, and insulteth over one that fears it. The
Crocodile city is in the heart of Egypt near to the Libian Mountain not
far from Ptolemais, in the end of the sixth Parallel of the third climat. The
Egiptians says Porphyry worshipped a Crocodile, because he was consecrated to
the Sun as the Ram, the Buzzard and the black beetle. (h) Hermes.] Cicero
reckneth five of them, two the Egyptians worrshipped: the first Nilus his
son, whom it was sa^dgeto name: second he that killed Argus, was Egypts
king, taught them letters and The Mercury.
laws, him they call Theut, after their first month. Eusebius. lib. 1. says
that the Phaenician theologians held Trismegistus to be Saturnes secretary,
Caelus his sons, and that he used his help in defending his mother, giving
him at his going into the South, all Egypt. Dionisius says he was counselor
to Isis and Osiris: and Osiris going forth to war, left him at home to direct
his wife Isis: that he was of singular prudence, and taught the world much
knowledge in arts and sciences. This (I think) was graund-father to this
Hermes that wrote thus: and that he was called Theut, the Demon (as Plato
says in his Phaed.) that invented Mathematiques, letters, and dice, and taught
them to ^hamus King of Egypt afterward called Hammon. (f) The of his surmane.]
Hermopolis, a great city in Epipt, A mark (says Ptolomy) to those that
travel from the West of Nile unto our sea: beyond Crocadilopolis. in the
seventh Parallel Hermopolis.
the therd climate. (k) For the first.] For he is but held a semigod, diefied
for his merits, as Hercules, Bacchus, and Romulus, were, Theodoretus says that
in Homers time he was held no God: for he makes Paeon cure Mars, not
Aesculapius, And speaking of Machaon, he calls him the Son of Aesculapius an
absolute Physician, (l) Second, many.] He is one of the perpetual Gods
counselors (m). This is one.] The famous Mercury was son to Jove and Maia,
Atlas his Grandchild, for there were two other as I said, Egyptians, and two
more, one the Son of Calus and Dies, the other, of Ualens and Phoronis: the
first they picture with Erected priuities for having beheld Proserpina: the
later, the Laebadians worship in a cave, and call him Trophonius. (n)
Trismegistus,] As the French say trespuissant, and we, thrice mighty. But the
latter wrote not Trismegistus, but his grandfather did: yet both were called
Hermes Trismegistus. Trismegistus.
The first, Theut, was a great king, a great Priest and, a Philosopher. Thus it
pleases some to describe his greatness. (o) Isis.] Isis and Osiris do much
good (says Hermes his book.) (p) In both their natures.] Hermes had it
without nature: extra naturam. (q) Adored.] The Egyptians had innumerable
things to their gods. Garlike and Onions, by which they swore as Pliny says:
and many creatures, after whom they named their cities, Crocodilopol^s,
Lycopolis, Leontopolls, and L^polis. upon the crocodyle, the wolf, the lion
and the place-fish: So Apis first instituting the adoration of the Ox, was
adored himself in an oxes shape, Mercury in a dogs, Isis in a cowes, Diodorus
write^h that their leaders wore such crests on their helmets, Anubis a dog,
Alexander the great a wolf. etc. whence the reverence of those creatures first
arose, and thereupon those Princes being dead, they ordained them divine
worships in those shapes. This is that which Mercury says, their souls were
adored that in their lives had ordained honor to those creatures, as indeed the
Princes wearing them on their helmes and sheelds, made them venerable, and
respected: and the simple people thought that much of their victories came from
them, and so set them up as deities.

Of the Honor that Christians give to the Martires. CHAP. 27.
YEt we erect no temples alters nor sacrifices to the martirs, because not
they, but their god is our God, we honor their memories, as Gods Saints,
standing till death for the truth, that the true religion might be propagated,
and all Idolatry demolished: whereas if any others had believed right before
them, yet fear forbad them confess it. And who has ever heard the Priest at
the altar, that was built up in gods honor, and the martires memories, say over
the body, I offer unto thee Peter or unto thee Paul, or (a) Cyprian? he offers
to God, in the places of their memorialls, whom God had made men, and martirs,
and advanced them into the society of his Angels in heaven, that we at that
sollemnity may both give thanks to God for their victories, and be encouraged
to endeavor the attainement of such crowns and glories as they have already
attained: still inuocating him at their memorialls: wherefore all the religious
performances done there, at the martires sollemnities, are ornaments of their
memories, but no sacrifices to the dead, as unto gods, and (b) those that bring
banquets thither, which notwithstanding the better Christians do not, not is
this custom observed in most places, yet, such as do so, setting them down,
praying over them, and so taking them away to eat, or bestow on those that
need: all this they do only with a desire that these meats might be
sanctified, by the martirs, in the god of martirs name. But he that knows
the only sacrifices that the Christians offer to God, (c) knows also that
these are no sacrifices to the Martires: wherefore we neither worship our
Martires with Gods honors nor men's crimes, neither offer them sacrifices nor
turn their (d) disgraces into any religion of theirs; As for Isis Osiris his
wife, and the Egyptian goddess and her parents, that have been recorded to
have been all mortal, to whom she sacrificing (e) found three grains of
barley, and showed it unto her husband and Hermes her counselor: and so they
will have her to be Ceres also, what gross absurdities are hereof recorded,
not by Potes, but their own Priests (as Leon showed to Alexander and he to his
mother Olimpia) let them read that list, and remember that have read: and then
but consider, unto what dead persons and dead persons works their diuinest
honors were exhibited. God forbid they should in the least respect compare them
with our Martirs, whom nevertheless we account no gods we make no priests
to sacrifice unto them, it is unlawful, indecent, and Gods proper due: neither
do we please them with their own crimes, or obscaene spectacles: whereas they
celebrate both the guilt that there gods incurred who were men, and the feigned
pleasures of such of them as were flat devils. If Socrates had had a god, he
should not have bin of this sort: But such perhaps as loved to excel in this
damnable art of making gods, thrust such an one upon him being an inocent
honest man, and unskillful in this their pernicious practice. What need we
more? none that has his wits about him will now hold that these spirits are to
be adored for the attainement of eternal bliss in the life to come. Perhaps
they will say that all the gods are good, but, of these spirits some are good
and some badde: and that by those that are good we may come to eternity, and
therefore ought to adore them: well, to rip up this question, the next book
shall serve the turn.

L. VIVES.
OR (a) Cyprian.] Bishop of Carthage, most learned, as witness his holy
works. He^ received the crown of Martyrdom under Ualerian, so Pontius his
Deacon writes. (b) Cyp^.
Th^se] A great custom in Afrike. Aug. confess. lib. 6. where he says that
his mother at Millaine (...) (...) (...).
(...) (...) ^otage, and bread and wine to the Martirs shrines, and gave them
to the porter: B^ Ambrose forbad her, both for that it might be an occasion of
gluttony, and for the resemblance it had with paganism. (c) Knows also.]
Many Christians offend in not distinguishing between their worship of God and
the Saints: nor does their opinion of the Saints want much of that the Pagans
believed of their gods, yet impious was Uigilantius to bar the Martirs, all
honor, and fond was Eunomius to forbear the Churches least he should be
compelled to adore the dead. The Martyrs are to be reverenced, but not adored,
as god is. Hieron c^tra vigilant. (d) Disgraces] [But now, even at the
celebration of Christ's passion and our Martires not to be adored.]
redemption, it is a custom to present plays almost as vile as the old
stage-games: should I be ^lent the very absurdity of such shows in so reverend
a matter, would condemn it sufficiently. There Judas plaieth the most
ridiculous Mimike, even then when he betraies Christ. There the Apostles run
away, and the soldiors follow, and all resounds with laughter. Then comes
Plays of the passion of Jesus Christ, unlawful.
Peter, and cuttes off Malchus care, and then all rings with applause, as if
Christ's betraying were now revenged. And by and by this great fighter comes and
for fear of a girl, denies his Master, all the people laughing at her
question, and hissing at his denial: and in all these reuells and ridiculous
stirs Christ only is serious and severe: but seeking to move passion and
(...) in the audience, he is so far from that, that he is cold even in the
diuinest matters: to the great guilt, shame, and sin both of the priests that
present this, and the people The Louanists want this. [Isis. Ceres.
that behold it. But we may perhaps find a fitter place for this thaeme] (e)
Found the grain of barley] And wheat also says Diodor. lib. 1. and thereupon
some Cities present them both in her ceremonies. But Osiris her husband first
observed their profit, and taught the world it, chiefly barley that makes ale
in such countries as want wine: and is now used in the North parts. But they
made meat of it in old time. Plin. lib. 18. out of an Athenian ceremony that
Wheat put barley out of credit.
Menander reports; proving it of elder invention then wheat. For had they
found wheat sooner (says Pliny) barley would have bin out of request for
bread, as it was presently upon the finding of wheat, thence-forth becoming
meat for beasts.

Finis lib. 8.
THE CONTENTS OF THE ninth book of the City of God.
1. The scope of the aforepassed disputation, and what is remaining to treat
of. chapter 1. 2. Whether amongst the spirits of the air that are under the
gods there be any good ones that can further a man in the attainement of true
blessedness. 3. What qualities Apuleius ascribes unto the devils, to whom he
gives reason but no virtue. 4. The opinions of the Stoikes and Peripatetiques
concerning perturbatio^s of the mind. 5. That the Christians passions are
causes of the practice of virtue, not Inducers unto vice. 6. What passion the
spirits that Apuleius makes Mediators between the Gods and Men are subject
unto, by his own confession. 7. That the Platonists do but seek contentions
in saying the Poets defame the gods, whereas their imputations pertain to the
devils and not the gods. 8. Apuleius his definition of the gods of heaven,
spirits of air, and men of earth. 9. Whether ayery spirits can procure a man
the Gods friendships. 10. Plotines opinion that men are less wretched in their
mortality, then the diuills are in their eternity, 11. Of the Platonists that
held men's souls to become Daemones after death. 12. Of the three contraries
whereby the Platonists distinguish the diuills natures from the Men's. 13. How
the diuills if they be neither blessed with the Gods, nor wretched with Men,
may be in the mean betwixt both without participation of either. 14. Whether
mortal men may attain true happiness. 15. Of the mediator of God and Man,
the Man Christ Jesus. 16. Whether it be probable that the Platonists say, that
the gods avoiding earthly contagion have no commerce with men, but by the
means of the ayry spirits. 17. That unto that be atitude that consists in
participation of the chiefest good, we must have only such a Mediator as
Christ, no such as the devil. 18. That the diuills under color of their
intercession, seek but to draw us from God. 19. That the word Demon is not
used as now of any Idolater in a good sense. 20. Of the quality of the diuills
knowledge, whereof they are so proud. 21. In what manner the Lord would make
himself known to the diuills. 22. The difference of the holy Angels
knowledge, and the diuills. 23. That the Pagan Idols are falsely called gods,
yet the scripture allows it to Saints and Angels.
FINIS.
THE NINTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD. Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
The scope of the afore-passed disputation, and what is remaining to treat of.
CHAP. 1.
IN these controversies of the gods, some have held deities of both natures,
good and evil: others (of better minds) did the gods that honor to hold the^
all good. But those (a) that held the first, held the ayery spirits to be gods
also, and called them gods, as they called the gods, spirits, but not so
ordinarily. Indeed they confess that Jove the Prince of all the rest was by
Homer (b) called a Demon. But such as affirmed all the gods were good ones,
and far better then the best men, are justly moved by the arts of the ayry
spirits, to hold firmly that the gods could do no such matters, and therefore
of ^ce ^re must be a difference between them and these spirits: and that what
ever ^asant affect, or bad act they see caused, wherein these spirits do show
the (...) power, that they hold is the diuills work, and not the gods. But yet
(...) ^ey place these spirits as mediators between their gods and men (as if
(...) ^an had no other means of commerce) to carry and recarry prayers and
(...) the one to the other, this being the opinion of the most excellent ^ers
the Platonists, with whom I choose to discuss this question, when ^ration of
many gods be helpful to eternal felicity? In the last book (...) how the
devils (delighting in that which all wise and honest men ab^ (...) in the
foul, enormous, irreligious fictions of the gods crimes (not (...) in the
damnable practice of Magike) can be so much nearer to the gods, that (...) must
make them the means to attain their favors: and we found it ^terly
impossible. So now this book (as I promised in the end of the other) must
(...) ^cerne the difference of the gods betwixt themselves (if they make any
(...)) ^or the difference of the gods and spirits (the one being far distant
from men (as they say) and the other in the midst between the gods and men)
but of the difference of these spirits amongst themselves. This is the present
question.

L. VIVES.
THese (a) that held] Plato held all the gods to be good, but the Daemones, to
be neither good not evil, but neuters. But Hermes has his good angels and
his bad. And Porphery In co^uiuio.
(...) ^s helpful Daemones, and his hurtful: as some of the Platonists hold
also. (b) Homer cal^] Daemones.
Pl^arch (de defect. Oracul.) says that Homer confounded the deities and
Demones toge^r, ^ng both names promiscually: He calls Jove a Demon: which
word as one interprets it, is sometimes used for good, and sometimes bad. And
Iliad. 1. he says, Jove with the other dae^, calling all the gods by that
name: upon which place his interpretor says: He calls (...) Daemones either
for their experience, wisdom, or government of man. So says Julius (...):
Homer called the Gods, Daemones, and Plato calls the worlds Architect the
great Demon: for Deity and Demon are both taken in one sense: This Demon
Plato mentions. De republ. But it is a question whether he mean the Prince
of all the world, or the devils Prince: for they have their Hierarchy also.
Every spirit (says Proclus De anima et daemone) in respect of that which is
next under it is called a Demon: and so does Jupiter (in Orpheus) call his
father Sa^. And Plato himself calls those gods that govern propagation, and
protect a man without mediation, Daemones. To declare (says he in Timaeus) the
generation and nature of the other Daemones, were more then man can comprehend:
for each power that protecteth a man without another mediation, is a demon,
be it a God, or less then a God. Thus far Proclus.

Whether amongst the spirits of the air that are under the gods, there be any
good ones, that can further a man in the attainement of true blessedness.
CHAP. 2.
FOr many vseto say there are some good devils and some badde: but whether
this opinion be Plato's or whose soever, it is not to be omitted, because no
man shall be deluded in honoring those spirits as if they were good, or such as
whilst he thinks should by their place be a mean of reconciliation
betwixt them and the gods, and desires their furtherance, to be with them
after death, do inueigle him and draw him in with deceit, quite from the
true God, with whom only and in whom only, and from whom only, every
reasonable soul, must expect and enjoy beatitude.

What qualities Apuleius ascribes to the devils, to whom he gives reason but
no virtue. CHAP. 3.
HOw is this difference of good and evil then extant, when as Apuleius the
Platonist, disputing so much hereof, and attributing so much to those ayry
powers, yet never speaks a word of their virtues, which he would have done
if they had had any? He shows not the cause why they are happy, but the
signs of their misery he opens at full: confessing that though they have
reason, they want virtue, that do not give way to unreasonable passions, but
(as fools use to be) they are often perturbed with tempestuous and unquiet
motions. His words are these. Of these Daemones, the Poets (not much amiss)
do faigne some to be haters, and some lovers of some particular men:
preferring some, and deiecting others; So that pity, anger, joy, and all
human effects are easily accidents unto them: and so is their mind exposed
to the dominion of all perturbations, which the gods (whose minds are quiet,
and retired) are not. Here you hear plainly that the devils souls as well as
mortals are subject to all disturbance of passion, and thereby not to be
compared D^ (...) (...) pas^.
unto wise men, who can curb and suppress those exorbitant affects, howeuer
accident unto them by reason of their humanity; giving then no predominance to
work any unreasonable effect, opposite to justice: But they are more like (not
to say worse) unto fools, and wicked persons, not in bodies, but qualities,
elder they are indeed, and incurably tortured, still floting in the sea of
perturbation, having no hold at all of verity, or virtue, which are the means
to repress all outrageous affections.

The opinions of the Stoikes and Peripatetiques concerning perturbations of the
mind. CHAP. 4.
COncerning motions of the mind which the Greeks call (...), and some of
(...) Tully) Perturbations others Affects, or affections, and some more ex^ ^m
the Greek, Passions, there be two opinions of the Philosophers: (...) that
they may befall a wise man, yet so as they are still awed by rea^ by the rule
of the mind, obliged to what conditions discretion impos^ ^olders of this are
Platonists, or Aristotelians, for Aristotle, the first (...) was Plato his
scholar. But others (as the Stoikes) exempt a wise man (...) ^ouch of those
passions. And (a) those, Tully in his books De finibus, (...) to be rather
materially then formally opposite unto the Platonists or ^ques: because the
Stoikes (b) will not admit the external helps of the (...) ^ate, to the name
of goods, reserving that only for virtue, as the art (...) ^ixed in the mind.
But the (c) others, following the common fashion, (...) goods, mary of small
value in respect of virtue: So then howsoever (...) in their name, they
concur in their esteem, nor do the Stoikes show (...) in this controversy
but nouelty of phrase: So that I hold directly, that ^estion, (d) whether a
wiseman may have passions of mind or no, their (...) ^sie is rather verbal,
then real: for I am persuaded they are just of the (...) and Peripatetiques
mind herein, though their words pretend a diffe^ This proof, I will show
fair to avoid the tediousness of a longer dis^ (e) A Gellius, an (f)
eloquent and excellent scholar, writteth in his No^ that he was at sea in the
company of a famous Stoike. This Philoso^ ^llius tells at large, but I in
brief) seeing the ship in great peril by (...) dangerous and dreadful
tempest, was pale for very fear: which some (...) by (being even in the chaps
of death so curiously observes whether An history of a Philosopher tha^ was in
a sto^ at sea.
(...) ^pher were preturbed or no) did percieue the storm ending, and fear
(...) tongues loose, a rich glutton (g) of Asia fell a scoffing the Stoike
(...) so terribly afraid of that brunt which himself had passed without a^ at
all: but he (h) replied as Aristippus the Socratist did, upon the like (...)
the other having but the soul of a base knave, needed not care for it, but he
^ll for the soul of Aristippus. This answer packt away the rich chuffe,
(...) Gellius asked the Philosopher (not desiring to offend, but to learn)
(...) the cause of his fear. Who desiring to satisfy a man so desirous to
(...) pulls out of his scrippe the book of (i) Epictetus, a Stoike, contay^
Axioms of Zeno and Chrysippus, Stoicismes founders: wherein Gellius (...))
showed him this position, That the (k) minds apprehensions (they call (...)
^ies) arising from fearful and terrifying objects, can neither be hindered
(...) ^ing a wise man, nor from moving his mind when they do befall: that
he (...), or be sad, a little by these passions too hasty intrusion upon
his reason: Yet (...) far that they leave an opinion or consent, of the mind
unto their effect, be^: for this they keep free, as the difference between
the fool and the wise: (...) consents to his passions: the wise man though
he suffer them, yet keeps (...), and his reprobation of them all, firm and
free. Thus much from A. (...) ^o better, but briefer then his own relation of
that with himself read ^etus, from the positive doctrine of the Stoikes.
Which being true, (...) small difference between them and other Philosophers
in this point of (...). For both do quit man's reason from being ouer-ruled by
passion. (...) ^haps therefore the Stoikes deny a wise man to feale them,
because they (...) not, nor hurt his wisdom. But they (m) befall him (not
moving his (...)) in the respects of the commodities or discommodities of this
life (...) notwithstandig he will not call goods, or evils. For if the
Philosopher had not e^ed that which he doubted to loose by that ship-wracke,
namely his (...) (...) bodylie safety, he would never have been pale for the
matter: (...) his mind stand fixed for all that external pallor, and he still
hold firm (...) (...) ^d bodily safety, which their he feared to loose, were
not of those (...) (...) make their possessors good, as virtue does. But in
that they say they (...) not to be called goods at all, but only commodities,
in this their mind is ^re upon the word then the matter. For what care is
there of their name, when as their loss leaves both Stoike and Peripatetique
alike affected? proving thereby their equal esteem of them, call them what
they list? If the danger of these goods or commodities should draw either of
them to mischiefs, or else to be lost: they both join in this; rather to
abjure the use of bodily benefits then to transgress the rules of justice.
Thus is the mind still fixed, holding steadfastly that no passion (though it
insult upon the souls meaner parts) can domineere o^: but reason over them,
excercising virtues sovereignty over them by opposition, nor by consent. For
such an one does Virgil say Eneas was. Men's immota manet, Lachrymae voluuntur
inanes.
His mind stood fixed, yet fruitless tears must out.


L. VIVES.
TH^se (a) Tully] De finib. lib. 3. Cato Minor is for the Stoikes, in the
question of the highest good: all whose arguments Tully himself (lib. 4)
refuteth, proouing their controversy with the Pl^ists and Peripatetiques to
be only verbal: whose principal founder Zeno was. (b) Will not] Cic. de
finib. calls them esteemables: and Acad quest. lib. 1. says thus. Zeno placed
all the (...) of beatitude, in virtue only: nor reckned ought good, but what
was honest, that being the ^ple and only good. The rest (though not bad, yet)
some are natural, some against ^re, (...) mean between both. The natural he
holds are to be held in some esteem, and contrary of the contrariety. The
mean, he leaves as neuters, not to be held at, any esteem: make degrees of
esteem in the natural also: the more esteemable he called (...) preferred,
the less (...), rejected, and these words Tully uses de finib. lib. 3. (c)
Others, Plato de l^g. lib. 4. makes goods triplet: corporal, mental,
external: the first and last, being secluded (...) of 3. (...).
from virtue: he makes vselesse, hurtful and dangerous, the midlemost, are
divine, and happy adjuncts of the wise man only, making man happy of
themselves alone: the other properly (...) not goods, but respectively: nor
unto all, but the just only: to whom that which the vulgar calls evil, is a
truer good, then these are to the wicked, serving them only as instruments of
more mischief. This is common in Plato, who gave original to almost all the
Stoikes rare and admired paradoxes: as, that honest things are only good: only
a wise man is rich and free: the (...) Pa^
good man it happy the bad miserable: to bear a wrong is more felicity then to
offer one. Yet did Plato call those corporal and external benefits, goods:
because (as Apuleius says Dog. Pla.) their use is necessary in common life:
yet so are they goods, as virtue must better them, and a^pt them to the fit
prosecution of happiness. So, good they are (says Plato) when they are ver^
(...), and serve in her ministry: when otherwise, they are direct plagues and
destructi^. (...) (...) Aristotle also held. (d) Whether a wise] Of affects
Tully discourses at lage (Tusc. quaest. (...)) (...), and what they are that a
wise man must not be exposed unto, in Stoicisme. But the Pla^ ^d their most
general followers the Peripatetiques say that they are naturally ingrafted
(...) (...), ^remoouable and only to be repressed. (e) A. Gellius] He lived
in Adrians time and (...) wrote his Noctes Atticae. He was very familiar with
Phauorinus and Taurus, both (...).
(...) (...) with Apollinaris and Probus, Grammarians: of his learning and wit,
take (...) (...), whom the most, nay rather all the Grammarians do second:
perhaps because (...) (...) of their profession (suffices it to say thus)
though by Augustines le^ I think him (...) (...). But of this elsewhere. The
place here quoted is. lib. 19. cap. 1. (f) El^] Or of quick ^tion. (g) Of Asia]
Which word adds to his luxury, for from Asia it first arose. (h) (...) (...)
Aristippus.] Who had the like chance in sailing to Corinth. Laert^. ((...))
(...)] A (...), (...) (...) ^opolis, servant to Epaph^s, Nero's chamberlain,
(...).
(...) unto the Antonines, of him was made this disticke.

(...) etc.

Borne was I slave, and Epictete my name:

Beloved of God; as Irus poor; and lame.

(...) he was indeed. Sustine and abstine, was much in his mouth, which Gellius
says often: (...) not much: nothing of his was extant in Suidas times: His
Manuell was his schol^ (...), not his. The book that this Philosopher pulled out
of his s^rip was the fifth of his (...). (k) Minds] Fantasies of (...) to
imagine. Tully translates it, a thing seen, it is Fantasy.
(...) that the mind frames it self after any object, arising of the external
impulsio^ which (...) by consent or resistance, so begetting opinion. But the
opinions condemned by (...), seem rather to be the affections that we do
procure our selves from our own (...) ^dgements and opinion: sorrow they
called an opinion of a great evil present: joy Opinion.
(...) good: desire an opinion of a great future good: fear, of an evil.
Thence do they (...) opinion troubles us more then real causes: and we are
oftener feared then hurt (...) touched already. They held further that an
ungrounded opinion, or weak assent (...) consideration does not befall a wise
man. (l) Not so farre] Arrianus in his En^ ^ddes a wise man as soon as any
terrible object presents it self unto him, to con^ ^s but a phantasme, and not
such as it appears. (m) Befall] Plato says that af^ (...) man as like
nerves, or little strings whereby nature draws us forward, into Affects how
(...) man.
(...) (...) themselves are contraries: but he that has given his reason once
dominion o^ ^all find their force of no effect worth esteeming.

^at the Christians passions are causes of the the practice of virtue, not
inducers unto vice. CHAP. 5.
(...) is no need to stand upon a large discovery what the christians
scriptures (...) in this point of affects: It does subject the whole mind to
Gods go^ (...) and assistance, and all the passions unto it, in that manner
that they are (...) seem the increase of justice, finally our doctrine
inquires not so much (...) be angry, but wherefore? Why he is sad, not whether
he be sad, and (...) For anger with an offender to reform him: pity upon one
afflicted (...) him: fear for one in danger to deliver him, these no man, not
mad, can (...). The Stoikes (a) indeed use to reprehend pity. But that Stoike
might ^estly have pitied another man's danger then have feared his own. (...)
far more humanity and piety said Tully (b) in Caesar's praise: Of all thy Pyey
(...).
(...) (...) none more admired, nor applauded then thy mercy: What is mercy but
a (...) ^on, in our own heart of another misfortunes, urging us as far as
our (...) ^tcheth to releoue him? This affect serves reason, when our pity
offend^ ^stice, either in releeuing the poor or forgiving the penitent. This
(c) (...) ^ent Cicero stuck not to call a virtue, which the Stoikes reckon with
the (...) does Epictetus out of the doctrines of Zeno and Chrysippus, the first
pa^ this sect, allow these passions unto a man, whom nathelesse they must (...)
keep from all vice, and consequently these passions that befall a wise (...)
^s they do not offer any prejudice to his reason or virtue, are no vices,
(...) Stoikes, Platonists and Peripatetiques do all agree in one. But (as (d)
Tul^ ^he Grecians (of old) affect verbosity of contention rather then truth:
But now it (...) question whether it be coherent unto ye infirmity of this
present life (...) these affections in all good offices how ever, whereas the
holy Angels, (...) they punish such as gods eternal providence appoints
with anger, (...) they help those that they love out of danger, without any
fear, and suc^ ^retched without feeling any compassion, are notwithstanding
said (af^ ^rase of speaking) to be pertakers of those passions, because of the
simili^ Angels why called after the affect that their offices rele^e.
(...) their works, not any way because of their infirmity of affections: And
so (...) (...) the scripture is said to be angry; yet far is he from
feeling affect, the (...) of his revenge did procure this phrase, not the
turbulence of his passion.

L. VIVES.
ST^es (a) indeed] Cic. pro Muren. A many come to you in distress and misery;
you shall (...) (...) (...) in taking any compassion upon them. This in
disgrace of Stoicisme has Tully. (b) (...) Pro Q. Ligario. (c) This now]
intimating that he had more words then wisdom, as (...) said of Catiline:
wisdom indeed being peculiar to those that serve the true God, the K^g (...)
(...) ^ole universe, and his wisdom, his so^e, (d) Tully saith] Crassus his
words of the Greeks op^ion of an orator. De oratore lib. 1.

What passion the spirits that Apuleius makes mediators between the gods and
men are subject unto, by his own confession. CHAP 6.
But to defer the question of the holy Angels awhile, let us see how the
Platonists teach of their mediating spirits, in this matter of passion. If
those Daemones ou^ ruled all their affects with freedom and reason, then would
not Apuleius (...) (...) that they are tossed in the same tempestuous
cogitations that men's (...) ^eete in. So their mind then, their reasonable
part, that if it had any (...) ^ted in it should be the dominator over these
turbulent affects of the (...) parts: this very mind floteth (say the
Platonists) in this sea of perturbation. Well, then the devils minds lie open
to the passions of lust, fear, wrath, and the rest. What part then have they
free, wise, and unaffected, whereby T^ (...) (...) sub^s ^o pas^.
to please the gods, and converse with good men, when as their whole mind is
so ^ated unto affects, and their vices, that their whole reason is eternally
emploi^ (...) deceit and illusion, as their desire to endamage all creatures
is eternal?

(...) the Platonists do but seek contentions in saying the Poets de fame the
go^s, whereas their imputations pertain to the devils, and not to the gods.
CHAP. 7.
I^ (...) say the Poets tolerable fictions that some gods were lovers or haters
of (...) men, were not spoken universally but restrictiuely, respecting the
evil (...) whom Apuleius says, do flote in a sea of turbulent thoughts: how
can this (...) (...)
(...) when in his placing of them in the midst between the gods and us, he
sai^ (...), some, for the evil, but (a) all, because all have ayrie bodies?
for this he says is a ^on of the Poets that make gods of those spirits, and
call them so, making ^m friends to such or such men, as their own loose
affects do put in their heads to (...): whereas indeed the gods are far from
these in place, blessedness (...) quality. This is the fiction then, to call
them gods that are not so: and to set (...) at odds, or at amity with such or
such particular men, under the titles of (...). But this fiction (says he) was
not much: for though the spirits be cal^ (...) as they are not, yet they are
described as they are. And thence (says he) (...) ^ers tale of Minerua, that
staide Achilles from striking in the midst of (...) (...) host. That this
was Minerua, he holds it false, because she (in his (...)
(...) (...) (c) a goddess highly placed amongst the greatest deities, far
from (...) with mortals. Now if it were some spirit that favored the (...)
Troy, as Troy had diverse against them, one of whom he calls (d) (...) (...)
Mars, who indeed are higher gods then to meddle with such (...) (...) (...)
spirits contended each for his own side, then this fiction is not (...) (...)
(...) (...). For it was spoken of them whom he himself has testified subject
to (...), as mortal men are: so that they might use their loves and hates not
according to justice, but even (e) as the people do in huntings and (...) each
one do the best for his own party: for the Philosophers care it (...) was
this, to prevent the imputation of such acts upon the gods (whose (...) the
Poets used) and to lay them upon the spirits to whom of right they (...).

L. VIVES.
B^ ^all] all are mean between gods and men, not in substance, but nature and
place. ^ers] Iliaed, 1. She staid Achilles from striking Agamemnon, upon ill
words past be^ ^m. (c) A goddesse] One of the twelve counsellor-gods that
Ennius has in his di^ good, powrefull, and invisible. (d) Uenus] They think)
says Plutarch De defect. (...) ^one of these calamities which the gods are
blamed for, were their doings, but the (...) certain wicked spirits. (e) As
the people] In the greater circuit, they had horse^ ^tings: and the riders
were attired either in white, blew, green or read: and so (...) were there.
Martial mentions two of their colors, Prasine, and Uenetian, that is, The
Circian colors.
(...) blew. Some hold those four colors dedicated to the four seasons of
the year. (...) ^aith Suetonius) added two more, golden and purple: The blew
was sacred to the (...) green to the verdant spring: white to the Autumn
frosts, and red to the sum^ P^ie writes thus hereof: I wonder to see so many
thousands of people gazing at a sort (...) ^ding about like boys, if they did
either respect the horses speed or the horsmans skill, it (...), but their
mind is all upon the color, and if they change colors in the midst of their
(...) spectators favor changes also: and those whom they knew but even now a
far of, and (...) upon their names, presently, they have done with, they:
Such favor, such credit, follows (...): Not in the vulgars judgment only
(which is not worth a tatter) but even in the (...) grauer sort, has this
foolery gotten residence. Epist. lib. 8.

Apuleius his definition of the gods of heaven, spirits of air, and men of
earth. CHAP. 8.
(...) of his definition of spirits? it is universal and therefore worth
inspec^. They are (says he) creatures, passive, reasonable, aeriall and
eternal: In all (...) there is no co^munity, that those spirits have with
goodmen, but they (...) bad also. For making a large description of man, in
their place, being (...) the gods are the first, to pass from commemoration of
both their (...), unto that which was the mean between them, viz. these
devils, thus Apule^ his description of man
(...) Men, ioying (a) in reason, perfect in speech, mortal in body, immortal
in (...) ^onate and unconstant in mind, brutish and frail in body, of
discrepant con^ ^d conformed errors, of impudent boldness, of bold hope, of
indurate labor, (...) ^taine fortune, perticularly mort^ll, generally
eternal, propagating one ano^ of life, slow of wisdom, sudden of death and
discontented in life, these dwell (...). In these generals (common to many) he
added one, that he knew was false (...) (b) slow of wisdom: which had he
omitted, he had neglected to perfect ^ription. For in his description of the
gods, he^ says, that that beatitude (...) men do seek by wisdom, excels
in them, so had he thought of any (...) devils, their definition should have
mentioned it, either by showing them ^ticipate some of the gods beatitude, or
of man's wisdom. But he has no ^ion between them and wretches: though he
be favorable in discoue^ ^eir maleuolent natures, not so much for fear of
them, as their servants (...) ^ould read his positions: To the wise he leaves
his opinion open enough, (...) that theirs should be: both in his separation
of the gods from all tem^ of affect, and therein from the spirits, in all but
eternity: and in his ^tion that their minds were like men's, not the gods, nay
and that not (...) wisdom, which men may partake with the gods, but in being
prove to passions, which rule both in the wicked and the witless: but is over
ruled by the wise man, yet so as he had (c) rather want it, then conquer it,
for if he seek to make the devils to communicate with the gods in eternity
of mind only, not of body, then should he not exclude man, whose soul he
held eternal, as well as the rest: and therefore he says that man is a
creature mortal in body, and immortal in soul.

L. VIVES.
IOying (a) in reason.] Or contending by reason, Cluentes, of Cluo, to strive.
(b) Slow.] Happy ^s he that getts to true knowledge in his age. Plato. (c)
Rather want.] A wise man has rath^ have no passions of mind: but seeing that
cannot be, he takes the next course, to keep the^ under, and have them still
in his power.

Whether the ayry spirits can procure a man the gods friendships. CHAP. 9.
Wherefore, if men by reason of their mortal bodies have not that participation
of eternity with the gods, that these spirits by reason of their immortal
bodi^ have: what mediators can their be between the gods and men that in their
best part, their soul, are worse then men, and better, in the worst part of a
creature, the body? for, all creatures consisting of body and soul, have the
(a) soul for the better part, be it never so weak and vicious, and the body
never so firm and perfect: because it is of a more excelling nature, nor can
the corruption o^ vice deiect it to the baseness of the body: but like base
gold, that is dearer the the best silver, so far does it exceed the bodies
worth. Thus then those ioly mediators, or posts from heaven to earth, have
eternity of body with the gods and corruption of soul with the mortals, as
though that religion that must make god and man to meet, were rather corporal
then spiritual! But what guilt or sentence has hung up those iugling
intercedents by the heels, and the head downward, that their lower parts
their bodies participate with the higher powers: and their higher, their souls
with the lower, holding correspondence with the Gods in their servile part, and
with mortals in their principal? for the body (as Salust says) is the souls
slave: at least should be in the true use* and he proceeds: the one we have
common with beasts, the other with gods: speaking of man whose body is as
mortal as a beasts. Now those whom the Philosophers have put between the
gods and us, may say thus also: We h^ body and soul, in community with gods
and men: but then (as I said) they are bound with their heels upward having
their slavish body common with the gods, and their predominant soul common
with wretched men: their worst part aloft and their best underfoot, wherefore
if any one think them eternal with the gods, because they never die the death
with creatures, let us not understand their bo^ to be the eternal palace
wherein they are blessed, but (b) the eternal pri^ wherein they are damned:
and so he thinks as he should.

L. VIVES.
THE (...) (a) f^.] For things inherent never change their essential
perfection, and I do wond^ that (...) the Peripatetique school of Paris would
make any specificall difference of soule^* (b) D^.] Not in the future tence:
for they are damned euersince their fall.

Plo^ines opinion that men are less wretched in their mortality then the
di^lls are in their eternity. CHAP. 10.
IT is said that Pl^, that lived but (a) lately, understood Plato the best of
any* He seaking of men's souls, says thus: (b) The father out of his mercy
bound them (...) f^r a season, So that in that men's bonds, (their bodies) are
mortal, he impu^ The devils miserable immortality.
it ^o God the fathers mercy, thereby freeing us from the eternal tedious^ of
this life. Now the devils wickedness is held unworthy of this favor (...)
passive souls have eternal prisons, not temporal as men's are, for they (...)
happier then men, had they mortal bodies with us, and blessed souls with the
Gods. And men's equals were they if they had but mortal bodies to their ^hed
souls: and then could work themselves rest after death by faith and (...).
But as they are they are not only more unhappy then man in the wretchedness of
souls, but far more in eternity of bondage in their bodies, (c) he would
(...) have men to understand that they could ever come to be gods, by any
grace or wisdom, seeing that he calls them eternal devils.

L. VIVES.
B^ (a) Lately.] In Probus his time, not 200. years ere Hon^rius his reign.
In Plotine (...) says, him thought Plato's academy revived. Indeed he was the
plainest and pu^ Plotine*
^ists that ever was. Plato and Plotinus, Princes of the Philosophers Macrob.
Porphiry (...) (...) wrote his life, and prefixed it unto Plotines works. (b)
The father. Plato said this of (...) (...) gods in Timaeo: but Plotine says it
was the mercy of y^ father, to free man from this lives (...), his words are
these. Jove the father pitying our souls la^s prefixed an expiration (...) ^ds
wherein we labor* and granted certain times for us to remain without
bodies, there (...) (...) worlds soul r^leth eternally, out of all this
trouble. De dub. animae. (c) For he.] Apuleius, (...) ^th that which follows.

(...) the Platonists that held men's souls to become Daemones after death.
CHAP. 11.
(...) says (a) also that men's souls are Daemones, and become (b) Lares if
their (...) be good: if evil, (c) Lemures, goblins: if different, (d) Manes.
But ^tious this opinion is to all goodness, who sees not; for be men never so
^ous, hoping to become Lemures, or Man^s, the more desirous they are (...)* the
worse they turn into, and are persuaded that some sacrifices will call (...)
to do mischief when they are dead, and become such: for these Laruae ((...)
^e) are evil Daemones that have been men on earth. But here is another (...):
let it pass: he says further, the Greeks call such as they hold bles^
(...), good Daemones: herein confirming his position that men's souls Eudemon^.
(...) Daemones after death.

L. VIVES.
HE says (a)] Having often named Genius, and Lar* giu^ me leave (good reader)
to handle (...) here a little. Apuleius his words are these. In some sense, the
soul of man while it is in (...) (...) may be called a Demon. -- Dii ne hunc
ardorem mentibus addunt,
Euriale, an sua cu^que deus sit dira Cupido,
Causen the gods (Eurialus) these fires,
Or been those gods which men call loose desires.


S^ the good desire is a good god in the mind. Some therefore think they are
called (...), Gen^*
(...) (...), that is, whose soul is purest perfect. I know not if I may
translate it the Genius be^se that god which is each man's soul though he be
immortal* yet has original after (...) manner with each man: and thither
tend the prayers we offer to our genius at car^ ^iunctions. Some assign the
body and soul severed (whose conjunction produces (...)) so that the second
sort of Daemones is men's souls acquit from the bonds of body and Lare^.
(...): these the ancient Latin call Lemures: and such of these as have a care
of their pro^* (...) stays quietly about the house, are called Lares. But such
as for their bad lives, are bound to wander* and use to amaze good men with
idle apparitions* (...)*
but to hurt the evil men call Laruae. But when their merits are indifferent
between the Lar* and the Larua, then they are called Manes, and for honors
sake are surnamed gods. For such as lived orderly and honestly, of those
persons, were first graced with divine titles by their successors, and so got
admittance into the temples, as Amphiarus in Baeotia, Mopsus in Africa, (...)
in Egypt, others elsewhere, and Aesculapius every where. And thus are gods that
have been mortal men divided. Thus far out of Apuleius from a most
imperfect copy though printed by one of good credit: Plato also calls our
souls least part, a Demon: l^ Cratil. His words: you know whom Hesiod calls
Daemones, even those men of the golden age: for of them he says. -- Men's an
demon. The golden (...) (...).

At genus hoc postquam fatalis condidit hora.
Demones hi puri terr^stres tunc vocitantur,
Custode* hominum faelices, qui mala pellunt.
-- A Demon or a mind,
But when set fate called hence this glorious kind,
Then hight they Earthly Daemones and pure.
Man's happy guides from ill, and guards most sure.


I think they were called golden (not that they were worth gold) because they
were just and virtuous, and in that respect are we called Iron. But any good
man of those days shall stand in the rank of Hesiodes golden men also. And
who is good, but the wise? I hold therefore that he called them Demons for
their wisdom and experience, as the word imports: wherefore well wrote he and
whosoever wrote it A good man dying is advanced and made a Demon, Demon.
in his wisdom. So say I that a wise man dying and living so, becomes a good
Demon, as (...) also affirms. Thus far Plato, in his Timaeus, whence] doubt
not but Origin had his error, that men's souls become Daemones, and so
contrariwse. Plutarch. Orig. Porphiry also says that a proper part of the
soul, viz, the understanding is a Demon, which he that has wise, is a happy
(...): and he that has not, is unhappy: that evil souls become wicked
spirits and liers and deceivers like them: But Proclus distinguishes of a
Demon and makes all plain. It is true (says he) that Plato says there is a
Demon in the reasonable soul: but that is comparatively true, not simply, for
their is a Demon essential, a Demon in respect, and a Dae^ in habit. Every
thing in respect of the inferior as a Demon, is called a Demon: so Jupiter
calls his father Saturn in Orpheus. And Plato calls them gods that have the
immediate disposition of generation Daemones: to declare the nature and
generation of the other Daemones, were more then man can comprehend (says
he:) for each power that affords a man immediate protection, be it a god
less or more, is called a Demon. Now the habitual Demon is the soul that
has practiced it self wholly in actions rather divine then humane and so has
had seciall dependence thereupon: and in this sense Socrates calls the souls
that lived well, and are preferred to better place and dignity, Demons. But
the essential Demon has not his name from habit, or respect, but from the
propriety of his own nature: and is distinct from the rest in essence,
proprieties, and actions. But indeed in Tym^us each reasonable soul is called
a D^. Thus far Pr^clus who likes not that a soul should be called a Demon
simply: for that he restraines only to that essence that is a mean between the
gods and us, nor will have any thing but our soul called a Demon compa^atiue:
not that which works the chie^e in it, be it reason or affect, in mi^ds sound
or pe^turbed wherein Apuleius and he agree not* for that w^ch Uirgill says
(it is indeed a ridle, or a problem) is like this of Plato: law to the good
(...) is his god, lust to the evil. Seruius expounds Virgill thus. Plotine and
other Philosophers (...) (...) ^stion, whether our mind move of it self unto
affects or counsels, or be l^d by s^ (...) (...)? first they said, it is
moved it self, yet found they afterward that our fa^iliar (...) (...) (...)
^stigator to all goodness, and this we have given us at our birth: but f^
affecti^s (...) (...) (...), in those we are our own guides; for it is
impossible that the good gods she (...) (...) unto evil. Thus much Seruius.
But surely the affects that do move us, Plato calls also Daemones. And it is
a wounder to see the controversies of men of one sect in the question of gods
and Daemones, Apuleius he contradicted p^, Pl^ him, Porphyry all of them, nor
can Iamblichus and he agree, nor Proclus and Iamblichus, (...) themselves
setting difference amongst them as they please to teach them. (b) Lares] L^res.
(...) with the Genti says Apuleius: and Censorinus shows it in an old
opinion. De die. not. (...) ^slates Daemones by Lares: mary with a condition,
If I may say so. Capella calls them (...), and Angeli, and Seruius (in Aeneid.
6.) Manes: it is said each man has his good Geni^ ^is bad* viz: reason that
effects good, and lust evil. This is the Larua the evil (...): that the
Lar, the good one. If the Larua overrule a man in this life, then is he (...)
by it in the life to come, and punished for his folly: if the Lar conquer, he
is puri^ ^d carried vpppe to bliss, by the said Lar. Plato also is of the same
opinion, saying (...) go to judgment. De rep Vltimo. (c) Lemures] The
peaceable dead souls are Lares, Lemures.
(...) ^ull Laruae or Lemures: and those they trouble or possess, Laruati. All the air says Cap^* (N^ptiar. lib. 2,) from the Moon is in Pluto's power,
otherwise called Summanus, (...) (...) summus: the Prince of devils: and the
Moon that is next the air is therefore (...) Proserpina, under whom the Manes
of all conception are subject, who delight after (...) (...) those bodies, and
if they lived honestly in their first life, they become Lares of houses ^tties:
if not they are made Laruae, and walking Ghostes: so that here are the good
and ^ll Manes which the Greeks call (...) and (...). Here also are their Go^
Mana and Maturna, and the Gods called Aquili, fura also, Furina, and mother
(...) and other Agents of the gods do live here. Thus much Capella. There
(says (...)) are the Lemures, Ghosts that affright and hurt men, presaging
their death: called (...) quasi Remures of Remus; for expiation of whose
murder Romulus offered and in^ the Lemuralia to be kept the third day of May,
at such time as February was vn-ad (...) the year. Ther-vpon it is sin to
marry in May. (In horat. Epist. lib. 2.) This he (...) (...) Ovid. Fastor. 5.
(d) Manes] As if they were good. Fest. For they used Mana (...) (...), also
mother Matuta, and Poma Matura ripe apples. These were adored for Ma^s.
(...) ^ath, and called the Manes; as it were good, whereas they were rather
Imma^ ^nstrous evil.

Of the three contraries whereby the Platonists distinguish the devils natures
from the men's. CHAP. 12.
(...) now to those creatures whom he places properly between the gods
(...) men, being reasonable, passive, aereall and immortal. Having placed the
(...) the highest, and the men the lowest, here (says he) are two of your
crea^ ^he gods and men much differing in height of place, immortallity and
(...), the habitations being immeasurably distant, and the life there eter^ and
perfection here, frail and (a) faltring: their wits advanced to (...), ours
dejected unto misery. Here now are three contraries between (...) two
uttermost parts, the highest and the lowest: for the three praises of the
(...), he compares with the contraries of man's. Theirs are height of (...)*
eternity of life, perfection of nature. All these are thus opposed by him (...)
^manity: the first height of place vnmeasurably distant from us: the second
(...) of life, poized with our frail and faltring state: the third perfection
of (...) and wit, counterpoized by our wit and nature, that are dejected
(...) misery. Thus the gods three, height, eternity, beatitude: are con^ in
our three Baseness, mortality and misery; now the devil being (...) midway
between them and us, their place is known, for that must needs (...) (...)
midde-distance between the highest and the lowest. But the other two (...)
(...) better looked into, whether the devils are either quite excluded from
(...), or participate as much of them as their middle posture require: excluded
(...) them they cannot be: for (b) we cannot say that they are neither happy
nor wretched (as we may say that the mid-place is neither the (...) (...)
lowest) beasts and unreasonable creatures neither are so. But such as have
(...) must be the one: Nor can we say they are neither mortal nor eternal:
for (...) (...) aline are the the one. But he has said they are eternal. It
remains then that they have one part from the highest, and another from the
lowest, so being the ^eane themselves. For if they take both from either,
their mediocrity is ouerthro^n, and they rely wholly upon the lower part or the
higher. Seeing therefore they cannot want these two qualities aboue-said, their
mediation arises from their pertaking one with either. Now eternity from the
lowest they cannot have: for there it is not: so from the highest they must
have that: So then is there nothing to participate for their mediety sake
between them and mortals, but misery.

L VIVES.
And (a) faltring] Subcisiua with Apuleius, or Succidua, with some Copyes of
Augustine, the later is more proper and significant. (b) We cannot]
Contradictories in opposites admit no mean: as one must perforce either run or
not run. Other opposites do, as black and white, contraries and other coullors
the means between them. Some admit it not in particulars: As living and dead
in creatures: Seeing and blind, at natures fit times. Arist. Categor.

How the devils if they be neither blessed with the gods nor wretched with
men, may be in the mean betwixt both without participation of either. CHAP. 13.
SO then according to the Platonists, the gods are in eternal blessedness,
or blessed eternity, and men are in mortal misery or miserable mortality: And
the spirits of the air between both, in miserable eternity, or eternal
misery. For in his five attributes given them in their definition, is none that
shows (as he promised) their mediety: this community with us including their
reason, their being creatures, and their being passive, and holding community
with the gods only in eternity: Having their ayry nature, common with
neither. How are they means then, having but one from the higher, and three
from the lower? Who sees not how they are thrust from the mean to the lower
side? But thus they may be found to be in the midst: they have one thing proper
to them selves only, their ayry bodies, as the gods have their celestial, and
man his (...): and two things they have common to both: their being creatures
and their gift of reason: For he speaking of the gods and men, said: Here
(...) you two creatures: Nor do they affirm but that the gods have reason.
Two then remains: their passiuenesse, and their eternity, one common with the
lower and the other with the higher, so being proportioned in the mean place
that they decline to neither side. Thus then are they eternally miserable or
miserably eternal. For incalling them passive he would have called them
miserable, but for offending them that served them. Besides, because the world
is not ruled by rash chance but by (a) Gods providence: these spirits The di^
eternally miserable.
should never have (...) eternally miserable, but that they are extremely
malicious: wherefore if the (...) be blessed, the^ is it not they that are in
this mediety between Gods and men: where is their place then, admitting their
ministry between gods and men. If they be good and eternal, then are they
blessed. If blessed, then ^ot in the midst, but nearer to the gods and further
from men: frustrate then is all their labor that seek to prove the mediety of
those spirits being good, immortal* and blessed, between the gods immortal
and blessed, and men mortal and w^ched. For having beatitude and immortality,
both attributes of the gods, and ^her proper unto man, they must need hold
nearer correspondence with gods t^ men. For if it were otherwise, their two
attributes should communicate with one upon either side, not with two upon one
side: as a man is in the midst be^ne a beast and an Angel: a beast being
unreasonable and mortal, an Angel ^sonable and immortal, a man mortal and
reasonable, holding the first with a (...), the second with an Angel, and so
stands mean; under Angels above (...). Even so in seeking a mediety between
immortality, blessed and mo^lity wretched, we must either find mortality
blessed, or immortality ^ched.

L. VIVES.
B^ (a) Gods prouidence] So Plato affirms often: that the great father both
created and ^ed all the world: Now he should do injustice in afflicting an
innocent with eter^ ^ery: for temporal affliction upon a good man is to a
good end, that his reward may ^ee the greater and he more happy by suffering
so much for eternal happiness.

Whether mortal men may attain true happpnesse. CHAP. 14.
(...) great question whether a man may be both mortal and happy: some (a)
^ering their estate with humility, affirmed that in this life man could not ^y,
others extolled themselves and avouched that a wise man was happy: (...) it
be so, why are not they made the means, between the immortally and the
mortally wretched? Hold their beatitude of the first, and their more the later?
Truly if they be blessed they envy no man For (b) what is more ^ed then envy?
And therefore they shall do their best in giving wretched (...) good council
to beatitude, that they may become immortal after death (...) joined in
fellowship with the eternal blessed Angels.

L. VIVES.
S^ (a) considering] Solon of Athens held, none could be happy til death. Plato
excepted a (...): But Solon grounded upon the uncertain fate of man: For who
could say Pryam was (...) before the war, being to suffer the misery of a
ten years siege? Or Craesus in all ^h, being to be brought by Cyrus to be
burnt at a stake? Now Plato respected the ^ty of attayning that divine
knowledge in this life, which makes us blessed. (b) What (...) is all the good
that envy has, that it afflicts those extremely that use it most, as Envy.
(...) ^eeke author says.

Of the Mediator of god and man, the man Christ Jesus. CHAP. 15.
(...) if that be true (which is far more probable) that all men of
necessity (...) be (a) miserable whilst they are mortal, then must a mean
be found (...) is God as well as man, who by the mediation of his blessed
mortality may (...) us out of this mortal misery unto that immortal
happiness: And (...) mean must be borne mortal, but not continue so. He
became mortal not by any weakening of his Deity, but by taking on him this our
frail flesh: he remained not mortal, because he raized himself up from
death: for the fruit of his mediation is, to free those whom he is mediator
for, from the eternal death of the flesh: So then it was necessary for the
mediator between God and us, to have a temporal mortality, and an eternal
beatitude, to have correspondence with mortals by the first, and to transfer
them by eternity to the second. Wherefore the good Angels cannot have this
place, being immortal and blessed. The evil may, as having their
immortality, and our misery: And to these is the good mediator opposed, being
mortal for a while, and blessed for ever, against their immortal misery. And
so these proud immortals, and hurtful wretches, least by the boast of their
immortality they should draw men to misery, has he by his humble death and
bountiful beaitude expelled from swaying of all such hearts as he has pleased
to cleanse and illuminate by faith in him: what mean the shall a wretched
mortal, far separate from the blessed immortals, choose to attain their
societies? The devils immortality is miserable: But Christ's mortality has
nothing vndelectable. There we had need beware of eternal wretchedness: here
we need not fear the death (which cannot be eternal) and we cannot but love
the happiness which is eternal for the me an that is immortally wretched aims
al at keeping us from immortal beatitude, by persisting in the contrary misery:
but the mean that is mortal and blessed, intends after our mortality to make us
immortal (as he shewewed in his resurrection) and of wretches to make us
blessed, with he never wanted. So that there is an evil mean that seperateth
friends, and a good that reconciles them: and of the first sort (b) is many,
because the blessedness that the other multitude attaineth, comes al from
participating of one God: whereof the miserable multitude of evil Angels being
(c) deprived, with rather are opposite to hinder, then interposed to further,
does all that in it lies to withdraw us from that only one way that leads to
this blessed good, namely the word of God, not made, but the maker of al: yet
is he no mediator as he is the word: for so is he most blessed, and immortal,
far from us miserable men. But as he is man: therein making it plain that to
the attainment of this blessed, and blessing good, we must use no other
mediators whereby to work: God himself, blessed and blessing al, having graced
our humanity with participation of his deity: for when he freeth us from
misery and mortality, he does not make us happy by participation of blessed
Angels but of y^ trinity, in whose participation the Angels themselves ar
blessed* and therefore (d) when he was below the Angels in form of a servant,
then we also above them in Phil, 2.
form of a god: being the same way of life below, and life it self above.

L. VIVES.
BE (a) miserable] Homer calls men (...), and (...), that is miserable, and so
do the Latins. (b) Is many] Virtue is simple, and singular, nor is there many
ways to it. Vice is confused, and infinite paths there are unto it. Arist.
Ethic. So the devils have many ways to draw a man from God, but the Angels but
one to draw him unto him by Christ the Mediator. (c) Depriued] As darkness is
the privation of light, so is misery of beatitude. But not contrariwise. (d)
When he was] Plin. 2. Who being in the form GOD, thought it no robb^ to be
equal with GOD, but made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form
of a servant. These are Paul's words proouing that though CHRIST were most like
to his father, yet never professed himself his equal here upon earth, unto
us that respected but his manhood: Though he might lawfully have done it: But
the LORD of (...) pu^te on him the form of a servant, and the high GOD debased
himself into one degree with us, that by his likeness to ours, he might bring
us to the knowledge of his power and essence, and so estate us in eternity
before his father: and that his humanity might so inuit us, that his Divinity
did not terrify us, but take hold of our acceptance of this inuitation, and so
translate us into joy perpetual. But he could neither have bin invited nor
allured to this, but only by one like our selves: nor yet could we be made
happy, but only by God the fountain of happiness. So then there is but one
way, Christ's humanity by which all access lies to his Deity, that is life
eternal and beatitude.

Whether it be probable that the Platonists say, That the gods avoiding earthly
contagion, have no commerce with men, but by the means of the ayry spirits.
CHAP. 16.
FOr it is false that this Platonist says Plato said: God has no commerce
with man: and makes this absolute separation, the most perfect note of their
glory and height. So then the Devils are left to deal, and to be infected by
man's conversation, and therefore cannot mundifie those that infect them, so
that both become unclean, the devils by conuersing with men, and then men by
adoration of the devils. Or if the devils can converse with men, and not be
infected, then are they better then the gods: for they cannot avoid this
inconvenience: for that he makes the gods peculiar, to be far above the
reach of man's corruption. But (a) God the Creator (whom we call the true God)
he makes such an one (out of Plato) as words cannot describe at any hand, nay
and that the wisest men in their greatest height of abstractiue speculation,
can have but now and then a sudden and (b) momentary glimpse of the (c)
understanding of this God. Well then if this high God (d) afford his ineffable
presence unto wise men, sometimes in their abstracti^e speculation: (though
after a sudden fashion) and yet is not contaminate God not polluted by being
present unto wise men.
thereby: why then are the gods placed so far off, sor fear of this
contamination* As though the sight of those ethaereal bodies that light the
earth were not sufficient. And if our sight of the stars (whom he makes
visible gods) do not ^minate them, then no more does it the spirits, though
seen nearer hand. Or^ man's speech more infectious then his sight, and
therefore the gods (to keep themselves pure) receive all their requests at
the delivery of the devils? What shall I say of the other sen^s? Their
smelling would not infect them if they were below, or when they are below as
devils, the smell of a quick man is not infect^s at all, if the steame of so
many dead carcasses in sacrifices infect not. Their taste is not so^ craving of
them as they should be driven to come and ask their meat of men: and for
their touch, it is in their own choice. For though (e) handling be peculiar
to that sense indeed, yet may they handle their business with men, to see them
and hear them without any necessity of touching: for men would dare to desire
no further then to see and hear them: and if they should, what man can touch a
God or a Spirit against their wills: when we see one cannot touch a sparrow,
unless he have first taken her? So then in sight, hearing and speech the
gods might have corporeal commerce with man. Now if the devils have thus much
without infection, and the gods cannot, why then the gods are subject to
contamination: and not the devils? But if they be infected also, then what
good can they do a man unto eternity, whom (being themselves infected) they
cannot make clean, nor fit to be adjoined with the gods, between whom and men
they are mediators? And if they cannot do this, what use has man of their
mediation? Unless that after death they live both together corrupted, and
never come nearer the gods; nor enjoy any beatitude, either of them. Unless
some will make the spirits like to spunges, fetching all the filth from others,
and retayning i^ in themselves: which if it be so, the gods converse with
spirits that are more unclean then the man whose conversation they avoid for
uncleanness sake. Or can the gods mundifie the devils from their infection,
vn-infected and cannot do so with men? Who believes this that believes not
the devils illusions? Again, if the looks of man infect, then those visible
gods, the (f) worlds bright eyes, and the other stars, are liable to this
infection, and the devils that are not seen but when they list, in better
state then they. But if the sight of man (not his) infect, then let them deny
that they do see man, we seeing their beams stretched to the very earth. Their
beams look vn-infected through all infection, and themselves cannot converse
purely with men only, though man stand in never so much necessity of their
help, we see the Suns and Moons beams to reflect upon the earth without
contamination of the light. But I wonder that so many learned men, preferring
things intelligible euer-more before sensible, would mention any corporal
matter in the doctrine of beatitude. Where is that saying of (g) Plotine:
Let us fly to our bright country, there is the father, and there is all?
What flight is that? (h) to become like to GOD. If then the liker a man is to
GOD the nearer he is also, why then the more unlike, the farther off: And man's
soul the more it looks after things mutable and temporal, the more unlike
is it to that essence that is immutable and eternal.

L. VIVES.
GOD (a) the Creator.] Apul. de d^o S^crat. and Dog. Platon. GOD is celestial,
ineffable, and vn-name-able, whose nature is hard to finde', and harder to
declare* God inco^prehensible
words The of Plato are these (...) To find God is hard, but to comprehend him
impossible. Thus far Apuleius. Plato in his Timaeus, that to find out the
father of this universe is a hard matter, but to express his full nature to
another, utterly impossible. And in his Parmenides, disputing of that One, He
says it can neither be named, defined, (...) comprehended, seen nor
imagined: (b) Momentary. Signifies that the dim light suddenly with-draweth
it self, leaving a slender species, or light impression thereof only, in the
minds of such as have seen it: yet such an one as gives ample testimony, of
the ^ensity and luster thereof. (c) Vnderstanding] In the world there are some
marks whereby the (...)* Maker may be known, but that a far off, as a light
in the most thick and spacious duke: and not God is to be partly kno^ne of his
creatures.
by all, but only by the sharpest wits that give themselves wholly to
speculation thereof. (d) Afford his] Nor does the knowledge of God leave the
wise mind, but is ever present when it is purely sought, and holyly. (e)
Handling] Contrectation, of Tracto to handle. (f) Worldet bright] Apulei* de
deo Socrat. For as their majesty required, he dedicated heaven to the immortal
gods, whom partly we see, and call them celestial: as, you the worlds
bright eye that guides the times: Vos O Clarissima mundi Lumina, says Virgill
of the Sun and Moon. Georg. 1. (g) Plotine] Plato says he, Coleyne copy.
(h) To become] The sentence is Plato (...) we rehearsed it in the last book.
He calls heaven our country, because hence we are exiled: Our bright
country, because all things there are pure, certain and illustrate, here
soul, fickle and obscure: There is the father of this universe, and all
things about him as the King of all, as Plato writes to Dyonisius. How shall
we get thither, being so far, and the way vnpasseable by our bodies? Only
one direct and ready way there is to it, to follow God with all our indea^r of
imitation. This only eleuateth us thither.

That unto that beatitude that consists in participation of the greatest
good, we must have only such a mediator as Christ, no such as the devil.
CHAP. 17.
TO avoid this inconvenience, seeing that mortal impurity cannot attain to
the height of the celestial purity, we must have a Mediator, not one bodyly
mortal as the gods are, and mentally miserable as men are, for such an one
will rather malign then further our cure; but one adapted unto our body by
nature, and of an immortal right eousnesse of spirit, whereby (not for
distance of place but excellence of similitude) he remained above, such an one
must give us his truly divine help in our ^ure from corruption and captivity.
Far be it from this incorruptible GOD to fear the corruption of (a) that
man which he put on, or of those men with whom as man he conuersed. For
these two Documents of his incarnation are of no small value, that neither true
divinity could be contaminate by the flesh, nor that the devils are our
bettets in having no flesh; This as the Scripture proclaymeth, is the Mediator
between GOD and man, the man CHRIST JESUS, of whose Divinity, equal with the
father, and his humanity, like unto ours: this is now no fi^e place to dispute.

L. VIVES.
OF (e) that man] The Phraze of Hierome, Augustine and all the Latin Fathers:
The Greeks use (...) in CHRIST that is man, nor have they any other Phraze God
assumed man.
to use for the Son of GOD his assumption of man: The later Divines (as if
they only were Divines and had found out all CHRIST'S Deity and humanity) say
that it was not All this commen^ary the Lovanists do l^aue quite out.
m^n, but manhood that he took upon him: And this (say they) is the best
ground against here^. As if Augustine and Hierome were no body. I but they
meant manhood (say these) though they said man. Well then, speak you as they
did, and think so too. But you are the neat Polishers of the rude ancient
Latin and Greek. Mary the best jest is, you will (...) none to contradict the
fathers, and give them the first opposition your selves, and in this you think
you show rare acuteness: But if an other do but leave your ^ripples, and
stick to the fathers, you presently proclayme him an Heretic. For if any of
your learners of Di^inity, desiring to seem more religious, and almost
attayning it, should say that CHRIST assured man, he is presently thrust from
the Lecture for an heretic. O but (say they) man is but the name of the
subject, but manhood declares the nature. Good God (...) Her etique will not
think you would deride him if he use it thus: And would not de^ide us if we
should use it so.

That the devils under coullor of their intercession, seek but to draw us from
God. CHAP. 18.
But those false and deceiptfull mediators the devils, wretched in uncleanness
of spirit, yet working strange effects by their aereall bodies, seek to draw
us from profit of soul, showing us no way to GOD, but sweating to conceal
that wholly from us: For in the corporal way, which is most false and
erroneous; a way that righteousness walks not (for our ascent to GOD must be
by this spiritual likeness, not by corporal elevation) but (as I said) in
this corporal way that the devils servants dream does ly through the
Elements, the devils are placed in the midst between the celestial Gods and
the earthly men, and the gods have this pre-eminence that the distance of place
keeps them from contagion of man: so that rather they believe that the devils
are infected by man, then he mundified by them, for so would he infect the gods
(think they) but for the far distance that keeps them clean. Now who is he so
wretched as to think any way to perfection, there, where the men do infect,
the spirits are infected, and the gods subject to infection? And will not rather
select that way where the polluted spirits are abandoned, and men are purged
from infection by that unchangeable God, and so made fit persons for the
fellowship of the Angels ever unpolluted.

That the word Demon is not used as now of any Idolater in a good sense CHAP.
19.
But to avoid controversy concerning words, because some of these
Daemonseruers, and Labeo for one, say, that (a) whom they call* Demones,
others call Angels: now must I say somewhat of the good Angels, whom indeed
they deny not, but had rather call them Demons then Angels. But we (as
scripture and consequently Christianity instructs us) acknowledge Angels both
good Demon used always in the scripture on the worst part.
and evil; but no good Demons. But wher-soeuer in our scripture Demon or
Daemonium is read, it signifies an evil and unclean spirit: and is now so
universally used in that sense, that even the (c) Pagans themselves that hold
multitude of gods and Demons to be adored, yet be they never such scholars,
dare not say to their slave as in his praise: thou have a Demon: who-soeuer
does say so, knows that he is held rather to curse then commend. Seeing
therefore that all ears do so dislike this word: that almost none but takes
it in ill part, why should we be compelled to expres our assertion further,
seeing that the use of the word Angel will (...) abolish the offense that the
use of the word Demon causes.

L. VIVES.
WH^ (a) they] (...) is a messenger: and thence in the Greeks we read often
(...), (...) ^t it is.
the messengers face. Euripid. Iphgen. So the Daemones being held the gods
messengers and interpretors, are called Angeli, and so is Mercury for his
office: Trismegistus and Capella both call him so, and auerre the duenesse of
his name as declaring our secret thought to the higher powers. (b) We (as
Scripture] The Gospel speaks much of good Angels, and Christ names the
devils Angels. (c) Pagans] I said before, that after Christ was borne, the name
of a Demon grew into suspect, and so into hatred, as the epithet of an evil
essence, as well to the vulgar as the Philosophers.

Of the quality of the devils knowledge, whereof they are so proud. CHAP. 20.
YEt the original of this name (if we look into divinity) affordes somewhat
^th observation, for they were called in Greek, (a) (...) for their know^ Now
(...).
the apostle speaking in the holy spirit, says: Knowledge puffs up, (...)
^ifieth: that is knowledge is then good when it linketh with charity: ot^ i^
^uffeth up, that is fills one with vain glory. So then: In the devils is the
^owledge without charity, and thence they are puffed so big and so proud, that
the (...) honors which they well know to be Gods due, they have ever (...)
(...) ^em-selues, and as far as they can do so still. Now what power the (...)
o^ C^ that came in form of a servant, has against this devils pride (as men
deserved) ^ered in their hearts, men's wretched minds being diueleshly as yet
puffed up, can by no means (because of their proud tumor) comp^hend or
conceive.

L. VIVES.
Greek (a) (...)] (...) in the old greek was (...), to know. Thence came
(...) quasi (...) says the author of the great Etymology, All knowing. And
(...) of the same mind, for their knowledge: In Cratylo. Capella follows
him, and so ^ers, Lactantius also (lib. 2.) gives them this name for their
understanding: And so Daem^.
does ^lcidius upon Plato his Timaeus.

In what manner the Lord would make himself known to the Devils. CHAP. 21.
FOR the devils had this knowledge, they could say to the Lord in the flesh:
(...) have we to do with thee, O Jesus of Nazareth? Art thou come to destroy us
Man. 1. ^4.
(...) time? Here is a plain knowledge without charity: they fear to be pla^y
him, but loved not the justice in him. Their knowledge was bounded ^is will,
and his will with conuenience: But they knew him not as the Angels (...) him,
that participate of his Deity in all eternity, but unto their terror, out of
(...) clutches, he quit those y^ he had predestined to his Kingdom of true
eter^y, and eternal glorious truth. The devils therefore knew him not as he
(...) life eternal, the unchangeable light, illuminating all the godly who
re^hat light to the purification of their hearts by faith, but they knew him by
^mporall effects of his presence, and secret signs of his virtue, which the
di^ angelical senses might easilier observe then man's natural infirmity:
^gnes when he suppressed, the Prince of devils made question of his Dei^empted
him for the (b) trial of his Deity, trying how far he would ^m-selfe to be
tempted, in (c) adapting his humanity unto our imitati^ (d) after his
temptation when the good and glorious Angels (whom ^els extremely feared) came
and ministered unto him; then the devils got Math, 4.
and more knowledge of him, and not one of them durst resist his command, (...)
he seemed infirm and (e) contemptible in the flesh.

L. VIVES.
Angelical (a) sences] Christ's miracles were more admired of the Angels and
Devils then of men, because they knowing the causes of things, saw natures
power con^ Christ's miracles.
and transcended. Now men though they saw them strange, yet wanted there not
(...) to say he cast out devils by Beelzebub, their Prince: not so much
believing this indeed, ^g that the simple multitude should believe it. And
others of later time have false^ged him with art Magic, against whom (by
GODS help) I will deal at large (...) books De sapientia Christiana. (b) For
tryall] The Devil generally tempts man to (...), but here he aimed not so much
at sin (for he knew his sanctity at least near inex^ble) but his fetch was
to see whether the Deity were in this human form. (c) A^g] Because he would
not seem exempted (by passing vntempted) from human con^: Nor should his
servants after him, think much to be tempted, seeing that old (...) ^nemy of
man did not spare CHRIST himself. (d) After temptation] This Temptation.
^mplary also: For as none shall pass vntempted, so if none yield to the
temptation, (...) shall all enjoy the solace and ministry of Angels, as
Hierome says. (e) Contemptible] (...), needy, of mean birth and place, far
from ostentation, and having his society of such like as he was.

The difference of the holy Angels knowledge and the Devils. CHAP. 22.
Unto the good Angels, the knowledge of all temporal things (that puffes up
the Devils) is vile: not that they want it, but in that they wholly respect the
love of that God that sanctifies them, in comparison of which ineffable and
unchangeable glory with the (a) love of with they are inflamed, they contemn all that is under it, that is (b) not it, yea and even themselves, that al their
good may be employed in inioying that only good: And so came they to a more
sure knowledge of the world, viewing in God the principal causes of the worlds
creation, which The devils knowledge
causes do confirm this, frustrate that, and dispose of all: now the (c)
devils are fat from beholding those eternal and fundamental causes in the
wisdom of God, only they can extract a notion from certain secret signs
which man is ignorant in, have more experience, and therefore may oftener
presage events. But they are The devils o^en decemed.
often deceived, mary the Angels never. For it is one thing to presage changes
and events from changeable and casual grounds, and to confound them by as
changeable a will (as the devils are permitted to do) and another thing to
foresee the changes of times, and the will of God in his eternal unalterable
decrees most (d) certain and (most powerful) by the participatio^ of his divine
spirit, as the Angels ar vouchsafed by due gradation to do. So are they eternal
and blessed He is their God that made them, for his participation and
contemplation, they do (e) continually enjoy.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) loue] Love always works on beauteous objects. Socrates in Plato's
Phado says Love of f^e obi^s.
that if corporal eyes could behold the face of honesty and wisdom, they
would hold it most deer and amiable. What then if we could see Gods face, whose
fayrenesse ((says the book of wisdom) appears even in this, that our
fairest objects are of his making. Diotina in Plato's Conui. (as we said
above) holds but one pulchritude worthy the love of an honest man that desires
beatitude. (b) Is not] all that is not God, being vile in respect of God, the
Angels contemn both all and themselves in respect of him, which cogitation
fastneth them so firm in Union with God, that his beatitude suffices without
all other appendances to make them eternally blessed. (c) The diuels] For they
cannot behold the pole or foundation whereupon all causes are grounded and
turned, nor the fount whence they arise: but only (by their pregnancy and wit,
surmounting ours, as also by experence, more then ours (being immortal) they
have a quick conceit of things present, and a surer presage in things to come
then we have. Whereby coniecturing events not from the proper cause, but their
own conjectures, they are oftentimes deceived, and ly, when they think they
speak most true, boasting that they know al things. Nor do the vnpure devils
fail herein only, but even the gods themselves, says Porphyry. (d) Most
certaine] Gods will has this certainty, it effects what it pleases, else
were it not certain, as not being in his power, but all effects being in his
hand, it is most certain. That is, nothing can fall out, but he wills it,
because he wills nothing but must fall so out. And therefore they that
observe his will, observe the sure cause of all effects, because all effects
have production from his will, so that rightly does Augustine call his will
most certain, and most powerful, his power being the cause of his wills
certainty. This will the Angels and Saints beholding, know as much as the
proportion of their beatitude permits. For all of them have The cert^y of
Gods w^,
no^ the same knowledge, but gradually, as they have beatitude, as he says.
(e) Continually] Continual is their speculation of God, least the least
intermission should make them wretched: yet does not the fear of that, cause
them continue the other, but that beatitude does wholly transport them from the
cogitation and desire of all other things, they inioying all goodness in him
that is the fountain of them all.

That the Pagan Idols are falsely called gods, yet the scripture allows it
to Saints and Angels. CHAP. 23.
NOw if the Platonists had rather call these gods, the^ Daemones, and ro^on them
amongst those whom the father created (as their Master Plat^ writ^ch) let
the^ do so: we will have no verbal controversy with them: If they call them
immortal, and yet Gods creatures, made immortal by adherence with him, and
not by themselves, they hold with us, call them what they will. And the best
Platonists (if not all) have left records that thus they believed: for whereas
they call such an immortal creature a god, we (b) contend not with them, our
scriptures saying ^s. 50. 1. P^ 130. 2. ^s. 95 3. ^s 96 4 5.
The God of gods, even the Lord has spoken: again: Praise yea the God of
Gods: Again: A great King above all gods: And in that it is written: He is to
be feared above al gods: The sequel explaines it: For all the gods of the
people are Idols: but the Lord made the bea^ens. He calls him over al gods,
to wit the peoples, those that the Nations Mar. 1. 24.
called their gods being Idols, therefore is he to be feared above them all, and
in this fear they cried: Art thou come to destroy us before our time? But
whereas it is written. The God of gods, this is not to be understood, the God
of Idols, or devils: and God forbid we should say, A great King above all Gods,
in reference to his kingdom over devils: but the scripture calls the men of
Gods family, gods, I have said you are gods, and al children of the most High:
of these must the God of gods be understood, Ps. 82. 6. Men called Gods, Why.
and over these gods, is King, The great King above al gods. But now one
question: If men being of Gods family, whom he speaks unto by men or Angels,
be called gods, how much more are they to be so called that are immortal, and
enjoy that beatitude which men by Gods service do aim at? We answer that the
scripture rather calls men by the name of gods, then those immortal blessed
creatures whose likeness was promised after death, because our unfaithful
infirmity should not be seduced by reason of their super eminence to make us
gods of them: which inconvenience in man is soon avoided. And y^ men of Gods
family are the rather called gods, to assure them that he is their God that is
the God of gods: for though the blessed Angels be called gods: yet they are
not called the Gods of Gods, y^ is of those servants of God of whom it is said,
You are gods, and al children of Cor, 1. 8. ver, 5. 6,
the most High. Here-vpon the Apostle says: though there be that are called
gods, whether in heaven or in earth, as there be many gods, and many Lords: yet
unto us there is but one God which is the father: of whom are all things and
we in him: and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are al things and we by him. No
matter for the name the^, the matter being thus past all scruple. But whereas
we say from those immortal quires, Angels are sent with Gods command unto men,
this they dislike, as believing that this business belongs not to those
blessed creatures whom they call gods, but unto the Daemones, whom they dare
not affirm blessed but only immortal: or so immortal and blessed as good
Daemones are, but not as those high gods whom they place so high and so far
from man's infection. But (though this seem a verbal controversy) the name of
a Demon is so detestable, that we may by no means attribute it unto our
blessed Angels. Thus then let us end this book. Know all that those blessed
immortals (how ever called) y^ are creatures, are no means to bring miserable
man to beatitude, being from them (c) doubly different. Secondly those that
partake immortality with them, and miserable (for reward of their malice) with
us, can rather envy us this happiness, then obtain it us therefore the fautors
of those Daemones can bring no proof why we should honor them as The diuel^
not to be worshipped.
God, but rather that we must avoid them as deceivers. As for those whom they
say are good, immmortall and blessed, calling them gods and allot^ing them
sacrifices for the attainment of beatitude eternal, In the next book (by Gods
help) we will prove that their desire was to give this honor not to them,
but unto that one God, through whose power they were created, and in whose
participation they are blessed.

LVIVES.
And (a) recken] Plato says that that great God the father created all the
rest. In Timaeo. (b) We contend not No man denies (says Cypryan) that there
are many gods by participations. Boethius calls every happy man a god, but one
only so by nature, (...) the rest by participation. And to us has Christ
given power to be made the sons of God. ((...) Doubtly, By, from our misery and
mortality: which two words, some copies add unto the t^xt. The sense is all
one, implied in the one and expressed in the other.

Finis, lib. 9.
THE CONTENTS OF THE tenth book of the City of God.
1 That the Platonists themselves held that One only God was the giver of all
beatitude ^to Men and Angels; but the controversy is, whether they that they
hold are to be worshipped for this end, would have sacrifices offered to
themselves, or resign all unto God. 2. The opinion of Plotine the Platonist
concer^ing the supernatural illumination. 3. Of the true worship of God,
wherein the Plato^ts failed in worshipping good or evil Angels though they
knew the worlds Creator. 4. That sacrifice is due only to the true God. 5. Of
the sacrifices which God requires ^ot, and what be requires in their
signification. 6. Of the true and perfect sacrifice. 7. That the good Angels
do so love us, that thy desire we should worship God only, and ^ot them. 8.
Of the miracles whereby God has confir^d his promises in the minds of the
faithful, by the ministry of his holy Angels. 9. Of unlawful Arts concerning
the Devils worship, whereof Porphery approoueth some and d^eth others. 10. Of
Theurgy that falsely promises to ^ie the mind, by the invocation of devils.
11. Of Porpheries epistle to Anebuns of Aeg^t, desiring him of instruction in
the seuer^ k^des of Daemones. 12. Of the miracles that God works by his
Angels ministry. 1^. How the invisible God has often made ^selfe visible, not
as he is really, but as we c^ld be able to comprehend his sight. 14. How but
one God is to be worshipped for all things temporal and eternal, all being in
the p^er of his providence. 15. Of the holy Angels that minister to Gods
providence. 16. Whether in this question of Beatitude we (...) tr^st those
Angels that refuse the divine ^ship and ascribe it all to one God, or those the
require it to themselves. 17. Of the Arc of the Testament, and the miracles
wrought to confirm the law and the promise. 18. Against such as deny to
believe the scriptures, concerning those miracles shown to Gods people. 19.
The reason of that visible sacrifice that the true religion commands us to
offer to one God. 20. Of the only and true sacrifice which the mediator
between God and Man became. 21. Of the power given to the devils, to the
greater glorifying of the Saints that have suffered martyrdom and conquered
the ayrie spirits, not by appeasing them, but by adhering to God. 22. From
whence the Saints have their power against the devils, and their pure purgation
of heart. 23. Of the Platonists principles in their purgation of the soul. 24.
Of the true only beginning that purges and renews man's whole nature. 25.
That all the Saints in the old law, and other ages before it, were justified
only by the mystery and faith of Christ. 26. Of Porphery his wavering between
confession of the true God, and adoration of the Devils. 27. Of Porphery his
exceeding Apuleius in impiety. 28. What persuasions blinded Porphery from
knowing Christ the true wisdom. 29. Of the inearnation of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which the impious Platonists shame to acknowledge. ^0. What opinions of
Plato, Pophery confuted and corrected. 31. Against the Platonists holding the
soul coeternall with God. 32. Of the universal way of the souls freedom,
which Porphery sought amiss, and therefore found not: That only Christ has
declared it.
FINIS.
THE TENTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
That the Platonists themselves held, that One only God was the giver of all
beatitude unto men and Angels: but the controversy is, whether they that they
hold are to be worshipped for this end, would have sacrifices offered to
themselves, or resign all unto God. CHAP. 1.
IT is perspicuous to the knowledge of all such as have use of reason, that man
desires to be happy: But the great controversies arise upon the inquisition
whence or how mortal infirmity should attain beatitude: in which the
Philosophers have bestowed all their time and study, which to relate were here
too tedious, and as fruitless. He that has read our 8. book, wherein we
selected with what Philosophers to handle this question of beatitude, whether,
it were to be attained by serving one God, the maker of the rest, or the others
also need not look for any repititions here, having (...) to (...) (...)
memory: if it fail him, we choose the Platonists, as worthily held the most
^thy Philosophers, because as they could conceive that the reaso^ble (...)
soul of man could never be blessed, but in participation of the light of God
the worlds creator: so could they affirm that beatitude (the aim (...) all
(...)) was vn-attainable without a firm adherence in pure love, vn^ ^hangeable
One: that is GOD. But because they also gave way to Pag^ (...) (becoming vain
(as Paul says) in their own imaginations) and belee^ ((...). (...) (...)
o^ would be thought to believe) that man was bound to honor many gods, and
some of them extending this honor even to devils, (whom we have indifferently
confuted:) it re^eth now to examine (by gods grace) how these immortal and
blessed creatures in heaven (be they in thrones, (a) dominations,
principalities, or powers) whom they call gods, and some of them good Daemones,
or ^gels as we do, are to be believed to desire our preservation of truth in
religion (...) piety: that is (to be more plain) whether their wills be, that
we should off^r (...) (...) and sacrifice, or consecrate ours or our selves
unto them, or only to god, (...) i^ both their God and ou^: the peculiar
worship of the divinity or (to spea^e ^preslie) the deity, because I have no
one fit Latin word to express (...): ^d, I will use the Greek (b) Latria,
which our brethren (in all translati^) do translate, Service. But that service
wherein we serve men, (...) by the Apostle in these words, Servants, be
obedient to your (...), (...) (...), expressed by another Greek word. But
Latria, as our Euangeli^ (...). (...).
(...) ^her wholly or most frequently, signifies the honor due unto GOD. I^
(...) therefore translate it (...) of Colo, to worship or to ti^, w^ (...) it
with more then God, for we (c) worship [coli^] (...) men of honor^ memory or
presence: besides Colo in general use, is prop^ ^o (d) things under us, as
well as those whom we reverence or adore* (...) ^omes the word Colonus, for a
husbandman, or an inhabitant. And the ^lled Caelicolae, of Caelum, Heaven: and
Colo, to inhabit, not to adore, or (...) yet (e) as husbandmen, that have
their name from the village of the ^ossesse, but as that rare Latinist says,
Vrbs antiqua fuit, (f) Tyrij tenuere (...) being here the inhabitants, not the
husbandmen. And hereupon the (...) have been planted and peopled by other
greater cities (as one hiue ^duceth diverse) are called colonies. So then we
cannot use Colo with ^o God without a restraint of the signification, seeing it
is communi^ ^o many senses: therefore no one Latin word that I know is
sufficient (...) the worship due unto God. For though Religion signify nothing
so (...) the worship of GOD, and there-vpon so we translate the Greek (...)
yet because in the use of it in Latin, both by learned and ignorant, ^erred
unto linages, affinities, and all kindreds, therefore it will not ^oyde
ambiguitie in this theme: nor can we truly say, religion is no^t Gods
worship: the word seeming to be taken originally, from hu^ and observance. So
Piety also is taken properly for the worship of (...) the Greeks use (...):
yet is it attributed also unto the duty toward (...): and ordinarily used for
(i) the works of mercy, I think because ^ands it so strictly, putting it in
his presence (k) for, and (l) before (...) Whence came a custom to call God,
Pious. Yet the Greeks never (...)) (...), though they use (...) for mercy, or
piety often. But in some (...) more distinction) they choose rather to say
(...), Gods worship, ^lainely, worship, or good worship. But we have no one
fit word ^sse either of these. The Greek, (...) we translate, service, but
with (...) it only to God: their (...), we turn it, Religion, but still with
a ^ence to God: their (...) we have no one word for, but we may (...)
worship: which we say is due only to him that is the true God, and ^uants
gods. Wherefore if there be any blessed immortalls in hea^ ^ther love us, nor
would have us blessed, them we must not serve: but Gods servants.
(...) love us, and wish us happiness, then truly they wish it us from the
(...) they have it. Or shall theirs come from one stock, and ours from (...)

L. VIVES.
(...) dominations] Iamblichus diuides the supernall powers into Angels,
Archan^s, Heroes, Principalities and Powers, and those he says do appear in
diverse ^ions. In Myster. All the other Platonists make them but gods and
Daemones. (...) is (...), to serve: but it grew to be used for (...), to
worship. Suidas. But La^.
^e the service of men called (...), not (...), for the place he quoteth is:
(...), etc. Ephesians. 6. 5. Hence arises the dictinction of adoratio, Latria,
Dulia and ^lla makes Latria and Dulia both one, for service or bondage, and
shows it (...) of Suidas: (...). Service or bondage is mercenary. For an ^h
in Xenophon: I would redeem this woman from slavery or bondage ((...)) (...),
O Cyrus. Cyripaed. lib. 3. then the wife replied: Let him redeem himself from
bon^ (...)) With his own life. Ibid. The scriptures also use (...), for to be
servile, (...), You shall do no servile work ((...).) And again, Thou shall
make (...) to b^ slave to thy Prince, ((...).) And in Job, a beggar is called
(...). (...) have the last syllable but one, long. (c) We worship] And so does
holy ^tion. (d) Things under vs] Rightly: for Col^ is to handle or exercise: so
Dul^.
(...) all that we use or practice, learning, arms, sports, the earth, etc.
It is also to inhabit. ((...)) (...).] Such as till hired grounds are called
coloni, as they are called (...) (...)* (...) (...) in hired houses in cities,
and husbandmen that till their own ground, (...) (...) (...) (...) ^nt forth
to inhabit any where, are called coloni. Thereupon grew the name of (...)* (...)
(...) (...) ^olonies, to omit the Greeks and Asians. The towns that send out
the colonies (...) (...) Metropolitan cities thereof. (f) Tyrii.] The Tyrian^
built Carthage, and (...) (...) with Dido Elisa, that ^ed from Pig^lion, after
the death of Sicheus her husband. This (...) is as common as a (...)* (g*
(...).] All one with Latria (says Suidas) and (...) and (...) are all one,
belonging to the gods. For Orp^, they say, first taught the mysteries of
religion, and because h^e was (...) Thracian he called this duty, (...): or
else of Thre^ ((...) (...)*
o^ word) to see (h) It is ref^rred.] Being taken for piety: which is referred
to our country, p^rents and ki^d. (i) The works.] The vulgar call the
merciful godly, mercy godliness: So do the Spani^ds, and French, that speak
Latin the (...)* (k) Fore and.] These two words some copie^ (...) ((...))
(...).] Whereupon it is said. I will have mercy and no sacrifice. Os^. 6. 6.
(...).] None of the learned use it in that sense indeed.

The opinion of Plotine the Platonist, concerning the supernall. illumination.
CHAP. 2.
But we and those great Philosophers have no conflict about this question: for
they well saw, and many of them plainly wrote that both their beatitude, ^dours
had original from the perticipation of an intellectual light, which they ^nted
God* and different from themselves: this gave them all their light, and by the
(...) of this, they were perfect and blessed* (a) in many places does Plotine
ex. (...) (...) (...) that which we call the soul of this universe, has the
beati^ (...) (...) with us ^ly a light which it is not, but which made it: and
(...) it has all the intelligible splendour. This he ar^ (...) from the visible
celestial bodies compared with these (...) the (...) for (b) one, and the
Moon for another, for (...) held to proceed from the reflection of the Sun.
So (says (...) (...) (...) the reasona^ or intellectual soul, of whose
nature all the (...), that are contained in Heaven, has no essence above it,
b^ (...) (...) (...) creat^d both it, and all the world; nor have those
supernall cre^tures their (...) or understanding of the truth from any other
orig^ll then ours has: herein truly agreeing with the scripture, where it is
wri^, ((...)) There was a man sent from God whose name was John, the same came
for a witness (...) (...). (...)
to bear witness of the light, that allmen (d) through him might believe, (e)
He (...) (...) the light but (...) to bear witness of the light. That was the
true light (f) (...) (...) (...) (...) ((...)) that comes into the world,
which difference shows, that (...) ^sonable soul which was in John could not
be the own light, but (...) (...) ^tion of ^ther, the true light. This John
himself confessed in his (...)* where he said, Of ^is (...) (...) all we
received.

L. VIVES.
(...) the contemplation of that good father arises all beatitude. Pl^ (...)
says y^ our souls after their temporal labors shall enjoy (...) (...), with
y^ soul of the universe. (b) For one.] For the Prince (...) (...) arises, and
the M^ for the worlds soul. (c) There was.] A (...) (...) (...) ^ger from (...)
(and consequently John an (...) (...) he could bring no such news from any but
God. (d) Through him] not in him (...) (for cursed is the man that trusts in
man) but in the light, by his testimony, yet Hier. 17
(...) cannot be distinguished to either side. (e) He was not] (...): (...),
Th^ophilact will have a mystery. The Saints are lights. You are the light of
the Mat. 5. 14
Christ. for they are derived from his light. Thence follows that: That was
the true (...) (says Augustine?) because that which is lightened ab externo is
light also, (...) true light that enlightneth. Or the article (...), may have
relation to the prece^ ^the sense be, John was not that light of which I
spoke. (f) Which lightneth] not that (...) ^ghtned, but because none are
enlightened but by this light, or as Chrysostom (...) each man as far as*
belongs to him to be lightened. If any do shut their ^st the beams, the
nature of the light does not cause the darkness in them, but (...) ^licious
depriving themselves of such a good, other-wise so generally spread (...) word.
(g) That commeth] (...). Origin allegorizeth upon it: it lightneth (...) into
the world of virtues not of vices.

(...) worship of God, wherein the Platonists failed in worshipping good or
evil angels, though they knew the worlds creator. CHAP. 3.
(...) thus, what Platonist, or other Philosopher soever had held so, and (...)
God, and glorified him as God, and been thankful, and not become (...)
conceits, nor have been an author of the peoples error, nor winked at ^re: they
would have confessed, that both the blessed immortalls and (...) mortals are
bound to the adoration of one only GOD of gods, (...) God and ours.

That sacrifice is due only to the true God. CHAP. 4.
(...) owe that Greek Latria, or service, both in our selves and sacrifices,
(...) all his temple, and each one his temples, he vouchsafing to inhabit (...)
^mme, and each in particular, being no more in all, then in one: for he (...)
^ltiplied nor diminished (b) our hearts elevated to him are his altars (...)
(...) son is the priest by whom we please him: we offer him bloody sa^ we
shed our blood for his truth: and incence when we burn in (...), (c) the
gifts he gives us, we do in vows return him: his benefits (...) unto him in
set solemnities, least the body of time should bring (...) ungrateful
oblivion: we offer him the sacrifices of humility and praises (...) of our
heart in y^ fire offeruent love: for by the sight of him (as we may (...) to be
joined with him, are we purged from our guilty and filthy affects (...) ^ted in
his name: he is our blessed founder, and our desires accomplish^ we elect, or
rather re-elect, for by our neglect we lost him: him there^ re-elect (whence
religion is derived) and to him we do hasten with the (...), to attain rest in
him: being to be blessed by attainment of that fi^ ^tion: for our good (whose
end the Philosophers iangled about) is no^ to adhere unto him, and by his
intellectual and incorporeall embrace, (...) grows great with all virtue (e)
and true perfection. This good are we ^loue with all our heart, with all our
soul, and all our strength. To this (...) ^ught to be lead by those that love
us, and to lead those we love. So is (...) ^mandements fulfilled, wherein
consists all the law and the Pro^ Thou shall love (g) thy (h) Lord thy (i)
God (k) with all thine heart, with (...) (...)
(...)* and with all thy mind: and (l) Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self. (...) a man how to love himself, was this end appointed, whereunto to
refer all his works for beautitude for he that loves himself, desires but
to be blessed. And the end of this is, coherence with god. So then the command
of loving his neighbor, being given to him that knows how to love himself,
(m) what does it but command and commend the love of God unto him? This Gods
true worship, true piety, true religion, and due service to God only,
wherefore what immortal power soever (virtuous or otherwise) that loves us as
it self, it desires we should but be his servants for beatitude, of whence
it has beautitude by serving him. If it worship not God, it is wretched, as
wanting God: if it do, then will not it be worshipped for God. It rather
holds, and loves to hold as the holy scripture writes. He that sacrifices to
any gods, but the one god shall be rooted out, for to be silent in other
points of religion there is none dare say a sacrifice is due, but unto god
alone. But much is taken from divine worship and thrust into humane honors,
either by excessive humility or pestilent flattery: yet still with a reserved
notice that they are men, held worthy indeed of reverence and honor, or at most
(n) of adoration. But who ever sacrificed but to him whom he knew, or thought,
or feigned to be a God: And how ancient a part of Gods worship a sacrifice is,
Caine and Abel do show full proof, God almighty rejecting the elder brothers
sacrifice, and accepting the yongers.

L. VIVES.
ALL (a) in sum. The Chruch. (b) Our hearts.] Thereupon are we commanded in
divine service to lift up our hearts, at the preparation to communion. Herein
being admonished to put off all worldly thought, and meditate wholly upon god,
lifting all the powers of our soul to speculate of his love, for so is the
mind quit from guilts and lets, and made a fit temple for God. (b) His only
son.] Some read, we and the priest please him with his only son, read
which you like. (c) The gifts.] What we give to God, is his own, not ours,
nor can we please him better, then refer what he has given us unto him
again, as the fount whence they slowed. What shall I render over to the Lord
(says the Psalmist) for all his benefits toward ^ee? I will take the cup of
salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. This is the only relation of
Psa. 116. 12 13. R^ligon.
grace, if thou have grace. (d) Re-elect.] Tully deriues religion of relegendo,
reading again, and calls it the knowledge of GOD, as Trismegistus does.
Lactantiuis had rather derive it of religando, binding, because the religious
are bound to God in bonds of Piety: Augustine of religendo, re-electing. I
think because it was fittest for his present allusion. (e) True perfection.]
Plato says that a happy man by speculation of the divine pulchritude shall
bring forth The sum of ^lle eligion.
true virtues, not any forms only. In conuiuio. (f). Thou shall love.] O what
a few laws might serve man's life! how small a thing might serve to rule (not a
true Christian, but) a true man! (indeed he is no true man that knows not
and worshippeth not Christ.) What needs all these Digests, Codes, glosses,
counselles, and cauteles? In how few words does our great Master show every
man his due course. Love thee that which is above as well as thou can, and
that which is next thee like thy self, which doing thou keep all the laws,
and have them persit, which others attain with such toil and scarcely keep
with so many iuitations and terrors. Thou shall then be greater then Plato or
Pythagoras with all their trauells and numbers: then Aristotle with all his
quirkes and sillogismes: what can be sweeter then love? thou ^rt taught
neither to fear, fly, nor shrink. (g) Thy.] God to many, yet the most
properly to his servants: and yet ever common. (h) Lord.] And therefore to be
reverenced. (i) God.] And only God. (k) Withal thine heart.] Love God with all
thine heart (says Augustine de doctri Christian.) that is, refer all thy
thoughts: with all thy soul, that is, refer all thy life: with all thy mind
that is, refer all thine understanding, unto him of whom thou had them
all. He leaves no part of us to be given to another, but will have the fruition
ofall himself. Origin explaines the heart, viz the thought, work, and memory:
the soul, to be ready to lose it for Gods sake. The mind, to profess, or
speak nothing but Godly things. (l) Thou shalt] Augustine de Doct. xp^n, says
that all men are neighbors one to another. And so says Christ in the first
precept: for as Chysostome says, Man is Gods Image: so that he that loves man,
seems to love Neighbors who be they.
God. This precept is so congruent to man's nature, that the Philosophers
approved it. For Nature (say they) has joined all men in league and likeness
together. And it is the first in the laws of friendship, to love our friend as
our self: for we hold him our second self. (m) What does it] Man's desire
being all upon happiness, if he love his friend as himself, he ought Our
friend our second self.
to de^e to lead him the same way he goes himself. (n) Of adoration.] For
even men in the scrip^es have a kind of reverend adoration allowed them.

Of the sacrifices which God requires not, and what he requires in their
signification. CHAP. 5.
But who is so fond to think that God needs any thing that is offered in
sac^ce? The scripture condemns them that think so diversely, one place of the
Psalmist (to make short) for all: I said unto the Lord, thou art my God (a)
because thou need none of my goods. Believe it therefore God had no need of
Psalm. 15. 2
man's cattle, nor any earthly good of his, no not his justice: but all the
worship that he gives God, is for his own profit, not Gods. One cannot say
he does the fountain good by drinking of it, or the light, by seeing by it.
Nor had the patriarchs ancient sacrifices (which now Gods people (b) read of,
but use not) any other intent, but to signify what should be done of us in
adherence to God, and charity to our neighbor for the same end. So then an
external offering, is a visible sacrament of an invisible sacrifice, that is,
an holy sign. And thereupon the penitent man in the Prophet (or rather the
penitent Prophet) desiring God to pardon his sins: Thou desire no sacrifice
though I would give it (says he:) b^ thou delightest not in burnt offering:
The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a Psa. 51, 16, 17. (...)
br^ken and humbled heart (O GOD) thou (c) wilt not despise. Behold here he
says, God will have sacrifices, and God will have no sacrifices. He will have
no slaughtered beast, but he will have a contrite heart. So in that which he
denied, was implied that which he desired. The Prophet then saying he will
not have such, why do fools think he will as delighting in them? If he
would not h^e had such sacrifices as he desired (whereof a contrite heart is
one) to have bin signified in those other (wherein they thought he delighted)
he would not have gi^en any command concerning them in Leuiticus: but there
are set times appointed for their changes, least men should think he took
pleasure in them, or accepted them of us otherwise, then as signs of the
other: Therefore (says another Psalm:) If I be hungry I will not tell thee
for all the world is mine, and all that the in is: will I eat the flesh of Bulls
or drink the blood of Goats, as who should say, if I Psalm. 50, 1^ 13.
would I would not beg them of thee having them in my power. But then adds be
their signification. Offer praise to God, and pay thy vows to the most high;
And call Ver. 14, 15
upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall (d)
gloryfie me. And in (e) another Prophet: wherewith shall I come before the
Lord and bow my Mich. 6, 6, 7. 8
self before the high GOD? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, and
with C^es of a year old? W^ll the Lord be pleased with thousands of Rams,
or with ten t^sand rivers of Oil? Shall I give my first borne for the
transgression, even the fruit of ^y body for the sin of my soul? He has
showed thee O man what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee: surely to
do Justice and to love mercy, and to humble ^y self, and to walk with thy
God.

In these words are both the sacrifices plainly distinct, and it is showed
that God respects not the first, that signify those he respects. as the
Epistle (f) entitled to the Hebrews says: To do good and to distribute
forget not: for with such Heb. 13. 16
sacrifices (g) God is pleased. And as it is elsewhere: I will have Mercy and
not sacrifice: this shows that the external sacrifice is but a tipe of the
better, and that Mercy.
which men call a sacrifice is the sign of the true one. And mercy is a true
sacrifice, whereupon it is said, as before: With such sacrifices God is
pleased. Wherefore all the precepts concerning sacrifices, in the Tabernacle
and the Temple have all reference to the love of God and our neighbor. For in
these two (as is said (h) is contained all the law and the Prophets.

L. VIVES.
BEcause (a) thou] He is his true Lord that needs not his goods, when the
other needs his. (b) Read] So is the best copies. (c) Thou wilt] The
Septuagints read it (...). in the third person, and so does Augustines text,
but not the vulgar [nor our translation.] (d) Some say magnify: some honor:
(...), says the Greek, and so Hierome translateth it. The difference is
nothing. (e) Another Prophet] Micah. 6. careful to walk with thy God, says
Hierome from the hebrew: Theodotion has it, take diligent heed, (...), stand
firm, to walk with thy God. (f) Intituled] Intimating the uncertainty
concerning the author thereof. (g) God is pleased] The old copies say, let God
be pleased: better then our vulgar God is deserved, promeretur. The greek is
(...): propiciatur, or placatur, is appeased. (h) Is conteyned] For this is the
end and scope of all the law, and Prophets precepts.

Of the true, and perfect sacrifice. CHAP. 6.
EVery work therefore tending to effect our beatitude by a sinful inherence
with God, is a true sacrifice. Compassion shown upon a man, and not for Gods
sake, is no sacrifice. For a sacrifice (though offered by a man) is a divine
thing and so the ancient Latinists term it: whereupon a man, consecrated
wholly to Gods name, to live to him, and die to the world, is a sacrifice. For
this is mercy shown upon himself. And so is it written: Pity thine own soul,
and please GOD. ^el. 30. 23
And when we chastise our bodyly abstinence, if we do it as we should, not
making our members instruments of iniquity, but of Gods justice, it is a
sacrifice, whereunto the Apostle exhorts us, saying: I beseech you therefore
brethrenby the mercies of GOD that you give up your bodies, a living sacrifice
holy and acceptable unto GOD, which is your reasonable serving of GOD. If
therefore the body being Romans 12, 1
but servant and instrument unto the soul, being rightly used in Gods service,
be a sacrifice, how much more is the soul one, when it relieth upon God, and
being inflamed with his love loses all form of temporal concupiscence, as
is framed according to his most excellent figure, pleasing him by perticipating
of his beauty? This the Apostle adioynes in these words: And fashion not your
selves like this world, but be ye changed in newness of heart, that ye may
prove what is the good will of God, and what is good, acceptable and perfect.
Wherefore seeing the works of mercy being referred unto God, (be they done to
our selves or our neighbors) Verse 2.
are true sacrifices: and that their end is nothing but to free us from misery
and make us happy, by that God (and none other) of whom it is said: It is good
for me to adhere (a) unto the Lord: Truly it follows that all the whole and
holy society Psam. ^3, 28 The christ^ans sacrifice.
of the redeemed and sanctified City, be offered unto God by that (b) great
Priest who gave up his life for us to become members of so great an head in (c)
so mean a form: this form he offered, and herein was he offered, in this is
he our priest or mediator and our sacrifice, all in this. Now therefore the
Apostle having exhorted us to give up our bodies a living sacrifice, pure and
acceptable to God, namely our reasonable serving of God, and not to fashion our
selves like this ^orld, but be changed in newness of heart, that (d) we
might prove what is the will of God, and what is good, acceptable and perfect,
all which sacrifice we ^re: For Isay (quoth he) through the grace that is
given to me, to every one among yo^, that no man presume to (e) understand
more then is meet to understand: but that he understand according to
sobriety, as GOD has dealt to every man the measure of faith: for as we have
many members in one body, and all members have not on^ office. So we being
many, are one body in Christ, and every one, one another members, having
diverse gifts according to the grace that is given us etc. This is the
christians sacrifice: we (...) one body with Christ, as the church celebrateth
in the sacrament The sacrament of the altar.
of the altar, so well known to the faithful, wherein is showed that in that
oblation, the church is offered.

L. VIVES.
ADhere (a)] It is the greatest good. (b) Great priest] Christ, of
Melchisedeochs order, not of Aarons: He went but once to sacrifice, and that
with only (to wit his crucified body) bought our peace of God. (c) So meane]
Christ's manhood is the churches head: his Godhead, the life and soul. (d) We
might proue] So Augustine uses this place wholly Epist. 86. which Eras^s
wonders at: the greek referring good, and acceptable, and perfect, all to the
will of God. B^t Augustine refers them either to the sacrifice, or uses
the^ simply without respect. And in the later sense Ambrose also uses it. (e)
Understand] Or think of himself, his bre^hren, or other matters. (f)
Sobriety] (...). A mediocrity of the whole life is Sobriety (...) Tully Offic.
1. out of Plato. Some-time (...) (says Tully elsewhere) is translated temp^e,
moderation, and sometimes modesty: but he doubts whether he may call it
frugality T^sc. 3.

That the good Angels do so love us, that they desire we should worship God
only, and not them. CHAP. 7.
WOrthily are those blessed immortals placed in those celestial habitations,
reioyeing in the perticipation of their Creator, being firm, certain and
holy, by his eternity, truth and bounty: because they love us mortal wretches
with a^alous pity, and desire to have us immortally blessed also, and will not
have us sacrifice to them, but to him to whom they know both us and themselves
to be sacrifices. For we both are inhabitants of that in the psalm: Glorious
things are Psalm. 87. 2
spoken of thee, thou City of GOD: part whereof is pilgrim yet with us, and
part assis^th us with them. From that eternal city where Gods unchanging will
is all their-law: and from that (a) supernall court (for their are we cared
for) by the ministry of the holy Angels was that holy scripture brought down
unto us, that says. He that sacrifices to any but God alone, shall be rooted
out. This scripture, this precept is confirmed unto us by so many miracles,
that it is plain enough, to whom the blessed immortalls, so loving us, and
wishing as themselves, would have us to offer sacrifice.

L. VIVES.
THat supernall (a) Court] Whence the Angels descend and minister us safety and
protection.

Of the Miracles whereby God has confirmed his promises in the minds of the
faithful by the ministry of his holy Angels. CHAP. 8.
I Should seem tedious in reuoluing the Miracles of too abstruse antiquity:
with what miraculous tokens God assured his promises to Abraham that in his
seed Genesis 17, 1^
should all the earth be blessed, made many thousand years ago? Is it not
miraculous for Abraham's barren wife to bear a son, she being of age both past
childbirth and conception? that (a) in the same Abraham's sacrifices, the fire
came down from Genesis 21
heaven between them as they lay divided? that the Angels foretold him their
destruction of Sodom, whom he entertained in men's shapes, and from them had
Gods promise for a son? and by the same Angels was certefied of the
miraculous Gen^s
delivery of his brother Lot., hard before the burning of Sodom? whose Ge^ 9
wife being turned into a statue of salt for looking back, is a great mystery,
that none being in his way of freedom should cast his eyes behind him? And
what stupendous miracles did Moses effect in Egypt by Gods power for the
freedom of Gods people? Where Pharaos Magicians (the Kings of Egypt that held
Gods people in thrall) were suffered to work some wonder, to have the more
admired foil: for they wrought by charms and enchantments (the delights of
the devils:) but Moses had the power of the God of heaven and earth, (to whom
the good Angels do serve,) and therefore must needs be victour: And the
Magicians failing in the third plague, strangely and mistically did Moses
effect the other 7. following: and then the hard* hearted Egiptians, and Pharao
yielded Exodus 14
Gods people their passage. And by and by repenting, and persuing them, the
people of God passed through the waters (standing for them, as rampires) and
the Egiptians left al their lives in their depth, being then re-ioyned. Why
should I rehearse the ordinary miracles that God showed them in the desert: the
sweetning of the bitter waters by casting wood therein, the Manna from heaven,
that Exodus 15
rotted when one gathered more then a set measure: yet gathering two measures
the day before the Saboath (on which they might gather none) it never putrified
at all: how their desire to eat flesh was satisfied with fowls that fell in
the tents sufficient (O miracle) for all the people, even til they loath the^!
how the holding up of Moses hands in form of a cross, and his prayer, caused
that not an Hebrew fell in the fight: and how the seditious, seperating
themselves from the society ordained by God, were by the earth swallowed up
quick, to invisible pains, ^od. 23
for a visible example. How the rock burst forth into streams being struck
with Moses rod, and the serpents deadly bytings being sent amongst them f^r
a just plague, were cured by beholding a brazen serpent set up upon a pole,
herein being both a present help for the hurt, and a type of the future
destruction of death by death in the passion of Christ crucified! The brazen
serpent, being for this memory reserved, and afterward by the seduced people
adored as an Idol, Ezechias a religious King, to his great praise, brake in
pieces.

L. VIVES.
IN (a) the same] This Augustine (Retract. lib. 2.) recanteth. In the tenth
book (says he speaking of this work) the falling of the fire from heaven
between Abraham's divided sacrifices, is to be held no miracle. For it was
revealed him in a vision. Thus far he. Indeed it was (...) miracle because
Abraham woudered not at it, because he knew it would come so to pass, and so
it was no nouelty to him.

Of unlawful arts concerning the devils worship, whereof Porphyry approoueth
some, and disalloweth others. CHAP. 9.
THese, and multitudes more, were done to commend the worship of one God unto
us, and to prohibit all other. And they were done by pure faith and confident
piety, not by charms and coniuration tricks of damned curiosity, by Magike,
or (which is in name worse) by (a) Goetia or (to call it more honorably) (b)
Theurgie, which who so seeks to distinguish (which none can) they say that the
damnable practices of all such as we call witches, belong to the Goetie, mary
the effects of Theurgy they hold lawdable. But indeed they are both damnable,
and bound to the observations of false filthy devils, in stead of Angels.
Porphyry indeed promises a certain purging of the soul to be done by
Theurgy, but he (d) f^ers and is ashamed of his text: he denies utterly that
one may have any recourse to God by this art: thus floteth he between the
surges of sacrilegious curiosity, and honest Philosophy: For, now, he
condemns it as doubtful, perilous, prohibited, and gives us warning of it:
and by and by, giving way to the praisers of it, he says it is useful in
purging the soul: not in the intellectual part that apprehends the truth of
intelligibilities abstracted from all bodily forms: but the (e) spiritual,
that apprehends all from corporal objects. This he says may be prepared by
certain Theurgike consecrations called (f) Teletae, The Teletae.
to receive a spirit or Angel, by which it may see the gods. Yet confesses
he that these Theurgike Teletae profit not the intellectual part a jot, to
see the own God and receive apprehensions of truth. Consequently, we see what
sweet apparitions of the gods these Teletae can cause, when there can be no
truth discerned in these visions. Finally he says the reasonable soul (or, as
he likes better to say, the intellectual) may mount aloft, though the
spiritual part have no Th^ke preparation: and if the spiritual do attain
such preparation, yet it is thereby made capable of eternity. For though he
distinguish Angels and Daemones, placing these in the air, and those in the
(g) sky, and give us counsel to get the amity of a Demon whereby to mount
from the earth after death, professing no other means for one to attain the
society of the Angels, yet does he (in manner, openly) profess that a
Demons company is dangerous: saying that the soul being plagued for it after
death, abhorres to adore the Daemones that deceived it. Nor can he deny that
this Theurgy (which he makes as the league between the Gods and Angels)
deals with those deuillish powers, which either envy the souls purgation, or
else are servile to them that envy it: A Chaldaean (says he) a good man,
complained that all his endeavor to purge his soul was frustrate, by reason a
great Artyst envying him this goodness, a diured the powers (he was to deal
with) by holy inuocations, and bound them from granting him any of his
requests. So he bound them, (says he) and this other could not loose them.
Here now is a plain proof that Theurgie is an art effecting evil as well as
good both with the gods and men: and that the gods are wrought upon by the same
passions and perturbations that Apuleius lays upon the devils, and men,
alike: who notwithstanding (following Plato in that) acquits the gods from all
such matters by their hight of place, being celestial.

L. VIVES.
BY (a) Goetia] It is enchantment, a kind of witchcraft. Goetia, Magia, and
Pharmacia Goetia,
(says Suidas) are diverse kinds: invented all in Persia. Magike, is the
invocation of devils, but those to good ends, as Apollonius Tyaneus used in
his presages. Goetie works upon Magike.
the dead by invocation, so called of the noise that the practisers hereof make
about graves. Pharmacia, works all by charmed potions thereby procuring
death: Magike, and Astrology, Pharmacy.
Magusis (they say) invented: And the Persian Mages had that name from their
countrymen, and so had they the name of Magusii. Thus far Suidas. (b)
Theurgy] It calls out the superior Theurgy.
gods, wherein when we err (says Iamblichus) then do not the good gods
appear, but badde ones in their places. So that a most diligent care must be
had in this operation, to observe the priests old tradition to a hairs breadth.
(c) Witches] Many hold that witches, and charms never can hurt a man, but it
is his own conceit that does it: Bodies may hurt bodies naturally (says
Plato de leg lib. 11.) and those that go about any such mischief with
magical enchantments, or bonds, as they call them, think they can hurt
others, and that others by art Goetique, may hurt them. But how this may be in
nature, is neither easy to know, not make others know: though men have a great
opinion of the power of Images: and therefore let this stand for a law. If any
one do hurt another by empoysoning, though not deadly, nor any of his house or
family, but his cattle, or his bees, if he hurt them howsoever, being a
Physician, and convict of the guilt; let him die the death: if he did it
ignorantly, let the judges fine or punish him at their pleasures. If any one
be convicted of doing Plato's law,
such hurt by charms, or incantations, if he be a priest, or a sooth-saier,
let him die the death: but if any one do it that is ignorant of these arts,
let him be punishable as the law pleases in equity. Thus far Plato, de
legib. lib 11. Porphyry says that the evil Daemones are evermore the
effectors of witch-crafts: and that they are chiefly to be adored that
overthrow them. These devils have all shapes to take, that they please, and
are most cunning and couzening in their prodigious shows, these also work in
these (...), those unfortunate loves: all intemperancy, couetice and ambition,
do these supply men with, and especially with deceit: for their propriety
most especial is lying. De animal. abst. lib. 2. (d) Falters] As seeing the
devils tricks in these works, selling themselves to us by those illusiue
operations. But Iamblichus being initiate and (as he thought) more religious,
held, that the art was not wholly reproueable, (being of that industry and
antiquity) because that sometimes it gulles the artiste: the priests must
therefore divide the spirits into Classes, and remember that no good spirit
will brag of his cunning. (e) Spirituall] Wherein are the abstracts of
external objects, all reserved, and sent to the common sense, the fantasy,
the estimation, and the memory: these, beasts have as well as we, being common
receipts of the sensible objects in both: but then we have the mind, and the
ponderatiue judgment of reason, consisting of the two intellects the
Recipient, and the agent: last of all is the will. (g) Skie] Plato to begin
with the King in this rank) says that the first kind of gods have invisible
bodies: the second spread through heaven, and visible: the third the Demons
bodies, Platos gods.
twofold: the first ethereall, more pure then the other in substance: the
second ayry, and more grosser, but neither of these entirely visible: there are
also the Semi-gods with warry bodies, seen, and unseen when they list, and
when we see them their transparent light forms make us wonder. In Epinom.
Psellus. (Out of one Mark a skillful Daemonist* relates six kinds of
Daemones. First the fiery, called in Barbarian Batleliureon, and these wander
in the top of the ayry region (for he keeps all the Daemones as profaine
creatures (out of a temple) under Psellus his Daemones.
the moon). 2. the ayry, nearer unto us. 3. the earthly, dwelling upon the
earth, perilous foes unto mankind. 4. watery, dwelling in rivers, lakes and
springs, drowning men often, raising storms at sea, and sinking ships. 5.
the subterrene, that live in caves, and kill well-diggers, and miners for
mettalls, causing earthquakes, and eruptions of flames, and pestilent winds.
6. night-walkers, the dark and most inscrutable kind, striking all things
they meet with cold passions. And all those devils (says he) hate both gods
and men but some worse then others. Then he proceeds to describe how they
hurt men, too tediously for me to dilate. Porphyry reckneth gods that are
either heavenly, ethereall, ayry, watery, earthly, or infernal, and assigns
every one their proper sacrifice. The earthly must have black beasts upon
alta^ so must the infernal, but in graves: the watery gods will have
black-birds thrown into the Porphyries gods.
sea, the ayry, white birds, killed. The celestial and etheriall white
sacrifices also that must (...) be diminished, and much more of this madness
has he in his book called Resp. ex orac. Apoll. Nor are they new inventions,
but drawn all from Orpheus and Mercury, Mercury left says Iamblichus,) an
hundred books of the Empyreall: an hundred of the Ethereall: and a thousand of
the celestial. Proclus diuides the devils into five regimentes rather then
sieve kinds destinguishing them by their functions. But of this, enough.
Augustine out of Porphyry calls their fiery gods Empyreal, whom both Plato and
Porphyry seem not to distinguish from the celestial, whom they make of fiery
nature.

Of Theurgy that falsy promises to mundifie the mind by the invocation of
devils. CHAP. 10.
BEhold now this other (and they say more learned) Platonist Porphyry, with his
own Theurgy makes all the gods subject to passion and perturbation. For they
may by his doctrine, be so terrifying from purging souls by those that envy
their purgation, that he that means evil may chain them for ever from
benefiting him that desires this good, and that by this art Theurgique: that
the other can never free them from this fear and attain their helps, though
he use the same Art never so: Who sees not that this is the devils mere
consinage but he that is their mere slave, and quite bard from the grace of
the Redeemer? If the good gods had any hand herein, surely the good desire of
Man that would purge his soul should vanquish him that would hinder it. Or if
the gods were just and would not allow him it, for some guilt of his, yet it
should be their own choice, not their being terrified by that envious party,
nor (as he says) the fear of greater powers that should cause this denial,
and it is strange that that good Chaldean that sought to be thus purged by
Theurgy could not find some higher GOD, that could either terrify the other
worse, and so force them to further him, or take away their terror, and set
them free from the others bond to benefit him: and yet so should this good
Theurgike still have lackt the rites wherewith to purge these gods from fear
first ere they came to purge his soul: For why should he call a greater GOD
to terrify them, and not to purge them? Or is there a GOD that hears the
malicious, and so frights the lesser gods from doing good, and none to hear
the well-minded, and to set them at liberty to do good again? O goodly
Theurgy! O rare purgation of the mind! where impure envy does more then pure
devotion! No, no, avoid these damnable The devils apparitions.
trap-falls of the devil, fly to the healthful and firm truth: For whereas
the workers of these sacrilegious expiations do behold (as he says) some
admired shapes, of Angels, or Gods, as if their spirits were purged: why 2.
Cor. 11. 14
if they do; ask the Apostles reason: For (a) Satan tranformeth himself into
an Angel of light.

These are his Apparitions, seeking to chain men's poor deluded souls in
fallacies, and lying ceremonies, wresting them from the true, and only purging
and perfecting doctrine of GOD: and as it is said of (b) Proteus, he turns
himself to all shapes; persuing us as an enemy, fawning on us as a friend, and
subuerting us in both shapes.

L. VIVES.
FOr (a) Satan] Confessed by Porphyry and Iamblichus both. The devils most
especial property is lying, and still they assume the faces of other Gods,
says the first. De sacrifice lib. 2. Their evil spirits often assume the
shapes of good, coming with brags and arrogance to men says the second. In
Myster. (b) Proteus] Son (says Hesiod) to Oceanus, and T^tis: a great
prophet, and as Virgill says skild in all things past, present and to come.
Ho^er faigneth that he was compeld to presage the truth of the Trojan war to
Agam^, and Uirgill says that Aristeus served him so also. Valerius Probus,
says he was an Egipti^, and called Busyris for his tyranny: Virgil calls him
Pallenius, of a town in Macedonia, and there was he borne (says Seruius)
mary reigned (as Virgill says) in Carpathum. Herodotus, says he was of
Memphis, and King there when Paris and Hellen came into Egypt, Pro^.
and for their adultery he would let them stay there but three days. In
Euterpe. Diodor^ says that the Egiptians called him Caeteus whom the Greeks
called Proteus, that he was Lib. 2.
a good Astronomer, and had skill in many arts, and reigned in Egypt in the
time of the Troyan war. The Egiptian Kings used always to give the half
Lion, or the Bull, or Dragon for their arms, and thence the Greeks had this
fiction. I think he changed his escutcheon often.

Of Porphyryes Epistle to Anebuns of Egypt, and desyring him of instruction in
the several kinds of Daemones. CHAP. 11.
TRuly Porphyry showed more wit in his Epistle to (a) Anebuns of Egypt, where
between learning and instructing he both opens and subuertes all these
sacriledges. Therein he reprooueth all the Daemones that because of their
foolishness do draw (as he says) the (b) humid vapors up, unto them: and
therefore are not in the sky but in the air, under the Moon, and in the
Moons body. Yet dares he not ascribe all the vanities to all the devils,
that stuck in his mind: For some of them he (as others do) calls good:
whereas before he had called them all fools. And much is his wonder why the
gods should love sacrifices, and be compelled to grant men's suits. And if the
gods and Daemones be distinguished by corporal, and vncorporall, why should
the Sun, Moon, and other Stars visible in Heaven (whom he auoutcheth to
be bodies) be called gods? and if they be gods, how can some be good, and
some evil? Or being bodies, how can they be joined with the gods that have
no bodies? Furthermore, he makes doubts whether the soul of a diui^r, or a
worker of strange things, or an external spirit, cause the effect.

But he coniectureth on the spirits side the rather of the two, because that
they may be bound, or loosed, by (c) herbs and stones, in this or that
strange operation. And some therefore, he says, do (d) hold a kind of
spirits, that properly hear us, of a subtle nature, and a changeable form,
counterfeyting both gods, Daemones, and dead souls, and those are agents in
all good or badde effects: But they never further man in good action, as not
knowing them, but they do entangle and hinder the progress of virtue, by all
means; they are rash and proud, lovers of fumigations, taken easily by
flattery, and so forth of those spirits that come externally into the soul,
and delude man's senses sleeping and waking: yet all this he does not affirm;
but conjectures, or doubts, or says that others affirm, for it was hard for
so great a Philosopher to know all the devils vileness fully, and to accuse
it freely, which knowledge no Christian Idiot ever seeks, but fully
detesteth. Perhaps he was afraid to offend Anebuns to whom he wrote, as a
gre^ Priest of such Sacrifices, and the other (e) admirers of those things as
appurtenances of the divine honors. Yet makes he as it were an inquisitiue
proceeding in those things which being well pondered will prove attributes to
none but malignant spirits. He asks (f) why the best gods being inuo^ed,
are commanded as the worst, to fulfill men's pleasures: and why they will not
hear ones prayers that is stained with venery, when as they have such (...)
contracts amongst themselves, as examples to others? Why they forbid their
priests the use of living creatures least they should be polluted by their
smells, when as they are inuoked, and invited with continual fuffumigations,
and smells of sacrifices? And the sooth-saver (g) is forbidden to touch the
carcass, when as their religion lies wholly upon carcasses. Why the charmer
threatens not the gods, or Daemor^s, or dead men's souls but (h) the Sun or
the Moon, or such celestial bodies, fetching the truth out by this so false a
terour? They will threaten to knock down the sky, and such impossibilities,
that the gods being (like foolish babes) afraid of this ridiculous terror,
may do as they are charged. He says farther that one Chaeremon, one of the
sacred (or rather sacrilegious) priests, has written, that that same Egiptian
Chaeremon
report of (i) Isis, or her husband Osyris, is most powerful in compelling of
the gods to do men's pleasures, when the inuoker threatens to reveal them, or
to cast abroad the members of Osyris, if he do not dispatch it quickly. That
these idle fond threats of man, yea unto the gods and heavenly bodies the
Sun, the Moon, etc. should have that violent effect to force them to
perform what men desire, Porphyry does justly wonder at, nay rather under
color of one admiring and inquiring, he shows these to be the actions of
those ^its whom he described under shadow of relating others opinions, to
be such deceitful counterfeiters of the other gods, mary they are devils
themselves without dissembling: As for the Herbs, Stones, Creatures, Sounds,
Words, Characters, and (k) constellations, used in drawing the powers of those
effects, all these he ascribes to the devils delight in deluding and abusing
the souls that serve and observe them.

So that Porphyry either in a true doubt, describes such of those acts, as
can have no reference to those powers by which we must aim at eternity, but
convince them selves the false devils peculiars: or else he desires by his
humility in inquiring, not by his contentious opposing, to draw this Anebuns
(that was a great Priest in those ceremonies, and thought he knew much) unto
a due speculation of these things, and to detect their detestable absurdity
unto him. Finally in the end of his Epistle he desires to be informed what
doctrine of beatitude the Egiptians held. But yet he affirms that such as
converse with the gods and trouble the deity about fetching again of thieves,
buying of lands, marriages, bargains or such like, seem all in a wrong way
to wisdom. And the gods they use herein, though they tell them true, yet
teaching them nothing concerning beatitude are neither gods nor good Daemones,
but either the false ones, or all is but a figment of man. But because these
arts effect many things beyond all human capacity, what remains, but
firmly to believe, and credibly to affirm that such wonders (in word or
deeds) as have no reference to the confirmation of their worship of that one
God, (to whom to adhere (as the Platonists affirm) is the only beatitude) are
only seducements of the deceiptfull fiendes, to hinder man's progress to
virtue, and soly to be avoided and discovered by true zeal and piety.

L. VIVES.
TO (a) Anebuns] Or Anebon. (b) Humid vapors] He says they love fumes, and
smells of flesh, which fatten their spiritual bodies, which live upon vapors,
and fumigations, and (...) diversely strengthed by their diue^sity: Iamblichus
(the truer Daemonist) seeing him put (...) as an expression of the devils
nature, denies it all. For Porphyry directly affirmed that all such spirits as
delighted in slaughtered offerings, were evil Daemones, and liers: and
consequently (...) Porphyryes (...) of the gods that love sacrifices.
were all his gods to whom he divides sacrifices in his Responsa, mentioned in
our Co^ upon the ninth chapter of this book. Thus was he tossed between truth,
and inueterate (...), daring neither affirm them al good, nor al evil, for
fear of his scholars, his disciplines authority, and the devil himself. (c)
Herbes] Porphyry maruells that men have the gods so obsqous, as to give
presages in a little meal. This admiration, and question Iamblichus (as he
uses) answers with a goodly front of words, which any one may read, but
neither the Egiptians, nor he himself can probably declare what they mean.
The gods (says he) exceeding in power and goodness, and the causes containing
all, are wretched if they be drawn down by meal: fond were their goodness,
if they had no other means to show it; and abject their nature, if it were
bound from contemning of meal: which if they can do why come they not into a
good mind, sooner then into good meal? (d) Do hold] Porphyry says those
evil Demones deceive both the vulgar, and the wise Philosophers, and they by
their eloquence, have given propagation to the error. For the devils are
violent, false, counterfeits, dissemblers and seek to imbezell gods worship.
There is no harm but they love it, and put on their shapes of gods to lead us
into deuillish errors. Such also are the souls of those that die wicked. For
their perturbations of Ire, concupiscence and mallce leave them not, but are
used by these souls being now become devils, to the hurt of mankind. They
change their shapes also, now appearing to us, and by and by vanishing: thus
illuding both our eyes and thoughts; and both these sorts possess the world
with couetice, ambition pride, and lust, whence all wars and conflicts arise:
and which is worst of all, they seek to make the rude vulgar think that these
things are acceptable to the gods. And poesy with the sweetness of phrase
has helped them p^tily forwards. Thus far Porphyry de Abstin. anim. lib. 2.
not in doubtful or inquiring manner, as he does in his writing to the priest,
but positiuely, in a work, wherein he shows his own doctrine. (e) admirers]
The Philosophers whom he says erred themselves concerning the gods natures,
some in favor of the gods, and some in following of the multitude. (f) Why the
best] Thus he begins, (...). etc. Of those that are called gods but are
(...) wicked D^mones. (g) The soothsaier] Epoptes, the proper word for him that
looks on th^r sacrifice. (h) The Sunne] So says Lucan his Thessalian witch,
that she can force the gods (...) what she list. Lucans. (i) Isis or] These
are the Sun and Moon. Their secret ceremonies being Isis.
most beastly and obscene, the devils fear to have them revealed (as Ceres
did) (...) else delude their worship by counterfeite fear, and so make use
of their fond error. This Osyris.
of Isis and Osyris belongs to the infernalls also; for Porphyry says the
greatest devil is called Serapis and that is Osyris, in Egypt, and Pluto in
Greece, his character is a three headed dog, signifying the devils of the
earth, air and water. His Isis, is Hecate or Proserpina: so it is plain that
this is meant of the secrettes of hell, which have mighty power in magical
practices. These does Erictho in Lucan threaten to the Moon, the infernalls,
and Ceres sacrifices. The Poet expresses it thus. -- Miratur Erichtho,
Has satis licuisse moras, irataque, morti
Uerberat immotum viuo serpente cadauer.
Perque cauas terrae quas egit carmine r^mas
Manibus illatrat, regnique silentia rumpit.
Ty^iphone, vocisque meae secura Megaera,
Non agitis s^uis Erebi per inane flagellis
Infelicen animam? I am vos ego nomine ver^,
Eliciam, stigiasque canes in luce superna
Destituam: per busta sequar: per funera custos
Expellam tumulis, abigam vos omnibus vrnis.
Teque deis, ad quos alio procedere vultu.
Ficta soles Hecate, pallenti tabida formae
Ostendam, faciemque Erebi mutare vetabo*
Eloquar immenso terrae sub pondere, quae te
Contineant Ennaea dapes, quo foedere moestum,
Regem noctis ames, quae te contagia passam,
Noluerit reuocare Ceres: tibi pessime mundi,
Arbiter immittam ruptis I itana cauernis,
Et subito feriere die.
-- Erichtho wonders much,
At fates de^ay, and with a living snake
She lasht the slaughtred corpse, making death quake,
Een-through the rifts of earth, rent by her charms,
She barks in hells broad ear these black alarmes,
Stone-deaf Megaera and Tysiphone,
Why scourge yea not that wretched soul to me
From hells huge depths? or will you have me call ye,
By your true names, and leave ye? (foul befall ye)
You stigian dogs, I Will leave you in the light,
And see the graves and you disseuerd quite.
And Hecate, thou that art never known
But in false shapes, I Will show thee in thine own:
Whole heaven (perforce) shall see thy putred hew*
And from earths gutts will I rip forth to view
The feasts, and means that make thee Pluto's whore,
And why thy mother fet thee thence no more,
And thou (the worlds worst King) al-be thou dead
In darkness, I will break through all, and send
Strange light amid thy caves.
And Porphiry (in Respons.) brings in Hecate compelled to answer the magician*
-- (...), etc.
-- Why do^ thou blind us so
Theodamas, what would thou have us do.
Apollo also confesses that he is compelled to tell truth against his will*
(...), etc.
I answer now perfore, as bound by Fate,
An^ by and by calls to be loosed: -- (...), etc loose the left ring.
Porphiry also said (as Iamblicus writes in Mister) that the Priests were wont
to use violent threats against the Go^s, as thus: if you do not this, or if
you do that, I will break down Heaven I will reveal Isis her secrets, and
diuulge the mystery hid in the depth: I will stay the Baris (a sacred shipin
Egypt) and cast Osiris members to Typhon. Now Iamblichus says those threats
tend not to the gods, but there is a kind of spirits in the world, confused,
indiscreet, and inconsiderat, that hears from others, but no way of it self
and can neither discern truths nor possibilities from the contraries. On
these do those threatenings work, and force them to all duties. Perhaps this is
them that Porphiry gives a foolish will unto: Iamblichus proceeds to the
threats* read them in him. (k) Constellations.] Prophiry writes out of
Chaeremon, that that astrology is of man incomprehensible: but all these
constellated works, and prophecies, are tought him by the devils. But
Iamblichus opposes him in this, and in the whole doctrine of devils. The man
is all for this prodigious superstition, and labors to answer Prophyry for
Anebuns.

Of the miracles that God works by his Angels ministry. CHAP. 12.
But all miracles (done by angels or what ever divine power) confirming the
true adoration of one God unto us, (in whom only we are blessed) we believe
truly are done by Gods power working in them immortalls that loue^s in true
piety. Hear not those that deny that the invisible God works visible
miracles: is not the world a miracle? Yet visible, and of his making. Nay, all
the mi^les done in this world are less then the world it self, the heaven and
earth Man a (...) (...).
and all therein, yet God made them all, and after a manner that man cannot
conceive nor comprehend. For though these visible miracles of nature, be now
no more admired, yet ponder them wisely, and they are more admirable then the
strangest: for man is (a) a greater miracle then all that he can work.
Wherefore God that made heaven and earth (both miracles) scorneth not as yet to
work miracles in heaven and earth, to draw men's souls that yet affect
visibilities, unto the worship of his invisible essence. But where and when he
will do this, his unchangeable will only can declare: (b) at whose disposing
all time past has been, and to come, is. He moves all things in time, but
time adoreth not him, nor moves he future effects otherwise then present.
Nor hears our prayers otherwise then he fore-seeth them ere we pray for when
his Angels here them, he hears in them, as in his true temples (not made
with hands) and so does he hold al things effected temporally in his Saints, by
his eternal disposition.

L. VIVES.
MAn is a (a) greater] The saying is most common in Trismegistus: Man is a
great miracle. (b) At whose disposing] Paul says all things lie open and bare
unto Gods knowledge, for all time is neither past nor to come, but present to
him. So does he determine, and dispose of all things as present, nor does
yesterday, or this day, pass or come with him, as it does with us. His power
and essence admitreth no such conditions, nor restraintes: All eternity is
present to All time (...) to God.
him, much more our little percell of time: yet he that made our souls,
adapted them times fit for their apprehensions: and though he see how we see
and know, yet he neither sees nor knows like us. Shall we run on in a
Philosophical discourse hereof, wanting rather words then matter, or is it
bett^r to burst out with Paul into admiration, and cry out. O the altitude of
the riches, wisdom, and knowledge of God!

How the invisible God has often made himself visible, not, as he is really
but as we could be able to comprehend his sight. CHAP. 13.
NOr hurts it his inuisibility to have appeared (a) visible oftentimes unto
the fathers. For as the impression of a sound of a sentence in the intellect,
is not the same that the sound was: so the shape wherein they conceived Gods
invisible nature, was not the same that he is: yet was he seen in that shape,
as the sent^e was conceived in that sound, for they knew that no bodily form
could (b) contain God. He talked with Moses, yet Moses entreated him (a) If
I have found (...) (...) thy fight, show me^e thy face, that I may (d) know
thee. And seeing it behou^ the law of God to be given from the mouths of
Angels with terror, not to (...) 33 (...).
a (...) of the wisest, but to a whole nation, great things were done in the
mount (...) ^he said people, the law being given by one, and all the rest
beholding the ^ble and strange things that were done. For the Israelites had
not that confidence in Moses that the Lacedaemonians had in (d) Lycurgus, to
believe that (...) (...) his laws from Jove or Apollo. For when that law was
given the people, that enioynes the worship of one God, in the view of the
same people were strange proo^ shown (as many as Gods providence thought fit)
to prove that that was the Creator whom they his creatures ought to serve in
the (...).

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) visible] John in his Gospel says, that no man has ever seen God:
and Paul con^ Whether the Fathers ^aw God or no.
it, yet Jacob says, He saw the Lord face to face. And Exodus 33. it is said
Moses (...) God face to face, as one friend with another: which many places of
Scripture te^ (...) is so sure that man cannot behold Gods invisible nature,
that some have said that (...) Angels nor Archangels do see him. Chrysostom. and
Gregor. The fathers therefore (...) such Majesty of form as they thought was
divine: for that the Angels spoake (...) ^ers, and gave them the law, Paul
affirms to the Hebrews in these words. If Heb 2. 2.
(...) ^ken by Angels was steadfast, etc. The same says Steven. Acts. 7. Now
this was no (...), (for none he has) says Chrysostom, that Christ says the
Jews never saw, (...) was that visible shape that the Angels (by Gods
appointment) take upon them, so Io 5 37.
(...) ^ing ordinary shapes, that it seems divine, and is a degree to the view
of the (...) (says he) Christ says they had not seen, though they thought
they had Exo. 19. (...)] A diverse reading in the Latin. (c) If I haue] It is
plain says Gregory that (...) life, man may see some images of God, but
never himself in his proper nature: as (...) ^pired with the spirit, seems
some figures of God, but can never reach the view of (...). Hence it is that
Jacob seeing but an Angel, thought he had seen God: And (...) for all he was
said to speak with him face to face, yet said: Show me thy face that I (...):
whence it is apparent that he desired to behold that clear uncircumcised
(...) ^ch he had but yet beheld in shadows and figures. Moralan Job. lib. 17.
But the An^ (...) deputy) answered Moses thus: Thou can not see my face, for
there shall no man Exo. 33. 20 ve^se 23.
(...) (...) l^e. But a little after: Thou shall see my back parts: but my face
thou shall not see. (...) of the deity left in his creatures we may see, and so
aspire toward his inuisibility: (...) knowledge thereof as God gives more
grace. But his true essence is more am^ weak sense and intellect can
comprehend: or then can be so far debased. But (...) ^th God it is not so,
nor do I think it impious or absurd to hold that God spoke (...) ^he Fathers,
and after Christ to many of the Saints: God, even that God of hea^ (...); it is
not against his Majesty, but congruent to his infinite goodness. His face
(...) as Augustine declares. (d) Know thee] Or see thee knowingly. (e)
Lycurgus] Lycurgus.
(...) King of Sparta, and Dionassa, brother to king Polibites, or (Plutarch)
Poli^ (...) whose death, he reigned until his brothers wife proved with
child: for then he (...) ^o the child unborn, if it were a son, and
proouing so, he was protector. He gave (...) ^nians sharp laws, and
therefore feyned to have them from Apollo of Delphos: (...) Jove, because he
went into Crete, (to avoid the maleuolence of some of his (...)) and there
they say, learned he his laws of Jove, that was borne there; Iustine (...) in
Creete: But the Historiographers do neither agree of his birth, laws, nor
(...) Plutarch) nor of his time, nor whether there were diverse so called.
Timaeus (...), and both Lacedaemonians: but says that both their deeds were
referred to the (...) ^e elder lived in Homers time, or not long after. Of
Lycurgus laws, I omit to (...) seeing they are so rife in Plutarch and
Zenophon, common authors both.

(...) but one God is to be worshipped for all things, temporal and eternal:
all being in the power of his providence. CHAP. 14.
(...) true religion of all mankind (referred to the people of God) as well
(...) has had increase, and received more and more perfection, by the suc^ and
continuance of time, drawing from temporalities to eternity, and ^ges visible
to the intelectuall: so that even then when the promise of ^wards was given,
the worship of one only God was taught, least man^ ^ld be drawn to any false
worship for those temporal respects: for he is (...) denies that all that men
or Angels can do unto man, is in the hand of ^ghty: Plotine the Platonist (a)
disputes of providence, proving it to be de^ ^om the high, ineffable and
beauteous God, (b) unto the meanest creature on earth, (c) by the beauty of
the flowers, and leaves: all which so transitory, momentary things, could not
have their peculiar, seuerally-sorted beauties, but from that intellectual and
immutable beauty forming them all. This our Savior showed, saying: Learn how
the Lillies of the field do grow: they labor not, neither (...), yet say I
unto you that even (d) Solomon in all his glory was not arayde like M^. 6. 2^.
29. 30.
one of these: Wherefore if God so cloathe the grass of the field which is to
day, and (...) ^orrow is cast into the Oven, shall not he do much more unto
you; O you of little faith? Wherefore though the mind of man be weak, and
clogged with earthly affects, and desires of those things that are so frail
and contemptible in respect of the blessings celestial (though necessaries for
this present life) yet does it well to desire them at the hands of one only
GOD, and not to depart from his service to obtain them elsewhere, when they
may soonest attain his love by neglect of such trifles, and with that love all
necessaries both for this life, and the other.

L. VIVES.
PLatonist (a) disputeth] In four books, showing that the least part of this
inferior world is respected by the Prince of nature, and that by the
intelligible world, which is with God, this world of ours was made: many that
the depression has altered it, that the other simple God^ pro^.
world produced this multiplied, and dispersed. (b) Unto the meanest] For some
held that Gods providence descended no lower then heaven. This same opinion
some say was Aristotle's, of which elsewhere: Others held that the Gods meddled
only with the greatest affairs on earth, and (as Kings) meddled not with petty
matters: whereupon Lucane makes C^sar speak thus to his mutinous soldiers:
-- Nunquam se cura deorum
Sic premit, vt vestra vitae, vestraeque saluti
Fata vacent: procerum motus haec cuncta sequuntur.
H^i paucis vinit genus. -- etc.
-- The gods do not respect
Your good so much, as to permit the fates
To tend on that: they manage greater states,
Mankind may live with small. -- etc.
(c) By the beauty] Every flower has such an apt form, growth, bud, seed,
and spring, that he that observes it, must needs say, the workman of this, is
none but God. Gods providence (says Proclus) descends from above unto each
parcel of the creation, omitting none. B^ seeing Plato is for us, what need
we cite his followers? He affirms Gods providence to dispose of every little
thing, and every great. In Epniom. having disputed of it, De legib. lib. 10.
The sum whereof is this: Seeing there are gods, they must not be thought
idle: therefore they look to human affairs: and knowing all, they know both
little and great: being far from (...) and sluggishnesse: nor is their power
a whit less, in the least businesses, nor do they think it vn^thy their
majesty to respect them, for they are degrees to the highest. Therefore they
regard all things, great and small. (d) Salomon] What purple, silk, or dye
(says Hierome upon this place) (...) ^le to the flowers? what is so white as
the Lily? what purple exceeds the Uiolet? Let (...) (...) (...) rather judges
in this, then the tongue. Thus far he. And truly Art can never attain
(...) perfection, imitate how it can: though our esteem prefer it, and
seeing it get a (...) by ^lation, attribute much more to it.

Of the holy Angels that minister to Gods providence. CHAP. 15.
IT ^sed the divine providence therefore so to dispose of the times, that as I
said, and we read in the acts, the law should be given (a) by the Angels
mouths, concerning the worship of the true God, wherein Gods person (not (...)
(...) proper substance, which corruptible eyes can never see, but by certain
^sitions of a creature for the creator) would appear, and speak syllabi^ a
man's voice, unto us: even he that in his own nature speaks not ^lly but
spiritually, not sensibly but intelligibly, not temporally, but (as (...) ^y)
aeternall, neither beginning speech, nor ending: whom his blessed ^ortall
messengers and ministers heard not with ears, but more sincere^ intellects:
and hearing his commands after an ineffable manner, they in^ and easily frame
to be delivered us in a visible and sensible manner. (...) was given (as I
say) in a division of time, first having all earthly pro^ that were types of
the goods eternal, which many celebrated in visible (...), but few understood.
But there the true religious worship of one (...) God, is directly and plainly
taught and testified, not by one of the peo^ by him that made heaven and earth,
and every soul and spirit that is not (...): for he makes them that are
made, and have need of his help that (...), in all their existence.

L. VIVES.
(...) Angels mouthes] Or by their disposing, as Gods ministers in those
miracles. Of ^-after.

Whether in this question of beatitude we must trust those Angels that refuse
the divine worship, and ascribe it all to one God, or those that require it to
themselves. CHAP. 16.
(...) Angels shall we trust then in this business of eternal bliss. Those
(...) require mortal men to offer them sacrifice and honors, or those (...)
it is all due unto GOD the Creator, and will us most piously, to give (...) it
all, as one, in the only speculation of whom we may attain (...) ^inesse.
For the sight of GOD, is a sight of that beauty, and worthy (...), that Plato
(a) did not doubt to call him that wanted this, unhappy, (...) ^euer such store
of goods besides. Seeing then that some Angels re^ this religious worship to
him, and some would have it themselves: (...) ^fusing all part of it, and the
second not daring to forbid him of part (...) the Platonists, Theurgiques, (or
rather (b) Periurgikes, for so may all Periurgikes
(...) be fitlye termed) or any other Philosophers answer which we (...)
^llow. Nay let all men answer that have any use of naturalll reason, ^her we
shall sacrifice to these Gods or Angels that exact it, or to (...) to whom
they bid us, that forbid it both to themselves and the (...) If neither of
them did any miracles, but the one side demanded sacri^, and the others said
no, GOD must have all, then ought piety to discern (...) the pride of the one
and the virtue of the other. Nay, I will say (...), if these that do claim
sacrifice should work upon men's hearts with (...), and those that forbid it,
and stand all for GOD, should not have (...) at all to work the like, yet
their part should gain more by reason, (...) others by sense: But seeing that
GOD, to confirm his truth, has (...) ministry, that debase themselves for
his honor, wrought more great, clear, and certain miracles, then the others,
least they should draw wea^e hearts unto their false devotion by inueigling
their senses with amazements* who is so grosely fond, as will not choose to
follow the truth, seeing it T^ (...) excel the Pagans.
confirmed with more miraculous proves? for the recorded miracles of the Pagan
gods (I speak not of such as time and natures secret causes by Gods
providence, have produced beyond custom, as monstrous byrths, sights in the
air and earth, fearful, or hurtful also, (c) all which the devils subtilty
persuaded the world, they both procured and cured) I mean of such as were
their evident acts, as the (d) remoouall of the gods (that Aeneas brought from
Troy) from place to place by themselves: (e) Tarquins cutting of a Whetstone
(f) the Epidaurian serpents (g) accompanying Esculapius in his transportation
to Rome: the (h) drawing on of the ship that brought Berecynthia's statue
from Phrygia (being other-wise not to be moved by so huge strength of men and
beasts) by one woman with her girdle, in testimony of her chastity: and the
(i) carrying of water from Tyber in a sieve by a (k) vestall, thereby acquitting
her self from an accusation of adultery. These, nor such as these, are
comparable to those, done in presence of the people of GOD, either for rarity
or greatness. How much less then the strange effects of those arts which the
Pagans themselves did legally prohibit, namely of Magic and Theurgie, (l)
many whereof are mere Deceptiones visus, and flat falsehoods indeed, as the
(m) fetching down of the Moon, till (says Lucan) she spume upon such
herbs as they desire. Now though some in their art seem to come near
others of the Saints wondrous deeds, yet their end that discerns the latter
ones far to excel the first, theirs. For their multitude, the more
sacrifi^ices they desire, the fewer they deserne. But ours do but prove unto
us one, that needs no such, as he has showed both by his holy writ, and
whole abolishment of them ceremonies afterward. If therefore these Angels
require sacrifice, then are these their betters that require none, but refer
all to God: for herein they show their true love to us, that they desire not
our subjection to them, by sacrifice, but unto him in contemplation of whom is
their felicity, and desire to see us joined to him from whom they never are
separate. But suppose the other Angels that seek sacrifices for many, and not
for one only, would not have them for them selves, but for the gods they are
under; The angels (...) god.
yet for all this are the other to be preferred before them, as being under
b^ one GOD, to whom only they refer all religion, and to none other: and
the other no way daring to forbid this GOD all worship, to whom the former
ascribe all. But if they be neither good Angels nor GODS, (as their proud
falsenesse proves) but wicked devils, desiring to share divine honors with
that one glorious GOD, what greater aid can we have against them then to
serve that GOD, to whom those good Angels serve, that ch^ge us to sacrifice
not to them but unto him, to whom our selves ought to be a sacrifice?

L. VIVES.
PLato (a) did^ It i^ ^is in many places: all things without virtue, and the
knowledge of the true (...) is vile and abject. (b) Per-^gikes] Of (...), to
burn, most like^ (c) All which] By sacrifice (says Ualerius) are the presages
of visions and thunders procured. The Hetrurians used the art, and Numa
brought it to Rome. It is much mentioned in (...), Seneca, Liuie, and other
Latin authors. Procurare is in this place to sacrifice to such a Procurare.
(...) (as fitteth the time) to make the event prosperous. (d) Remoouall) Ual.
lib. 1. They were brought to Lauinium, and placed there by Aeneas, and being
borne to Alba by Ascanius, the^ ^ned to their other seat again: and because
they might be perhaps se^retly rem^* they were brought to Alba again, and
they departed the second time. (e) Tarquins] He ^ing to increase the number of
his trained soldiers, Actius Naeuius the Augur forb^ Actius Naeuius, Augur
^till he had beheld the Auguries. Tarquin, to scoff his art: Presage by the
art ((...) he) whether my thoughts shall come to pass: It shall (quo^h
Actius, out of his (...):) (...) this Whetstone (quoth Tarquin) with this
razour. He did ^t in that full presence, and whilst he lived ever after was
honorably respected, and had a statue erected h^ in that (...) where it was
done (namely the Consistory) with a Whe^tone and a r^zor, as te^ of the fact.
Liu. lib. 1. G^ero de diuinat lib. 1. but they say Actius cut it, not Tarquin.
(f) (...) Epidaurian] This is that Aesculapius that was brought from his Temple
(five miles (...) ^aurus) to Rome, in form of a Serpent. The great devil it
was surely (says Lactan^ ^out The (...) ^pent.
dissembling: for the Scriptures call him a Serpent, and ^herecides the Syrian
(...) ^y all have serpentine feet. (g) Accompanying] Nay the serpent it self
was Aes^, unless they held him invisible, and this serpent his companion
visible. Aesculapius (...) ^ted with a Serpent wound about a rod, and called
Ophinchus, that is, the (...) (...) was a statute also that Physicians should
use Snakes. Higin. Histor. Caelest. Plini^ t^kes the Snake was sacred to him,
because it is so medicinable: but Macrobius says, be^ is so quick-sighted.
Horace. Cur in amicorum vitium tam cernis acutum,
Quam aut aquila, aut serpens Epidaurius?
Why do into thy friends ill carriage prye,
With a quick Eagles, or a Serpents eye?
(...) ^ing] The ship that came from Pessinuns with the Mother of the gods,
sticking im^ in Tyber, on ground, Q. Claudia a Vestall, (slandered for
incontinencie because Claudia a Vestall.
(...) to go handsome) took her girdle, and knitting it to the ship, praide
Berecyn^ ^ee knew her chaste to follow her, and so she did, whereupon Claudia
had a statue (...) the goddesses temple, that stood safe when the Temple was
twice burned, Liu. l. 2. (...). Ualer. Maximus. (i) Carrying of water] A
diverse reading: but of no mo^ ((...)) A Uestall] Turria. Ualer. lib. 8. (l)
Many] Men's thoughts often make them (...) see that which they see not indeed,
and this is often done by a Phant^sme, or ap^* And hence is most of our
reports of spirits walking, arisen. Yea the spirits them deceive our senses:
which is no wonder, seeing that our iuglers can do the like (...) (...) mayn,
which if another should do, you should have some make a miracle of: Iugler^.
(...) doings truly are admirable, and their manner very hard to conceive.
Some (...) are not done but by the devils means: not so: they are but the
quick conuey^ and exercise, their swift motion preventing our eye-sights: So
does he that (...) bread and blows forth meal: and he that drinks, and
letts it out at his throat. (...) ^ople will marvel to see them eat daggers,
spue heaps of needles, laces, and (...)

(...) to speak of the tricks of natural Magic, making men look
headless, and (...) like Asses^ and spreading a Vine all over the room. Many
know the reasons hereof: (...) ^e written of and easily done by men, much more
by the devils, that are such cunning (...). That the Pagans suspected their
gods miracles to be but illusions, or saigned ^tions, Ualerius shows
plainly, lib. 1. I know (says he) the doubtful opinion of (...), concerning
the gods speech and apparitions, objected to men's ^ares and eyes, but (...)
they are old traditions, let us believe their authors, and not detract from the
autho^ reverend and antique doctrine. And Liuie says in diverse places that
the dangerous Illusion^.
(...) men's thoughts so scrupulous, that they believed and reported far more
myra^ were true. (m) Fetching downe] Of the Magicians power Lucan writes thus.
-- Illis et Sydera Primum,
Praecipiti deducta polo Phaebeque serena,
Non aliter diris verborum obsessa venenis,
Palluit et nigris, terrenisque ignibus arsit.
Quam si fraterna prohiberet imagine tellus,
I^sereretque s^as flammis c^lestibus vmbras.
Et patitur tant^s ca^tu depress^ labores,
Do^ec suppositas propior despumet in herbas.
-- They first disroab'd the spheres,
Of their clear greatness, and Phaebe in her station,
With black enchantments and damned Invocation,
They strike as red, or pale, and make her fade,
As if the Sun casting earths sable shade
Upon her front, this alteration made,
So plague they her with harms, till she come nyer,
And spume upon such herbs as they desire.
So in Uirgil, a witch says she can turn the course of the stars. Aeenid.
4. And Apuleius his witch could weaken the gods, and put out the stars. And
Ovid says of Medea. Illa relucta^te^ cursu deducere luna^
Nititur, and tenebras addere solis ^quis.
She works to fetch swift Phaebe from her chair,
And wrap the Suns bright steeds in darkened air.
For they believed that charms would fetch the Moon down from heaven. Uirg.
Pharma^. Carmin^ ^el ^lo possunt deducere luna^:
Charms force the silver Moon down from her sphere:
And Phaedras nurse in Seneca's Hippolitus, worshipeth the Moon in these
terms. Sic te Lucidi vultus ferant,
Et nube rupta, cornibus puris eas:
Sic te gerente^ frena nocturni ^theris,
Detrab^re nunquam Thessali cantus queant.
So be thy face vnshrouded,
And thy pure horns vnclouded!
So be thy silver chair far from the reach
Of all the charms that the Thessalians teach.
And in these troubles they held that making of noise helped the moon, and
kept her from hearing the inchaunters words: whereupon they sounded cymballs,
and bet upon drums and b^sens: for this, they thought a singular help.
Propert. Cantus et e curru lun^m deducere te^tant,
Et facerent, si no^ aer^ repulsa sonent.
Charms seek to draw down Phaebe from her seating,
And would, but for the noise of basens beating.
And I^all speaking of a woman that was an everlasting prater, says: Vn^
laboranti, p^terit succurrerre lunae.
Her only voice would keep the moon from charms.
They used it also in Eclipses, not knowing their cause. Pliny speaking of the
first declarers hereof says: (...) ^n, and learned that discovered much in the
law of nature, more then others, (...) (...) (...) (...) of s^ stars or some
mischief to beefall them in their eclipses, Pindarus (...) (...) (both great
scholars) were subject to this fear, the failing of the Sun and Moons
light* (...) (said they) the power of witchcraft upon them, and therefore men
b^ it from them (...) (...) ^d confused sounds. Nor is it any wonder those
learned men should A^ (...) (...) the (...).
believe that the Moon was set from heaven, when as there was a sort of men
(since we co^ remember) that believed that an ass had drunk up the moon,
because drinking in the (...) where it shonne, a cloud came on the sudden, and
covered it: so the ass was impriso^* (...) ^ing had a very lawful, and
orderly trial, was ripped up, to have the Moon (...) of his belly, to shine
in the world again. (n) She spum'd] This they held was the (...) of Cerberus
dog unto the Moon, Hecate, or Proserpina, and the Enchantresses, (...) it
much in their witch-crafts.

Of the Arc of the testament and the miracles wrought to confirm this law and
promise. CHAP. 17.
(...) we of God, given by the Angels, commanding the worship of one God, and
forbidding all other, was put up in an Arc called the Arc of the (...):
Whereby is meant that GOD (to whose honor all this was (...) was not included
in that place or any other, because he gave them (...) answers from the place
of the Arc, and showed miracles also from (...): but that the Testament of his
will was there: The law (that was (...) upon tables of stone and put in the
Arc) being there: Which (...) in their travel, carried in a Tabernacle,
gave it also the name of (...) ^nacle of the Testament, which the Priests with
due reverence did (...)* And their sign was a pillar of a clowd in the day,
which shone in the night Exodus 13.
(...)* and when it removed, the tents removed, and where it stayed, they
rested. (...), the law had many more great testimonies given for it, besides
what I have (...) besides those that approached out of the place where the Arc
stood: for (...) ^ey and the Arc were to pass Jordan, into the land of
promise, The waters (...) lef^ them a dry way* Besides having borne it 7. times
about the first City ^os 4. Ios. 6. 1 King^. 5.
the (...) their foe, and (as the ^and was then) slave to Paganism, the walls
fell flat (...) ^thout ruin or battery. And when they had gotten the land of
Promise, and (...) Arc (for their sins) was taken from them, and placed by the
victor Idola^ ^ir* chief gods temple, and locked fast in, coming again the
next day, (...) and their Idol thrown down and broken all to pieces: and
being terrifi^ ^se prodigies (besides a more shameful scourge) they restored
the Arc (...) they took it from. And how? They set it upon a carriage yoking
kine in (...) ^eifers*) whose calves they took from them, and so (in trial of
the divine (...) ^rn'd them loose to go whether they would: They without guide
came ^ght to the Hebrwes, never turning again for the bleating of their Calves,
but ^ought home this great mystery to those that honored it: These and such
like ^thing to God, but much to the terror and instruction of man. For if the
Phi^ers (cheefely the Platonists) that held the providence of God to extend
(...) thing great and small, by the proof drawn from the several forms
^auties of herbs and flowers as well as living creatures, were held to be more
(...) persuaded then the rest: How much more do these things testify the Deity
^ing to pass at the hour when this religion was taught, that commands
^tion of one God, the only loving and beloved God, blessing all, limi^ ^hese
sacrifices in a certain time, and then changing them into better by (...)
Priest: and testifiing hereby that he desires not these, but their signifi^,
not to have any honor from them neither, but that we by the fire of (...)
might be inflamed to adore him, and adhere unto him, which is al for our (...)
good, and adds nothing to his.

Against such as deny to believe the scriptures, concerning those miracles
shown to Gods people. CHAP. 18.
VVil any one say there was no such miracles; all is lies? He that says so
and takes a way the authority of scripture herein, may as well say that the
Gods The devils work wonders for their worship.
respect not men. For they had no mean but miracles, to attain their worship,
wherein their Pagan stories show how far they had power to prove themselves
always rather wonderful then useful. But in this our work (whereof this is
the tenth book) we deal not against Atheists, nor such as exclude the gods
from dealing in man's affairs, but with such as prefer their gods, before our
God, the founder of this glorious City: knowing that he is the Creator
invisible and im^table of this visible and changeable world, and the giver of
beatitude, from none of his creatures, but from himself intyrely. For his
true Prophet says: It is good for me to adhere unto the Lord. The Philosophers
contend about the final good Ps. 72.
(a) to which all the pains man takes has relation. But he said not, it is
good for me to be wealthy, honorable or invested a King: Or (as some of the
Philosophers shamed not to say) It is good for me to have fullness of bodily
pleasure: Or (as the better sort said) It is good for me to have virtue of
mind: But he said: It is good for me to adhere unto God. This had he taught
him, unto whom: only both the Angels, and the (b) testimony of the law do
reach all sacrifice to be due: So that the Prophet became a sacrifice unto
him, being inflamed with his intellectual fire, and holding a fruition of his
ineffable goodness in a holy desire to be united to him. Now if these men of
many gods in the discourse of their miracles, give credence to their
historyes and magical; Or (to speak to please them) Theurgicall books, why
should not the scripture be believed in these other, who are as far beyond
the rest as he is above the others, to whom only these our books teach all
religious honor to be peculiar?

L. VIVES.
TO (a) which al Tully (stoically) divided man's offices or duties into two
parts, absolute, referred to the absolute virtues, wisdom, etc. and so to good
ends, and this the Greeks call Offices.
(...), the Latins rectum, a thing well done, containing all virtuous acts:
the other is referred to the rules of common life, and has always a probable
reason why it has this effect rather then that. This is called medium, a mean
or community, possible to be drawn to a wise or to a foolish event. Such
actions concern commonweals* honors, riches. etc. (b) Testimony of]
Miracles, says one copy, and another otherwise, all comes to one purpose.

The reason of that visible sacrifice that the true religion commands us to
offer unto one God. CHAP. 19.
But as for those that think visible sacrifices pertain to others, and
invisible to him, as only invisible, as greater to the greater, and better to
the better, ((...): the duties of a pure heart, and an holy will) verily these
men conceive not that the other are Symbols of these, as the sound of words,
are significations of things. Wherefore as in our praises and prayers to him,
we speak vocal words, but offer the contents of our hearts, even so we in
our sacrifice, know that we must offer thus visibly to none but him to whom
our hearts must be an invisible sacrifice For then the Angels, and predominate
powers do (a) rejoice with us and further us with all their power and ability.
But if we offer unto them, they are not willing to take it, and when they are
personally sent down to men, they expressly forbid it. And this the (b)
Scriptures testify: Some held that the Angels were either to have adoration,
or (that which we owe The Angels refuse honors. Apoc. 19.
only to God) sacrifice: but they were forbidden, and taught that al was only
Gods and lawfully given him. And those Angels the Saints did follow (c) Paul
and Barnabas being in Lycaonia, the people (for a miraculous cure) held them
gods, and Acts. (...)
would have sacrificed unto them, but they humbly and godlyly denied it, and
preached that God unto them in whom they believed But the wicked spirits do
affect it only because they know it to be gods only due. For (as Porp^yry and
others think) it is the divine honors, not the smells of the offerings that
they delight in. For those smells they have plenty, and may procure themselves
more if they list. So then these arrogant spirits affect not the smoke
ascending from a body, but the honors given them from the soul, which they
may deceive and domineere over, stopping man's way to God, and keeping him from
becoming Gods sacrifice, by offering unto other then God.

L. VIVES.
Rejoice (a) with] The Angels rejoice at man's righteousness. (...). 15. (c)
Scriptures] John would have worshipped the Angel that was sent him, but he
sorbad him, willing him rather to worship God, whom he (as his fellow
servant) served. Apoc. 19. (c) Paul] Being in Lyaconia (a part of Asia)
preaching Gods word, and curing a lame man by Gods power, the people said they
were gods, calling Barnabas Jove, and Paul (that preached) Mer^ury the
pretended God of speech. So they prepared them sacrifices, but the Apostles
were angry, and ^orbad it, fearing to take to themselves, the due of God.

Of the only and true sacrifice, which the Mediator be tweene God and man
became. CHAP. 20.
Wherefore the true Mediator, being in the form of a servant, made Mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, taking sacrifices with his father,
as God, yet in in the servile form choose rather to be one then to take any,
least some hereby should gather that one might sacrifice unto creatures, By
this is he the Priest, off^ring, and offerer. The true Sacrament whereof is
the Churches daily sacrifice: which being the body of him the head, (a)
learneth to offer it self by him. The ancient sacrifices of the Saints were
all diverse types of The church a sacrifice. How:
this also, this being figured in many and diverse, as one thing is told in
many words, that it might be commended (b) without tediousness. And to this
great and true facrifice, all false ones gave place.

L. VIVES.
LEarneth (a) to] Or says she offers by him, so the Coleyne and Bruges
copies have it: but the other is good also. (b) Without tediousnesse] For
variety eases that, and in discourse he that repeateth one thing twice of one
fashion, procures loathing, but vary it a thousand ways, and it will still
pass pleasing. This is taught in Rhetorike. And it is like that which Q.
Flam^ius in Liuie, says of the diverse sauces: Therefore the types of the old
law that signified one thing, were diverse, that men might apprehend the future
salvation with less surfeit, and the (...) persons, amongst so many might find
one whereby to conceive what was to come.

Of the power given to the devils, to the greater gloryfying of the Saints that
have suffered martyrdom, and conquered the ayry spirits, not by appeasing
them, but adhering to God. CHAP. 21.
THe Devils had a certain temporary power allowed them, whereby to excite
such as they possessed, against GODS City, and both to accept sacrifices of
the willing offerers, and to require them of the vnwil^g, yea even to extort
them by violent plagues: nor was this at all prejudicial, but very commodious
for the Church, that the number of Mar tirs might be fulfilled: whom the City
of God holds so much the dearer, because they spe^ their blood for it against
the power of impiety: these now (if the church admi^ the words use) we might
worthily call our (a) Heroes. For this name came from (...), Juno, and
therefore one of her sons (I know not which) was called He^* the mystery
being, that Juno was Queen of the air, where the Heroes (the well deserving
souls) dwell with the Daemones. But ours (if we might use the word) The
Mart^rs the devils conquerers.
should be called so, for a contrary reason, namely not for dwelling with the
Daemones in the air, but for conquering those Daemones, those aereall powers,
and in them, all that is called Juno: whom it was not for nothing, that the
Poets made so envious, and such an opposite to (c) good men being deified for
their virtue. But unhappily was Virgill ouer-seene in making her first to say,
Aeneas conquers men, and then to bring in Helenus warning Aeneas, as his
ghostly father in these words. Iunoni cane vota libens, dominamque potentem,
Supplicibus supera donis --
Purchased great Iunos (d) wrath with willing prayers
and (e) conquered her with humble gifts --
And therefore Porphyry (though not of himself) holds that a good God or
Genius never comes to a man till the bad be appeased: as if it were of more
power then the other, seeing that the bad can hinder the good for working, and
must be entreated to give them place, whereas the good can do no good unless
the others list, and the others can do mischief maugre their beards. This is
no tract of true religion* our Martirs do not conquer Juno, that is the ayry
powers, that malice their virtues, on this fashion: Our Heroes (If I may say
so) conquer no^ Her^ by humble gifts but by divine virtues. Surely (f) Scipio
deserved the name of African rather for conquering Africa, then for begging or
buying his honor of his foes.

L. VIVES.
Our (a) Heroes] Plato in his order of the gods, makes some less then ayry
Daemones, and more then men, calling them demigods: now certainly these be
the Heroes: for so (...) Heroes and Semigods.
they called that are begotten of a god and a mortal, as Hercules Dionysius,
Aeneas, Aesc^pius, Romulus, and such: one of whose parents being a god, they
would not call them bare men, but somewhat more, yet less then the Daemones.
And so holds Iamblicus. Hierocles the S^ (relating Pythagoras his verses, or as
some say Philolaus his) says that Angels and Heroes (as P^to says) are both
included in the rank of Daemones: the celestial are Angels, the earthly He^*
the mean Daemones. But Pythagoras held (quoth he) that the gods sons were
called He^ Daemones: And so they are, in that sense that Hesiod calls the men of
the golden age, Ter^ Daemones: for he puts a fourth sort of men, worse then
the golden ones but better then the third sort, for the Heroes. But these and
the other also he calls men, and Semi-gods: saying (...)
(...). --
A blessed kind of Heroes they were
Surnamed Semi-gods --
To wit, those y^ Plato means: for these ar more ancient and venerable then
they that ^ailed (...) Jason in the fatal ship, and sought in the war of Troy.
For Hesiod calls the^ warlike, and thence (...) Me^der says) were they held
wrathful, and violent: if any one went by their temples (called (...) (...).
(...) must pass in reverend silence, least he should anger the Heroes, and
set altogether by the He^.
^es. And many such temples were er^cted in Greece. (...) mentions diverse to
Vliss^s, T^talus, and Acrisius. The Latins had them also: Plin. lib. 19.
mentions of one. Pla^o deriues Heroes, of (...) Love: because the love
between a god or goddess and a mortal* produced the Heroes. Some draw it
from (...), to speak, because they were eloquent statesmen. Hierocles allows
the deriuation from love, but not in respect of the birth, but their singular
love of the gods, inciting us to the like. For Ia^blichus says they rule over
men, giving us life* reason, guarding and freeing our souls at pleasure. (But
we have shown these to be the powers of the soul, and each one is his own
Demon) Some derive it from (...), earth, they being earthly Daemones. For so
Hesiod calls the good souls departed, and Pythagoras also, bidding (...)
^orship the earthly Daemones. Homers interpretor likes this deriuation. (...)
(says he) in one language is earth: and of earth was mankind made. Capella
(Nupt. lib. 2.) says that all between us and the Moon, is the Kingdom of the
Manes and father Dis. But in the highest part are the Heroes, and the Manes
below them: and those Heroes, or semi-gods, have souls and holy minds in men's
forms, and are borne to the worlds great good: So was Hercules, Dionys*
Tryptole^s etc. and therefore the name comes of (...), Juno because she rules
the air, whither the good souls ascend, as Hierocles witnesses in these
verses of Pythagoras or Philolaus, relating their opinion herein. (...)
(...)
If quit from earthly dross to heaven thou soar
Then shall thou be a God, and dye no more.
But Plato thinks them to become Sea-goddes: I believe because he holds
them grosser bodyed then the Daemones whom he calls purely a^reall: and so
thought fit to give them h^bitation in the most appropin quate part of
nature, the water. Hera also the Latins use for a Lady or a Queen: V^rg. Aen.
3. and so Heroes, if it derive from Hera, may be taken for ^ords or Kings.
(b) One of her sonnes] I think I have read of this in the Greek commenta^es,
but I cannot remember which: these things (as I said before) are rather
pertinent to chance then schollership. (c) Good mens] As to Hercules, Dionysius
and Aeneas. (d) Great] The translation of Hera. For Proserpina whom Charo^
(Aeneids 6.) calls Lady, is the infernal Juno. And I^ the celestial is called
the great, and the infernal also (says Seruius.) For father Dis, is called
Jupiter infernal. So Claudian sings in the silent ring of the spirits, at the
wedding of Or^s and Proserpina. Nostra parens Juno, tuque ^germane tona^tis
Rap^. Prose^p. lib. 2.

Et gener, vnanimis con^ortia d^cite somni
M^tuaque alternis (...) (...).
Juno our mother, and thou Jove's great son
And brother, sweetly may you take your rest,
Linckt in each others arms* and breast to breast.
And Protesilaus in Lucian, calls Plato, Jupiter. (e) Conquer] Showing (says
Donate) that the greatest enemies are sooner conquered by ob^ysance then
opposition. (f) Scipio] The first general Scipio African.
that ever got sur name from his prouincial conquests, was P. Cornelius Scipio,
Publius his son. He subdued Af^ica* and s^buerted Haniball, and was instiled
African. I speak of Generals and provincial conquests: Coriolanus had that
name from the conquest of a town, and Sergius Fi^enas, was so surnamed for
subduing the Fidenates.

From whence the Saints have their power against the devils and their pure
purgation of heart. CHAP. 22.
GOdly men do expel the aereall powers opposing them, from their possession
by (a) exorcismes, not by pacification: and break their Temptations by prayer,
not unto them but unto God, against them. For they conquer nor chain no man
but by the fellowship of sin. So that his name y^ took on him humanity, and
lived without sin, confoundes them utterly. He is the Priest Sin only
^euers man from God.
and sacrifice of the remission of sins: He the Mediator between G^ Da^
man, even the man Christ Jesus by whom we are purged of sin, and re^led
unto God: for nothing seuers man from God but sin, which not our me^, but
Gods mercy wipeth off us: it is his pardon, not our power, for all the po^ that
is called ours, is ours by his bountyous goodness; for we should think (...)
well of our flesh, unless we lived (b) under a pardon all the while we are
in the flesh. Therefore have we our grace by a Mediator, that being polluted
by the flesh, we might be purged by the like flesh. This grace of God wherein
his great mercy is shown us, does rule us by faith in this life, and after
this life is ended, wi^ transport us by that unchangeable truth unto most
absolute perfection.

L. VIVES.
BY (a) exorcisme] (...), is to admire: Augustine translate sit so, and
Exorcista, an ad^rer: Exorcisme.
and Exorcismus, admiration. The Exorcist expels the devil from the
Chatecum^nist, ere he be baptized. August. Symbol. It is the third of the
lesser orders of the churh: they are (...) all seven. Of this and of Exorcisme
before Baptism read Petrus Lumbardus: Sentent. lib. 4. (...) 8. and 24. (b)
Under a pardon] Under the law of sin and infirmity, least any one should
exto^ himself. All the good we do, comes from God, by whose pardon we are
vnhusked of the old man, sin: and by him we live in justice.

Of the Platonists principle in their purgation of the soul. CHAP. 23.
POrphyry says that the Oracles said that neither the Suns nor Moons
Teletae could purge us, and consequently, the Teletae of no gods can. For if
the Suns and Moons (the chief gods) cannot, whose is more powerful? But
the Oracles answered (quoth he) that the beginnings may: least one should
think that upon the denial of this power to the Sun and Moon, some other
God of the multitude might do it. But what beginnings he has as a Platonist,
we Porphyry his opinion of the Trinity.
know. For he speaks (a) of God the father, the Son called in greek the
Fathers intellect: but of the spirit, not a word: at least not a plain one:
though what he means, by a mean between the two, I cannot tell: for if he
follow (c) Plotin^ in his discourse of the three privy essences, and would
have this third, the souls nature: he should not have put it as the mean
between the father and the son. For Plotine puts it after the fathers
intellect, but Porphyry in calling it the mean, interposeth it between them.
And this he says as well as he could, or would: but we call it neither the
fathers spirit alone, nor the sons, but both. The Philosophers speak freely,
never fearing to offend religious ears in those incomprehensible mysteries:
but we must lay our words to a (d) line, that we produce no impious error,
by our freedom of speech concerning these matters. Wherefore Heed must be had
of discourse of the Trinity.
when we speak of God, we neither talk of two principles, nor three as ^e may
not say there were two gods or three, though when we speak of the father,
the son or the holy ghost, we say that each of these is God. Nor say we with
the Sabellian heretics, that he that is the father is the son, and he that
is the holy ghost is the father and the son, but the father is the sons
father, and the The Sabellian Heretics.
son the fathers son, and the holy spirit both the fathers and the sonne^,
but neither father nor son. True then it is that man is purged by none but
the ^ginning, but this beginning is by them too variably taken.

L. VIVES.
OF (a) God the] It is a question that has troubled many, Whether the
Philosopher Whether the Philosophers kne^ the ^inity.
had any notion of the* Trinity? First, we our selves, to whom the mystery of
redemp^on is revealed, have but a small glance (God knows) of that radiant
light. But what the Philosophers of old wrote hereof is easily apparent that
they spoke it* rather then knew what they spoke, it is so obscure. These
secrets belonged not to their discovery. It sufficed them to attain the unity
of God: And if (by Gods inspiration) they spoke oughtt concerning the Trinity,
it was rather to serve as a testimony of the future truth against their
masters op^ns* then to expres any understanding they had thereof themselves.
Aristotle writes (de (...) et mund^ l. 2) y^ the Pythagorists placed perfection
in three, the beginning, midst, and end: and this nu^ b^ they used in religion.
Thence some hold that Theocritus his witch said, To three I offer, three I holy
call: But Virgill more plain:
Terna tibi haec primum triplici diuersa color
Lycia circundo, terque haec altaria circum
Effigiem duco^numero deus impare gaudet
First wrap I these three thorns (to frame my spel)
Three times about the shape: the altars then
We compass thrice: God loves od numbers well.
And Zeno calls Logos, fate, necessity, God, and Jove's soul. But Plato
seems far more plain: for (Socrates in his de Re p l. 6.) having disputed
sufficiently of the nature of good, and affirmed that he held it too great a
theme for any man's discourse to contain, says thus: But O you happy men, let
us leave to say what is good until another time: For I hold it utterly
incomprehensible of man's mind. But my desire at this time is to express what
the son of this good is, which is most like to good it self: If you will I will
proceed, if not let it alone. Then Glaucus replied that he should go on with
the son and leave the father till another time. So he proceeds to discourse of
the birth, and son of good, and after some questions, says: that good, is as
the sun, and the son is as the light we have from the sun. And in his Epistle
to Hermias he speaks of such as were sworn to fit studies, and (the Muses
sister) lerning by God, the guide and father of al things past, and to come.
And in his Epinomis he says that by that most divine Word, was the world and
al therein created. This word, did so ravish the wise man with divine love, that
he conceived the means of beatitude. For many say that (...), is meant of the
Word, not of the world, and so we have used it in the eighth book, speaking of
Plato's opinion of beatitude. So that Plato mentions the father and the son
expressly, mary the third he thought was indeclareable. Though he hold that in
the degrees of Divinity, the soul of the world, the third proceeds from the
beginning, and the begininnings son, Men's* which soul (if one would stand
for Plato) might easily be defended to be that spirit that moved upon the
waters, which they seem to diffuse through the whole mass, and to impart life
and being to every particular. And this is the Trine in divinity of which he
writes to Dionysius aenigmatically, as himself says. Al things are about
the King of al, and by him have existence: the seconds about the second, and y^
thirds about the third. I omit to write what Trismegistus says, and Iamblichus
from him: we are all for the Platonist: but I cannot omit Serapis his answer
to Thules (the King of Egypt in the Trojan wars) who inquyring of him who was
most blessed, had this answer. (...), etc.
(...). etc.
First God and then the son, and next the spirit,
All coeternall, one in act, and merit. Serapis his answer.

(b) The son] Porphyry (explaning Plato's opinion, as Cyril says against
Iultan) puts three essences in the Deity: 1 God almighty. 2. the Creator. 3.
the soul of the world: nor is the deity extended any further. Plato and he
both, call the Creator (...), the fathers intellect, with the Poets (though
obscurely) touch at, calling Minerua (...), borne without a mother, the wisdom
brought forth out of the fathers brain* (c) Plotine] he w^ote a book of the
three persons or substances: y^. first he makes absolute, and father to the
second, that is also eternal and perfect. Plotine.
He calls the father Men's also in another place, as Plato does: but the word
arose from him: For he says (De prou^d. lib. 2.) in the beginning all this
whole universe was created by the Men's (the father) and his Word. (d) Alme]
religion tyeth us to have a care how we speak herein. (e) Sabellians] They
said that the person of the father, and ^f the Son (...). (...)* 24.
was all one, because the scripture says: I and the Father am one

Of the true only beginning that purges and renueth man's whole nature. CHAP.
24.
But Porphyry being slave to the malicious powers (of whom he was ashamed,
yet durst not accuse them) would not conceive that Christ was the beginning* by
whose incarnation we are purged, but contemned him in that flesh Pride (...)
one from light of the mystery of redemption.
which he assumed to be a sacrifice for our purgation, not apprehending the
great sacrament, because of his diuell-inspired pride, which Christ the good
Mediator by his own humility subverted, showing himself to mortals in that
mortal state which the false Mediators wanted, and therefore insulted the more
over men's wretcheds souls: falsely promising them succors from their
immortality. But our good and true Mediator made it apparent, that it was not
the fleshly substance, but sin that is evil: the flesh and soul of man may
be both assumed, kept, and put off without guilt, and be bettered at the
resurrection. Nor is death, though it be the punishment of sin (yet paid by
Christ for our sins) to be anoyded by sin, but rather, if occasion serve,
to be endured for justice. For Christ's dying, and that not for his own sin,
was of force to procure the pardon of all other sins. That he was the
beginning, this Platonist did not understand, else would he have confessed his
power in purgation. For neither the flesh nor the soul was the beginning, but
the word, all creating. Nor can the flesh purge (...) by it self, but by that
word that assumed it, when the word became flesh and dwells in us. For he
speaking of the mystical eating of his flesh (and some that understood not
being offended at it, and departing, saying: This is a hard saying, Io. 1. 14.
who can hear it?) Answered to those that staid with him: It is the spirit
that quickneth, the flesh profits nothing. Therefore the beginning, having
assumed flesh and Io. 6. 60.
soul, mundifieth both in the believer. And so when the Jews asked him who
he was, he answered them, that he was the (a) beginning, which our flesh and
blood being encumbered with sinful corruption, can never conceive, unless he
Io. 8. 25.
by whom we were, and were not, do purify us. We were men, but just we
were not. But in his incarnation our nature was, and that just, not sinful:
This is the mediation that helps up those that are fallen, and down: This is
the seed that the Angels sowed, by dictating the law wherein the true worship
of one God was taught and this our Mediator truly promised.

L VIVES.
THe (a) beginning] (...). Augustine will have the Son to be a beginning,
but no otherwise then the father, as no otherwise GOD. And this he takes (...)
for, Valla The (...).
and Erasmus say that (...) can be no nowne here, but an aduerbe, as, in the
beginning. I will speak my mind here of briefly: though the phraze be obscure
and perhaps an Hebraisme, as many in the new Testament are: Christ seems not
to say he is the beginning: but being asked who he was, he having no one
word to express his full nature to all their capacities, left it to each ones
mind to think in his mind what he was, not by his sight but by his words:
and to ponder how one in that bodily habit, could speak such things. It was
the Deity that spoke in the flesh, whence all those admirable acts proceeded.
Therefore he said, I am he (...) the beginning, and I speak to you using a
mortal body as an instrument, giving you no more precepts by angels, but by my
self. This answer was not unlike that, given to Moses; I am that I am: but
that concerned Gods simple essence and majesty, this was more later, and
declared God in the f^me of man.

That all the saints in the old law, and other ages before it, were justified
only by the mystery, and faith of Christ. CHAP. 25.
By the faith of this mystery might the ancient Saints of God also be
justified (together with godly life) not only before the law was given the
hebrews, (for they wanted not Gods instructions nor the Angels) but also in
the very (...) of the law, though they seemed to have carnal promises in the
types of spyr^al things, it being therefore called the old Testament. For
there were Prop^s then that taught the promise as well as the Angels, and one of
them was he ^se sacred opinion of man's good, I related before: It is good for
me to adhere vn^. ^s. 73. 28.
In which Psalm the two Testaments are distinguished. For first, he ^ng those
earthly promises abound so to the ungodly) says his (b) feet slipp^, and that
he was almost down, as if he had served God in vain, seeing that ^ty that
he hoped of God was bestowed upon the impious: and that he labored sore to
know the reason of this, and was much troubled until he entered into the
sanctuary of God, and there beheld their ends whom he, (in error) thought
happy. But then (c) as he says, he saw them east down in their ex^on, and
destroyed for their iniquity, and that all their pomp of temporal (...) was
become as a dream, leaving a man when he is awake, frustrate of ^ed joys he
dreamed off. And because they showed great here upon (...) (says he) In thy
City thou shall make their Image be held as nothing. (...) good it was for
him to seek those temporalties at none but Gods hands ^weth ^aying, I was as a
beast before thee, yet was I always with thee as a beast ^erstanding. For I
should have desired such goods as the wicked could not (...) with me: but
seeing them abound with goods, I thought I had served thee (...) end, when as
they that hated thee inioyed such felicity. Yet was I always with (...) fought
no other gods to beg these things upon. And then it follow^. Thou have
holden me by my right hand, thou have guided me by thy will, and have as^ into
glory. As if all that which he saw the wicked enjoy were belonging (...) left
hand, though seeing it, he had almost fallen. What have I in heaven but (...)
(says he?) And would I have upon earth but thee? Then he does check him^
justly, for having so great a good in Heaven (as afterward he understood)
(...) yet begging so transitory, frail and earthen a thing of God here below:
(d) (...) heart fails, and my flesh, but God is the God of mine heart. A good
failing, to (...) the lower and elect the loftyer. So that in another Psalm he
says: My soul Ps. 83.
^geth and faints for the Courts of the Lord. And in another: My heart
faints (...) thy saving health. But having said both heart and flesh
faints: he reioyned The flesh is cleansed by the heart.
not, The God of mine heart and flesh, but the God of my heart: for it is by
the heart that (...) ^sh is cleansed, (as the Lord says) Cleanse that which is
within, and then that (...) is without shall be clean: Then he calls God his
portion, not any thing of (...), but himself. God is the God of my heart, and
my portion for ever. Because (...) men's manifold choyces, he chose him only.
For (e) behold (says he) they (...) ^thdraw themselves from them, shall
perish: (f) thou destroyest al them that go (...) from thee, that is, that make
themselves prostitute unto many gods: and then ^owes that which is the cause I
have spoken all this of the Psalm: As for me, it is good for me to adhere unto
GOD, not to withdraw my self, nor to go a whoring. And then is our adherence
to God perfect, when all is freed that should be freed. But as we are now,
the hold is, I put my trust in the Lord God, for hope that is seen, is no
hope, how can a man hope for that which he sees, savth the Romans 8. 24.
Apostle. But when we see not our hope, then we expect with patience: wherein
let us do that which follows, each one according to his talent becoming an
Angel, a messenger of God, to declare his will, and praise his gracious glory.
That I may declare all thy works (says he) in the gates of the daughter of
Sion: This is that glorious City of God, knowing and honoring him alone: This
the Angels declared, inuiting us to inhabit it, and become their fellow
Citizens in it. They like not that we should worship them as our elected
Gods, but with them him that is God to us both: Nor to sacrifice to them: but
with them, be a sacrifice to him. Doubtless then, (if malice give men leave to
see the doubt cleared) all the blessed immortalls that envy us not (and if they
did, they were not blessed) but rather love us, to have us partners in their
happiness, are far more favorable and beneficial to us, when we join
with them in sacrificing our selves to the adoration of the Father, the Son
and the holy Spirit.

L. VIVES.
WHich (a) Psalm. 73. divinely soluing of this question of the Philosophers: Why
(one God ruling all) have the good so often hurt, and the bad so much good? Or
Epicurus his Dilemma: If there be a God, whence is evil? If none, whence is
good? Augustine recites some verses, and we will breefely interpose here and
there a word. (b) Feet slipped] or moved by the unworthy event, to take
another way, it seeming to him to have done so little good in this. (c) Them]
All things (says the wise man) are secret until the end, but then the good
life helps, and the bad, hurts: the one rewarded and the other plagued: for
then all appears in truth. (d) My heart.] A sanctified man in all his
troubles and faintings of strength and counsel, still keeps heart-hold of
God, making him his portion for ever: loose he all things, God he will never
loose. Augustine (me thinks) applies this to the defect of spirit, through the
vehement desire of celestial comfortes. For the soul will languish into much
love, and lose all the self in entyre speculation of that it affects. Or he
may mean, that although all bodily means of strength or state, do fail a
good man, yet his mind will still stick firmly unto God, and entertain a
contempt of all worldly wealth, and all gifts of wit, or fortune, in respect
of this God, this only riches, and heritage. (e) Behold] Therefore is it good
to adhere to him from whom who-soeuer departs, perishes. (f) Thou
destroyest] We ought to keep our soul chaste, as the spouse of God: which if
it go a whoring, after the desires and lusts of the world, neglecting God, he
casts it off as a man does his dishonest wife, and diuorceth it from him. And
this is the death of the soul, to leave the true life thereof.

Of Porphyry his wavering between confessing of the true God, and adoration of
the devils, CHAP. 26.
Me thinks Porphrry (I know not how) is ashamed of his Thevrgicall
acquaintance. He had some knowledge of good, but he durst not defend the
worship of one God, against the adoration of many. He said there were some
Angels, that came down and taught Theurgike practisers things to come: and
others that declared the will of the Father upon earth, and his altitude and
immensity. Now whether would he have us subject to those Angels that declare
the will of the Father vyon earth, or unto him whose will they declare. It Is
plain, he bids us rather imitate them then invoke them: why then we need
not fear to give no sacrifices to these blessed immortals, but refer it all
freely unto God. For questionless that which they know to be due to that God
only in whose participation they are blessed, they will never ascribe to
themselves either by figures or significations. This is arrogance proper to
the proud and miserable devils, from which the zeal of Gods subjects and such
as are blessed b^ coherence with him, ought to be far separate. To which
blessed coherence it behou^ ^e Angels to favor our attaynement, not arrogating
our subjection to (...), but declaring God the mean of both our coherences
unto us. Why fea^ thou now (Philosopher) to censure these adverse powers,
enemies both to the true God and true virtue? Thou said but (a) now that the
true Angels that re^le Gods will, do differ from them that descend unto men
that use Theurgicall ^rations. Why do thou honor them so much as to say
they teach divine ^ges? How can that be, teaching not the will of the Father?
(a) Those now are they whom the malicious Theurgike bound from purging the
soul of the good (...) Whom he could not loose, for all that they desired
to be let loose, and (...) (...) him some good. Doubtest thou yet that those
are wicked devils? Or do (...) ^ssemble for fear of offending the
Theurgikes, whose curiosity inueigled (...) so, that they made theee believe
they did thee a great pleasure in teaching (...) this damnable cunning? Dare
thou extol that maliciousplague (no pow^ (...) is a slave, and no regent over
the envious, above the air, into Heaven, and do the starry gods, or the
stars themselves such, foul disgrace as to place it amongst them.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) but now] The old copies read Distinxisti for Dixisti: but the sense
is not alte^ a tittle. (b) Those now] He had said before that the evil Demon
hinders the (...) ^at the first must depart ere the latter could come to work
effect. And of the Chal^ ^ome another malicious fellow hindered from being
purged in soul.

Of Porphyry his exeeding Apuleius in impiety. CHAP. 27.
^w much more tolerable was the error of Apuleius thy fellow sectary who ^on
fessed (spite of his teeth, for all his honoring of them) that the devils
(...) the Moon only were subject to perturbation! quitting the Gods aethere^
^th visible as the Sun, Moon, etc. And invisible also from these affects, by
all (...) arguments he could devise. Plato taught thee not this thine impiety,
but thy (...) masters, to thrust up mortal vices amongst the aethereall
powers, that the gods might instruct your Theurgike in divinity: which
notwithstanding thou in thine intellectual life make thy self excel: putting
art Theurgike as not necessary for thee, but for others that will be no
philosophers, yet you teach it, to repay (...) masters, in seducing those to
it that affect not Philosophy, yet holding it of (...) use for a Philosopher as
thou thy self art: So that all that fancy, not Phylo^, (which being hard to
attain is affected by few) might by thine autho^ inquire o^t Theurgikes, and
of them attain (no intellectual but) a spiritual ^cation. And because the
multitude of those, do far exceed the Phyloso^, therefore more are drawn to
thy unlawful Magical masters, then to (...) schools, for this the unclean
Devil (those counterfeyt aethereall ^es whose messenger thou art become)
promised thee, that such as were purged by Theurgy should never return to the
father, but inhabit (...) Christ (...) upon him whole m^n.
air amongst the aethereall gods. But those whom Christ came (...) (...)
those devilish powers, endure not this doctrine. For in him have (...) (...)
merciful purification of body, soul and spirit. For therefore put he on
(...) man without sin, to cleanse whole man from sin: I wish thou had
kno^ (...) him, and laid the cure of thy self upon him rather then upon thine
o^ne fra^e, weak virtue, or thy pernicious curiosity. For he which your own
(a) Oracles (as thou writest) acknowledged for holy and immortal, would never
have deceived thee. Of whom also that famous Poet says (Poetically indeed) as
under a another person, but with a true reference to him, (b) Te duce si qua
manent sceleris vestigia nostri
Irritaperpetua soluent formidine terras.
Thy conduct all sins marks from man shall clear,
And quit the world of their eternal fear.
Speaking of those steps of sin (if not sins) which by reason of our
infirmity may have residence in the great proficients of righteousness, and
are cured by none but Christ, of whom the verse speaks. For Virgill (c)
spoke it not of himself, as he shows about the fourth verse of his Eglogue,
where he says Vltima Cumaei venit iam carminis aetas: Virgil. E^. 4.

Time, and Sybilla's verse are now new met.
Plainly showing he had it from Sybilla Cumaea. But those Theurgikes (or
rather fiendes in the shapes of gods) do rather putrify the purify men's
hearts by their false aparitions, and deceiptfull illusion in change of forms.
For how should they cleanse another, being unclean themselves? Otherwise
could they not be bound by the charms of the envious, either to fear to
infect, or to envy to bestow the good they seemingly were about to do. But it
suffices that thou The Theurgikes cannot purge or cleanse (...) sp^.
confessest that neither the souls intellectual part is made pure, nor the
spiritual, (that is under the other part) eternal by art theurgike. But Christ
promises this eternity, and therefore (to thy own great admiration, and deep
grief) the World flocketh to him (d). What of that that thou can not deny
that the Theurgikes do often err and draw others into the same blindness,
and that it is a most plain error to become supplyant to those Angelical
power? And then (as though thou had not lost thy labor in the former
assertion) thou sendest such as live not intellectually to the Theurgikes to
be purged in the minds spiritual part.

L. VIVES.
YOur (a) Oracles] Of this in the 20. book. (b) Te duce] Seruius refers all
this eglogue to the civil wars in Assinius Pollio's Consulship, that in his
time they should end, and all the fear be exti^ct. But they out-lasted him.
He was Consul with Domitius Aenobarb^, the fourth veare of his Triumvirship.
(c) Spoke it not] The whole eglogue is nothing but Sy^ verses, which being
Enygmatically spoken of Christ, and the time touched in certain misti^ tokens,
Virgill observing it to be near hand, thought they meant some of the Rom^
Princes, and ^o attributes them to Saloninus Pollio's son. (d) What of] Or,
which because thou can not deny, thou do so falter in thy doctrine, and
contrary thy self, that first the teach that the Theurgikes etc. And this
is the better reading of the two.

What persuasions blinded Porphiry from knowing Christ the true wisdom. CHAP.
28.
THus drawest thou men into most certain error, and (a) art not ashamed of it
being a professor of virtue and wisdom, which if thou truly respected, thou
would have known Christ the virtue, and wisdom, of god the father, and not
(b) have left his saving humility for the pride of vain knowledge. Yet thou
confessest that the virtue of (c) continence only, without Theurgy, and with
those Teletae (thy frutlesse studies) is sufficient to purge the soul
spiritually. And once thou said that the Teletae eleuate not the soul after
death as they do now, nor benefit the spiritual part of the soul after this
life: and this (d) thou tossest, and tumblest, only (I think) to show thy
self skillful in those matters, and to please curious ears, or to make others
curious. But thou do well to say this art is dangerous both (e) for the laws
against it, and for the (f) performance of it. I would to God that wretched men
would hear thee in this, and leave the gulf, or never come near it, for
fear of being swallowed up therein. Ignorance (thou say) and many vices
annexed thereunto, are not purged away by any Teletae but only by the fathers
intellect, his Men's, that knows his will. But that this is Christ thou
beleeuest not: contemning him for assuming flesh of a woman; for being
crucified like a fellon, because thou think it was fit that the eternal
wisdom should contemn those base things, and be imbodied in a most elevated
substance. I but he fulfills that of the prophet, I will destroy the wisdom
of the wise, 1. Cor. Abd. 1. Esaias. 33.
and cast away the understanding of the prudent. He does not destroy his
wisdom in such as he has given it unto, but, that which others ascribe to
themselves, who have none of his, and therefore the Apostle follows the
prophetical testimony, thus, where is the wise? Where is the Scribe? where is
the (g) disputer of the (...) ^ath not God made the wisdom of this world
foolishness? for seeing the world The wisdom of the word foolishness.
by wisdom knew not God in the wisdom of God, it pleased God by the
foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. Seeing also that the Jews
require a sign, and the Grecians seek after wisdom. But we preach Christ
crucified, a stumbling block unto the Jews, and foolishness unto the
Grecians. But unto them that (h) are called both Jews and Grecians we preach
Christ, the power, and wisdom of God: for the (i) foolishness of God is wiser
then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men. This now the wise and
strong in their own conceit do account as foolish, and weak. But this is the
grace that cures the weak, and such as boast not proudly of their false
happiness, but humbly confess their true misery.

L. VIVES.
ARt not (a) ashamed. An old phrase in the latin, malum non te pudet. (b) Have
left.] For he was first of our religion, and afterward fell from it, and
railed at it like a mad man. (c) C^ce.] De abst. animal. Continence and
frugality eleuate the soul and adioyne it unto God. But Plato is far more
learned and elegant upon this point in his Charmides: showing (...) temperance
purges the mind, and is the only cure of an infected conscience, that no ^er
enchantments can cleanse the soul from corruption. (d) Tossest.] Porphyry is
most ab^ in his Tantologies, as we may see in that common book of his de
predicabilibus. (e) For the laws.] Plato for bad it, and the civil laws do
so also, sub pana. (f) Performance.] Being ^gerous if it be failed in: for the
Devils will be angry, and do the imperfect magitian much mischief, as many
horrible examples have testified: for they love perfect impiety, from (...)
there is no regresse unto piety. Therefore they terrify men there unto. (g)
Disputer (...) and naturalist, (...), and is referred to the Philosophers
immoderate iang^* (h) (...) To godliness and piety, and made Citizens of God,
(i) Foolishnesse] Uulgarius (...) cross foolish, because it seemed so: yet is
it wiser then men; for the Philosophers kept a (...) about trifles and
superfluities, whilst the cross produced the worlds redemption. An^ (...)
deity seemed weak in being nailed to the cross: yet is it far more strong
then (...) not only because the more we seek to suppress it, the more it
mounteth and sprea^ but also because the strongest devil was bound and crushed
down by CHRIST in (...) weak form.

Of the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, which the impious Platonists
shame to acknowledge. CHAP. 29.
THou teach the Father and his Son, calling him his intellect, and their
mean (by which we think thou meanest the holy spirit) calling them after
your manner, three Gods. Wherein though your words be extrauagant, yet you
have a little glympse of that we must all rely upon. But the incarnation of
the unchangeable Son, that saves us all, and brings us all to that other
which we believe and rely upon, that you shame to confess. You see your true
country (though a long, long way off) and yet you will not see which way to get
thither. Thou confessest that the grace to understand the deity, is given to a
very few. Thou say not, few like it, or few desire it; but, is given to a
few, fully confessing the gift of it to lie in Gods bounty, and not in man's
sufficiency. Now thou playest the true (a) Platonist and speak plainer,
saying, That no man in this life can come to perfection of Wisdom: yet that
Gods grace and providence does fulfill all that the understanding lacks, in
the life to come. O had thou known Gods grace resident in Jesus Christ our
Lord! O that thou could have discerned his assuming of body and soul to be
the greatest example of grace that ever was! But what? in vain do I speak to
the dead: But as for those that esteem thee for that wisdom or curiosity in
arts, unlawful for thee to learne^ perhaps this shall not be in vain. Gods
grace could never be more grace^y extolled, then when the eternal son of
God, came to put on man, and made man the mean to derive his love to all men:
whereby all men might come to him, who was so far above all men, being
compared to them, immortal to mortal, unchangeable to changeable, just to
unjust, and blessed to wretched. And because he has given us a natural
desire to be eternally blessed, he remaining blessed, and putting on our
nature, to give us what we desired, taught us by suffering to contemn what
we feared. But humility, humility a butthen unacquainted with your stiff
necks, must be the mean to bring you to credence of this truth. For what,
can it seem incredible to you (that know such things, and ought to inioyne
your selves to believe it) can i^ seem incredible to you, that GOD should
assume man's nature and body? you give so much to the intellectual part of the
soul (being b^ human) that you make it consubstantiall with the Fathers
intellect, which you confess is his Son. How then is it incredible for that
Son^ to assume one intellectual soul to save a many of the rest by? Now
nature teaches us the cohaerence of the body and the soul to the making of a
f^ man. Which if it were not ordinary were more incredible then the other. For
we may the more easily believe that a spirit may cohere with a spirit (being
both incorporcall, though the one human, and the other divine) then a
corporal body with an incorporeall spirit. But are you offended at the strange
childbirth of a Virgin? This ought not to procure offense, but rather pious
admiration, that he was so wonderfully borne. Or dislike you that he changed
his body after death and resurrection into a better, and so carried it up into
heaven being made incorruptible, and immortal? This perphappes you will not
believe, because Porphyry says so often in his work De regressu aniae,
(whence I have cited much) that the soul must leave the body entirely, ere it
can be joined with God. But that opinion of his ought to be retracted, seeing
that both he and you do hold such incredible things of the worlds soul
animating the huge mass of the bodily universe. For Plato (b) teaches you to
call the world a creature, a blessed one, and you would have it an eternal
one. Well then how shall it be eternally happy, and yet never put off the body,
if your former rule be true? Besides, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, you all
say, are creatures, which all men both see, and say also. But your skill (you
think) goes farther: calls them blessed creatures, and eternally with their
bodies. Why do you then forget or dissemble this, when you are invited to
Christianity, which you otherwise teach and profess so openly? why will you
not leave your contradictory opinions (subuerting themselves) for
christianity, but because Christ came humbly, and you are all pride? Of what
quality the Saints bodies shall be after resurrection, may well be a question
amongst our greatest christian doctors, but we all hold they shall be
eternal, (c) and such as Christ showed in his resurrection. But how-so-euer
seeing they are taught to be incorruptible, immortal, and no impediment to
the souls contemplation of God, and you your selves say that they are
celestial bodies immortally blessed with their souls; why should you think
that we cannot be happy without leaving of our bodies, (to pretend a reason
for avoiding christianity) but only as I said, because Christ was humble, and
you are proud? Are you ashamed to be corrected in your faults? a true
character of a proud man. You that were Plato's (d) learned scholars, shame to
become Christ's, who by his spirit taught a fisher wisdom to say, In the
beginning (...) the word, and the word was with God and GOD was the word. The
same was in the beginning with God: all things were made by it, and without it
was made nothing (e) that was made. In it was life, and the life was the light
of men. And the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehended
it not. (f) Which beginning of Saint John's Gospel, a certain Platonist (as
old holy (g) Simplictanus afterward Bishop of Millaine told me) said was
fit to be written in letters of gold, and set up to be read in the highest
places of all Churches. But those proud fellows scorn to have GGD their
Master, because the word became (...), and dwelt in us. Such a thing of
nothing it is for the wretched to be sick and weak, but they must axalt
themselves in their sickest weakness, and shame to take the only medicine
that must cure them: nor do they this to rise, but to (...) a more wretched
fall.

L. VIVES.
TRue (a) ^latonist Plato in Phaed. and Epinon, hereof already, book the 8.
(b) Teaches in his Timaeus. (c) And such.] Sound, incorruptible, immortal,
pertaking with the soul in happiness. Phillip. 3. We look for the savior,
even the Lord Jesus Christ who shall change our vile body that (...) may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body. etc. ver. 21. (d) Learned.] What an
insolent thing is it to boast of wisdom? As if Plato were ashamed of his
Master Socrates that said, he knew nothing? and did not glory in all his life
that he was scholar to that stone cutters son, and that all his wisdom
whatsoever was his Masters? And as if Socrates himself (in Plato and
Xenophon chief founders of that discipline) did not refer, much of his
knowledge to Aspasia and Diotima his two women instructers, (e) That was made.]
The point is so in the greek as we have lest it: as if the world should become
nothing but for the care of the creator, as the Philosophers held. The Coleyn
copy also points it so, but we must let this alone, as now. (f) Which
beginning.] Augustine Confess. lib. 8. says that he had read the beginning of
Saint John's Gospel. In the beginning was the word, In Plato, but not in the
same words. Amelius the Platonist says. And this was that word, by which all
things were made, that were made, yet being eternal (as Heraclitus says) and
disposed in their order and dignity with god (as the other Barbarian held) that
word was God, and with God, and by it was all things made, and it was the life
and being of all things that were made, thus far Amelius, calling Saint John
a barbarian. But we teach it out of Plato, that by the word of God were
althings made, and out of Plotine that the Son of God is the creator:
Numerius will not have the first; God to be the creator, but the second. (g)
Simplicianus.] Bishop of Millaine, a friend of Augustines, between whom many
letters were written. He being but as yet a Priest, exhorted, Augustine, to use
his wit in the study of holy writ. Gennad. Catolog. viror* illustr.

What opinions of Plato, Prophiry confuted, and corrected. CHAP. 30.
IF it be unfit to correct ought after Plato, why does Porphiry correct such,
and so many of his doctrines? (a) Sure it is that Plato held a transmigration
of men's souls into beasts: yet though (b) Plato the learned held thus,
Porphiry his scholar justly refuted him, holding that men's souls returned no
more to the bodies they once left, but into other humane bodies. He was
ashamed to believe the other, least the mother, living in a mule, should carry
her son; but never shamed to believe the later, though the mother living in
some other maid might beecome her sons wife. But how far better were it to
believe the sanctified and true Angels, the holy inspired prophets; him that
taught the coming of Christ, and the blessed Apostles, that spread the gospel
through the world? how far more honestly might we believe that the souls
return but once into their own bodies: rather then so often into others? But
as I said, Porphiry reclaimed this opinion much in subuerting those bestial
transmigrations, and restraining them only to human bodies. He says also
that God gave the world a soul, that it learning the badnesse of the corporal
substance by inhabiting it, might return to the father, and desire no more to
be joined to such contagion. Wherein though he err something (for the soul is
rather given to the body to do good by, nor should it learn any evil but that
it does evil,) yet herein he exceeds, corrects all the Platonists, in houlding
that the soul being once purified and placed with the father, shall never more
suffer worldly inconvenience. Where he overthrows one great Platonisme: viz.
that the dead are continually made of the living and the living of the dead:
proving that (c) Platonical position of Virgill false, where he says that the
souls being purified. and sent unto the Elisian fields (under which fabulous
name they figured the joys of the blessed) were brought to drink of the river
Lethe that is to forget things past. Scilicet immemores supera vt conuexa
reuisent
Rursus and incipiant in corpora velle reuerti.
The thought of heaven is quite out of the brain.
Now gin the wish to live on earth again.
Porphiry justly disliked this, because it were foolish to believe that men
being in that life which the only assurance of eternity makes most happy,
should desire to see the corrupton of mortality, as if the end of purification
were still to return to n^w pollution, for if their perfect purification
require a forgetfulness of all evils: and that forgetfulness produce a
desire in them to be imbodied again, and consequently to be again corrupted,
Truly the height of happyinesse, shall be the cause of the greatest
unhappiness: the perfection of wisdom the cause of foo^nesse, and the
fulness of purity, mother unto impurity. Nor can the ^oule e^r be blessed,
being still deceived in the blessedness: to be blessed it must be se^e: to be
secure it must believe it shall be ever blessed, and that falsely, because it
must sometimes be wretched: wherefore if this joy must needs rise of a false
cause, how can it be truly joyful? This Prophiry saw well, and therefore held
that the souls once fully purified returned immediately to the Father, least it
should be any more polluted with the contagion of earthly and corruptible
affects.

L. VIVES.
SV^ (a) it is.] Plato, Pythagorizing, held that the souls after death passed
into other bo^ ^n his Timaeus, an^ his last de Repub. and in his Phaedrus also,
in which last he pro^ds the necessity of the Adrastian law, commanding every
soul, that has had any true sp^lation of God to pass straight to the
superior circle without impediment: and if it persevere there, then is it to
become blessed eternally, continuing the former course, but if it ^ge that, and
fall under the touch of punishment, then must it return to a body. And if it
(...) (...) come to those aforesaid degrees, then the knowledge makes it a
Philosopher, the next degree under it, a King, Emperor, or valiant man: the
third, a magistrate, or the father of a (...): the fourth, a Physician or
chirurgian: the fifth, a Priest or a Prophet, the sixth, a poet, the ^nth a
tradesman, or an husband man: the eight, a Sophister, or guilder, the ninth a
ty^. Thus do souls pass unto life and passing that well, are exalted, if not
depressed, for it is 10000. years ere the soul return to his first state: no
soul recouereth his broken wings be^ that time, but he that has been a true
Philosopher; for he that passes three courses so, shall be reinstalled at
3000. years end: for the rest, some of them shall be bound under the earth in
pains, and others invested with bliss in heaven, at the prefixed time of
iudgm^, but all shall return to life after a 1000. years, and each one shall
have his choice, so that some that were men before, become beasts, and some
that were beasts before, men, if so be that they were ever men before: for
that soul that never looked upon truth, shall never have (...) form. This is
Platonisme. Now Plato speaking of these choices, in his last de repub, says
that their election still flolloweth the fashions of their former lives. So
that Orpheus his soul chose a swan to live in, nor would become a woman for
his hate of them. Thamiris soul went (...) a nightingale, and a swans soul
went into a man: Ajax into a lion, Agamemnon into (...) ^gle, and Thersites
into an ape. (b) Plato.] Some read, Plotine. Prophyry writes that in the (...)
year of Gallienus his reign he came into Italy, Plotine being then fifty
years of age, (...) that he heard him five years. And Plotine was a direct
Platonist in this theme of trans^gration of souls. So that both their names
may well be recited in the text. (c) Platonicall.] Plato de Rep. li. 10. says,
that the souls go into the l^thean field, wherein grows nothing, and there
they all ly down and drink of the river Amelita, and those that drink
largly, forget al things. (Amelita indeed is oblivion, or neglect of things
past,) this done they fall a sleep, and about midnight, a great thunder
awaketh them, and so they return to life. Anchises in Uirgil Amelita.
speaks of these in this manner. Has omnes vbi mill rotam voluere per annos,
Lethaum ad fluuium Deus euocat, agmine maguo,
Scilicet immemores etc. --
And when the thousand years are come and gone,
God calls them all to Letha, every one.
So they forget what is past, and respect not what is to come: and this they
do not willingly but of necessity.

Against the Platonists holding the soul coeternall with God. CHAP. 31.
But altogether erroneous was that opinion of some Platonists importing the
continual and (a) necessary revolution of souls from this or that, and to it
again: which if it were true, what would it profit us to know it? unless the
Platonists will prefer themselves before us, because we know not that they
are to be made most wise in the next life, and blessed by their false belief?
If it be absurd and foolish to affirm this, then is Porphyry to be preferred
before all those transporters of souls from misery to bliss, and back again:
which if it be true, then here is a Platonist, refuses Plato for the better:
and sees that which he saw not, not refusing correction after so great a
master, but preferring truth before man, and man's affection. Why then do we
not believe divinity in things above our capacity, which teaches us that the
soul is not coeternall with God, but created by God? The Platonists refuse,
upon this (seeming sufficient) reason, that that which has not been for ever,
cannot be for ever. I but Plato says directly that both the world, and the
gods, made by that great GOD in the world, had a beginning, but shall have no
end, but by the will of the creator, endure for ever. But they have a (b)
meaning for this, they say this beginning concerned not time, but substitution:
for (c) even as the foot (say they) if it had stood eternally in the dust, the
foote-step should have been eternal also, yet no man but can say, some foot
made this step; nor should the one be before the other, though one were made by
the other: So the world, and the God there-in have been ever coeternall with
the creators eternity, though by him created. Well then, put case the soul
be and has been eternal; has the souls misery been so also? Truly if
there be something in the soul that had a temporal beginning, why might not
the soul it self have a beginning also? And then the beatitude, being firmer
by trial of evil, and to endure for ever, questionless had a beginning,
though it shall never have end. So then the position that nothing can be
endless that had a temporal beginning, is quite ouer-throwne. For the
blessedness of the soul has a beginning but it shall never have end. Let our
weakness therefore yield unto the divine authority, and us trust those holy
immortalls in matter of religion, who desire no worship to themselves, as
knowing all is peculiar to their and our God: nor command us to sacrifice but
unto him to whom (as I said often) and must so still) they and we both are a
sacrifice to be offered, by that priest that took our manhood, and in that
this priesthood upon him, and sacrificed himself even to the death for us.

L. VIVES.
ANd (a) necessary] Plato subjects the soul both in the body, and without the
body unto the power of the fates, that after the revolution of life, death must
come: and after the purification of the soul, life again: making our time in
the body, uncertain, but freeing us from the body a 1000. years. This
revolution they held necessary, because God creating but a se^nu^ber of souls
in the beginning the world should otherwise want men to inhabit it, it being
so (...), and we so mortal. This, Virgill more expressly calls a wheel, which
being once turned about, restores the life that it abridged: and another
turning, taking it away again, both br^ things to one course. This from death
to death, that, from life to life: but that works by death, and this by life.
(b) A meaning] It is well known that Plato held that God created Plato's
opinion of the worlds crea^on.
the world. But the question is, whether it began temporally, some years ago,
or had no tem^ll beginning. Plutarch, Atticus, and Seuerus held that Plato's
world had a beginning ^porall, but was never to have end: But Crantor, Plotine,
Porphyry, Iamblichus, Proculus and (...) (all Platonists) thought that it never
began, nor never should have end. So does (...), adjoining this and
Pythagoras his opinion in one, for Plato, Pythagorized in all na^ questions.
This Cicero, Iustine Martyr and Boethius do subscribe unto also. Plato (^th
Apuleius de deo* Socrat.) held all these gods to be true, incorporeall living
and eternal: (...) neither beginning nor end. Yet Apuleius in his Dogma
Platonis, affirms that Pla^ taught uncertainly concerning the worlds
beginning, saying one while, it had an origi^, and another while, it had none.
(c) Even as] Our Philosophers disputing of an (...) that is coequall in time
and being with the cause, compare them to the Sun and the (...) light.

Of the universal way of the souls freedom, which Porphyry sought amiss,
and therefore found not: that only Christ has declared it. CHAP. 32.
THis is the religion that contains the universal way of the souls freedom:
^or no where else is it found but herein. This is the (a) Kings high way that
leads The Kings l^gh way.
to the eternal dangerlesse Kingdom, to no temporal or transitory one. And
^reas Porphyry says in the end of his first book, De regressu animae, that
there (...) (...) one sect yet, either truly Philosophical, (b) Indian or
Chaldaean that teachet^ this universal way: and that he has not had so much
as any historical rea^ of it, yet he confesses that such an one there is,
but what it is he knows (...) (So insufficient was all that he had learnt,
to direct him to the souls true ^me and all that himself held, or others
thought him hold: for he obser^ want of an authority fit for him to follow) But
whereas he says that (...) of the true Philosophy ever had notice of the
universal way of the souls (...), he shows plain that either his own
Philosophy was not true, or else (...) (...) wanted the knowledge of this way,
and then, still, how could it be true? for (...) universal way of freeing the
souls is there but that which freeth all souls, (...) co^nsequently without
which none is freed? But whereas he adds Indian or Chaldaean, he gives a
clear testimony, that neither of their doctrines contai^ this way of the
souls freedom yet could not he co^ceale, but is still a telling (...) (...)
from the Chaldaeans had he the divine oracles. What universal way (...) does
he mean, that is neither received in Philosophy nor into those Pa^
disciplines that had such a stroke with him in matters of divinity, (because
(...) with them did the curious fond superstition, invocation of all Angels)
(...) which he never had so much as read of? What is that universal way, not
peculiar to every particular nation but common to (c) all the world and given
to it by the power of God? Yet this witty Philosopher knew that some such way
there is was. For he believes not that Gods providence would leave mankind
without a mean of the souls freedom. He says not, there is no such, but
that so great and good an help is not yet known to us, nor unto him: no
meruell: for Prophyry was yet all (d) for the world, when that universal way
of the souls freedom, christianity, was suffered to be opposed, by the
devils and their servants earthly powers, to make up the holy number of
Martires (e) that is, witnesses of the truth, who might show that all corporal
tortures were to be endured for advancement of the truth of piety. This
Porphyry saw, and thinking persecution would soon extinguish this way,
therefore held not this the universal, not conceiving that that which he
stuck at, and feared to endure in his choice, belonged to his greater
commendation and confirmation. This therefore is that universal way of the
souls freedom, that is granted unto all nations out of Gods mercy, the
knowledge whereof comes, and is to come unto all men: we may not, nor any
hereafter, say, why (f) comes it, so soon, or, why so late, for his wisdom
that does send it, is unsearchable unto man. Which he well perceived when he
said, it was not yet received, or known unto him: he denied not the truth
thereof, because he as yet, had it not. This I say is the way that will free
all believers, wherein Abraham trusting, received that divine promise, In thy
seed shall all the nations be blessed. Abraham^ as a Chaldaean, Genes. 22
but for to receive this promise, that the seed which was disposed by the
Angels in the mediators power, to give this universal way of the souls
freedom unto all nations, he was commanded to leave his own land and kindred,
and his fathers house. And then was he first freed from the Chaldaean
superstitions, and served the true God, to whose promise he firmly trusted.
This is the way recorded in the Prophet. God be merciful unto us and bless
us: and show us the light of his countenance and be merciful unto us. That
thy way may be known upon earth: thy Psalm. 60
saving health among all nations. And long aft^r. Abraham's seed being
incarnate, Christ says of himself, I am the way, the truth and the life. This
is the universal way, mentioned so long before by the Prophets. It shall be in
the last days that the John 14 Esaias 2
(g) mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills and all nations shall fly unto
it. And many people shall go and say, come let us go up to the mountain of
the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his way, and
we will walk therein. For the law shall go forth of Syon, and the word of
the LORD from Jerusalem. This way therefore is not peculiar to some one nation
but common to all. Nor did the law, and word of God stay in Jerusalem, or Syon,
but come from thence to ouerspread all the world. Thereupon the mediator being
risen from death said unto his amazed and amated disciples. Al things must be
fulfilled which are written of me in the law, the Prophets and the Psalms.
Then opened he their understanding, that they might understand the scriptures,
saying, thus it behooued CHRIST to suffer and to rise again from the dead the
third day: and that repentance and remission of Luke 24
sins should be preached in his name amongst all nations beginning at
Jerusalem. This then is the universal way of the souls freedom, which the
Saints and Prophets (being at first but a few as God gave grace, and those
all Hebrews, for that estate was in a (h) manner consecrated) did both
adumbrate in their temple, sacrifice and Priesthood, and foretold also in
their prophecy, often mistically, and sometimes plainly. And the Mediator
himself and his Apostles, revealing the grace of the new testament, made
plain all those significations, that success of precedent times had retained,
as it pleased God, the miracls which I spoke of before evermore giving
confirmation to them. For they had not only angelical visions, and saw the
ministers of heaven, but even these simple men relying wholly upon Gods word,
cast out devils, cured diseases, (i) commanded wildbeasts, waters, birds,
trees, elements, and stars, raised the dead. I except the miracles, peculiar
to our Savior, chiefly in his birth, and resurrection, showing in the first,
the mystery of (k) maternall virginity, and in the other the example of our
renouation. This way cleanses every soul, and prepares a mortal man in
every part of his, for immortality. For least that which Prophyry calls the
intellect should have one purgation, the spirital another, and the body
another, therefore did our true and powerful Savior take all upon him.
Besides this way, (which has never failed mankind, either (l) in prophecies,
or in their (m) performances) no man has ever had freedom, or ever has or
ever shall have. And whereas Porphyry says he never had any historical notice
of this way, what history can be more famous then this that looks from such a
towering authority, down, upon all the world? or more faithful, since it so
relates things past, as it prophecyeth things to come: a great part whereof
we see already performed, which gives us assured hope of the fulfilling of
the rest. Porphyry, nor ever a Platonist in the world can contemn the
predictions of this way, (albee they concern but temporal affairs) as they
do all other prophecies and diuinations of what sort soever: for them, they
say they neither are spoken by worthy men, nor to any worthy purpose: true, for
they are either drawn from inferior causes, as (...) can presage much (n)
concerning health, upon such or such signs: or cls the unclean spirits
foretell the arts that they have already disposed of, (o) confirming the
minds of the guilty and wicked, with deeds fitting their words, or words
fitting their deeds, to get themselves a domination in man's infirmity. But the
holy men of this universal way of ours never respect the prophesying of those
things, holding them justly, trifles: yet do they both know them and often
foretell them to confirm the faith in things beyond sense, and hard to
present unto plainness. But they were other, and greater matters which they,
(as God inspired them) did prophecy: namely the incarnation of Christ, and all
things thereto belonging, and fulfilled in his name, repentance and conversion
of the will unto God, remission of sins, the grace of justice, faith, and
increase of believers throughout all the world, destinction of Idolatry,
temptation for trial, mundifying of the proficients, freedom from evil, the
day of judgment, resurrection, damnation of the wicked, and glorification of
the City of GOD in (...) eternal Kingdom. These are the prophecies of them of
this way: many are fullfilled, and the rest assuredly are to come. That this
straight way, leading to the knowledge and coherence of GOD, lies plain in
the holy scriptures, upon whose truth it is grounded: they that believe not
(and therefore know not) may oppose this but can never overthrow it: And
therefore in these ten books I (...) spoken (by the good assistance of GOD)
sufficient in sound judgments, (though some expected more) against the impious
contradictors, that prefer (...) gods before the founder of the holy city
whereof we are to dispute. The (...) five of the ten, opposed them that adored
their gods for temporal respects: A rec^pitulation of the former ten book^.
(...) five later, against those that adored them for the life to come. It
remains now according as we promised in the first book, to proceed in our
discourse of the two cities that are confused together in this world and
distinct in the other, of whose original, progress and consummation, I now
enter to dispute, e^ ^oking the assistance of the almighty.

L. VIVES.
Kings (a) high] or road: the Kings, the Pr^tors, and the Soldiors way the
laws held holy. (b) Indian] The Gymnosophists, and the Brachmans, much
recorded for admirable deeds and doctrine. (c) All the world] Therefore is our
faith called Catholic, because it was not (...) (...).
taught to any peculiar nation, as the Jews was, but to all mankind excluding
none: all may be saved by it, and none can without it: nor has every nation
herein (as they have in Paganism) a several religion. But for the other, the
Romans had those gods and this worship, and the Grecians others: the French
others from theirs, Spain, Scythia, India, Persia, all several. B^ all that
profess CHRIST have one GOD, and one sacrifice (d) All for the world] Living
under Diocletian, a sore persecutor of Christianity. (e) Witnesses] (...), is a
witness. (f) ^hy c^eth] Why came it not ere now? or so. (g) Mountaine] Some
books, leave out, of (...) ^se* the 70. read it (...), etc. the mount of the
Lord and house of our God. (h) I^ ^er] It was the beginning, or seminary of
Gods Church. (i) Commanded] Some add, the devils to depart: but it is
needless. (k) Maternall] The mystery is that nothing that o^ Savior touched,
is stained, or corrupted. (l) In prophecies] In Moses law. (m) Performances]
In our law, by Apostles, and other holy Preachers. (n) Concerning health] Or,
to befall the health, better. (o) Confirming] or, the rule of which they
challenge to themselves, in fitting wicked a^fections with correspondent
effects. For they can use their powers of nature far m^re knowingly then we,
in procuring health or sickness.

Finis lib 10.
THE CONTENTS OF THE eleventh book of the City of God.
(...). Of that part of the work wherein the de^ion of the beginnings and ends
of the ^es, the Heavenly and Earthly are de^ (...) Of the knowledge of God,
which none can (...), but through the Mediator between ^d Man, the Man Christ
Jesus. (...) Of the authority of the canonical scrip^ ^de by the spirit of
God. (...) ^at the state of the world is neither e^, nor ordained by any new
thought of (...) ^f he meant that after, which he meant ^re. (...) ^at we ought
not to seek to comprehend ^te spaces of time or place ere the world (...).
(...) That the World and Time had both one ^g, nor was the one before the
other. (...) Of the first six days that had morning, ^g ere the Sun was
made. (...) (...) we must think of Gods resting the (...) after his six days
work. (...) ^is to be thought of the qualities of (...) ^ording to scripture.
(...) ^e uncompounded unchangeable (...) Father, the Son and the Holy (...)
God in substance and quality, ever (...) same. (...) ^ether the Spirits that
fell did ever (...) the Angels in their bliss at their (...) (...) (...)
happiness of the just, that ^as yet (...) (...) reward of the divine promise
com^ the first men of Paradise, before sins (...) (...) Whether the Angels
were created in (...) of happiness that neither those that (...) ^hey should
fall, nor those that perseue^ ^ew they should persevere. (...) (...) this is
meant of the devil. He a^ in the truth, because there is no (...) him. (...)
The meaning of this place. The devil (...) from the beginning. (...) Of the
different degrees of creatures, (...) ^ble use and reasons order do differ. 17.
That the vice of malice is not natural but against nature, following the will
not the Creator in sin. 18. Of the beauty of this universe, augmented by Gods
ordinance, out of contraries. 19. The meaning of that. God separated the light
from the darkness. 20. Of that place of scripture, spoken after the
separation of the light and darkness. And God saw the light, that it was
good. 21. Of Gods eternal unchanging will and knowledge, wherein he pleased to
create al things in form, as they were created. 22. Concerning those that
disliked some of the good Creators creatures, and thought some things naturally
evil. 23. Of the error that Origin incurreth. 24. Of the divine Trinity,
notifying it self (in some part) in all the works thereof. 25. Of the
tripartite division of all philosophical discipline. 26. Of the Image of the
Trinity, which is in some sort in every man's nature, even before his
glorification. 27. Of Essence, knowledge of Essence, and love of both. 28.
Whether we draw nearer to the Image of the holy Trinity in loving of that love,
by which we love to be, and to know our being. 29. Of the Angels knowledge of
the Trinity in the Deity, and consequently, of the causes of things in the
Archetype, ere they come to be effected in works. 30. The perfection of the
number of six, the first is complete in all the parts. 31. Of the seventh
day, the day of rest, and complete perfection. 32. Of their opinion that held
Angels to be created before the world. 33. Of the two different societies of
Angels, not unfitly termed light, and darkness. 34. Of the opinion that
some held, that the Angels were meant by the severed waters, and of others that
held waters uncreated.
FINIS.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD. Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of that part of the work wherein the demonstration of the beginings and ends
of the two Cities, the heavenly and the earthly, are declared. CHAP. 1.
WE give the name of the City of GOD unto that society whereof that scripture
bears witness, which has gotten the most excellent authority and
pre-eminence of all other works whatsoever, by the disposing of the divine
providence, not the affectation of men's judgments. For there it is said:
Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God: (...). ^7. 2 (...). 4^. 1
and in an other place, Great As the LORD, and greatly to be praised, in the
City of our God even upon his holy mountain, increasing the joy of all the
earth. And by and by in the same Psalm: As we have heard so have we seen in
the City of the Lord of Hoastes, in the City of our God: God ^th established
it for ever and in another. The rivers streams shall make glad the City of
God, the most high has sanctified his tabernacle, God is in the midst of it,
vn^ed. (...). ^6
These testimonies, and thousands more, teach us that there is a City of God,
whereof his inspired love makes us desire to be members. The earthly
citizens prefer their Gods before this heavenly Cities holy founder, knowing
not that he is the God of gods, not of those false, wicked, and proud ones,
(which wanting his light so universal and unchangeable, and being thereby
cast into an extreme needy power, each one follows his own state, as it
were, and begs peculiar honors of his servants) but of the Godly, and holy
ones, who select their own submission to him, rather then the worlds to them,
and love rather to worship him, their God, then to be worshipped for gods
themselves. The foes of this holy City, our former ten books (by the help of
our Lord and King) I hope have fully ^ffronted. And now, knowing what is next
expected of me, as my promise, viz. to dispute (as my poor talent stretches)
of the original, progress, and consummation of the two Cities that in this
worldly confusedly together: (...) the assistance of the same God, and King of
ours, I set pen to paper: intending (...) (...) show the beginning of these
two, arising from the difference between (...) ^gelical powers.

Of the ^ledge of God, which none can attain but through the mediator between
God and man, the Man Christ Jesus. CHAP. 2.
IT is a gr^, and admirable thing for one to transcend all creatures corporal
or incorporall, frail and mutable, by speculation; and to attain to the Deity
it self, and learn of that, that it made all things that are not of the
divine essence. For so does God teach a man, speaking not by any corporal
creature vn^ (...) ^erberating the air between the ear, and the speaker: nor
by any (...) nature, or apparition, as in dreams, or otherwise. For so he
does How God speaks unto man.
(...) unto bodily ears, and as by a body, and by breach of air and distance.
(...) are very like bodies. But he speaks by the truth, if the ears of the
(...) ready, and not the body. For he speaks unto the best part of the (...)
and that wherein God only does excel him, and understand a man (...) fashion,
you cannot then but say, he is made after Gods Image, being (...) God only by
that part wherein he excels his others, which he ^ed with him by beasts.
But yet the mind (a) it self (wherein reason and (...) ^ding are natural
inherents) is weakened, and darkened by the mist of in^ ^ror, and diss-enabled
to enjoy by inherence (b) nay even to endure that (...) light, until it be
gradually purified, cured, and made fit for such an (...) therefore it must
first be purged, and instructed by faith, to set it the (...) ^in, truth it
self, Gods Son, and God, taking on our man without (...) godhead ordained
that faith, to be a pass (c) for man to God, by (...) ^at was both God and
man. (d) for by his manhood, is he mediator, No Godhead of the sons waisted
in his assumption of man.
(...), is he our way. For if the way lie between him that goes, and the
(...) ^ch he goes, there is hope to attain it. But if (e) one have no way,
nor (...) way to go, what booteth it to know whether to go? And the one^,
infallible high way is this mediator, God and Man: God, our iour^ Man our way
unto it.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) it selfe] We call the mind man's purest and most excellent part, by
which (...) ^stand, argue, collect, discourse^, apprehending things simply, or
comparing (...) ^g all arts and disciplines, managing the whole course of
life, and inuenting (...) the mind. (b) Nay even to endure] So is the best
reading] (c) For by his] This (...), but all added by some other, unto the
chapters end.

Of the authority of the canonical Scriptures, made by the spirit of God.
CHAP. 3.
(...) having spoken what he held convenient, first by his Prophets, then (...)
^fe, and afterward by his Apostle, made that scripture also, which (...)
^icall, of most eminent authority, on which we rely in things that Faith
concerns things invisible.
(...) ^nderstanding, and yet cannot be attained by our selves. For if things
(...) either to our exterior or interior sense (we call them things present)
(...) own in our own judgments (b) we see them before our eyes, and (...)
as infallible objects of our sense: then truly in things that fall not in
(...) of sense, because our own judgments do fail us, we must seek out
(...) ^rities, to whom such things (we think) have been more apparent, (...)
we are to trust. Wherefore, as in things visible, having not seen them (...)
we trust those that have* (and so in all other objects of the senses:) e^ ^ngs
mental, and intelligible, which procure a notice or sense, in man, (...) ^omes
the word, sentence:) that is (c) in things invisible to our exteri^e must needs
trust them, (d) who have learned then of that incorpo^, or (e) behold them
continually before him.

L. VIVES.
(...) (...) sensible] That power in man or other creature whatsoever that
discerns any Sens^.
(...) (...) called sense. Five exterior senses there are, and one within, the
mind, or soul, feeli^ (...) of sorrow, or of ought that the exteriors
present, joy, praise, glory, virtue, vice, hope, (...) (...) the exteriors, as
thus: we say, what do you think of this wine? this music? this ^ure* and
of such a man's judgment or wisdom, Philosophy, divinity, or policy? Thus much
because our Philosophers will not endure the mind should be called sense,
directly against Augustine. But what has a Philosopher of our time to do with
the knowledge of speech, (...) is (as they interpret it) with grammar? (b) We
see them] So it must be, prae sensibus, before o^ senses, not pr^sentibus (c)
In things inuisible] Visible comes of Videre to see, that that is To see.
common to all the senses. Saw you not what a vile speech he made? saw you
ever worse wine? and so the Greeks use (...). So does Augustine use invisible
here, for that which is no object to any exterior sense. (d) Who have learned]
The Saints, of God their Master. (e) Behold] The holy Angels.

The (...) state of the world is neither eternal, nor ordained by any new
thought of gods, as if he meant that after, which he meant not before. CHAP. 4.
OF things visible, the world is the greatest, of invisible, God. But the first
we see, the second we but believe. That God made the world, whom shall we
believe with more safety them himself? Where have we heard him? never better
then in the holy scriptures, where the Prophet says. In the beginning God
created heaven and earth. Was the Prophet there when he made it? no. But Gods
wisdom, whereby he made it, was there, and that does infuse it self into
holy souls, making Prophets and Saints, declaring his works unto them
inwardly, without any noise. And the holy Angels that eternally behold the
face of the Father, they come down when they are appointed, and declare his
will unto them, of whom he was one that wrote, In the beginning God created
heaven and earth, and who was so fit a witness to believe God by, that by the
same spirit that revealed this unto him, did he prophecy the coming of our
faith. But (a) what made God create heaven and earth, then, not sooner: (b)
they that say this to import an eternity of the world, being not by God
created, are damnably, and impiously deceived and infected. For (to except all
prophecy) the very (c) order disposition, beauty and change of the world and
all therein proclaims it self to have been m^de (and not possible to have
been made, but) by God, that ineffable, invisible great one, ineffably and
invisible bea^teous. But they that say God made the world, and yet allow it no
temporal, but only a formal original, being made after a manner almost
incomprehensible, they seem to say somewhat in Gods defense from that
chancefull rashness, to take a thing into his head that was not therein
before, viz* to make the world, and to be subject to change of will, he be^g
wholly unchangeable and for ever. But I see not how their reason can stand in
^er respects, chiefly (d) in that of the soul, which if they do coeternize
with (...), (...) can never show how that misery befalls it anew, that was
never acci^ (...) it before. (e) If they say that the happiness and misery
have bin coeternale^ then must they be so still, and then follows this
absurdity, that the soul being (...), shall not be happy in this, that it
foreseeth the misery to come. If it (...) foresee their bliss nor their (...)
(...) is it happily a false vnderstand^ (...) (...) a most fond assertion.
(...) (...) they hold that the misery and the (...) (...) ^ed each other from
al eternity, but that afterward the soul be^ (...) (...) no more to misery,
yet does not this save the^ from being c^ed (...) (...) was never truly happy
before; but then begineth to enjoy (...) new, and vncert^ happiness: and so they
confess that this so strange and unexpected (...) thing bef^ls the soul then,
that never befell it before: which new changes cause (...) ^y deny y^ God
eternally foreknew, they deny him also to be the author of that (...): (which
were wicked to do.) And then if they should say that he (...) resolved that
the soul should not become eternally blessed, how far (...) ^m quitting him
from that mutability which they disallow? But if (...) ^ledge, that it had (f)
a true temporal beginning, but shall never (...) ^ral end, and having once
tried misery, and gotten clear of it, shall never (...) ^ble more, this they
may boldly affirm with prejudice to Gods immu^ will. And so they may beeleeue
that the world had a temporal origi^ (...) that God did not alter his eternal
resolution in creating of it.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) made] Epicurus his question. C^c. de not. deor. 1. Uelleius reasons
of it. (b) They (...) This is a maine doubt, mightily divided and tossed into
parts by great wits, and (...) ^tes. Some hold the world never made, nor ever
ending, so do the Peripateti^ ^y Whether the world be created.
Latins (as Pliny, and Manilius) follow them: Cato the elder says that of the
(...) ^me said it was created, but must be eternal, as they (in the other
book) said Pla^ said it was from eternity, but must have an end. Some, that
God made it corrup^ ^dlesse, as preserved by the divine essence, and these are
Pythagoreans. Some say it (...) beginning and must have an end: the Epicureans,
Anaxagoras, Empedocles and the (...) this. Of these Plut. de Plac. Philoso.
Galen. Histor. Philosoph. (if that book be his.) (...) die not. Macrobius,
and others do write. Aphrodiseus stands to Aristotle, be^ ^inion was the most
battered at. Galen made the senses judges of all the whole (...) because we
see the same world, all in the same fashion, therefore it was vncrea^ be
eternal. For as Manilius says. The Father sees not one world; the Son ano^
of them that make it eternal, say that God made it. Some give it no cause of
bee^ it cause of it self, and all besides. Arist. de caelo and mundo. (c)
Order] Chance (...) ^ke so singularly an ordered work, nor any other reason or
workman, but beau^ could produce so beauteous an object. All the Philosophers
schools that smelt of (...), held directly that nothing proved the world to
be of Gods creating, so much (...) ^ll beauty thereof. Plato, the Stoikes,
Cicero Plutarch, and Aristotle were all thus (...) Cic. de not. de. lib. 2. (d)
In that of the soule] Plato thrusts their eternal souls into (...) unto
prisons for sins committed. (e) If they] They must needs say they were either
ever (...) ever wretched, or successively, both: which if it be, the alteration
of the souls na^ ^use it, perforce. For what vicissitude of guilt and
expiation could there be for so (...) ^sand years of eternity, so constant,
as to make the souls now blessed and now mi^ A true] Some read, a beginning as
number has; number begins at one, and so runs (...): the great number may still
be increased, nor can you ever come to the end of num^ has no end, but is
justly called infinite.

(...) we ought not to seek to comprehend the infinite spaces of time or
place, ere the world was made. CHAP. 5.
(...) then let us see what we must say to those that make God the worlds
(...) and yet examine the time: and what they will say to us, when we exa^ of
the place. They ask why it was made then, and no sooner, as we ^ke,, why was
it made in this place and in no other? for if they imagine in^ ^paces of time
before the world, herein they cannot think that God did (...), so likewise may
they suppose infinite spaces of place besides the world, (...) if they do not
make the Deity to rest and not operate, they must fall to (...) (a) his dream
of innumerable worlds, only this difference there will be, (...) all his worlds
of the (b) casual coagulation of Atoms, and so by their (...) dissolues them:
but they must make all theirs, Gods handiworkes, if the, will not let him rest
in all the inter-mirable space beyond the world, and have none of all them
worlds (no more then this of ours) to be subject to dissolution. (c) for we
now dispute with those that do as we do, make God the incorporeall Creator
of all things that are not of his own essence. For those that stand for many
gods, they are unworthy to be made disputants in this question of religion.
The other Philosophers have quite (d) out-stript all the rest in fame and
credit because (though they werefarre from the truth, yet) were they nearer
then the rest. Perhaps they will neither make Gods essence dilatable, not
limmitable, but (as one should indeed hold) will affirm his incorporeall
presence in all that spacious distance besides the world, employed only in
this little place (in respect of his immensity) that the world is fixed in: I
do not think they will talk so idly. If they set God on work in this one
determinate (though greatly dilated) world: that reason that they gave why God
should not work in all those infinite places beyond the world, let them give
the same why God wrought not in all the infinite times before the world. But as
it is not consequent that God followed chance rather then reason in placing of
the worlds frame where it now stands, and in no other place, though this
place had no merit to deserve it before the infinite others: (yet no man's
reason can comprehend why the divine will placed it so:) even so no more is it
consequent, that we should think that it was any chance made God create this
world than, rather then at any other time, whereas all times before had their
equal course, and none was more meritorious of the creation then another: But
if they say, men are fond to think there is any place besides that wherein the
world is: so are they (say we) to immagine any time for God to be idle in,
since there was no time before the worlds creation.

L. VIVES.
EPicurus (a) his dreame] Who held not only many worlds, but infinite: I
showed it elsewhere. M^odorus.
Metrodorus says it as absurd to imagine but one world, in that so infinite a
space as to say that but one care of corn grows in a huge field. This error
Aristotle and the Sto^kes beat quite down, putting but that one for the world,
which Plato, and the wisest Philosophers called (...), the universe. (b)
Casuall] Great ado the Philosophers keep about natures principles: Democritas
makes all things of little bodies that fly about in the void places, having
form and magnitude, yet indivisible, and therefore called (...), Atoms,
Epicurus gave them weight also, more then Democritus did: and made those
indivisible diuersly-formed things, to (...) about (...).
(of diverse quantities and weights) up and down casually in the void and
shuffling together in diverse forms, thus produce infinite worlds, and thus
infinite worlds do arise continue and end, without any certain cause at all:
and seeking of a place, without the world, we may not take it as we do our
places, circumscribing a body: but as a certain continuance, before the world
was made, wherein many things may possibly be produced and live. So though
their be nothing without this world, yet the mind conceiueth a space wherein
God may bo^ place this, and infinite worlds more. (c) For wee] With the
Plat^nists, he means. (d) Out (...)] The ancients held the Platonists and
Stoickes in great respect and reverence. Cicero.

That the world and time had both one beginning, nor was the one before the
other. CHAP. 6.
FOr if eternity and time be well considered, time (a) never to be extant
without motion, and (b) eternity to admit no change, who would not see that
time could not have being before some mouable thing were created; whose motion,
and (...) (...) alteration (necessarily following one part another) the time
might run (...) (...) therefore that God whose eternity alters not, created the
world, and (...) can he be said to have created the world in time, unless you
will say (...) something created before the world, whose course time did
follow? (...) holy and most true scriptures say that: In the beginning God
created hea^ ^h, to wit, that there was nothing before then, because this was
the Be^ which the other should have been if ought had been made before, (...)
the world was made with Time, and not in Time, for that which is made (...) ^s
made both before some Time, and after some. Before i^ is Time past, af^ ^me to
come: But no Time passed before the world, because no creature (...) by whose
course it might pass. But it was made with the Time if mo^ Times condition, as
that order of the first six or seven days went, (...) were counted morning
and evening until the Lord fulfilled all the work (...) (...) sixth day, and
commended the seventh to us in the mystery of sanctifi^* Of what fashion those
days were, it is either exceeding hard, or altoge^ ^possible to think, much
more to speak.

L. VIVES.
I^ (...) ^euer] Aristotle defined time the measure of motion, making them
utterly inse^. Time.
Some Philosophers define it, motion, so do the Stoikes. (b) Eternity) So
says Au^ ^en, Boethius also, Nazianzene, and others all out of Plato, these are
his words. When (...) (...) this great mooueable and eternal universe, beheld
his work, he was very well pleased, (...) ^ake it yet a little liker to the
Archetype. And so, even as this creature is immortal, (...) (...) to make the
world eternal, as near as the nature thereof would permit: but his na^ ^ll,
and squared not with this made work. But he conceived a moveable form of e^
Eternity.
together with ornament of the heavenly structure, gave it this progressiue
eternal I^ ^ity: which he named Time, dividing it into days, nights, months
and years: all which (...) (...) heaven, and none of them were before heaven.
Thus Plato in his Timaeus: Time (says (...) (...) the Image of eternity: but
time moves, and eternity moves not, being naturally fixed ^able: toward it
does time pass, and ends in the perfection thereof, and may be dissolved
(...) ^orlds creator will. In dogm. Platon.

Of the first six days that had morning, and evening, ^re the Sun was made.
CHAP. 7.
(...) (...) ordinary (a) days, we see they have neither morning nor evening
but (...) ^e Sun rises and sets. But the first three days of all, had no
Sun, for (...) made the fourth day. And first, God made the light, and
severed it from (...) ^nesse, calling it day, and darkness, night: but what
that light was, and (...) ^nne a course to make morning and night, is out of
our sense to judge, (...) we understand it, which nevertheless we must make no
question but be^* (b) for the light was either a bodily thing placed in the
worlds highest pa^ far from our eye, or there where the Sun was afterward
made: (c) or (...) the name of light signified that holy city, with the
Angels and spirits whereof the Apostle says: Jerusalem which is above is our
eternal mother in heaven. Gal. 4. 26.
(...) (...) another place he says: ye are all the children of light, and
the sons of the (...) ^re not sons of night and darkness. (d) Yet has
this day the morn and e^, because (e) the knowledge of the creature, compared
to the Creators, is (...) ^ery twilight: And day breaks with man, when he
draws near the love and praise of the Creator. Nor is the creature ever be
nighted, but when the love of the Creator forsakes him. The scripture orderly
reciting those days, never mentions the night: nor says, night was, but, the
evening and the morning were the first day, so of the second, and soon. For the
creatures knowledge, of it self, is as it were far more discolored, then
when it ioynes with the Creators, as in the Knowledge of a creature.
art that framed it. Therefore, even, is more congruently spoken then night,
yet when all is referred to the love, and praise of the Creator, night becomes
morning: and when it comes to the knowledge of it self it is one full day.
When it comes to the Firmament that seperateth the waters above and below, it
is the second day. When unto the knowledge of the earth, and all things that
have root thereon, it is the third day. When unto the knowledge of the two
lights the greater and the less, the fourth: when it knows all
water-creatures, fowls and fishes, it is the fifth, and when it knows all
earthly creatures, and man himself it is the sixth day.

L. VIVES.
ORdinary (a) daies] Coleynes copy reads not this place so well. (b) For the]
The school men Sent. 2. did. 24. dispute much of this. But Augustine calls
not the light a body here: but says God made it either some bright body, as
the Sun, or e^s the contraction of the incorporeall light, made night, and
the extension, day, as Basil says, moving like the Sun, in the egresse making
morning, in the regresse evening. Hug. de. S. Victore, de Sacram. lib. 1. (c)
Or els] Aug. de genes ad lit. lib. 1. (d) Yet hath] A diverse reading, both to
one purpose. (e) The knowledge] De genes. ad lit* lib. 4. Where he calls it
morning when the Angels by contemplating of the creation in themselves (where
is deep darkness) lift up themselves to the knowledge of God: and if that in
him they learn all things (which is more certain then all habitual
knowledge) then is it day: It grows toward evening when the Angels turn from
God to contemplate of the creatures in themselves, but this evening never
becomes night for the Angels never prefer the work before the work man:
that were most deep, dark night. Thus much out of Augustine, the first
mentioner of mornings and euenings knowledges.

What we must think of Gods resting the seventh day after his six days
work. CHAP. 8.
But whereas God rested the seventh day from al his works, and sanctified it,
this is not to be childishly understood, as if God had taken pains; he but
spoke the word, and (a) by that i^telligible and eternal one (not vocal nor
temporal) were all things created. But Gods rest signifies theirs that rest in
God, as the gladness of the house signifies those y^ are glad in the house,
though something else (and not the house) be the cause thereof. How much more
then if the beauty of the house make the inhabitants glad, so that we may not
only call it glad using the continent for the contained, as, the whole Thea^er
applauded, when it was the men: the whole meadows bellowed, for, the Oxen, but
also using the efficient for the effect, as a merry epistle; that is, making
the readers merry. The^fore the scripture affirming that God rested, means
the rest of all things in God, whom he by himself makes to rest: for this the
Prophet has promised to all such as he speaks Gods rest not personal but
efficient.
unto, and for whom he wrote, that after their good works which God does in
them or by them, (if they first have apprehended him in this life by faith)
they shall in him have rest eternal. This was prefigured in the sanctification
of the Saboath by Gods command in the old law, whereof, more at large in due
season.

L. VIVES.
BY (a) that intelligible] Basil says that this word is a moment of the will*
by which we conceive better of things.

What is to be thought of the qualities of Angels, according to scripture.
CHAP. 9.
NOw having resolved to relate this holy Cities original, and first of the
angels who make a great part thereof so much the happier in that they never (a)
were pilgrims, let us see what testimonies of holy wri^t concern this point.
The scriptures speaking of the worlds creation speak not plainly of the
Angels, when or in what order they were created, but that they were created,
the word heaven includes. In the beginning God created heaven and earth, or
rather in the world Light, whereof I speak now, are there signified: that they
were omitted, I cannot think, holy writ saying, that God rested in the
seventh day from all his works, the same book beginning with, In the
beginning God created heaven and earth: to show that nothing was made ere then.
Beginning therefore with heaven and earth, and earth the first thing created*
being as the scripture plainly says, without form and void, light being
yet un made, and darkness being upon the deep: (that is upon a certain
confusion of earth and waters) for where light is not darkness must needs be,
then the creation proceeding; and all being accomplished in six days, how
should the angels be omitted, as though they were none of Gods works, from
which he rested the seventh day? This though it be not omitted, yet here is it
not plain: but elsewhere it is most evident. The three chil^ sung in their
himne, O all ye works of the Lord, bless ye the Lord, amongst which they
reckon the angels. And the Psalmist says: O praise God in the heavens, (...)
him in the heights: praise him all ye his angels, praise him all his hoasts;
praise (...) s^e and Moon, praise him sta^res and light. Praise him ye
heavens of heavens, (...) the waters that be above the heavens, praise the name
of the Lord, for he spoke the (...) and they were made: he commanded and they
were created: here divinity calls the ^ls Gods creatures most plainly:
inserting them with the rest, and saying of all: He sp^ke the word and they
were made: who dares think that the Angels were made after the six days: If
any one be so fond, hearken, this place of scripture confounds him utterly,
(e) When the stars were made, all mine angels praised me with a Job. 38. 7^
loud voice. Therefore they were made before the stars, and the stars were
made the fourth day. what? they were made the third day, may we say so? God
forbid. That days work is fully known, the earth was parted from the waters,
and two ^nts took forms distinct, and earth produced all her plants. In the
second day then? neither. Then was the firmament made between the waters above
and below, and was called Heaven, in which firmament the stars were created
the fourth day. (c) Wherefore if the angels belong unto Gods six days work,
they are that light called day; to commend whose unity, it was called, one day,
not the first day, nor differs the second or third from this, all are but this
one, doubled unto 6. or 7. six of Gods works, the 7. of his rest. For when
God said: Let there be light, and there was light; if we understand the angels
creation aright herein, they are made partakers of that eternal light, the
unchangeable wisdom of God, allcreating, namely, the only be gotten son of
God, with whose light they in their creation were illuminate, and made light,
and called day in the participation of the unchangeable light and day, that
Word of God by which they and all things else were created. For the true light
that lightneth every man that comes into this world, this also lightneth
every pure angel, making it light, not in it self, but in God, from whom if
an Angel fall, it becomes impure, as all the unclean spirits are, being no
more a light in God, but a darkness in it self, deprived of all perticipation
of the eternal light: for Evil has no nature; but the loss of good, that is
evil.

L. VIVES.
Never were (a) pilgrims] But always in their country: seeing always the face
of the father. (b) When the starres] Job. 38 7. So the Septuagints do
translate it, as it is in the te^t. (c) Wherefore if] The Greek divine put the
creation of spirituals, before that of things corporal, making God use them as
ministers in the corporal work: and so held Plato* Hierome following Gregory
and his other Greek Masters held so also. But of the Greeks, Basil and
Dionysius, and almost all the Latins, Ambrose, Bid, Cassiodorus, and
Augustine in this place holds, that God made althings together, which agrees
with that place of Ecclesiasticus, chap. 18. verse. 1. He that lives for ever,
made althings together.

Of the uncompounded, unchangeable Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
spirit, one God in substance and quality, ever one and the same. CHAP. 10.
GOod therefore (which is God) is only simple, and consequently unchangeable.
This good created all things, but not simple, therefore changeable. I say
created, that is made, not begotte. For that which the simple good begot, is as
simple as it is, and is the same that begot it. These two we call Father and
son both which with their spirit, are one God: that spirit, being the fathers
and the Unity in (...).
sons, is properly called in scriptures, the holy spirit, (a) it is neither
father nor son, but personally distinct from both, but it is not really: for
it is a simple and unchangeable good with them, and coeternall. And this
trinity is one God: not simple because a trinity (for we call not the nature of
that good, simple, because the father is alone therein, or the son, or holy
ghost alone, for that name of the trinity is not alone with personal
subsistence, as the (b) Sab^llians held) but it is called simple, because it is
one in essence and the same one in quality (excepting their personal relation:
for therein the father has a son, yet is no son, and the son a father,
yet is no father. (c) But in consideration each of it self, the quality and
essence is both one therein, as each lives, that is* has life, an^ is life it
self. This is the reason of the natures simplicity, wherein nothing adheareth
that can be lost, nor is the continent one and the thing contained another, as
vessels and liquors, bodies and colors, air and heat, or the soul and
wisdom are: for those are not coessentiall with their qualities: the vessel
is not the liquor, nor the body the color, nor air heat, nor the soul
wisdom: therefore may they all loo^ these adjuncts, and assume others: the
vessel may be empty, the body discolored, the air cold, the soul foolish.
But (d) the body being one incorruptible (as the saints shall have in the
resurrection) that incorruption it shall never loose, yet is not that
incorruption one essence with the bodily substance. For it is a like in all
parts of the body, all are incorruptible. But the body is greater in who^e then
in part, and the parts are some larger, some lesser, yet neither enlarging or
lessening the incorruptibility. So then (e) the body being not entire in it
self, and incorruptibility being entire in it self, do differ: for all parts
of the body have inequality in themselves, but none in incorruptibility. The
finger is less then the hand, but neither more nor less corruptible then the
hand: being unequal to themselves, their incorruptibility is equal. And
therefore though incorruptibility be the bodies inseparable inherent, yet the
substance making the body, and the quality m^ing it incorruptible, are
absolutely several. And so it is in the adiunct aforesaid of the soul, though
the soul be always wise, (as it shall be when it is delivered from misery to
eternity) though it be from thence evermore wise yet it is by participation of
the divine wisdom, of whose substance the soul is not. For though the air be
ever light, it follows not that the light and the air should be all one. (I
say not this (f) as though the air were a soul as some that (g) could not
conceive an vncorporal nature, did imagine. But there is a great similitude in
this disparity: so that one may fitly say, as the corporeal air is lightened
by the corporeal light, so is the incorporeal soul by gods wisdoms
incorporeall light, and as the air being deprived of that light, becomes
dark, (h) corporeal darkness being nothing but air deprived of light, so
does the soul grow darkened, by want of the light of wisdom) According to this
then, they are called simple things, that are truly and principally divine,
because their essence and (i) their quality are indistinct, nor do they partake
of any deity, substance, wisdom, or be^titude, but are all entirely
themselves. The scripture indeed calls the Holy Ghost, the manifold spirit of
wisdom, because the powers of it are many: but all one with the essence, and
all included in one, for the wisdom thereof i^, not manyfold, but one, and
therein are infinite and unmeasurable (k) treasuries of things intelligible,
wherein are all the immutable and inscrutable causes of al things, both
visible, and mutable, which are thereby created: for God did nothing
unwittingly, (l) it were disgrace to say so of any human artificer. But if he
made all knowing, then made he but what he knew. This now produces a wonder,
but yet a truth in our minds: that the world could not be unto us, but that it
is now extant: but it could not have been at all (m) but that God knew it.

L. VIVES.
IT is (a) Neither.] Words I think ad little to religion, yet must we have a
care to keep the old path and received doctrine of the Church, for divinity
being so far above our reach, Religious phrases.
how can we give it the proper explanation? All words, are man's invention for
humane uses, and no man may refuse the old approved words to bring in new of
his own invention, for when as proprieties are not to be found out by man's
wit, those are the fittest to declare things by, that ancient use has le^ us,
and they that have recorded most part of our religion. This I say for that a
sort of smattring rash fellows impiously presume to cast the old forms of
speech at their heels, and to set up their own maisters-ships, being gr^ssly
ignorant both in the matters and their bare forms, and will have it law^ull
for them, at their fond likings to (...) or fashion the phrases of the fathers
in mat^er of religion, into what form they list, like a (...) of wax. (b)
Sabellians. Of them before* The h^ld no persons in the Ternity. (c) But in
c^deration.] The Bruges copy reads it without the sentence precedent in the
copy that Uiues commented upon, and so does Paris, Louaines and Basills all]
(d) The body.] Proving accidents both separable and inseparable to be distinct
from the substance they do adhere unto. (e) The body being not.] The body
cons^sts of parts: ^t cannot stand without them, combined and co^gulate in one:
the hand is not the body of his whole, nor the magnitude* yet the incor^bility
of the hand is no part of the bodies incorruptibility, for this is not
diuisible, though it be in the whole body, but so indivisible, that being all
in all the body, it is also all in (...) part: and so are all spiritual
things, Angels* souls, and God; their natures possess no place so that they
may say, this is on my rig^t hand, this on the left, or this above, and this
below, but they are entirely whole in every particle of their place, and yet
fa^le not to fill the whole; whether this be easilier spoken or understood
judge you.

(f) As though.] So Anaximenes of Miletus, and Diogenes of Apollonia held.
Ana^as held the soul was like an air. Heraclitus, produced all souls out of
respiration, thereupon calling it (...), of (...), to refrigerate. Plato in
Cratyl. The ancients took our (...) we draw, for the soul* Whereupon the
Poet said, vxoris anima (...). My wives breath stinkes. They called all air
also the soul. Uirgil Semina terrarum animaeque marisq^ (...). As they had
been the seeds of earth, air, sea, etc. (g) Could not.] C^c. Tusc. q^st. lib.
1. They could not conceive the soul that lives by it self, but sought a shape
for it. (h) C^ ^kenesse.] Arist, de anima. lib. 2. Darkness is the absence of
light from a transpare^ body, by which we see. (i) Their quality.] The Greeks
call it (...). Tully in his academikes takes this for a body. But Augustine
here calls all adherences to the substance (which Philosophers call
accidents) qualities. Quintil, and others, show the name of Quality to be
general, and both in the abstract, and conceit, appliable to all accidents.
(k) Treasuries.] Storehouses, or treasures themselves. (l) It were.] All were
he a bungler, and had no skill, the word is, any, (m) But that God.] Wose care
vpholds, or else would it stand but a while. But he cannot care for that he
knows not: nor any workman supports a work he is ignorant in, or perfometh
any such.

Whether the spirits that fell did ever partake with the Angels, in their
bliss at their beginning. CHAP. 11.
WHich being so, the Angels were never darkness at all, but as soon as ever
they were made they were made light: yet not created only to live, and be as
they listed, but live happily and wisely in their illumination, from which some
of them turning away, were so far from attaining that excellence of blessed
wisdom which is eternal, with full* security of the eternity that they (a)
fell to a life, of bare foolish reason only, which they cannot leave although
they would: how they were pertakers of that wisdom, before their fall, who can
define? How can we say they were equally pertakers with those that are really
blessed by the assurance of their eternity, whom if they had been therein
equal, they had still continued in the same eternity, by the same assurance?
for life indeed must have an end, last it never so long, but this cannot be
said of eternity, for it is life, because of living; but it is eternity of
never ending: wherefore though all eternity, be not blessed (for hell fire is
eternal) yet if the true beatitude be not without eternity their beatitude was
no such as having end, and therefore being not eternal, whether they knew it,
or knew it not: fear keeping their knowledge, and error their ignorance from
being blessed. But if their ignorance built not firmly upon uncertainty, but
on either side, wavering between the end, or the eternity of their beatitude;
this protraction proves them not pertakers of the blessed Angels happiness,
(b). We ty not this word, beatitude, unto such strictness, as to hold it Gods
only peculiar: yet is he so blessed as none can be more: In comparion of
which (be the Angels as blessed of themselves as they can) what is all the
beatitude God ^ly (...).
of any thing, or what can it be?

L. VIVES.
THey fell (a) to a life.] The Devils have quick, and subtle wits, yet are
not wise, knowing (...) themselves nor their Father as they ought, but being
blinded with pride and envy* (...) most ^ondly into all mischief. If they were
wise, they should be good, for none is wicked in (...) ignorance rules not, as
Plato and Aristotle after him, teaches. (b) We tie (...).] The (...) defined
beatitude. A numerically perfect state in all good, peculiar to God, in (...)
(...) (...) the Angels and Saints are blessed. (...).


The happiness of the i^st that as yet have not the reward of the divine
promise, compared with the first man of paradise, before sins original.
CHAP. 12.
NEither do we only call (a) them blessed, respecting all reasonable
intellect^ (...), for who dares deny that the first man in Paradise was blessed
before his (...) ^ough he knew not whether he should be so still or not. He
had been so (...); had he not sinned: for we call them happy (b) whom we see
live well in (...) (...) hope of the immortality to come, without (c) terror
of conscience, (...) ^rue attainment of pardon for the crimes of our natural
imperfection. (...) ^ough they be assured of reward for their perseverance, yet
they are not (...) ^seuer. For what man knows that he shall continue to the
end in acti^ ^crease of justice, unless he have it by revelation from him,
that by his (...) ^ouidence instructs few (yet fa^leth none) herein? But as
for present (...), our first father in Paradise was more blessed then any just
man of the (...) but as for his hope, every man in the miseries of his body, is
more blessed: (...) (...) whom truth (not opinion) has said that he shall be
rid of all molesta^ partake with the Angels in that great God, whereas the man
that lived (...) ^se, in all that felicity was uncertain of his fall or
continuance therein.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) them blessed] This reading is best approved. Augustine means that
the Angels (...) they were uncertain of their fall or continuance, yet were
(in a sort) blessed, only (...) ^gh glorious nature: as Adam was in those
great gifts of God before his fall. (b) (...) (...)] Christ calls them blessed.
Mat. 8. (c) Terror of conscience] The greatest bliss A pure conscience.
(...) a pure conscience: as Horace says, to blush for guilt of nothing, and
the greatest (...) (...) ^uilty conscience*. This was that the Poets called the
furies. Cic. contra Pisonem (...).

^er the Angels were created in such a state of happiness, that neither (...)
those that fell, knew they should fall, nor those that perseuered, fore-knew
they should persevere. CHAP. 13.
(...) ^fore now it is plain, that beatitude requires both conjoined: such
(...) ^tude I mean, as the intellectual nature does fitly desire: that is, to
(...)* the unchangeable good, without any molestation, to remain in him (...)
without delay of doubt, or deceit of error. This we faithfully believe (...)
Angels have: but consequently that the Angels that offended, and (...) lost
that light, had not, before their fall: some beatitude they had, but (...)
knowing: this we may think, if they (a) were created any while be^y sinned.
But if it seem hard to believe some Angels to be created (...) ^ore-knowledge
of their perseverance or fall, and other-some to have (...) ^cience of their
beatitude, but rather that all had knowledge alike in their (...) and continued
so, until these that now are evil, left that light of good^ verily it is
harder to think that the holy Angels now are in them certain of that
beatitude, whereof the scriptures afford them so (...) ^einty, and us also
that read them. What Catholic Christian but (...) that no Angel that now is,
shall ever become a devil: nor any devil (...), from henceforth? The truth
of the Gospel tells the faithful, that (...) be like the Angels, and that
they shall go to life eternal. But if (...) ^re never to fall from bliss,
and they be not sure, we are above (...) like them: but the truth affirming
(and never erring) that we (...) their like, and equals, then are they sure
of their blessed eternity: whereof those other being uncertain (for it had
been eternal had they been certain of it) it remains that they were not
the others equals, or if they were, these that ^ood firm, had not this
certainty of knowledge, until afterward. Unless we will say that which
Christ says of the Devil: He has been a murderer (...) ^he beginning, and
abode not in the truth, is not only to be understood from Ioh. 8. 44.
the beginning of mankind, that is since man was made, whom he might kill by
deceiving; but even from the beginning of his own creation: and therefore
because of his auersion from his creator, and (b) proud opposition (herein both
erring and seducing) was d^bard ^uen from his creation, from happiness,
because he could not delude the power of the Almighty. And he that would not in
piety hold with the truth, in his pride counterfeits the truth, that the
Apostle John's saying, The devil sins from the beginning, may be so
understood also: that is, ever (...). 1. 3. 8.
since his creation, he rejected righteousness: which none can have, but a
will subject unto God. Whosoever holds thus, is not of the heretics opinion,
called the (c) Manichees, nor any such damnations as they, that hold that the
Devil had a wicked nature given him in the beginning: they do so doat that
they conceive not what Christ said, He aboade not in the truth, but think he
said, He was made enemy to the truth: But Christ did intimate his fall from
the truth, wherein if he had remained, he had perticipated it with the holy
Angels, and been eternally blessed with them.

L. VIVES.
Were (a) created] The time between their creation and rebellion, was so
little, that it seemed The (...).
none, (b) Proud opposition]. So the approved copyes do read. (c) Manichees]
Hearing that the Devil sinned from the beginning, they thought him created
sinful and vicious by nature rather then will: for that is natural and
inuoluntary in one, which the creator in^eth him with in his creation.

How this is meant of the Devil, He abode not in the truth, because John. 8. 44
there is no truth in him. CHAP. 14.
BUT Christ set down the reason, as if we had asked why he staid not in the
truth? because, there is no truth in him. Had he stood in it, truth had been
in him. The phrase is improper: it says, He aboade not in the truth, because
there is (...) truth in him, whereas it should renuerse it, and say, there is
no truth in him because ^e aboade not therein. But the Psalmist uses it so
also. I have cried, because thou h^ Ps^. 17. 16.
^ard (...) o God: whereas properly it is: Thou have heard me o God because I
have cried. But he, having said, I have cried: as if he had been asked the
reason, adjoined the cause of his cry in the effect of gods hearing: as if he
said. I show that I cried, because thou have heard ^e, o God.

The meaning of this place, The Devil sins from the beginning. CHA. 15.
ANd that that John says of the Devil, The (a) devil sins from the
beginning, (...) ^hey (b) make it natural to him, it can be no sin. But how
then will they (...) the Prophets, as Esayes prefiguring the Prince of Babylon
says: How art t^ (...) from heaven, O Lucifer, son of the morning? and
Ezechiel: Thou have (...) (...). ^4. 12
(...) (...) (...) Gods garden, every precious stone was in thy raiment? This
proves him (...). 28. 13.
(...) (...) (...) so does that which follows more plainly: Thou wast perfect
i^ (...) (...) (...) (...) ^y t^ wast created, etc. Which places if they have
none other (...). 15.
fit^ (...) (...)* do prove that he was in the truth, but abode not therein:
and that (...) place, H^ (...) not in the truth, proves him once in the truth,
but not per^uering, and that also; He sins from the beginning, means the
beginning of (...), (...) from his pride, but not from his creation. Now must
the place of Job, con^ ^he devil, (He (c) is the beginning of Gods works, to
be deluded by the Angels: Job. 40. Psalm. 104
(...) ^f the Psalm, this dragon whom thou have made to scorn him:) are to
be ta^ God had made the devil at first, fit for the Angels to deride, but y^
that (...) ^ned for his punishment after his sin. He is the beginning of Gods
works, (...) is no nature in the smallest beast, which God made not, from him
is all (...) ^sistence and order: wherefore much more must the creature that is
an^ by the natural dignity have their pre-eminence of al Gods other works.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) devil* We may not draw nay wrest) the gospel to those
gramm^ticismes. A mo^ or two breaks no square in this phrase from the
beginning. So we say, Envy in bro^ from the beginning: a little time does not
prove this false. (b) They] The Mani^ ^as, and those that say the Angels
could not sin in the moment of their creati^ it, because otherwise the author
of their work should bear the blame rather then (...) work. And so Origin
seems to hold saying. The serpent opposed not the truth, nor was (...) go upon
his belly, ever from the point of his creation But as Adam and Eve were, a
while (...)* ^o was the serpent no serpent, one while of his being in the
Paradise of delight, for (...) not malice. In Ezechiel. So Augustine thought,
that the first parents offended not (...) (...) they were created. (c) He is]
Job. 44. the words, to be deluded by the Angels, are (...) Septuagints.

Of the different degrees of creatures, wherein profitable use and reasons
order do differ. CHAP. 16.
(...) ^ll things that God made, and are not of his essence, the living is
before ^ad: the productiue before these that want generation, and in their
living, ^ue before the senseless, as beasts etc. before trees, and in things
sensitive, ^able before the unreasonable, as Man before beasts: and in things
rea^ ^mortalls before mortals, as Angels before men, but this is by natures
(...) they esteem of these, is peculiar and different, as the diverse uses are:
(...) some senseless things are preferred before some sensitive, so far,
that (...) power, we would root the later out of nature, or (whether we know
or (...) what place therein they have) put them all after our profit. For who
^ther have his pantry full of meat the^ mice, or possess pence then fleas.
(...): for man's esteem (whose nature is so worthy) will give more often^ a
horse then for a servant, for a ring then a maid. So that in choice, (...) of
him that respects the worth often controlls him that respects his ^de or
pleasure, nature pondering every thing simply in it self, and (...) thing
respectively for another: the one valuing them by the light of (...), the other
by the pleasure, or use of the sense: And indeed a certain (...) love, has
gotten such predominance in reasonable natures, that al^ Good (...) better
(...) bad Angels.
generally, all Angels excel men in natures order, yet by the law of ^nesse
good men have gotten place of preferment before the evil (...).

(...) the vice of malice is not natural, but against nature, following the
will, not the creation in sin. CHAP. 17.
(...) in respect of the devils nature, not his will, we do understand (...)
place a right, He was the beginning of Gods works. For where the vice of Job.
40
(...) in, the nature was not corrupted before: (a) vice is so contrary to
(...) that it cannot but hurt it. (b) therefore were it no vice, for that
nature that (...) God, to do so, but that it is more natural to it to desire
adherence with God (c) The ^ill will then is a great proof that the nature was
good. But as God is the (...)* Creator of good natures, so is he the just
disposer of evil wills: that when they use good natures evil, he may use the
evil wills, well. Thereupon he (...) that the devils good nature, and evil
will, should be cast down, and de^d by his Angels, that is that his
temptations might confirm his Saints, whom the other, sought to iniur^. And
because God in the creating of him, foresaw both his evil will, and what good,
God meant to effect thereby; therefore the Psalmist says: this Dragon whom
thou have made for a scorn: that, in that very creation that it were good by
Gods goodness, yet had God foreknowledge how to make use of it in the bad
state.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) vice] Socrates and the Stoickes held virtue, natural, vice
unnatural. For, follow the conduct of the true purity of our nature, separated
from depraved opinion, and we shall never sin. (b) Therefore] If it did the
nature, that offends, more real good to offend, then forbear, it were no
offense, nor error, but rather a wise election, and a just performance. (c) The
evil will] (...) ^ill.
Thence arise all sins, and because they oppose nature, nature resists
them: whereby offending pleases their will but hurts the nature, the will being
voluntarily evil, their nature forced to it: which were it left free, would
follow the best (for that it loves) and go the direct way to the maker, whose
sight at length it would attain.

Of the beauty of this universe, augmented, by Gods ordinance, out of
contraries. CHAP. 18.
FOr God would never have fore-knowne vice in any work of his, Angel, or Man,
but that he knew in like manner, what good use to put it unto, so making the
worlds course, like a fair poem, more gracious by Antithetique figures.
Antitheta, (a) called in Latin, opposites, are the most decent figures of all
elocution: some, more expressly call them Contra-posites. But we have no use of
this word, though for the figure, the latin, and all the tongues of the world
use it. (b) S. Paul uses it rarely upon that place to the Corynthes where he
says. By the arm^ of righteousness on the right hand, and the left: by honor
and dishonor, by evil report C^ 1, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.
and good, as deceivers, and yet true, as unknown and yet known, as dying,
and behold (...) li^e, as chastned, and yet not killed, as sorrowing and yet
ever glad, as poor, and yet make (...) (...) rich, as having nothing, yet
possessing althings. Thus as these contraries opposed do give the saying an
excellent grace, so is the worlds beauty composed (...) (...) the (...).
of contrarieties, not in figure, but in nature. This is pla^e in
Ecclesiasticus, in this verse? Against evil, is good, and against death is
life, so is the Godly against the sinner: (...) look for in all thy works of
the highest, two and two, one against one. (...) (...) (...)


L. VIVES.
AN^a (a) are] Contraposites, in word, and sentence. Cic. ad Heren. lib. 4.
calls it (...), (...).
Composition (says Quintilian) con^tion, or (...), is diversely used. First in
opposition of (...) ^o one: as, fear yielded to boldness, shame to lust: it
is not out wit b^ your help. Secondly of sentence to sentence: as, He may
rule in orations, but must yield in judgments Louvaine copy defective.]
(...). There also is more to this purpose, so as I see no reason why Augustine
should say the word (...) (...) (...) (...) with us. (b) S. Paul] Augustine
makes Paul a Rhetorician. [Well it is tolerable, (...) says i^d one of us said
so, our ears should ring of herefie presently, (...) are so ready (...) some
men's ^ongue ends, because indeed they are so full of it themselves.]

The meaning of that place, God separated the light from darkness. CHAP. 19.
^erefore though the hardness of the Scriptures be of good use in produ^ing
many truths to the light of knowledge, one taking it thus and another ^et so as
that which is obscure in one place be explaned by some other (...) by manifest
proofs: Whether it be that in their multitude of opini^e light on the authos
meaning, or that it be too obscure to be at^nd yet other truths, upon this
occasion, be admitted) yet verily I think ^urdity in Gods works to believe
the creation of the Angels, and the se^ of the clean ones from the unclean,
then, when the first light (Lux) ^de: Upon this ground: And God separated the
light from the darkness: ^od called the light day, and the darkenkesse he
called night. For he only was Gen 1. 4. 5.
(...) discern them, who could fore-now their fall ere they fell, their de^ of
light, and their eternal bondage in darkness of pride. As for the (...) we
see, viz: this our natural light and darkness, he made the two (...)
lights, the Sun and the Moon to separate them. Let there be lights (says
(...) firmament of the Heaven, to separate the day from the night. And by and
(...) God made two great lights, the (a) greater light to rule the day, and the
(...) rule the night: He made both them and the stars: And God set (...)
the firmament of heaven (b) to shine upon the earth, and to rule in the (...)
night, and to separate the light from darkness, but between that light (...)
the holy society of Angels, shining in the luster of intelligible truth, (...)
opposite darkness: the wicked Angels, peruersly fallen from that light (...)
^ee only could make separation, who fore-knoweth, and cannot but (...) all the
future evils of their wills, not their natures.

L. VIVES.
(...)] The greater light to rule or to begin y^ day. [(...)] So the
Septuagints trans^ (...) both rule and beginning: and principium is used
sometimes for rule, as in Ps. 110. v. 3. (...) or, that they might shine (...):
Some of the Latins have used the infinitive (...) the conjunction. Pestis
acerba boum, pecorumque aspergere virus. says Virgil.

Of that place of scripture spoken after the separation of the light and
darkness, And God saw the light that it was good. CHAP. 20.
(...) may we ouerslip y^ these words of God; Let there be light, and there was
light, (...) immediately seconded by these: And God saw the light that it was
good: not (...) ^ad separated the light and darkness, and named them day and
night, least ^d have seemed to have shown his liking of the darkness as well as
y^ light. ^ras the darkness, which the conspicuous lights of heaven divide from
the (...) inculpable: therefore it was said after it was, and not before, And
God saw that (...). And God (says he) Set them in the firmament of heaven to
shine upon the ^d to rule in the day and night, and to separate the light from
the darkness; and (...) that it was good: Both those he liked, for both were
sin-les: but having said (...) be light, and there was so, he adioines
immediately, And God saw the light (...) good. And then follows: God separated
the light from the darkness, and (...) the light day, and the darkness, night:
but here he adds not, And God (...) it was good: least he should seem to
allow well of both, the one being ^turally but) voluntary evil. Therefore the
light only pleased the Creator: the Angelical darknesses, though they were to
be ordained, were not to be approved.

L. VIVES.
IMmediately (a) seconded] The Scripture speaking of the spiritual light, the
Angels, before y^ part of this light, that is part of the Angels became dark,
God approved the light, that is all the Darkness.
Angels whom he had made good, and light: but speaking of our visible light,
made the fourth day: God approves both light and darkness: for yt darkness God
created, and it was not evil as y^ Angels that became dark were, and therefore
were not approved, as the fourth days darkness was.

Of Gods eternal unchanging will and knowledge wherein he pleased to create al
things in form as they were created. CHAP. 21.
What means that saying that goes through all, and God saw that it was good,
but the approbation of the work made according to the work-mans art, Gods
wisdom? God does not see it is good, being made, as if he saw it not so Genesis
1.
ere it was made: But in seeing that it is good being made, which could not
have been made so but that he foresaw it, he teaches (but learneth not)
that it is good. Plato (a) durst go further: and say That God had great joy in
the beauty of the Universe. He was not so fond to think the newness of the
work increased Gods joy: but he showed that that pleased him being effected
which had pleased his wisdom to foreknow should be so effected, not that
Gods knowledge varyeth, or apprehends diversely of things past, present and
future. He does not foresee things to come as we do, nor beholds things
present, or remembers things past as we do: But in a manner far different
from our imagination. He sees them not by change in thought, but immutably,
be they past or not past, to come or not to come, all these has he eternal
present, nor thus in his eye and thus in his mind (he consists not of body
and soul) nor thus now, and otherwise hereafter, or heretofore: his knowledge
is not as our is, admitting alteration by circumstance of time, but (b)
exempted from all change, and all variation of moments: For his intention
runs not from thought to thought; all things he knows are in his vnbodily
presence. He has no temporal notions of the time, nor moved he the time by
any temporal motions in himself. Therefore he saw that which he had made
was good, because he foresaw that he should make it good. Nor doubted his
knowledge in seeing it made, or augmented it, as if it had been less ere he
made it: he could not do his works in such absolute perfection, but out of his
most perfect knowledge. Wherefore if one urge us with, who made this light? It
suffices to answer, God: if we be asked, by what means; suffices this, God
said let there be light and there was light: God making it by his very word.
But because there are three necessary questions of every creature, who made it
how he made it, and wherefore he made it? God said (quoth Moses) let there
be light, and there was light, and God saw the light that it was good. Who
made it? God. How? God said but let it be, and it was: wherefore? It was good.
No better author can there be then God, no better art then his Word, no better
cause why, then that a good God should make a good creature. And this (c) Plato
praised as the iustest cause of the worlds creation: whether he had read it, or
heard it, or got it by speculation Plato.
of the creatures, or learned it of those that had this speculation.

L. VIVES.
PLato (a) durst not] In his Timaeus. The father of the universe, seeing the
beauty of it, and the forms of the eternal gods, approved it, and rejoiced.
(b) Expelled from all] James, 1. 17. in whom is no variablenes, nor shadowing
by turning. Hierome (contra Iouin.) reads it, in whom is no difference or
shadowing by moment. Augustine uses moment also whether referring it to time,
or quality, I know not. For neither retyres at all from his light to a shadow,
nor is any the least shadow intermixed with his light. Momentum is also a
turning, a conversion or a changeable motion, coming of moueo to move: it is
also an inclination, as in balances. This place may mean that God entertaines
no vicissitude or pass from contrary to contrary, as The just cause of the
worlds creation.
we do. (c) Plato] Let us see (says he) What made the Worlds Creator go
about so huge a work: Truly he excelled in honesty, and honesty enuyeth not
any m^an, and therefore he made all things like himself, being the iustest
cause of their original.

Concerning those that disliked some of the good Creators creatures, and
thought some things naturaly evil. CHAP. 22.
YEt this good cause of the creation, Gods goodness: this just, fit cause,
which being well considered would give end to all further inuestigation in this
kind, some heretics could not discern, because many things, by not agreeing
with this poor fray le mortal flesh (being now our just punishment) do
offend, and hurt it, as fire, cold, wild beasts, etc. These do not observe in
what place of nature they live, and are placed, nor how much they grace the
universe (like a fair state) with their stations, nor what commodity redounds
to us from them, if we can know how to use them: in so much that poison (a
thing one way pernicious) being conveniently ministered, procures health: and
contrary wise, our meat, drink, nay the very light, immoderately used, is
hurtful. Hence does Gods providence advize us not to dispraise any thing
rashly, but to seek out the use of it warily, and where our wittte and
weakness fails, there to believe the rest that is hidden, as we do in
other things past our reach: for the obscurity of the use, either excerciseth
the humility, or beats down the pride, nothing (a) at all in nature being
evil, (evil being but a privation of good) but every thing from earth to
heaven ascending in a degree of goodness, and so from the visible unto the
invisible, unto which all are unequal. And in the greatest is God the great
workman, yet (b) no lesser in the less: which little things are not to be
measured to their own greatness being near to nothing, but by their makers
wisdom: as in a man's shape, shane his eye-brow, a very nothing to the body,
yet how much does it deforme him, his beauty consisting more of proportion and
parilyty of parts, then magnitude. Nor is it a wonder that (c) those that hold
some nature bad, and produced from a bad beginning, do not receive GODS
goodness for the cause of the creation, but rather think that he was
compelled by this rebellious evil of mere necessity to fall a creating, and
mixing of his own good nature with evil in the suppression and reforming
thereof, by which it was so foiled, and so toyled, that he had much ado to
re-create and mundifie it: nor can yet cleanse it all, but that which he could
cleanse, serves as the future prison of the captiued enemy. This was not the
Maniches foolishnes, but their madness: which they should abandon, would they
like Christians believe that Gods nature is unchangeable, incorruptible,
impassible, and that the soul (which may be changed by the will, unto worse,
and by the corruption of sin be deprived of that unchangeable light) is no
part of God nor Gods nature, but by him created of a far inferior mould.

L. VIVES.
NOthing (a) at all] This Augustine repeats often, and herein do al writers of
our religion, (besides Plato, Aristotle, Tully, and many other Philosophers)
agree with him, Plato in his Nothing ^aturaly ^ell
Timaeus, holds it wicked to imagine any thing that God made evil, he being so
good a God himself: for his honesty envied nothing, but made all like
himself. And in his 2. de rep. he says: The good was author of no evil but
only of things good: blaming Hesiod and Homer for making Jove the author of
mischief; confessing God to be the Creator of this universe and thereby showing
nothing to be evil in nature. I will say briefly what I think: That is good
as Aristotle says i^ ^s ^etorik) which we desire either for it self, or for
another use And the just contrary is evil w^efore in the world, some things are
useful and good: some auoideble and bad. Some (...) and indifferent, and to
some men one thing is good, and to others bad: yea unto one man, at several
times, several, good, bad, or neuter, upon several causes. This opinion the
weakness of our judgments and respects of profit do produce. But only that is
the divine judgment which so disposes all things, that each one is of use in
the worlds government. And he knows all without error, that sees all things
to be good, and useful in their due seasons, which the wise man intimates,
when he says, That God made all things good, each in the due time. Therefore
did he bless all with increase and multiplication. If any thing were always
unprofitable, it should be rooted out of the creation. (b) No lesse] Nature is
in the least creatures, pismires, gnats, bees and spiders, as potent, as in
horses, ox^n, whales, or elephants and as admirable. Pliny. lib. 11. (c) Those]
This heresy of the Manichees, Augustine declares De here is. ad Quod vult deum.
Contra Faust. Manich. De Genes. ad liter.

Of the error that Origin incurreth. CHAP. 23.
But the great wonder is that some hold one beginning with us, of all things,
and that God created all things that are not of his essence, otherwise they
could never have had being: And yet will not hold that plain and good belief
of the Worlds simple and good course of creation, that the good God made all
things good. They hold that all that is not GOD, after him, and yet that all
is not good which none but God could make. But the (a) souls they say (not
part, but creatures of God) sinned in falling from the maker: and being cast
according to their deserts, into diverse degrees, down from heaven, got certain
bodies for their prisons. And ther-upon the world was made (say they) not for
increase of good, but restrrint of bad, and this is the World. Herein is Origin
justly culpable, for in his Periarchion, or book of beginnings, he affirms
this; wherein I have much marvel, that a man so read indiuine scriptures,
should not observe, first how contrary this was to the testimony of scripture,
that confirms all Gods works with this. And God saw that it was good: And at
the conclusion, God saw all that he made, and lo, it was very good. Auerring
no cause for this creation, but only, that the good God should produce good
things: where if no man had sinned, the world should have been adorned and
filled (b) only with good natures. But sin being committed, it did not follow
that all should be filled with badnes, the far greater part remaining still
good, keeping the course of their nature in heaven: nor could the evil willers,
in breaking the laws of nature, avoid the just laws of the al-disposed God
For as a picture shows well though it have black colors in diverse places so
the Universe is most fair, for all these stains of sins, which
notwithstanding being waighed by themselves do disgrace the luster of it.
Besides Origin should have seen (and all wise men with him) that if the world
were made only for a penal prison for the transgressing powers to be
imbodyed in, each one according to the guilt, the less offenders the higher
and lighter, and the greater ones the baser and heavier: that then the Devils
(the worst preuaricators) should rather have bin thurst into the basest, that
is earthly bodies, then the worst men. But that we might know that the spirits
merits are not repaid by the bodies quality: the worst devil has an (c) ayry
body, and man (though he be bad,) yet of far less malice and guilt, has an
earthly body, yea and had ere his fall. And what can be more fond, then to
think that the Sun was rather made for a soul to be punished in as a
prison, rather then by the providence of God, to be one, in one world as a
light to the beauty, and a comfort to the creatures? Otherwise, two, ten, or en
hundred souls sinning all a like, the world should have so many Suns: To
avoid which we must rather believe that there was but one soul sinned in that
kind, deserving such a body rather then that the Makers miraculous providence
did so dispose of the Sun, for the light and comfort of things created: It is
not the souls whereof speak they know not what, but it is their own souls
that are so far Questons in the consideration of nature.
from truth, that they must needs be attanted and restraned. Therefore these
three I commended before, as fit questians of every creature, viz: who made
it, how, and why, the answer to which is, GOD by his word, because he is
good whether the holy Trinity, the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost do
imitate this unto us from their mystical body, or there be some places of
Scripture that does prohibit us to answer thus, is a great questian and not
fit to be opened in one volume.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) soules] Origin in his first book Periarchion, holds that GOD first
created all things incorpore all, and that they were called by the names of
heaven and earth, which afterward were given unto bodies. Amongst which
spirituals, or souls (Mentes) were created, who declining (to use Ruffinus his
translation) from the state and dignity, became souls as their name (...)
declares, by waxing cold in their higher state of being mentes. The mind
fryling of the divine heat, takes the name and state of a soul, which if it
arise and ascend unto again, it gains the former state of a mind. Which were
it true, I should think that the minds of men, unequally from God some more
and some less, some should rather be souls then other some: some retaining
much of their mental vigor and some little or none. But these souls (says
he) being for their soul falls to be put into grosser bodies, the world was
made, as a place large enough to exercise them all in, as was appointed: And
from the diversity, and in-equality of their fall from him did God collect the
diversity of things here created. This is Origens opinion. Hierom recites it
ad auitum. (b) which good] We should have been Gods freely without any
trouble. (c) Any ayry body] Of this here-after.

Of the divine Trinity, notifying it self (in some part) in all the works
thereof CHAP. 24.
WE believe, (a) and faithfully affirm, that God the Father begot the world,
his wisdom by which al was made, his only Son, one with one coeternal, most
good and most equal: And that the holy spirit is both of the Father and the
(...), consubstantiall, and coeternall with them both: and this is both a
Trinity in respect of the persons, and but one God in the inseparable divinity
and one omnipotent in the inseparable power, yet so, as every one of the three
be held to be The holy spirit, (...) person (...) (...).
God omnipotent: and yet altogether are not three Gods omnipotents, but one God
omnipotent: such is the inseparable unity of three persons, and so must it be
ta^ off. But whether the spirit, being the good Fathers, and the good Sons
may ^e said to be both their goodnesses, (c) here I dare not rashly determine:
I durst rather call it the sanctity of them both: not as their quality, but
their substance and the third person in Trinity. For to that, this probability
leads me, that the Father is holy, and the Son holy, and yet the Spirit is
properly called holy, as being the substantial, and consubstantiall holiness
of them both. But if the divine goodness be nothing else but holiness; then
is it but diligent reason, and no bold presumption to think (for exercise of
our intentions sake) that in these three questions of each work of God, who
made it, how, and why the holy Trinity is secretly intimated unto us: for it
was the Father of the word that said, Let it be made; and that which was made
when he spoke, doubtless was made by the word: and in that, where it is said,
And God saw that it was good, it is plain that neither necessity nor use, but
only his mere will moved God to make what was made, that is, Because it was
good: which was said after it was done, to show the correspondence of the good
creature to the Creator, by reason of whose goodness it was made. If this
goodness be now the holy spirit, then is all the whole Trinity intimate to us in
every creature: and hence is the original, form, and perfection of that holy
City whereof the Angels are inhabitants. Ask whence it is; God made it: how
has it wisdom. God enlightened it. How is it happy? God whom it enioyes has
framed the existence, and illustrated the contemplation, and sweetened the
inherence thereof in himself, that is, it sees, loves, rejoices in Gods
eternity, shines in his truth, and ioyeth in his goodness.

L. VIVES.
VV^ (a) beleeue] Let us believe then and be silent, hold, and not inquire,
preach faithfully, and not dispute contentiously. (b) Begotte] What can I do
here but fall [Lou^aine copy defectiue]
to adoration? What can I say but recite that saying of Paul, in admiration: O
the deepnesse of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! (c)
Here I dare not] [Nor I though many divines call the spirit the Fathers
goodness, and the Son his wisdom. Who dare affirm ought directly, in
those deep mysteries.] (d) Because it] or, because it was equally good.

Of the tripartite division of All Phylosophicall discipline. CHAP. 25.
HEnce was it (as far as we conceive) that Philosophy got three parts: or
rather that the Philosophers observed the three parts. They did not invent
them, but they observed the natural, rational and morrall, from hence. These
are the Latin names, ordinarily used, as we showed in our eighth book: not
that it follows that herein they conceived a whit of the Trinity: though
Plato were the first that is said to find out and record this division: and
that unto him none but God seemed the author of all nature, or the giver of
reason, or the inspirer of honesty. But whereas in these points of nature,
inquisition of truth, and the final good, there are many diverse opinions, yet
al their controversy lies in those three great, and general questions: every
one makes a discrepant opinion from another in all three, and yet all do
hold, that nature has some cause, knowledge, (...), and life some direction
and sum. For three things are sought out in The parts of a work man.
(...), nature, skill and practice, his nature to be judged off by wit,
(...) ^y knowledge, and his practice (a) by the use. (b) I know well that
^elongs to fruition properly, and use to the vser: (And that they seem to
^ently used, fruition of a thing which being desired for it self only, de^
us: and use of that which we seek for another respect: in which sense we ^her
use, then enjoy temporalityes, to deserve the fruition of eternity: ^e wicked
inioyes money, and uses GOD, spending not money for (...) ^ut honoring him
for money) Yet in common phraze of speech we (...) ^ruition, and enjoy use.
For fruits properly are the fields increase, (...) ^ppon we live: So then
thus I take use in three observations of an ar^ nature, skill and use. From
which the Philosophers invented the seven ^lines, tending all to beatitude: The
natural for nature, the rational (...) ^e, the moral for use. So that if our
nature were of it self, we should (...) own wisdom, and never go about to
know it by learning, ab exter^ if our love had original of it self, and
returned upon it self; it would (...) unto beatitude, exempting us from need
of any other good. But seeing (...) has being from GOD our author, doubtless
we must both (...) to teach us true wisdom, and to inspire us with the
means to be^ ^essed, by his high sweetness.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) by the vse] [vsu^, I translate, practice, fructus use: otherwise]
Here seems to be an (...) of the word use, for whereas he says, workmanships
stands on three grounds, na^ ^d Use. Fruit. Fruiti^.
use, use is here practice. But he wrested it to his meaning, namely the
practice of e^ ^eferred to use or profit, and thereby judged. (b) I Know] we
have fruition of y^ we de^ ^er end: therefore says Aug. We only enjoy God, and
use al things else. Of this read ^tr. Christ. In 80. quest. De trinit: where he
ties fruition, to eternal felicity, use to the (...) him had Peter Lumbard
enough: Sent. l. 1. and the schoolme^, even more then enough.

Of the Image of the Trinity which is in some sort in every man's nature, even
before his glorification. CHAP. 26.
(...) we have in our selves an image of that holy Trinity which shall be
perfec^ ^y reformation, and made very like it: though it be far unequal, and
far (...) from it, briefly neither coeternall with God, nor of his substance,
yet is it (...) ^est it of any creature, for we both have a being, know it, and
love both our ^d knowledge. And in these three no false appearance ever can
deceive us. (...) not discern them as things visible, by sense as we see
colors, hear (...) ^scent smells, taste sauors, and touch things hard and
soft: the (a) abstacts of (...) ^ble we conceive, remember and desire in
incorporeal forms most like (...) ^ther: in those three it is not so; I know
(b) without al fantastical imagi^ ^at I am my self, that this I know and
love. I fear not the (c) Academike (...) ^s in these truths, y^ say, what if
you er? (d) if I er, I am. For he that has no (...) ^ot er: and therefore mine
error proves my being: which being so, how (...) ^holding my being? for though
I be one that may er, yet doubtless in that (...) being, I er not: and
consequently, if I know that I know my being: and love two, I adioyne this love
as a third of equal esteem with the two. (...) not err in that I love,
knowing the two things I love, without (...) they were false, it were true
that I loved false things. For how could I be justly checked for loving of
false things if it were false that I loved them? But ^ing the things loved,
are true, and sure, how can the love of them be b^ true and sure? And there is
no man that desires not to be, as there is none de^ not to be happy: for how
can he have happiness, and have no being?

L. VIVES.
THe (a) abstracts] For shut our eyes, and taste, our thought tells us what a
thing whiteness and sweetness is, wher-vpon our dreams are fraught with such
things, and we are able to judge of them without their presence. But these are
in our exterior senses, our imagination, our (...) (...).
common sense, and our memory, all which beasts have as well as we, and in
these many things are rashly observed, which if we assent unto, we err: for
the senses are their weak, dull and unsure teachers, teaching those other to
apprehend things often false, for true. But the reasonable mind, being proper
only to man, that ponders al, and uses all diligence to avoid falsehoods
(...).
for truth, warning us to observe well ere we judge. (b) Phantasticall] Of
fancy, already. (c) Academickes] These took away the trust of the senses, and
held that nothing was known. If you said, I know this stone to move; because I
see it, or touch it: they replied: What if you err? Did you never think you
saw somewhat move, that stood still, (as in sailing, or riding?) Did you never
think somewhat moved that moved not, under your touch? There you were
deceived, so may you be now. Restrain your assent, nothing offends wisdom
more then consent before full knowledge. (d) If I erre] Therefore our
Philosophers upon Aristotle's Posteriora, say, that this proposition is of the
greatest evidence.

Of essence, knowledge of essence, and love of both. CHAP. 27.
SO (a) naturally does this delight, that very wretches, for nothing else but
this, would rather leave their misery, then the World, knowing themselves
wretches tho, yet would they not dye. And the most wretched of all, either in
wise judgments (for (b) their foolishness;) or in theirs that hold themselves
blessed (for their defect hereof:) If one should profer them an immortality of
misery, and tell them if they refused it, they should become just nothing, and
loose all being, verily they would rejoice and choose an eternal misery
before a millity of being. This our common sense testifies. For why do they
fear to end their misery by death rather then continue it, but that nature
still wishes to hold a being? And therefore seeing they know they must dye,
they do make such great accoumpt of a long life in their misery, ere they dye:
Wherein doubtless they show how thankful they will be for immortality,
though it had not end of their misery. And what of brute beasts that understand
not this, from the Dragon to the worm? Do they not show their love of being,
by avoiding death al ways possible? The trees and plants that have no sense of
death nor means to avoid it, do they not put forth one sprig into the air,
and another (c) deeper into the earth, whereby to attract nutriment and
preserve their being? Nay, the very bodies that (...) neither sense nor
vegetation, by their very motion vpwardes, downewardes, or middle suspension,
move to the conservation of their essence and nature. Now then may be gathered
how much man's nature is beloved, and loath to be deceived, from hence, that man
had rather (d) lament in a sound mind, then rei^ in folly. Which power is in
no mortal creature but man: others have sharper sights then we, yet not any
can behold the incorporeall light, which in some sort lightneth our minds,
producing a true judgment of all these things, (...) (...) as we are capable
of it. But though the unreasonable creatures sen^ ^eine no knowledge, yet some
similitude of knowledge there is in them. (...) ^er corporal creatures, having
no sense in themselves, are but the obi^ of others senses, therefore called
sensible: and the growth and power (...) (...) the trees draw nutriment, this
is like their sense. But these and all oth^ ^porall bodies causes, are hid in
nature, marry their forms in the diuer^ (...) parts of the worlds structure)
are apparent to us, seemingly professing a (...) be known since they could not
know themselves: but our bodily sen^ ^ge not of them though they apprehend
them. That is left unto a far (...) ^cellent interior sense, discerning just
and unjust, (f) just, by the intelli^ ^rme, unjust, by the privation thereof.
The office of this sense, neither the (...) ear, the smell, the taste, nor the
touch can perform. By this I know (...) ^ng, and I know this knowledge, and I
love them both, and know that I (...) both.

L. VIVES.
SO (a) naturally] A Stoicall and Academicall disputation handled by Tully,
(Offic. 1. and de (...). (...). Stoically, and (De fin. 5.) Academically. (b)
For their] Foolishness is the greatest (...) and wisdom the good. So held the
Stoikes. (c) Deeper] A diverse reading: the text (...) both. (d) Antisthenes
the first Cynickes choice. His reason was because to rejoice in ^d mind, was
base, and cast down the mind from the true state. Socrates in (...) (...)
Alcibiades, that possessions without wisdom, are not only fruitless, but
hurtful. (e) ^re] It is not then our wit or toil, but GODS bounty that
instructs us in the (...) ^ourse of nature, and sharpens the judgment: which
bounty the good man attaining (...) bad, must needs be wiser, though less
learned, or popularly acute. Therefore says (...) Into an evil soul, wisdom
will not come. The same that Socrates said, Only good men (...) (f) Just, by]
By a form, left in my mind by seeing justice done, and the due con^ ^ing
thereto: which, be it absent, I conceive what injustice is, by seeing the fair
(...) ^ent harmony subverted; I build not upon hurts, violence, injuries, or
reproaches, (...) no priuations, but may be justly done upon due command of the
magistrate, or with ^ent: but upon this, I see the virtues decorum broken.
Form is neither to be taken ^pes or abstracts of things, reserved in the
soul, and called motions, say some: Well, (...) they either want wit or
knowledge: And because they cannot make themselves (...) by things really
extant: they must fetch their audiences ears up to them by pursuing (...), and
non entia: this is our schoole-mens best trade now a days.]

^ther we draw nearer to the image of the holy trinity, in loving of that love
by which we love to be, and to know our being. CHAP. 28.
(...) we have spoken as much as needs here, of the essence and knowledge,
(...) much we ought to respect them in our selves, and in other creatures vn^
^ough we find a different similitude in them. But whether the love that (...)
^e them in, be loved, that is to declare. It is loved: we prove it, because
it i^ ^d in all things that are justly loved. For he is not worthily called a
good (...) (...) knows good, but he that loves it. Why then may we not love
that (...) (...) selves, whereby we love that which is to be loved. They may
both (...) ^e man: and it is good for a man that his goodness increasing, his
^d decrease, even to the perfection of his cure, and full change into (...):
for if we were beasts, we should love a carnal sensitive life: (...) good
would suffice our nature (b) without any further trouble; if (...) ^ees, we
should not indeed love any thing by motion of sense: yet should we seem to
affect fruitfulness and growth, if we were stones, water, wind, fire, or so,
we should want sense, and life, yet should we have a natural appeti^e unto our
due (c) places, for the (d) motions of weights are like the bodies loves: go
they upward or downwards; for weight is to the body, as love is to the ^ule.
But because we are men, made after our creators image, whose eternity is true,
truth eternal: charity, true and eternal; neither confounded nor severed, we
run through all things under us, (which could not be created, formed, not
ordered without the hand of the most essential, wise, and good God) and so
through all the works of the creation: gathering from this (e) more plain,
and from that less apparent marks of his essence: and beholding his image in
our selves (f) like the prodigal child, we recall our thoughts home, and
return to him from whom we fell. There our being shall have no end, our
knowledge no error, our love no offense. But as now, though we see these three
sure, trusting not to others, but observing it our selves, with our certain
interior sight, yet because of our selves we cannot know how long they shall
last, when they shall end, whither they shall go, doing well or evil,
therefore here we take other witnesses, of the infallibity of whose credit we
will not dispute here, but hereafter. In this book of the City of God, that
was never pilgrim, but always immortal in heaven, being compounded of the
Angels eternally coherent with God, and never ceasing this coherence: between
whom and their darkness, namely those that forsook him, a separation was made
as we said at first by God, now will we (by his grace) proceed in our
discourse already begun.

L. VIVES.
FOr that (a) is loue] There is a will in us arising from the corruption of the
body, which reason rules, not as it does the better will, but it haleth it and
traileth it to good: it flies all good properly, and seeks evils, bodily
delights and pleasures: These two Paul calls the law of the flesh, the law of
the spirit, sometimes flesh and spirit. The first, brutish, foul, hated of
good men, who when they can cannot expel it, they compel and force it unto
Gods obedience: otherwise it produces a love of things unmeet. (b) Without]
Either in this life, or unto our bodies. (c) Places] Or orders, and forms of
one nature: the preservation of which each thing desires for it self, helping
it self against external violence, if it be not hindered. (d) (...)] of this
before: the Latin word is, momenta. (e) More plaine] Our reason pl^ceth an
Image rather then a mark of God in us. Man has the sight of heaven and the
knowledge of God bestowed upon him, whereas all other creatures are chained to
the earth Wherefore the spirit ouer-looking the creation, left his image in our
erected nature, in the rest, whom he did as it were put under foot, he left
only his marks. Take this now as a figurative speech. (f) Pr^digall] Luc. 15.

Of the Angels knowledge of the Trinity in the Deity, and consequently, of the
causes of things in the Archetype, ere they come to be effected in works.
CHAP. 29.
THese holy Angels learn not of God by sounds, but by being present wi^ the
^geable truth, his only begotten word, himself, and his holy spirit, (...)
(...) (...), of substantial persons: yet hold they not three Gods, but one,
(...) this they (a) ^ow plainer then we know our selves. (b) The creatures also
(...) they know (...) in the wisdom of God, the worke-mans draught, then in
the things produced: and consequently themselves in that, better then in
th^selues, though ^ing their knowledge in both: for they were made, and are not
of (...) ^nce that made them. Therefore in him their knowledge is day, in
(...), (as we said) twy-light. But the knowledges of a thing, by the means
(...) and the thing it self made, are far different. (c) The understanding
(...) a figure does produce a perfecter knowledge of it, then the draught
(...)) dust: and justice is one in the changelesse truth, and another in the
(...) ^oule. And so of the rest, as the firmament between the waters above
(...), called heaven, the gathering of the waters, the appearance of land, (...)
^f plants, creation of fowls and fishes, of the water, and four foo^ed (...)
^he earth, and last, of man the most excelling creature of all. All these the
(...) ^scerned in the Word of God, where they had their causes of their pro^
^mmoueable and fixed, otherwise, then in them selves: clearer in him, (...) in
themselves: yet referring all those works to the Creators praise, (...) ^ke
morning in the minds of these contemplators.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) plainer] They have both sharper wits then we, and the light
whereby they (...) ^he ^rinity is far brighter then that by which we know
our selves. (b) The crea^ ^owing the effect better in the cause, then in it
self, (c) The vnderstanding] Mathe^ ^ciples give better knowledge of times and
figures, then draughts, which can ne^ ^ct as to present the thing to the eye,
truly, as it is: and better conceive we by (...) a straight line is the
shortest draught from point to point, and that all lines drawn (...) ^ter to
the cyrcle are equal, by the precepts of Geometry, rather then by all the
(...) ^f dust? nay) of Parrhasius or Apelles. (d) Dust] The old Mathematicians
drew ^tions in dust, wi^h a compass, the better to put out or in what they
would. This (...) was a doing when Syracusa was taken. Liu. Tully calls it,
learned dust. De not. (...) secto in puluere metas, says Persius, Lines in
divided dust. Satyr. 1.

(...) perfection of the number of six, the first is complete in all the
parts. CHAP. 30.
^ese were performed in six days because of the perfection of the (a) (...)
of six, one being six times repeated: not that God was tied unto time, (...)
not have created all at once, and af^erwards have bound the motions (...)
^ngruence, but because that number signified the perfection of the (...) six is
(b) the first number that is filled by conjunction of the parts, the (...) ^ird
and the half: which is one, two, and three; all which conjoined (...) ^arts in
numbers are those that may be described of how (c) many they (...) ^alfe, a
third, a fourth, and so forth. But four being in nine, yet is no just (...)
one is the ninth part, and three the third part. But these two parts, one
(...), are far from making nine the whole. So four is a part of ten, but no
(...) ^one is the tenth part, two the fif^, and five the second: yet these
three parts (...) and 5; make not up full ten, but eight only. As for the
number of twelfe, (...) exceed it. For there is one the twelfe part, six the
second, four the third, (...) fourth, and two the sixth. But one, two, three,
four and six, make above (...) ^mely sixteen. This by the way now to prove
the perfection of the (...) of fix, the first, (as I said) that is made of the
conjunction of the parts: (...) did God make perfect all his works. Wherefore
this number is not to ^d, but has the esteem apparently confirmed by many
places of scrip^ ^r was it said in vain of Gods works, Thou made all things
in number, W^. 1^.
(...) (...) measure.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) number] Pythagoras, and Plato after him, held all things to be
disposed by numbers, teaching them so mysteriously, that it seemed they sought
to conceal them from the express professors, not only the profane vulgar.
Our divines both Greek and Latin put many mysteries in numbers. But Hierome
the most of all, affirming that the Evangelist omitted some of Christ's
progeny, to make the rest fall in a fit number. (b) For six] The perfection of
a number is to consist of all the parts: such are scarce in Arithmetique, and
such is six only within The number of six.
ten, and twenty seven within a hundred: for this latter consists of 1. 2. 4.
7. and 14. The mystery of the creation is contained in the number of six
Hier. in Ezech. (c) Of how many] as an half, a fourth, a fifth, sixth, etc.
four in nine, is neither half, three nor four, and so up to the ninth, as
far as nine goes. For the least quantitatiue part, names the number, as the
twelfth of twelve: the twentieth in twenty, and that is always an unite. This
kind of part we call an aliquote. Euclide calls an aliquote only, a part,
the rest parts. For his two definitions, (his third and his fourth) are these.
A part is a less number dividing a greater. Parts, are they that divide not.
And so the old writers used these words.

Of the seventh day, the day of rest and complete perfection. CHAP. 31.
But in the seventh day, that is, the (a) seventh repetition of the first day
(which number has perfection also in another kind) God rested, and gave the
first rule of sanctification therein. The day that had no even, God would not
sanctify in his works but in rest. For there is none of his works, but being
considered first in God, and then in it self, will produce a day knowledge,
and an euens. Of the perfection of seven, I could say much, but this volume
grows big, and I fear I shall be held rather to take occasion to show my
small skill, then to respect others edification. Therefore we must have a care
of gravity and moderation, least running all upon number, (b) we be thought
neglecters of weight and measure. (c) Let this be a sufficient admonition, (d)
that three is the first number, wholly, odd, and four wholly even, and these
two make seven, which is therefore oftentimes put for (e) all: as here; The
just shall fall seven times a day, and arise again, that is, how often soever
he fall, he shall rise again. (This is not meant of iniquity, but of
tribulation, drawing him to humility.) Again, Seven Pro. 24. 16.
times a day will I praise thee: the same he had said before: His praise shall
be always in my mouth. Many such places as these the Scripture has, to
prove the number of seven to be often used for all, universally. Therefore
is the holy spirit called oftentimes (f) by this number, of whom Christ said,
He shall teach us all truth. There is Gods rest, wherein we rest in God: In
this whole, in this perfection is rest, in the part of it was labor: Therefore
we labor, because we know as yet but in part, but when perfection is come,
that which is in part shall be abolished. This makes us search the scriptures
so labouriously. But the holy Angels, (unto whose glorious congregation our
toylesome pilgrimage casts a long look) as they have eternal permanence, so
have they easy knowledge, and happy rest in God, helping us without ttouble,
because their spiritual, pure and free motions are without labor.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) seauenth] Signifying all things created at once. (b) We be thought]
alluding to the precedent, saying, God made althings in number, weight and
measure: that if he should say too much of number, he should seem both to
neglect his own gravity and measure, and the The number of ^auen.
wise-mans. (c) Let this] The Jews in the religious keeping of their Sabbath,
show that 7. was a number of much mystery. Hierome in Esaias. Gellius. lib. 3.
and his emulator Macrobius (in Somn. Scip. lib. 1.) record the power of it in
Heaven, the Sea, and in Men. The Pythagorists, as Chalcidius writes, included
all perfection, nature and sufficiency herein. And we Christians hold it
sacred in many of our religious mysteries. (d) That 3. is* An even number
(says Euclid) is that which is diuisible by two: the odd is the contrary.
Three, is not diuisible into two, nor any: for one is no number: Four is
divided into two, and by unites: and this four was the first number that got
to halfes, as Macrobius says, who therefore commends 7. by the same reason
that Aug. uses here. (e) For all] Aug. in Epist. ad Galat. (f) By this number]
Sermon. de verb, dom. in monte. This appellation arises from the gifts, shown
in Esaias, Chap. 32.

Of their opinion that held Angels to be created before the world CHAP. 32.
But if some oppose, and say that that place, Let there be light and there was
light, was not meant of the Angels creation, but of some (a) other corporal
light, and teach that the Angels were made not only before the firmament
dividing the waters, and called heaven, but even before these words were
spoken: In the beginning God made heaven and earth: Taking not this place as if
nothing had been made before, but because God made all by his Wisdom and
Word, whom the Scripture also calls a (a) beginning, as answered also to
the Jews when they inquired what he was: I will not contend, because I delight
so in the intimation of the Trinity in the first chapter of Genesis. For having
said: In the beginning God Ps. 104.
made heaven and earth: that is the Father created it in the Son, as the Psalm
says: O Lord how manyfold are thy works! In thy wisdom made thou them
all: presently after he mentions the Holy Spirit. For having showed the
fashion of earth, and what a huge mass of the future creation God called
heaven and earth: The earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon
the deep: to perfect his mention of the Trinity he added, (c) And the spirit
of the Lord moved upon the waters. Let each one take it as he likes: it is so
profound that learning may produce diverse opinions herein, all faithful and
true ones: so that none doubt that the Angels are placed in the high heavens,
not as coeternals with God, but as sure of eternal felicity: To whose society
Christ did not only teach that his little ones belonged, saying: They shall be
equal with the Angels of God: but shows further, the Mat. 18. 10.
very contemplation of the Angels, saying: Se that you despise not one of these
little ones, for I say unto you, that in heaven, their Angels always behold the
face of my Father which is in Heaven.

L. VIVES.
SOme (a) other corporeall] Adhering to some body. (b) Beginning] I reprove not
the divines A beginning.
in calling Christ a beginning. For he is the mean of the worlds creation, and
chief of all that the Father begotte. But I hold it no fit collection from his
answer to the Jews. It were better to say so because it was true, then
because John wrote so, who thought not so. The heretics make us such
arguments, to scorn us with, at all occasion offered. But what that wisely and
freely religious Father Hierome, held of the first verse of Genesis, I will now
relate. Many (as Jason in Papisc. Tertull. contra Praxeam, and Hillar. in
Psalm.) Hold that the Hebrew text has, In the Son God made Heaven and earth
which is directly false. For the 70. Symachus, and Theodotion translate it, In
the beginning: The Hebrew is Beresith, which Aquila translates in Capitulo, not
Ba-ben, in the Son. So then the sense, rather then the translation gives it
unto Christ, who is called the Creator of Heaven and earth, as well in the
front of Genesis (the head of all books) as in S. John's Gospel. So the
Psalmist says in his person: John, 13.
In the head of the book it is written of me, viz. of Genesis, and of John: Al
things were made by it, and without it was made nothing, etc. But we must know,
that this book is called Beresith, the Hebrews using to put their books names
in their beginnings Thus much word for word out of Hierome. (c) And the spirit]
That which we translate Ferebatur, moved (says Hierome) the Hebrews read
Marahefet, forwhich we may fitly interpret, incubabat, brooded, or cherished
as the hen does heregges with heat. Therefore was it not the spirit of the
world, as some think, but the holy spirit that is called the quickner of all
things from the beginning: If the Quickner, then the maker, Ps. 104. 30.
if the Maker then the God: If thou send forth thy word (says he) they are
created.

Of the two different societies of Angels, not unfitly termed light and
darkness. CHAP. 33.
THat some Angels offended, and therefore were thrust into prisons in the worlds
lowest parts until the day of their last judicial damnation, S. Peter
testifies plainly, saying That God spared not the Angels that had sinned, but
cast them down into hell and delivered them into (a) chains of darkness to
be kept unto damnation. Now whether Gods prescience separated these from the
other, who doubts? that he called the other light, worthily, who denies? Are
not we hear on earth, by faith, and hope of equality with them, already ere
we have it, called light by the Apostle? Ye were once darkness, (says he)
but are now light in the Lord. And well do these perceive the other
Apostaticall powers are called darkness, who consider Ephesians. 5. 8.
them rightly, or believe them to be worse then the worst unbeliever.
Wherefore though that light, which GOD said should be, and it was, be one
thing and the darkness from which GOD separated the light be another: yet
the obscurity of this opinion of these two societies, the one inioying GOD, the
other swelling in (b) pride: the one to whom it said: Praise GOD all ^ee his
Angels, the other whose Prince said: All these will I give thee if thou will
fall down and worship me: the one inflamed with GOD'S love, the other, blown
big with self-love (whereas it is said) God resists the proud and gives
grace to the lowly:) the one in the highest heavens, the other in the obscurest
air: Iame^. 4.
the one, piously quiet, the other madly turbulent: the one punishing or
releeuing according to Gods (c) justice and mercy: the other raging with the
over unreasonable desire to hurt and subdue: the one allowed GODS Minister to
all good, the other restrained by GOD from doing (d) the desired hurt: the one
scorning the other for doing good against their wills by temptations: the other
envying this, the recollection of the faithful pilgrims: the obscurity (I say)
of the opinion of these two so contrary societies (the one good in nature and
will, the other good in nature also, but bad by will) since it is not explaned by
other places of scripture, that this place in Genesiis of the light and
darkness, may be applied as Denominatiue unto them both (though the author
had no such intent) yet has not been unprofitably handled: because though
we could not know the authors will, yet we kept the rule of faith, which
many other places make manifest. For though Gods corporal works be here
recited, yet have some similitude with the spiritual, as the Apostle says: you
are all the children of the light, and the children of the day: we are no
sons of the night nor darkness. But if this were the authors mind, the other
disputation has attained perfection: that so wise a man of God, nay the spirit
in him, in reciting the works of God, all perfected in six days, might by no
means be held to leave out the Angels, either in the beginning, that is
because he had made them first, or (as we may better understand, In the
beginning) because he made them in his only begotten Word, in which beginning
God made heaven and earth: Which two names either include all the creation
spiritual and temporal, which is more credible: Or the two great parts only
as continents of the lesser, being first proposed in whole, and then the parts
performed orderly according to the mystery of the six days.

L. VIVES.
INto (a) cheynes] This is plain in Saint Peter's second Epistle and Saint
Iudes also. The Angels (says the later) which kept not their first estate, but
left their own habitation has he reserved in everlasting cheynes, under
Darkness, unto the judgment of the great day. Augustine uses prisons, for
places whence they cannot pass, as the horses were enclosed and could not
pass out of the circuit until they had run. (b) Pride] Typhus, (...), is
Pride, and the Greeks use Typhon (of (...), to be proud and (...), to burn)
for the fiery devil: So says Plutarch of Typhon, Osyris his brother, that he
was a devil that troubled all the world with acts of malice, and torment.
Augustine rather uses it then the Latin, for it is of more force, and was of
much use in those days: Philip the Priest uses it in his Commentaries upon
Job. (c) Iustice] For God does justly revenge, by his good Ministers. He makes
the spirits his messengers, and flaming fire his Ministers. Ps. 103. (d) The
desired] There is no power on the earth like the devils Job. 40. Which might
they practice as they desire, they would burn, drown, waste, poison, torture
and utterly destroy man and beast: And though we know not the devils power
directly, where it is limited, and how far extended: yet are we sure they can
do us more hurt then we can ever repair. Of the power of Angels read August^
de Trinit. lib. 3.

Of the opinion that some held, that the Angels weee meant by the several
waters, and of others that held the waters uncreated. CHAP. 34.
YEt some there (a) were that thought that the (b) company of Angels were meant
by the waters: and that these words, Let there be a firmament in the midst of
the waters, and let it separate the waters from the waters, meant by the
vpperwaters Genesis 1.
the Angels, and by the lower, either the nations, or the devils. But if this
be so, there is no mention of the Angels creation, but only of their
separation. (c) Though some most vainly, and impiously deny, that God made the
waters, because he never said, Let there be waters. So they may say of earth:
for he never said Let there be earth. I but say they: it is written God created
both heaven and earth. Did he so? Then is water included therein also, for one
name serves both: for the Psalm says: The sea is his, and he made it, and his
hands prepared the dry land: but the (d) elementary weights do move these men
to take the waters above, for the Angels, Ps. 95.
because so an element cannot remain above the heavens. No more would these
men, if they could make a man after their principles, put fleame, being (e) in
stead of water in man's body, in the head: (f) but there is the seat of fleame,
most fitly appointed by God: but so absurdly in these men's conceits, that if
we know not (though this book told us plain) that God had placed this fluid,
cold and consequently heavy humor in the uppermost part of man's body, these
world-weighers would never believe it. And if they were subject to the
scriptures authority, they would yet have some meaning to shift by. But seeing
that the consideration of all things that the Book of God contains
concerning the creation, would draw us far from our resolved purpose, let
us now (together with the conclusion of this book) give end to this
disputation of the two contrary societyes of Angels, wherein are also some
grounds of the two societies of mankind, unto whom we intend now to proceed,
in a fitting discourse.

L. VIVES.
SOme (a) there were] as Origin for one, who held that the waters above the
heavens were no waters but Angelical powers, and the waters under the heavens,
their contraries, devils. Epiph. ad Joan. Hierosol. Episc. (b) Companies]
Apocal. The peaple are like many waters, and here-vpon, some thought the Psalm
meant, saying: You waters that be above the heavens praise the name of the
Lord: for that belongs only to reasonable creatures to do. (c) Though some]
Augustine reckons this for an heresy to hold the waters coeternall with God:
but names no author. I believe Hesiods Chaos and Homers all producing waters
were his originals. (d) Elementary] I see all this grows into question,
whether there be waters above the heavens, and whether they be elementary as
ours are. Of the first there is less doubt. For if (as some hold) Waters above
heaven.
the firmament be the air, then the separation of waters from waters was but
the parting of the clouds from the sea. But the holy men, that affirm the
waters of Genesis to be above the starry firmament, prevail. I guess now in
this great question, that a thick clowd, commixt with air was placed betwixt
heaven and earth, to darken the space between heaven and us: And that part of
it, being thickened into that sea we see, was drawn by the Creator, from the
face of the earth, to the place where it is, and that other part was borne up
by an unknown power, to the uttermost parts of the world. And hence it came
that the upper still including the lower, heaven the fire, fire the air, air
the water, this water includes not the earth, because the whole element
thereof is not under the Moon, as fire and air is. Now for the nature of
those waters, Origin, (to begin with the eldest) holds them resolved into most
pure air: which S. Thomas dislikes, for such bodies could never penetrate the
fire, nor the heavens. But he is too Aristotelique, thinking to bind
incomprehensible effects to the laws of nature, as if this were a work of
nature strictly taken, and not at the liberty of GODS omnipotent power, or that
they had forced through fire and heaven by their condensed violence: Some
disliked the placing of an element above heaven, and therefore held the
Christalline heavens composed of waters, of the same show, but of a far other
nature then the Elementary Both of them are transparent, both cold, but that is
light and ours heavy. Basil says those waters do cool the heat of the
heavens. Our Astronomicall divines, say that Saturnes frigidity proceeds from
those waters: ridiculous as though all the stars of the eighth spear are not
cooler then Saturn! These waters (says Read) are lower then the spiritual
heavens, but higher then all corporeal creatures: kept (as some say) to
threaten a second deluge: But (as others hold better) to cool the heat of the
stars. De nat^rer. But this is a weak conjecture. Let us conclude as
Augustine does, upon Genesis: How, or what they are we know not: there they are
we are sure, for the scriptures authority weighs down man's wit. (c) In
stead of] Another question tossed like the first: How the elements are in our
bodies. In parcels and Atoms peculiar to each of the four, says Elements how
commixtures.
Anaxagoras, Democritus, Empedocles, Plato, Cicero, and most of the
Peripatetiques, Arabians Auerroes, and Auicen: parcels enter not the bodies
composition, says another, but natures only. This is the school opinion, with
the leaders, Scotus and Occam, Aristole is doubtful (as he is generally) yet
holds the ingresse of elements into compoundes. Of the Atomists, some confound
all, making bodies of coherent remaynders, Others destroy all substances.
Howsoever it is, we feel the Elementary powers, heat and drought in our
gall, or choler of the fire: heat and moisture, ayry, in the blood: cold and
moist, watery in the fleame: Cold and dry, earthly, in the melancholy: and in
our bones solydity is earth, in our brain and marrow water, in our blood,
air: in our spirits cheefely of the heart, fire. And though we have less of
one then another, yet have some of each. (f) But there] And thence is all our
troublesome The seat of the brain
fleame derived: Fitly it is seated in the brain, whether all the heat
aspyreth. For were it below, whither heat descends not so, it would quickly
grow dull, and congeale: Whereas now the heat keeps it in continual act,
vigor and vegetation.

Finis, lib. II.
THE CONTENTS OF THE twelfth book of the City of God.
1. Of the nature of good and evil Angels. 2. That no essence is contrary to
God, though all the worlds frailty seem to be opposite unto this immutable
eternity. 3. Of gods enemies not by nature, but will, which hurting them,
hurts their good nature, because there is no vice but hurts nature. 4. Of
vselesse and reason-lesse natures, whose order differs not from the Decorum
held in the whole universe. 5. That the Creator has deserved praise, in every
form and kind of Nature. 6. The cause of the good Angels bliss, and the
evils misery. 7. That we ought not to seek out the cause of the vicious
will. 8. Of the perverse love, whereby the soul goes from the unchangeable to
the changeable good. 9. Whether he that made the Angels natures, made their
wills good also, by the infusion of his love into them, through his holy Spirit.
10. Of the falsenes of that History, that says the world has continued many
thousand years. 11. Of those that hold not the Eternity of the world, but
either a dissolution and generation of innumerable worlds, or of this one at
the expiration of certain years. 12. Of such as held Man's Creation too lately
effected. 13. Of the revolution of Times at whose expiration some Philosophers
held that the Universe should return, to the state it was in at first 14. Of
Man's temporal estate, made by God out of no newness, or change of will. 15.
Whether (to preserve Gods eternal domination) we must suppose that he has
always had creatures to rule over, and how it may be held always created
which is not coeternall with God. 16. How we must understand that God promised
Man life eternal before all eternity. 17. The defense of Gods unchanging will,
against those that fetch Gods works about from eternity, in circles from state
to state. 18. Against such as say things infinite are above Gods knowledge.
19. Of the worlds without end, or Ages of Ages. 20. Of that impious assertion,
that souls truly blessed, shall have diuer s reuolutions into misery again.
21. Of the state of the first Man and Mankind in him. 22. That God fore-knew
that the first Man should sin, and how many people he was to translate out of
his kind into the Angels society. 23. Of the nature of Man's soul, being
created according to the Image of God. 24. Whether the Angels may be called
Creators, of any the least creature. 25. That no nature or form of any thing
living has any other Creator but God. 26. The Platonists opinion, that held
the Angels Gods creatures, and Man the Angels. 27. That the fullness of
Mankind was created in the first Man, in whom God foresaw, both who should
be saved, and who should be damned.
FINIS.
THE TWELFTH BOOK* OF THE CITY OF GOD Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of the nature of good and evil Angels. CHAP. 1.
BEfore I speak of the creation of man, wherein (in respect of mortal
reasonable creatures) the two Cities had their original, as we showed in the
last book of the Angels: (to show as well as we can) the congruity and
conuenience of the society of Men with Angels: and that there are not four,
but rather two societies of Men and Angels qualitied alike, and combined in
either, the one consisting both of good Angels and Men, and the other of evil:
that the contrariety of desires between the Angels good and evil arose from
their diverse natures and beginnings, we may at no hand believe: God having
been alike good in both their creations, and in all things beside them. But
this diversity arises from their wills: some of them persisting in God, their
common good, and in his truth, love and eternity: and other some delighting
more in their own power, as though it were from themselves, fell from that
common al-blessing good to dote upon their own: and taking pride for
eternity, vain deceit for firm truth, and factious envy for perfect love,
became proud; deceiptfull and envious. The cause of their beatitude was their
adherence with GOD; their must their miseries cause be the direct contrary,
namely, their not adherence with GOD. Wherefore if when we are asked why they
are blessed, and we answer well, because they stuck fast unto GOD, and
being asked why they are wretched, we answer well, because they stuck not
unto GOD: Then is there no beatitude for any reasonable or understanding
creature to attain, but in God. So then though all creatures cannot be
blessed, for beasts, trees, stones, etc. are incapable hereof; yet those that
are, are not so of themselves, being created of nothing, but they have it
from the Creator. Attayning him they are happy, loosing him, unhappy: But he
himself is good only of himself, and therefore cannot loose his good,
because he cannot loose himself. God the only immutable good.
Therefore the one, true blessed God, we say is the only immutable good: and
those things he made, are good also, because they are from him, but they are
^able because they were made of nothing. Wherefore though they be not the
chief goods, God being above them, yet are they great, in being able to
adhere unto the chief good, and so be happy, without which adherence, they
cannot but bewrteched Nor are other parcels of the creation better, in that
they cannot be wretched: For we cannot say our other members are better the^
our eyes in that they cannot be blind* but even as sensitive nature in the
worst plight, is better then the insensible stone: so is the reasonable (albeit
miserable) above the brutish, that cannot therefore be miserable. This being
so, then this nature created in such excellence, that though it be mutable yet
by inherence with God that unchangeable good, it may become blessed: Nor
satisfies the own need without blessedness, nor has any means to attain
this blessenesse but God, truly commits a great error and enormity in not
adhering unto him. And all sin is against nature and hurtful thereunto.
Wherefore that nature differs not in Nature, from that which adhereth unto
God, but in Vice: And yet in that Vice is the Nature it self laudable still.
For the Vice being justly discommended, commends the Nature: The true
dispraise of Vice being, that it disgraceth an honest nature: So therefore even
as when we call blindness a fault of the eyes, we show that sight belongs
to the eye: And in calling the fault of the ears deafness, that hearing
belonges to the ear: So likewise when we say it was the Angels fault not to
adhere unto God, we show that that adherence belonged to their natures. And how
great a praise it is to continue in this adherence, fruition and living in so
great a good without death, error or trouble, who can sufficiently declare or
imagine? Wherefore since it was the evil Angels To adhere v^o God.
fault not to adhere unto GOD (all vice being against nature:) It is manifest
that GOD created their natures good: since it is hurt only by their departure
from him.

That no essence is contrary to GOD, though all the worlds frailty seem to be
opposite to his immutable eternity. CHAP. 2.
THis I have said least some should think that the Apostaticall (a) powers
whereof we speak, had a different nature from the rest, as having another
beginning; and (b) not GOD to their author. Which one shall the sooner avoid
by considering what GOD said unto Moses by his Angels, when he sent him to
the children of Israel: I am that I am. For God being the highest Exodus 3.
essence, that is eternal and unchangeable: gave essence to his creatures, but
not such as his own: (d) to some more and to some less: ordering natures
existence by degrees; for as wisdom is derived from being wise, so is essence
ab ipso esse, of having being: the word is new not used of the old Latinists,
but taken of late into the tongue, to serve for to explayne the Greek (...)
which it expresses word for Essence
word. Wherefore unto that especial, high essence, that created all the rest,
there is no nature contrary, but that which has no essence: (f) For that which
has being is not contrary unto that which has also being. Therefore no
essence at all is contrary to GOD the chief essence, and cause of essence in
all.

L VIVES.
APostaticall (a) powers] (...), A forsaker, of (...); The devils are such that
fall from GOD. Theodoret writing of Gods and Angels, says the Hebrew word
is Satan; the Greek (...). Hierome interprets it an adversary, or
transgressor. (b) Apo^a.
Not GOD] Least some should think GOD created not their nature. (c) I am] Of
this already in the eight book. (d) To some] Arist de mundo. The nearest unto
GOD (says Apuleius*) do gain from his power the most celestial bodies, and
every thing the nearer him, the more Divine, and the farther, the lesser. Thus
is GODS goodness, derived gradually from Heaven unto us. And our belief of
this extension of GODS power, we must think that the nearer, or farther off
that he is, the more, or less benefit nature feels. Which the Philosopher
gave him to understand when he said That Gods essence is communicated to some
more, and to some less. For in his predicaments, he directly affirms that
essence admits neither intention nor remission, more nor less. A stone has
essence as well as an Angel. This therefore is referred to the excellence and
qualityes adherent or infused into the essence, which admit augmentation, and
diminution. (e) The word is.] Not so new but that Flauius Sergius used it
before Quintilian, but indeed it was not in general use till of late, when
Philosophy grew into the latin tongue. (f) For that.] Nothing (says
Aristotle) is contrary to substance: taking contrary, for two opposites of one
kind: as black and white, both colors, for he reckneth not priuations, nor
contradictories, for contraries, as he shows in his division of opposites
into four species.

Of Gods enemies, not by nature, but will, which hurting them, hurts their
good nature: because their is no vice but hurts nature. CHAP. 3.
THe scripture calls them Gods enemies, because they oppose his sovereignty
not by nature but will, having no power to hurt him, but them selves. Their will
to resist, not their power to hurt, makes them his foes, for he is
unchangeable Gods enemies.
and wholly incorruptible: wherefore the vice that makes them oppose God, is
their own hurt, and no way Gods: only, because it corrupts their good
nature. Their nature it is not, but there vice that contratieth God: evil
only being contrary to good. And who denies that God is the best good? so then
vice is contrary unto God, as evil is unto good. The nature also which it
corrupts is Good, and therefore opposed by it: but it stands against God as
evil only against good; but against this nature, as evil and hurt also, for
evil cannot hurt GOD, but incoruptible natures only, which are good by the
testimony of the hurt that evil does them, for if they were not good, vice
could not hurt them, for what does it in hurting them but a bolish their
integrity, luster, virtue, safety, and what ever vice can diminish or root out
of a good nature? which if it be not therein, vice takes it not away, and
therefore hurts not: for it cannot be both a vice, and hurtlesse, whence we
gather that though vice, cannot hurt that unchangeable good, yet it can hurt
nothing but good: because it is not, but where it hurts. And so we may say
that vice cannot be in the highest good, nor cannot be but in some good. Good
therefore may be alone, but so cannot evil: because the natures that an evil
will has corrupted, though as they be polluted they are evil, yet as they are
natures, they are good. And when this vicious nature is punished, there is this
good besides the nature, that it is not unpunished, for this is just, and what
is just is questionless good, and no (a) man is punished for the falts of his
nature, but of his will, for that vice that has gotten from a custom into an
habit, and seems natural, had the original from corruption of will: for now
we speak of the vices of that nature wherein is a foul capable of the
intellectual light, whereby we discern between just and unjust.

L. VIVES.
NO (a) man.] Vice or a falt, generally, is a declining from the right. So that
there are of them natural, as if we have gotten any custom of any act
against the Decorum of that Vice and (...).
kind, or have it by nature: as to have more, or fewer members then we should:
stammering of speech, blindness, deafness, or any thing against perfection:
be it in men, beasts, trees, (...) or whatsoever. Then there is falte of
manners, and fault of art, when the worke-man (...) erred from his science. (b)
Natural.] So that is dominereth, and plays the tyrant in a (...), seeking to
compel him to do thus: whereupon many say in excuse of sins, that they
cannot do withal, whereas their own will nousles it up in them, and they may
oppose it if they (...) Though it be not so easily expelled as admitted, yet
the expulsion is not impossible, and unless you expel it, you shall not be
acquit of the guilt.

Of liuelesse, and reasonlesse natures, whose order differs not from the
decorum held in the whole Universe. CHAP. 4.
But it were a sottishness to think that the falts of beasts, trees, and
other unreasonable, senseless, or liuelesse creatures, whereby their
corruptible nature is damnified, are damnable: for the creators will has
disposed of those, thus, to perfect the inferior beauty of this universe by
this (a) successiue alteration of them. For earthly things are not comparable
to heavenly: yet might not the world want those, because the other are more
glorious. Wherefore, in the succession of those things one to another in their
due places, and in the (b) change of the meaner into qualities of the better,
the order of things transitory consists. Which orders glory we delight not
in, because we are annexed to it, as parts of mortality, we cannot discern
the whole Universe, though we observe how conveniently those parcells we see,
are combined: whereupon in things out of our contemplations reach, we must
believe the providence of the Creator, rather then be so rash as to condemn
any part of the worlds F^brique, of any imperfection. Though if we mark well,
by the same reason, those vnvoluntary, and unpunishable falts to those
creatures, commend their natures unto us: none of whom nath any other maker
but GOD: because we our selves dislike that that nature of theirs which we
like should be defaced by that falt: unless men will dislike the natures of
things that hurt them, not consider their natures, but their o^ne profit as (c)
of those creatures that plagued the pride of Egypt. But so they might dispraise
the Sun, for some offenders, or Exodus 8
unjust deteiners of others right, are by the Judges condemned (d) to be set
in the hot Sun. Wherefore it is not the consideration of nature in respect of
our profit, but in it self that glorifieth the Creator. The nature of the
eternal fire is assuredly laudable, though the wicked shall be therein
everlastingly tormented. For what is more fair then the bright, pure and
flaming fire? what more useful to heat, cure, or boil withal? though not so
hurtful in burning. Thus that (e) being penally applied, is pernicious, which
being orderly used, is, convenient: (f) for who can explane the thousand uses
of it in the world? Hear Natures absolute excellence even in things that
punish man.
them not (g) that praise the fires light and dispraise the heat: respecting
not the nature of it but their own profit and disprofite: they would see, but
they would not burn. But they consider not that this light they like so,
being immoderately used, hurts a tender eye: and that in this heat which
they dislike so, many (h) creatures do very conveniently keep, and live.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) successiue] One decaying, and another succeeding. (b) Change of the]
He touches the perpetual alteration of elements and elementary bodies, where
some are transmuted into the more powerful agent, and sometimes the agent puts
on the nature of the passive. Air Punishment of malefactor* in the sun.
continually takes from water, and water from air: So does fire from air and
air from fire, but in diuer^ places. (c) Of those] The frogs, and ^nats. (d)
To be set* A ^inde of punishment, especially infamous, yet, not without pain.
The bawdes in Spain are thus punished: set in the stocks, and anointed al
with honey, which draws all the Bees, F^es and Waspes in a Country, unto them.
(e) Being penally] So we read it for the best. (f) ^or who* Thence is the
common proverb of a thing of common use: We have as much use of it, as of
fire or water: as T^lly says of friendship. Lael. And to forbid one fire and
water, (man's two chief necessaries) is as it were to expel him of all human
society. Uitruuius says that the coming t^her unto the fire brought men
first to talk together, and so produced commerce, societies and cities lib. 2.
Lactantius proves man a divine creature, because he only of all creatures
uses the fire. (g) That praise] Taught by Plutarchs Satyr that loved
Prometheus his The goodness of fire.
new found fire, so that he fell a kissing of it, and burning his lips threw
it down, and ran ^way. Such a tale tells Mela of the sea-bordering Affricans,
to whom Eudoxus carried fire. (h) C^res] In Cyprus in the brass furnaces,
where they burn redd Virrioll many daye^ together, are produced winged
creatures, a little bigger then the greatest flies, and those live i^ the fire.
Arist. Hist. animal. lib. 5. The Salamander they say not only lives in the
fire unburned, Salamander.
but also puts it out, with his very touch.

That the Creator has deserved praise in every form and kind of nature.
CHAP. 5.
WHerefore all natures are good, because they have their form, kind, and a
certain rest withal in themselves. And when they are in their true posture
of nature, they preserve the essence in the full manner as they received it:
and that, whose essence is not eternal, follows the laws of the creator
that swayeth it, and changes into better, or worse, tending (by Gods
disposition) still to that end which the order of the universe requires: so
that that corruption which brings all natures mortal unto dissolution,
cannot so dissolve that which was, but it may become that afterward which it
was before, or that which it should be: which being so, then God, the highest
being, who made all things that are not himself, (no creature being fit for
that equality, being made of nothing) and consequently being not able to have
been, but by him) is not to be discommended through the taking offense at some
faults, but to be honored upon the due consideration of the perfection of all
natures.

L. VIVES.
A (a) certaine] Every thing keeping harmonious agreement both with it self
and others, without corrupting discord: which made some ancient writers
affirm, that the world (...) upon love:

The cause of the good Angels bliss, and the evils misery. CHAP. 6.
THE true cause therefore of the good Angels bliss, is their adherence to
that most high essence: and the just cause of the bad Angels misery, is their
departure from that high essence, to reside upon themselves, that were not
such: which vice what is it else but (a) pride? For pride is the root of all
sin. Eccl. 10.
These would not therefore stick unto him, their strength, and having power to
be more (b) perfect by adherence to this highest good, they preferred
themselves that were his inferiors, before him. This was the first fall,
misery and vice of this nature, which all were it not created to have the
highest being, yet might it have beatitude by fruition of the highest being:
but falling from him, not be ^de nothing, but yet less then it was, and
consequently miserable. Seek the c^e of this evil will, and you shall find
just none. For what can cause the wills (...), the will being sole cause of all
evil? The evil will therefore causes evil works, but nothing causes the
evil will. If there be, then either it has a will or ^one. If it have, it is
either a good one or a bad: if good, what fool will say, a good will is cause
of an evil will? It should if it caused sin: but this were extreme
absurdity to affirm. But if that it have an evil will, then I a^ke what
caused this evil will in it? and to limite my questions, I ask the cause of
the first evil will. For not that which an other evil will has caused, is
the first evil will, but that which none has caused: for still that which
causes is before the other caused. If I be answered, that nothing caused it,
but it was from the beginning, I ask then whe^er it were in any nature: If it
were in none, it had no being: if it were in any, it corrupted it, hurt it, and
deprived it of all good: and therefore this Vice could not be in an evil
nature, but in a good, where it might do hurt: for if it could not hurt, it
was no vice, and therefore no bad will: and if it did hurt, it was by privation
of good, or diminishing of it. Therefore a bad will could be from eternity in
that wherein a good nature had been before, which the evil will destroyed by
hurt. Well if it were not eternal, who made it? It must be answered, something
that had no evil will: what was this inferior, superior, or equal unto it? If
it were the superior, it was better, and why then had it not a will, nay, a
better will?

This may also be said of the equal: for two good wills never make the one
the other bad: It remains then that some inferior thing that had no will was
cause of that vicious will in the Angels. I but all things below them, even to
the lowest earth, being natural, is also good, and has the goodness of form
and kind in all order: how then can a good thing produce an evil will? how
can good be cause of evil? for the will turning from the superior to the
inferior, becomes bad, not because the thing whereunto it turns is bad, but
because the division is bad, and perverse. No inferior thing then does deprave
the will, but the will depraues it self by following inferior things
inordinately. For if two of like affect in body and mind should behold one
beauteous personage, and the one of them be stirred with a lustful desire
toward it, and the others thoughts stand chaste, what shall we think was
cause of the evil will in the one and not in the other? Not the seen beauty:
for it transformed not the will in both, and yet both saw it alike: not the
flesh of the beholders face, why not both? nor the mind we presupposed them
both alike before, in body and mind. Shall we say the devil secretly
suggested it into one of them, as though he consented not to it in his own
proper will?

This consent therefore, the cause of this assent of the will to vicious
desire, is that we seek. For, to take away one let more in the question, if
both were tempted, and the one yielded, and the other did not, why was this,
but because the one would continue chaste, and the other would not? whence then
was this secret fall but from the proper will, where there was such parity in
body and mind, a like sight, and a like temptation? So then he that desires
to know the cause of the vicious will in the one of them, if he ma^ke i^ well
shall find nothing. For if we say that he caused it, what was he ere his
vicious will, but a creature of a good nature, the work of GOD, that
unchangeable good? Wherefore he that says that he that consented to this
lustful desire which the other with-stood, (both being before alike affected,
and beholding the beautiful object alike) was cause of his own evil will,
whereas he was good before this vice of will; Let him ask why he caused this?
whether from his nature, or for that he was made of nothing; and he shall
find that his evil will arose not from his nature, but from his nothing: for
if we shall make his nature the effecter of his vicious will, what shall we
do but affirm that good is the efficient cause of evil? But how can it be
that nature (though it be mutable) before it have a vicious will, should do
viciously, namely in making the will, vicious?

L. VIVES.
But (a) pride] Scotus holds that the Angels offense was not pride, I think
only because he will oppose Saint Thomas, who held (with the Fathers) the
contrary. (b) Perfect] in essence and exellence.

That we ought not to seek out the cause of the vicious will. CHAP. 7.
LEt none therefore seek the efficient cause of an evil will: for it is not
efficient but deficient, nor is there effect but defect: namely falling from
that highest essence, unto a lower, this is to have an evil will. The causes
whereof (being not efficient but deficient) if one endeavor to seek, it is as
if he should seek to see the darkness, or to hear silence: we know them
both, this by (a) the ear, and that by the eye: but not by any forms of
theirs, but privation of forms. Let none then seek to know that of me which
I know not my self: unless he will learn not to know what he must know
that he cannot know: for the things that we know by privation and not by
form, are rather (if you can conceit me) known by not knowing: and in
knowing them, are still unknown. For the bodies eye coursing over bodyly
objects, sees no darkness, but when it cease to see. And so it belongs to
the ear, and to no other sense to know silence, which notwithstanding is not
known but by not hearing. So our intellect does speculate the intelligible
forms, but where they fail it learneth by not learning: for who can
understand his faults? This I know, that Gods nature can never fail in time,
nor in part: but all things that are made of nothing may decay: which Psalm. 19.
The divine essence never can fail.
do not-with-standing more good, as they are more essential: for then do
they something when they have efficient causes: but in that they fail, and
fall off, and do evil, they have deficient causes: and what do they then but
vanity?

L. VIVES.
BY the (a) eare] Contraries are known both by one method, say the
Philosophers, and the primative is known only by separation of the knowledge
of the Positive.

Of the perverse love, whereby the soul goes from the unchangeable to the
changeable good. CHAP. 8.
I Know besides that wherein the vicious will is resident, therein is that
done, which if the will would not, should not be done: and therefore the
punishment falls justly upon those acts which are wills and not neces^ities. It
is not the (a) thing to which we fall, but our fall that is evil: that is:
we fall to no evil natures, but against natures order, from the highest to
the lower: and therefore evil. Couetise is no vice in the gold, but in him
that peruersly leaves justice to T^ inordinate love of things bad, not the
things ^selues.
love gold, whereas justice ought always to be preferred before riches. Nor
is lust the fault of sweet bautious bodies, but the souls that runs
peruersly to bodily delights, neglecting temperance, which scorns all company
with those, and prepares us unto far more excellent and spiritual pleasures.
Vainglory is not a vice proper to human praise, but the souls, that
peruersely affects praise of men, not respecting the consciences testimony.
Nor is pride his vice that gives the power, but the souls, peruersly loving
that power, contemning the justice of the most mighty. By this then, he that
peruersly affected a good of nature, though he attain it, is evil himself in
this good; and wretched, being deprived of a better.

L. VIVES.
THE (a) thing] It is not the action, but the quality and manner thereof that
is vicious, said Plato.

Whether he that made the Angels natures, made their wills good also, by the
infusion of his love into them through his holy spirit. CHAP. 9.
SEeing therefore there is no natural nor (a) essential cause, effecting the
evil of will, but that evil of mutability of spirit, which depraueth the good
of nature, arises from it self: being effected no way but by falling from
God, which falling also has no cause: If we say also that good wills have no
efficient cause we must beware least they be not held uncreated and coeternall
with God. But seeing that the Angels themselves were created, how can their
wills but be so also? Besides being created, whether were they created with
them, or without them first? if with them, then doubtless he that made one,
made both: and (b) as soon as they were created, they were joined to him in
that love wherein they were created. And therein were they severed from the
other, because they kept their good-wills still, and the other were changed by
falling in their evil will, from that which was good, whence they needed not
have fallen unless they had listed. But if the good Angels were at first
without good wills, and made those wills in themselves without Gods working,
were they therefore made better of themselves then by his creation? God
forbid. For what were they without good wills, but evil. Or, if they were not
evil because they had no evil wills neither, nor fell from that which they
had not, how-so-euer they were not as yet so good, as when they had gotten good
wills. But now if they could not make themselves better then God (the best
workman of the world) had made them: then verily could they never have had
good wills but by the operation of the creator in them. And these good wills,
effecting their conversion (not to themselves who were inferiors, but) to the
supreme God, to adhere unto him, and be blessed by fruition of him, what do
they else but show, that the best will should have remained poor, in desire
only, but that he who made a good nature of nothing capable of himself, (e)
made it better by perfecting it of himself, first having made it more desirous
of perfection? for this must be examined: whether the good Angels created good
will in themselves, by a good will or a badde, or none: if by none, then none
they created. If by a badde, how can a badde will produce a good? if by a good,
then had they good wills already.

And who gave them those, but he that created them by a good will, that is in
that chaste love of their adherence to him, both forming them nature, and giving
The fall from good the cause of evil.
them grace? Believe it therefore the Angels were never without good will,
that is Gods love: But those that were created good, and yet became evil by
their proper will, (which no good nature can do but in a voluntary defect from
good, that, and not the good being the cause of evil) either (d) received
less grace from the divine love, then they that persisted therein, or if the
had equal good at their creation, the one fell by the evil wills, and the
other having further help attained that bliss, from which they were sure
never to fall, as we showed in our last book. Therefore, to gods due praise we
must confess that the diffusion of Gods love is be^owed as well upon the
Angels, as the Saints, by his holy spirit bestowed upon them: and that that
Scripture: It is good for me to adhere unto God, was peculiar Psalm. 73.
at first to the holy Angels, before man was made. This good they all
participate with him to whom they adhere, and are a holy city, a living
sacrifice, and a living temple unto that God. Part whereof, namely that which
the Angels shall gather and take up from this earthly pilgrimage unto that
society, being now in the flesh, upon earth, or dead, and resting in the (e)
secret receptacles of souls, how it had first original, must I now explain,
as I did before of the Angels. For of Gods work, The first man, came all man
kind, as the scripture says, whose authority is justly admired throughout the
earth and those natures, whom (amongst other things) it prophesied should
believe it.

L. VIVES.
OR (a) Essential.] As having essence. (b) As soon.] He plainly confesses
that the Angels were all created in grace. De corrept, et great. Before they
fell they had grace. Hierome also The creation of the Angels.
upon Os^a affirms that the Devils were created with great fullness of the
holy spirit. But Augustine De genes. ad lit, seems of another mind, saying the
angelical nature was first created vnformall. The Divines here upon are
divided: some following Lombard Sent. 2. did. 4. Ales, and B^nture deny that
the Angels were created in grace. Saint Thomas holds the contrary. I dare not,
nor have not where withal to decide a matter so mightily disputed and of such
moment. Augustine in most plain words, and many places, houlds that they were
created in grace as that of Exechiel seems also to import: Thou sealest up the
sun, and art full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty. (c) Made it.] Showing
that God gave them more grace when they showed Eze. 28. 12
their obedience (of this I see no question made:) in such measure, as he
assured them of eternity of bliss. (d) Received less.] If all the Angels had
grace given them, it then should have bin distributed with respect of persons,
to some more, and to some of the same order less. But it was given gradually
to the orders not to each particular Angel: whereupon some of the same order
fell, and some stood, though both had grace given them alike. (e) Secret.] He
The dgree^ of grace.
doubts not of the glory, but of the glories place before the judgment; for
they may be blesed any where, God, in whose fruition they are blessed being
every where.

Of the falsenesse of that History that says the world has continued many
thousand years. CHAP. 10.
LEt the conjectures therefore of those men that fable of man's and the worlds
original they know not what pass for us: for some think that men (...)
been always, as of the world; as Apuleis writes of men: Severally mortal,
but generally, eternal, (b) And when we say to them: why if the world has
always been, how can your histories speak true in relation of who invented
this or that, who brought up arts and learning, and who first inhabited this
or that region? they answered us: the world has at certain times been so
wasted by fires, and deluges, that the men were brought to a very few: whose
progeny multiplied again: and so seemed this as man's first original, whereas
indeed it was but a reparation of those whom the fires and floods had
destroyed: but that man cannot have production but from man. They speak now
what they think, but not what they know: being deceived by a sort of most
false writings, that say the world has continued a many thousand years, where
as the holy scriptures gives us not account of (c) full six thousand years
since man was made. To show the falsenesse of these writings briefly, and that
their authority is not worth a rush herein, (d) that Epistle of Great Alexander
to his mother, containing a narration of things by an Aegiptian Priest unto
him, made out of their religious mysteries: contains also the Monarchies,
that the Greek histories record also: In this Epistle (e) the Assyrian
monarchy lasts five thousand years and above. But in the Greek history,
from Belus the first King, it continues but one thousand three hundred years.
And with Belus does the Egiptian story begin also. The Persian Monarchy
(says that Epistle) until Alexanders conquest (to whom this Priest spoke
thus) lasted above eight thousand years: whereas the Macedonians until
Alexanders death lasted but four hundred four score and five years, and the
Persians until his victory two hundred thirty and three years, by the Greek^
story. So far are these computations short of the Egiptians, being not equal
with them though they were trebled. For (f) the Egiptians are The Egiptian
years.
said once to have had their (g) years but four months long: so that one
full year of the Greeks or ours, is just three of their old ones. But all
this will not The Greek histories (...) th^n the Egiptian^ in the computation
of the Monarchies
make the Greek and Egiptian computations meet: and therefore we must rather
trust the Greek, as not exceeding our holy scriptures account. But if this
Epistle of Alexander being so famous, differ so far from the most probable
account, how much less faith then ought we to give to those their fabulous
antiquities, fraught with leasings, against our divine books, that foretold
that the whole world should believe them, and the whole world has done so: and
which prove that they wrote truth in things past, by the true occurrences of
things to come, by them presaged.

L. VIVES.
Severally (a) mortall] Apuleius Florid. l. 2. cunctim, generally, or
universally, of cunctus, all, (b) And when] Macrobius handles this argument at
large. De somn. scip. and thinks he puts it off with that that Augustine here
recites. Plato seems the author of this shift in his Timaus, where Critias
relating the conference of the Egiptian Priest and Solon, says, that we know
not what men have done of many years before; because they change their
country, or are expelled it by floods, fires, or so, and the rest hereby
destroyed. Which answer is easily confuted, foreseeing that all the world can
neither be burned nor drowned (Arist. Meteor.) the remainders of one ancient
sort of men might be preserved by another, and so derived down to us, which
Aristotle seeing (as one witty, and mindful of what he says) affirms that
we have the relics of the most ancient Philosophy left us. Metaphys. 12. Why
then is there no memory of things three thousand years before thy memory. (c)
Full six thousand] Eusebius whose account Augustine follows, reckons from
the creation unto the sack of Rome by the Goths 5611. years* following the
Septuagints. Forbid out of the Hebrew reserueth unto the time The liberty
that the old wri^ers used in computation of time.
of Honorius and Theodosius the younger (when the Goths took Rome) but 4377.
of this different computation here-after. (d) That Epistle] Of this before,
book eight. (e) The Assyri^] Hereof in the 18. book more fitly. Much liberty
do the old chroniclers use in their account of time. Plin. lib. 11, out of
Eudoxus, says that Zoroaster lived 6000. years before Plato's death. So faith
Aristotle. Herimippus says he was 5000. years before the Trojan war. Tully
writes that the Chaldees had accounts of 470000. years in their chronicles. De
diuinat 1. (...) says also that they reckned from their first astronomer
until great Alexander 43000. years. (f) The Egiptians] Extreme liers in
their years. Plato writes that the City Sais in Egypt had chronicles of the
countries deeds for 8000. years space. And Athens was built 1000. years
before Sais. Laertius writes that Vulcan was the son of Nilus, and reckneth
48863. years between him and Great Alexander:: in which time there fell 373.
ecclipses of the Sun, and 832. of the Moon. Mela lies alittle lower: saying
that the Egiptians reckon 330. Kings before Amasis, and above 13000. years.
But the lie wanted this subsequent, that since they were Egiptians, Heaven has
had four changes of reuolutions, and the Sun has set twice where it rises
now. Diodorus also writteth that from Osyris unto Alexander that built
Alexandria, some reckon 10000. and some 13000. years: and some fable that the
Gods had the Kingdom of Isis: and then that men reigned afterward very near
15000. years, until the 180. Olympiad, when Ptolomy began to reign.
Incredible was this ab^ vanity of the Egiptians who to make themselves the
first of the creation, lied so many thousand years. Which was the cause that
many were deceived, and deceived others also as conc^ning the worlds original.
Tully follows Plato and makes Egypt infinitely old, and so does ^ristotle.
Polit 7. (g) Years but] Pliny lib. 7. says the Nations divided their years
some The monthly years.
by the Summer, some by the Winter, some by the quarters as the Archadians
whose year was three months, some by the age of the Moon, as the Egiptians.
So that some of them have lived a thousand of their years. Censorinus says
that the Egiptians most ancient years was two months. Then King Piso made it
four, at last it came to thirteen months and five days. Diodorus says that
it being reported that some of the ancient Kings had reigned 1200. years,
being to much to believe, they found for certain that the course of the Sun
being not yet known, they counted their years by the Moons. So then the
wonder of old (...) cease, some dividing our year into four as diverse of
the Greeks did. Diodorus says also that the Chaldees had months to their
years. But to show what my conjecture is of these numbers of years amongst
the nations, I hold that men being so much gi^n to the stars, counted the
course of every star for a year. So that in 30. years of the S^e, are one
of Saturn, five of Jupiter, six of Mars, more then 30. of Uenus and Mercury,
and almost 400, of the Moon. So they are in all near 500.

Of those that hold not the eternity of the World, but either a dissolution and
generation of inumera^le Worlds, or of this one at the e^piration of certain
years. CHAP. 11.
But others there are, that do not think the World eternal, and yet either
imagine it, not to be one (a) world but many: or (b) one only, dissolved and
regenerate at the date of certain years. Now these must needs confess, that
there were first men of themselves, ere any men were begotten. (c) For they
cannot think that the whole world perishing, any man could remain, as they
may do in those burnings, and inundations which left still some men to repair
mankind: but as they hold the world to be re-edified out of the own ruins,
so must they believe that mankind first was produced out of the elements, and
from these first, as man's following propagation, as other creatures, by
generation of their like.

L. VIVES.
NOt to be one (a) world] Which Democritus and Epicurus held. (b) One onely]
Heraclytus, Hippasus and the Stoickes held that the world should be consumed by
fire, and then be re^ed. (c) For they cannot] Plato and Aristotle hold that
there cannot be an universal deluge, or burning. But the Stoickes (as Tully
says) believed that the World at length should become all on fire, and the
moisture so dried, as neither the earth could nourish the plants, nor the air
be drawn in breadth ^or produced, all the water being consumed. So that Plato
and Aristotle still reserved (...) then for propagation: these, none, but
destroyed All, to re-edifie All.

Of such as held Man's Creation too lately effected. CHAP. 12.
WHerefore our answer to those that held the world to have been ab aeterno,
against Plato's express confession, though some say he spoke not as he
thought, the same shall be our answer still to those that think Man's Creation
too lately effected, having letten those innumerable spaces of time pass, and
by the scriptures authority been made but so late, as within this six
thousand years. If the b^ity of time be offensive, and that the years since
Man was made seem so few, let them consider that (a) nothing that has an
extreme, is continual: and that all the definite spaces of the World being
compared to the interminate Nothing co^uall that has an extreme.
Trinity, are as (a very little: Nay as) just nothing. And therefore though we
should reckon five or six, or sixty, or six hundred thousand years, and
multiply them so often till the number wanted a name, and say then GOD made
man, yet may we ask why he made him no sooner? For GODS pause before Man's
Creation being from all eternity was so great, that compare a definite number
with it, of never so unspeakable a quantity, and it is not so much, as one
half drop of water being counterpoised with the whole Ocean: for in these,
though the one be so exceeding small, and the other so incomparably great, yet
(b) both are definite. But that time which has any original, run it on to
never so huge a quantity, being compared unto that which has no beginning, I
know not whether to call it small, or nothing. For, withdraw but moments from
the end of the first, and be the number never so great, it will (as if one
should diminish the number of a man's days from the time he lives in, to his
birth day) decrease, until we come to the very beginning. But from the later
abstract (not moments, nor days, nor months nor years, but as much time as
the other whole number contained, (lie it out of the compass of all
computation) and that as often as you please, prevail you when you can never
attain the Beginning, it having none at all? Wherefore that which we ask now
after five thousand years and the ouerp^s, our posterity may as well ask
after six hundredth thousand years, if our mortallity should succeed, and our
infirmity endure so long. And our forefathers, presently upon the first man's
time might have called this in question. Nay the first man himself, that very
day that he was made, or the next might have asked why he was made no sooner?
But when soever he had been made, this contro^ie of his original and the
worlds should have no better foundation then is (...) now.

L. VIVES.
NOthing (a) that] Cic. de senect. When the extreme comes, then that which is
past, is gone (b) Both are] Therefore is there some propertion between them,
whereas between definite, and indefinite there is none.

Of (...) (...) of Times at whose expiration some Philosophers held that the V^
should (...) to the state it was in at first. CHAP. 13.
NOw these Philosophers believed that this world had no other dissolution,
(...) renewing of it continually at certain (a) reuolutions of time, wherein
the (...) of things was repaired: and so passed on a continual (b) rotation of
ages (...) and coming: whether this fell out in the continuance of one world,
or the (...) arising, and falling gave this succession, and date of things by
the own re^ion, from which ridiculous mocking they cannot free the immortal
nor the (...) ^oule, but it must still be tossed unto false bliss, and beaten
back into true mi^ how is that bliss true, whose eternity is ever uncertain,
the soul either (...) ^gnora^t of the return unto misery, or fearing it in
the midst of felicity? But (...) from misery to happiness never to return,
then is some thing begun in (...) which time shall never give end unto, and why
not then the world? and why (...) made therein; (to avoid all the false tracts
that deceived wits have de^ distract men from the truth): for (c) some will
have that place of Ecclesias^ Ecc. 1. 9. 10
(...) that is it that has been that (which shall be: what is it that has
been made? (...) ^ch shall be made. (d) And there is no new thing under the
sun: nor any thing (...) (...) may say, behold this is new: it has been
already in the time that was before (...) be understood of these reciprocal
reuolutions, whereas he meant either (...) things he spoke of before, viz, the
successiue generations; the suns mo^, the torrents falls; or else generally
of all transitory creatures; for there were (...) ^ore us, there are with us,
and there shall be after us, so it is of trees, and (...). Nay even monsters,
though they be unusual, and diverse, and some have (...) ^t but once, yet as
they are generally wonders, and miracles, they are ^st and to come: nor is it
news to see a monster under the Sun. Though (...) ^ll have the wise man to
speak of Gods predestination that fore-framed (...) therefore that now there
is nothing new under the Sun. But far be (...) from believing that these
words of Solomon should mean those reuolu^ they do dispose the worlds course
and renouation by: as Plato the A^ Philosopher taught in the Academy that in a
certain unbounded (...)* yet definit, Plato himself, his scholars, the city
and school should after (...) ages meet all in that place again and be as
they were when he taught (...) God forbid I say that we should believe this.
For Christ once died for our Rom 6. (...). These. 4. Psalm. 12. 7.
(...) and rising again, dies no more, nor has death any future dominion
over him, (...) after our resurrection shall be always with the Lord, to whom
now we say (...) the Psalm: Thou will keep us O Lord and preserve us from
this generation for (...) The following place I think fittes them best: The
wicked walk in a circuit: (...) cause their life (as they think) is to run
circularly, but because their false do^ runs round in a circular maze.

L. VIVES.
^lutions (a) Of.] Platonisme holding a continual progression and succession
of causes (...) effects, and when heaven has reuolued it self fully, and come
to the point whence it Revolution of times.
(...) first, then is the great year perfect, and all shall be as they were at
first. (b) Rotation.] (...), a ^it word of Uoluo to roll. (c) Some.] Origin,
Periarch. lib. 2. I will follow Hierome (...) then R^s in citying Origens
Dogmaticall doctrines, and that for good reasons: we (...) Origin) that there
was a world ere this, and shall be another after it: will you hear our (...) for
the later? Here Esaias saying I will create new heavens, and a new earth; to
remain in Is^. 65. 17.
(...), for the first Ecclesi^stes: What is it that has bin? that which
shall be. etc. for all things (...), as they are in the old ages before us. Thus
Origin, yet he doubts whether these (...) shall be alike, or somewhat different.
(d) And there is no.] Simmachus has translated (...) then Hierome, referring
it unto Gods prescience, that al things of this world were first in the
Creators knowledge, though Augustine a little before, take it as meant of the
generality of things, and touches Hieromes exposition.

Of Man's temporal estate, made by God, out of no newness or change of will.
CHAP. 14.
But what wonder if these men run in their circular error, and find no way
forth, seeing they neither know mankindes original nor his end? being not
able to pearce into Gods depths: who being eternal, and without beginning yet
gave time a beginning, and made Man in time whom he had not made before, God
eternal.
yet not now makes he him by any sudden motion, but as he had eternally
decreed. Who can penetrate this (a) inscrutable depth, wherein GOD gave Man a
Psalm. 11.
temporal beginning and had none before: and this out of his eternal,
unchangeable will; multiplying all mankind from one? for when the Psalmist had
said, Thou shall keep us OLORD, and preserve us from this generation for ever,
then he reprehendeth those whose fond and false doctrine reserve no eternity
for the souls blessed freedom, in adjoining, The wicked walk in a Cy^cuite:
as who should say, what do thou think or believe? Should we say that God
suddenly determined to make Man, whom he had not made in all eternity before,
and yet that God is ever immutable, and cannot change his will, least this
should draw us into doubt, he answers God presently, saying: In thy deep
wisdom did thou multiply the sons of men. Let men think talk or dispute,
as they will (says he) and argue as they think, In thy deep wisdom, which
none can discover, did thou multiply mankind. For it is most deep, that GOD
should be from eternity, and yet decree that Man should be made at this time,
and not before, without alteration of will.

L. VIVES.
THis inscrutable] The text is inuestigabilem, put for the just contrary minime
inuestigabi^ unsearchable, as indolere and inuocare in latin is used both for
affirmative and negative.

Whether (to preserve Gods eternal domination) we must suppose that he has
always had creatures to rule over, and how that may be held always created,
which is not coeternall with God. CHAP. 15.
But I, as I dare not deny Gods domination (a) eternal from ever, so may I not
doubt but that Man had a temporal beginning before which he was not. But when
I think, what God should be Lord over from enternity, here do I fear Romans
11. 14
to affirm any thing, because I look into my self, and know that it is said,
Wh^ can know the Lords counsels? or who can think what God intends? Our
cogitations are fearful, and our fore-casts are uncertain. The corruptible
body suppresseth the soul, and the earthly mansion keeps down the mind that
is much occupied. Therefore of these which I reuolue in this earthly mansion,
they are Wis^. 3.
many, because out of them all I cannot find that one of them or besides them
which perhaps I think not upon, and yet is true. If I say there has been
creatures ever for God to be Lord off who has been ever, and ever Lord: but
the they were now those; and then others by success of time (least we should
make some of them coeternall with the Creator, which faith and reason
reprooueth) This must we look that it be not absurd for a mortal creature
to have been ^uely from the beginning, and the immortal creature to have had
a tem^ original in this our time, and not before, wherein the Angels were
created ^her they be meant by the name of light, or, heaven, of whom it is
said, (...) ^inning God created heaven and earth:) and that they were not from
the be^g, until the time that they were created: for otherwise they should be
co^ll with God. If I say they were not created in time, but before it, that God
(...) be their Lord, who has been a Lord for ever. Then am I demanded,
(...) they were before all time, of how could they that were created be from
(...)? And here I might perhaps answer how that which has been for the (...)
of all time, may not be unfitly said to have been always, and they have
(...) (...) in all time, that they were before all time, if Time began with
heavens (...), and they were before heaven. But if time began not so, but
were be^uen not in hours, days, months or years (for sure it is that these
dimen^, properly called times, began from the stars courses, as God said
when Times.
(...) them: Let them be for signs, and seasons and days, and years) but in
some (...) wondrous motion whose former part did pass by, and whose later,
succee^, it being impossible for them to go both together: If there were such
a (...) in the Angels motions, and that as soon as they were made, they began
to (...) thus, even in this respect have they been from the beginning of all
(...) Time, and they having original both at once. And who will not say that
^th been for all. Time, has been always? But if I answer thus; some (...)
^to me, why are they not then coeternall with the Creator if both he and ^ue
been always? What shall I say to this? That they have bin always, (...) that
time and they had original both together, and yet they were created? (...)
deny not that time was created, though it has been for all times conti^;
otherwise, there should have been a time that had been no time, but ^oole
will say so? we may say, there was a time when Rome was not: when ^lem was
not: Abraham, or Man himself, or so, when they all were not. N^ the world it
self being not made at times: beginning but afterward, we (...) say; there
was a time when the world was not. But to say, there was a time when time was
not, is as improper, as to say there was a Man when there was no (...), or a
world, when the world was not. If we mean of diverse perti^, we may say,
this Man was when that was not: and so this Time was when (...) not; true. But
to say Time was, when no Time was, who is so sottish? (...) as we say Time was
created, and yet has been always, because it (...) been whilst Time has
been, so is it no consequent then that the An^ that have been always, should
yet be uncreated, seeing they have been ^s, only in that they have been
since Time has been: and that because (...) could not have been without
them. For whereno creature is whose mo^lay proportion Time forth, there can be
no Time: and therefore though (...) ^ue been always they are created, and not
coeternall with the Creator: (...) he has been unchangeable from all
eternity, but they were created, and (...) said to have been always, because
they have been all Time, that could (...) without them. But Time, being
transitory, and mutable, cannot be co^ll with unchanging eternity? And
therefore though Angels have no bodi^ ^tation, nor is this part past in them
and the other to come, yet their (...), measuring Time, admits the
differences of past and to come: And therefore they can never be coeternal with
their Creator, whose motion admits neither past, present, nor future.
Wherefore GOD having been always a Lord, has always had a creature to be
Lord over, not begotten by him, but created out of nothing by him, and not
coeternall with him, for he was before it, though in no time before it: nor
foregoing it in any space, but in perpetuity. But if I answer this to those
that ask me, how the Creator should be always Lord, and yet have no creature
to be Lord over: or how has he a creature that is not coeternall with him, if
it has been always: I fear to be thought rather to affirm what I know
not, then teach what I know? So that I return to the Creators revealed will;
what he allows to wiser knowledges, in this life, or reserueth for all unto
the next, I profess my self unable to attain to. But this I thought to
handle without affirming, that my readers, may see what questions to for bear
as dangerous: and not to hold them fit for farther inquiry: rather following
the Apostles wholesome counsel, saying: I say through the grace that is given
me, unto every one amongst you, presume not to understand more then is meet to
understand, (...). 12
but understand according to sobriety, as God has dealt unto every man (c) the
measure of faith, for (d) if an infant be nourished according to his strength,
he will grow up, but if he be strained above his nature, he will rather fade
then increase in growth and strength.

L. VIVES.
DOmination (a) eternall] He had no servants to rule, in respect of whom he
might be called a Lord: for Lord is a relative: and it fitted not the Son and
the Holy Ghost to call him Lord. (b) He has beene] His continuance, is, but
we abuse the words: and say he was, and shall be: not being able in out
circumscribed thoughts to comprehend the eternity. (c) (...) measure] (...).
The Greeks use the Accusative often of our ablative, or rather for the
seventh case Paul means the proportionating of wisdom to the measure of
faith. (d) If an infant] Quintilian has such another family: pour water
easily into a narrow mouthed glass, and it will be filled: but power to fast,
and it will run by, and not go in. Institut. lib. 1.

How we must understand that God promised Man life eternal, before all
eternity. CHAP. 16.
What revolution passed ere man's creation, I confess I know not: but sure I
am, no creature is coeternall with the Creator. The Apostle speaks of
eternal times, not to come, but (which is more wondrous) past. For thus he
says, under the hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, has
promised before all eternity (a) of time: but his word he has manifested in
time. Behold he talks of (...). 2
Times eternity past, yet makes it not coeternall with GOD. For he was not
only himself before all eternity, but promised eternal life before it, which
he manifested in his due Time: that was, his word: for that is eternal life.
But how did he promise it unto men that were not before eternity, but that in
his eternity and coeternall world, he had predestined what was in Time to be
manifested.

L. VIVES.
BBfore (a) all eternity.] Tit. 1. 2. Hi^ome expoundes it thus. We may not
omit to decl^ The (...) (...) what they are.
how GOD that cannot lie, promised life, before eternity. Even since the world
(as it is (...) (...) (...)) ^s made, and time ordained to pass in days,
months and years, in this course the times pass (...) come being past or
future. Whereupon some Philosophers held no time present, but all either past or
to come: because all that we do, speak, or think, either passes as it is a
doing, or is so come if it be not done. We must therefore believe an eternity
of continuance, before these ^ldly times: in which, the Father was, with the
Son and the Holy Ghost, and if I may say so, all ^ity is one Time of Gods:
nay innumerable Times, for he being infinite was before time, and shall exceed
all Time: our world is not yet 6000. years old: what eternities what huge
Times and originalls of ages may we imagine was before it, wherein the A^gells,
Thrones, Dominations and other hoasts served God, and subsisted by Gods
command, ^out measure or courses of Times? So then, before all these Times,
which neither the tongue (...) declare, the mind comprize, or the secret
thought once touch at, did GOD the Father of visdome promise his Word and
Wisdom, and Life to such as would believe upon this promise: Thus far Hierome.
Peter Lumbard obiecting this against himself, makes Hierome speak it as
confuting others, not affirming himself. Sent. lib. 2. So does he with
Augustine also is many places: an easy matter, when great authors oppose ought
that we approve. Augstine against the Priscillianists says that them times
were called eternal, before which there was no time, as if one should say,
from the creation, our common reading is: before the world began, the greek is
(...).

The defense of Gods unchanging will against those that fetch Gods works about
from eternity, in circles, from state to state. CHAP. 17.
NO^ do I doubt that there was no man before the first man's creation: but deny
the (I cannot tell what) revolution of the same man I know not how often, or of
others like him in nature, nor can the Philosophers drive me from this, by
obiecting (acutely they think) that nullum (a) infinitum est scibile, infinite
th^s are beyond reach of knowledge. And therefore God (say they) has definite
forms Arguments against the creation of things, in time.
in himself of all the definite creatures that he made: nor must his
goodness be ever held idle, nor his works temporal, as if he had had such an
e ternity of leisure before, and then repented him of it and so fell to work:
therefore, say they, is this revolution necessary: the world either remaining
in change (which though it has been always yet was created) or else being
dissolved, and re-edified in this circular course: otherwise giving Gods works
a temporal beginning we seem to make him disallow and condemn that leisure
that he rested in from all eternity before as sloathfull, and vselesse. But if
he did create from eternity, now this and then that, and came to make man in
time, that was not made before, then shall he seem not to have made him by
knowledge (which they say contains nothing infinite) but at the present time,
by chance as it came into his mind. But admit those reuolutions (say they)
either with the worlds continuance in change, or circular revolution, and then
we acquit GOD both of this (so long and idle seeming) cessation, and from all
operation in rashness and chance. For if the same things be not renewed, the
vati^ion of things infinite are too incomprehensible for his knowledge or
prescience.

These batteries the ungodly do plant against our faith, to win us into
their circle: but if reason will not refute them, faith must deride them. But
by Gods grace reason will lay those circularities flat enough. For here is
these men's error: running rather in a maze then stepping into the right way,
that they proportionate the divine unchangeable power, unto they human frail
and weak spirit, in mutability and apprehension. But as the Apostle says: (b)
Comparing themselves to themselves, they know not themselves. For because their
2. Cor. 10, 1^.
actions that are suddenly done, proceed all from new intents, their minds
being mutable, they do imagine (not GOD, for him they cannot comprehend, but)
themselves for GOD, and compare not him to himself, but themselves (in his
stead) unto themselves. But we may not think that GODS rest affects him one
way, and his work another, he is never affected, nor does his Gods vvorking
and his resting.
nature admit any thing that has not been ever in him. That which is
affected, suffers, and that which suffers, is mutable. For his vacation is
not idle, sloathfull nor sluggish, nor is his work painful, busy, or
industrious. He can rest working, and work resting. He can apply an eternal
will to a new work, and begins not to work now because he repents that he
wrought not before. But if he rested first and wrought after (which I see not
how man can coceiue) this first and after were in things that first had no
being, and afterward had. But there was neither precedence nor subsequence in
him, to alter or abolish his will, but all that ever he created, was in his
unchanged fixed will eternally one and the same: first willing that they should
not be, and afterward willing that they should be, and so they were not,
during his pleasure, and began to be, at his pleasure. Wonderously showing to
such as can conceive it, that he needed none of these creatures, (but created
them of his pure goodness) having continued no less blessed without them,
from alll vn-begunne eternity.

L. VIVES.
NV^ infinitum (a)] Arist. metaphys. 2. and in his first of his posterior
Analitikes, he says (...).
that then know we a thing perfectly, when we know the end; and that
singularities are infinite b^ ^rsalities most simple. So as things are infinite
they cannot be known, but as they are defi^, they may. And Plato having
divided a thing unto singularities, forbiddes further progress for they are
infinite and incomprehensible. (b) Comparing] Cor. 2. 10. This place, Erasmus
says, Augustine uses often in this sense.

Against such as say that things infinite are above Gods knowledge. CHAP. 18.
But such as say that things infinite are past Gods knowledge, may even as well
Number (...).
leap headlong into this pit of impiety, and say that God knows not all
numbers. That numbers are infinite, it is sure, for take what number you can,
and think to end with it let it be never so great and immense, I will ad unto
it, not one, nor two, but by the law of number, multiply it unto ten times the
sum it was. And so is every number composed, that one (a) cannot be equal to
another, but all are different, every particular being definite, and all in
general, infinite. (b) Does not GOD then know these numbers because they are
infinite, and can his knowledge attain one sum of numbers, and not the rest?
what mad man would say so? nay they dare not exclude numbers from Gods
knowledge, Plato having so commended God for using them in the worlds creation:
and our Scripture says of God. T^ (...) ordered al things in measure, number,
and weight: and the Prophet says. He (...) the world: and the Gospel says:
All the heirs of your heads are W^. 11, 17
numbered. M^. 10, 30


God forbid the that we should think y^ he knows not number: whose wisdom
(...) ^standing is in numerably infinite as David says: for the infiniteness
of (...) though it be beyond number is not unknown to him whose know^
infinite. Therefore if whatsoever be known be comprehended in the (...) that
knowledge, then is all infiniteness bounded in the knowledge of (...) because
his knowledge is infinite, and because it is not vncomprehensi^ (...)
knowledge. Wherefore if numbers infiniteness, be not infinite vn^ knowledge,
nor cannot be, what are we mean wretches that dare pre^ ^mit his knowledge,
or say that if this revolution be not admitted in (...) renewing, God cannot
either foreknow althings ere he made them, (...) them when he made them?
whereas his wisdom being simply and ^ly manifold, can comprehend, all
incomprehensibility, by his incom^le comprehension, so that whatsoever thing
that is new and unlike to all (...) should please to make, it could not be
new, nor strange unto him, nor (...) ^ore-see it a little before, but contain
it in his eternal prescience.

L. VIVES.
(...)] Two men, two horses or whatsoever, make both one number. I inquire not
(...) ^hether the number and the thing numbered be one or no: the schools ring
of that ^gh. (b) Does not] The best reading.

Of the worlds without end, or ages of ages. CHAP. 19.
(...) does so, and that there is a continual connection of those times which
(...) (...) (...).
(...) ^lled Secula (a) seculorum, ages of ages, or worlds without end: running
(...) indestinate difference: only the souls that are freed from misery, re^
^ernally blessed, or that these words, Secula seculorum do import the (...)
remaining firm in Gods wisdom and being the efficient cause of ^ory world, I
dare not affirm. The singular may be an explication of (...), as if we
should say, Heaven of heaven, for the Heavens of heavens. ^D calls the
firmament above which the waters are, Heaven, in the sin^ (...), and yet the
Psalm says, and you waters that be above the Heavens, (...) of the LORD.
Which of those two it be, or whether Secula (...) Genes. (...) Psalm. 148
another meaning, is a deep question. We may let it pass, it belongs (...)
proposed theme: but whether we could define, or but observe (...) discourse,
let us not adventure to affirm ought rashly in so obs^ ^ouersie. Now are we
in hand with the circulary persons that (...) ^ings round about till they
become repaired. But which of these opini^ be true concerning these Secula
seculorum, it is nothing to these reuo^ ^cause whether the worlds of worlds be
not the same revolued, but o^ ^uely depending on the former (the freed souls
remaining still (...) ^lesse bliss) or whether the Worlds of worlds, be the
forms (...) ^sitorie ages, and ruling them as their subjects: yet the
circulari^ ^o place here how-soeuer: The Saints (b) eternal life overthrows
(...).

L. VIVES.
(...) (a)] The scriptures often use these two words both together. Hierome (in
^p. ad Gal. expounds them thus, we (...)* (says he) the difference between
Seculum, Seculum Secu^, Secula (...).
and secula seculorum. Seculu^ sometimes a space of time: sometimes eternity,
the hebrew is (...). and when it is written with the letter van before it, it
is eternity: when otherwise, it is 50. years or, a Iubily. And therefore the
Hebrew servant that loved his Master for his wife and children, had his care
bored, and was commanded to serve an age, Seculum, 50. (...), (...).
years. And the Moabites and Amonites enter not into the Church of God until
the 15. generation, and not until an age: for the year of Iubily quit all
hard conditions. Some say that Seculum seculorum has the same respect that
Sanctu Sanctorum, and Caelum Caelorum, the Heavens of heavens had, or as the
Works of works, or Song of songs. That difference that the heavens had to
those whose heavens they were, and so the rest, the holy above all holy, the
song excelling all songs etc. So was secula seculorum the ages excelling all
ages. So they say that this present age includes all from the worlds beginning
unto the judgment: And then they go further, and begin to graduate the ages
past, before and to come after it, whether they were or shall be good or ill,
falling into such a forest of questions, as whole volumes have been written,
only of this kind. (b) Eternall] Returning no more to misery: nor were that
happy without certeynty of eternity: nor eternal if death should end it.

Of that impious assertion that souls truly blessed, shall have diverse
reuolutions into misery again. CHAP. 20.
FOr what (a) Godly ears can endure to hear, that after the passage of this
life in such misery, (if I may call it a life, (b) being rather so offensive a
death, and yet (c) we love it rather then that death that frees us from it)
after so many intolerable mischieues, ended all at length by true zeal and
piety, we should be admitted to the sight of God, and be placed in the
fruition and perticipation of that incorporeall light and unchangeable
immortal essence with love of which we burn, all upon this condition, to
leave it again at length, and be re-infolded in mortal misery amongst the
hellish immortalls, where GOD is lost, where truth is sought by hate, where
blessedness is sought by uncleanness, and be cast from all enjoying of
eternity, truth, or felicity: and this not once but often, being eternally
reuolued by the course of the times from the first to the later: and all this,
because by means of these circularities, transforming us and our false bea^des
in true miseries, (successively, but yet eternally) GOD might come to ^ow his
own works. Whereas otherwise he should neither be able to rest from
working, not know ought that is infinite? Who can hear or endure this? Which
were it true, there were not only more wit in concealing it, but also ((...)
speak my mind as I can) more learning in not knowing it: (d) for if we
shalb^ ^ssed in not remembering them there, (e) why do we agrauate our misery
(...) knowing them here? But if we must needs know them there, yet let us
(...) (...) selves ignorant of them here, to have the happier expectation, then
the (...) that we shall attain: here expecting blessed eternity, and there
(...) only bliss, but with assurance that it is but transitory. But if they
^y that no man can attain this bliss unless he know the transitory
reuolutions thereof, ere he leave this life, how then do they confess that
the more one loves GOD, the easilier shall he attain bliss, and yet teach
the way how (...) ^ll this loving affect? (...) will not but love him lightly
whom he knows he must leave, and (...) ^st his truth and wisdom, and that
when by the perfection of his bliss, (...) to the full knowledge of him? (f)
one can never love his friend faith^ know that he shall become his enemy. But
God forbid that this ^g of theirs that our misery should never be ended, but
only interrup^ and then by false happiness, should be true. For what is
falser then (...), wherein we shall be either wholly ignorant in such light or
otherwise ^ly afraid of the loss of it, being on the top of felicity? If
we (...) that we shall become wretched, our misery here is wiser then hap^
^ere. But if we shall know it, (g) then, the wretched soul had better
^serable state and go from thence to eternity, then in a blessed to fall ^ce
to misery. And so (h) our hope of happiness is unhappy, and of ^ppie: and
consequently, we suffering miseries here, and expecting them (...) rather
wretched then blessed in truth. But piety cries out, and truth ^h this to be
false. The felicity promised us is true, eternal, and wholly True felicity.
^pted by any revolution to worse.

(...) follow Christ, our right way, and leave this circular maze of the
impious. ^phyry the Platonist refused his Masters opinion in this
circumrotation (...), being moved heereto either by the vanity of the thing,
or by fear (...) Christians arguments; and had rather affirm (as I said in
the tenth (...) that the soul was sent into the world to know evil, that
being pur^ it, it might return to the Father, and never more suffer any such
(...): how much more then ought we to detest this impiety, this enemy ^ith and
christianity? These circles now being broken, there is no^th us to think that
man had no beginning, because (I know not (...) ^olutions have kept althings in
such a continual course of up and (...) ^at nothing can be new in the
world. For if the soul be freed, (...) ^o more return to misery, it being
never freed before, there is an (...) a great one, new begun, namely the
souls possession of eternal (...)

(...) this fall out in an immortal nature without any circumvolution, why ^s
possible in mortal things? If they say that bliss is no new thing to (...)
because it returns but unto that which it enjoyed always before: (...)
freedom new then, for it was never freed before, being never mise^d the
misery is new unto it, that was never miserable before. Now ^nesse happen, not
in the order that Gods providence allotted, but by (...) ^here are our
reuolutions that admit nothing new, but keep all in ^e? But if this nouelty
be within the compass of Gods providence, ^ule ((...)) given from heaven, or
fallen from thence, there may be new (...) that were not before, and yet in
the order of nature. And if the soul (...) procure it self new misery (which
the divine providence fore^ included in the order of things, freeing it from
thence also by this (...) power) how dare flesh and blood then be so rash as
to deny that ^y may produce things new unto the world (though not to himself)
^ugh he foresaw, yet were never made before? If they say it is no ^t the freed
souls return no more to misery, because there are some ^d daily freed from
thence, why then they confess that there is still ^es created, to be new
freed from new miseries. For if they say they (...) new fowls, but have been
from eternity, which are daily put into new bodies, and living wisely, are
freed, never to return: then they make the so^ies of eternity, infinite: for
imagine a number of souls never so large, they could not suffice for all the
men of these infinite ages past, if each soul as soon as it was quit, flewe
up, and returned no more. Nor can they show new there may be an infinite (k)
sort of souls in the world, and yet debar GOD from knowing of things
infinite. Wherefore seeing their reuolutions of bliss and misery are
casheered, what remains but to aver that GOD can when his good pleasure is
create what new thing he will, and yet because of his eternal foreknowledge
never change his will? And whether the number of those freed, and not returning
souls may be increased, look they to that, who will keep infiniteness out
of the world: we shut up our disputation on both sides. If it may be
increased, why deny they that that may be made now, that had no being
before, if that number of freed souls that was before, be not only increased
now, but shall be for ever? But if there be but a certain number of souls to
be freed, and never to return, and that number be not increased, whosoever
it shall be, it is not the same yet that it must be, nor can it increase, to
the consumation but from a beginning, which being not before man, that man was
made to begin, before whom was no other.

L. VIVES.
What (a) Godly] The Platonists have a great stir amongst themselves whether
the soul shall return to her star whence she was taken, or follow the
reuolutions, from body to body. Plato in his Phadrus, and his Resp. makes it
eternally happy. Thence do P^rphyry and (...) deny the return of it after
purgation. Proclus and Plotine, take Plato's eternity but for a great space of
time: and submit the purest soul to the period of revolution. (b) Beeing] Cic.
De repub. lib. 6. says (after Plato) that our life being inuolued in such
killing misery, is rather to be called a death. (c) We love it] This is a
chief one in this bodies inconveniences, it blindes our reason so far that
it allures us all to love it, and makes us Our life (...) to death.
hate and abhor all that oppose it, whereas were our reason and judgment
sound, and not ouer-borne by the body, they would desire to leave this living
death, and ^ghing, say with the Apostle, Wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death. (d) For if] We shall all drink of
(...) they say. (e) Why doe] Fear of evil is a great torture, and Romans 7.
one had better die secure then live in fear. (f) One can] Scipio in Tullies
Laelius, denies that there can be a saying so prejudicial to a^itie, as to
say that I love him now but I shall (...) (...): nor will he believe that B^s
ever said such a word (as it was said) being one of the ^en sages. But some
ambitious dishonest fellow that desiired to have all in his own power might say
so. For how can he be friend to him whom he thinks he can be foe to? This
rule who soever gave it tends to the abolishment of friendship: but in deed
we (...) more need observe this in our friendshippes, not to begin to love
him whom we could ever hate. Thus Cicero. (g) Then the wretched] For
happiness is far better after (...) then misery after happiness. For the
feeling of misery is lessened by hope of happiness, and happiness is as much
lessened by fear of misery. My mother Blanch, a (...) (...) ((...) (...)
(...) (...)* had w^t to tell me when I was a child, that the Sirens sung (...)
(...), (...) (...) (...) (...). (...).
(...) (...) (...)* and (...) in fair wether: hhoping the later in the first,
and fearing the first in the (...) ((...)) Our hope] Not of unhappiness, but
unhappy, of the happiness to come. ((...)) G^ from] He touches the
Platomists controversy: some holding the souls given of GOD, (...) others
that they were cast down for their guilt, and for their punnishment, (...)
(...) (...)* (k) sportes of soules] A diversity of reading but let us make good
(...) (...).

Of the state of the first man, and mankind in him. CHAP. 21.
^rd question of Gods power to create new things without change of (...)
because of his eternity, being (I hope) sufficiently handled, we may (...)
that he did far better in producing mankind from one man only, (...) had
made many: for whereas he created some creatures that love to be (...) in
deserts, as Eagles, Kites, Lions, Wolves, and such like: and others, (...)
rather live in flocks and companies, as Doves, Stares, Stagges, (a) (...) and
such like: yet neither of those sorts did he produce of one alone, (...) many
together. But man, whose nature he made as mean between An^asts, that if he
obeyed the Lord his true creator, and kept his hests, (...) be transported to
the Angels society: but if he became perverse in The goodness of obedience.
(...) offended his Lord God by pride of heart, then that he might be cast ^h
like a beast, and living the slave of his lusts after death be destinate ^all
pains, him did he create one alone, but meant not to leave him ^th-out
another human fellow: thereby the more zealously commend^ concord unto us,
men being not only of one kind in nature, but also ^dred in affect: creating
not the woman he meant to join with man, ^did man, of earth, but of man, and
man whom he joined with her, not of (...) of himself, that all mankind
might have their propagation from one.

L. VIVES.
((...)) Da^ in the diminutiue, because it is a timorous creature, neither
wild, no^ (...)*

God fore-knew that the first Man should sin, and how many people he was to
translate, out of his kind into the Angels society. CHAP. ^22.
(...) was not ignorant that Man would sin, and so incur mortallitye (...)
for himself and his progeny: nor that mortals should run on in (...) of
iniquity that brute (a) beasts should live at more atonement (...) between
themselves; whose original was out of water and earth, (...) whose kind came
all out of one, in honor of concord: for Lions ne^ among themselves, nor
Dragons, as men have done. But God foresaw (...) that his grace should adopt
the godly, justify them by the holy spirit, ^ir sins, and rank them in
eternal peace with the Angels, the last (...) dangerous death being destroyed:
and those should make use of Gods ^g all mankind from one, in learning how
well God respected unity in (...).

L. VIVES.
((...)) (...)] Any place will hold bruite-beasts without contention, sooner
then (...) m^n is Wool^e to man as the Greek Proverb says. Pli^. lib. 7. and
all other Dis^ amongst men vvor^.
^gree among themselves, and oppose strangers. The stern Lion fights not with
(...) nor does the Serpent sting the Serpent: the beasts and fishes of the sea
a^ with their own kind. But man does man the most mischief. Dic^ (says
Tully) wrote a book of the death of men: (He is a free and copious
Peripatetique) and herein having reckned up inondations, plagues, burning,
exceeding abundance of bea^ and other external causes, he compares then with
the wars and seditions wherewith man has destroyed man: and finds the later
far exceeding the former. This war amongst men did Christ desire to have
abolished, and for the fury of wrath to have grafted the heat of zeal and
charity. This should be preached, and taught, that Christians ought not to be
as wars, but at love one with another, and to bear one with another: men's
minds are already to forward to shed blood, and do wickedly: they need not be
set on.

Of the nature of man's soul, being created according to the image of God.
CHAP. 23.
THerefore God made man according to his (a) image and likeness, giving him a
soul whereby in reason and understanding he excelled all the other Genesis 2.
creatures, that had no such soul. And when he had made man thus of earth,
and either (b) breathed the soul which he had made, into him, or rather made
that breath one which he breathed into him (for to breath, is but to make a
breath) Breathing in his face.
then (c) out of his side did he take a bone, whereof he made him a wife, and
an help, as he was God, for we are not to conceive this carnally, as we see
an artificer work up any thing into the shape of a man, by art: Gods hand is
his power working visible things inuisibly. Such as measure Gods virtue and
power that can make seeds of seeds by those daily and usual works, hold this
rather for a fable then a truth: But they know not this creation, and therefore
think unfaithfully thereof as though the works of ordinary conception, and
production, are not strange to those that know them not, though they assign
them rather to natural causes, then account them the deities works.

L. VIVES.
HIs (a) Image.] Origin thinks that man is Christ's image and therefore the
scripture calls man Gods image, for the Son is the fathers image, some think
the Holy Ghost is meant in the simyly. But truly the simyly consists in nothing
but man, and the likeness of God. A man (says Paul) is Gods image. It may be
referred to his nature and in that he is Gods likeness, 1. Cor. 11.
may be referred to his gifts, immortallity, and such, wherein he is like God.
(b) Breathed. It is a doubt whether the soul were made before, and infused
after, or created with the body. Aug de gens. ad lit. li. 7. says that ye
soul was made with the other spiritual substances, and infused afterward, and
so interprets this place, He breathed into his face the breath of life.
Others take it as though the soul were but then made, and so does Augustine
here. (c) Out of his.] Why the woman was made after the man, why of his ribbe
when he was a sleep, and how of his rib, read Magister sentent. lib. 2. Did.
18.

Whether the Angels may be called creators, of any, the least creature. CHAP.
24.
But here we have nothing to do with (a) them that hold the divine essence
not to meddle with those things at all. But (b) those that follow Plato in
affirming that all mortal creatures, of which man is the chief, were made by
the lesser created Gods, through the permission or command of the creator, and
not by himself that framed the world, let them but absure the superstition
wherein thy seek to give those inferiors just honors, and sacrifices, and they
shall quickly avoid the error of this opinion, for it is not lawful to hold
any creature, be it never so small, to have any other Creator then God, even
before it could be understood. But the Angels (whom they had rather call
Gods) though (c) at Angels the creators of nothing.
his command they work in things of the world, yet we no more call them
creators of living things, then we call husbandmen the creators of fruits and
trees.

L. VIVES.
WIth (a) ther^.] With the Epicurists, that held althings from chance, or from
mere nature without GOD (althings I mean in this subl^ary world:) which
opinion some say was A^les, or with the heretics, some of whom held the
diuills creators of al things corporal. (b) Those that.] Plato in his Timaeus
brings in God the Father commanding the lesser Gods to make the lesser living
creatures: for they are creatures also: and so they took the immortal
beginning of a creature, the soul, from the stars: imitating the Father, and
Creator: and borrowing parcells of earth, water and air from the world, knit
them together in one: not as they were knit, but yet in an insensible
connection, because of the combination of such small parts, whereof the whole
body was framed. One Menander a Scholar of Simon Magus, said the Angels made
the world: Saturninus said that 7. Angels made it beyond the Fathers
knowledge. (c) Though.] The Angels as Paul says, are Gods ministers, and
deputies, and do ^y things upon earth at his command: for as Augustine says,
every visible thing on earth is under an Angelical power, and Gregory says
that nothing in the visible would but is ordered Angels Gods deputies and ^rs.
by a visible creature. I will except Miracles, if any one contend. But Plato,
as he follows M^s in the worlds creation, had this place also of the creation
of living things from the Scripures, for having read that God this great
architect of so new a work, said: ^et us make (...) after our own Image,
thought he had spoken to the Angels, to whose ministry he supposed Genesis 1.
man's creation committed: But it seemed unworthy to him that God should use
them in ^king of man the noblest creature and make all the rest, with his own
hands: and therefore he thought the Angels made all, whose words if one consider
them in Tullies translation (which I use) he shall find that Plato held none
made the soul but God, and that of the stars, which ^ully de (...). 1.
confirms out of Plato, saying that the soul is created by God within the
elementary body which he made also: and the lesser Gods did nothing, but as
ministers, c^e those which he ^ad first created: and form it into the essence
of a living creature. Seneca explanes Pla^ more plainly saying. That when God
had laid the first foundation of this rare and excellent frame of nature, and
begun it, he ordained that each peculiar should have a peculiar governor and
though himself ^ad modelled, and dilated the whole universe, yet created he
the lesser gods, to be his ministers, (...) vicegerents in this his kingdom.

That no nature or form of any thing living has any other Creator but God.
CHAP. 25.
WHereas there is one form given externally to all corporal substances
according to the which Potters, Carpenters and other shape antiques, and
figures of creatures: and another that contains the efficient causes hereof
in the secret power of the uniting and understanding nature, which makes not
only the natural forms, but even the living souls, when they are not extant.
The first, each artificer has in his brain, but the later belongs to none but
God, who formed the world and the Angels without either world or Angels, for
from that ((...)) all dividing, and all effectiue divine power, which cannot be
made, but makes, and which in the beginning gave rotundity both to the Heavens
and Sun, from the same, had the eye the apple, and all other round figures
that we see in nature their rotundity not from any external effectiue, but
from the depth of that creators power that said. I fill heaven and earth: and
whose wisdom reaches from end to end, ordering all in a delicate Decorum:
wherefore what use he made of the Angels in the creation, making all himself,
I know not. I dare neither ascribe them more then their power, nor detract any
thing from that. But with their favors, I attribute the estate of althings as
they are natures unto God, only of whom they thankefully aknowledge their
being: we do not then call husbandmen the creators of trees or plants, or any
thing else: fot we read, Neither is he that planteth any thing, neither he that
waters, but God, that gives the increase. No, not (...). Cor. 37.
the earth neither, though it seems the fruitful mother of al things that
grow: for 1. Cor. 1538
we read also. God gives bodies unto what he will, even to every seed his
own body. Nor call we a woman the creatrixe of her child, but him that said
to a servant of his. Before I formed thee in the womb I knew thee: and
although the woman's soul Hier. 1.
being thus or thus affected, may put some quality upon her burden (b) as we
read that Jacob colored his sheep diversely by spotted sticks: yet she can
no more make the nature that is produced, then she could make her self: what
seminall causes then soever that Angels, or men do use in producing of things
living or dead, or (c) proceed from the copulation of male and female, (d) or
what affections soever of the mother dispose thus or thus of the coullour or
feature of her conception, the natures, thus or thus affected in each of their
kinds are the works of none but God: whose secret power passes through all,
giving all being to all what soever, in that it has being: (e) because without
that he made it, it should not be thus, nor thus, but have no being at all,
wherefore if in those forms external, imposed upon things corporal, we say
that (not workmen, but) Kings, Romulus was the builder of Rome, and Alexander
of (f) Alexandria, because by their direction these cities were built: how
much the rather ought we to call God the builder of nature, who neither makes
any thing of any substance but what he had made before, nor by any other
ministers but those he had made before: and if he withdraw his (g) efficient
power from things, they shall have no more being then they had ere they were
created: Ere they were, I mean in eternity, not in time: for who created time,
but he that made them creatures, whose motions time follows.

L. VIVES.
THat (a) all-diuiding.] All dividing may be some addition, the sense is good
without it. (b) Pli^ib. 8.
As we.] Pliny, says that look in the Rams mouth, and the color of the
veins under his tongue, shall be the color of the lamb he gets: if diverse,
diverse: and change of waters varieth it. Their shepehards then may have sheep
of what color they will: which Jacob knew well enough, for he liking the
particolours cast white straked rods into the watring places, at Ramming time,
that the sight of them might form the Images of such colors in the
conception, and so it did. Genesis 30. (c) Proceed.] The same Pliny. lib 7. says
that the mind has are* collection of similitudes in it, wherein a chance of
sight, hearing or remembrance is of much effect, the images taken into the
conceit at the time of conception are held to be powerful in framing the thing
conceived: and so is the cogitation of either party, how swift soever it be:
whereupon is more difference in man then in any other creature, but the
swiftnes of thought, and variety of conceits forms us so diversely: the
thoughts of other creatures being immovable and like themselves in all kinds.
Thus much Pliny. The Philosophers stand wholly upon immagination in conception.
At Hertzogenbosh in Brabant on a certain day of the year whereon they say
there chief Church was dedicated) they have public plays unto the honor of
the Saints as they have in other places also of that country, some act Saints
and some A child like a d^uill.
devils, one of these devils spying a pretty wench, grew hot, and in all have,
danceth home, and casting his wife upon a bed, told her he would beget a young
diu^l upon her, and so lay with her, the woman conceived, and the child was no
sooner borne, but it began to dance, and was rust of the shape that we paynt
our devils in. This Margueret of Austria Maximilians Daughter, Charles the
(...), told John Lamuza, King Ferdinands grave ambassador, and now Charles his
(...) in Aragon, a man as able to discharge the place of a Prince as of a
Lieu^enant (d) What John Lamuza. Women's longing that are with child.
^ctions.] Childbearing women do often long for many evil things, as coals,
and ashes. I (...) one long for a bit of a young man's neeke, and had lost her
birth but that she bitte of his ^ke until he was almost dead, she took such
hold. The Phisicians write much hereof, ^d the Philosophers somewhat. Arist de
animal. They all ascribe it to the vicious humors in the stomach, which if
they happen in men, procure the like distemper. (e) Because. So read the old
books. (f) Alexandria.] Asia, Sogdia, Troas, Cilicia, India, and Egypt have al
cities called Alexandria, built by Alexander the great, this that Augustine
means of, is that of Egypt the most famous of all: sytuate upon the
Mediterrane sea, near Bicchieri, the mouth of Nile: called Alexandria
now Scanderia, or Scandaroun. (g) Efficient.] Fabricatiuam: pertaining to
composition and diui^ of matter: in things created by it self, for these are
not the works of creation. Angels (...), beasts, and liuelesse things, can
effect them.

The Platonists opinion that held the Angels Gods creatures, and man the
Angels. CHAP. 26.
ANd Plato would have the lesser Gods (made by the highest) to create all other
things, by taking their immortal part from him, and framing the mortal
themselves: herein making them not the creators of our selves but our bodies
only. And therefore Porphiry in holding that the body must be avoided ere the
soul be purged, and thinking with Plato, and his sect, that the souls of bad
livers were for punishment thrust into bodies (into beasts also says Plato but
into man's only says Porphiry) affirms directly that these gods whom they
will have us to worship as our parents and creators, are but the forgers of our
prisons, and not our formers, but only our iaylors, locking us in those
dolorous grates, and wretched setters: wherefore the Platonists must either give
us no punishment in our bodies: or else make not those gods our creators, whose
work they exhort us by all means to avoid and to escape: though both these
positions be most false, for the souls are neither put into bodies to be
thereby punished; no^ has any thing in heaven or earth any creator but the
maker of heaven and earth. For if there be no cause of our life, but our
punishment, how (a) is it that Plato says the world could never have been
made most beautiful, but that it was filled with all kind of creatures? But if
our creation (albe it mortal) be the work o^ God; how i^ i^ punishment then
to enter into Gods benefits, that is our bodies? (b) and if God as Plato says
often) had all the creatures of the world in his prescience, why then did not
he make them all? would he not make some, and yet in his unbounded knowledge,
knew how to make all? wherefore our true religion rightly affirms him the
maker both of the world, and all creatures therein, bodies, and souls, of
which, in earth man, the chief Piece was made alone, after his Image, for the
reason showed before, if not for a greater: yet was he not left alone, for
there is nothing in the world so sociable by nature, and so iarring by vice, as
man is; nor can man's ^re speak better either to the keeping of discord whilst
it is out, or expelling it when it is entered; then in recording our first
Father, whom God created single, (from him to propagate all the rest) to give
us a true admonition to preserve an union over greatest multitudes. And in that
the woman was made of his ribbe, was a plain intimation of the concord that
should be between man and wife. These were the strange works of God for they
were the first. He that believes them not, must utterly deny all wonders: for
if they had followed the usual course of nature, they had been no wonders.
But what is there in all this whole work of the divine providence, that is not
of use, though we know it not? The holy Psalm says: Come and behold the
works of the Lord, what wonders he has Psalm. 46. 8.
wrought upon the earth. Wherefore, why the Woman was made of Man's ribbe, and
what this first seeming wonder prefigured, if God vouchsafe I will show in
another place.

L. VIVES.
HOw (a) is it that Plato] His words are these. GOD speaks to the lesser
Gods. Marks In Timaeo.
what I say unto you: we have three kinds remaining: all mortal: which if we
omit, the creation will not be perfect: for we shall not comprehend all
kinds of creatures in it, which we must needs do to have it fully absolute.
(b) And if GOD] There also he says, that God has the Ideas of all creatures,
mortal and immortal in himself, which he looked upon: the immortal ones
when he made the things that should never perish; the mortal, in the rest. I
ask Marriage commended in the creation
not here whether that God be those Ideae, or whether they be something else:
the Platonists know not themselves. (c) The concord that should] Because the
woman was not made of any external parts, but of man's self, as his daughter,
that there might be a fatherly love of his wife in him, and a filial duty
toward him in the wife: she was taken out of his side, as his fellow: not out
of his head as his Lady, nor out of his feet as his servant.

That the fullness of mankind was created in the first man, in whom God
foresaw both who should be saved, and who should be damned. CHAP. 27.
But now because we must end this book; let this be our position: that in the
first man, the foresaid two societies or cities, had original; yet not
evidently, but unto Gods prescience: for from him were the rest of men to
come: some to be made fellow citizens with the Angels in joy: and some with
the Devils in torment, by the secret, but just judgment of God. For seeing that
it is written: All the ways of the Lord be mercy and truth, his grace can
neither be unjust, nor his Psa. 25. 10
justice cruel.

Finis, lib. 12.
THE CONTENTS OF THE thirteenth book of the City of God.
1. Of the first Man's fall, and the procurement of mortality. 2. Of the death
that may befall the immortal soul and of the bodies death. 3. Whether death
propagated unto all men from the first, be punishment of sin to the Saints.
4. Why the first death is not withheld from the regenerate from sin by
grace. 5. As the wicked use the good law evil, so the good use death which is
evil, well. 6. The general evil of that death, that seuereth soul and body.
7. Of the death that such as are not regenerate do suffer for Christ. 8. That
the Saints in suffering the first death for the truth are quit from the second.
9. Whether a man at the hour of his death, may be said to be among the dead,
or the dying. 10. Whether this mortal life be rather to be called death then
life. 11. Whether one may be living and dead both together. 12. Of the death
that God threatened to punish the first man withal if he transgressed. 13. What
punishment was first laid on man's preuarication. 14. In what state God made
Man, and into what state he fell by his voluntary choice. 15. That Adam
forsook God ere God forsook him, and that the souls first death was the
departure from God. 16. Of the Philosophers that held corporal death not to
be penal, whereas Plato brings in the Creator, promising the lesser Gods that
they should never leave their bodies. 17. Against the opinion, that earthly
bodies cannot be corruptible, nor eternal. 18. Of the terrene bodies, which
the Philosophers hold cannot be in heaven, but must fall to earth by their
natural weight. 19 Against those that hold that Man should not have been
immortal, if he had not sinned. 20. That the bodies of the Saints now resting
in hope, shall become better then our first fathers was. 21. Of the Paradise
when our first parents were placed, and that it may be taken spiritually also,
without any wrong to the truth of the history as touching the real place.
22. That the Saints bodies after resurrection shall be spiritual and yet not
changed into spirits. 23. Of bodies animate and spiritual, these dying in
Adam, and those being quickened in Christ. 24. How Gods breathing a life into
Adam, and Christ's breathing upon his Apostles when he said; Receive the holy
spirit, are to be understood.
FINIS.
THE THIRTEENTH BOOK: OF THE CITY OF GOD Written by Saint Augustine Bishop
of Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of the first Man's fall, and the procurement of mortality. CHAP. 1.
Having gotten through the intricate questions of the worlds original, and
man-kindes; our method now calls us to discourse of the first man's fall, nay
the first fall of both in that kind, and consequently of the original and
propagation of our mortality; for God made not man as he did Angels, that
though they sinned, yet could not dye: but so, as having (a) performed their
course in obedience, death could not prevent them from partaking for ever of
blessed and Angelical immortality: but having left this course, death should
take them into just damnation, as we said in the last book.

L. VIVES.
Having (a) performed] Every man should have lived a set time upon earth, and
then being confirmed in nature by tasting of the tree of life, have been
immortally translated into heaven. Here are many questions made: first by
Augustine, and then by Lombard. did. 2. What [The Louaynists are deaf on this
side, but not blind, they can see to leave out all this.]
man's estate should have been, had he not sinned: but these are modest and
timorous inquirers; professing they cannot find what they seek [But our later
coments upon Lumbard, fly directly to affirmative positions, upon very
conjectures, or grounds of nature. I hear them reason, but I see them
grauelled and in darkness: where yet they will not feel before them ere they
go, but rush on despite of all break-neck play. What man has now, we all
know to our cost: what he should have had, it is a question whether Adam knew,
and what shall we then seek? why should we use conjectures in a things so
transcendent, that it seems miraculous to the heavens? as if this must follow
natures laws, which would have amazed nature, had it had existence then.] What
light Augustine gives, I will take, and as my power and duty is, explain: the
rest I will not meddle with.

Of the death that may befall the immortal soul, and of the bodies death.
CHAP. 2.
But I see I must open this kind of death a little plainer. For man's soul
(though it be immortal) dies a kind of death. (a) It is called immortal,
because it can never leave to be living, and sensitive: and the body is
mortal, because it may be destitute of life, and left quite dead in it self.
But the death of the soul is, when God leaves it: and the death of the body
is when the soul leaves it: so that the death of both, is when the soul
being left of God, leaves the body. And this The forsaking of God ^e death of
the soul Man. 10. 28
death is seconded by that which the Scripture calls the (b) second death.
This our Savior signified, when he said, fear him which is able to destroy
both body and soul in hell: which coming not to pass before the body is
joined to the soul, never to be separated, it is strange that the body can be
said to die by that death, which seuereth not the soul from it, but torments
them both together. For that ^all pain (of which we will speak here-after)
is fitly called the souls dea^, because it lives not with God: but how is it
the bodies which lives with the soul? for otherwise it could not feel the
corporal pains that expect it after the resurrection: is it because all life
how-so-euer is good, and all pain evil, that the body is said to dye, wherein
the soul is cause of sorrow rather then life? Therefore the soul lives by
God, when it lives well: (for it cannot live without God, working good in it:)
and the body lives by the soul, when the soul lives in the body, whether it
live by God or no. For the wicked have li^ ^body, but none of soul: their
souls being dead (that is, forsaken of God) l^g power as long as their
immortal proper life fails not, to afforde them (...), but in the last
damnation, though man be not insensitiue, yet this sense of (...) ^ing neither
pleasing nor peaceful, but sore and painful, is justly termed (...) death
then life: and therefore is it called the second death, because it fol^th the
first breach of nature, either between God and the soul, or this and the ^dy:
of the first death therefore we may say, that it is good to the good, (...)
(...) to the bad But the second is bad in all badnesse, unto all, and good to
none.

L. VIVES.
IT (a) is called] Bruges copy differs not much: all is one in substance. (b)
Second death] (...). 2. 11. and 21 8.

Whether death propagated unto all men from the first, be punishment of sin
to the Saints. CHAP. 3.
^ere's a question not to be omitted: whether the first death be good to (...)
^ood? If it be so, how can it be the punishment of sin? for had not our (...)
sinned, they had never tasted it: how then can it be good to the vp^ cannot
happen but unto offenders? and if it happen but unto offenders (...) not be
good, for it should not be at all unto the upright: for why should Death by
sin.
(...) punishment that have no guilt? We must confess then, that had not
(...) parents sinned, they had not dyed: but sinning; the punishment of death
^cted upon them and all their posterity: for they should not produce (...) ^ng
but what themselves were, and the greatness of their crime depraved (...)
^ture: so that that which was penal in the first man's offending, was made
(...) in the birth of all the rest: for they came not of man, as man came of
the (...). The dust was man's material: but man is man's parent. That which is
earth is (...) flesh, though flesh be made of earth: but that which man the
father is, man the (...) is also. For all mankind was in the first man, to
be derived from him by the (...), when this couple received their sentence of
condemnation. And that (...) man was made, not in his creation, but in his fall
and condemnation, that Psalm 49 ^0. Infants weaker the^ the young of any other
creature.
(...) ^got, in respect (I mean) of sin, and death. For his sin (a) was
not cause of (...) weakness in infancy, or whiteness of body, as we see in
infants: those God would have as the original of the yonglings, whose parents
he had cast down to (...) mortality, as it is written: Man was in honor and
understood not but became (...) the beasts that perish, unless that infants
be weaker in motion and appetite (...) all other creatures, to show man's
mounting excellence above them all, com^le to a shaft that flies the stronger
when it is drawn farthest back in the (...). Therefore man's presumption and
just sentence, adjudged him not to those ^lities of nature: but his nature was
depraved unto the admission of con^entiall in-obedience in his members against
his will: and thereby was bound to death by necessity, and to produce his
progeny under the same conditions that his crime deserved. From which band of
sin, if infants by the mediators grace be freed, they shall only be to suffer
the first death, of body, but from the eternal, penal second death, their
freedom from sin shall quit them absolutely.

L. VIVES.
HIs sin (a) was not.] Here is another question, in what state men should
have been borne, had they not sinned: Augustine propounds it in his book. De
baptis. paruul. some think they should have been borne little, and presently
become perfect men. Others, borne little, but in perfect strength only not
grows; and that they should presently have followed the mother as we see
chickens, and lambs. The former give them immediate use of sense, and reason:
the later, not so, but to come by degrees, as ours do. Augustine leaves the
doubt as he finds it: seeming to suppose no other kind of birth, but what we
now have.

Why the first death is not withheld from the regenerat from sin by grace.
CHAP. 4.
IF any think they should not suffer this, being the punishment of guilt, and
Why death remains after baptis^.
there guilt cleared by grace, he may be resolved in our book called De
baptismo paruulorum. There we say that the separation of soul and body
remains to succeed (though after sin) because if the sacrament of
regeneration should be immediately seconded by immortality of body, our faith
were disanulled, being an expectation of a thing unseen. But by the strength
and vigor of faith was this fear of death to be formerly conquered, as the
Martires did: whose conflicts had had no victory, nor no glory, nay had bin no
conflicts if they had been deified and freed from corporal death immediately
upon their regeneration: for if it were so who would not run unto Christ to
have his child baptized, least he should die? should his faith be approved by
this visible reward? no, it should be no faith, because he received his reward
immediately. But now the wounderfull grace of our Savior has turned the
punishment of sin, unto the greater good of righteousness. Then it was said
to man, thou shall die if thou sin, now it is said to the Martyr, die, to
avoid sin. Then, if you break my laws, you shall die, now, if you refuse Genesis
2.
to die, you break my laws. That which we feared then if we offended, we must
now choose, not to offend. Thus by Gods ineffable mercy the punishment of sin
is become the instrument of virtue, and the pain due to the sinners guilt, is
the just man's merit. Then did sin purchase death, and now death purchases
righteousness: I mean, in the Martires whom their persecutors bad either
renounce their faith or their life, and those just men chose rather to suffer
that for believing which the first sinners suffered for not believing: for
unless they had sinned they had not dyed, and Martires had sinned if they had
not died. They dyed for sin, these sin not because they die. The others
crime made death good, which before was evil, but God has given such grace to
faith that death which is life's contrary, is here made the ladder whereby to
ascend to life.

As the wicked use the good law, evil, so the good use death, which is evil,
well. CHAP. 5.
FOr the Apostle desiring to show ye hurt of sin being vnpreuented by grace,
doubted not to say that the law which forbids sin, is the strength of sin.
The sting (...) (says he) is sin, and the strength of sin is the law.
Most true: for (a) forbidding of unlawful desires, increase them in him, where
righteousness is not 1. Cor. 15. 50.
of power to suppress all such affects to sin. And righteousness can never
be l^d without gods grace procure this love. But yet to show that the law is
not evil, though he calls it the strength of sin, he says in another
place, in the (...) question: The law is holy, and the commandment holy, and
just, and good. Was Romans 7.
that then which is good (says he) made death to me? GOD forbid: bu^ sin
that it might appear sin, wrought death in me by that which is good, (b)
that si^e might be out of measure sinful by the commandment. Out of measure,
(...), because preuarication is added, (c) the law being also contemned (...)
the lust of sin. Why do we recite this? Because as the law is not (...)
^en it exciteth concupiscence in the bad, so earth is not good when it in^th
the glory of the good: neither the law when it is forsaken by sinners and (...)
them Preuaricators: nor death when it is undertaken for truth, and man them
Martyrs. Consequently, the law forbidding sin is good, and death (...) the
reward of sin, evil. But as the wicked use all things, good and evil,
badly, so the just use all things, evil and good, well. Therefore the wicked
use the (...) that is good, badly, and the use death that is bad, well.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) of] It is natural unto exorbitant minds, the more a thing is
forbidden them We follow things forbidden.
(...) to affect it: as women (whose minds are most unstayed) desire that
only that (...) ^hibited. So that whereas men knew not what it was to go to
the stews, nor (...) upon it, in comes the law, and says, thou shall not
go, and so taught them all (...) to go, setting their depraved natures upon
pursuit of those unlawful acts. I (...) (says Paul) what concupiscence was,
until the law told me, Thou shall not covet. (...) that Sol^ set down no law
against parricide: which being unknown, he was (...) to declare then punish.
Pro Ros. Amerin. (b) That sinne] The old books read, (...) ^ner. Augustine ad
Simplic. an. lib 1. quotes it thus: that the sinner might be out (...) a
sinner etc. but his quotations are both false: For thus it should be read
indeed: (...) ^er might be out of measure sinful, etc. Sinner, being referred
to sin. (...) (...) ^ith the Greek: unless you will make sinful a nowne,
and no participle, as Salust ^tens, and Terence, Fugitans. (c) The law] All the
terrors of the law being contem^ such as have turned their custom of sin
into their nature.

The general evil of that death that seuereth soul and body. CHAP. 6.
WHerefore, as for the death that diuides soul and body, when they suffer it
whom we say are a dying, it is good unto none. For it has a sharp (a) ^rall
sense by which nature is wrung this way and that in the composition (...) (...)
living creature, until it be dead, and until all the sense be gone wherein
(...) (...) and body was combined. Which great trouble, one stroke of the bo^,
or one rapture of the soul oftentimes preuenteth, and out runs sense, in
^tnesse. But what-so-euer it is in death, that takes away (b) our sense with so
^ous a sense, being faithfully endured, it augmenteth the merit of paci^ ^ut
takes not away the name of pain. It is sure the death of the first man,
^pagate, though if it be endured for faith and justice, it be the glory of
^nerate. Thus death being the reward of sin, some-time quitteth sin (...)
^ll reward.

L. VIVES.
Unnatural (a) sense,] Sense, for passion. (b) Our sense with so grievous a
sense.] The first active, the second passive, the great passion, takes away
our power of ience.

Of the death of such as are not regenerate do suffer for Christ. CHAP. 7.
FOr whosoever he is that being not yet regenerate, dies for confessing of
Christ, it freeth him of his sin, as well as if he had received the sacrament
of Martirdom to the unbaptized in the steed of baptism. John. 3. Math 16.
John. 12. Psalm, 116.
Baptism. For he that said, Unless a man be borne again of water, and of
the holy spirit, he shall not enter into the kingdom of God, excepteth these
elsewhere, in as general a saying: whosoever confesses me before men, him
will I confess before my father which is in heaven: And again. He that
loses his soul for me shall find it. Hereupon it is that, Precious in the
sight of the Lord is the death of the Saints. For what is more dear, then that
death wherein all a man's badnes is abolished, and his good augmented? Those
thad die daptized, because they could live no longer, are not of that merit
that those that die willingly, where as they might have lived longer, because
these had rather die in confessing of Christ, then deny him, and so come to
baptism: (a) Which if they had done, this sacrament would have for given it,
because they denied him for fear of death. For in it even their (b) villainy
was forgiven that murdered Christ. (c) But how cold they love Christ so dearly
as to contemn life for him, but by abounding in the grace of that spirit, that
inspireth where it pleases? Precious therefore is the death of those Saints
who took such gracious hold of the death of Christ that they stuck not to
engage their own souls in the quest of him, and whose death showed that they
made use of that which before was the punishment of sin, to the producing of
a greater harvest of glory. But death ought not to seem good, because it is
Gods help, and not the own power that has made it of such good use, that
being once propounded as a penalty laid upon sin, it is now elected, as a
deliverance from sin, and an expiation of sin, to the crowning of justice
with glorious victory.

L. VIVES.
WHich (a) if] Intimating that no guilt is so great but Baptism will purge it.
(b) The^ villanie] It is like he means of some that had helped to crucify
Christ, and were afterward converted. (c) But how] It could not be but out of
great abundance of grace that they should love Christ, as well as those that
were baptized already in him.

That the Saints in suffering the first death for the truth are quit from the
second. CHAP. 8.
FOr if we mark well, in dying well and laudably for the truth, is a (worse)
death ^oyded, and therefore we take part of it, least the whole should fall
upon (...) and a second, that should never have end. We undertake the
separation of the body from the soul, least we should come to have the soul
severed from God and then from the body: and so man's first death being past,
the second, that endless one, should fall presently upon him. Wherefore the
does as I say that we suffer (a) when we die, and causes us dye, is good
unto Death, good to the good, and bad to the bad.
(...) (...), but it is well tolerated, for attaining of good. But when men
once are in death, and called dead, then we may say that it is good to the
good, and bad to the bad. For the good souls, being severed from their bodies,
are in rest and the evil in torment, until the bodies of the first rise to
life eternal, and the later unto the eternal, or second death.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) when] The dead, and the dying are said both to be in death: death
being both in (...) departure and after, in the first as a passion, in the
second as a privation. Both are of (...) the authors. Virg.

(...) ^amus quanquam media iam morte tenetur,

(...) (...) lies now in midst of death. -- that is a dying: and the

(...) Morte Neoptolemi regnorum reddita cessit. -- pars Heleno.

(...) Pyrhus death got Helenus, that part that now he holds. -- that is, after
his death.

Whether a man at the hour of his death may be said to be amongst the dead or
the dying. CHAP. 9.
(...) now for the time of the souls separation from the body (be it good or
(...)* whether we say it is in death, or after it? if it be after death, it
is not (...) ^en being past and gone, but rather the present life of the soul,
good or (...) the death was evil to them whilst it was death, that is,
whilst they, (...) ^ffered it, because it was a grievous passion (though the
good use this (...)): How then can death being past, be either good or bad?
Again if we (...) ^ell, we shall find that that grievous passion in man is not
death. For (a) as (...) we feel, we live: and as long as we live, we are
before death, and not in it: for (...) ^ath comes, it takes away all sense,
yea even that which is grieved by (...) ^pproach. And therefore how we may call
those that are not dead, but in (...) ^ges of deadly affliction, dying, is hard
to explain, though they may be (...) ordinarily so: for when death is come,
they are no more in dying, but in (...) or, death. Therefore is none dying but
the living: because when one is in Who may be said to be dysng.
(...) ^atest extremity, or (b) passage, as we say' if his soul be not gone,
he is (...) alive then. Thus is he both living and dying: going to death and
from life, (...) living as long as the soul is in the body: and not yet in
death, because the (...) is vndeparted. And when it is departed, then he is not
in death, but rather (...) death: who then can say who is in death? no man
dying is, if no man can be (...) ^ng and dying at once: for as long as the
soul is in the body we cannot (...) ^at he lives. (c) But if it be said that
he is dying who is drawing toward (...), and yet that the dying and the living
cannot be both in one at once, then know not I who is living.

L. VIVES.
(...)) long] But death is a temporally effected separation of soul and body,
and as soon (...) members begin to grow cold, he begins to dye, the
departure of the soul is Death what it is.
(...) ^ance of death, the one is no sooner gone but the other is there. (b)
Passage] Mart. (...) ^d agas. A^le agas animam. Ago to do, agere animam, to
die: because the ancient (...) (...) the soul was but a breath: and so being
breathed out, death followed. (c) But if] If he be said to dye that draws
toward death, then all our life is death: for (...) soon as ever we are
borne, the body begins to seek how to thrust out the soul, and (...) life,
and by little do expel it. Which made some Philosophers say, that we dyed in
ou^ (...) and that that was the end of death which we call the end of life,
either because then we began to live, or because death was then ended, and had
done his worst.

Whether this mortal life be rather to be called death then life. CHAP. 10.
FOr as soon as ever man enters this mortal body, he begins a perpetual
journey unto death. For that this changeable life enioynes him to, if I may
call the course unto death a life. For there is none but is nearer death at the
years end then he was at the beginning: to morrow, then to day: to day then
yesterday, by and by then just now, and now then a little before; (a) each part
of time that we pass, cuts off so much from our life, and the remainder still
decreaseth: The time of life is a course unto death.
so that our whole life is nothing but a course unto death, wherein one can
neither stay nor slack his pace: but all run in one manner, and with one
speed. For the short liver, ran his course no faster then the long: both had
a like passage of time, but the first had not so far to run as the later,
both making speed alike. It is one thing to live longer, and another to run
faster. He that lives longer, runs farther but not a moment faster. And if
each one begin to be in death as soon as his life begins to shorten,
(because when it is ended he is not then in death but after it) then is every
man in death as soon as ever he is conceived. For what else do all his days,
hours and minutes declare, but that they being done, the death wherein he
lived, is come to an end: and that his time is now no more in death (he being
dead,) but after death? Therefore if man cannot be in life and death both at
once, he is never in life as long as he is in that dying rather then living
body. Or is he in both? in life that is still diminished, and in death because
he dies, whose life diminishes? for if he be not in life, what is it that is
diminished, until it be ended, and if he be not in death, what is it that
diminishes the life? for life being taken from the body until it be ended,
could not be said now to be after death, but that death end^d it and that it
was death whilst it diminished. And if man be not in death, but after it, when
his life is ended, where is he but in death whilst it is a diminishing?

L. VIVES.
EAch (a) part] All our life flows off by unspied courses, and dies every
moment of this hasting times. Quintilian. Time still cuts part of us off: a
common proverb. Poets and Philosophers all say this, and Seneca especially,
from whom Augus^ine has much of that he relates here.

Whether one may be living and dead, both together. CHAP. 11.
But if it be absurd to say a man is in death before he came at it (for what is
it that his course runs unto, if he be there already?) chiefly because it is
((...)) too strange to say one is both living and dying, since we cannot say
one is both sleeping and waking, we must find when a man is dying. Dying
before death come, he is not, then is he living: dying when death is come, is
he not, for then is he dead. This is after death, and that is before it. (b)
When is he in death then? for then is he dying, to proportionate three
things, living, dying, and dead, unto three times, before death, in death, and
after. Therefore when he is in death, that is neither living, or before death,
nor dead, or after death, is hard to be defined. For whilst the soul is in
the body (especially with sense) man lives assured, as yet being soul and
body, and therefore is before death, and not in it. But when the soul and
sense is gone, then is he dead, and after death. These two then take away his
means of being in death, or dying, for if he live he is before death, and if
he cease to live, he is after death. Therefore he is never dying nor in
death. For this is sought as present in the change of the times, and is found
the one passing into the other without the least interposed space. Do we not
see then that by this reason the death of the body is nothing? If it be, how
is it any thing, being in nothin, and whereing nothing can be? for if we live,
it is not any thing yet, because we are before it, not in it: if we live not,
it is nothing still, for now we are after it and not in it. But now, if death
be nothing before nor after, what sense is there in saying, before, or after
death? I would to God we had lived well in Paradise that death might have bin
nothing indeed. But now, there is not only such a thing but it is so grievous
with us, as neither tongue can tell, nor reason avoid. Let us therefore speak
according to (c) custom: for so we should, and call the time ere death come,
before death: as it is written (d) Judge none blessed before his death. Let us
call the Eccl. 11. 28.
(...) when it is already come, after death: this or that was after his death:
and let us speak of the present time, as we can: he dying, gave such a
legacy, he dying left thus much, or thus much, though no man could do this but
the living, and rather before his death, then at, or in his death. And let us
speak as the holy scripture speaks of the dead, saying they were not after
death but in death For in death there is no remembrance of thee: for until
they rise again they are Psalm. 6. 5
justly said to be in death as one is in sleep until he awake. Though such
as are in sleep we say are sleeping, then may we not say that such as are
dead are dying. For they that are once separate wholly from them bodies, are
past dying the bodily death, (whereof we speak) any more. But this that I say,
one cannot declare, how the dying man may be said to live, or how the dead man
can be said to be in death: for how can he be after death, if he be in
death, since we cannot call him, dying, as we may do he that is in sleep,
sleeping, or he that is in languor, ^guishing, or he that is in sorrow,
sorrowing, or in life, living? But the dead until they arise are said to be
in death, yet we cannot say they are dying. And therefore I think it was not
for no cause (perhaps God decreed it) that mortor, the latin word for to die,
could not by any means be brought by (e) grammartians unto the form of other
verbes. (f) Ortor, to arise, has ortus in the preterperfect tense, and so have
other verbes that are declined by the participle of the pretertense. But Morior
must have mortuus for the preterperfect tence, doubling the letter V. for
Mortuus ends like fatuus, arduus conspicuus, and such like that are no
preterperfect tenses, but nownes, declined without tenses, (...) times: and
this as if it were a nowne decsinable, that cannot be declined, is put for the
participle of the present tense. So that it is convenient, that as it cannot
effect the signification by act, no more should the name be to be (g) declined
by art. Yet by the grace of Our Redeemer, we may decline (that is, avoid) the
second death. For this is the sore one, and the worst of evils, being no
separation but rather a combination of body and soul unto eternal torture.
Therein s^all none be a fore death nor after death, but eternally in death:
never living, never The second death.
dead, but ever dying. For man can never be in worse death, then when the death
he is in, is endless.

L. VIVES.
TOo (a) strange] Insolens for insolitum, vn-accustomed. Salusts word (that
antiquary) and [Louvaine copy defective, as I do think it may very lawfully
in this:]
Gellius, his ape. (b) When is he] Oh Saint Augustine, by your favor, your
wits edge is too blunt! here you not our rare school divines? the first is,
the first is not, the last is, the last is not: death is not in this instant
for now it is done: conceive you not? Why thus: It was but now, and now it is
not: not yet? then thus -- but you must into the schools, and learn of the
boys: for those bables are fitter for them then for men. But you and I will
have a great deal of good talk of this, in some other place.] (c) Custome]
The mistress of speech, whom all arts ought to observe. (d) Judge none] Like
Solons saying. No man can be called blessed, and he be dead: because he
knows not what may befall him. (e) Grammarians] You are too idle in this
chapter, Saint Augustine: First in commanding us to apply our speech to the
common sense: and secondly, in naming gramarians in a matters of divinity: how
much more in drawing any argument pertaining to this question from them. If any
smatterer of our divines had done it, he should have been hissed out of our
schools: but you follow the old discipline, and keep the arts combined:
mixing each others ornament and no way disioyning them. (f) Orior] That
comparison holds in grammar it is a great Comparison, or analogy.
question, and much tossed. Aristarchus, a great grammarian defended it, and
Crates building upon Chrisippus his Perianomalia, did oppose it. Varro's
fragments hereupon, lay down both their reasons: and Quintilian disputes of
it. Caius Caesar wrote also to Cicero concerning Analogy. Doubtless it must
be allowed in many things but not in all: otherwise, that art cannot stand, nor
hardly worldly discourse. (g) Declined] Alluding to the ambiguity of the word,
declinari: it cannot be declined, that is avoided, nor declined, that is
varied by cases.

Of the death that God threatened to promise the first man withal if he
transgressed. CHAP. 12.
IF therefore it be asked what death GOD threatened man with all upon his
trangression and breach of obedience, whether it were bodily or spiritual, or
that second death: we answer, it was, all: the first consists of two, and
the second entirely of all: for as the whole earth consists of many lands, and
the whole Church of many Churches, so does the universal death consist of all
the first consisting of two, the bodies, and the souls, being the death
wherein the soul being foresaken of GOD, forsakes the body, and endures
pains for the time: but the second being that wherein the soul being
forsaken of GOD endures pains for ever. Therefore when GOD said to the first
man that he placed in Paradise, as concerning the forbidden fruit. Whenever
thou eatest thereof thou sha^ die the death, he comprehends therein, not only
the first part of the first death, wheresoever the soul loses God, nor the
later only, wherein the soul leans the body, and is punished after that
separation but also that last part, or the second which is the last of deaths,
eternal, and following after all: all this is comprehended in that commination.

What punishment was first laid on man's preuarication. CHAP. 13.
FOr after mankind had broken the precept, he was first, forsaken of Gods
grace and confounded with his ownenakednesse: and so with the fig leaves
Genes. (...).
(the first perhaps that came to hand,) they covered their nakedness and
shame: their members were before as they were then, but they were not (a)
shameful before, whereas now they felt a new motion of their disobedient flesh,
as the reciprocal (b) punishment of their disobedience, for the soul being now
delighted with perverse liberty and scorning to serve GOD, could not have the
body at the former command: and having willingly forsaken GOD the superior, i^
could not have the inferior so serviceable as it desired, nor had the flesh
subject as it might have had always, had it self remained Gods subject. For
then the flesh began to covet, and contend against the spirit, and (c) with
this contention are we all borne, (d) drawing death from our original, and
bearing natures corruption, and Romans 8.
contention, or victory in our members.

L. VIVES.
NOt (a) shamefull] Not filthy nor procuring shame, they had not been
offenside, had we (...) sinned, but had had the same use that or feet, our
hands now, but having offended, there was an obscaene pleasure put in them,
which makes them to be ashamed of, and covered. (b) Reciprocall] Which
disobedience reflected upon them: as they obeyed not GOD, to (...) nature
subjected them, so should they find a rebel, one of the members, against the
rule of reason. (d) With this Some books ads something here, but it is
needless. (d) Drawing (...)] That is, upon the first sin, arose this
contention between the mind and their affects which is perpetually in us;
wherein the mind is sometimes victor, and sometimes (...): some read without
victory, implying that the affections cannot be so suppressed, but then they
will still rebel against reason, and disturb it. This is the more subtle
sense, and seems best to me.

In what state GOD made Man, and into what state he feil by his voluntary
choice. CHAP. 14.
FOr GOD (the Creator of nature and not of vice) made man upright: who being
willingly depraved and justly condemned, be got all his progeny under the (...)
deprauation and condemnation: for in him were we all, when as he being ^ced by
the woman, corrupted (a) us all: by her that before sin was made of himself.
We had not our particular forms yet, but there was he seed of (...)
natural propagation, which being corrupted by sin must needs produce man of
that same nature, the slave to death and the object of just comdemnation: and
therefore this came from the bad using of (b) free will, thence aro^ all this
teame of calamity, drawing al men on into misery (excepting Gods Saints) from
their corrupted original, even to the beginning of the second death which has
no end.

L. VIVES.
COrrupted (a) us all] A diversity of reading. Augustines meaning is that we
being all potentially in hm, and he being corrupted by sin, therefore we,
arising all from him as our first fountain, draw the corruption a long with us
also. (b) Free will] For our first parents abused the freedom of it, having
power as well to keep Gods hests eternally, as to break them.

That Adam forsook GOD ere GOD for sooke him, and that the souls first death
was the departure from GOD. CHAP. 15.
Wherefore in that it was said You shall die the death, because it was not
said, the deaths, if we understand that death, wherein the soul leaves the
life, that is GOD (for it was not forsaken ere it forsook him, but contrary,
the own will being their first leader to evil, but the Creators will being
the first leader to good, both in the creation of it, before it had being, and
the restoring of it when it had fallen:) wherefore if we do understand that God
meant but of this death, where he says, whenever thou eatest thereof thou
shall die the death: as if he had said: whenever you forsake me in
disobedience, I will forsake you in justice: Genes. 2, 17.
yet verily do all the other deaths follow the denunciation of this death. For
in that the soul felt a disobedient motion of the flesh, and thereupon covered
the bodies secret parts, in this was the first death felt, that is the
departure of the soul from God. Which was signified in that, that when the man
in mad fear had gone and hid himself, God said to him, Adam where art thou?
not ignorantly seeking him, but watchfully warning him to look well where he
was, seeing God was not with him. But when the soul forsakes the body decayed
with age, then is the other death felt, whereof God said in imposing man's
future punishment, earth thou wast, and to earth thou shall return: That by
these two, the first death which is of whole man, might be accomplished, which
the second should second, if Gods grace procure not man's freedom from it: for
the body which is earth, returns not to earth but by the own death, that is
the departure of the soul from it. Wherefore all christians (b) holding the
Catholic faith, believe, that the bodily death lies upon mankind by no law
of nature, as if GOD had made man for to die, but as a (c) due punishment for
sin: because God in scourging this sin, said unto man, of whom we all are
descended, Earth thou wast and (...) earth thou shall return.

L. VIVES.
EArth (a) thou wast] (...), say the Septuagints, by the later article, (...)
implying the element of earth, the grave of althings dying. (b) Holding the]
Augustine often auerreth directly, that man had not died, had he not sinned:
nor had had a body subject to death or disease: the tree of life should have
made him immortal. And S. Thomas Aqui^as, the best school divine holds so
also. But Scotus, either for faction, or will, denies it al, making m^ in his
first state subject to diseases, yet that he should be taken up to heaven ere
he died: but if (...) (...) had (...) (...), (...) had not died.
he were left on earth, he should die at length: for that the tree of life
could not eternize h^ but only prolong his life. (c) A due] deserved by his
guilt.

Of the Philosophers that held corporal death not to be penal, whereas Plato
brings in the Creator promising the lesser gods that they should never leave
their bodies. CHAP. 16.
But the Philosophers against whose callumnies we defend this City of God,
(...) is (...) church, think they give us a witty scoff for saying that the
souls separation from the body is to be held as part of the punishment, when
as they affirm (...) ^n (a) is the soul perfectly blessed when it leaves the
body, and goes up p^ and naked unto God. If I should find no battery against
this opinion out of their own books I should have a great ado to prove not
the body, but the corruptibility of the body to be the souls burden: whereupon
is that which we (...) in our last book, A corruptible body is heavy, unto the
soul. In adding, cor^le, Wis 9. 15
he shows that this being inflicted as sins punishment, upon the (...) not
the body it self, is heavy to the soul: and if he had not added it, yet
(...) have understood it so. But Plato affirming plainly that the gods that
the ^or made, have incorruptible bodies, and bringing in their maker, promising
(...) as a great benefit) to remain therein eternally, and never to be
separated (...) them, why then do those never (b) dissemble their own
knowledge, to (...) ^ristianity trouble: and contradict themselves in seeking
to oppose against ^to's words (c) Tully translateth thus: bringing in the great
GOD, speaking (...) the gods he had made: (d) You that are of the gods
original, whom I have ^d, attend: (e) these your bodies, by my will, are
indissoluble: although every (...) ^ay be dissolved. But (f) it is evil, to
desire to dissolve a thing (g) compounded by (...) but seeing that you are
created, you are neither immortal, nor indissoluble: yet (...) never be
dissolved, nor die: these shall not prevail, against my will, which is a (...)
assurance of your eternity, then all your forms, and compositions are. Behold,
(...) ^ith that their gods, by their creation and combination of body and soul
(...) ^all, and yet immortal, by the decree and will of him that made them. If
(...) it be pain to the soul, to be bound in any body, why should God seem
(...) ^way their fear of death, by promising them eternal immortality? not
(...) of their nature, which is compounded, and not simple, but because of his
(...)* which can eternize creatures, and preserve compounds immortally, from
^on: whether Plato hold this true of the stars, is another question. For (h)
(...)* not consequently grant him that those globous illuminate bodies, (...)
^ht and day upon earth, have each one a peculiar soul whereby it lives, (...)
^ed and intellectual, as he affirms directly of the world also. But this, as
(...) no question for this place. This I held fit to recite against those that
(...) the name of Platonists, are proudly ashamed of the name of christians,
(...) ^e communication of this name with the vulgar, should debase the (...)
(because small) number of the (i) Palliate. These seeking holes in the coat
^stianity, bark at the eternity of the body, as if the desire of the souls
(...) the continuance of it in the frail body, were contraries, whereas their
(...) Plato holds it as a gift given by the great GOD to the lesser, that they
(...) not die, that is, be severed from the bodies he gave them.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) is] Philolaus the Pythagorean held that man having left his body,
became an (...) God, and Plato says our body depresseth our thoughts, and
calls it away from (...) ^emplations: that therefore we must leave it, that in
this life also as well as we can, (...) ^her life where we shall be free, we may
see the truth and love the good. Hereupon (...) ^th a man cannot be happy
without he leave the body, and be joined unto God. (d) (...)] An imitation of
Terence, t^ si sapis quod scis, nescias. (a) Tully translateth] Tullies (...)
(...) (...), is a piece of Plato's Timaeus, the whole work is very falty in
Tully. He that will read Plato himself, the words begin thus: (...) etc. Plato
had it out of Timaeus of Locris his book, after whom he named his dialogue:
for thus says Timaeus: God desyring to d^e an excellent work, created, or
begot this God, who shall never die, unless it please that God that made him,
to dissolve him. But it is evil to desire the dissolution of so rare a work
(d) You that are of] Deorum satu orti. (e) These your] Tully has this
sentence: a depraved sense by reason of the want of a negative. (f) It is
euill] Or, an evil man's part. (g) Compounded] Or, combined. (h) We may not]
Augustine durst never decide this question. Origin it seems followed Plato,
and got a many of the learned unto his side. (i) Palliate] The Romans Toga, or
gown, Palli^i.
was the Greeks Pallium: and they that would seem absolute Grecians, went in
these Pallia, or clokes: and such were observed much for their Graecisme in
life and learning. For as we teach all our arts in latin, now, so did they in
greek then. They were but few, and therefore more admired.

Against the opinion, that earthly bodies cannot be corruptible, nor eternal.
CHAP 17.
THey stand in this also, that earthly bodies cannot be eternal, and yet hold
the whole earth which they hold but as a part of their great God (though not of
their highest) the world to be eternal. Seeng then their greatest GOD, made
another God, greater then all the rest beneath him, that is, the world, and
seeing they hold this is a creature having an intellectual soul included in
it by which it lives, having the parts consisting of 4 elements, whose
connection that great GOD (least this other should ever perish) made
indissoluble, and eternal: why should the earth then, being but a mean member
of a greater creature, be eternal, and yet the bodies of earthly creatures
(God willing the one as well as the other) may not be eternal? I but say
they, earth (a) must be returned unto earth, whence the bodies of earthly
creatures are shapen, and therefore (say they) these must of force be
dissolved, and die, to be restored to the eternal earth from whence they were
taken. Well if one should affirm the same of the fire, and say that all the
bodies taken thence, should be restored unto it again, as the heavenly bodies,
thereof consisting, were not that promise of immortality, that Plato said God
made unto those gods, utterly broken by this position? Or can it not be so,
because it pleases not God, whose will as Plato says is beyond all other
assurance? why may not God then have so resolved of the terrene bodies, that
being brought forth, they should perish no more, once composed, they should be
dissolved no more, nor that which is once taken from the elements should ever
be restored? and that the souls being once placed, the bodies should never
for sake them, but enjoy eternal happiness in this combination? why does not
Plato confess that God can do this? why cannot he preserve earthly things from
corruption? Is his power as the Platonists, or rather as the christians avouch.
A likely Conjecture deceives the Philosophers.
matter! the Philosophers know Gods counsels, but not the Prophers! nay rather
it was thus, their spirit of truth revealed what God permitted unto the
Prophets: but the weakness of conjecture in these questions, wholly deluded
the Philosophers. But they should not have bin so far besotted in obstinate
ignorance as to contradict themselves in public assertions, saying first that
the soul cannot be blessed without it aba^don al body, whatsoever, and by and
by after (b) that the gods have blessed souls, and yet are continually tied
unto celestial and fiery bodies: and as for Jupiters (the worlds) soul, that
is eternally inhere^t in the 4 elements composing this universe. For Plato
holds it to be diffused, from the midst of earth, geometrically called the (c)
center, unto the extremest parts of heaven through all the parts of the world
by (d) mystical numbers: making the world, a blessed creature, whose soul
enjoys full happiness of wisdom and yet leaves not the body, and wose body
liueteh eternally by it, and as though it consist of so many different (...),
yet can neither dull it nor hinder it. Seeing then that they give their con^res
this scope, why will they not believe that God has power to eternize (...)
bodies, wherein the souls without being parted from them by death, or (...)
^rdened by them at all in life may live most in blessed eternity, as they (...)
(...) gods do in fiery bodies, and their Jupiter in all the four elements? If
(...) ^es cannot be blessed without the bodies be quite forsaken, why then let
(...) ^ods get them out of the stars, let Jupiter pack out of the elements:
if they (...) go, then are they wretched. But they will allow neither of
these: they (...) ^uerre that the Gods may leave their bodies, least they
should seem to ^ip mortals: neither dare they bar them of bliss, least
they should con^ ^em wretches. Wherefore all bodies are not impediments to
beatitude, but (...) the corruptible, transitory and mortal ones: not such as
God made man (...) but such as his sin procured him afterward.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) must] This is scripture, that the body is earth, and must become
earth. Homer Gens. 3.
(...) it the Grecians: for he calls Hectors carcass, earth. Phocylides, an
ancient writer (...) thus. (...) etc.
Our body is of earth, and dying must,
Return to earth: for Man is made of dust.


(...) ^er has also the like, recited by Tully, Tusc. qu. 1. wherein the words
that Augustine (...) ^xtant. Mors est finitas omnibus quae generi humano
angorem,
Nec quicquam afferunt: reddenda est terra terra.
Of all the pains wherein Man's soul soiournes,
Death is the end: all earth to earth returns.


(...) ^t the gods] Some books read, terrene gods: falsely, Augustine has
nothing to do The Center.
(...) ^e gods in this place. (c) Center] A center is that point in the midst
of a sphaericall (...) ^m whence all lines drawn to the circumference are
equal. It is an indivisible point, (...) ^d parts, neither should it be all
in the midst, nor the lines drawn from it to the cir^ In Timaeo.
equal, as not being all drawn from one part. Plato places the worlds
(...) the center, and so distends it circularly throughout the whole universe:
and then (...) ^ng his position, makes the divine power above, diffuse it self
downe-ward, even (...) ^ter. (d) Musical numbers] Hereof see Macrobius,
Chalcidins, and Marsilius Ficinus, (...) ^at of Plato's Timaeus, which he
either translated, or reformed from the hand of an^ ^ese numbers for their
obscurity are grown into a proverb.

Of the terrene bodies which the Philosophers hold, cannot be in heaven, but
must fall to earth by their natural weight. CHAP. 18.
(...) but (say they) an earthly body is either kept on earth, or carried to
(...) ^th by the natural weight, and therefore cannot be in heaven. The first
(...) ^de were in a wooddie, and fruitful land, which was called Paradise. But
(...) we must resolve this doubt, seeing that both Christ's body is already
as^d, and that the Saints at the resurrection shall do so also, let us ponder
these earthly weights a little. If man's art, of a metal that being put into
the water, sinketh, can yet frame a vessel, that shall swim, how much more
credible is it for Gods secret power, whose omnipotent will, as Plato says,
can both keep things produced, from perishing, and parts combined from
dissoluing, (whereas the combination of corporal and vncorporeall is a
stranger and harder operation then that of corporalls with corporalls) to take
(a) all weight from earthly things, whereby they are carried downe-wards, and
to qualify the bodies of the blessed souls so, as though they be terrene,
yet they may be incorruptible, and apt to ascend, descend, or use what motion
they will, with all celerity. Or, (b) if the Angels can transport bodily
weights whether they please, must we think they do it with toil, and feeling
of the burden? Why then may we not believe that the perfect spirits of the
blessed can carry their bodies whither they please, and place them where they
please? for whereas in our bodily carriage of earthly things, we feel, that
the (c) more big it is, the heavier it is, and the heavier, the more
toile-some to bear: it is not so with the soul: the soul carries the bodily
members better when they are big, and strong, then when they are small, and
meagre, and whereas a big sound man is heavier to others shoulders, then a
lean sick man, yet will he move his healthful heaviness with far more
agility then the other can do his crasie lightness, or then he can himself
if famine or sickness have shaken off his flesh. This power has good
temperature more then great weight in our mortal, earthly and corruptible
bodies. And who can describe the infinite difference between our present
health, and our future immortality? Let not the Philosophers therefore oppose
us with any corporal weight or earthly ponderosity. I will not ask them why
an earthly body may not be in heaven as well as (d) the whole earth may hang
alone without any supportation: for perhaps they will retire their disputation
to the center of the world unto which all heavy things do tend. But this I
say, that if the lesser Gods (whose work Plato makes Man and all other living
things with him) could take away the quality of burning from the fire, and
leave it the light, (e) which the eye transfuseth: shall we then doubt that
that GOD, unto whose will he ascribes their immortality, the eternal
coherence and indissolubility of those strange and diverse combinations of
corporealls and incorporealls, can give man a nature that shall (...). Cor. 15
make him live incorruptible, and immortal, keeping the form of him, and
avoiding the weight? But of the faith of the resurrection, and the quality of
the immortal bodies, more exactly (God willing) in the end of the work.

L. VIVES.
ALL (a) weight] These are Gods admirable works, and it is the merit of our
faith that we owe unto God to believe them. I wonder the schoolmen will
inquire of these things, and define them by the rules of nature. (b) If the
Angells] To omit the schools, and natural reasons, herein is the power of an
Angel seen, that in one night God smote: 80000 men of the Assyrians camp by
the hand of an Angel 4. Kings 19. Now let Man go brag of his weakness. (c) The
world big. Here is no need of predicamentall distinctions: he uses big, for
the man weight, not for the quantity. (d) The whole earth] It hangs not in
nothing for it hangs in the air: yet would air give it way, but that it has
gotten the middlemost place of the world, and keeps there in the own nature,
immovable. The Philosophers marvelled that the earth fell not, seeing it hung
in the air: but that which they thought a fall, should then be no fall but an
ascending, for which way soever earth should go, it should go toward the
heaven: and as it is no marvel that our Hemisphere ascends not, no more is
it of any else, for the motion should be all one, above and beneath being all
alike in a globe. But is a thing to be admired and adored, that the earth
should hang so in the air, being so huge a mass, as Ovid ^ith. Terra pila
similis nullo fulcimine nixa,
Aere suspenso, tam grave pendet onus.
Earths massy globe in figure of a ball,
Hangs in the air; vpheld by naught at all.
(^) With the eye] Plato in his Timaeus, speaking of man's fabric says, that
the eyes were endow^ ^th part of that light that shines and burns not: meaning
the suns: for the Gods commanded (...) ^re fire (brother to that of heaven) to
flow from forth the apple of the eye: and there^ when that, and the days light
do meet, the conjunction of those two so well acquainted (...), produces
sight: And least that the sight should seem effected by any other thing (...)
^re in the same work, he defines colors to be nothing but fulgores e
corporibus ma^s: fulgors, flowing out of the bodies wherein they are. The
question whether one sees How man sees.
(...) ^ission, or reception, that is whether the eye send any beam to the
object, or receive a^ ^om it, is not here to be argued. Plato holds the
first. Aristotle confuteth him in his (...) De sensoriis, and yet seems to
approve him, in his Problemes. The Stoickes held the first (...) whom Augustine
(De Trinitate) and many of the Peripatetiques, follow. Aphrodiseus held (...)
the eye sends forth spirits: Pliny says it receives them. Haly the Arabian
makes the (...) to go from the eye and return suddenly, all in a moment:
the later Peripatetiques ^ing Occam, and Durandus, admit no Species on either
side. But of this in another place. (...) both would have the eye send
something forth, and receive something in.

Against those that hold that man should not have been immortal if he had not
sinned. CHAP. 19.
(...) now let us proceed with the bodies of the first men, who if they had not
^ed, had never tasted of that death which we say is good only to the good:
(...) ^s all men know, a separation of soul and body, wherein the body of the
(...) that had evident life, has evident end. For although we may not doubt,
(...) ^he souls of the faithful that are dead, are in rest: yet (a) it were
so much (...) for them to live with their bodies in good state, that they that
hold it most (...) to want a body, may see themselves convinced herein
directly. For (...) man dare compare those wise men, that have either left
their bodies, or are to (...) them, unto the immortal gods to whom the great
GOD promised perpe^ of bliss, and inherence in their bodies. And Plato thought
it the greatest ^ing man could have, to be taken out of the body (after a
course virtuously (...)) and placed in the bosoms of those gods, that are
never to leave their (...). Scilicet immemores supra vt conuexa reuisant, Virg
Aen^ ad. 6.

Rursus and incipiant in corpora velle reuerti.
The thought of Heaven is quite out of their brain,
Now began they wish to live on earth again.


Which Virgil is commended for, speaking after Plato. So that he holds, that
(...) ^oules of men can neither be always in their bodies, but must of force
be ^d from them: nor can they be always without their bodies, but must be
(...) successively, now to live, and now to die, putting (b) this difference
that (...) men when they die are carried up to the stars, and every one stays a
while in (...) fit for him, thence to return again to misery, in time: and to
follow the (...) of being imbodied again, and so to live again in earthly
calamity, but your (...), are bestowed after their deaths in other bodies, of
men or beasts, accor^g to their merits. In this hard and wretched case places
he the wisest souls, who have no other bodies given them, to be happy in,
but such as they can neither be eternally within, nor eternally abandon. Of
this Platonisme, Porphyry (as I said elsewhere) was ashamed because of the
christian times, excluding the souls not only from the bodies of beasts, and
from that revolution, but affirming them (if they lived wisely) to be set free
from their bodies, so as they should never more be incorporate, but live in
eternal bliss with the Father. Wherefore least he should seem in this point
to be exceeded by the Christans that promised the Saints eternal life, the
same does he give to the purified souls: and yet, to contradict Christ, he
denies the resurrection of their bodies in incorruptibility; and places the
soul in bliss without any body at all. Yet did he never teach that these
souls should be subject unto the incorporated gods in matter of religion. Why
so? because he did not think them better then the Gods, though they had no
bodies. Wherefore if they dare not (as I think they dare not) prefer human
souls before their most blessed though corporeal gods, why do they think it
absurd for christianity to teach that our first parents had they not sinned,
had been immortal, this being the reward of their true obedience? and that
the Saints at the resurrection shall have the same bodies that they labored in
here, but so, that they shall be light, and incorruptible as their bliss shall be
perfect and unchangeable.

L. VIVES.
YEs (a) were it] If the following opinion of Plato concerning them were true.
(b) This difference] Plato says that some creatures follow God well, are like
him, and are reuolued with the sphere of heaven until they come below and
then they fall: Some get up again: some are ouer-whelmed: these are the
foolish, and those the wise: the mean, have a middle place. So the wise soul
is elevated to heaven, and sits there, until the revolution bring it down
again, from seeing of truth, others voluntarily break their wings and fall
ere the time be expired. The Philosophers souls at the end of 3000. years,
return to the star whence they came: the rest must stay 10000. years ere
they ascend.

That the bodies of the Saints now resting in hope, shall become better then our
first Fathers was. CHAP. 20.
THe death that seuereth the souls of the Saints from their bodies is not
troublesome unto them, because their bodies do rest in hope, and the efore
they seemed senseless of all reproach here upon earth. For they do not (as
Plato will have men to do) desire to forget their bodies, but rather,
rememb^ing what the truth that deceives none, said unto them (a) that they
should not loose an hair of their head, they desire and wait for the
resurrection of their bodies wherein they suffered such pains and are never to
suffer more. (b) For if they hated not their flesh when they were feign to bind
it from rebelling by the law of the spirit, how much shall they love it,
becoming wholly spiritual? for if we may justly call the spirit serving the
flesh, carnal, then so may we call the flesh serving the spirit, spiritual,
(c) not because it shall be turned into the spirit (as some think, because it is
written: It is sown a natural body but it aris^th a spiritual body): 1.
Cor. 15
but because it shall serve the spirit in all wonderful, and ready obeisance,
to the fulfilling of most secure will of indissolluble immortality, all sense
of trouble, heaviness, and corruptibility being quike taken from it. For it
shall not be so bad, as it is now in our best health: nor as it was in our
first pa^ts before sin; for they (though they had not dyed but that they
sinned) What bodies our first parents had.
(...) ^aine to eat corporal meat as men do now: having earthly, and not
spiritual bodies: and though they should never have grown old and so have died
(the (...) of life that stood in the midst of Paradise, unlawful for them to
taste of, affording them this estate by GODS wonderful grace) yet they eat of
more (...) then that one: (which was forbidden them, because it was bad but
(...) their instruction in pure and simple obedience, which is a great virtue
in a ^ble creature placed under God the creator, for though a man touched no
(...) ^et in touching that which was forbidden him, the very act was the sin
(...) obedence,) they lived therefore of other fruits, and eat, least their
carnal (...) should have been troubled by hunger, or thirst: but the taste of
the tree (...) (...) was given them, to confirm them against death, and
weakness by age, (...) rest serving them for nutriment, and this one for a
sacrament: the tree of life (...) (...) earthly paradise, being as the wisdom
of God is in the heavenly, whereof (...) (...) ^itten: It is a tree of life to
them that embrace it. Pro. 3. 18.


L. VIVES.
VN^ them. (a) That] Luc. 21. 7. (b) For if.] Ephesians. 5. 29 no man ever yet
hated his own flesh. (c) Not because Saint Origin faith that all our corporal
nature shall become spiritual, and all (...) ^ance shall become a body purer
and clearer then the light, and such an one as man can^ ^ine: God shall be all,
in all, so that every creature shall be transmuted into that which (...) then
all, namely into the divine substance, for that is the best. Periarch.

Of the Paridise wherein our first parents were placed, and that it may be
taken spiritually also without any wrong to the truth of the history as
touching the real place. CHAP. 21.
Whereupon some referred that (a) Paradise wherein the first man was placed as
the scripture records, al unto a spiritual meaning taking the trees, to (...)
^es, as if there were (b) no such visible things, but only that they were
(...) signify things intelligible. As if there were not a real Paradise,
because (...) understand a spiritual one: as if there were not two such women
as Agar (...), and two sons of Abraham by them, the one being a bond woman
and (...) (...) free, because the Apostle says that they signified the two
Testaments: (...) (...) the Rock gushed not forth in water, when Moses smot
it, because that (...) ^ay prefigure Christ, the same Apostle saying the rock
was Christ! No man (...) that the Paradise may be understood, the bliss of the
Saints the (c) four (...), four virtues; prudence, fortitude, temperance and
justice: the trees, all (...) ^sciplines: the tree of life, wisdom the mother
of the rest: the tree of the ^edge of good and evil, the trial of
transgression, for God decreed a pu^nt for sin, justly, and well, if man
could have made use of it to his own (...). These things may also be
understood of the Church, and that in a better (...), as prophetique tokens of
things to come, Paradise may be taken for the Church, as we (d) read in the
canticles thereof. The four floods are the four Ghospels: the fruitful
trees, the Saints: their fruits, their works: the tree of life, the holy of
holies, Christ: the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, free election of
will, for if man once forsake Gods will, he cannot use himself, but to his
own destruction: and therefore he learneth either to adhere unto the good of
all goods, or to affect his own only, for loving himself, he is given to
himself, that being in troubles, sorrows, and fears (and feeling them
withal) he may sing with the Psalmist, My soul is cast down within me: and
being reformed? I will Psalm. 42. 6. Psalm. 59. 9.
wait upon thee O God, my defense. These and such like, may be lawfully
understood by Paradise, taken in a spiritual sense, so that the history of the
true and local one be as firmly believed.

L. VIVES.
PAradise. (a)] Augustine super Genes. ad. lit. lib. 8. recites three opinions
of Paradise: 1. Spiritual only: 2. local only: third spiritual and local
both: and this he approues for the likeliest. Paradise.
But where Paradise was, is a maine doubt in authors. Josephus places it in
the east, and so does Bid, adding withal that it is a region, severed by seas
from all the world, and lying so high that it touches the moon, Plato in his
Phaedo places it above the clouds, which others dissalow as unlikely.
Albertus Grotus herein follows Auicen, and the elder writers also as
Polibius, and Eratosthenes, imagining a delicate and most temperate region
under the equinoctial, against the old Position, that the climate under the
equinoctial was inhabitable. The equinoctial diuides the torrid Zone in two
parts, touching the Zodiac in two points, Aries, and Libra. There did he
think the most temperate clime having twelve hours day, and twelve night, all
the year long, and there placed he his Paradise. So did Scotus: nor does this
controull them that place it in the east, for there is cast and west under the
equinoctial line. Some say that the sword of fire signifies that burning
clymate, wherein as Arrianus says, there is such lightning and so many fiery
apparitions, where Paradise was, Hierome thinks that the Scriptures does
show, and though the Septuagintes translate in Eden, from the east: Oriens is a
large signification. Hierome says thus for Paradise there is Ortus: Began. Eden
Eden.
is also Deliciae, pleasures, for which Symmachus translateth Paradisus
florens. That also which follows Contra Orientem, in ye Hebrew Mikkedem.
Aquila translateth (...): we may read it, from the beginning Symmachus has
(...), and Theodotion, (...) both which signify beginning, and not the east,
whereby it is plain that God had made Paradise before he made heaven and
earth, as we read also in the Hebrew. God had planted the Paradise Eden from
the beginning. This out of Hierome. (b) No such.] No man denies that Paradise
may be spiritually understood, excepting Ambrose in his book De Paradiso. But
all the Fathers profess that Paradise was a real pleasant place, full of
trees, (as Damascene says) and like to the Poets imaginary Elysium. Away with
their foolery (says Hierome upon Daniel) that seek for figures in truths,
and would overthrow the real existence of trees, and rivers in Paradise, by
drawing all into an Allegory. This did Origin, making a spiritual meaning of
the whole hi^ory, and placing the true Paradise in the third heaven, whither
the Apostle Paul was rapt. (c) Four rivers.] Nile of Egypt. Euphrates and
Tigris of Syria; and Ganges of India. There heads are unknown, The rivers of
Paradise.
and they run under the Ocean into our sea: and therefore the Egiptian priests
called Ni^, the Ocean. Herodot. (d) Read in the.] Cant, 4 12. My sister, my
spouse is as a garden enclosed as a spring shut up, and a fountain sealed up,
their plants are as an orchard of pomegranates with sweet fruits. etc.

That the Saints bodies after resurrection shall be spiritual, and yet not
changed into spirits. CHAP. 22.
THe bodies of the Saints in the resurrection shall need none of the tree of
life to preserve them in life, health or strength, nor any meat to keep away
hunger and thirst: They shall have such an every way absolute immortality, that
they shall never need to ear: power they shall have to do it if they will,
but no ^ssity. For so the Angels did appearing visibly and sensibly, not of
necessity, (...) of power and will to afford their ministry unto man in more
congruence. Genes. 18.
(...) we may not think that when (a) they lodged in men's houses, they did but
ear (b) seemingly: though they seemed to eat with the same appetite that the
(...) did, who knew them not to be Angels. And therefore the Angel says in
Tobi^n saw me eat, but you saw it but in vision: that is, you thought I had
eaten as Tob. 12.
(...) did, to refresh my body. But if the other side may be probably held of
the Angels, yet verily we doubt it not to be true (c) of Christ, that he in
his spiritual flesh after his resurrection (yet was it his true flesh) eat
and drank with his disciples: The need only, not the power, is taken from
those glorified bodies which are spiritual, not because they cease to be
bodies, but because Luc. 23.
they subsist by the quickening of the spirit.

L. VIVES.
THey (a) lodged] In the houses of Abraham, Lot, and Tobias. (b) Eat
seemingly] They did not eat as we do, passing the meat from the mouth to the
stomach through the throat, (...) so decoct it, and disp^rse the juice through
the veins, for nut^iment, nor yet did they de^ men's eyes, by seeming to move
that which they had for their chaps, and yet moving (...) not, or seeming to
chaw bread, or flesh, and yet leaving it whole. They did eat really, (...)
^ere not nourished by eating. (c) Of Christ] Luke the 23. The earth (says Bid
upon (...) ^ce) drinks up water one way, and the sun another: the earth for
need: the sun (...) power. And so our Savior did eat, but not as we eat:
that glorious body of his took ^te, but turned it not into nutriment, as ours
do.

Of bodies animate and spiritual, these dying in Adam, and those being
quickened in Christ. CHAP. 23.
(...) ^s the bodies that have a living soul (though as yet vnquickned by the
^it) are called animate, yet are our souls but bodies: so are the other
cal^tuall: yet God forbid we should believe them to be spirit, or other then
^tiall fleshly bodies, yet incorruptible, and without weight, by the quick^ of
the spirit. For man shall not then be earthly but celestial, not that he shall
(...) his earthly body, but because he shall be so endowed from heaven, that he
(...) ^habite it with loss of his nature, only by attaining a celestial
quality. (...) ^st man was made earth of earth, into (a) a living creature, but
not into (b) ^ing spirit: as ^ee should have been, had he perseuered in
obedience. ^lesse therefore, his body needing meat and drink against hunger
and (...) and being not kept in youth, and from death by indissoluble
immortality, but (...) by the Tree of life, was not spiritual, but only
anima^e: yet should it not (...) ^ied, but that it incurred Gods heavy sentence
by offending. And though he (...) take of other meats out of Paradise, yet had
he bin (c) ^bidden to touch (...) of life, he should have bin liable to time
and corruption, in that life only; (...) had he continued in spiritual
obedience, though it were but merely ani^, might have been eternal in
Paradise. Wherefore though by these words (...), (d) When soever you eat
thereof you shall dye the death; we understand by (...), the separation of
soul and body, yet ought it not seem absurd, in that (...) dyed not the very
day that they took this deadly meat, for that very (...) their nature was
depraved, and by their just exclusion from the Tree (...), the necessity of
death entered upon them, wherein we all are brought forth. And therefore the
Apostle says not: The body shall dye for sin, but The body is dead because
of sin, and the spirit is life for justice sake. Romans 8. 10
And then he adds: But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
dead d^ in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by his spirit dwelling in you. Therefore then as the Apostle
says shall be in quickening of the spirit, which is now in the life of soul,
and yet dead, because it must necessarily dye. But in the first man, it was in
life of soul, and not in quickening of spirit, yet could it not be called dead,
because had not he broken the precept, he had not been bound to death. But
whereas God signified the death of the soul in leaving of him, saying Adam
where art thou? and in saying, Earth thou art, and to earth thou shall go,
signified the death of the body in leaving of the soul, therefore we must
think he spoake not of the second death, reserving that secret because of his
new testament, where it is plainly discovered: that the first which is common
to all, might be shown to proceed from that sin, which one man's act made
common to all: but that the second death is not common to all, because of those
holy only whom he has fore-knowne and predestined (as the Apostle says)
to be made like the image of his son, that he might be the first borne of
many brethren, whom the grace of God by this mediator had saved from the second
Romans 8. 29
death.

Therefore the first man's body was but animate, as the Apostle witnesses, who
desiring our animate bodies now, from those spiritual ones, that they shall
become in the resurrection: It is sown in corruption (says he) but shall rise
again 1. Cor. 15. 42
incorruptible: it is sown in reproach, but it is raised in glory: it is sow^n
in weakness, but raised in power: it is sown an animated body, but shall
arise a spiritual body. And then to prove this, he proceeds. for if there
be a natural (or animated) body, 44
there is also a spiritual body. And to show what a natural body is, he
says: The first man Adam was made a living soul. Thus then showed he what a
natural 45
body is, though the scripture do no^ say of the first man Adam, when God
br^athed in his face, the breath of life, that man became a living body, but
man became a living soul. The first man was made a living soul, says the
Apostle, meaning a natural body. But how the spiritual body is to be taken,
he she^eth also, adding, but the last man, a quickening spirit: meaning Christ
assuredly, who rose from death to dye no more. Then he proceeds saying: That
was not first made which is spiritual but that which is natural, and that
which is spiritual after-wards. Here he shows most plainly that he did
mean by the living soul, the natural body, and the spiritual, by the
quickening spirit. For the natural body that Adam had, was first, (though it
had not dyed but for that he sinned) and such have we now, one nature drawing
corruption and necessity of death, from him and from his sin: such also did
Christ take upon him for us: not needfully, but in his power: but the
spiritual body is afterward: and such had Christ our head in his
resurrection, such also shall we his members have in ours. Then does the
Apostle describe the difference of these two, thus. The first man is of the
earth earthly; the second is of heaven, heavenly; as the earthly one was so are
all the earthly: and as the heavenly one is, such shall all the heavenly ones
be. As we have borne the Image of the earthly, so shall we bear the image
of the heavenly. This the Apostle inferres upon the sacrament of regeneration,
as he says elsewhere: All ye that are baptized into Christ have put on
Christ: which shall then be really performed, when that which is natural in
our birth, shall become spiritual in our resurrection, that I may use his own
words: for we are saved by hope. We put on the Romans 8. (...).
image of the earthly man, by the propagation of sin and corruption, adherent
Christ the heavenly man.
unto our first birth; but we put on that of Heavenly man by grace, pardon and
promise of life eternal, which regeneration assures us by the mercy only of
the mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, whom the Angel
calls the Heavenly man because he came from Heaven to take upon him the shape
of earthly mortality, and to shape it into heavenly immortality. 1 Co. 15. 22
He calls the rest, heavenly also, because they are made members of Christ
by grace they and Christ being one, as the members and the head is own body.
This he auerreth plainly in the chapter aforesaid, by a man came d^h, and by a
man came the resurrection from the dead: for as in Adam all die, even so in
Christ shall all be made alive: and that into a quickening spirit, that is a
spiritual body: not that all that die in Adam shall become members of Christ,
for many more of them shall fall into the eternal second death: but it is
said, all, and all, because as none die natural, but in Adam, so none shall
revive spiritual but in Christ, we may not then think that our bodies at the
rusurrection shall be such as Adams was at the creation, nor that this place,
As the earthly one was, so are all the earthly, is meant of that which was
effected by the transgression: for we may not think that Adam had a spiritual
body ere he fell, and in his fall was made a natural one: he that conceiueth
it so, gives but little regard to that great teacher, that says. If there be a
natural body, then is there also a spiritual; as it is also written, the first
man Adam was made a living soul, was this done after sin, being the first
estate of man, from whence the blessed Apostle took this testimony of the
(...) to show what a natural body was.

L. VIVES.
A Living (a).] Or with a living soul, but the first is more usual in holy
writ. (b) A quickning] ^ssed and joined with God: b^ which conjunction it
imparteth integrity and immor^ ^to the body. (c) Forbidden.] Out of much
diversity of reading I hold this the best: for, (...) ^oule that lives and the
quickening spirit that gives life. (d) When soever.] Symmachus (...) Hierome)
expounds this place better, thou shall be mortal. But ind^ed we die as soon
(...) borne as Manilius says. Nascentes morimur, finisque, ab origin pendet.
Being borne we die: our ends hangs at our birth:


How Gods breathing life into Adam, and Christ's breathing upon his Apostles
when be said, receive the holy spirit, are to be understood. CHAP. 24.
S^e therefore do unadvisedly think that God, when he breathed in his face the
^th of life and man became a living soul, did (a) not then give him a soul
but by the holy spirit only quickened a soul that was in him before. They
ground (...) Christ's breathing upon his Apostles after his resurrection and
saying, (...) the Holy spirit: thinking that this ^was such another breathing,
so that (...) ^angelist might have said, they became living souls, which if
he had (...) it would have caused us to imagine all reasonable souls dead
that are (...) ^kned by Gods spirit, though their bodies seem to be a live.
But it (...) so when man was made, as the Scripture shows plain, in these
words ((...) ^d GOD formed man being dust of the Earth: which some thinking to
(...), translate. (c) And GOD framed man of the Lome of the Earth because it
was said before, amist went up from the earth and watered all the earth: that
lome should seem to be produced by this mixture of earth and water for
immediately follows. And God framed man being dust of the earth, as the Greek
translations (d) whence our latin is, do read it: but whether the Gree^e
(...), be formed, or framed, it makes no matter: (e) framed, is the more
proper word, but they that used formed thought they avoided ambiguity, because
Man formed.
that fingo, in the latin is used (f) commonly for to feygne, by lying or
illuding. This man therefore being framed of dust, or lome, (for lome is
moystned dust) that this dust of the earth (to speak with the scripture more
expressly) when it received a soul was made an animate body, the Apostle
affirms saying, the man was made a living soul: that is, this dust being
formed was made a living soul. I (say they) but he had a soul, now, already,
other-wise he could not have been man being neither soul only, nor body
only, but consisting of both. It Is true, the soul is not whole man, but the
better part only, nor the body whole man but the worse part only, and both
conjoined make man, yet when we speak of them disioyned, they loose not that
name; for who may not follow custom, and say, such a man is dead? such a man
is now in joy, or in pain, and speak but of the soul only? or such a man is
in his grave, and mean but the body only? will they say the scripture uses
no such phrase? yes, it both calls the body and soul conjoined by the name of
man and also dividing them, calls the soul the inward man, and the body the
outward, as if they were two men, and not both composi^gone.

And mark in what respect man is called Gods image and man of earth, returning
to earth, the first is in respect of the reasonable soul which God breathed or
inspired into man, that is, into man's body: and the la^er is in respect of the
body which God made of the dust, and gave it a soul, whereby it became a
living body, that is, man became a living soul: and therefore whereas Christ
breathing upon his Apostles, said, receue the holy spirit: this was to show
that the spirit was his, as well as the Fathers, for the spirit is the Fathers,
and the Sons, making up the Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, being
no creature, but a creator? That breath which was carnally breathed, was not
the substantial nature of the Holy Man how created.
Spirit, but rather a signification (as I said) of the Sons communication of
the spirit with his Father, it being not particular to either, but common to
both. The scriptures in Greek calls it always (...), as the Lord called it
here, when by signifiing it with his breath, he gave it to his disciples: and
I never read it otherwise called in any place of Gods book. But here, whereas
it is said Isa. 57. 16.
that God formed man being dust of the earth, and breathed in his face the
spirit (or breath) of life: the Greek is (g) not (...), but (...): which word
is read oftener for the creature then the creator: and therefore some latinists
(for difference sake) do not interpret this word (...) spirit, but breath, for
so it is in Esaias, where God says (h) I have made all breath: meaning
doubtless every soul. Therefore that which the Greeks call (...), we do
sometimes call breath; some-time spirit, some-time inspiration, and aspiration,
and sometimes (i) soul: but (...) never but spirit, either of man, as the
Apostle says, what man knows the things of a man but the spirit of a man
which is in him: or of a beast as we read in the I Co^. 2. 11 Eccl^3. 21. Psa.
148. 8.
preacher: Who knows whether the spirit of man ascends vpwardes, and the
spirit of the beast downwards to the earth? or that bodily spirit which we
call wind, as the Psalm says, fire, hayle, snow, Ice, and the spirit of
tempests: or of no creature, but the creator himself: whereof our Savior said
in the Gospel: Receive the holy (...): signifying it in his bodily breath: and
there also where he says, Go, and b^ise all nations in the name of the
father, the son, and the holy spirit, plainly and excellently intimating the
full Trinity unto us: and there also where we read; God is a spirit, and in
many other places of scripture. In all those places of Script^, John. 4. 24.
the Greek we see has (...), and not (...), and the Latin, flatus, and not
spi^us. And therefore if in that place, He breathed into his face the breath
of life, t^ Greek had not (...) (as it has) but (...), yet were it no
consequent that we should take it for the holy spirit, the third person in
Trinity, because (...) is v^ for a creature, as well as the creator, and as
ordinarily. O but (^ay they) he ^ld not have added vitae, of life, but that
he meant that spirit: and whereas (...) s^id; Man became a soul, he would
not have added living, but that he meant the souls life; which is given from
above by the spirit of God: for the soul ha^g a proper life by it self, why
should he add living, but to intimate the (...) given by the holy spirit? But
what is this but folly to respect conjecture, and (...) to neglect scripture?
for what need we go further then a chapter, and be^old: let the earth bring
forth the living soul: speaking of the creation of all e^ly creatures: and
besides for five or six Chapters only after, why might (...) ^ot observe
this: Every thing in whose nosthrills the spirit of life did breath, Genes, 7.
22.
^soeuer they were in the dry land, dyed; relating the destruction of every
living (...) upon earth, by the deluge? If then we find a living soul, and a
spirit of life in beasts, as the Scripture says plainly, using (...) and not
(...), in this very (...) place: why may we not as well say, why added he
living there, seeing (...) soul cannot be unless it live? and why added he,
Of life, here, having ^d spirit? But we understand the Scriptures ordinary
usage of the living (...) and the spirit of life, for animated bodies,
natural, and sensitive: and yet (...) this usual phrase of Scripture, when it
comes to be used concerning (...) (...) of man: Whereas it implies that man
received a reasonable soul of (...) ^ated by his breath, (k) not as the other
were, produced out of water and (...) and yet so, that it was made in that body
to live therein, and make it an ani^ body, and a living soul, as the other
creatures were, whereof the Scripture said: Let the earth bring forth a living
soul: and that in whose nostrills was the ^rit of life, which the Greek text
calls not (...), but (...), meaning not the holy spirit, but their life. But
we (say they) do conceive Gods breath to come from the mouth of God; now if
that be a soul, (l) we must hold it equal, (...) ^substantiall with that
wisdom, or Word of GOD, which says, I am come (...) (...) the mouth of the
most high. Well: it says not, that it was breathed from Eccl, 24. (...).
(...) ^outh, but came out of it And as we men (not out of our own nature,
but) (...) (...) air about us, can make a contraction into our selves, and
give it out (...) in a breath, so Almighty GOD (not only out of his own
nature, or of (...) ^feriour creature, but) even of nothing can make a breath,
which he may (...) most fitly said to breath or inspire into man, it being as
he is, incorporeall, (...) ^ot as he is, immutable, because it is created, as
he is not.

(...) to let those men see that will talk of Scriptures, and yet mark not
what (...) do intend, that something may be said to come forth of GODS mouth
(...) that which is equal and consubstantiall with him, let them read or hear
(...) own words: Because thou art luke warm, and neither cold nor hot, it
will (...) to pass that I shall spew thee out of my mouth. Therefore we have
to contra^ the Apostles plainness in distinguishing the natural body wherein
we now are, from the spiritual wherein we shall be: where he says; It is
sown a natural body, but arises a spiritual body: as it is also written:
The first man Adam was made a living soul, and the last Adam, a quickening
spirit. The first was of earth, earthly, the second of heaven, heavenly: as is
the earthly, such are all the earthly, and as the heavenly is, such are the
heavenly. And as we have borne the Image of the earthly, so shall we bear
the Image of the heavenly. Of all which words, we spoke before. Therefore the
natural body wherein man was first made, was not made immortal: but yet was
made so that it should not have dyed, unless man had offended. But the body
that shall be spiritual and immortal, shall never have power to dye, as the
soul is created immortal, who though it do in a manner lose the life, by
loosing the spirit of God, which should advance it unto beatitude, yet it
reserueth the proper life, that is, it lives in misery for ever, for it cannot
dye wholly. The Apostaticall Angels, after a sort, are dead by sinning: because
they forsook God, the fountain of life, whereat they might have drunk The
Apostatical Angels.
eternal felicity: yet could they not dye so, that their proper life and sense
should leave them, because they were made immortal; and at the last judgment
they shall be thrown headlong into the second death, yet so as they shall live
therein for The devil at the judgment shall be cast into the second death.
ever, in perpetual sense of torture. But the Saints (the Angels
fellow-cittizens) belonging to the grace of God, shall be so invested in
spiritual bodies, that from thence-forth they shall neither sin nor die:
becoming so immortal (as the Angels are) that sin can never subvert their
eternity, the nature of flesh shall still be theirs, but quite extracted from
all corruption, vnweeldynesse and ponderosity. Now follows another question,
which (by the true Gods help) we mean to decide; and that is this; If the
motion of concupiscence arose in the rebelling members of our first parents,
immediately upon their transgression, where-vppon they saw, that is, they did
more curiously obser^e their own nakedness, and because the unclean motion
resisted their wills, covered their privy parts; how should they have begotten
children, had they remained as they were created, without preuarication? But
this book being fit for an end, and this question not fit for a too succinct
discussion, it is better to leave it to the next volume.

L. VIVES.
DId not (a) then] This the Manichees held. Aug. de Genes. ad lit. lib. 2. Ca^.
8. (b) And GOD formed] They do translate it, And God framed man of earth taken
from the earth: I think Augustine wants a word, taken or taking: Laurinus
his copy teadeth it as the Septuagints do. Yet the Chaldee Thargum, or
paraphraze, reading it as Augustine has it; and so it is in the Bible that
Cardinal Ximenes, my patron, Cr^ his predecessor, published in four languages
being assisted by many learned men, but for the greek especially by John
Vergara, a deep uprightly judicious, and vnvulgar Scholar. (...) Verg^ra.
(...) Co^li.
Their Pentateuch, Lewis Coronelli lent me forbearing all the while that I was
in hand with this work, for the common good. (c) And God framed] Hieromes
translation. (d) Whence (...)] Showing that in his time, the Church used the
Latin translation, from the seauentie, and no^ Hi^s. I wonder therefore that
men should be excluded from sober using of diverse translations. (e) (...)]
(...), the Greek is, we use it of those that form any thing out of claye:
that is [^gere] and great authors use it concerning men. He made them [finxit]
greedy and gluttonous. Salust. He made thee [finxit] wise, temperate, etc. by
nature. Cic. (...) M^. speaking of Cato Mai^r. To form I think is nothing but
to give form property. (f) Commonly] [If a modern divine had plaide the
Gramarian thus, he should have heard of it. But Augustine may: but if he and
Paul lived now adays, he should be held a Pedant, [The Louaine copy defective.
(...) a petty orator, and Paul a mad man, or an heretic.] Not (...).] The
Chaldees read, a speaking spirit. Here Augustine shows plainly how necessary
the true knowledge of the mea^gs of words is in art and discipline. (h) I have
made] I say. 57. 16. the 70. also read it (...) (...), all breath. Many of the
Latinists animus, and anima, for air, and breath. Uirg. Semina terrarumque
animaeque marisque fuissent.
They had been seeds of earth, of air and sea:
And Tully in his Academikes uses it for breath: Si vnus and simplex, vtrum
sit ignis, an anima, (...) s^guis: If it be simply one, whether is it fire,
breath, or blood. Terenc. Compressi animam: I (...) my breath. Plaut. Faetet
anima vxoris tuae. Your wives breath stinkes, and Pliny Anima (...) virus
grave: A Lions breath is deadly poison. (i) Soule] I like this reading better
then B^es copies: it squares better with the following Scriptures. (k) Not as
the] If we say that Augustine held man's soul created without the body, and
then infused, as Aristotle seems to ^rre, De generat. animal, S. Thomas, and a
many more modern authors go down the wind. But if we say it is not created
as the mortal ones are, that are produced out of the ^osition of the
substances wherein they are: but that it is created from above, within man,
^out all power of the material parts, to work any such effect, this were the
most common opinion, and Aristotle should be thus understood: which seems not
to agree with this assertion, that it comes ab externo: nor with his opinion
that holds it immortal, and inborne, if I understand his mind aright,
whereof I see his interpretors are very uncertain, (l) We must hold] There
were not only a many Pagans (as we have shown) but some Chri^ also that held
the soul to be of Gods substance: nor were these heretics only, as (...)
^risilliannists, and some others, but even that good Christian Lactantius: not
that I, or Lanctantius.
(...) wiser then I, will approve him in this, but in that he seems to
stand zealously ^d unto Christ. His words are these: Having made the body, he
breathed into it a soul, out of (...) l^ing fountain of his own spirit,
which is eternal. Institut. divine. lib. 2. wherein he seems (...) (...) that
man's soul was infused into him from the spirit of God.

Finis, lib. 13.
THE CONTENTS OF THE foureteenth book of the City of God.
1. That the inobedience of the first man had drawn all mankind into the
perpetuity of the second death, but that Gods grace has freed amany from it.
2. Of the carnal life apparent in the souls viciousness, as well as the
bodies. 3. That sin came from the soul, and not the flesh, and that the
corruption which sin has procured is not sin but the punishment of sin.
4. What it is to live according to man, and to live according to God. 5. That
the Platonists teach the natures of soul and body, better then the Maniches,
yet they err in ascribing sin, unto the nature of the flesh. 6. Of the
quality of man's will, unto which all affections, Good and Bad, are subject. 7.
That Amor and Dilectio are of indifferent use in the Scriptures both for Good
and Evil. 8. Of the three passions that the Stoykes allow a wiseman, excluding
sadness as foe to a virtuous mind. 9. Of the perturbations of mind, which the
just do moderate, and rule aright. 10. Whether Man had those perturbations in
Paradise, before his fall. 11. The fall of the first Man, wherein Nature was
made good, and cannot be repaired but by the Maker. 12. Of the quality of Man's
first offense. 13. That in Adams offense, his Evil will was before his evil
work. 14. Of the pride of the transgressio^, which was worse then the
transgression it self. 15. Of the just reward that our first parents received
for sin. 16. Of the evil of lust, how the name is ge^rall to many vices, but
proper unto venereall concupiscence. 17. Of the nakedness that our first
parents discovered in themselves after their sin. 18. Of the shame that
accompanies copulation, as well in common, as in marriage. 19. That the motions
of wrath and lust are so violent, that they do necessarily require to be
suppressed by wisdom, and that they were not (...) our Nature, before our fall
depraved it. 20. Of the vain obscaenity of the Cynikes. 21. Of the blessing of
multiplication before sin, which the transgression did not abolish, but only
linked to lust. 22. That God first instituted and blessed the band of marriage.
23. Whether if man had not sinned, he should have begotten children in
paradise, and whether there should there have bin any contention, between
chastity and lust. 24. That our first parents had they lived without sin,
should have had their members of generation as subject unto their wills as any
of the rest. 25. Of the true beatitude, vnattayne abl^ (...) this life. 26.
That our first parents in Paradise mig^ have produced manking without any sham^
appetite. 27. That the sinners, Angels, and men, cannot with their
perverseness disturb Gods providence. 28. The state of the two Cities the
Heavenly and the Earthly.
FINIS.
THE FOVRTEENTH BOOK: OF THE CITY OF GOD Written by Saint Augustine Bishop
of Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
That the inobedience of the first man had drawn all mankind into the
perpetuity of the second death, but that Gods grace has freed a many from it.
CHAP. 1.
WE said in our precedent books that it was Gods pleasure to propagate all men
from one, both for the keeping of human nature in one sociable similitude,
and also for to make their unity of original be the means of their concord in
heart. Nor should any of this kind have dyed but the first two (the one
whereof was made of the other, and Death propagate by sin.
the other of nothing) had incurred this punishment by their disobedience: in
committing so great a sin, that their whole nature being hereby depraved, was
so transfused through all their offspring in the same degree of corruption,
and necessity of death; whose kingdom here-vpon became so great in man, that
all should have been cast headlong in the second death, that has no end, by
this due punishment, but the undue (a) grace of God acquitted some from it:
whereby it comes to pass, that whereas mankind is divided into so many
nations, distinct in language, discipline, habit, and fashion: yet is there
but two sorts of men that do properly make the two cities we speak of: the
one is, of men that live according to the flesh, and the other of those that
live according to the spirit, either in his kind: and when they have attained
their desire, either do live in their peculiar peace.

L. VIVES.
Undue (a) grace] For God owes no man any thing, and therefore it is called
grace, because it comes gratis, freely, and because it makes the receiver
gratum, thankful. Who has gi^ Grace.
unto him first and he shall be recompensed? Romans 11. 35. If it were due, he
should not then give, but restore it. Not by the works of righteousness which
we have done, but according to his (...) he saved us. Tit. 3. 5.

Of the carnal life, apparent in the souls viciousness as well as the
bodies. CHAP. 2.
WE must first then see what it is to live according to the flesh, and what,
according to the spirit. The raw and inconsiderate considerer hereof, not
attending well to the scriptures, may think that the Epicureans were those
that lived according to the flesh, because ^hey made bodily pleasure that
summum bo^, and all such as any way held corporal delight to be man's chiefest
good: as the vulgar also, which not out of Philosophy, but out of their own
pronenesse to lust, can delight in no pleasures, but such as are bodily and
sensible: but that the Stoickes that placed this summum bonum in the mind,
live according to the spirit: (for what is man's mind but his spirit?) But the
Scriptures prove them both to follow the courses of the flesh, calling the
flesh not only an earthly animate body, as it does saying. All flesh is not
the same flesh; for there is one flesh of men, and another flesh of beasts, and
another of fishes, and another of birds: but it 1. Cor. 15. 39 Flesh used for
man.
uses the word in far other significations, amongst which one is, that it
calls whole man, that is, his entire nature, flesh, using the part for the
whole: as By the works of the law shall no flesh be justified. What means
he by no flesh, Rom 3. 20
but no man? he explaineth himself immediately: a man is justified by faith
without the works of the law. And in another place: No man is justified by
the law. Gala. 3. 11
The word was made flesh. What is that but man? Some misconceiuing this place,
John. 1. 13
held that Christ had no human soul. For as the part is taken for the whole
in these words of Mary Magdalene. They have taken away my Lord, and I know Ioh.
20. 13
not where they have laid him: Meaning only the flesh of Christ, which she
thought they had taken out of the Sepulcher: so is the part taken for the
whole, when we say flesh, for Man, as in the quotations before. Seeing
therefore that the Scripture uses flesh in so many significations (too tedious
here to recollect.)

To find what it is to live according to the flesh (the course being enill
when the flesh is not evil,) let us look a little diligently into that place
of the Apostle Paul to the Galathians, where he says, The works of the flesh
are manifest, Gal. 5. 19* 20, 21. The works of the flesh
which are adultery, fornication uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry,
Witchcraft, hatred, debate, emulation, (b) wrath, contentions, seditions,
heresies, envy, drunkenness, gluttony, and such like, whereof I tell you
now, as I told you before, that they which do those things shall not inherit
the Kingdom of God. The due consideration of this place of the Apostle, will
presently give us sufficient demonstration (as far as here needs) what it
is to live according to the flesh, for in the works of the flesh which he
says are manifest, rehearsing and condemning them, we find not only such as
appertain to bodily and luxurious delight, as fornications, uncleanness,
luxury, and drunkenness, but such also as discover the viciousness of the
mind, truly distinct from fleshly pleasures. For who conceiueth not that
Idolatry, Witchcraft, emnity, contention, emulation, wrath, envy, sedition,
The mental vices ascribed to the flesh.
and heresy, are rather mental vices th^n corporal? A man may for very
reue^ence, of some Idolatrous or heretical error, abstain from the lusts of
the body, and yet though he do so, by the Apostles words, he lives
according to the flesh: and in avoiding the works thereof, commits most
damnable works thereof. Who has not enmity in his heart? or who says to his
enemy, or him that he thinks his enemy, you have an evil flesh against me?
none; you have an evil mind against me. Lastly, as all men that should hear
those carnal vices recited, would affirm they were meant of the flesh, so
none that hears those mental crimes, but refers them all to the mind?
^hy then does this true and faithful teacher of the Gentiles, call them The
works of the flesh, but in that he takes flesh for man, as the part for the
whole?

L. VIVES.
SOme (a) misconceiuing] Those were the Apollinarists. Aug^n Joan. Sermon. in
Arriu^, 83. Q^. The Cerdonians also, and the Apelli^ held so. de har ad quod
vult Deu^. (b) Wrath] (...) H^ reads it, irae, but animus is used also for
wrath. Salust, You saw last year how wrathfully [quantis animis] Lucutlus
opposed L. Quintius, hereof comes the word animositas, that Augustine uses
Animosity.
for wrath. Uirgil calls them East winds Animosi, wrathful. Macrobius in Some.
Scip. 2. uses it so too. That anger that the greeks call (...), is momentarie
and of no continuance. Tully calls it excandescentia, a fury now beginning, and
presently ceasing, there is in this text of Paul, ^ixae, scoldings, or
altercations, (...), which Augustine adds not.

That sin came from the soul, and not the flesh: and that the corruption
which sin has procured, is not sin, but the punishment of sin. CHAP. 3.
IF any man say that the flesh is cause of the viciousness of the soul, he is
ignorant in man's nature, for the corruptible body does but burden the soul:
therefore the Apostle speaking of this corruptible body whereof he had said
before, although our outward man be corrupted: we know (quoth he) that if our
earthly house of habitation be aestroyed, we have a building given of God, an
house not made 1. Cor. 5. (...) 2, 3, 4.
with hands, but an eternal one in heaven, therefore we sigh, desyring to be
clothed with that habitation which we have in heaven: notwithstanding if we
be clothed we shall not be found naked. For we that are in this habitacle,
sigh, and are burdened, because we would not be unclothed, but clothed upon,
that mortality might b^ swallowed up of life. We are therefore burdened with
this corruptible body, and yet knowing that it is not the bodies nature, but
corruption, that causes this burden, we would not be despoiled of it, but
be clothed upon it, with the immortality thereof. It shall then be a body
still, but burden some to us no more, because it is become incorruptible: so
then, as yet the corruptible body is heavy Wis. 9, 15
unto the soul and the earthly mansion keeps down the comprehensiue mind.
But yet such as think that the evils of the mind arise from the body, do
err. For though that Virgill do seem to express a plain (a) Platonisme in
these verses. Igneus est ollis vigor and celestis origo,
Seminibus, quamtum non noxia corpo^a tardant,
Terrenique hebetant artus, moribundaque membra.
Those seeds have fiery vigor, heavenly spring,
So far as bodies hinder not with fulness,
Or earthly dying members clog with dullness.


Seeming to derive the four known passions of the mind, (b) Desire, Fear,
Joy and Sorrow, as the originalls of all guilt, wholly from the body, by these
verses following. Hinc metuunt, cupiuntque, dolent, gaudentque, nec aura^
Suscipiunt, clausae tenebris and carcere caeco.
Heare-hence they fear, desire, displeased, content,
Nor look to heaven, in darke-blinde prison pent.


Yet our faith teaches us otherwise. For this corruption that is so burdensome
to the soul, is the punishment of the first sin, not the cause^ the
corruptible flesh made not the soul to sin, but the sinning soul made the
flesh corruptible: from which corruption although there do arise some
incitements unto sin, and some vicious desires, yet are not all the sins of an
evil life to be laid upon the flesh, otherwise, we shall make the diuil, that
has no flesh, sin-lesse: for though we cannot (c) call him a fornicator, a
drunkard, or by any one of those carnally vicious names, (though he be a
secret prouoker of man unto all those) yet is he truly s^ most proud and
envious, which vices have possessed him so far, as therefore The devils have
no flesh yet have they fleshly works.
is he destinate unto eternal torment in the prisons of this obscure air.
Now those vices that domineere in him the Apostle calls the works of the
flesh, though sure it is that he has no flesh. For he says that emnity,
contention, emulation, wrath, and envy are the works of the flesh: to all
which, pride gives being, yet rules pride in the flesh-lesse devil. For who
hates the Saints more then he? who is more envious, contentious, emulating,
and wrathful against them then he? Doing all this without the flesh, how are
these the works of the flesh, but because they are the works of man, whom as
I said before, the Apostle means by flesh? for man became like the devil not
in being in the flesh (for so was not the devil) but in living according to
his own lust, that is according to the fleshly man: for so chose the devil to
do, when he left the truth, to become a lier, not through GOD, but through
himself, who is both a lier, and the father of lying. For he lied first, and
from him, sinning and lying had their beginning. 10. 5.


L. VIVES.
Plain (a) Platonisme] No more then Pythagorisme, both alike: but of this in
the 8. book. (b) Desire] There are four chief affects of the mind, two,
delightful, and two sorrowful The minds four affects.
Of the first, the one belongs to things present: joy, and is, an opinion of a
present good the other, desire, unto future: and is, an opinion of a future
good. Of the two sad ones, sorrow, is an opinion of a present evil, and fear,
of a future, and of these affects, come all the rest, Envy, Emulation,
Detraction, Pity, Vexation, Mourning, Sadness, Lamentation, Care, Doubt,
Troublesomnesse, Affliction, Desperation: all these come of sorrow: and Sloth,
Shame, Error, Timorousness, Amazement, Disturbance, and Anxiety, from fear.
And then, Exultation, Delight and Boasting of Joy, with Wrath, Fury, Hatred,
Emnity, Discord, Need, and Affectation, all of Desire. Cic. Tusc. quest. lib.
4. (c) Cannot call him] Of this hereafter.

What it is to live according to Man, and to live according to God. CHAP. 4.
THerefore a man living according to man, and not according to God, is like the
devil: because an Angel indeed should not live according to an Angel, but
according to God: to remain in the truth, and speak truth from him, and not
lies from himself. For the Apostle speaks thus of man. If the truth of GOD
has abounded through my lying: calling lying his, and the truth of God.
Therefore he that lives according to the truth, lives according unto God, not
according to Romans 3. 7
himself. For God said, I am the truth: But he y^ lives not so, but according
to himself, lives according to lying: not that man (whom God that never
createdlie, did create) is the author of lying, but because man was created
upright, to live according to his creator and not himself, that is, to do his
will rather then his own. But not to live, as he was made to live, this is a
lie. For he (a) would be blessed, and yet will not live in a course possible
to attain it: (b) What can there be more lying then such a will? And
therefore it is not unfitly said every sin, is a lie. For we never sin but
with a will to do our selves good, or no^ to do our selves hurt.

Therefore is it a lie when as that we think shall do us good turns unto our
hurt: or that which we think to better our selves by, makes us worse, whence
is this, but because that man can have his good but only from God, whom he
forsakes in sinning: and none from himself in living according to whom, he
sins? Whereas therefore we said that the contrariety of the two cities
arose hereupon, because some lived according to the flesh, and others according
to the spirit we may likewise say it is because some live according unto Man,
and other some unto God. For Paul says plainly to the Corinthians, Seeing
there is 1. Cor. 3. (...)
emulation, and contention amongst you, are you not carnal, and walk
according to man. To walk therefore according to man, is carnal, man being
understood in his, inferior part, flesh. For those which he calls carnal
here, he calls natural before, saying: (c) What man knows the things of a
man but the spirit of a man, which 1 Cor 2, 11, 12, 13, 14.
is in him? even so, no man knows the things of God but the Spirit of God.
Now we have not received the spirit of the Word, but the Spirit which is of
God, that we might know the things that God has given us, which things also
we speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but (d) being taught
by the spirit comparing spiri^ll things with spiritual things. But the
natural man perceives not the things of the spirit of God: (e) for they are
foolishness unto him. Unto those natural men he spoke this a little
afterward: I could not speak unto you brethren as unto spiritual men, but as
unto carnal. And here is that figure in speech that uses the part for the
whole to be understood: for the whole man may either be meant by the soul, or
by the flesh: both which are his parts: and so a natural man and a carnal
man, are not several, but all one, namely one that lives according to man:
according as those places afore-cited do intend. By the works of the law (f)
shall no flesh be justified: and that where it is said that (g) Seventy five
souls v^ent down with Jacob into Romans 3. 10 Genesis 46, 27.
Egypt, in the former by flesh, is meant, man, and in the later, by 75. souls,
are meant 75. persons. And in this, not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, he might have said: which carnal wisdom teaches: as also,
according to the flesh, for according unto man, if he had pleased. And it was
more apparent in the subsequence: for when one says, I am Paul's, and another,
I am Apollo's, are you not men? That which he had called natural, and carnal
before, he now more 1. Cor, 3, 4
expressly, calls man: meaning, you live according to Man, and not according
to God, whom if you followed in your lives, you should be made gods of men.

L. VIVES.
HE (a) would] No man lives so wickedly, but he desires beatitude: though
his course lead him quite another way, directly unto misery. (b) What can]
There is nothing more deceiptfull then the wicked. For it deludeth him
extremely in whom it rules. (c) What man] This place is cited otherwise, and
more expressly in the latin text of the first book. (d) Taught by the sp^it]
(...) etc. But some read, by the Doctrine of the spirit (e) For they are] The
spiritual things of GOD seem fooleries unto carnal and unsettled men: as the
Pagans ^dome and virtues were scorned of the rich gnoffes that held shades for
substances, and virtues for mere vanities. Thence has Plato his cave wherein
men were used to shapes ^d appearing shadows that they thought their had been
no other bodies. Derep. lib. 7. (f) shall no flesh] Some read it in the present
tense, but erroneously: the greek is (...) (...) (...) abitur. (g) Seventy
five soules] Soul, for man, is an Hebraicall phrase: for life, a greek Soul,
(...) man.
phrase: used also by the latin. Nonius Marcellus says Uirgil uses it for
bodies, there where he says. Intereasocios, inhumataque corpora terrae,
Mandemus, qui solus honos Acheronte sub imo est:
Ite ait egregias animas quae sanguine nobis,
Hanc patriam peperere suo. --
Mean while the unburied bodies of our mates,
Give we to Grave, sole honor after Fates,
Go honor those brave souls with their last dues.
Who with their blood purchased this land for us.
Whether it be so or no, let him look to it: (...) indeed in the Greek is
sometimes used for the whole creature.

That the Platonists teach the natures of soul and body better then the
Manichees, yet they err in ascribing sin unto the nature of the flesh. CHAP.
5.
WE should not therefore iniure our creator in imputing our vices to our flesh:
the flesh is good, but to leave the creator and live according to this created
good, is the mischief: whether a man do choose to live according to the body
or the soul or both, which make full man, who therefore may be called by either
of them? For he that makes the souls nature, the greatest good, and the
bodies the greatest evil, does both carnally affect the soul, and carnally
avoid the flesh: conceiving of both as human vanity, not as divine verity
teaches: him indeed the (a) Plotonists are not so mad as the Manichees, that
hate the carnal body, as the natural cause of all mischief, and yet make God
the creator of all the elements, parts and qualities that this visible world is
composed of. Yet the Platonists hold that these our mortal members, do produce
the affects of fear, desire, joy, and sorrow in our bodies: from which four
perturbations (as Tully calls them) or passions (as other translators give
them) the whole inundation of man's enormities have their source and spring. If
this be so, why does Aeneas in Virgill hearing by his father that the souls
were to return back into bodies, wunder at this opinion, and cry out. O pater
anne aliquas ad caelum hinc ire putandum est,
Sublimes animas, iterumque ad tarda reuerti
Corpora? quae lucis miseris tam dira cupido?
What father do you think the souls are taine
To heaven, and thence, to this dull flesh return.
What dire affect should urge them to their pain.
Is this same dire affect as yet remaining in the soul, being now quit from
the carnal burden in such a commended purity! does he not say they are purged
from all bodily infection, when as they desire to return into the body again,
if it were so then (as it is most vain to hold so) that there were an eternal
revolution of the pollution, and the purgation, then can it not be truly said
that all vicious affects are the effects of the flesh: for as this (b) noble
speaker says, that dire affect which does compel the soul being purged from
all earthly (c) contagion (...) desire the body again, is not of the body. And
therefore they confess that all the souls ill affects arise not from the
flesh: as desire, fear, joy, and (d) sorrow: but it may have those passions of
it self.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Maniches] They held all flesh the work of the devil, not of GOD, and
therefore they forbad their hearers to kill any creatures, least they should
offend the Princes of darkness from whom they said all flesh had original:
and if they used their wives, yet must they avoid generation, least the divine
substance which goes into them by their nourishment should bebound in the
fleshly bonds of the child begotten. Aug: ad Quod vult deum. The Prisci^ianists
held thus also. (b) Noble spe^ker] So he called Tully before, and Virgil now.
(c) contagion] Or, habitacle. (d) Sorrow] Tullie calls it egritudo, Tusc. 3.

Of the quality of man's will, unto with all affections, good, and bad, are
subject. CHAP. 6.
But the quality of man's will, is of some moment, for if it be bad, so are all
those motions, if good, they are both blameless, and praiseworthy: for there
is (a) a will in them all: nay they are all direct wills: what is desire, and
joy, but a will (b) consenting to that which we affect: and what is fear, and
sorrow, but a will contrary unto what we like? But when we consent to the
desire of any thing, that is desire, and when we consent in enjoying any
thing, this is delight: ^o, when we dislike a thing, and would not have it
come to pass, this will, is fear: when we dislike it being come to pass,
this is grief or sorrow. And this according to the variety of the things
desired and avoided, as the will consents, or dislikes so are our diversity of
passions. Whereof a Man that makes GOD and no^ Man the steeres-man of his
life, ought to love good: and consequently, to hate evil: and because none is
evil by nature, but all by vice: he that lives after Gods love, owes his
(c) full hate unto the Evil: not to hate the man for his Lawful hate.
vice, nor to love the vice for the man, but hate the vice and love the man:
for the vice being cured, he shall find no object of his hate, but all for
his love.

L. VIVES.
(a) A Will] The Stoickes hold that only to be (...) (which Tully translates
will) when a thing is firmly and constantly desired, therefore it is defined,
a desire of any thing Will.
with reason which is in a wise man only: but that which is against reason, is
called a lust, or an inordinate desire being resident in all fools. The
Peripatetiques call both these wills, the one good and the other badde: the
controversy (as I said elsewhere is but verbal. For the Stoickes call
affects wills also, nor skilleth it whether Will, follow Name or Reason: for it
is euer-more Will, though that be properly called Will, wherein is that
freedom of election, and is harbor to Vice, or Virtue. (b) Consenting] To
believe a thing to be, or not to be, is no consent, or dissent, but
Knowledge, Faith, or Opinion, (Arist. in Analyt. Posterior.) but to will, or
not to will in any thing that belongs to the will, which pertains to the
mind, and as it were, appoints and decrees what is to be done or not done. (c)
Full hate] Explayning that of the Psalm 139. 22. I hate them with a perfect
hatred.

That amor, and dilectio, are of indifferent use in the scriptures, both for
good and evil. CHAP. 7.
FOr he that is resolved to love GOD, and his neighbor according unto God and
not Man: for this love, is called a Man of a good will, and this is called more
commonly, charity, in the scriptures, though sometimes it be called love
therein also. For the Apostle will have his magistrate to be a lover of good.
And our LORD asking Peter thus: Simon the son of Jonah, love thou me (a)
more then these, he answered, Lord, (b) thou know that I love thee: he
asked him so again, and he answered so again, then they asked him the third
time, by (...), amo whereas he had used (...), diligo, in the other two, only
to show, that diligere, and amare were both one, to love, as Peter had used the
one, in all the three questions. This I thought, worth recital, but some say
(c) dilectio, charity, is one thing, and amor, love, another: and that the
first is (d) used in the good, and the later in the badde: But sure it is that
the profane authors never used them so. But let the Philosophers look to their
distinctions. For their books use amor love, in good senses, and in reference
to GOD, most frequently. But we were to (e) show that our scriptures whom we
place far above their authorities, do not use amor and dilectio with any
such distinct difference: for we have shown that they use amor in a good
sense. If any one think, it is used both in good respect and bad, and
dilectio, only in the good, let him look in that of the Psalm: He that
loves [diligit] iniquity hates his own soul: here is diligo, upon Psa. 11 1
Io. 2
a badde subject. And here the Apostle John: If any man love [Dilexerit] the
world, the love [dilectio] of the Father is not in him. Behold here dilectio
in one place, in both the respects. But if any one seek to know whether amor
be used in evil (we have shown it in good,) let him read this: Men shall be
lovers of themselves, 2. Tim. 3, 2 4.
etc. Lovers of pleasures more then lovers of GOD. For, an up right will is
good love, and a perverse will is badde love. Love then desyring too enjoy that
it loves is desire: and enjoying it, is joy: flying what it hates it is
fear, feeling it, it is sorrow.

These are evils if the love be evil: and good if it be good. What we say
let us prove by scripture. The Apostle aesires to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ: And, My heart breaks for the continual desire I have unto thy
judgments. Phil. 1 Psa. 119, 20
(f) Or if this be better: My soul has coueted to desire thy judgments?
And, desire of wisdom leads to the Kingdom: yet custom has made it a law,
that where Wis. 6, 20
concupiscentia, or cupiditas is used without addition of the object, it is
ever taken Psa. 31
in a badde sense. But Joy, or Gladness the Psalm uses well: Be glad in the
LORD, and rejoice you righteous, and thou have given gladness to mine heart,
and, Psa. 4
In thy presence is the fullness of joy. Fear, is also used by the Apostle in
a good Psalm. 16, 11
sense: Work out your salvation with fear, and trembling: and, Be not high
minded, but fear: and, But I fear least as the serpent beguiled Eve through
his suttlety, so Romans 11. 20
that your minds should be corrupted from the chastity that is in Christ. But
as for that sorrow (which Tully had rather call (g) egritude, and Virgill,
dolor; where he says, dolentque, gaudentque, yet (h) I had rather call it
tristitia, sadness, because egritude, and dolor, are oftener used for bodily
affects: the question whether it be used in a good sense or no, is fit to be
more curiously examined.

L. VIVES.
MOre (a) then these] Then these do: to avoid ambiguity. (b) Then kn^ (...),
is here translated diligo, and (...), am^, both to love. (c) Some] Orig. h^. 1.
(...) C^. The scripture (I think) being careful (says he) to keep the
readers in the tract of true understanding it, for the capacity of the weaker,
called that Charity, or Dilectio, which they think wise men called love. (d)
Is used.] The Latinists use these two words far other-wise: ^ing Diligo for a
light love, and amo for a seruent one. Dol obellam antea diligebam, nunc (...),
^ith Tully, and elsewher, more plainly Clodius Tribu. Pleb. valde me diligit,
seu vt (...) Amo and Di^o, diff^.
(...) addam, valde me amat. I grant that amor is the meaner word, and oftener
used in ob^y then dilectio. The same difference that the latins put between
amo and diligo, the same (...) the Greeks put between (...) and (...) (e) To
show.] The places here cited prove nothing unless that (...) be both used in
a good or an evil sense: for ye latin translation is the (...) of the
interpretor not of the author: But perhaps he desired to show it, because he
dealt ag^ Grecian, namely, Origin. (f) Or, if.] For so the 70. translated it.
Here begins he to show that none of the four affects are bad of themselves.
(g) Egritude.] Tusc quaest. 3. and 4. (h) I had rather. Tully (a) Tusc. qu. 2.)
calls bodily vexation, dolor, and (Iusc. 4.) defends egritudo, to be in the
mind, as egrotatio is in the body: and affirms (lib. 3.) that it has not any
distinct name from sorrow.

Of the three passions that the Stoickes allow a wiseman, excluding sadness, as
foe to a virtuous mind. CHAP. 8.
THose which the Greeks call (a) (...), and Tully, Constantiae, the Stoickes
make to be three, according to the three perturbations in a wisemans mind, ^ng
will for desire, (b) joy for exultation, and wariness for fear: but instead
of ^at egritude or dolor which we to avoid amphibology call sadness, they ^y
that a wise mind can intertaine any thing: for the will, (say they) affects
good: which a wiseman effects: joy, concerns the good he has attained,
(...) wariness avoideth that he is to avoid: but seeing sadness arises from
(...) ^ill cause, already fallen out, (and no evil happineth to a wiseman)
there^ wisdom admits nothing in place thereof. Therefore (say they) none but
^en can will, rejoice, and beware, and none but fools can covet, exult, (...)
and be sad. The first are the three constancies (says Tully,) and the later
(...) four perturbations. The Greeks, as I said call the three, (...), and
these (...), (...). In (c) seeking the correspondency of this, with the phrase
of holy writ, I found this of the prophet. There is no (c) joy (says the Lord)
unto the ^ed, as if the wicked might rather exult, then have joy, in their
mischiefs, for Esaias. 57. 12
^y is properly peculiar to the good and Godly: That also in the gospel: What
Mat. 7. 12.
soever ye would that men should dee unto you, even so do ye to them: this
seems to ^imate that a man cannot will any evil thing but covet it: by reason
of which ^ome of interpretation, some translators added good, What good soever.
etc. for ^y thought it fit for man to desire that men should do them no
dishonesty, and ^rfore put in this, least some should think that in their
luxurious banquets (to be silent in more obscene matters) they should fulfill
this precept, in doing to others as others did unto them. But (e) good, is not
in the original the greek, but only, as we read before: What soever ye
would. etc. for in saying ye would, he means good. He said not, whatsoever
you coue^, yet must we not always tie our phrases to this strictness, but take
leave at needful occasions, and when we read those that we may not resist,
we must conceive them so, as the true sense (...) no other passage, as for
example sake, in the savd places of the Prophet and the Apostle who knows not
that the wicked exult in pleasure? and yet there is no joy (says the LORD) to
the wicked. Why? because joy is properly and strickly used in this place. So
may some say that precept, Whatseouer (...) would etc. is not well delivered:
they may pollute one another with uncleanness, or so: Notwithstanding, the
command is well given: and is a most true and healthful one. Why? because
will, which properly cannot be used in evil, is put in the most proper
signification in this place. But as for ordinary usage of speech, we would not
say, Have no will to tell any ^e: but that there is a badde will also,
distinct from that which the Angels praised saying: (f) Peace in earth to men
of good will. Good were here superfluous, if that there were no will but
good, and how coldlie had the Apostle praised Luc. 2, 14
charity, in saying that it rejoices not in iniquity, but that envy rejoices
therein: For the Pagan authors do use these differences. (g) I desire (says
Tully) Fathers 1 Cor. 13, 6
conscript, I desire to be merciful. Here he uses Cupio in a good sense,
and who is so perverse to say he should have used Volo rather? And T^rence his
lascivious youth: (h) I would have none but Philumena says he. That this will
was lust, his (i) ancient servants answer declares, saying to his Master:
How much better were it for you, to cast this love out of your heart rather
then Andr. act. 2 S^. 1
seek to inflame it more therein? That they used joy in an evil sense,
Virgills verse of the four perturbations does record. Hinc metuunt,
cupiuntque, dolent, gaudentque,
Heere-hence they fear, disire, displeased, content.


And the same author in another place says. Mala mentis gaudia.
The minds badde joys.


So then both good and evil do will, beware, and take joy, and to rehearse
them in other terms, the good and badde, do desire, fear, and rejoice:
mary, those do it well, and these badly according as their wills are. And that
sadness, for which the Stoickes can afforde a wise man just nothing, is
apparent in good men, especial of our profession. For the Apostle praises the
Corinthians for that they were Godly sorrowful. I but (may some say) the
Sadness according to God.
Apostle congratulateth their sorrow in repentance, and that is proper to none
but sinners: for his words run thus.

I perceive well that the same Epistle made you sorry though it were but for
a season, but I now rejoice not that you were sorry but that you sorrowed unto
repentance: 2 Cor. 7, 8 9, 10, 11
for you sorrovved Godly, so that in nothing you were hurt by us. For Godly
sorrovv causes (k) repentance unto salvation, not to be repented of: but the
vvorldly sorrovv causes death: for behold this Godly sorrovv, what great
care it has wrought in you. Verelie the Stoickes may answer for themselves,
that this sorrow seemed useful unto their repentance, but it cannot be in a
wise man because he cannot do an act sinne-full or worthy of repentance, nor
can admit any thing that should procure sadness in him. For they say that (l)
Alcibiades (if I have not forgetten the man's name) thinking himself happy,
and (m) Socrates disputing against it and proouing him miserable, because he
was not Alcibiades his sadness.
wise, fell a weeping. So here was his want of wisdom cause of this good
sorrow, whereby he grieved that he was as he should not be, but a wise man
(say the Stoickes) can never have this sorrow.

L. VIVES.
E^ (a) and] Tusc. lib. 4. (...), is a good affect, and may be understood two
way either arising of pleasure, whose contrary is sorrow: or it may derive
from that purified Erapathia.
will which the Stoickes held: for I said before that the Stoickes held that
wills were only good, as Tully plainly relates. (b) Joy for euxltation] It
is need to joy, but not to exult, wariness also is a judicious avoidance of
evil: fear, an amazed and reason-lesse deiection. (c) Seeking the] I see not
unto what so long a discourse of words only out of the translation can (...):
if he produced them out of their original there were some reason for it. (d)
Ioy] Peace, says the vulgar, but the 70. Joy. (e) Good is not] (...) etc. It
were too idle to use many words in persuading all men in what doubts soever,
to have recourse to the scriptures: This Hierome urges, and Augustine here
warns, confirming it by his example. We have opposers that say it is far
more sure in the latin then in the originiall: but I will never trouble my
self to answer them, they are few, and those are fools and time will either
stop their mouths (seeing their breath is vainly spent) or the consent of the
learned, will silence their ^sh clamours. (f) Peace in earth] The greek is,
and good will unto men. (...). but all is to one purpose.

(g) I desire] In Calilni. 1. and Tully uses Cupio six hundred times in this
sense: And this Argument of Augustines out of the latin writers is fitter to
his purpose then all those out of the scriptures: and that not so much against
the Greeks Stoickes, as Tully the Latinist. (h) Philumena.
I ^ld] Charinus his words in Terences Andria,. Philumena, quasi beloved of
(...), she was supposed the daughter of Chremes. [My commentator has held his
peace a great many [The Louaine copies defective.]
books through, but here he has got his tongue again. Philumena (says he)
was a Whore. Troth, this is no honest man's part, to make a chaste Virgin, an
Whore: oh but he ^keth as many of our times do also, that there is no man
speaks in the Poets, but Thieves and Pandars: nor any woman but Whores and
Bawdes. And Philumena being found in a ^-house, what could this doue-eyd
innocent Preaching Friar do less then take her for Whore?] (i) Ancient] Or,
miser? For Charinus was not wise enough in his love. This was (...) ^n Birrhia.
(k) Repentance vnto] So we read commonly. The old copies, and Bruges books
read, unto the impenitent, for salvation: falsely, the Coleyne reads it the
best [as we have translated it] For the greek is (...) etc (l) Alcibyades]
Kinsman to Pericles Prince of Athens, to whose tuition he was left. He was
the most beautiful personage of Alcibiades.
the world, of wondrous wit, and most industrious in art military, he was
the Athenians general in their wars against Lacedaemon and Sicylie. No man
had ever a more flexible wit to the two greatest diversities; hight of virtue,
and hight of vice: of his life, Plutarch, Emilius Pr^s, and Iustine, (known
authors) do write. (m) Socrates] Who taught him, and made show of love to
him, to keep him from the unchaste love of others. Plato mentions him often.
Socrates would sometimes cherish him, when he obeyed him, and sometimes,
chide him sharply, when he brake out into exorbitances. As ye may read in
Plato's, Alcibiades of the nature of man. Socrates (says Tully) having
persuaded him that he had nothing that was man in him, and that high borne
Alcibiades diffred nothing from a common porter, he grew into great grief,
and beseeched Socrates to teach him virtue, and abolish this his baseness.
Tusc. 4.

Of the perturbations of mind which the just do moderate, and rule aright.
CHAP. 9.
But concerning these questions of perturbations, the Philosophers are already
answered in the 9. book, in which we show that theircontention is rather verb^
then real. But according to our religion and scriptures, the citizens of GOD,
as long as they are pilgrims, and in the way of GOD, do fear, desire,
rejoice and sorrow. But their love being right, streighteth all those affects.
They feet eternal pain, and desire eternal joy: They sorrow for the
present, because as Romans 8, 23
yet they sigh in themselves, waiting for their adoption, even the redemption
of their bod^s: they rejoice in hope, because that shall be fulfilled which is
written: Death is swallowed up into victory. They fear to offend, and desire
to persevere: 1. Cor. 15, 54
they sorrow for sin, and rejoice in doing good, they fear to sin,
because; for that iniquity shall be increased the love of many shall be cold, they
desire to persevere, Mat. ^4, 12 Mat. 10 22 1 Io. 1, 8 2 Cor. 9, 7.
because: He that endures to the end shall be saved: they sorrow for sin,
because If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves and there is no
truth in us: they rejoice in good works, for GOD loves a cheerful giver.
And as they are strong or weak, so do they desire, or fear to be tempted:
rejoicing, or sorrowing in temptations: they fear to be tempted, for If any
man fall into a falt by any occasion, ye which are spiritual, restore such an
one with the spirit of meek^nesse, considering Gal 6 1 Psalm. 2^, 2
thy self also, least thou be tempted: they desire to be tempted, for,
Prove me O LORD and try me, examine my reins and mine heart said David:
They sorrow in temptations, for they hear how Peter wept: they rejoice in
them, for Brethren, count it exceeding joy when ye fall into diverse
temptations, says James.

And they do not feel affects for themselves only, but for others also, whom
they desire should be freed, and fear least they perish, sorrowing at their
fall and rejoicing at their deliverance: for if we that are come from (a)
Paganism to Christianity may give an especial instance in that worthy and
dauntlesse man that boasted of his infirmities, that teacher of faith and truth
to the nations, that toyler above all his fellow Apostles, that edifier of Gods
people by sermons, being present, and by more Epistles then they all, being
absent, that blessed Man Paul (I mean) CHRIST'S Champion, (b) taught by him,
(c) anointed from him, (d) crucified with him (e) glorified in him, (f) in the
Theater of this World where he was made a spectacle, to GOD, Angels and Men,
fighting a (g) lawful, and (h) great fight, and following hard toward the
(i) mark for the (k) prize of the high calling: How gladly do we with the
eyes Philip. 3, 14 Romans 12, 15 2 Cor. 11, 3
of faith behold him, weep with them that weep, and rejoice with them that
rejoice, (l) fightings without, and terrors within, desyring to be dissolved
and to be with CHRIST, desyring to see the Romans, and to receive fruit
from them as well as the others, being jealous over the Corinthians, and
fearing least their minds should be corrupted; from the chastity with is in
CHRIST, having great sadness, and continual sorrow of heart for Israel that
being ignorant in GODS justice, would erect one of their own, and not be
subject unto gods: and denouncing his lamentation for diverse that had not
repen^d them of their fornication and uncleanness. If these affects, arising
from the love of good, be vicious, then let true vices be called virtues: But
seeing (...) Cor. 11. (...)
their use is leuelled by the rule of reason, who dare call them frail or
imperfect passions of the mind? Our LORD himself, living in the form of a
servant (yet without sin) used them when he thought it requisite: for we
may not think that having man's essential body, and soul, he had but
seeming affectes.

And therefore his sorrow for Ierusalems hardness of heart, his joy for the
believers, his tears for Lazarous, his desire to eat the Passover with his
disciples, Mat. 3 John 11 Luk ^2 Mat 26
and his deadly heaviness of soul upon the approach of his passion, these are
no fained narrations.

But these affects of man he felt when it pleased him, as he was made man
when it pleased him. Wherefore we confess that those affects, in their best
kind are but pertinent to this present life, not unto that which we hope for
hereafter: and that we are often ouer-pressed by them: a laudable desire or
charity may move us: (m) yet shall we weep whether we will or no. For we
have them by our human infirmity, but so had not CHRIST (n) for he had his
very infirmity it self, from his own power. But as long as we live in this
infirmity, we shall live worse if we want those affects. For the Apostle
dispraiseth and detests (o) such as want natural affect. And so does the
Psalm, saying, I looked for some to pity me, and there was none. For to want
the Romans 1, 30 Psalm. 69, 20
sense of sorrow in this mortal life (as a (p) great scholar held) never
be-falls, a man without great stupidity of body, and barbarism of mind. (q)
Therefore the greek (...), or impassibility being meant of the mind, and not
the body, if it be understood as a want of those perturbations only which
disturb the mind, and resist reason, it is to be defended, and desired. For
the Godly wise and holy men (not ordinary ranglers) say all directly, if we
say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth in
us. But if a man had this same (...), (meant as before) he had no sin indeed
in him. But it is well if we can live here without (r) crime: but he that
thinks he lives without sin does not avoid sin but rather excludes all
pardon. But now if (...), be an utter abandoning of all mental affects
whatsoever, who will not say such a stupidity is not worse then sin? We may
fitly say indeed that true happiness shall be utterly void of fear and
sorrow: but who can say it shall be void of love, and joy, but he that
professes to oppose the truth? but if this (...), be a freedom from fear,
and sorrow, we must not aim at it in this life, if we mean to live after
the law of GOD. But in the other promised life of eternity (s) all fear
shall be excluded from us. For that fear whereof the Apostle John says. There
is no fear in love, but perfect love casts 1. Ioh. 4, 18
(...) fear, and he that fears is not perfect in love, is not that kind of
fear whereof the Apostle Paul feared the fall of the Corinthians, for love
has this fear in it, and nothing has it but love: but the other fear is not
in love, whereof the same Apostle Paul says, for ye have not received the
spirit of Psalm 9, 9
bondage to fear again. But that chaste fear, remaining world without end,
if it be in the world to come (and how else can it remain world without
end?) shall be no fear terrifying us from evil, but a fear keeping us in an
inseparable good. For where the good attained is unchangeably loved, there is
the fear to loose it inseperably cheined. For by this chaste fear is meant
the will that we must necssarily have, to avoid sin: not with an ungrounded
carfulness least we should sin, but being founded in the peace of love,
to beware of sin. But if that firm and eternal security be acquit of all
fear, and conceive only the fullness of joy, then the fear of Lord is pure,
and indureth for ever, is meant as that other place is: The patience of the
afflicted shall not perish for ever. Psalm. 9. 1^


Their patience shall not be eternal, such needs only where miseries are to
be eternally endured. But that which their patience shall attain, shall be
eternal. So it may be that this pure fear is said to remain for ever, because
the scope whereas it aims is everlasting: which being so, and a good course
only leading to beatitude, then has a badde life badde affects, and a good
life good ones. And the eternal beatitude shall have both joy and love, not
only right, but firm, and vnmoouing: but shall be utterly quit of fear, and
sorrow. Hence is it apparent what courses GODS Cities ought to run, in this
earthly pilgrimage, making the spirit, not the flesh, GOD, and not humanity the
lanterae to their paths: and here also we see their estate in their immortal
future instalement. But the City of the impious that sail after the compass
of carnalitie, and in their most divine matters, reject the truth of GOD, and
rely upon the (t) instructions of men, is shaken with these affects, as with
earthquakes, and infected with them as with pestilent contagions. And if any of
the citizens seem to curb themselves from these courses, (u) they grow so
impiously proud and vainglorious, that the less their trouble is by these
passions the bigger their tumor. And if any of them be so rarely vain, and
barbarous, as to embrace a direct stupidity, beecomming insensible of all
affect, they do rather abjure true manhood then attain true peace.
Roughness does not prove a thing right, nor (x) can dullness produce solid
soundness.

L. VIVES.
FRom (a) Paganisme] So did not Paul, for he was an Israelitie of the tribe of
Benjamin, and therefore some books do fasly read, He that came from paganism
etc. (b) Taught] There were masters of fence that taught these champions. Aug.
alludeth to them. (c) Anoyn^d from] Some read, bound unto in, as Paul himself
says: and this is more proper: though his allusion run through the anointing,
exercise and fashions of the champions. (d) Crucified] For they had certain
bounds that they might not pass in any exercise. e) Glorified] Victorious. (f)
In the Theater] Before a full and honorable view. (g) Lawfull] The champions
had their laws, each might not play that would. (h) Great fight] They had
their lesser fights and their greater, as had the runners, and the wrastlers.
(i) The marke] That being perfect and having past daily more and more
contentions, he might at length become Master of the five exercises, and have
his full degree. Paul's words are in the Epistle to the Philippians. 3. 13. 14.

(l) Fightings] He reckneth Paul's affects being all good. (m) Yet shall we
weepe] Either suddenly, or forcibly, for joy, or sorrow. (n) For he] He was
God and Man, and therefore had his affects in his power to extend or repress
at pleasure: ours are violent, and whirle us with them through all obstacles,
by reason of our own impotent infirmity: and therefore we say our mind is
impotent in yielding hereunto. (o) Such as want] (...), such as are sence^se of
misery, or happiness in themselves or friends: and those stupidities much like
the Greeks (...), of whom read Pliny lib. 7. Socrates they say was never
seen to change his ^ance: this continual fixation of mind sometimes turns
into a rigid sowrenesse of (...), abolishing all affects from the soul, and
such men the Greeks call (...). (p) A great sch^] Crantors opinion the
Academike in Tully, Tusc. quest. 3. (q) Therefore the] S^. Epist. lib. 1.
Explain (...), with one word, and call it impacience we cannot, witho^
(...). For so we may come to have our meaning to be thought just contrary to
what (...).
it is. We mean one that is senseless of all evil, and we may be thought
to mean one that i^ too sensible of the least, think then whether we may
better say invulnerable, or impatient. This is that difference between us and
the Epicureans. Our wiseman feels (...) but subdues them ^l; theirs are
acquit from feeling them. Thus Seneca.

(...) ^rime. The difference between crime, and sin he declares. Tract. 41.
sup. Joan, thus a (...) (says he) is an act worthy of accusation and
comdemnation. And therefore the Apostle Crime.
(...) ^der for the election of Priests, Deacons, or other Churchmen, says
not, if any of you (...) sin, for so he should exclude all Mankind from
being elected; but if any be (...) ^ime: as man slaughter, whoredom, some
kind of envy, adultery, theft, fraud, sacrilege, and (...). Thus to explane
this place. (s) All fear.] Or, this (...) is to be expected, (t) In^.] Some
arts the devils taught men, as Magike, Astrology, and all divination excep^
^phecy. Plato says that a devil called Theut invented Arithmetik, Geometry,
Astro^ ^d Theut.
Dicyng, and taught them to Thamus, King of Egypt. I doubt not but that Logike
(...) ^uills invention also, it teaches the truths opposition, and obstinacy
in falsenesse, so ^ly, delighting to put verity to the worse, by deceipte. (u)
They grow so.] Pride was ^on vice almost of all the Philosophers. (x)
Stupidity, or dullness.] The Physicians when (...) cure an hurt member, do
apply their stupes, to avoid the sense of pain only but (...) ^sease of the
part which they are often fayn^ ^ut of.

Whether man had those perturbations in Paradise, before his fall. CHAP. 10.
(...) is a good question whether our first parent, or parents (for they were
(...) in marriage) had those natural affects ere they sinned, which we shall be
^ed of when we are perfectly purified. If they had them, how had they that
^ble bliss of Paradise? who can be directly happy that either fears or for^
and how could they either fear or grieve in that copious affluence of bliss,
(...) they were out of the danger of death and sickness having althings that a
^ll desired, and wanting althings that might give their happiness just The
state of our first parents.
(...) ^fence? Their love to God was unmoved, their union sincere, and (...)
exceeding delightful having power to enjoy at full what they loved. (...) in a
peaceable avoydance of sin, which tranquillity kept out all ex^ ^oyance. Did
they desire (think ye) to taste the forbidden fruit, and yet (...) die? God
forbid we should think this to be where there was no sin, (...) a sin to
desire to break Gods command, and to forbear it rather for (...) ^unishment
then love of justice. God forbid I say that ere that sin was, (...) be
verified of the forbidden fruit which Christ says of a woman: whosoever (...)
^ter a woman to lust after her has already committed adultery with her in his
(...) How happy were our first parents, being troubled with no perturbations
(...) nor no sickness of body! even so happy should all mankind have bin
(...) not transfused that misery which their sin incurred, into their poste^
any of their seed had committed an act worthy of codemnation. And (...)
remaining, until, by the words increase and multiply, the number of (...) ^nat
were fulfilled, then should a better have been given us, namely (...) the
Angels have, wherein there is an eternal security from sin (...): and so
should the Saints have lived then after no taste of labor, sor^ death, as they
shall do now in the resurrection, after they have endured (...).

L. VIVES.
(...).] The desire is a sin as well as the act not only by the Scriptures,
but by the ^ct discipline of humanity also. Cic. Philippic. 2. Though there be
no law against it, for (...) ^th not, if this man desire thus much land, let
him be fined, as Cato the elder pleaded (...) ^odians.

The fall of the first man, wherein nature was made good, and cannot be
repaired but by the maker. CHAP. 11.
But God, foreknowing althings, could not but know that man would fall:
therefore we must ground our City upon his prescience and ordinance, not upon
that which we know not, and God has unrevealed For man's sin, could not
disturb Gods decree, nor force him to change his resolve: God fore-knew and
prevented both, that is, how bad man (whom he had made) should become and
what good he meant to derive from him, for all his badnesse. For though God
be said to change his res^ (as the scriptures (a) tropically say that he
repented, etc.) Yet this is in respect of man's hope, or natures order, not
according to his own prescience. So then God made man, upright, and
consequently well-willed: otherwise he could not have been upright. So that
this good will, was Gods work, man being therewith created. But the evil
will, which was in man before his evil work, was rather a failing from the
work of God to the own works, then any work at all. And therefore were the
works evil, because they were according to themselves, and not to God, this
evil will being as a tree bearing such bad fruit, or man himself, in respect
of his evil will. Now this evil will, though it do not follow, but oppose
nature, being a falt: yet is it of the same nature that vice is, which cannot
but be in some nature: but it must be in that nature which God made of
nothing, not in that which he begot of himself, as his word is, whereby
althings were made: for although God (...). (...).
made man of dust, yet he made dust of nothing, and he made the soul of
nothing, which he joined with the body, making full man. But evils are so
far under that which is good, that though they be permitted to be for to
show what good use Gods provident justice can make of them, yet may that which
is good, consist without them, as that true and glorious God him self, and all
the visible resplendent heavens do, above this darkened and misty air of ours:
but evils cannot consist but in that which is good, for all the natures
wherein they abide being considered as mere natures, are good. And evil is
drawn from nature, not by abscission of any nature contrary to this or any
part of this, but by purifiying of that only, which was thus depraved. Then
(b) therefore is the will truly free, when it serves neither vice nor sin.
Such God gave us, such we lost, and cannot recover but by him that gave it: as
the truth says: If the son free you, you shall be Ioh. (...).
truly freed, it is all one as if he should say: If the son save you, you
shall be truly saved, (c) for he is the freer, that is the Savior. Wherefore
(d) in Paradise both local, and spiritual man made God his rule to live by,
for it was not a Paradise local, for the bodies good, and not spiritual for
the spirits: nor was it a spiritual (...) the spirits good, and no local one
for the bodies: Noe, it was both for both. But after that (e) that proud, and
therefore envious Angel, falling through that pride from God unto himself,
and choosing in a tiranicall vain glory ra^r to rule then to be ruled, fell
from the spiritual paradise, (of whose fall, and (...) fellows, that
thereupon of good Angels became his, I disputed in my ninth book (...) God
gave grace and means) he desiring to creep into man's mind by his
ill-perswading suttlely, and envying man's constancy in his own fall chose the
serpent, one of the creatures that as then lived hurtlesse with the man (...)
^oman in the earthly paradise, a beast slippery, and moveable, wreatchd ^ots,
and fit (f) for his work, this he chose to speak through: abusing it, (...)
subject unto the greater excellency of his angelical nature, and making it
(...) ^rument of his spiritual wickdnesse, through it he began to speak
deceit^ unto the woman: beginning at the meaner part of mankind, to invade the
(...) by degrees: thinking the man was not so credulous, nor so soon deluded
(...) would be, seeing another so served before him, for as Aaron consented not
by ^sion, but yielded by compulsion unto the Hebrews idolatry, to make Exodus
32. Kin. 11.
(...) an Idol, nor Solomon (as it is credible) yielded worship to idols of his
own ^ous belief, but was brought unto that sacrilege by his wives perswa^:
So is it to be thought, that the first man did not yield to his wife in this
^ession of Gods precept, as if he thought she said two; but only being
^elled to it by this sociall love to her, being but one with one, and both of
(...) ^ture and kind, for it is not in vain that the Apostle says: Adam was
not (...) ^iued: but the woman was deceived: but it shows that the woman did
1. Ti. 2. 14.
(...) the serpents words true, but Adam only would not break company (...)
^is fellow, were it in sin, and so sinned wittingly: wherefore the Apostle
(...) not, He sinned not: but, He was not seduced, for he shows that he
sinned Rom 5. 12. 14.
(...): by one man sin entered into the world; and a little after more
plainly: after ^er of the transgression of Adam. And those he means are
seduced, that (...) the first to be no sin, which he knew to be a sin,
otherwise why should (...), Adam was not seduced? But he that is not acquainted
with the divine se^ might therein be deceived to conceive that his sin was
but venial. And (...) in that the woman was seduced he was not, but this was
it that (i) decei^, that he was to be judged, for all that he had this
excuse. The woman (...) gave me to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I
did eat, what need we (...) then? though they were not both seduced, they were
both taken in sin Genesis 3. 12.
(...) the devils captives.

L. VIVES.
^ally. (a) Say.] Figuratively. A trope (says Quintilian, is the translation
of one word (...) the fit signification of another, from the own: that God
repented, is a Metaphor, a Trope.
(...) (...) figure that who so knows not and yet would learn, for the
understanding of scrip^ not go unto Tully, or Quintilian, but unto our great
declamers, who knowing not y^ (...) between Gramar and Rhetorike, call it all
by the name of grammar. (b) Then there^ (...) that it is otherwise not free:
for suppose it had not sinned: but because then it is ^m the burden of all
crimes, from all evil customs, and is no more molested by the (...) invasions
of vice. (c) He is the.] They are both only from God. (d) In Paradise,] Part
Paradise.
^asure and delight. Man being placed in earthly Paradise had great joy
corporally, (...) greater spiritually: for without this, the bodies were
painful rather then pleasing: (...) is the fountain of delight, which being
sad, what joy has man in any thing. (e) (...).] Envy immediately succedeth
pride by nature, for a proud man so loves himself ^eues that any one should
excel him, nay equalize him, which when he cannot avoid ^es them: whence it
comes that envy ^itts chiefly amongst the highest honors, (...) the peoples
favor does not always grace the Prince alone. Swetonius says that Cali^ (...)
the meanest, some for that the people favored them, others for their form or
(...) (...) the devil envy man's holding of so high a place, and this envy
brought death (...) ^d, (f) Fit for.] He says super genes. ad. lit. that the
devil was not permitted to (...) other creature but this: that the woman might
learn that from a poisonous crea^ (...) nothing but poison, Pherecides the
Syrian says the devils were cast from hea^ (...), and that their chief was
Ophioneus, that is, Serpentine. (g) Subiect] The devil took the serpents
body, and therefore was the serpent held the most subtle creature of all, as
Augustine says upon Genesis. (h) Sociall loue] Necessitudo, is oftne^ taken
for love and kindred then for need or necessity. (i) Deceived him] Adam was
deceived in (...), that he thought he had a good excuse to appease Gods wrath
withal, in saying that he did it to gratify his fellow, and such an one as God
God had ordained to dwell with him.

Of the quality of man's first offense. CHAP. 12.
But if the difference of motion to sin, that others have from the first man,
do trouble any one, and that other sins do not alter man's nature, as that
first transgression did: making him liable to that death, torture of affect,
and corruption which we all feel now, and he felt not at all nor should have
felt, but that It was not the fruit but disobe^ that o^threw Adam.
he sinned: If this (I say) move any one, he must not think therefore, that
it was a light (...) that he committed in eating of that fruit which was not
(a) hurtful at all, but only as it was forbidden. For God would not have
planted any hurtful thing in that delicate Paradise. But upon this precept
was grounded obedience, (b) the mother and guardian of all the other virtues of
the soul: to which it is good to be subject, and pernicious to leave (leaving
with it the Creators will) and to follow ones own. This command then of for
bearing one fruit when there were so many besides it, being so easy to
observe; and so short to remember (cheefely when the affect opposed not the
will) which followed upon the transgre^on) was the more unjustly broken, by how
much it was the easier to keep.

L. VIVES.
NO^ (a) hurtfull] Of it self. (b) The mother] GOD lays nothing upon his
creatures, men or angels, as if he needed their help in any thing, but only
desires to have them in obedience to him. Thence is the rule: Obedience is
better then sacrifice. Hierome upon the eleventh Chaper of Jeremy, Verse, 3.
Cursedis the man that hears notthe words of this contract: Not for the
privilege of the nation (says he) nor the wrong of Obedience the mother of
all (...).
(...), nor the leisure of the Sab^th: But for obedience it is that God is
Isreal's God, and they his people. Likewise in Isai. Chap. 44. Augustine wrote a
work called De obedientia and hu^. What ^e has said here he repeateth often.
Contra aduers. leg. and Proph. l. 1. and de b^ (...).

That in Adams offense his evil will was before his evil work. CHAP. 13.
But evil began within them secretly at first, to draw them into open
disobedi^ce afterward. For there had been no evil work, but there was an
evil will before i^: and what could begin this evil will but pride, that is
the beginning Pride. ^e. 10.
of all ^rme? And what is pride but a perverse desire of height, in forsaking him
to whom the soul ought soly to adhere, as the beginning thereof, to make the
self (...) the own beginning. This is when it likes it self too well, or
when it (...) it self so, as it will abandon that unchangeable good which
ought to be more delightful to it then it self. This defect now is
voluntary: For if the will remained firm in the love of that superior firmest
good which gave it light to see it, and zeal to love it; it would not have
turned from that, to take delight in (...) ^fe, and thereupon have be come so
(a) blind of sight, and so (b) could of (...) that either (c) she should have
believed the serpents words as true, or (...) (d) he should have dared to
prefer his wives will before Gods command, (...) to think that he offended but
(e) venially, if he bare the fellow of his life ^pany, in her offense. The
evil therefore, that is, this transgression, was no^ (...) but by such as were
evil before, such eat the fordidden fruit: there could b^ ^ill ^ll ^kes done
by (...) (...) ^l persons.
fruit, but from an evil tree, the tree was made evil against nature, for it
(...) become evil but by the unnatural viciousness of the will: and no nature
can be ^praued by vice, but such as is created of nothing. And therefore in
that it is (...) it has it from God: but it falls from God in that it was
made of nothing. (...) ^n was not made nothing upon his fall, but he was
lessened in excellence by ^ing to himself, being most excelling, in his
adherence to God: whom he ^g, to adhere to, and delight in himself, he grew
(not to be nothing, but) (...) nothing. Therefore the scripture called proud
men, otherwise, (f) ^es of themselves. It is good to have the heart aloft, but
not unto ones (...) that is pride: but unto God, that is obedience, inherent
only in the Humility.
(...).

^ility therefore there is this to be admired, that it eleuates the heart: and
in ^is, that it deiecteth it. This seems strangly contrary, that elevation
should (...), and deiection aloft. But Godly humility subjects one to his
superior: and (...) ^boue all; therefore humility exalts one, in making him
Gods subject. ^de the vice, refusing this subjection, falls from him that is
above all, and ^es more base by far (then those that stand) fulfilling this
place of the Psalm. 73.
(...) have cast them down in their exaltation. He says not when they were
(...) they were dejected afterward: but, in their very exaltation were they
(...), their elevation was their ruin. And therefore in that humility is so
(...) in, and commended to the City of God that is yet pilgrim upon earth,
^hly extolled by (g) Christ, the King thereof; and pride, the just con^en by
holy writ, to be so predominant in his aduersaies the devil and (...): in this
very thing the great difference of the two cities the Godly, and ^ly, with
both their Angels accordingly, lies most apparent: Gods ^ing in the one, and
self-love in the other. So that the devil had not (...) ^nkinde to such a
palpable transgression of Gods express charge, but (...) will and) self-love
had gotten place in them before, for he deligh^ Genesis 3. 5.
which was said (h) you shallbe as Gods: which they might sooner have (...)
obedience and coherence with their creator then by proud opinion (...) ^ere
their own beginners, for the created Gods, are not Gods of them (...) by
participation of the God that made them, but man desiring more (...), and chose
to be sufficient in him self, fell from that all-suffici^

^en is the mischief, man liking himself as if he were his own ^d away
from the true light, which if he had pleased himself with ^ght have been
like: this mischief (say I) was first in his soul, and (...) drawn on to the
following mischievous act, for the scripture is Pro. 16. 18.
(...), Pride goes before destruction, and an high mind before the fall: the
(...) ^s in secret, fore runs the fall which was in public, the first being
(...) fall at all, for who takes exaltation to be ruin, though the defect
(...) ^e place of height. But who sees not that ruin lies in the express
breach of Gods precepts? For therefore did GOD forbid it, that being done, (i)
all excuse and auoydance of justice might be excluded. And therefore I dare
say it is good that the proud should fall into some broad and disgraceful
sin thereby to take a dislike of themselves, who fell by to much liking
themselves: for Peter's sorrowful dislike of himself, when he wept, was more
healthful to his soul then his unsound pleasure that he took in himself
when he presumed. Therefore says the Psalm: fill their faces with shame,
that they may seek thy name O Lord: that is that they may delight in thee and
seek thy name, who before, delighted Ps. 83.
in themselves, and sought their own.

L. VIVES.
SO (a) blinde] Losing their light. (b) Cold] Losing their heat. (c) She
should] Here she lackt her light, was blind and saw not. (d) He should] Here
he wanted his heat, and was cold, in neglecting Gods command for his wives
pleasure. But indeed, they both want both: the woman had no zeal, preferring
an apple before God: the man had no light, in casting himself and us headlong
he knew not whether. (e) Uenially] I do not mean to dispute here whether
Adams sin were venial or no: As Bonauenture and Scotus do. I know his sin
was cappitall, and I am thereby wretched. (f) Pleasures of] Pet. 2. 2. 10. (The
Greeks call them (...), but it is not so in Peter: I only name it from the
latin.) Wis. 6. This vice therefore is called (...) or self-love; Socrates
calls it the root of all enormity: It is the head of all pride, and the base
of all ignorance. (g) Christ] Who was made obedient to his father even unto
death, to which he was led like a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb when
it is clipped, he was silent, neither threatening those that smote him, nor
reproching those that reproched him: All hayle thou example of obedience,
gentleness, mansuetude and modesty, imposed by thy father unto our barbarous,
brutish, ungrateful, impious mankind. (h) You shall bee] Fulfill thy mind
(proud woman) advance thy self to the height: What is the uttermost scope of
all ambitious desire? To be a God: why eat, and thou shall be one. O thou
fonde^ (...) in (...) accuse (...) (...). (...)
of thy sex, hopest thou to be deified by an apple? (i) All excuse] No
pretense, no show, no imaginary reason of justice would serve the turn. For
the eye of Gods justice cannot be blinded, but the more coullor that one lays
upon guilt before him, the fouler he makes his own soul and the more
inexcusable.

Of the pride of the transgression, which was worse then the transgression it
self. CHAP. 14.
But pride that makes man seek to coullor his guilt, is far more damnable
then the guilt it self is, as it was in the first of mankind. She could say,
the serp^ beguilde me, and I did eat. He could say: The woman thou gave me,
she g^ (...) of the tree, and I did eat: Here is no sound of asking mercy, no
breath of de^ng help: for though they do not deny their guilt, as Caine did,
yet their p^e seeks to lay their own evil upon another, the man's upon the
woman, and hers upon the Serpent. But this indeed does rather accuse them of
worse then acquit them of this, so plain and palpable a transgression of Gods
command. For the woman's persuading of the man, and the serpents seducing of
the (...) to this, does no way acquit them of the guilt: as if there (a) were
(...) thing to be believed, or obeyed before God, or rather then the highest.

L. VIVES.
AS if there (a) were] There is nothing to be believed rather then God, or to
be este^ (...) God but the woman believed the Serpent rather then God, and the
man preferred his (...) God.

Of the just reward that our first parents received for their sin. CHAP. 15.
^refore because God, (that had made man, according to his image, placed (...)
in Paradise, above all creatures, given him plenty of althings, and laid (...)
nor long laws upon him, but only that one brief command of obe^ to show that
himself was Lord of that creature whom free (a) service (...) ^itted) was
thus contemned: thereupon followed that just condemnation (...) ^h, that man,
who might have kept the command, and been spiritual (...), became now carnal
in mind: and because, he had before delighted (...) ^ne pride, now he tasted
of Gods justice: (b) becoming not as he de^ ^lly in his own power, but
falling even from himself, became his slave (...) ^ght him sin, changing
his sweet liberty into wretched bondage, be^ ^gly dead in spirit, and
unwilling to die in the flesh, forsaking eternal (...) condemned to eternal
death, but that Gods good grace delivered him. (...) holds this sentence too
severe, cannot proportionate, the guilt incurring (...) (c) the easiness of
avoiding it: for as Abraham's obedience is highly extol^ ^cause the killing of
his son (an hard matter) was commanded him, so Abraham's obedience.
(...) ^ir disobedience in Paradise, so much the more extreme, as the precept
(...) to perform. And as the obedience of the second was the more rarely
(...), in that he kept it unto the death: so was that disobedience of the first
(...) more truly detestable, because he brake his obedience to incur death:
The punishment of disobedience.
(...) the punishment of the breatch of obedience is so great, and the pre^ ^ly
kept, who can at full relate the guilt of that sin that breaks it, (...)
^ither in aw of the commanders majesty, nor in fear of the terrible (...)
following the breatch?

(...) to speak in a word, what reward, what punishment is laid upon diso^,
but disobedience? What is man's misery, other then his own diso^ to himself:
that seeing (e) he would not what he might, now he cannot Psa. 144. 4
(...) would? for although that in Paradise, all was not in his power during
(...) ^dience, yet then he desired nothing but what was in his power, and so
did (...) would.

(...) ^w, as the Scripture says, and we see by experience, man is like to
vanity, (...) can recount his innumerable desires of impossibilites, the flesh,
and the (...), that is himself, disobeying the will, that is himself also,
for his mind (...) ^led, his flesh payned, age and death approaches, and a
thousand other (...) seize on us against our wills, which they could not do, if
our nature were (...) obedient unto our will. And the flesh suffers (g)
something, that hin^ ^e service of the soul, what skilleth it whence, as long
as it is Gods al^ justice, to whom we would not be subject, that our flesh
should not be (...) to the soul, but trouble it whereas it was subject wholly
unto it before, (...) we in not serving God, do trouble our selves and not him?
for he (...) (...) ^ice, as we need our bodies* and therefore it is our
(...) to (...) body, not any hurt to him in that we have made it such a body.
Be (...) those that we call fleshly pains, are the souls pains, in, and
from the flesh, for what can the flesh either feel, or desire without the
soul? But when we say the flesh does either, we mean either the man (as I
said before) or Pains of the flesh, and (...) (...).
some part of the soul that the fleshly passion affects, either by
sharpness, procuring pain and grief, or by sweetness producing pleasure. But
fleshly pain is only an offense given to the soul by the flesh, and a (h)
dislike of that passion that the flesh produces: as that which we call
sadness, is a distaste of things befalling us against our wills: But fear
commonly forerunneth sadness, and that is wholly in the soul, and not in the
flesh: But whereas the pain of the flesh is not fore-run by any fleshly fear,
felt in the flesh before y^ pain: (i) pleasure indeed is vsher'd in by
certain appetites felt in the flesh, as the desires thereof: such is hunger and
thirst and the venereall affect usually called lust: whereas (k) lust is a
general (...) a ge^ll name (...) all vici^ effects
name to all affects that are desirous: for (l) wrath is nothing but a lust of
revenge, as y^ ancient writers defined it: although a man sometimes without
sense of revenge will be angry at senseless things; as to gag his pen in anger
when it writes badly, or so: But even this is a certain desire of revenge,
though it be reasonlesse, it is a certain shadow of returning evil to them
that do evil. So then wrath is a lust of revenge, avarice a lust of having
money, obstinacy a lust of getting victory, boasting a lust of vain glory; and
many such lusts there are: some peculiarly named, and some namelesse: for who
can give a fit name to the lust of sovereignty, which notwithstanding the
tyrants show by their intestine wars, that they stand well affected unto?

L. VIVES.
(...) (...) (a) seruice] For to be Gods servant is to be free, nay to be a
King. (b) Becoming (...) (...) ^he best reading. (c) the easinesse] my friend
Nicholas Valdaura told me that he had (...) (...) ^hor (I know not whom) that
the fruit that Adam eat was hurtful to the body; (...) was rather an
aggrauation of Adams sin, then any likelihood of truth. (d) Second man]
Christ called by Paul, the second man, of heaven, heavenly, as Adam the first
was of earth, earthly. (e) He would not] Torences saying in Andria: since you
cannot have that you desire, desire that which you may have. (f) Mind] There is
in the soul (Men's) belonging to the reasonable part, and animus, belonging to
the sensual, wherein all this tempest of affects does rage. (g) Something]
Weariness and slownesse of motion, whereby it cannot go cheer^ to work, nor
continue long in action. (h) A dislike] Or a dislike of the evil procured by
the passion. (i) Pleasure] Hereupon says Epiourus, Desire censureth pleasure,
pleasures are best being: but seldom used, says Iunenall; voluptates
commendat rarior vsus. (k) Lust (...) a generall] We showed this out of Tully,
it comes of libet, that extended it self unto all de^ that are not bounded by
reason. (l) Wrath is] Tusc. quest. 4. Wrath is a desire to punish (...) by
whom one thinks he is wronged. It is a greeuing appetite of seeming reueng,
(...) (...) (...). Rhet. lib 2.

(...) (...) evil of lust: how the name is general to many vices, but proper
unto venereall concupiscence. CHAP. 16.
ALthough (...) (...) there be many lusts, yet when we read the word, (...),
alone, (...) (...) of the object, we commonly take it for the unclean (...) of
the generatiue parts. For this does sway in the whole body, moving (...) ^ole
man, without, and within, with such a commixtion of mental af^ ^d carnal
appetite, that hence is the highest bodily pleasure of all prod^d: So that in
the very (a) moment of the consummation, it ouer-whel^ almost all the light,
and power of cogitation. And what wise and godly (...) there, who being
married, and knowing (as the Apostle says) how (...) his vessel in holiness
and honor, and not in the lust of concupiscence, as (...) ^es do which know
not God, had not rather (if he could) begette his 1 Thessalonians. 4. 4. 5.
d^n without this lust: that his members might obey his mind in this act
(...) ^pagation, as well as in the lust, and be ruled by his will, not
compelled (...) ^upiscence? But the lovers of these carnal delights
themselves can^ ^e this affect at their wills, either in nuptial
conjunctions, or wic^ ^purities: The motion will be sometimes importunate,
against the will, (...) ^e-times immovable when it is desired: And being
fervent in the (...), yet will be frozen in the body: Thus wondrously does this
lust sail (...) both in honest desire of generation, and in lascivious
concupiscence: ^imes resisting the restraynt of the whole mind, and some-time
^ng it self, which being wholly in the mind, and no way in the bo^ ^e same
time.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) moment] Therefore Hippocrates said that carnal copulation was a
little Epilepsy, Carnal copulation.
^ng sickness. Architas the Tarentine to show the plague of pleasure, bad one to
ima^ man in the greatest height of pleasure that might be: and auerred that
none would (...) to be void of all the functions of soul, and reason as long
as delight lasted.

Of the nakedness that our first parents discovered in themselves after their
sin. CHAP. 17.
(...) (...) man ashamed of this lust, and justly are those members (which lust
(...) or suppresses against our wills, as it lusts) called shameful: before
^ed they were not so. For it is written, they were both naked and were not
(...), not that they saw not the nakedness, but because their nakedness was
Gen, 2. 25.
(...) shameful: for lust did not as yet move these parts against their wills:
(...) the disobedience of the flesh as yet made a testimony of the disobedi^
(...). They were not made blind as (a) the rude vulgar think, for the (...)
the creatures whom he named, and the woeman saw, that the tree was good (...)
and pleasing to the eyes. Their eyes therefore were open, but they were Gen, 3.
(...).
(...) opened, that is, occupied, in beholding what good the garment of (...)
^estowed upon them, in keeping the knowledge of the members rebel^ ^inst the
will from them: which grace being gone, that disobedience (...) be punished
by disobedience, there entered a new shame upon those (...) motions that made
their nakedness seem indecent: This they obser^ ^d this they were ashamed off
Thence it is, that after that they had (...) the command, it was written of
them, Then the eyes of them both ^ed, and they knew that they were naked, and
they sowed fig tree Gen, 3. 7.
(...) together and made themselves breeches. Their eyes were opened, not to
see, for they saw before: but to discern between the good that they had lost
and the evil that they had incurred. And therefore the tree was called the tr^
What was meant by the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
of the knowledge of good and evil, because if it were tasted of against the
precept by them, it should let them see this difference, for the pain of the
disease being known, the pleasure of health is the sweeter. So, they knew that
they were naked: naked of that grace that made their bodily nakedness
innocent, and vnresting the will of their minds. This knowledge they got, happy
they if they had kept Gods precepts, and believed him, and never come to know
the hurt of faithless disobedience. But then being ashamed of this fleshly
disobedience that vpbrayded theirs unto God, they sowed fig-tree-leaues
together, and made them breetches, or couers for their priuities. The latin
word is (b) Campestria, taken C^pestra
from the vestures wherewith the youths that wrastled, or exerced themselves
naked in the field (in campo) did cover their genitories withal, being
therefore called by the vulgar, campestrati. Thus their shamefastness wisely
covered that which lust disobediently incited as a memory of their disobedient
wills justly herein punished: And from hence, all mankind, arising from one
original, have it naturally in them to keep their priuities covered; that
even some of the (c) Barbarians will not bath with them bare, but wash them in
their couertures. And whereas there are some philosophers called Gymnosophists
because the live naked in the (d) close deserts of India; yet do they cover
their genitalls, whereas all the rest of their bodies, are bare.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) rude vulgar.] Because it is written He did eat: and then the eyes of
them both were opened. Genesis 3. (b) Campestria.] So learned writers call
breetches. Horace. in Epist. Penula solst it io, campestre niualibus auris.
A cloak for heat, and bretches for the cold.
Acron upon this place says it covers nothing but the priuities. Cato sat in
judgment (says one) without a coat, only having on a pair of bretches
under his gown, because it was summer: and so went he down into the court,
and pleaded. Ascon. in Orat. pro M. Scaur. Some take Capistrum for campestre,
being nothing near it. Nor can I see why Petrus do ^talibus in his Historia
Scholastica should say that bretches were not invented in Noes time. (c)
Barbarian,] It was a foul shame for a Lydian or any other Barbarian to be
seen naked by his fellows. Herodot, in Clio. The Romans never washed the
father with the son in law nor the father with his own son if he were not
above fifteen years of age. This was an old custom Cic. Offi. li. 1. (d).
Close deserts.] Close and deserts, both, to comend their shamefastnes, for
nothing need be ashamed of the sons sight, much less of a dark and ^y
desert, But how come these Gymnosophists in India. Philostratus placing them in
Ethiopia, near to Nilus. (In vita Appollonii Elianci.) And Hierome also
follows him saying. Returning The Gym^.
to Alexandria, he went into Ethyopia, to see the Gymnosophists, and that
famous table of the (...), (...) the sand. But Pliny, Solinus, Strabo,
Apuleius, Prophiry and others, place the Gy^sophists in India near unto the
river Indus, in the region called Indoscythica, yet Philostratus is not
deceived, for their original is from India, wherein Strabo says there were
two sorts of Philosophers.

The civil, or such as used the cities, called Brachmans, (and those wore
linen, and beasts skins: they bathed with Apolonius, as Phylostratus says,
and one of them took a letter out of his cappe and gave it to a woman whose
son was-troubled with an evil spirit:) The (...) were such as lived in the
woods, naked, or sometimes clothed with leaves, and barks of (...) ^hey called
them Hermans, or Gymnosophists, and from those came they of Ethiopia. For (...)
^bitants upon Indus are reported to have come upon Ethiopia with an huge power,
and (...) to have taken up dwellings upon Nilus banks: and this they named
India also, and (...) their Hermans or Gymnosophists thither: so that the name
grew common to both ^dorus lib. 4. relating the Ethiopians customs, says that
some went all naked, some (...) their priuities with Fox tails, and some had
breeches made of hair: And Strabo ^th a story of eight slaves that the
Ambassadors of those countries gave unto Caesar, all (...) for their priuities,
which they covered with breeches.

Of the shame that accompanyeth copulation, as well in common as in marryage.
CHAP. 18.
(...) the act of lust, not only in punishable adulteries, but even in the use
of ^lots which the (a) earthly city allows, is ashamed of the public (...)
although the deed be liable unto no pain of law: and the stews them ^ue
their secret provisions for it, even because of natural shame: Thus (...)
^asier for unchasteness to obtain permission, then for impudence to give (...)
^ke practice. Yet such as filthy themselves, will call this filthynesse, and
(...) they love it, yet (b) dare not profess it. But now for copulation in
mar^ which according to the laws of matrimony, must be used for propaga^ ^ke:
does it not seek a corner for performance, though it be honest, and (...)?
Does not the Bridegroom turn all the feast-maisters, the attendants, ^que,
and all other out of his chamber, before he begin to meddle with (...). And as
(c) that great author of Roman eloquence said, whereas all Tusc. lib, 3.
(...) deeds desire the light, that is love to be known: This only (...) so
to be known, that it shameth to be seen. For who know^ what the man must do
to the woman to have a child begotten, seeing the (...) sollemnly married for
this end? But when this is done, the children them, if they have any before,
shall not know. For this act does desire (...)) ^ight of the mind, yet so as
it flies the view of the eye: why, but (...) because that this lawful act of
nature, is (from our first parents) ac^nied with our penal shame?

L VIVES.
(...) ^thly (a) Citty] For it was lawful to have an whore, or a concubine. De
Concub. ^t. lib. 25. Augustine shows plainly that Romes old civil law
allowed much that (...) prohibited. This they gainsay that seek to adapt
Heatheisme to Christianity, and (...) so long, that corrupting both, and
disliking either, they will prove neither good (...) good Christians. (b) Dare
not professe] This is Ciceroes proof, that pleasures are not (...) all good
loves to be published, and he that has it may glory in it: but none dare (...)
bodily pleasures. (c) That great author] [Our Passauantius has said nothing
along ^ere he speaks: who this was (says he) mine expositor settes not down:
nor can I tel^ [The Louanists defective here. P^ in french is go onfo^d.
(...), or I Will not believe ye: yet, faith, who can be so hard hearted as not
to believe him (...) swearing, when he confesses plainly he knows not,
cheefely in that which we (...) ^ily believe he knew not indeed, though he
should swear never so fast that he (...) troth mine honest Passauant, thou
might do better to have followed thy* names (...), and have made no stand at
all here.] But Lucan lib. 7. calls Tully thus, and the (...) quoted by Augustine
are his. Tusc. q. l. 3. (d) Sight] That the minds but not the eyes (...)
behold and judge of the effect.

That the motions of wrath and lust are so violent that they do necessarily
require to be suppressed by wisdom: and that they were not in our nature,
before our fall depraved it. CHAP. 19.
HEere-vppon the most accute and judicious Philosophers held wrath, and lust to
be two vicious parts of the mind: because they moved man without all order
and measure to acts uncondemned by wisdom, and therefore needed to be
ouer-swayed by judgment and reason: which (a) third part of the soul, they
placed as in a tower, to be sovereign over the rest, that this commanding,
and they obeying, the harmony of justice might be fully kept in man. These
parts which they confess to be vicious in the most wise, and temperate man,
so that the mind had need still to tie them from exorbitance to order: and
allow them that liberty only which wisdom prescribes, as (b) wrath in a
lust repulse of wrong, and lust in propagation of ones of spring: these I say
were not vicious at all in man whilst he lived sinlesse in Paradise. For they
never aimed at any thing besides rectitude, reason directing them without
raynes. But now when-soeuer they move the just and temperate man they must be
hamperd down by restraynt, which some do easily, and others with great
difficulty: They are now no parts of a sound, but pains of a sick nature.
And whereas shamefastness covers not wrath, nor other affects, in their
immoderate acts, as it does lusts: what is the reason but that it is not the
affect but the assuming will that moves the other members, performing those
affectionate acts, because it rules as chief in their use? For he that
being angry, rayles, or strikes, could not do it but that the tongue and the
hand are appointed to do so by the will, which moves them also when anger is
absent; but in the members of generation, lust is so peculiarly enfeoffed, that
they cannot move, if it be away, nor stir unless it (being either
voluntary, or forcibly excited) do move them. This is the cause of shame and
auoydance of beholders in this act: and the reason why a man being in
unlawful anger with his neighbor, had rather have a thousand look upon him,
then one when he is in carnal copulation with his wife.

L. VIVES.
Which (a) third part] Plato in his Timaeus following Timaeus the Locria^, and
other Pythagorists diuides the soul into three parts: and in his De Rep. He
places anger in the heart, The parts of the soul
concupiscence in the liver and spleen, and reason the Lady and gouernesse of
the work (as Claudian says) in the brain, (b) Wrath in a iust] It was called
the whetstone of valor, and the rayser of just and vehement affects against the
foe, or a wicked Citizen. Cicero. Seneca de Ira.

Of the vain obscaenity of the Cynikes. CHAP. 20.
THis the dogged Philosophers, that is, the Cynikes observed not, auerring,
that truly dogged, vnpure and impudent sentence against man's shamefastness, D^.
that the matrimonial act being lawful, is not shame, but ought, if one
lust, to be done in the street. Even very natural shame subverted this soul
error. For though Diogenes is said to do thus once, glorying that his
impudence would make his sect the more famous: Yet afterward the Cynikes le^t
it, and shame prevailed more with them, as they were (...)* then that absurd
error to become like dogs. And therefore I think that (...), or those that
did so, did rather show the motions of persons in copulation ^o Natural shame.
the beholders that saw not what was done under the cloak, then that (...)
performed the venereall act in their view indeed. For the Philosophers (...)
not ashamed to make show of copulation there, where lust was ashamed to ^e
them. We see there are Cynikes to this day, (b) weareing cloakes, ^aring
clubbes, yet none of them dare do this: if they should, they would (...) all
the street upon their backs either with stones, or spittle. Question (...)
therefore man's nature is justly ashamed of this act: for that disobedience,
whereby the genitall members are taken from the wills rule and given ^s, is a
plain demonstration of the reward that our first Father had for his (...): and
that ought to be most apparent in those parts, because thence is (...) ^ture
derived which was so depraved by that his first offense: from which (...) (...)
is freed, unless that which was committed for the ruin of us all (we (...)
then all in one) and is now punished by Gods justice, being expiated in (...)
one by the same Gods grace.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) Cynikes] Of (...), a Dog. Antisthenes, Socrates his scholar was
their author. ^ir fashions were to revile, and bark at all men, to be obscene
in public, without Cynikes.
^g, and to beget all the children they could: finally, what ever we are
ashamed to do (...) secret, that would they do openly: yet were they great
scorners of pleasures, and of (...) matters, yea even of life. Of this sect
were (as I said) Antisthenes, the author, Diogenes (...), Crates of Thebes, and
Menippus of Phaenice. Tully says their manners were (...) ^ill and
abominable. In offic. (b) Wearing cloakes] The cloak was the Greeks (...)
^t, The cloak.
as the gown was the Romans. The Cynikes wore old tattered cloakes, and (...)
in their hands: Augustine calls them clubbes. Herein they bost that they are
like (...), their tattered robe being like his Lyons-skin, their staff like
his club, and their (...) ^sures, as his were monsters. Lucian, (...). There
are Epistles under Diogenes (...), that say these garments are unto him in the
same stead that a Kings are to him: his (...) his mantle, and his staff, his
scepter. The Donatists, and the Circumcelliones (being The donatians and
Circumcelliones.
(...) both of one stamp) in Augustines time went so cloaked, and bare
clubbes, to destroy (...) Christians withal.

Of the blessing of multiplication before sin, which the transgression did
not abolish but only lincked to lust. CHAP. 21.
^D forbid then that we should believe, that our parents in Paradise should ^e
full-filled that blessing. Increase and multiply, and fill the earth: in that
Genesis 1.
(...) made them blush and hide their priuities: this lust was not in them
until (...) ^ne: and then, their shame fast nature, having the power and rule
of the (...)* perceived it, blushed at it, and covered it. But that blessing of
marriage, Lust g^oing upon sin.
^rease, multiplication, and peopling of the earth; though it* remained in
(...) after sin, yet was it given them before sin to know, that procreation of
(...) ^onged to the glory of marriage, and not to the punishment of sin. But the
(...) are now on earth, knowing not that happiness of Paradise, do think
^dren cannot be gotten, but by this lust which they have tried, this is that
(...) honest marriage ashamed to act it.

(...) (a) rejecting and impiously deriding the holy scriptures that say they
were ^d of their nakedness after they had sinned, and covered their priuities,
and (b) others though they receive the scriptures, yet hold that this blessing,
Increase and multiply, is meant of a spiritual, and not a corporal
faecundity: because the Psalm says, thou shall multiply virtue in my soul,
and interpret the following words of Genesis, And fill the earth and rule over
it, thus: earth, that is the flesh Psalm. 138, 3
which the soul fills with the presence, and rules over it, when it is
multiplied in virtue: but that the carnal propagation cannot be performed
without that lust which arose in man, was discovered by him, shamed him, and
made him cover it, after sin: and that his progeny were not to live in
Paradise, but without it, as they did: for they begot no children until they
were put forth of Paradise, and then they did first conioyne, and beget them.

L. VIVES.
OThers (a) reiecting] The Manichees, that rejected all the old Testament, as
I said elsewhere. The Adamites.
(b) Others though] The Adamites that held that if Adam had not sinned there
should have been no marying. (c) Thou shall multiply] The old books read,
Thou shall multiply me in soul, by thy virtue. And this later is the truer
reading, I think, for Aug. followed the 70. and they translate it so.

That God first instituted, and blessed the band of Marriage. CHAP. 22.
But we doubt not at all, that this increase, multiplying and filling of the
earth, was by Gods goodness bestowed upon the marriage which he ordained in
the beginning, ere man sinned, when he made them male and female; sexes
evident in the flesh. This work was no sooner done, but it was blessed: for
the scripture having said. He created them male, and female, adds presently:
And God blessed them, saying, Increase and multiply etc. (a) All which though
they may not The distinction o^ sexes in the cr^tion.
unfitly be applied spiritually, yet male and female can in no wise be
appropriate to any spiritual thing in man: not unto that which rules, and
that which is ruled: but as it is evident in the real distinction of sex,
they were made male and female, to bring forth fruit by generation, to
multiply and to fill the earth. This plain truth none but fools will oppose.
It cannot be meant of the spirit ruling, and the flesh obeying, of the reason
governing and the affect working: of the contemplative part excelling, and the
active serving, nor of the minds understanding and the bodies sense: but
directly, of the band of marriage, combining both the sexes in one. Christ
being asked, whether one might put away his wife for any cause, because Moses
by reason of the hardness of their hearts suffered them to give her a bill of
divorce, answered saying, Have you not read, that he which made Mat. 19, 4
them at the beginning, made them male and female? and said for this cause
shall ^man leave father and mother and sleaue unto his wife, and they tvvaine
shall be one flesh? So that now they are no more two but one. Let no man
therefore sunder what God has coupled together. Sure it ts therefore that male
and female were ordained at the beginning in the same form, and difference
that mankind is now in. And they are called one, either because of their
conjunction, or the woman's original, who came of the side, of man: for the
Apostle warnes all married men by this example, to love their wives.

L. VIVES.
ALL (a) which] There is nothing in the scripture but may be spiritually
applied: yet must we keep the true, and real sense, otherwise we should make a
great confusion in religion: for the Heretics, as they please, wrest all unto
their positions. But if God, in saying Increase, etc. had no corporal meaning,
but only spiritual, what remains but that we allow this spiritual increase
unto beasts, upon whom also this blessing was laid?

Whether if man had not sinned, he should have begotten children in Paradise,
and whether there should there have been any contention betvveene chastity
and lust. CHAP. 23.
But he that says that there should have been neither copulation nor
propagation but for sin, what does he else, but make sin the original of
the holy number of Saints? for if they two should have lived alone, not
sinning, seeing sin (as these say) was their only mean of generation, then
verily was sin necessary, to make the number of Saints more then two. But if
it be absurd to hold this, it is fit to hold that, that the number of Gods
cittizen^ should have been as great, then, if no man had sinned, as now shall be
gathered by Gods grace out of the multitude of sinners, as long (a) as this
worldly multiplication of the sons of the world (men) shall endure. And
therefore that marriage that was held fit to be in Paradise, should have had
increase, but no lust, had not sin been. How this might be, here is no fit
place to discuss: but it need not seem incredible that one member might
serve the will without lust then, so many serving it now. (b) Do we now move
our hands and feet so lasily when we will unto their offices, without
resistance, as we see in our selves, and others, chiefly handicraftesmen,
where industry has made dull nature nimble; and may we not believe that those
members might have served our first father unto procreation, if they had not
been seized with lust, the reward of his disobedience, as well as all his
other served him to other acts? does not Tully, disputing of the difference of
gouerments (in his books of the Commonweal) and drawing a simyly from man's
nature, say, that they (c) command our bodily members as sons, they are so
obedient, and that we must keep an harder form of rule over our minds
vicious parts, as our slaves? In order of nature the soul is above the body,
yet The souls power over the body.
is it harder to rule then the body. But this lust whereof we speak is the
more shameful in this, that the soul does neither rule it self therein, so
that it may not lust; nor the body neither, so that the will rather then lust
might move these parts, which if it were so were not to be ashamed of. But
now, it shameth not in other rebellious affects, because when it is conquered
of it self, it conquereth it self, (although it be inordinately and
vitiously) for although these parts be reasonlesse, that conquer it, yet are
their parts of it self, and so as I say, it is conquered of it self. For when
it conquereth it self orderly, and brings all the parts under reason, this is a
laudable and virtuous conquest, if the soul be Gods subject. But it is less
ashamed when it obeys not the vicious parts of it self, then when the body
obeys not it, because it is under it, depends of it, and cannot live
without it. But the other members being all under the will, without which
members nothing can be performed against the will, the chastity is kept
vnviolated: but the delight in sin is not permitted. (d) this contention,
fight, and altercation of lust and will, this need of lust to the sufficiency
of the will, had not been laid upon the wed-locke in Paradise, but that
disobedience should be the plague to the sin of disobedience: other wise
these members had obeyed their wills as well as the rest. (e) the seed of
generation should have been sown in the vessel, as corn is now in the
field. What I would say more in this kind, modesty bids me forbear alittle,
and first ask (f) pardon of chas^e ears: I need not do it, but might
proceed in any discourse pertinent to this theme, freely, and without any
fear to be obscene, or imputation of impurity to the words, being as honestly
spoken of these as others are of any other bodily members. Therefore he that
reads this with unchaste suggestions, let him accuse his own guilt, not the
nature of the question: and observe he the effect of turpitude in himself,
not that of necessity in us: which the chaste and religious reader will easily
allow us, to use in confuting of our experienced (not our credulous) adversary,
who draws his arguments from proof not from belief. For he that abhors
not the Apostles reprehension of the horrible beastliness of women, who
perverted the natural use and did against nature, will read this without
offense, especially seeing we neither rehearse nor reprehend that damnable
bestiality, that he condemns, but are upon discovery of the affects of
human Romans 1, 26.
generation, yet with avoydance of obscene terms, as well as he does avoid
them.

L. VIVES.
AS long (a) as] In this world, the sons thereof beget, and the sons
thereof are begotten: but by Christ's mercy they become the sons of the
Kingdom, they are generate, by sin, and regenerate by grace. (b) Do we not]
This is the common opinion of the schools. Sent. lib. 2. did. 20. But some of
the Greeks do hold, that generation should have been both without sin and
copulation: which is not likely. For to what end then was the difference of
sex and the members of generation given. (c) Command] For we do far more
easily rule our body then the rebellious affects of the soul, which war
perpetually with reason, so that the soul rules the body with more ease then
it does the inferior part of it self. (a) This contention] Aquinas does not
deprive the marriage in Paradise of all pleasure, but allows it that which is
pure, and chaste, and far unlike to our obscene and filthy delight in
copulation. The gene^ field.
(r) Uessell] or generatiue field: put for the place of conception: as Uirgil
does. Hoc faciunt, nimio ne luxu obtusior vsus,
Sit genitali aruo.


(f) Pardon] So we do being to speak of obscene matters: with such words as
these, saving your reverence, or, saving your presense. So does Pliny in his
preface, being to insert words of barbarism, rusticity, and bluntness, into
his work.

That our first Parents, had they lived without sin, should have had their
members of generation as subject unto their wills, as any of the rest. CHAP. 24
MAn therefore should have sown the seed, and woman have received it, as
need required, without all lust, and as their wills desired: for as now we
are, our articulate members do not only obey our will, our hands, or feet,
or so, but even those also that we move, but by small sinews, and Tendones,
we contract and turn them as we list: as you see in the voluntary motions of
the mouth and face. And the (a) lungs, the softest of all the intrailes but for
the marrow, and therefore placed in the arches of the breast far more safely to
take in and give out the breath, and to proportionate the voice, do serve a
man's will entirely, like a pair of Smiths, or Organs bellows: to breath, to
speak, to cry, or to sing. I omit that it is natural in some creatures if
they feel any thing bite them, to move the skin there where it bites, and no
where else: shaking off not Extraordin^ies powers of motion in some perons.
only flies, but even darts or shaftes by this motion of the skin. Man
cannot do this: what then? could not God give it unto what creatures he
listed? Even so might man have had the obedience of his lower parts, which his
own disobedience debarred. For GOD could easily have made him withal his
members subjected to his will, even that which now is not moved but by lust:
for we see some men's natures far different from other some: acting those
things strangely in their bodies, which others can neither do nor hardly will
believe. (c) There are that can move their ears, one or both, as they please:
there are that can move all their hair toward their forehead, and back
again, and never move their heads. There are that can swallow ye twenty
things whole, and contracting but their guts a little, give you every thing up
as whole as if they had but put it into a bag. (d) There are that can
counterfeite the voices of birds and other men, so cunningly, that unless you
see them you cannot discern them for your hearts. (e) There are that can
break wind back-ward so artificially, that you would think they sung. (f) I
have seen one sweat when he listed, and it is sure that (g) some can weep
when they list, and shed tears, plentifully. But it is wonderful that diverse
of the brethren (h) tried of late in a Priest called Restit^tus, of the (i)
village of (k) Calamon, who when he pleased (and they requested Restitus his
ecstasy.
him to show them this rare experiment) (l) at the fayning of a lamentable
sound (...) himself into such an ecstasy, that he lay as dead, sencles of all
punishing, ^cking, nay even of burning, but that he felt it sore after his
awaking. And this (...) was found to be true, and (m) not counterfeite in him,
in that he lay still without any breathing: yet he sa^d afterward, that if one
spoke aloude, he thought he heard him, as if he were a sarre off. Seeing
therefore that in this (...) of ours, the body serves the will in such
extraordinary affects; why should we not believe that before his disobedience,
the first man might have had his means and members of generation without lust?
But he taking delight in himself, was left by God unto himself, and
therefore could not obey himself, because he would not obey GOD. And this
proves his misery the plainer, in that he cannot live as he would: for if he
would do so, he might think himself ^ppy: (n) yet living, in obscenity, he
should not be so indeed.

L. VIVES.
THE (a) lungs] The marrowe is not usually taken for any part of the intrailes.
It is observed that Tully, and the most learned Latinists, use Pulmo
continually in the plural number: I (...) it is because it is parted into two
fillets or lappets: but Celsus, Persius and Lactantius The lungs.
(...) it in the singular. (b) To take in] For there goes a pipe from the
lungs into the mouth, cal^ As^ra arteria by Celsus, and Gurgulio by Lactantius
[the weasand-pipe] and through this (...) breath goes in and out: for that is
the proper function thereof. Arist. Histor. animal. lib. (...) (c) There are]
Aristotle says that man only of all creatures cannot move his ears, that is,
he (...) move the^ voluntarily, as horses, etc. do. (d) There are that]
Plutarch talks of one Parme^ ^t could imitate the voices of all creatures
rarely, whence the proverb, Nihil ad Parmenonis (...), (...). (e) There are
that can break] There was such an one, a Germane, about Maximilians (...) ^d
his son Phillips, that would have rehearsed any verse whatsoever with his
tail. (f) (...)] And when I was sick of a Tertian, at Bruges, as often as the
Physician told me that it was goo^ to sweat, I would but hold my breath a
little and cover my self over head in the (...), and I sweat presently. They
that saw it, wondered at my strange constitution, but they would have wondered
more had they seen Augustines sweater, that sweat as easily as I can spit. (g)
Some] The hired mourners in Italy, and almost all women-kinde. (h) Tried of
late] Such like has Pliny of one Hermotimus of Clazomene, whose soul would
leave his body and go into same Hermotimus, of Clazomene.
countries, and then come back and tell what he had seen. (i) Uillage]
(...), is a neighbor-hood, a dwelling together. They that dwell in diverse
hemispheres under one parallel, are called Paraeci. But Parochia, is an other
matter, and used now for a parish. Augustine meant of the other. (l) Calaman]
Calamisus, was a town in Italy: Calamo was in Phaenicia, and that I think
Augustine meant of: unless there were some village in Africa called so: as
being bu^ by the Phenicians, who once possessed almost al Africa. (l) At the
feigned] Some feigned mourning, whereupon his fantasy took the conceit, and
produced the rapture, or he fained such a sound himself, and so put of his
external senses thereby. (m) Not counterfeite] He did not oppose himself
wittingly to those punishings and burnings, but was senseless of them indeed.
(n) Yet liuing] Felicity is not in opinion, but really solid: not in shade, or
imagination, but in esse, and truth. Nor was that noble Argiue happy, who as
Horace says, thought he had seen five tragedies acted. In vacuo solus sessor,
plausorque, Theatro.
Aplauding loud when none were on the stage.


Of the true beatitude: vnattainable in this life. CHAP. 25.
But if we observe aright: none lives as he list, but he is happy, and none
is happy, but he is just, yet the just, lives not as he list, until he
attain, that sure, eternal, hurtlesse, vndeceiuing state. That he naturally
desires, nor can he b^e perfect, until he have his desire. But what man
hereupon earth can say he lives as he list, when his life is not in his own
hand? he would live feign, and he must die. How then lives he as he list,
that lives not as long as he list? But if he list to die, how can he live as
he list that will not live at all? and if he desire to die, not forgo all
life, but to change it for a better, then lives he not yet as he list, but
attaineth that by dying. But admit this, he lives as he list, because he has
forced himself, and brought himself to this, to desire nothing but what is in
his power, as Terence says: (a) Since you cannot have what you would have,
desire the which you may have: Yet is he not blessed, because he is a patient
wretch. For beatitude is not attained unless it be affected. And if it be both
attained and affected, then must this affect needs surmount all other, because
all other things are affected for this. And if this be loved as it ought to be
(for he that loves not beatitude as it ought to be loved cannot be happy)
then cannot it choose but be desired to be eternal. So that the blessed life
must needs be joined with ete^.

L. VIVES.
SI^ce (a) you] This was an old saying. Plato, de rep.

That our first parents in Paradise might have produced mankind, without any
shameful appetite. CHAP. 26.
THerefore man lived in Paradise as he desired, whilst he desired but (...)
God commanded, he inioyed God, from whence was his good: he lived without
need, and had life eternal in his power, he had meat for hunger, drink for
The first man's felicit^ er^ he^ sinned.
thirst, the tree of life to keep off age, he was free of all bodily
corruption and sensible molestation: he feared neither disease within nor
violence without: Hight of health was in his flesh, and fullness of peace in
his soul, and as Paradise was neither fiery nor frosty, no more was the
inhabitants good will offended either with desire, or fear: there was no true
sorrow, nor vain joy, their joy continued by Gods mercy, whom they loved with
a pure good conscience and an unfeigned faith: their wedlock love was holy and
honest, their vigilance and custody of the precept without all toil or
trouble. They were neither weary of leisure, nor unwillingly sleepy. And can
we not in all this happiness suppose that they might beget their children
without lust, and move those members without concupiscentiall affect, the man
(a) being laid in his wives lap (b) without corruption of integrity? God
forbid. Want of experience need not drive us from believing that their
generatiue parts might be moved by will only, without exorbitance of hotter
affect: and that the sperme of the man might be conueid into the place of
conception without corruption of the instrument receiving as well as a virgin
now does give forth her (c) menstruous flux without breach of virginity. That
might be cast in as this is cast forth. For as their child birth should not
have been fore-run by pain, but by (d) maturity, which should open a way for
the child without torment: so should their copulation have been performed
without lust full appetite, only by voluntary use. This theme is immodest,
and therefore, let us conjecture as we can, how the first Parents of man were,
ere they were ashamed: needs must our discourse hereupon, rather yield to
shamefastness then trust to eloquence: the one restraines us much, and the
other helps us little For seeing they that might have tried, did not try this
that I (...) said, deserving by sin to be expelled Parradise, ere they had
used (...) means of propagating man how can man now conceive it should be
done, (...) by the means of that headlong lust, not by any quiet will? This
is that (...) stops my mouth, though I behold the reason in mine heart. But
howso^: Almighty God, the Creator of all nature, the helper and rewarder of all
good wills, the just condemner of the badde, and the ordainer of both, wanted
not a prescience how to fulfill the number of those whom he had destinate to
be of his city, even out of the condemned progeny of man, distinguishing
them not by their merrits, (for the whole fruit was condemned in the corrupted
(...)) but by his own grace, freeing them both from themselves, and the
slavish (...), and showing them what ^ee bestowed on them: for each one now
ac^ledgeth that it is not his own deserts, but Gods goodness that has freed
(...) from evil, and from their society with whom he should have shared a
just ^nation. Why then might not God create such as he knew would sin, ^ereby
to show in them and their progeny both what sin deserved, and what (...)
mercy bestowed? and that the perverse inordinate offense of them, under (...),
could not pervert the right order which he had resolved?

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) laid] So says Uirgil of Uulcan and Uenus. Aeneid. 8. Optatos dedit
amplexus, placid^sque petiuit,
Coniugis effusus gremio per membra soporem.
Embracing me, soft slumber on him crept,
And in her lap he laid him down and slept.


(b) Without corruption] Therefore should the place of conception be opened,
says T^mas, and Bonauenture, for that must needs have been opened in
childbirth: for bodies do not penetrate one another. And this were no breach
of integrity no more then opening of the mouth. For the integrity depends upon
the mind. Some hold that the ^atrix should The monthly flowers in women.
have opened at birth but keep shut at copulation as it does in the effusion
of the menstruall blood: and these hold with Augustine. (c) Menstruous] It
begins in them when (...) breasts begin to grow big: about the twelfth
year of their age, it is like the blood of a beast new killed, and happens
once a month, more or less, in some much, and in some small. Arist. Hist.
animal. lib. 7. (d) Maturity] Which as yet, at childbirth, extends and
opens the bones of the lower part of the belly, which at any other time can
hardly be cleft open with an hatchet: but then it should have been opened
without pain, where as now the pain is extreme.

That the Sinners, Angels and Men, cannot with their peruesnesse disturb
Gods providence. CHAP. 27.
ANd therefore the offending Angels and Men no way hindered the great works of
God, who is absolute in all that he wills; his omnipotency d^tributeth all
unto all, and knows how to make use both of good and bad: and therefore why
might not God using the evil angel (whom he had deserued^y condemned for his
evil will, and cast from all good) unto a good end, permit him to tempt the
first man in whom he had placed an upright will? and who was so estated, that
if he would build upon Gods help, a good man should conquer an evil angel;
but if he fell proudly from God, to delight in himself, he should be
conquered, having a reward laid up for his uprightness of will assisted by
God, and a punishment for his perverseness of will in forsaking of God. Trust
upon Gods help he could not unless God helped him: yet follows it not, that
he had no power of himself, to leave this divine help in relying wholly upon
himself: for all we cannot live in the flesh without nourishment, yet may we
leave the flesh when we list: as they do that kill themselves: even so, man
being in Paradise Man has no power of himself to avoid sin.
could not live well without Gods help: but yet it was in his power to live
badly, and to select a false beatitude, and a sure misery. Why then might not
God that knew this before hand, permit him to be tempted by the malicious
wicked spirit? Not being ignorant that he would fall, but knowing withal, how
doubly the devil should be overthrown by those that his grace should select
out of man's posterity. Thus God neither was ignorant of the future event,
neither compelled he any one to offend: but showed by succeeding experience
both to Men and Angels, what difference there was between presuming of ones
self, and trusting unto him. For who dare say, or think that God could not
have kept both Men and Angels from falling? But he would not take it out of
their powers, b^ showed thereby the badnesse of their pride and the goodness of
his own grace.

The state of the Two Cities, the Heavenly and the Earthly. CHAP. 28.
TWo loves therefore, have given original to these two Cities: self loue^
contempt of God unto the earthly, love of God in contempt of ones self to the
heavenly, the first seeks the glory of men, and the later desires God only
as the testimony of the conscience, the greatest glory. That glories in it
self, and this in God. That e^alteth it self in the own glory: this says to
God: My glory and the lifter up of my head. That boasts of the ambitious
conquerours, led by the Psalm. 3. 3
lust of souereinty: in this every one serves other in charity, both the (a)
rulers in counselling and the subjects in obeying. That loves worldly virtue
in the potentates: this says unto God, I will love thee, O LORD, my strength.
And the wise men of that, follow either the goods of the body, or mind, or
both: living Psalm. 18. 1
according to the flesh: and such as might know God, honored him not as GOD,
nor were thankful but became vain in their own imaginations and their
foolish heart was darkened: for holding themselves wise, that is extolling
themselves proudly in their wisdom, they became fools: changing the glory of
the incorruptible God to the likeness of the image of a corruptible Man, and
of birds and foure-footed beasts and serpents: for (b) they were the peoples
guides, or followers unto all those Idolatries, and served the creature rather
then the Creator who is blessed for ever. But in this other, this heavenly
City, (c) there is no wisdom of man, but only the piety that serves the
true God and expects a reward in the society of the holy Angels, and Men,
that God may become all in all.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) rulers] Into how excellent a breuiat has he drawn the great
discourses of a good commonweal, namely that the ruler thereof do not
compel, nor command, but standing Augustines Eutopia.
(...) lo^t like centinells, only give warnings, and counsels, (thence were
Romes old Magistrates called Confulls:) and that the subjects do not repine
nor resist, but obey with alacrity. (b) They were] Some of the Poets and
Philosophers drew the people into great errors: and some followed them with the
people. (c) There is no] No Philosophy, Rethorike, or other art: the only art
here is to know and worship God, the other are left to the world, to be admired
by w^ldings.

Finis, lib. 14.
THE CONTENTS OF THE fifteenth book of the City of God.
1. Of the two contrary courses taken by man's progeny from the beginning. 2. Of
the Sons of the flesh and the sons of promise. 3. Of Saras barrenness,
which God turned into fruitfullnesse. 4. Of the co^flicts and peace of the
earthly city. 5. Of that murderer of his brother, that was the first founder
of the earthly City, whose act the builder of Rome paralelled in murdering his
brother also. 6. Of the languors that Gods citizens endure on earth as the
punishments of sin during their pilgrimage, and of the grace of God curing
them. 7. Of the cause and obstinacy of Caines wickedness which was not
repressed by Gods own words. 8. The reason why Cayne was the first of
mankind that over built a City. 9. Of the length of life and bigness of
body that ^en had before the deluge. 10. Of the difference that seems to be
between the Hebrews computation and ours. 11. Of Mathusalems years, who
seems to have lived 14. years after the Deluge. 12. Of such as believe not
that men of old Time lived so long as is recorded. 13. Whether we ought to
follow the Hebrew computation, or the Septuagints. 14. Of the parity of years,
measured by the same spaces, of old, and of late. 15. Whether the men of old
abstained from women, until that time that the scriptures say they begot
children. 16. Of the laws of marriage, which the first women might have
different from the succeeding. 17. Of the two heads and Princes of the two
Cities, borne both of one Father. 18. That the significations of Abel, Seth,
and Enos, are all pertinent unto Christ, and his body the Church. 19. What the
translation of Enoch signified. 20. Concerning Caines succession, being but
eight from Adam, whereas Noah is the tenth. 21. Why the generation of Caine is
continewed down along, from the naming of his son Enoch, whereas the scripture
having named Enos, Seths son goes back again, to begin Seths generation
at Adam. 22. Of the fall of the sons of God by loving strange women, whereby
all (but eight) perished. 23. Whether it be credible that the Angels being of
an incorporeall nature should lust after the women of earth, and marrying them,
beget Giants of them. 24. How the words that God spoke of those that were to
perish in the deluge. And their days shall be an hundred and twenty years, are
to be understood. 25. Of Gods unpassionate and vnaltering anger. 26. That Noah
his Arc, signifies, Christ and his Church in all things. 27. Of the Arc and
the Deluge, that the meaning thereof is neither merely historical, nor merely
allegorical.
FINIS.
THE FIFTEENTH BOOK: OF THE CITY OF GOD Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of the two contrary courses taken by man's progeny, from the beginning. CHAP. 1.
OF the place, and felicity of the local Paradise together with man's life and
fall therein, there are many opinions, many assertions and many books, as
several men, thought, spoke, and wrote. What we held hereof, or could gather
out of holy scriptures, correspondent unto their truth and authority, we
related in some of our precedent books: If they be farther looked into, they
will give birth to more questions, and longer dispu^ then this place can permit
us to proceed in: our time is not so large as to (...) us to stick
scrupulously upon every question that may be asked by bu^s that are more
curious of inquiry then capable of understanding. I think (...) sufficiently
discussed the doubts concerning the beginning of the world, (...), and
mankind: which last is divided into two sorts: such as live accor^ Man, and
such as live according to God. These, we mistically call, two Cit^ ^cieties,
the one predestinate to reign eternally with GOD: the other The two Cities.
^ed to perpetual torment with the devil. This is their end: of which (...).
Now seeing we have said sufficient concerning their original, both (...) (...)
^ngells whose number we know not, and in the two first Parents of man^ think
it fit to pass on to their progression, from man's first offspring vn^ ^cease to
beget any more. Between which two points all the time in^* wherein the livers
ever succeed the diers, is the progression of these two (...) Caine therefore
was the first begotten of those two that were man-kinds P^s: and he belongs to
the City of man: Abell was the later, and he be^ to the City of GOD. For as
we see that in that one man (as the Apostle (...)) that which is spiritual was
not first, but that which is natural first, and (...) ^he spiritual,
(whereupon all that comes of Adams corrupted nature must (...) be evil and
carnal at first, and then if he be regenerate by Christ, becom^ good and
spiritual afterward:) so in the first propagation of man, and pro^ of the two
Cities of which we dispute, the carnal citizen was borne first, (...) the
Pilgrim on earth, or heavenly citizen afterward, being by grace pre^, and by
grace elected, by grace a pilgrim upon earth, and by grace a (...) in heaven.
For as for his birth, it was out of the same corrupted mass (...) ^as
condemned from the beginning: but God like a potter (for this simyly the ^ostle
himself uses) out of the same lump, made, one vessel to honor and (...) to
reproach. The vessel of reproach was made first, and the vessel of honor Romans
9. 2^.
^ards. For in that one man, as I said, first was reprobation, whence we (...)
^eeds begin (and wherein we need not remain) and afterward, goodness, (...)
which we come by profiting and coming thither, therein making our abode.
Whereupon it follows that none can be good that has not first been evil,
though all that be evil, became not good: but the sooner a man betters
himself, the quicker does this name follow him, abolishing the memory of the
other. Therefore it is recorded of Caine that he built a City, but Abell was a
pilgrim, and built none. For the City of the Saints is above, though it have
citizens here upon earth, wherein it lives as a pilgrim until the time of
the Kingdom come, and then it gathers all the citizens together in the
resurrection of the body and gives them a Kingdom to reign in with their
King, for ever and ever.

Of the Sons of the flesh, and the Sons of promise. CHAP. 2.
THe shadow, and prophetical image of this City (not presenting it but
signifying it) served here upon earth, at the time when it was to be
discovered, and was called the holy City, of the significant image, but not of
the express truth, wherein it was afterward to be stated. Of this image
serving, and of the free City herein prefigured the Apostle speaks thus unto
the Galatians: Tell Gal. 4. 21 22. 23. 24, 25.
me you that will be under the law have ye not (a) heard the law? for it is
written that Abraham had two Sons, one by a bondwoman, and the other by a
free: But the son of the bondwoman was borne of the flesh, and the son of
the freewoman by promise. This is (b) allegorical: for these are the two
Testaments, the one given (c) from Mount Syna, begetting man in servitude,
which is Agar: for (d) Syna is a mountain in Arabia, joined to the Jerusalem
on earth, for it serves with her children. But our mother, the celestial
Jerusalem, is free. For it is written, Rejoice thou barren that bear not:
break forth into joy, and cry out, thou that trauelest not without Child,
for the desolate has more Children then the married wife, Isay 54. 1
but we, brethren, are the sons of promise according to Isaac. But as then
he that was borne of the flesh, (e) persecuted him that was borne after the
spirit, even so it is now. But what says the scripture. Cast out the
bondwoman and her son, for the (f) bond-womans son shall not be heir
with the free woman's. Then brethren are not we the children of the bond-woma^,
but of the free. Thus the Apostle authorizeth us to conceive of the old and
new Testament. For a part of the earthly City was made an image of the
heavenly, not signifying it self, but another, and therefore serving: for it
was not ordained to signify it self, but another, and it self was signified
by another precedent signification: for Agar, Saras servant, and her sonnewere
a type hereof. And because when the light comes, the shadows must avoid, Sara
the freewoman, signifying the free City (which that shadow signified in
another manner) said, cast out the bondwoman and her son: for the
bond-womans son shall not be heir with my son Isaac: whom the Apostle
calls the free woman's son. Thus then we The earthly City in two forms.
find this earthly City in two forms: the one presenting it self, and the
other prefiguring the City celestial, and serving it. Our nature, corrupted
by sin produces citizens of earth: and grace freeing us from the sin of
nature, makes us celestial inhabitants: the first are called the vessels of
wrath: the last, of mercy. And this was signified in the two sons of
Abraham: the one of which being borne of the bondwoman, was called Ismael,
being the son of the flesh: the other, the free-womans, Isaac, the son of
promise. both were Abraham's sons: but natural custom begot the first, and
gracious promise the later. In the first was a demonstration of man's use, in
the second was acommendation of Gods goodness.

L. VIVES.
NOt (a) heard] Not read says the Greek better, and so does Hierome translate
it. (b) Allegoricall] An allegory (says Quintilian) shows one thing in
word and another in An allegory.
s^ce: sometimes the direct contrary. Hierome says, that that which Paul
calls allegorical ^ere, he calls spiritual elsewhere. (c) From mount] So
do Ambrose and Hierome read it. Sina th^moun.
(d) Syna is] I think it is that which Mela calls Cassius, in Arabia. For
Pliny talks of a mount C^s in Syria. That of Arabia is famous for that Jupiter
had a temple there, but more for Pom^ tomb. Some think that Sina is called
Agar in the Arabian tongue. (e) Persecuted] In G^sis is only mention of the
childrens playing together, but of no persecution, as Hierome ^eth: for the two
brethren Ismael and Isaac, playing together at the feast of Isaacs wea^g, Sara
could not endure it, but entreated her husband to cast out the bondwoman and
her ^e. It is thought she would not have done this, but that Ismael being the
elder offered the y^ger wrong. Hierome says, that for our word playing, the
Hebrews say, making of Idols, or ^ing the first place in jest. The scriptures
use it for fighting, as Kin. 2. Come, let the children (...) and play before
us: whether it be meant of imaginary fight, or military exercise, or of a (...)
fight in deed. (f) Bond-womans sonne] Genesis reads, with my son Isaac, and
so do (...) ^o. but Augustine cites it from Paul. Galat. 4. 25.

Of Saraes barrenness, which God turned into fruitfulness. CHAP. 3.
FOr Sara was barren and despaired of having any child: and desiring to have
(...) child, though it were from her slave, gave her to Abraham to bring him
^en, seeing she could bring him none her self. Thus exacted she her (a) due
(...) husband, although it were by the womb of another: so was Ismael borne
(...) begotten by the usual commixtion of both sexes in the law of nature: and
^-vpon said to be borne after the flesh: not that such births are not Gods be^
or works, (for his working wisdom as the scripture says, reaches from Wisd.
8. 1.
(...) to end mightily, and disposes all things in comely order:) but in that,
that (...) the signification of that free grace that God meant to give unto
man, such a (...) should be borne, as the laws and order of nature did not
require: for na^ denies children unto all such copulations as Abraham's and
Saras were, (b) (...) and barrenness both swaying in her then: whereas she
could have no child (...) younger days, when her age seemed not to want
fruitfulness, though fruit^esse wanted in that youthful age. Therefore in
that her nature being thus af^d could not exact the birth of a son, is
signified this, that man's nature be^ corrupted and consequently condemned for
sin, had no claim afterward (...) any part of felicity. But Isaac being
borne by promise, is a true type of the ^s of grace, of those free citizens,
of those dwellers in eternal peace, where (...) private or self-love shall be
predominant, but all shall joy in that universal (...), and (c) many hearts
shall meet in one, composing a perfect model of ^y and obedience.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) due] by law of marriage. (b) Age and] For she was both aged, and
naturally bar^. So some both men and women as Aristotle says, are borne so.
(c) Many hearts] that True concord.
^e concord of the Apostles, of whom it is said: The multitude of the believers
were of (...). Acts. 4. 32.

Of the conflicts, and peace of the earthly City. CHAP. 4.
But the temporal, earthly city (temporal, for when it is condemned to
perpetual pains it shall be no more a city) has all the good, here upon
earth, and therein takes that joy that such an object can afford. But because
it is not a good that acquits the possessors of all troubles, therefore this
city is divided in it self, into wars, altercations, and appetites of
bloody and deadly victories. For any part of it that warreth against another,
desires to be the worlds conqueror, whereas indeed it is vices slave. And if
it conquer, it extolls it self and so becomes the own destruction: but if we
consider the condition of worldly affairs, and grieve at man's opennesse to
adversity, rather then delight in the events of prosperity, thus is the
victory deadly: for it cannot keep a sovereignty for ever where it got a
victory for once. Nor can we call the objects of this cities desires, good,
it being in the own human nature, far surmounting them. It desires an
earthly peace, for most base respects, and seeks it by war, where if it
subdue all resistance, it attaineth peace: which notwithstanding the adverse
part, that fought so unfortunately for those respects, do want. This peace they
seek by laborious war, and obtain (they think) by a glorious victory.
Earthly peace a false good obtained ^y war.
And when they conquer that had the right cause, who will not gratulate their
victory, and be glad of their peace? Doubtless those are good, and Gods good
gifts. But if the things appertaining to that celestial and supernall city
where the victory shall be everlasting, be neglected for those goods, and those
goods desired as the only goods, or loved as if they were better then the
other, misery must needs follow and increase that which is inherent before.

Of that murderer of his brother, that was the first founder of the earthly
city, whose act the builder of Rome paralleld, in murdering his brother also.
CHAP. 5.
THerefore this earthly Cities foundation was laid by a murderer of his own
brother, whom he slew through envy, being a pilgrim upon earth, of the
heavenly city. Whereupon it is no wonder if the founder of that City which
was to become the worlds chief, and the Queen of the nation, followed this
his first example or (a) archetype in the same fashion. One of their Poets
records the fact in these words: (b) Fraterno primi mad^erunt sanguine muri.
The first walls steamed with a brothers blood.
Such was Romes foundation, and such was Romulus his murder of his brother
(...), as their histories relate: only this difference there is, these
brethren were both citizens of the earthly city and propagators of the
glory of Rome, for whose institution they contended. But they both could not
have that glory, that if they had been but one, they might have had. For he
that glories in dominion, must needs see his glory diminished when he has a
fellow to share with him. Therefore the one to have all, killed his fellow, and
by villainy grew unto bad greatness, whereas innocence would have installed
him in honest meannesse. But those two brethren, Caine and Abel, stood not both
alike affected to earthly matters: nor did this procure envy in them, that if
they both should reign, he that could kill the other, should arise to a
greater pitch of glory, for Abel sought no dominion in that city which his
brother built, but that devil envy did all the ^chiefe, which the bad bear
unto the good, only because they are good: for the possession of goodness is
not lessned by being shared: nay it is increased (...) it has many possessing
it in one link and league of charity. Nor shall he (...) have it, that will
not have it common: and he that loves a fellow in it, shall h^ it the more
abundant. The strife therefore of Romulus and Remus, shows the ^on of the
earthly city in it self: and that of Caine and Abel show the opposition (...)
^he city of men and the city of God. The wicked opose the good. But the good
The good contend not one against another.
(...) ^e perfect, cannot contend amongst themselves: but whilst they are
vnper^ ^ey may contend one against another in that manner that each contends a^
himself, for in every man the flesh is against the spirit and the spirit
against (...) (...). So then the spiritual desire in one may fight against the
carnal in ano^, or contrary wise: the carnal against the spiritual, as the
evil do against the g^, or the two carnal desires of two good men that are
inperfect may contend (...) (...) bad do against the bad, until their diseases
be cured, and themselves brought to ^lasting health of victory.

L. VIVES.
A^type. (a) It is the first pattent, or copy of any work; the book written
by the authors ^e hand, is called the Archetype. Iuuenall, An archetype.
Et iubet archetypos iterum seruare Cleanthas.
And bids him keep Cleanthes, archetypes.
(b) (...).] Lucan. lib. 8. The history is known. (c) His brother built.] Did
Caine build a city (...) (...) means he the earthly city which vice and
separation from God built? the latter I (...) (d) The wicked.] This is that I
say, vice neither agrees with virtue, nor it self: for amity (...) ^ongst the
good, the bad can neither be friends with the good, nor with themselves.

Of the langours of Gods Citizens endure in earth as the punishments of sin,
during their pilgrimage, and of the grace of God curing them. CHAP. 6.
But the langour or disobedience (spoken of in the last book) is the first
pu^ment of disobedience, and therefore it is no nature but a corruption: for
(...) it is said unto those earthly prilgrimes and God proficients: Bear (a)
ye (...) ^hers burdens, and so ye shall fulfill the Law of Christ: and
again: admonish the Gal. 6. 2. 1. Th. 5. 14 Gal. 6. 1. Mat. 18. 15. 1. Ti. 5.
20
(...) ^fort the feeble, be patient toward all, overcome evil with goodness,
see that (...) hurt for hurt: and again, If a man be fallen by occasion into
any sin, you that (...) ^all restore such an one with the spirit of
meekness considering thy self least (...) be tempted: and besides, let not
the sun go down upon your wrath: and (...) (...) Gospel: If thy brother
trespass against thee, take him and tell him his falt be^ (...) and him alone.

(...) ^cerning the scandalous offenders, the Apostle says: Them that sin,
rebuke (...) the rest may fear: and in this respect many things are taught
concerning ^g. And a great charge is laid upon us to keep that peace there,
where that (...) of the (c) servants, being commanded to pay the ten thousand
talents he ought, because he forcibly exacted his fellows debt of an hundred
pence. Unto which simily the Lord Jesus adds this cloze. So shall mine
heavenly father do unto you, except you forgive each one his brothers
trespasses from your hearts. Thus are Gods citizens upon earth cured of their
diseases, whilst they are longing for the celestial habitation. But the Holy
spirit works within to make the salve Mat. 18. 35
work that is outwardly applied, otherwise though God should speak to
mankind out of any creature, either sensibly or in dreams, and not dispose of
our hearts with his inward grace, the preaching of the truth would not further
man's conversion a whitte. But this does God in his secret and just providence,
dividing the vessels of wrath and mercy. And it is his admirable and secret
work, that sin (e) being in us rather the punishment of sin as the Apostle
says, and dwelling in our members, when it does not reign in our mortal
body, obeying the desires of it, and when we do not give up our members as
instruments of iniquity to serve it, it is converted into a mind consenting
not unto it in any evil, by Gods government, and man that has it somewhat
quietly here, shall have it afterward most perfectly settled, sinlesse, and in
eternal peace.

L. VIVES.
Bear (a) yee] The Greek is (...). (b) The spirit of meekenesse] Because of
that which follows: Considering thy self least thou also be tempted. It is
fit that one that corrects sin, should consider that he might sin
himself: least if he grow proud because he is more perfect then his
brother, revenge be at hand, and make him fall worse. (c) The seruants] Our
Savior treating of brotherly remission, recites this Parable. Math. 18. (d)
Not disposing] Ecclesiastes the 7. 15. Behold the work of God: who can make
straight that which he has made crooked. And hence it is that a few rules
serve to guide some in honesty, and none, other-some. If the mind be not
inwardly moved to good, the outward words do but little good. (e) Being in
vs] for the pronenesse to badnesse that is in us all, is the punishment of the
first man's sin, by which without great resistance, we are harried into all
enormity. Besides there is no sin but vexes him in whom it is. The first
revenge (says Iuuenall) is, that no guilty man is quitte by his own
conscience. But this place is diversely read. But the true sense is, If that
original promise to sin which we have all from Adam be not predominant
over the whole man, nor reign not (as the Apostle says) in our members, but
be subjected ^o the mind, and the mind unto God the governor, not
consenting to that wicked procliuitie, but rather peaceably restraining it, and
coming unto the curing of GOD that good Physician, then that crazed affect
becomes sound perfection, and with the whole man attaineth immortality. For
this aptness or inclination to sin, which the schoole-diuines call fomes, is
sin in us.

Of the cause and obstinacy of Cains wickedness, which was not repressed by
Gods own words. CHAP. 7.
But that same speaking of God unto Caine in the form of some of his creatures
(as we have showed that he used to do with the first men) what good did it
do him? did he not fulfill his wicked intent to murder his brother, after
GOD had warned him? who having distinguished both their sacrifices, rejecting
the one and receiving the other (no (b) doubt by some visible sign) and that
because the one wrought evil and the other good, Caine grew exceeding wroth,
and his look was dejected. And God said unto him: Why is thy look dejected*
(c) ^f thou offer well, and diuidest not well, (d) have thou not sinned? be
quiet (e) unto thee shall his desire be subject and thou shall rule over him.
In this admonition of God unto Caine, because the first words. If thou offer
well and diuidest no^ (...)* have thou not sinned, are of doubtful
understanding, the translators have ^ne it unto diverse senses, each one seeking
to lay it down by the line How a sacrifice should be off^ed.
(...) ^h. A sacrifice that is offered to the true God, to whom only such are
(...) well offered. But the division may be evil made upon a bad distinction
of (...) ^es, place, offering, offrers or of him to whom it is offered, or of
them to (...) the offering is distributed: meaning here by division, a
discerning be^ offering at due times, in due places* due offerings, due
distributions and the (...) of all these: As if we offer, where, when and what
we should not: or (...) better to our selves then we offer to God: or
distribute the offering to the ^ctified, herein profaning the sacrifice. In
which of these Caine offended (...) we cannot easily find. But as the Apostle
John said of these two brethren; (...) Caine who was of the wicked, and slew
his brother, and wherefore slew he him? (...) his own works were evil and
his brothers good. This proves that God res^d not his gifts; for that he
divided evil, (f) giving God only some of ^ll, and giving himself to
himself, as all do that leave Gods will to (...) their own, and living in
perverseness of heart, offer gifts unto God as (...) to buy him, not to cure
their vicious affects but to fulfill them. This is the ^ty of the earthly City
to worship one, or many Gods for victory, and ^striall peace, never for
charitable instruction, but all for lust of soueraigne^* The good use this
world to the enjoying of God, but the wicked just con^ wise, would use God to
enjoy the world, (g) such I mean as hold God to (...) to have to do in
humanity: for there are that are far worse and believe (...). So then Caine
knowing that God respected his brothers sacrifice and (...), ought to have
changed himself and fallen to imitation of his good bro^ not to have swollen
up in envy against him. But because he was sad, and (...) cast down, this
grief at another good, chiefly his brothers, God (...) ^nde great falt with,
for there-vpon he asked him saying: Why art thou sad (...) is thy countenance
cast down? His envy to his brother, God saw, and re^ded. Man, that knows not
the heart, might well have doubted when ^ee was sad for his own badnesse that
displeased God, or for his brothers (...), for which God accepted his
sacrifice. But God giving a reason why (...) ^ould not accept his, that he
might have iuster cause to dislike himself (...) his brother, having not
divided, that is, not lived well, and being not wor^ to have his sacrifice
accepted, does show that he was far more unjust, (...), that he hated his
just brother for no cause: yet he sends him not away (...) a good and holy
command: Be quiet quoth he: for unto thee shall his (...) ^ee subject and
thou shall rule over him. What over his brother? God for^ no, but over sin:
for he had said before, have thou not sinned? and now ^ddeth, be quiet for
unto thee. etc. Some may take it thus, that sin shall ^ned upon man, so that
he that sins, shall have none to blame for it (...) himself: for this is
the wholesome medicine of repentance, and the fit plea ^rdon, that these words
of God be vnsterstood as a percept, and not as a pro^: for then shall every man
rule over sin, when he does not support it by ^ce, but subdue it by repentance:
otherwise he that becomes the protec^ it, shall sure become prisoner to it.
But if we understand this sin to (...) (...) carnal concupiscense whereof
the Apostle says: The flesh coueteth a^ the spirit, amongst whose works, envy
is reckened for one, which in^ Cayne to his brothers murder, then we may well
take these words (...): It shall be turned unto thee, and thou shall rule over
it, for the carnal part being moved (which the Apostle calls sin, saying, I
do not this but the sin which dwells in me:) which part the Philosophers
call the vicious part of the soul, that ought not to rule but to serve the
mind, and be thereby curbed from unreasonable acts: when this moves us to
any mischief, if we follow the Apostles counsel, saying, give not your
members as weapons of unrighteousness unto Romans 6. 13.
sin, then is this part conquered and brought under the mind and reason.
This rule God gave him that maliced his brother, and desired to kill him whom
he ought to follow: be quiet quoth he, y^ is, keep thine hands out of
mischief, let not sin get predominance in thy body, to effect what it
desires, nor give thou thy members up as weapons of unrighteousness
thereunto, for unto thee shall the desires thereof become subject, if thou
restrain it by supression and increase it not by giving it scope. And thou
shall rule over it: Permit it not to perform any external act, and thy
goodness of will shall exclude it from all internal motion. Such a saying
there is also of the woman, when God had examined and condemned our first
parents after their sin, the devil in the serpent, and man and woman in
themselves: I will greatly increase thy sorrows and thy conceptions (says
he): in sorrow shall thou bring forth children: and then he adds, And thy
desire shall be subject to thine husband and he shall rule over thee: thus what
was to Caine concerning sin or concupisence, the same was said here to the
offending woman: where we must learn, that the man must govern the woman, as
the soul should govern the body. Whereupon the Apostle said, he that loves
his wife loves himself, for no man ever hated his own flesh. These we must
cure, as (...). 5.
our own, not cast away, as strangers. But Caine, conceived of Gods command
like a maleuolent reprobate, and yielding to his height of envy, lay in wait
for his brother and slew him. This was the founder of the fleshly City. How he
further-more was a Type of the Jews, that killed Christ the true shepherd
prefigured in the shepherd Abel I spare to relate, because it is a prophetical
Allegory, and I remember that I said somewhat hereof in my work against
Faustus the Manichee.

L. VIVES.
HE (a) used.] Sup. Genesis ad lit. lib. 8. He inquireth how God spoke to Adam,
spiritually, or corporally* and he answers that he spoke to him as he did
to Abraham, Moses. etc. in a corporal shape, thus they heard him walking in
Paradise in the shade. (q) No doubt.] How could Caine know (says Hierome) that
God accepted his brothers sacrifice and refused his, but that it is true that
Theodotion does say: the Lord set Abels sacrifice on fire, but Caines he did
not, that ^ire had wont to come down from heaven upon the sacrifice, Salomons
offering at the (...) of the temple, and Elias his upon mount Carmel do
testifie^ Thus far Hierom. (c) If thou.] So do the seauenty read it: our common
translation is: If thou do well shall thou not be accepted, (...) if thou do
not well, sin lies at the door. Hierome rehearses the translation of the
seauenty and says thus: the Hebrew and the Septuagintes do differ much in this
place. But the Hebrew read it as our vulgar translations have it: and the
seauenty have it as Augustine reads it. (d) Be quiet.] Run not headlong on,
neither be desperate of pardon; sins original is adherent unto all men, but,
it is in man's choice to yield to it or no. (e) Unto thee shall.] (...), say the
seauenty. Aquila has Societas, and Sy^achus Appetitus, or Impetus. The ^g ^ay
be either that sin shall be our fellow, or that sins violence shall be in our
power to (...), as the sequel declares, and this later is the likelier to be
the true meaning. (f) Gi^ God.] God respects not the gift but the giver, and
therefore the sacrifices of the wicked (...), and neither acceptable to God nor
good men, as Plato says. (g) Such I mean.] For (...) some Atheists: but such
wicked as believe a God, think that they can mean God by (...) to return
them the same again, ten-fould, be it gold or silver. As Sylla and Crassus of^
Hercules the tenth part of their good, that they might be hereby enritched.

The reason why Caine was the first of mankind that ever built a city. CHAP. 8.
(...) now must I defend the authority of the divine history that says, that
this (...) man built a city, when there were but three or four men upon earth,
(...) had killed his brother, there were but Adam, the first father, Caine him^
his son Enoch, whose name was given to the city. But they that stick (...)
consider not that the Scriptures (a) need not name all the men that were (...)
earth at that time: but only those that were pertinent to the purpose. (...)
^pose of the Holy Ghost in Moses was to draw a pedigree, and genealo^ Adam,
through certain men, unto Abraham, and so by his seed unto the (...) of God:
which being distinct from all other nations, might contain all (...) and
prefigurations of the eternal City of Heaven and Christ the king and (...):
all which were spiritual and to come: yet so, as the men of the Earthly (...)
^ad mention made of them also; as far as was necessary to show (...) ^saries
of the said glorious city of God. Therefore when the Scrip^ ^on up a man's
time, and conclude, he lived thus long, and had sons (...) ^ers, must we
imagine that because he names not those sons and daugh^ might be in so many
years as one man lived in those times, as many (...) gotten and borne, as
would serve to people diverse cities? But it (...) ^o God, who inspired the
spirit by which the scriptures were penned, (...) ^guish these two states, by
several generations, as first, that the several (...) ^gies of the carnal
Citizens, and of the spiritual unto the deluge, might (...) ^cted by
themselves where they are both recited: their distinction, in (...) one is
recited down from the murderer Cayne, and the other from (...) ^ous Seth, whom
Adam had given for (b) him whom Caine had murdered, (...) conjunction, in that
all men grew from bad to worse, so that they de^ ^o be all over whelmed with
the flood, excepting one just man called (...) wife, his three sons and their
wives: only these eight persons did (...) ^chsafe to deliver in the Arc, of
all the whole generation of mankind, (...) therefore it is written. And Caine
knew his wife which conceived and bare (...) (c) and he built a city and
called it by his sons name, Henoch: this pro^ that he was his (d) first
son, for we may not think that because (...) here, that he knew his wife,
that he had not known her before, for this is (...) Adam also, not only when
Caine was begotten, who was his first son, (...) Seth, his younger son was
borne aso. Adam knew his wife and she (...) and bare a son and called his name
Seth. Plain it is then that the Scrip^ ^th this phrase in all copulations, and
not only in those wherein the first (...) are borne. Nor is it necessary that
Henoch should be Caines first son, (...) the city bore his name, there might
be some other reason why his fa^ ^ed him above the rest (e), For Judas, of
whom the name of Iud^, and (...) ^me, was not Isreal's first borne: but admit
Henoch, was this builders (...), it is no consequent that his father named the
city after him as soon as he was borne, for then could not he have founded a
city, which is nothing else but a multitude of men combined in one band of
society. Therefore when What a City is.
this man's children and family grew populous, then he might sort them into a
city, and call it after his first son, for the men lived so long in those
days, that of all that are recorded together with their years, he that lived
the least time (f) lived 753. years. And some exceeded 900. yet all were short
of a 1000. (g) Who makes any doubt now that in one man's time, mankind might
increase to a number able to replenish many cities more then one? It is a good
proof hereof, that of Abraham's seed only, the Hebrew people in less then
500. years grew to such a number that their went 600000. persons of them, out
of Egypt, and those all warlike youths: to omit the progeny of the Idumaeans
that Esau begot, and the (h) nations that came of Abraham's other son, not by
Sara: for these belong not to Israel.

L. VIVES.
NEeded (a) not.] Noe they say, had a son called Ionicus, a great astronomer:
Moses names Ionicus.
him not. (b) For him.] Thereupon was he called Seth. Genesis 4. 25. (c) And he
built. The humanists cannot agree about the first city-founder. Some (with
Pliny) say Cecrops, who built that which was first called Arx Cecropia, and
afterward Acropolis: Staho says (...) built Argos (which Homer calls
Pelasgicon) first. The Egyptians claim all themselves, and The first City.
make their Diospolis, or Thebes the eldest city of all: But this Henochia as
Joseph notes which Cayne built is the eldest of all, Cayne being plagued with
terror of conscience for the death of hi^ brother built it, and walled it
about. It was a tipe of this world, and the society of devils. Henochia.
Hi^on ad Marcellam. (d) First son.] Josephus says he was, but he takes the
scriptures at the first sight. (e) For Judas.] He was Jacobs fourth soon by
Lea. Judah was first called Canaan of Chams son, and afterward Judah of Judas
Jacobs son. Josephus. So says Iustine. lib. 36. who reckneth Judea.
but ten sons of Israel, but he erres in this, as he does there where he
says that, the whole nation were called Jews by Israel himself after his
son Judas, who died after the division, but before his father. Lactantius
says that they took this name in a certain desert of Syris where they
rested, because Judas had bin the captain of that company, and the land where
they had dwelt, had bin called Judea. lib. 4. But I think that both the nation
got the name, and the tribe of Judah the Kingdom, for that in passing of the
read sea, all the tribes stopping, Judah made first way out after Moses, which
the Hebrews say is meant by that of Jacob unto Judas, Thou have come up from
captivity my son, for so do they read it, (f) Lived 753.] I think this Genesis
49. 9.
was Lamech, Noes father, who as the Hebrew says lived 757. years, and the
Septuagins 753. (g) Who makes.] In my fathers time their was a town in
Spain, every dweller whereof was descended from the children of one man who
was then a live: yet were there an hundred houses in the town, so that the
youngest knew not by what name of kindred to call the old man, for our language
has names no higher then the great grandfather. (h) The nations.] From Is^ael
Abraham's son by Agar.

Of the length of life, and bigness of body that men had before the deluge.
CHAP. 9.
THerefore no wiseman need doubt that Caine might build a City, and that a
large one, men living so long in those days: unless some faithless will take
occason of incredulity from the number of years which our authors recite men
to have lived, and say it is impossible: And so also they may deny the bigness
of men's bodies in those days to have far exceeded ours: whereof their famous
Poet (a) Virgil gives a testimony of a bounder stone, that a valiant man
caught up in fight, and running upon his foe, threw this at him. Uix illud
lecti bis sex ceruice tulissent,
Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora tellus.
It past the power of twelve strong men to raise,
That stone from ground: as men go now adays.
(b) Intimating that m^n of elder times were of far larger bodies: How much
more then before that famous deluge in the worlds infancy? This difference of
growth is convinced out of old Sepulchers which either ruins, or ruiners, or
(...) ^hance have opened, and wherein have been found bones of an incredible
^e. Upon the shore of Vtica, I my self and many with me, saw a man's (c) (...)
^oth of that bigness, that if it had been cut into pieces, would have (...)
an hundred of ours. But I think it was some Giants tooth: for though the ^ents
bodies exceeds ours, the Giants exceeded all them: and our times (...) seen
some (though very few) that have ouer-growne the ordinary sta^ exceedingly. (d)
Pliny the second, that great scholar, affirms that the (...) the world
lasts, the lesser bodies shall nature produce: as Homer (he (...)) does
often complain: not deriding it as a fiction, but recording it as a (...) of
the miracles of nature. But as I said, the bones of the entombed (...) have
left great proofs of this unto posterity: but as for the continu^ their
times, that cannot be proved by any of those testimonies: yet ^e not derogate
from the credit of holy Scriptures, nor be so impudent ^g incredulous of what
they relate, seeing we see those things have ^taine events, that they
foretell. Pliny (e) says that there is as yet a (...) wherein men live two
hundred years. If then we believe that this (...) of life which we have not
known, is yet extant in some vn-knowne (...), why may we not believe that it
has been general in ancient ^ls it possible that that which is not here may
be in another place, and is it ^ble that that which is not now, might have come
at some other time?

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) giues] Aeneid. 12. of Turnus. Alluding to that fight of Diomedes and
Aeneas (...), where Diomedes takes up a stone which fourteen such men as the
world (...) (faith he) could not lift, and threw it at Eneas, who being
stricken down with (...) ^her covered him with a miste and so saved him.
Iuuenall touches them both, at (...) Uirgil and Homer. Sat. 15. Saxa
inclinatus per humum quaesita lacertis
Incipiunt torquere domestica seditione
Tela, nec hunc lapidem quali se Turnus and Ajax,
Et quo Tydides percussit pondere coxam
Aeneae, sed quam valiant emittere dextrae
Illis dissimiles, and nostro tempore natae.
Nam genus hoc viuo iam decrescebat Homero.
Terra malos homines nunc educat atque pufillos,
Ergo dous quicunque aspexit, ridet and odit, etc.
They stoopt for stones to cast, and kept a coil
With those fit weapons for a scambling broyle:
Not such as Turnus threw, nor Ajax tall,
Nor that Aeneas haunch was hurt withal,
But such as our weak arms to weald were able:
Far short of those: those worthies memorable
Began to fail ere Homer failed his pen:
And earth brings nothing forth but Pygmee-men,
The Gods behold our growth with ieasting scorn, etc.


(b) Intimating] And in his Georgikes, lib. 1. Girandiaque eff^ssis mirabitur
^sse sepulchris.
And gaze on those huge bones within the tomb.
(c) Ax^th] Upon Saint Christophers day we went to visit the chief Church of
our city, and there was a tooth shown us as big as my fist, which they say
was Saint Christophers. There was with me Hierom Burgarin^, a man of a most
modest and sober carriage, and Hier^e Burgarin^.
an infatigable student: which he has both from nature and also from the
example of his father^ who though he were old, and had a great charge of
family, yet gave himself to his book that his children might see him and
imitate him. (d) Plinie] His natural history we Pliny the sec^d.
have. I need neither stand to commend this work, nor the authors learned
diligence. This which Augustine cites is in his seventh book: where also he
says, that in Crete there was a mountain rent by an earthquake, and in it, a
body of forty six cubits long was found. Some said it was Otus his body, and
some Orions. Orestes his body was dug up by oracle, and found to be seven
cubits long. Now Homer complained of the decrease of stature, very near a
thousand years ago. Thus far Pliny: Cyprian writes hereof also to
Demetrianus, and Vriell Gods Angel spoke it also unto Esdras. Besides Gellius
(lib. 3.) says, that the ordinary stature of man was never above seven foot,
which I had rather believe, then Herodotus that fabulous Historiographer, who
says that Orestes his body was found to to be seven cubits, which is twelve
foot and. unless as Homer think, the bodies of the ancients were larger then
those of later times, who decline with the worlds declining age: But Plato,
Aristotle, and their followers, that held the world to be eternal, affirm
that it neither diminishes nor declineth. (e) Saith] Lib. 7. chap. 48.
Hellanicus says, that there is a race of the Epirotes in Etolia that live two
hundred years, and Damastes holds so also, naming one Pistor^s a chief man
amongst them in strength, who lived three hundred years.

Of the difference that seems to be between the Hebrews computation and
ours. CHAP. 10.
Wherefore though there seem to be some difference between the Hebrews
computation and ours, I know not upon what cause, yet it does not disprooue
that those men lived as long as we say they did. For Adam ere he begot Seth, is
said by our (a) books, to have lived two hundred and thirty years, by the
Hebrews, but one hundred and thirty. But after he had be gotten Seth, he
lived seven hundred years by our account, and eight hundred by the Hebrews.
Thus both agree in the maine sum. And so in the following generations, the
Hebrews are still at such or such an ones birth, an hundred years behind us
in this fathers age, but in his years after his sons birth, they still come
up unto our general sum, and both agree in one. But in the ^xt generation
they differ not a letter. In the seventh generation wherein Henoch was (not
he that dyed* but he that pleased GOD and was translated) there is the same
difference of the one hundred years before he begotte his son: but all come
to one end still: both the books making him live three hundred sixty and five
years ere his translation.

The eight generation has some difference, but of less moment, and no^ like
to this. For Mathusalem having begotten Enoch, before he had his next s^e
whom the Scriptures name, is said by the Hebrews to have lived twenty years
longer then we say he lived: but in the account of his years after this
son, we added the twenty, and both do iumpe in one just sum. Only in the
ninth generation, that is in the years of Lamech the son of Mathusalem and
the father of Noah, we differ in the whole sum, but it is but sour and
(...) years, and that they have more then we: for his age, ere he begot Noah,
in the Hebrew is six years less then in ours: and their sum of his years
afterward is thirty more then ours: which six taken from thirty, leaves four
and twenty, as I said before.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) bookes] Meaning the Latin translations that the Church used then,
out of the 70. (...) Hieroms was either published or received. And by the
Hebrew books he means the (...) scriptures, and the Hebrew authors thereto
agreeing. Adam (says Hierome) lived (...), and begot a son like himself
and called his name Seth. Where we are to con^ ^t from Adam to the flood,
where we read two hundred years and the overplus, the (...) read only one
hundred and the ouer-plus. And the days of Adam after he had be^ Seth, were
seven hundred years, because the translators had erred an hundred before,
(...) he puts but seven hundred, where the Hebrew has eight hundred. Thus
far Hierome, (...) ^cepts not at all at this manner of computation. Augustine
omittes Iareds begetting of (...) in the sixth generation, but this indeed goes
not above two hundred years.

Of Mathusalems years, who seems to have lived fourteen years after the
deluge. CHAP. 11.
^here is a (a) notable question arising upon this difference between us (...)
^he Hebrews, where Mathusalem is reckoned to have lived fourteen (...) after
the deluge: whereas the Scripture accompteth but eight persons (...) saved
therein of all mankind, whereof Mathusalem was none. For in ^kes, Mathusalem
lived ere he begot Lamech, one hundred sixty seven (...) and Lamech until he
begot Noah, one hundred four score and eight years, (...) joined, make three
hundred fifty and five years, unto which add Noah's (...) ^dred years (for
then begun the deluge) and so the time between Man birth and the deluge is
nine hundred fifty and five years. Now Man days are reckoned to be nine
hundred sixty and nine years: for (...) hundred sixty* and seven years of
age ere he begot Lamech* he (...) hundred and two years after, which make in
all nine hundred sixty (...) from whence take nine hundred ^iftie five (the
time from his birth to (...) ^ge) and there remains fourteen, which he is
thought to live after the (...) Whereupon some think that he lived this time
(not upon earth (...) was not a soul of those escaped* but) in the place to
which his son (...) ^slated, with him until the deluge were come and gone:
because they (...) call the authority of these truths into question* seeing
the Church (...) ^wed them, nor believe that the Jews have the truth rather
then we: (...) that this should rather be an error in us* then in those o^ of
whom (...) it by the Greek. But say they, it is incredible that the seventy
(...) ^ers, who translated all at one time, and in one sen^ could er^, or would
falsify in a thing impertinent unto them: but that the Jews, envying out
translations of their law and their Prophets, altered diverse things in their
books, to subvert the authority of ours. This opinionatiue suspicion, every
one may take as he please: but this is once sure, Mathusalem lived not after
the deluge, but dyed in the same year, if the Hebrews accoumpt be true.
Concerning the Septuagints translation, I will speak my mind here-after, when
I come (by Gods help) to the times themselves, as the method of the work
shall exact. Suffices it for this present question to have shown by both
books, that the Fathers of old lived so long, that one man might see a number
of his own propagation sufficient to build a city.

L. VIVES.
NOtable (a) question] Hierome says it was famous in all the Churches. Hierom
affirms that the 70. erred in their account, as they did in many things else:
and gathers out of the Jews and Samaritanes books, that Mathusalem dyed in
that year wherein the deluge began. Whereupon Augustine does justly deride
those that will rather trust the translation then the original:

Of such as believe not that men of old time lived so long as is recorded.
CHAP. 12.
NOr is any ear to be given unto those that think that one of our ordinary
years would make ten of the years of those times, they were so short: And
therefore say they, nine hundred years of theirs, that is to say, ninety of
ours: their ten is our one, and their hundred, our ten. Thus think they that
Adam was but twenty and three years old when he begot Seth: and Seth but
twenty and an half when he begatte Enos, which the Scriptures calls two
hundred and five years. For as these men hold, the Scripture divided one year
into ten parts, calling each part a year: and each (a) part has a sixe-folde
quadrate, because that in six days God made the world to rest upon the
seventh, (whereof I have already disputed in the eleventh book.) Now six
times six, (for six makes the sixe-fold quadrate) is thirty six: and ten
times thirty six is three hundred and sixty, that is twelve months of the
Moon. The five days remaining and that quarter of a day, which (b) four
times doubled is added to the leap year, those were added by the ancients
afterward to make up the number of other years, and the Romans called them
Dies intercalares* days enterposed. So Enos was nineteen years of age when
he begot Cay^n, the Scriptures saying he was one hundred foure-score and ten
years. And so down through all generations to the deluge, there is not one in
all our books that begot any son at an hundred, or an hundred and twenty
years, or there-abouts, but he that was the youngest father was one hundred and
three score years of age: because (say they) none can beget a child at ten
years of age which that number of an hundred makes: but at sixteen years
they are of ability to generate, and that is as the Scriptures say, when they
are one hundred and threescore year old. And to prove this diversity of
years likely, they fetch the Egiptian years of four months, the Acarnans of
six months, and the Latins of thirteen months. (c) Pliny having recorded
that some lived one hundred and fifty years, some ten more, some two hundred
years some three hundred, some five hundred, some six hundred, nay some eight
hundred, held that all this grew upon ignorance in computation. For some (says
he) made two years of summer and winter* some made four years of the four
quarters, as the Arcadians did with their year of three months. And the
Egiptians (says he) besides there little years of 4. months (as we said
before) made the course of the Moon to conclude a year, every month. Thus
amongst them (aith^he) are some recorded to have lived a thousand years. These
probabilities have some brought, not to subvert the authority of holy writ, but
to prove it credible that the Partiarches might live so long, and persuaded
themselves (thinking it no folly neither to persuade others so in like manner)
that their years in those days were so little, that ten of them made but one
of ours, and a hundred of theirs, ten of ours. But I will lay open the eminent
falsenesse of this, immediately. Yet ere I do it, I must first touch at a more
credible suspicion. We might overthrow this assertion out of the Hebrew
books, who say that Adam was not two hundred and thirty, but a hundred and
thirty years old when he begot his third son, which if they make but thirteen
years, then he begot his first son, at the eleauenth, or twelfth year of his
age. And who can in natures ordinary course now, beget a child so young? But let
us except Adam, perhaps he might have begotten one as soon as he was created:
for we may not think that he was created a little one, as our children are
borne. But now his son Seth, was not two hundred years old (as we read) but a
hundred and fifty, when he begot Enos, and by their account but eleauen years
of age. What shall I say of Canaan who begot Malalehel at seauenty, not at a
hundred and seauenty years of age, say the Hebrews? If those were but seven
years, ^at man can beget a child then?

L. VIVES.
EAch (a) part has a] A number quadrate is that which is formed by
multiplication of it self, (...) three times three, four times four, and six
times six. The year has 365. days and six A quadra^ in number.
(...): those computators did exclude the five days and six hours, and
dividing the three ^dred and sixty into ten parts, the quotient was, thirty
six. (b) Four times] Of this read (...) in Caesar. Censorin. Macrob. and
B^da. Before Caesar's time the year had three hundred ^-fiue days. And
observing that the true year required ten days and six hours more, it was
put to the priests, at the end of February to interpose two and twenty days,
and because that these six hours every fourth year became a day, then it was
added, and this month was (...) nothing but the intercalatory month. In the
intercalary month says Asconius, Tully Intercalation of days.
(...) for Milo. Now this confused interposition, Caesar being dictator took
away, com^ding them to keep a year of three hundred sixty five days, and
every fourth year inter^ a day into the Calends of March, which was called
Bissextile* because the sixth of the ^ds of March was twice set down in such
years* for the better adapting of these to the (...)* ^e made a year of
fifteen months interposing two months between No^mber and ^ber, with the
intercalary month for that year: and this was to bring the month and (...) to
the course of the Sun: for the accounts made by winter and summer, they called
the (...) of confusion, for it contained 443. days, (c) Pliny] Lib. 7. cap. 48.

Whether we ought to follow the Hebrew computation, or the Septuagints. CHAP.
13.
BUT if I say thus, or thus* presently. I must be answered, it is one of the
Jews lies: of which before: for it is incredible that such (a) laudable and
honorable fathers as the Septuagints were, would record an untruth. Now if I
should ask them whether it be likely that a nation so large, and so far
dispersed as the Jews should all lay their heads together to forge this lie,
and through their malice others credites, subvert their own truths, or that
the seauenty being Jews also, and all shut up in one place (for Ptolomy had
gotten them together for that purpose) should envy that the gentiles should
enjoy their scriptures, and put in those errors by a common consent, who sees
not which is easier to effect? But (b) God forbid that any wise man should
think that the Jews (how froward soever) could have such power, or so many
and so far dispersed books, or that the seauenty had any such common intent
to conceal their histories truth from the Gentiles. One might easier believe
that the error was committed in the transcription of the copy from Ptolomies
library, and so that it had a successiue propagation through all the copies
dispersed. This may welbe suspected indeed in Mathusalems life, and in that
other, where there is four and twenty years difference in the whole-sum. But
in those where the falt is continued, so that an hundred years in the one are
still overplus before the generations, and wanting after it, and in the other,
still wanting before, and overplus after, still agreeing in the maine: and this
continued through the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and seventh
generation: this professes a constancy in error, and intimates rather
industrious endeavor to make it so, then any negligent omission to let it pass
so. So that this disparity in the greek and latin, from the hebrew where
these years are first wanting, and then added, to procure the consent of both,
is neither to be said the Jews malice not the Septuagints diligence, but upon
the transcribers error that copied it first from Ptolomies library: for unto
this very day, numbers, where they are either hard to be understood, or seem
to denote a thing not very needful, they are negligently transcribed, and more
negligently corrected: for thinks he that he need learn how many thousand
there was in every Tribe of Israel? it is held vselesse: how few is there that
can discern what use to make hereof? But here, where in all these generations,
here wants an hundred years, and here is an hundred too many: wanting,
afterward when they exceeded before the birth of such or such a son, and
exceeding afterward when they wanted before: he that did this, desiring to
pers^ade us, that the fathers were to live so long because the years were so
short: and desyring to show that by their maturity, when they were fit to
generate: and hereby thinking to persuade the incredulous, that a hundred of
those years were but ten of ours: this made him where he found an age which
his account would disable for generation, to add an hundred years, and after
the generation was past, to take it from the maine sum of his days of life.
For thus desired he to prove these ages co^nient for generation (by his
account) and yet not to diminish from the true computation of their whole
years. Which because he did not in the sixth generation, this is that that
persuades us the rather to think that he did it where it needed, because where
it needs not, he adds not not alters any thing. For there in the hebrew
he found that Iared lived a hundred sixty and two years before he begot
Henoch, which time comes to sixteen years, two months, and some od days by
his account, and that age is fit for generation, and therefore he would not
add an hundred here, to make them up twenty six of our years by his reckning:
nor would he detract any thing from the time of Iared after (...) birth. This
was that made the sums of both books agree. Another persuasion is (c)
because in the eight generation before that Mathusalem had begot Lamech, the
Hebrews reading one hundred eighty two, our books have twenty years less,
where-as ordinarily we use to find a hundred more: and after Lamech his birth
they are added again to make up the sum, which is one in both the books.
For if he would take a hundred and ^ie years to be seauenteene, because of the
ability to get children: he should neither have added nor subtracted any
thing from thence: for he found a time full enough here, for want of which he
was feign to add a hundred years ^where. Wherefore we should verily think
that this error of the twenty years were occasioned by some fault in
transcription, but that the sum of 10* is added to the grand-summe again, to
make both books agree. Shall we think it was subtletie in him? to cover his
addition and subtraction of those years when need was, by practicing it also
(not with hundreds, but with less sums) where he needed not? whether we
think it was thus or no, or that the right is this or that, I make no
question, the rightest course of all in all those controversies concerning
computations, if the two books differ (seeing both cannot be true) yet (d)
believe the original rather then the translation. For some of the Greek
copies, besides a Latin one, and a Syrian one, affirm that Mathusalem died
six years before the deluge.

L. VIVES.
LAudable (a) and] A diversity of reading: but of no moment. (b) God forbid]
Thus may we answer those that say the Jews have corrupted the old Testament,
and the Greeks the new, least we should go to drink at truths springhead.
(c) Because in the] I conceive (...) (...) meaning here: Hierom and the
seauentie, read both that Mathusalem was a hundred eighty and seven when he
begot Lamech: unless Augustine had read it otherwise in some other* (d)
Beleeue] This Hierom admireth and reason inuiteth us to^ no man of wit will
gainesay it: but in vain do good judgments defend this, for blockishnesse
lies against it like a rock, not that they only are ignorant in those tongues,
for Augustine had no Hebrew, and very little Greek, but they want his modesty:
he would ever learn, and they would never learn, but would teach that
wherein they are as skillful as a sort of Cumane Asses.

Of the parity of years, measured by the same spaces, of old, and of late.
CHAP. 14.
NOw let us see how plain we can show that ten of their years is not one of
ours, but one of their years as long as one of ours: both finished by the
course of the sun, and all their ancestors long lives laid out by that
rec^ng. It is written that the flood happened the three score year of Noah's
(...). But why do the Scriptures say: In the six hundredth year of Noah's
life, in the s^d month, and the twenty seventh day of the month, if the
year were Genesis y. 11.
but thirty six days? for so little a year must either have no months, or
it (...) have but three days in a month, to make twelve months in a year.
How then can it be said, the six hundredth year, the second month, and the
twenty seventh day of the month, unless their years and months were as
ours is? How can it be other-wise said that the deluge happened the twenty
seven of the ^th? Again at the end of the deluge it is written. In the
seventh month and the twenty seventh of the month, the Arc rested upon the
Mountain Ar ar ^t (...) and the waters decreased until the eleauenth month:
and in the eleauenth month, the first day, were the tops of the mountains
seen. So then if they had such months, their years were like ours: for a
three daied month cannot have 27. days: or if they diininish all
proportionably, and make the thirteenth part of three days, stand for one day,
why then that great deluge that continued increasing forty days, and forty
nights, lasted not full 4. of our days. Who can endure this absurdity? Cast by
this error then that seeks to procure the scriptures credit in one thing, by
falsifying it in many. The day without al question was as great then as it is
now, begun and ended in the compass of four and twenty hours: the month as
it is now, concluded in one performance of the Moons course: and the year as
it is now, consumate in twelve lunary reuolutions* Eastward, (a) five days
and a quarter more, being added for the proportionating of it to the course of
the Sun: six hundred of such years had Noah lived, two such months and
seau^n and twenty such days when the flood began, wherein the rain fell
forty days continually, not days of two hours and a piece, but of four and
twenty hours with the night, and therefore those fathers lived some of them
nine hundred such years, as Abraham lived but one hundred and eighty of; and
his son Isaac near a hundred and fifty, and such as Moses passed over to
the number of a hundred and twenty, and such as our ordinary men now a days do
live seauenty, or eighty of, or some few more, of which it is said, their
overplus is but labor and sorrow. For the discrepance of account between us
and the Hebrews Psalm 90. 20
concerns not the lenght of the Patriarchs lives, and where there is a
difference between them both, that truth cannot reconcile, we must trust to
the tongue whence we have our translation. Which every man having power to
do, yet (b) it is not for naught no man dares not adventure to correct that
which the Seventy have made different in their translation from the Hebre^ for
this diversity is no error, let no man think so: I do not: but if there be
no falt of the transcriber, it is to be thought that the Holy Spirit meant to
alter some-things concerning the truth of the sense, and that by them, not
according to the custom of interpreters, but the liberty of Prophets: and
therefore, the Apostles are found not only to follow the Hebrews, but them
also, in cityng of holy Testimonies. But hereof (if GOD will) hereafter: now to
our purpose. We may not therefore doubt, that the first child of Adam living so
long, might have issue enough to people a city (an earthly one I mean not
that of Gods) which is the principal ground whereupon this whole work
entreats.

L. VIVES.
Five (a) days and] The Moons month may be taken two ways: either for the
moons departure, and return to one and the same point, which is done in
seven and twenty The month of the moon.
days: or for her following of the sun until she join with him in the
Zodiake: which is done in nine and twenty days, twelve hours, and four and
forty minutes: for she never finds the sun where she left him, for he is
gone on of his journey, and therefore she has two days and an half to
overtake him; the Jews allow her thirty days: and call this (...) full month.
(b) It is] Not without a cause.

Whether the men of old abstained from women until that the scriptures say
they ^egot children. CHAP. 15.
But will some say, is it credible that a man should live eighty, or ninty,
n^more then a 100. years without a woman, and without purpose of continency,
and then fall a begetting children as the Hebrews record of them? or if they
lifted, could they not get children before? this question has two answers,
for either they lived longer (a) immature then we do, according to the length
of time exceeding ours, or else (which is more likely) their first borne are
not reckened, but only such as are requisite for the drawing of a pedigree
down from Adam unto Noah, from whom we see a deriuation to Abraham: and so
until a certain period, as far as those pedegrees were held fit to
prefigure the course of Gods glorious Pilgrim-citty, until it ascend to
eternity. It cannot be denied that Caine was the first that ever was borne of
man and woman. For Adam would Genesis 4. 1
not have said, I have (l) gotten a man by the Lord, at his birth, but that he
was the first man borne before the other two. Him, Abell was next whom the
first or elder killed, and herein was prefigured what persecutions God glorious
City should endure at the hands of the wicked members of the terrestrial
society, those sons of earth, I may call them. But how old Adam was at the
begetting of these two, it is not evident: from thence is a passage made to the
generations of Caine, and to his whom God gave Adam in murdered Abels seed,
called Seth: of whom it is written, God has appointed me another seed for
Abell whom Caine slew. Seeing therefore that these two generations, Caines, and
Seths, do perfectly insinuate the two cities: the one celestial, and laboring
upon earth: the other earthly and following our terrestrial affects: there is
not one of all Caines progeny, from Adam to the eighth generation, whose age is
set down when he begot his next son: yet is his whole generation rehearsed:
for the Spirit of God would not record, the times of the wicked before the
deluge, but of the righteous only, as only ^orthy. But when Seth was borne
his fathers years were not forgotten though he had begotten others before, as
Caine and Abel; and who dare say whether he had more besides them? for it is no
consequent that they were all the sons he had, because they were only named
for the fit distinction of the two generations: for we read that he had
sons, and daughters, all which are unnamed, who dare affirm how many they
were, without incursion of rashness? Adam might by Gods instinct say at Seths
birth, God has raised me up another seed for Abell, in that Seth was to
fulfill Abells sanctity, not that he was borne after him by course of time. And
where as it is written, Seth lived 105. or 205. years, and begot E^s, who but
one brainelesse would gather from hence that Enos was Seths first s^n, to give
us cause of admiration that Seth could live so long continent without purpose
of continency, or without use of the marriage bed, unto generation? for it is
writ of him. He begat sons and daughters and the days of Seth were 912.
years, (...) (...) died. And thus, the rest also that are named, are al
recorded to have had sons Genesis 5. 8.
and daughters. But here is no proof that he that is named to be son to any of
them, should be their first son: nor is it credible that their fathers lived all this while either immature, or unmarried, or vnchilded, nor that they were
their fathers first ^ome. But the scripture intending to descend by a
genealogicall scale from Ad^ unto Noah to the deluge, recounted not the first
borne of every father, but only such as fell within the compass of these two
generations. Take this example, to clear all further or future doubt: Saint
Matthew the Evangelist intending to record the generation of the Man, CHRIST,
beginning at Abrah^, and descending down to David, Abraham (says he,) begot
Isaac: why not (...)? he was his first son? Isaac begot Jacob: why not Esau?
he was his first (...) too. The reason is, he could not descend by them unto
David. It follows: Jacob begat Judas and his brethren. Why? was Judas his
first borne? Judas begat Ph^es and Zara. Why neither of these were Judas his
first sons, he had three before either of them. So the Evangelist kept only
the genealogy that tracted directly down to David, and so to his purpose.
Hence may we therefore see plain that the men's first borne before the deluge,
were not respected in this account, but those only through whose loins the
propagation passed from Adam to Noah the Patriarche; And thus the fruitless
and obscure question of their late maturity, is opened as far as needs: we
will not tire our selves therein.

L. VIVES.
LOnger (a) immature] Maturity in man, is the time when he is fit to beget
children: when as hair grows upon the immodest parts of nature in man or
woman. (b) Gotten] Or possess Maturity.
(...), say the seauenty. Caine, says Hiero^ is (...), possession.

Of the laws of marriage, which the first women might have different from the
succeeding. CHAP. 16.
THerefore whereas mankind (after the forming of the first man out of clay,
and the first woman out of his side,) needed conjunction of male and female,
for propagation sake, it being impossible for man to be increased but by such
means, the brethren married the sisters,: this was lawful then, through the
compulsion of necessity: but now it is as damnable, through the prohibition of
it in religion: for there was (a) a just care had of charity, that them to whom
concord was most useful, might be combined together in diverse bonds of kindred
and affinity: that one should have many in one, but that every peculiar should
be bestowed abroad, and so many, byas many, should be conglutinate in honest
Affinity the propagator of charity.
conjugal society. As, father, and father in law, are two names of kindred: So
if one have both of them, there is a larger extent of charity. Adam is
compelled to be both, unto his sons, and his daughters, who were matched
together being brothers and sisters. So was Euah both mother and stepmother
to them both. But if there had bin two women for these two names, the love of
charity had extended further: The sister also here, that was made a wife,
comprised two alliances in her self, which had they been divided and she
sister to one, and wife to another the combination had taken in more persons
then as now it could, being no mankind upon earth, but brothers and sisters,
the progeny of the first created. But it was fit to be done as soon as it
could, and that then wives and sisters should be no more one: it being no
need, but great abomination to practice it any more. For if the first men's
nephews, that married their cousin-germaines, had married their sisters, there
had been three alliances (not two) includ^ in one: which three ought for the
extention of love and charity to have been communicated unto three several
persons: for one man should be father, stepfather, and uncle unto his own
children, brother and sister, should they two mary together; and his wife
should be mother, stepmother and aunte unto them and they themselves should be
not only brother and sister, but (b) brother and sisters children also. Now
those alliances that combine three men unto one, should conioyne nine persons
together in kindred and amity if they were seuere^ one may have one his sister,
another his wife, another his cousin, another his father, another his uncle,
another his step father, another his mother, another his a^te, and another his
stepmother: thus were the sociall amity dilated, and not contracted all into
two or three. And this upon the worlds increase we may observe even in Paynims
and Infidels, that although (c) some of their bestiall laws allowed the
brethren to marry their sister, yet better custom abhorred this badde
liberty: and for all that in the worlds beginning it was lawful, yet they
avoid it so now as if it had never been lawful: for custom is a g^at matter
to make a man hate or affect any thing: and custom herein suppressing the
immoderate immodesty of concupiscence, has justly set a brand of ignominy upon
it, as an irreligious and vnhumaine act: for if it be a vice to plow beyond
your bounder, for greediness of more ground: how far does this exceed it,
for lust of carnality to transgress all bound, nay subvert all ground of good
manners? And we have observed that the marriage of cousin-germaines, because
of the degree it holds next unto brother and sister, to have been wonderful
seldom in these later times of ours: and this now because of good custom
otherwise, though the laws allowed it, for the law of GOD has not forbidden
it, (d) nor as yet had the law of man. But this, although it were lawful, is
avoided, because it is so near to that which is unlawful: and that which one
does with his cousin, he almost thinks that he does with his sister: for
these because of their near consanguinity, (e) are called brothers and
sisters, and are ^eed very near it. But the ancient fathers had a religious
care to keep the ^red with such limmites, least it should spread unto nothing:
binding of it back again into it self, when it was a little diffused, and
calling it still to a new combination in it self. And hereupon when the earth
was well replenished with (...)* they desired no more to marry brother unto
sister, yet notwithstanding (...) one desired a wife in his own kindred. But
without all question the pro^ of cousin germans marriages is very honest:
partly for the aforesaid (...), because one person therein shall have two
alliances, which two ought ra^ (...) have, for the increase of affinity: and
partly because there is a certain (...) natural instinct, in a man's
shamefastness, to obst^ine from using that (...) (though it tend unto
propagation) upon such as propinquity has bound (...) ^stly to respect, seeing
that inculpable wed-locke is ashamed of this very (...). In respect of mankind
therefore, the coupling of man and w^man, is the (...) of a city: and the
Earthly City needs only this, marry the Heavenly (...) needs a further
matter, called regeneration, to avoid the corruption of (...) (...)
generation. But whether there were any sign, or at least any corporal (...)
sign of regeneration before the deluge, or until circumcision was ^ded unto
Abraham, the scripture does not manifest. That these first (...) ^ificed unto
GOD, holy writ declares, as in the two first brethren, and (...) (...), after
the deluge, when he came out of the Arc he is said to offer unto (...)* But
of this we have spoaken already, to show that the devils desire to be ^ted
Gods, and offered unto, only for this end, because they know that true (...) is
due to none but the true GOD.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) was] That alliance might be augmented by matches abroad, and not
kept conti^ within the walls of one parentage, but intermixed with bloods, and
linages: thu^ is union dilated, and love sown through mankind. Cic. de finib.
lib. 5. (...) (...) (...) of two brethren are called Patrueles: of a brother
and a sister, Am^: of (...) (...) ^sobrini. The latins have three words for
cousin germans.
[generally, cousin germans they are all.] Marcellus de propriet. (...)*
(...) (...) their] The Gods used it, Saturn married his sister Ops, and
Jupiter, Juno. The (...) (...) and the Athenians allowed it. But the Romans,
never. (d) Nor as yet] There was a law (...) marying of kindred (says
Plutarch) until at length it was permitted that father or (...) mary his
brothers or sisters* daughter: which arose hereupon: A good poor man (...)
(...) people loved very well, married his brothers daughter: and being
accused, and brought before the Judge, he pleaded for himself so well, that he
was absolved, and this la^ ^reed by (...) universal consent. (e) Are called]
So Abraham called Sarah. And Tully calls (...) (...) his uncles son,
brother. De finib. lib. 5. Yet Augustine says not, they are brothers etc.
(...) very near it.

Of the two heads and Princes of the Two cities, borne both of one father.
CHAP. 17.
ADam therefore being the Father of both the progenies, belonging to the
Earthly and Heavenly City, and Abell being slain, and in his death a
wonderful (a) mystery commended unto us; Caine and Seth became the heads of
the two parties: in whose sons such as are named, the Two Cities began to
show themselves upon earth, in mankind: for Caine begot Enoch, and built an
Earthly City after his name, no such City as should be a pilgrim in this
earthly world, but an enioyer of the terrestrial peace. Caine, is interpreted,
Possession, whereupon either his father or his mother at his birth said, I have
gotten a man by God. Henoch Caine, possession Henoc dedication. Seth
resurrection. Enos, man.
is interpreted, Dedication: for the earthly City is dedicated here below
where it is built: for here is the scope and end that it affects and aims at.
Now (b) Seth is called, Resurrection, and Enos his son is called, Man, not as
Adam was: (for Adam is man, but in the Hebrew it is common to male and femall:
for it is written: Male and femall made he them, and calls their name Adam:
so that (...) doubtless was not so properly called Euah but that Adam was a
name indifferent to them both.) But (c) Enos is so properly a man, that it
excludes all womankinde (as the Hebrew linguists affirm) as importing the
son of the resurrection where they shall not marry, nor take no wife. For
regeneration (...) exclude generation from thence. Therefore I hold this no
idle n^te, that in the Genesis 4, 19 20, 21, ^2.
whole generation drawn from Seth there is not one woman named as begotten in
this generation. For thus we read it. Mathusaell begot Lamech and Lamec^
took unto him two wives: Adah, and Zillah, and Adah bare Iabell, the father of
such as lived in tents and were keepers of cattle; and his brothers name was
^aball, who was the father of Musicians. And Zillah also bare (d) Tobel, who
wrought in brass and iron: and the sister of Tobel was Naamah. Thus far is
(...) generations recited being eight from Adam, with Adam seven to Lamech
tha^ had these two wives, and the eight in his sons, whose sisters are also
reckned. This is an elegant note, that the Earthly City shall have carnal
generatio^s until it end: such I mean as proceed from copulation of male
and female. And therefore the wives of him that is the last Father, here, are
name^ by their proper names, and so is none besides them before the deluge, b^
Euah. But even as Caine is interpreted Possession, of the Earthly Cities
fou^der, and Henoch his son, interpreted, Dedication, who gave the City his
name, d^ show that it is to have both an earthly beginning, and ending, in
which there is no hope but of things of this world: so likewise Seth is
interpreted the Resurrection, who being the father of the other generations,
we must see what holy writ delivers concerning his son.

L. VIVES.
A Wonderful (a) mistery] First of the death of Christ, and then of the
martires, whom the worldly brother persecuteth. (b) Seth is] Hierome puts
it, position: Posuit. The table at the end of the Bible containing the
interpretation of the Hebrew names, says that Seth, is put, or set. (c) Enos]
As Adam is (says Hierome) so is Enos, a man. (d) Tobel] Augustine follows
the seauenty, who read (...): whereas the Hebrews read it, Tubalcain: who was
the son of Zillah as Josephus records also.

That the signification of Abel, Seth and Enos, are all pertinent unto Christ
and his body, the Church. CHAP. 18.
ANd Seth (says the scripture) had a son, and he called his name Enos. This
man hoped to call upon the name of the Lord, for the son of the resurrection
Genes. 4. 26.
lives in hope, says the truth, it is true: all the while that he continues
in his pilgrimage here below, together with the City of God, which arises out
of the faith of Christ's resurrection: for by these two men, Abel, interpreted
Sorrow, and Seth, Resurrection, is the death and rising again of Christ
perfigured, of which faith the City of God has original, namely in these men
that (a) hoped to call upon the Lord God. For we are saved by hope says the
Apostle. But hope which is seen is no hope: for hops he for that he sees?
but if we hope for that which we Romans 8. 24 25.
see not, then do we with patience abide it: who can say that this does not
concern the depth of this mystery? Did not Abel hope to call upon the name of
the Lord God when his sacrifice was so acceptable unto him? And did not Seth so
also, of whom it is said, God has appointed me another seed for Abell? Why
then is this peculiarly bound unto Seths time in which is understood the time
of all the Godly, but that it behooued that in him who is first recorded to
have been borne, to eleuate his spirit from his father that begot him, unto a
better father, the King of the celestial country, Man, that is, that society
of man, who live in the hope of blessed eternity, not according to man, but
GOD, be prefigured? It is not said, He hoped in God: nor he called upon God:
but he hoped to call upon God. Why hoped to call? but that it is a prophecy
that from him should arise a people who by the election of grace should call
upon the name of the Lord GOD. This is that which the Apostle has from another
prophet, and shows it to pertain unto the grace of God, saying, Whosoever
shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved. This is Romans 10. 13.
that which is said, He called his name Enos (which is, man) and then is added,
This (...) hoped to call upon the name of the Lord: wherein is plainly shown
that man ought not to put his trust in himself. For cursed is the man that
trusts in man, as we read elsewhere, and consequently in himself: which
if he do not, ^e may become a citizen of that City which is founded above
in the eternity of bliss, not of that which Caine built and named after his
son, being of this ^orld, wavering, and transitory.

L. VIVES.
THE (a) hoped] Some read it, Then men began to call upon the name of the
LORD: referring to the time, and not to Seths person. It is an ordinary phrase
in authors. The (...) approoueth it, and so seems Hierome to do. The Hebrews
think that, then they beg^ (...) set up Idols in the name of the LORD.
Hierome. But Augustine follows the seauenty (...), this man hoped to call
upon etc.

What the translation of Enoch signified. CHAP. 19.
FOr Seths progeny has that name of dedication also for one of the sons, the
seventh from Adam, who was called (a) Henoch, and was the seventh of that
generation: but he was translated, or taken up because he pleased God, and
lived in that famous number of the generation whereupon the Sabbath was
sanctified, namely the seventh, from Adam: and from the first distinctions of
the generations in Caine and Seth the sixth: in which number man was made, and
all Gods works perfited. The translation of this Enoch is the prefiguration of
our dedication which is already performed in Christ, who rose from death to die
no more, and was assumed also. The other dedication of the whole house
remains yet whereof Christ is the foundation, and this is deferred until the
end, and final resurrection of all flesh to die no more. We may call it the
house of God, the Church of God, or the City of God: the phrase will be borne.
Virgill calls Rome (b) Assaracus his house, because the Romans descended from
Troy and the Troyans from Assaracus: and he calls it Aeneas his house, because
he led the Trojans in to Italy, and they built Rome: Thus the Poet immitated
the scriptures, that calls the populous nations of the Hebrews, the house of
Jacob.

L. VIVES.
CAlled (a) Henoch] There were two Henochs, Caine begot one, Iared another of
the st^k Two Henoches.
of Seth, of this he means here. (b) Assaracus] He was son to Capys and
father to Anchises, from whom Eneas and the Romans are derived. (c) He led]
Salust. Co^r. Ca^.

Concerning Caines succession, being but eight from Adam, whereas Noah is the
tenth. CHAP. 20.
I But (say some) if the scripture meant only to descend down from Adam to
Noah in the deluge, and from him to Abraham, where Matthew the Evangelist
begun the generation of the King of the Heavenly City, Christ, what meant it
to meddle with Caines succession? I answer it meant to descend down to the
deluge by Caines progeny, and then was the Earthly City utterly consumed,
though it were afterward repaired by Noah's sons. For the society of these
worldlings shall never be a wanting until the worlds end: of whom the
scripture says. The children of this world marry and are married. But it is
r^eneration Luc. ^0. 34
that takes the City of GOD from the pilgrimage of this world, and pl^ceth it
in the other, where the sons neither may nor are married. Thus then generation
is common to both the Cities here on earth: though the City of G^ have many
thousands that abstain from generation, and the other has some c^zens, that
do imitate these, and yet go astray: for unto this City do the authors o^ (...)
heresies belong, as livers according to the world, not after Gods prescription.
The (a) Gymnosophists of India, living naked in the dese^ts, are of this
society also: and yet abstain from generation. For this abstinence is not
good, unless it be in the faith of God, that great good. Yet we do not find
any that professed it before the deluge, Enoch himself the seventh from Adam,
whom GOD took up, and suffered not to die, had sons and daughters, of whom
Mathusalem was the man through whom the generation passed downe-wards. But why
then are so few of Cains progeny named, if they were to be counted down to
the flood, and their lenght of years hindered not their maturity, which
continued a hundred or more years without children? for if the author
intended not to draw down this progeny unto one man, as he does to Noah in
Seths, and so to proceed, why omitted he the first borne to come unto Lamech,
in wh^e time there conjunction was made, in the eight generation from Adam, and
the seventh from Caine; as if there were somewhat more to be added, for the
descent down, either unto the Israelites, (whose terrestrial City Jerusalem
was a type of the City of God,) or down unto Christ's birth in the flesh,
(who is that eternal GOD and blessed founder and ruler) when as all Caines
posterity were abolished? Whereby we may see that the first borne were reckned
in this recital of the progeny: why are they so few then? So few there could
not be, unless the length of there fathers ages stayed them from maturity an
hundred years at the least. For to admit that they begun all alike to beget
children at thirty years of age: eight times thirty (for there are eight
generations from Adam to Lameches children inclusiuely) is two hundred and
forty: did they beget no children then, all the residue of the time before the
deluge? what ^as the cause then that this author recites not the rest: for our
books account from Adam to the deluge (b) two thousand two hundred sixty two
years, and the Hebrews, one thousand six hundred fifty six. To allow the
lesser number for the truer, take two hundred and forty, from one thousand six
hundred fifty six, and there remains one thousand four hundredth and sixteen
years. Is it likely that Caines progeny had no children all this time? But let
him whom this troubles observe what I said before, when the question was put,
how it were credible that the first men could for bear generation so long: It
was answered two ways: either because of their late maturity, proportioned to
their length of life: or because that they which were reckned in the descents
were not necessarily the first borne, but such only as conveyed the generation
of Seth through themselves down unto Noah.

And therefore in Caines posterity if such an one wants as should be the scope
whereunto the generation (omitting the first borne, and including only such as
were needful, might descend) we must impute it to the latelinesse of
maturity, whereby they were not enabled to gene^ation until they were above
one ^ndred years old, that so the generation might still pass through the
first borne, and so descending through these multitudes of years, meet with
the ^oud: I cannot tell, there may be some more (c) secret course why the
Earthly Cities generation should be (d) rejected until Lamech and his
sons, and (...) the rest unto the deluge wholly suppressed by the author^. And
(to ^de this late maturity) the reason why the pedigree descends not by the
first borne may be for that Caine might reign long in his City of He^: and
begette many Kings who might each beget a son to reign in (...) own stead.
Of these Caine, I sa^, might be the first: Henoch his son the next: (for
whom the City was built that he might reign, there:) (...) the son of
Henoch the third: (e) Manichel the son of Gaida^ the fourth, (...) Mathusael
the son of Manichel the fit: Lamech the son of Mathusael the sixth, and this
man is the seventh from Adam by Caine. Now it follows not that each of these
should be their fathers first begotten, their merits, virtue, policy, chance,
or indeed their fathers love might easily enthrone them. And the deluge might
befall in Lamechs reign, and drown both him and all on earth but for those in
the Arc: for the diversity of their ages might make it no ^der, that there
should be but seven generations from Adam by Caine to the deluge, and ten, by
Seth: Lamech as I said being the seventh from Adam, and Noah the tenth, and
therefore, Lamech is not said to have one son* but many, because it is
uncertain who should have succeeded him, had he died before the deluge. But
howsoever Caines progeny be recorded, by Kings, or by eldest sons, this I
may not 'omit, that Lamech, the seventh from Adam, had as many children as
made up eleauen, the number of preuarication. For he had three sons and
one daughter (His wives have a reference to another thing not here to be stood
upon. For here we speak of descents: but theirs is unknown.) Wherefore
seeing that the law lies in the number of ten, as the ten commandments
testify, eleauen ouer-going ten in one, signifies the transgression of the
law, or sin. Hence it is that there were eleauen haire-cloath vailes made for
the Tabernacle, or mooueable Temple of GOD during Exodus 26. 7
the Israelites trauells. For (g) in haire-cloath is the remembrance of sin
included, because of the (h) goats that shall be set on the left hand: for in
repentance we prostrate our selves in hayre-cloath saying as it is in the
Psalm, My sin is ever in thy sight. So then the progeny of Adam by wicked
Caine, ends Psalm. 51. 4
in the eleauenth, the number of sin: and the last that consuma^eth the
number, is a woman, in whom that sin began, for which we are all deaths
slaves: and which was committed, that disobedience unto the spirit, and carnal
affects might take place in us. For (i) Naamah Lamechs daughter, is interpreted
beautiful pleasure. But from Adam to Noah by Seth, ten, the number of the
law, is consumate: unto which Noah's three sons are added two their father
blessed, and the third fell off: that the reprobate being (...), and the elect
added to the whole, (k) twelve, the number of the Patriarchs and Apostles
might herein be intimate: which is glorious because of the multiplication of
the parts of (l) seven producing it: for four times three, or three times
four is twelve. This being so, it remains to discuss how these two
progenies distinctly intimating the two two Cities, of the reprobate and the
regenerate, came to be so commixt and confused, that all mankind but for eight
persons, deserved to perish in the deluge.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Gymnosophists] Strab. lib. 15. (b) 2262.] Eusebius and Bid have it
from the S^gints but 2242. it may be Augustine saw the last number. LXII. in
these chara^, and they had it thus XLII. with the X. before. The transcriber
might easily commit (...) an error. (c) Secret cause] I think it was because
they only of Caines generation should be named that were to be plagued for
his brothers murder: for Josephus writes hereof (...) these words: Caine
offering unto God, and praying him to be appeased, got his great gu^ of
homicide somewhat lightened: and remained cursed, and his offspring unto the
s^uenth generation, liable unto punishment for his desert. Besides Caine lived
so long himself, and the author would not continue his generation farther then
his death. (d Recided) Not commended, as some books read. (e) Manichel] Some
read (...)* (...) has Ma^iel: the (...): (...) (f) Mathusael] Eusebius,
Mathusalem, the seauentie, (...). (g) In hair cloth] The Prophets wore
haire-cloth to ^re the people to repentance. Hier. s^p Zachar. The Penitents
also wore it. (h) Goates] Christ says* He will gather the ^Word* that is the
just Haire-cloath.
and simple men together, in the worlds end, and set them on his right hand:
and the Goats, the luxurious persons, and the wicked, on his left. This
hayre-cloth was made of Goats hair, and called Cilicium, because (as Uarro
says) the making of it was first invented in Cilicia. (i) Naamah] It is both
pleasure and delicate comeliness* (...). (k* (...)] Naamah.
Of this read Hierome upon Ezechiel. lib. 10. (l) Seauen] A number full of
mysterious religion, as I said before.

Why the generation of Caine is continued down along from the naming of his
son Enoch, whereas the Scripture having named Enos, Seths son, goes back
again to begin Seths generation at Adam. CHAP. 21.
But first we must see the reason why Cains generation is drawn out along to
the deluge, from the naming of his son Enoch, who was named before all his
other posterity, and yet when Seths son Enos is borne, the author does not
proceed downward to the flood, but goes back to Adam in this manner: This is
the book of the generation of Adam, In the day that God created Adam, in the
likeness Gen 5, 12.
of God made he him, male and female created he them, and blessed them, and
called their name Adam that day that they were created. This I hold is
interposed, to go back to Adam, from him to reckon the times: which the author
would not do in his description of the Earthly City: as also God remembered
that without respecting the account. But why returns he to this
recapi^ulation after he has named the (a) righteous son of Seth, who hoped
to call upon the name of the Lord: but that he will lay down the two Citti^s
in this manner: one by an homicide until he come to an homicide (for Lamech
confesses unto his two wives that he had been an homicide) and the other by
him that hoped to call upon the name of the Lord. For the principal business
that Gods City has in (...) pilgrima^ upon earth* is that which was
commended in that one man, who was appointed a seed for him that was slain.
For in him only, was the unity of the supernall City, not really complete,
mystically comprised: therefore the son of Caine, the son of possession,
what shall he have but the name of the Earthly City on earth, which was
built in his name? Hereof sings the Psalmist: (b) They have called their lands
by their names: whereupon that follows Psalm. 49, 11
which he says elsewhere: Lord thou shall desperse their image to nothing in
thy Psalm. 73, 20
City. But let the son of the resurrection, Seths son, hope to call upon
the Lor^s name, for he is a type of that society that says: I shall be ^ke a
fruitful Olive in the house of God, for I trusted in his mercy. And let him
not seek vaineglorie Psalm. 52. 8 Psalm. 40, 4
upon earth, for Blessed is the man that makes the Lord his trust: and
regards not vanity, and false fondness.

Thus the two Cities are described to be seated: the one in worldly
possession, (...) other in heavenly hope, both coming out at the common gate
of mortality, which was opened in Adam, out of whose condemned progeny, as out
of a putrified lump, God elected some vessels of mercy and some of wrath:
giving due pains unto the one, and undue grace unto the other, that the
citizens of God upon earth may take this lesson from those vessels of wrath,
never to (d) rely on their own election, but hope to call upon the name of
the Lord: because the natural will which God made (but yet here the
changelesse made it not changlesse) may both decline from him that is good, and
from all good, to do evil, and that by freedom of will; and from evil also to
do good, but that not without Gods assistance.

L. VIVES.
THat (a) righteous] Enos, Seths son, interpreted, man. (b) They haue] This
is the truest reading and nearest to the Hebrew: though both the seauenty, and
Hierom read it otherwise. (c) Giuing] To show Gods just punishment of the
wicked, and his free saving of the chosen. (d) Rely on their] As Pelagius
would have men to do.

Of the fall of the sons of God by loving strange women, whereby all (but
eight) perished. CHAP 22.
THis freedom of will increasing and pertaking with iniquity, produced a
confused comixtion of both Cities: and this mischief arose from woman also:
but not as the first did For the women now did not seduce men to sin, but the
daughters that had been of the Earthly City from the beginning, and of evil
conditions, were beloved of the citizens of God for their bodily beauty: which
is indeed a gift of God, but given to the evil also, least the good should
imagine it of any such great worth. Thus was the greatest good only perteyning
to the good left, and a declination made unto the least good, that is common to
the bad also, and thus the sons of God were taken with the love of the
daughters of men, and for their sakes, fell into society of the earthly,
leaving the piety that the holy society practiced. And thus was carnal beauty
(a gift of good indeed, but yet a temporal, base and transitory one)
sinne-fully elected and loved before God, that eternal, internal, and
sempiternall good: just as the covetous man forsakes justice* and loves
gold, the gold ^eeing not in fault but the man: even so is it in all other
creatures. They are all good, and may be loved well, or badly: well, when our
love is moderate, badly when it is inordinate: as (b) one wrote in praise of
the Creator: Haec ^ua sunt, bona sunt, quia tu bonus ista creasti,
Nil nostrum est in eis, nisi quod peccamus amantes,
Ordine neglecto pro te quod conditur abs te.
Those are thy goods, for thou (chief good) did make them,
Not ours, yet seek we them in steed of thee:
Perverse affect in forcing us mistake them.
But we love the Creator truly, that is, if he be beloved for himself, and
nothing that is not of his essence beloved, for of him we cannot love any thing
amiss. For that very love, where-by we love that is to be loved, is it self
to be moderately loud in our selves, as being a virtue directing us in honest
courses. And t^ore I think that the best and briefest definition of virtue be
this, It is (c) a^ ^der of love: for which Christ's spouse the City of God
says in the holy can^* He has ordered his love in me. This order of love
did the sons of God Cant. 2. 4
(...) neglecting him, and running after the daughters of men: in which two ^s
both the Cities are fully distinguished: for they were the sons of men by
^ure, but grace had given them a new style. For in the same Scripture, (...) it
is said that, The sons of God loved the daughters of men, they are also
called the Angels of GOD. Whereupon some thought them to be Angels and ^ot
men that did thus.

L. VIVES.
W^ch (a) is indeed] Homer. Iliad. 3. (b) One wrote] Some read: as I wrote once
in praise of a t^per. I know not which to approve. (c) An order] That nothing
be loved but (...) which ought to be loved, as it ought, and as much as it
ought. So does Plato graduate the ^easonable and mental love. (d) He has
ordered] This says Origin is that which our S^r says, Thou shall love thy
Lord with all thine heart, with all thy soul, with all thy mind, (...) ^th
all thy strength: And thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: but not with
all thin^ (...)* and love thine enemies, (he says not, as thy self, nor
withal thine heart, but holds it ^nt to love them at all.) In Cantic.

Whether it be credible that the Angels being of an incorpore all nature,
should lust after the women of earth, and marrying them, beget Giants of them.
CHAP. 23.
^is question we touched at in our third book, but left it undiscussed,
whe^er the Angels, being spirits, could have carnal knowledge of women: for
(...) ^itten, He makes his Angels spirits: that (a) is, those that are
spirits, he (...) his Angels, by sending them on messages as he please: for
the Greek Psalm. 103
(...) ^rd (...), which the Latins call (c) Angelus, is interpreted a
messenger. (...) ^ether he meant of their bodies, when he adds: And his
ministers a fla^, or that he intimate that Gods ministers should burn with
fiery zeal ^ritie, it is doubtful: yet do the scriptures plainly auerre that
the An^ appeared both in visible and palpable figures. (b) And seeing it is so
(...) a report, and so many auerre it either from their own trial or from
(...), that are of indubitable honesty and credit, that the Syluanes and
(...), commonly called (e) Incub^, have often injured women, desiring and ac^
^rnally with them: and that certain devils whom the Frenchmen call (...),
do continually practice this uncleanness, and tempt others to it, which ^ed
by such persons, and with such confidence that it were impudence (...) it. I
dare not venture to determine any thing here: whether the (...) being imbodyed
in air (for this air being violently moved is (...) ^lt) can suffer this
lust, or move it so as the women with whom (...) ^ixe, many feel it (f) yet
do I firmly believe that Gods Angels could (...) ^ll so at that time: nor that
the Apostle Peter did mean of them when he said: If God spared not the Angels
that had sinned, but cast them down into hell, and delivered them into chains
of darkness to be kept unto damnation: but rather of those that turned
apostata's with the devil their prince at first, in him I mean that deceived
mankind in the serpent. That men were also called the Angels of God the
scripture testifies also, saying of John: Behold, I send mine Angel before ^hy
face which shall prepare the way before thee. And Malachie the prophet by a
peculiar grace given him, was called an Angel. But some stick at this, that
in Mar^. 1. Man 3. 1.
this commixtion of them that were called Gods Angels with the women of earth
there were Giants begotten and borne: as though that we have no such
extraordinary huge statured creatures even in these our times. Was there not a
woman of late at Rome, with her father and mother, a little before it was
sacked by the Goths, that was of a giantlike height in respect of all other?
It was wonderful to see the concourse of those that came to see her, and she
was the more admired, in that her parents exceeded not our tallest ordinary
stature. Therefore there might be giants borne before that the sons of God
(called also his Angels) had any carnal confederacy with the daughters of
men, such I mean, as lived in the fleshly course: that is ere the sons of
Seth meddled with the daughters of Caine, for the Scripture in Genesis says
thus, So when men were multiplied upon earth, and there were daughters borne
unto them, the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and
they took them wives of all that they liked. Genesis 6.
Therefore the Lord said my spirit shall not always strive with man: because he
is but flesh, and his days shall be 120. years. There were Giants in the earth
in those days, yea and after that the sons of God came unto the daughters of
men, and they had borne them children, these were Giants, and in old time were
men of renown. These words of holy writ show plainly that there were Giants
upon earth when the sons of God took the fair daughters of men to be their
wives, (g) for the scripture uses to call that which is fair good. But there
were Giants, borne after this: for it says. There were Giants upon earth in
those days and after that the sons of God came unto the daughters of men: so
that there were Giants both then and before: and whereas it says. They begot
unto themselves, this shows that they had begotten children unto God before,
and not unto themselves, that is not for lust, but for their duty of
propagation, nor to make themselves up, any flaunting family, but to increase
the Citizens of God, whom they (like Gods angels) instructed to ground their
hope on him, as the son of the resurrection, Seths son did, who hoped to
call upon the name of the Lord: in which hope, he and all his sons might be
sons and heirs of life everlasting. But we may not take them to be such
Angels as were no men: men they were without doubt, and so says the Scripture:
which having first said, the Angels of God s^ the daughters of men that they
were good, and they took them wives of all whom they The sons of S^ called
Ange^ ^ically.
liked: adds presently: And the Lord said, my spirit shall not always strive
with m^ because he is but flesh. For his spirit made them his Angels, and
sons, but they declined downwards, and therefore he calls them men, by
nature, not by grace: and flesh, being the forsaken forsakers of the spirit.
The 70. call them the Angels and sons of God: some books call them only the
sons of God, leaving out Angels: But (h) Aquila whom the Jews prefer before
all, calls them neither, but the sons of Gods: both is true, for they were
both the sons of God, and by his patronage, the brethren of their fathers:
and they were the sons of the Gods: as borne of the Gods, and their equals,
according to that of the Psalm: I have said ye are Gods, and ye are al
sons of the most high, for we^ do worthily believe that the 70. had the
spirit of prophecy, and that what soever Psalm. 82. 6.
they altered is set down according to the truth of divinity, not after the
pleasure of translators, yet the Hebrew they say, is doubtful and may be
interpreted (...) the sons of God, or of Gods. Therefore let us omit the
scriptures that are (...) (i) Apocripha, because the old fathers of whom we
had the scriptures, (...) not the authors of those works, wherein though there
be some truths, y^ their multitude of falshhoods makes them of no canonical
authority. S^ Scriptures questionless were written by Enoch the seventh from
(...). As the canonical (k) Epistle of Jude records: but it is not for ^ng
that they were left out of the Hebrew Canon which the Priests kept in (...)
^mple. The reason was, their antiquity procured a suspicion that they (...) not
truly divine, and an uncertainty whether Henoch were the author or (...) ^ing
that such as should have given them their credit unto posterity never (...)
them. And therefore those books that go in his name and contain those (...)
of the giants that there fathers were no men, are by good judgments held (...)
^ne of his: but counterfeite, as the heretics have done many, under the (...)
of the (b) Apostles and (m) Prophets, which were all afterward examined, (...)
^ust from canonical authority. But according to the Hebrew canonical ^res,
there is no doubt but that there were Giants upon the earth before (...) ^ge,
and that they were the sons of the men of earth, and Citizens of ^all City,
unto which the sons of God, being Seths in the flesh, forsak^ ^ice adjoined
themselves. Nor is it strange if they begot Giants. They (...) (...) all
Giants, but there were far more before the deluge, then have (...) ^ce: whom
it pleased the creator to make, that we might learn that a (...) should
neither respect hugeness of body nor fairness of face: but (...) his
beatitude out of the vndecaying, spiritual and eternal goods that (...) ^iar
to the good, and not that he shareth with the bad: which another (...) ^eth to
us, saying: There were the Giants famous from the beginning that (...) so great
stature and so expert in war. These did not the Lord choose, neither Baruch. 5.
(...) the way of knowledge unto them: but they were destroyed because they
(...) wisdom, and perished through there own foolishness.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) is those] That Augustine held that the Angels and Devils had
bodies, he that (...) ^th this work, and his books de natura demon, and de
genesi ad literam; shall see plain^ ^eld it himself, and spoke it not as an
other man's opinion, as Peter Lumbard says (...) ^ke: It was his own* nor
followed he any mean authors herein, having the (...), and then Origin,
Lactantius, Basil and almost all the writers of that time on his (...) need
(says Michael Psellus, de d^monib,) that the spirits that are made messengers,
(...) ^ue bodies too (as Saint Paul says) whereby to move, to stay, and to
appear vi^ and whereas the Scripture may in (...) place call them
incorporeall, I answer, that is (...) of our grosser, and more solid bodies, in
comparison of which, the transparent in^ bodies are ordinarily called
incorporeall. Augustine gives the Angels most subtiliat^ (...) ^visible,
active, and not pa^ue and such the Devils had ere they fell: but then, (...)
were condensate and passive, as Psellus holds also: (b) (...)] It is N^ius
(...): a messenger: (...), is Mitto to send, and therefore the Angel, says
Hierom, is Angels what it is,
(...) ^f nature, but of ministry. And hereof comes Euangelium, called the
good message. Homer and Tully unto Atticus use it often. (c) Angels] Turning
(...) into n: and (...) into (...)* (d) And seeing] Psellus affirms out of
one Mark a great Daemonist, that the devils c^st forth sperme, producing
diverse little creatures, and that they have genitories (but not like men's)
from whence the excrement passes: but all devils have not such, but only the
wa^y and the earthly, who are also nourished like spunges with attraction of
humor. (e) Incub^ O^ ^bus and Succ^us.
(...) to lie upon: They are devils that commix with women: those that put
themselves under men, as women, are called succubi. There are a people at this
day that glory that their descent is from the devils, who accompanied with
women in men's shapes, and with men in women's: (This in my conceit is viler,
then to draw a man's pedigree from Pirates, thieves, or famous hacksters, as
many do^.) The Egiptians say that the Devils can only accompany carnally
with women, and not with men. Yet the Greeks talk of many men that the (...)
have loved, as Hiacinthus, Phorbas, and Hippolitus of Sicione by Apollo, and
Cyparissus by Syl^nus. (f) Yet do I firmely] Lactantius lib. 2. cap. 15.
says, that the Angels, whom God had appointed to preserve and guard
mankind, being commanded by God to beware of loosing their celestial and
substantial dignity by earthly pollution, not-with-standing were allured by
their daily conversation with the women, to have carnal action with them, and
so sinning, were kept out of heaven and cast down to earth: and those the
devil took up to be his agents and officers. But those whom they begot,
being neither pure Angels nor pure men, but in a mean between both, were not
cast down to hell, as their parents were not taken up into heaven: and thus
became there two kinds of devils: one celestial and another earthly. And
these are the authors of all mischiese, whose chiefetaine the great Dragon is.
Thu^ says Eusebius also lib. 5. And Plutarch confirms it saying, That the
fables of the Gods, signified some-things that the devils had done in the old
times: and that the fables of the Giants and Titans, were all acts of the
devils. This makes me sometimes to doubt whether these were those that were
done before the deluge, of which the scripture says: And when the Angels of
God saw the daughters of men, etc. For some may suspect that those Giants, and
their spirits are they whom ancient Paganism took for their Gods, and that
their wars were the subject of those fables of the Gods. (g) For the
scriptures] Because (...) is both good and fair. Terence, Phorm. E^ch. (h)
Aquila] In Adrians time he turned the Scriptures out of Hebrew into Greek.
Hierom calls him a curious and diligent translator: and he was the first
Aquila, a (...).
^ter the seauentie that came out in Greek. Euse^ius likes him not: but to
our purpose: he r^deth it, the sons of the Gods: meaning the holy Gods or
Angels, for God standing in the congregation of the people, and he will judge
the Gods in the midst of it. And Symachus following this sense, said: And when
the sons of the mighties beheld the daughters of men, etc. (i) Apochrypha]
S^reta: of (...), to hide. They were such books as the Church used not The
Apocrypha.
openly: but had them in private to read at pleasure: as the Revelation of the
Apostle Peter: the book of his Acts, etc. (k) Epistle] Hierom upon the first
Chapter of Paul to ^itus, ^aith that Iud^ cites an Apocryphal book of
Henochs. Iudes words are these. But Michael the Arc^gell when he stro^e
against the devil, and disputed about the body of Moses, durst (...) bl^ him
with cursed speaking, but said only: The Lord rebuke thee. Which Enoch ^yd
these words, is uncertain, for they do not seem to be his that was the
seventh from Adam. For he was long before Moses, unless he spoke
prophetically of things to come. And therefore Hi^rome intimates that the
book only whence this was, was entitled, Enoch. (l) Prophets] As the N^rites
counterfeited a work under Hieremi^s name. Aug. in Matt. ^ap. 27. (m) A^] As
Thomas his Gospel, Peter's revelation, and Barnabas his Gospel* which was
brought (...) Alexandria, signed with his own hand: in the time of the Emperor
Zeno.

How the words that God spoke of those that were to perish in the deluge: and
their days shall be an hundred and twenty years, are to be understood. CHAP.
24.
But whereas God said: Their days shall be a hundred and twenty years, we
must not take it as though that it were a forewarning, that (a) none after that
should (...) above that time, for many after the deluge lived five hundred
years. But it (...) (...) (...) understood that God spoke this about the end
of Noah's five hundred (...), that is when he was four hundred and four score
years old, which the (...) ordinarily calls five hundred taking the greatest
part for the whole: (...) the six hundred year of Noah, and the second month,
the flood be^ ^o the hundred and twenty years were passed, at the end of which
man^ (...) be vnuersally destroyed by the deluge. Nor is it frute^esse to be^
^e deluge came thus, when there were none left on earth, that were (...) (...)
of such a death: not that a good man dying such a death should be (...) (...)
worse for it after it is past. But of all those of Seths progeny whom ^he
(...) names, there was not one that died by the deluge. This flood the (...)
says grew upon this: The Lord saw that the wickedness of man was great The
cause (...) (...) (...) (...)* (...) 5 6* 7
(...), and all the imaginations of his heart were only and continually evil:
and (...) ^ued in his heart how he had made man in the earth, and said: I will
aestroy (...) (...) of the earth the man whom I have made, from man to beast,
and, from the (...) things to the fowls of the air, for I am angry that I
have made them.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) none.] This Lactantius held. lib. 2. His words are these. The earth
being dried, the (...) ^ing the iniquity of the former world, least their
length of life should be the mid wife (...) (...), he shortened the days of
man by degrees, until they came to a hundred and (...) (...) there ^e fi^ his
bound: not to be ouerpassed. But Hierome goes with Augus^ (...) shall yet have
a hundred and twenty years to repent in, not, tha^ the life o^ no (...) shall
not exceed a hundred and twenty years, as many erroneously understand (...)
that Abraham, after the deluge, lived a hundred threescore and fifteen
years; (...) hundred: nay some above three hundred years. Josephus differs
somewhat (...) but not much: for he says that after the flood men's days
grew fewer, vn^ (...)* and (...) him the bound of man's life was set up at a
hundred and twenty (...) (...) decree, and according to the number also that
Moses lived. (b) Reuolued.] (...), but the seauenty have (...) recogitauit: he
reuolued in his thought.

Of Gods unpassionate and vnaltering anger. CHAP. 25.
(...) anger (a) is no disturbance of mind in him, but his judgment as^ sin
the deserved punishment: and his reuoluing of thought is an Gods prescience and
act a like firm and both unalterable.
(...) ordering of changeable things: for God repents not of any thing (...)
man does: but his knowledge of a thing ere it be done, and his thought (...) it
is done are both alike firm and fixed. But the Scripture without (...) cannot
instill into our understandings the meaning of Gods works (...) the proud, nor
stire up the idle, nor exercise the inquirers, nor de^ understanders. This it
cannot do without declining to our low capa^ (...) whereas it relates the
future destruction of beasts, and birds, It (...) the greatness of the
dissolution, but does not thereaten it unto the (...) creatures as if they had
sinned.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) ^ger.] Lactantius wrote a book of Gods Anger, we (with Hierome)
refer the (...) unto him, if he desire to know further.

That Noah his Arc signifies Christ and his Church in all things. CHAP. 26.
NOw whereas Noah being (as the truth says) a just man in his time, and
perfect (yet not as the Citizens of God shall be perfect in that immortality
wherein they shall equalize the Angels, but perfect as a mortal pilgrim of
God may be upon earth) was commanded by God to build an Arc, wherein he, his
family, and the creatures which God commanded to come into the Arc unto him,
might be saved from the waters: this verily is a figure of Gods City here
upon earth, that is, his Church which is saved by wood, that is, by that
whereupon Christ the mediator between God and man was crucified: For the
dimensions of the length, deapth and breadth of the Arc, do signify man's body,
in which the Savior was prophesied to come, and did so: for (a) the length of
man's body from head to foot, is six times his breadth from side to side: and
ten times his thickenesse measuring prependicularly from back to belly: lay
a man a long and measure him, and you shall find his length from head to foot
to contain his breadth from side to side six times, and his height from the
earth whereon he lies, ten times, whereupon the Arc was made three hundred
cubits long, fifty broad, and thirty deep. And the door in the side was the
wound that the soldiers spear made in our Savior, for by this do all men go
in unto him: for thence came the sacraments of the believers: and the Arc
being made all of square wood, signifies the unmoved constancy of the Saints:
for cast a cube, or squared body which way you will, it will ever stand firm. So
all the rest that concerned the building of this Arc, (b) were tipes of
Ecclesiastical matters. But here it is too long to stand upon them: we have
done it already, against Faustus the Manichee, who denied that the old
testament had any prophetical thing concerning Christ. It may be one may take
this one way, and another another way: so that all be referred to the Holy
City whereupon we discourse, which as I say often ^boured here in this
terrestrial pilgrimage: other-wise he shall go far from his meaning that
wrote it. As for example, if any one will not expound this place: make it with
the (c) lowest, second, and third rooms: as I do in that work against
Faustus, namely that because the Church is gathered out of al nations, it had
two rooms, for the two sorts of men circumcised and uncircumcised whom the
Apostle other-wise calls (d) Jews and Greeks: and it had three rooms,
because all the world had propagation from Noah his three sons, after the
flood: if any one like not this exposition, let him follow his own pleasure,
so he control not the true rule of faith in it: for the Arc had rooms below
and rooms above, and therefore was called double roomed: and it had rooms
above those upper rooms, and so was called triple-roomed, being three stories
high. In these may be meant the three things that the Apostles prayseth so:
Faith, Hope and Charity: or (and that far more fittly) the three evangelical
increases: thirty fold, sixty fold and an hundred fould: cha^ marriage dwelling
in the first; chaste widowhood in the second: and chaste virginity (...). 13. ^3
in the highest of all: thus, or otherwise may this be understood, ever
respecting the reference it has to this Holy City. And so I might say of the
other things here to be expounded: which although they have more then one
exposition, yet all they have must be liable to one rule of concord in the
Catholic faith.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) length [The same also he has against Faustus lib. 12. Ambrose also
compares Noah's Arc, to man's body, but in another manner. Lib. de Noe et Arca.
(b) Were types] The Arc a type of the church.
The Apostle Peter takes the Arc for a figure of the Church. 2. Pet 3. 56.
Where H^rome ^eth the Arc to be the Church, Contra Iouin. and contra
Luciferianos Cyprian does the (...) ^so. De spiritu sancto, (if that work be
his.) Origin also and many others say much of (...) Allegory. (c) Lowest
second] The Arc was thus built (says Origin.) It was divided in^o ^o lower
rooms, and over these were three other rooms, each one immediately above o^.
The lowest was the sink or common Iakes: and that next it was the graner, or
place where meat was kept for all the creatures: then in the first of the
other three, were the wild be^s kept, in the second the tamer, and in the
third were the men themselves. Josephus writes (...) of four rooms, whereas
all else make five. But he might perchance omit the Iakes, as (...) de
Natalibus says. (d) Jews and] He distinguishes them by their tongues: for
Paul co^rsed with none but they spoake either Hebrew or Greek: for at Rome
they spoake (...) as commonly then as we do Latin at this day.

Of the Arc, and the deluge, that the meaning thereof is neither merely
Historical, nor merely allegorical. CHAP. 27.
But let none think that these things were written only to relate an
hystori^ll truth without any typical reference to any thing else: or contrary
wise, ^ere were no such things really acted, but that it is all allegorical:
or that ^soeuer it is, it is of no use, nor include^h any prophetical meaning
concer^ ^he Church: for who but an Atheist will say, that these books are of
no (...) have been so religiously kept, and so carefully delivered from one
age ^ther, so many thousand years together? or that they are only
historical, (...) ^s (to let all the rest pass) the bringing in of the
unclean creatures by (...), and the clean by seauens, must needs have some
other meaning, for they (...) have been preserved had they been but paires,
as well as the other. (...) not God, that taught this means of
re-instauration, repair them as he (...) ^ated them? And now for those that
say that all this was but mystical one^ ^st they imagine it impossible that
any flood should become so huge as to (...) the height of any mountain
fifteen cubits, because of the (a) top of (...) Olympus which they say
reaches above the clouds, and is as high as ^uen, so that the grosser air
that engenders winds and rain cannot (...) so high: never observing in the
mean space, that the grossest element of (...) earth can lie so high: or will
they say the top of this mountain is not (...)? no; why then do those bad
proportionators allow the earth to lie so (...) and yet deny the water to mount
higher, auerring not-with-standing that (...) ^ater is higher and of a more
ability to ascend then the earth? what reason ^hey show why earth should hold
so high a place in air, for thus many ^sand years, (...) et that water may
not arise to the same height for a little (...) They say also, that the Arc
was too little to hold such a number of crea^, seven of every clean one, and
two of every unclean one. It seems (...) make accoumpt only of three hundred
cubits in length, fifty in breadth, ^irtie in depth, never marking that every
room therein was of this size, making the whole Arc to be nine hundred
cubits in length, one hundred and fifty in breadth, and ninety in deapth or
height. And if that be true that Origin does elegantly prove, that Moses
(being learned (as it is written) in all the wisdom of the Egiptians, who were
great Geometricians) meant of a Geometrical cubite in this case, one of which
make six of ours, who sees not what an huge deal of rooms lies within this
measure? for whereas they say that an Arc of such greatness could no way be
built, they talk idely, for huger cities then this Arc have been built: and
they never consider the hundred years that it was a building in, through-out:
unless they will say that one stone may be bound fast unto another by lime
only, and walls on this manner be carried out (d) so many miles in compass,
and yet timber cannot be lastened unto timber by (e) mortayses, (f) ^piri,
nails and pitch, whereby an Arc might be made, not with embowed ribs, but
in a straight lineall form, not to be lanched into the sea by the strength of
men, but lifted from earth by the ingruent force of the waters themselves,
having GODS providence, rather then man's practice, both for steres-man and
pilot. And for their scrupulous question concerning the Vermin, Mice, (g)
Stellions, Locusts, Hornets, Flies and Fleas, whether there were any more of
them in the Arc then there should be by GODS command? they that move this
question ought first to consider this: that such things as might live in the
waters, needed not be brought into the Arc: so might both the fishes that
swamme in the water, and (h) diverse birds also that swamme above it.

And whereas it is said, They shall be male and female, that concerns the
reparation of kind: and therefore such creatures as do not generate, but are
produced them selves out of mere putrefaction, needed not be there: if they
were, it was as they are now in our houses, without any known number, if the
greatness of this holy mystery included in this true and real act, could not
be perfited without there were the same order of number kept in all those
creatures, which nature would not permit to live with-in the waters, that care
belonged not unto man, but unto GOD. For Noah did not take the creatures and
turn them into the Arc, but GOD sent them in all, he only suffered them to
enter: for so says the book: Two of every sort shall come unto thee: not by
his fetching, but by GODS bidding: yet may we well hold that none of the
creatures that want sex, were there: for it is precisely said, They shall be
male and female. There are creatures that arising out of corruption, do (i)
afterward engender, as flies: (k) and some also without sex, as Bees: some
also that have sex and yet engender not, as Hee-mules and Shee-mules: it is
like that they were not in the Arc, but that their parents, the horse and the
Ass served to produce them after-wards: and so like-wise of all other
creatures (l) gotten between diverse kinds. But if this concerned the
mystery, there they were: for they were male and female.

Some also stick at the diversity of meats that they had, and what they
eat, that could eat nothing but flesh: and whether the were any more
creatures there then was in the command, that the rest might feed upon them:
or (m) rather (which is more likely) that there were some other meats besides
flesh, that contented them. For (n) we see many creatures that eat flesh,
eat fruits also, and Apples, chieflye Figs and Chest-nuts: what wonder then
if God had taught this just man to prepare a meat for every creatures eating,
and yet not flesh? what will not hunger make one eat? And what cannot God make
wholesome, and delightsome to the taste, who might make them (if he pleased) to
live without any meat at al: but that it was befitting to the perfection of
this mystery that they should be fed? And thus all men, b^t those that are
obstinate, are bound to believe that each of these many fold circumstances, had
a figuration concerning the Church: for the Gentiles have now so filled the
Church with clean and unclean, and shall do so until the end and now are al
so enclosed in those ribs, that it is unlawful to make stop at those inferior
(although obscurer) ceremonies, which being so, if no man may either think
these things as written to no end: nor as bare and insignificant relations, nor
as sole vnacted allegories, nor as discourses impertinent to the Church; but
each ought rather to believe that they are written in wisdom, and are both
true histories, and mystical allegories, all concerning the prefiguration of
the Church; then this book is brought unto an end: and from hence we are to
proceed with the progress of both our cities, the one celestial, and that is
Gods, and the the other terrestrial, and that is man's, touching both which, we
must now observe what fell out after the deluge.

L. VIVES.
THe top (a) of.] The Geographers have diverse Olympi: but this here, is in
Thessaly ten furlongs high, as Plutarch says in the life of Aemilius Paulus.
The top is above the Mount Olympus.
(...) region of the air as some hold, and prove it because the ashes of the
Sacrifice would ly ^ystned, and unmoved all the year long* Solin. This is a
fable says Francis Philelphus, who (...) ^p the hill himself, to see the
trial. And it is strange that the top of Olimpus, or Ath^s (...) ^edon, or
of any other mountain should be so high above the circle of the earths globe,
(...) (...) should exceed the half part of the air, and lying above all
moisture, have such con^ll fountains and rivers flowing from it: for they are
the mothers of winds and rain. (b) A^ Heaven.] Intimating the use of the
Poets, who call Heaven Olympus because of this (...). Hom. Iliad. ^1. (c) They
say also.] Origin Homil. 2, in Genes. has these words. As far (...) gather by
descriptions, the Arc was built up in four Angles, arising all from an equal
(...) (...) finished on the top in the breadth of one cubit, for it is said
that it was built thirty cubits (...) ^ty broad, and thirty high, but yet was
it so gradually contracted that the breadth and (...) met all in one cubit: and
afterward. But the fittest form for to keep of the rain (...) weather, was
to be ridged down a proportioned descent from the top downward, so to
shoot off the wet, and to have a broad and spacious base in a square
proportion, least the ^ion of the creatures within should either make it lean
at'one side or sink it down right. (...) (...) ^ll this cunning fabrike, some
questions there are made, and those chiefly by Apelles, (...) of Marcions but
an inuentor of another heresy: how is it possible (says he) to put Apelles
anheretique.
(...) (...) Elephants in the room that the Scripture allows for the Arc?
Which to answer, our (...) said that Moses who (according to the Scriptures)
was skilled in all the arts of Egypt (...) (...) Geometrical cubytes in this
place, (and Geometry is the Egyptians chief study.) (...) (...) Geometry, both
in the measuring of solides and squares, one cubit is generally taken (...)
(...) of our common cubits, or for three hundred minutary cubits. Which if it
be so, hear, (...) (...) had room at large to contain all the creatures that
were requisite for the restoration (...) (...) world. Thus far Origin. (d) So
many miles.] As Babilons, Romes, and Memphis. But (...) (...) a city in
Thrace, the Greeks called it (...), The long wall, for there was an (...) long
wall began there, which reached unto the Melican Bay, excluding Cherone^ (...)
the rest of Thrace, Miltiades the Athenian captain built it. There was such
an^ (...) the lake Lemanus unto mount Iura, dividing Burgogne from Switzerland,
built (...) (...), ninteene miles long, and sixteen foot high. Seuerus did
the like in England, to keep the Scots and Picts from inuading the Britains.
(e) Mortayses] Let your posts (^aith V^truuius) be as thick as the maine body
of your pillar under the wreath whence the (...) (...), Mortayses, subscudines.
and let them be mortaised together, so that the hole of every joint be two
fingers wide. (f) Epiri] Either it is falsely written, or else we may go
seek what it is. (g) Stellions] A kind of Lizard that benummeth where he
biteth. A kind of Spider also Plin. 8. and 9. Aristo. Stellions.
(h) Diverse birds] Ducks, Swans, Cormorants, Sea-guls, Water-swallowes,
Puffins, etc. (i) Afterward engender] Flies are not generate, and yet do
engender. For the male and female commixe, and produce a worm, which in time
becomes a fly. Aristot. Hist. animal. lib. 5. (k) And some also] How Bees
are produced (says Aristotle, Hist. animal. lib. 5. It is uncertain: some
think they do not engender, but fetch their issue elsewhere, but whence none
Bees.
knoweth]: some say from the Palme-flowre, others from the reeds, others from
the Olives. Uirgil in his Georgikes held that they did not engender: his words
are these: Illum adeo placuisse apibus mirabere morem, Virg. Geor. 4.

Quod nec concubitu indulgent, nec corpora segnes
In venerem soluunt, aut foetus nixibus aedunt:
Verum ipsae e foliis natos, and suauibus herbis
Ore legunt, etc. --
Would you not wonder at the golden Bees
They use no venery, nor mix no thighs:
Nor groan in bringing forth: but taking wing,
Fly to the flowers, and thence their young they bring
Within their pretty mouths, bred there, etc. --
Some there be that say the Bees be all females, and the Drones males, and so
do ^gender: and that one may have them produced of the flesh of a Calfe. (l)
Gotten between diuerse] as creatures begotten between Wolves and Dogs, or
Bears and Bitches, etc. Pliny says that such beasts are never like either
parent, but of a third kind, and that they never engender either with any
kind, or with their own: and therefore Mules never have young ones. But by
Plinies leave, it is recorded that Mules have brought forth young, and have
been oftentimes big bellyed: and this is common in Cappadocia says
Theophrastus, and in Syria says Aristotle. Indeed these are of another kind
then ours be. (n) Or rather] Origin says, they did e^e flesh. (n) We see
many creatures] Dogs, Crows, and Foxes, when they want flesh, will eat
fruits, Figs and Chest-nuts especially, and live as well with them as with
all the flesh in the world.

Finis lib. 15.
THE CONTENTS OF THE sixteenth book of the City of God
1. Whether there be any families of Gods citi^ns named between Noah and
Abraham. 2. What prophetique mysteries were in the s^es of Noah. 3. Of the
generations of the three sons of Noah. 4. Of the confusion of tongues, and
the building of Babylon. 5. Of Gods coming down to confound the language of
those Tower-builders. 6. The manner how GOD speaks to his Angels. 7. Whether
the remote Isles were supplied with the beasts of al sorts that were saved in
the Arc. 8. Whether Adams or Noaths sons begot any monstrous kinds of men.
9. Whether their be any inhabitants of the (...) called the Antipodes. 10. Of
the generation of Sem, in which the City of God lies, down unto Abraham. 11.
That the Hebrew tongue (so called after^ of Heber) was the first language upon
(...), and remained in his family when that great confusion was. 12. Of that
point of time wherein the City (...) GOD began a new order of succession in
(...). (...). Why there is no mention of Nachor, Tha^ (...) in his departure
from Caldea into Me^ia. 14. Of the age of Thara, who lived in Charra until his
dyinge day. 15. Of the time wherein Abraham received the promise from God, and
departed from Charra 16. The order and quality of Gods promises made unto
Abraham. 17. Of the three most eminent kingdoms of (...) world; the chief of
which in Abraham's (...) ^as most excellent of all. 18. Of Gods second promise
to Abraham that (...) and his seed should possess the land of Canaan. 19. How
God preserved Saras chastity in Egypt, when Abraham, would not be known that
she was his wife but his sister. 20. Of the separation of Lot and Abraham,
without breach of charity or love between (...). 21. Of Gods third promse of
the land of Ca^ to Abraham, and his seed for ever. 22. How Abraham overthrew
the enemies of (...) ^mits; freed Lot from captivity, and was ^ed by
Melchisedech the Priest. 23. Of Gods promise to Abraham, that he would make
his seed as the stars of heaven and that he was justified by faith, before
his circumsision. 24. Of the signification of the sacrifice which Abraham was
commanded to offer when he desired to be confirmed in the th^gs he believed.
25. Of Agar, Saras bondwoman, whom she gave as conc^e unto Abraham. 26. Of
Gods promise unto Abraham, that Sara (though she were ol^) should have a son
that should be the father of the ^tion, and how this promise was sealed in the
mystery of circumsision 27. Of the man-child that if it were not circumsised
the eigh^ day, it perished for breaking of Gods covenant. 28. Of the changing
of Abraham's and Saras names, who being the one to barr^, and both too old to
have children, yet by Gods bounty, were both made fruitful. 29. Of the three
men, or Angels, wkerin God appeared to Abraham in the plain of mambr^. 30.
Lots deliverance, Sodomes destruction: Abimaleches lust, and Sarahs chastity.
31. Of Isaac borne the time prefixed, and named so because of his parents
laughter. 32. Abraham's faith and obedience proved in his intent to offer his
son: Sarahs death. 33. Of Rebecca, Nachers niece, whom Isaac married. 34.
Abraham's marrying Keturah after Sarahs death, and the meaning thereof. 35. The
appointment of God concerning the two twins in Rebeca's woombe. 36. Of a
promise and blessing received by Isaac, in the manner that Abraham had received
his. 37. Of Esau and Jacob, and the mysteries included in them both. 38. Of
Jacobs iourny into Mesopotamia for a wife: his vision in the night as he went:
his return with four women, whereas he went but for one. 39. Jacob enstiled
Israel. The reason of this change. 40. Jacobs departure into Egypt with seventy
five souls; how to be taken seeing some of them were borne afterward. 41.
Jacobs blessing unto his son Judah. 42. Of Jacobs changing of his hands, from
the heads of Joseph's sons, when he blessed them. 43 Of Moses his times, ^osua:
the Judges, the Kings: S^ule the first (...) David the chief both in merit,
and in mystical reference.
FINIS.
THE SIXTEENTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Whether there be any families of Gods citizens named, between Noah and
Abraham. CHAP. 1.
TO find in the evidences of holy writ whether the Glorious City of GOD
continued on in a good course after the deluged, or through the second
inundation of impiety was so interrupted, as Gods religion lay wholly
unrespected is a very difficult matter: because that in all the canonical
scriptures, after that Noah and his three sons with his and their wives were
saved by the Arc from their deluge, we cannot find any one person until
Abraham's time, evidently commended for his piety: only Noah's prophetical
blessing of his two sons Sem and Iaphet, we do see, and know that he knew
what was to follow along time after. Whereupon he cursed his middlemost son,
(who had offended him) not in himself, he laid not I say the curse upon
himself, but upon his grandchild saying, Cursed be Canaan, a servant of
servants shall he be unto his brethren. This Canaan was Chams son, his that
did not cover, but rather discover (...). 9. ^5.
his fathers nakedness. (a) And then did he second this, with a blessing upon
his eldest sons, saying: blessed be the Lord God of Sem, and let Canaan be
his servant. The Lord make Iaphet rejoice (b) that he may dwell in the tents of
Sem: all which, together G^n. 9. 26.
with Noah's planting a vine-yeard, being drunken with the wine, and uncovered
in his sleep, all those circumstances have their prophetical interpretations
and mystical references.

L. VIVES.
ANd (a) then] A diversity of reading: the best lies before you. (b) That he
may dwel] Hierome says it is meant of the Christians who expelling the Jews
do dwell and inioye the light of the holy scriptures.

What prophetique mysteries were in the sons of Noah. CHAP. 2.
But their true event has now cleared their former obscurity: for what
diligent obseruer sees them not all in Christ? Sem, of whose seed Christ's
hum^nity came, is interpreted, Named. And who is more named then Christ, whose
name is now so fragrant that the prophetical Canticle compares it to an (...)
C^. 1. 2
powered out: in whose houses, that is, in whose churches, the diffused nations
shall inhabit. For Iaphet is, diffused. But Cham, who is interpreted hot,
Noa^s middle son being as distinct from both, and remaining between both,
being neither of the first fruits of Israel, nor of the fulness of the
nations, what is he but a type of our hot heretics, not hot in the
spirit of wisdom, but of (a) turne-coate suttletie, that burns in their
hearts to the disturbance of the Saints quiet? But this is useful to the good
proficients in the church as the Apostle says. There must be Heresies amongst
you that they which are approved might be known. Whereupon also it is
written. The learned son wilbee wise, 1. Cor. 11, 19
and use the fools as his minister. For there are many things perteyning to
the Catholic faith which the Heretics turbulently tossing and turning, cause
them that are to defend them against them both to observe them the more fully,
understand them the more clearly, and avow them the more confidently. Thus the
enemies question adds the perfection of understanding. Although not only the
professed Infidels, but even the cloaked Heretics also ^ke under the name of
christians, and yet live wickedly, may be justly comprised in Noah's middle
son: for in word they declare, and in deed they dishonor the passion of
CHRIST prefigured in Noah's nakedness. Of these it is said, Ye shall know
them by their fruits: and therefore was Cham cursed in his Mat. 7, 16
son, as in his fruit, that is his work: whereupon Chanaan, is fitly
interpreted, their motion, and what is that ^ut their work. But Shem and
Iaphet prefiguring circumcision and vncercumcision, or as the Apostle says,
the Jews and the Greeks, (those I mean that are called and justified)
hearing of their fathers ^ednesse (the Redeemers typical passion) took a
garment and putting it upon their shoulders, went back-ward, and so covered
their fathers nakedness, (...) ^ing what they covered. In like manner, we, in
Christ's Passion do reue^ that which was done for us, yet abhor we the Jews
villainy herein. The ^nt, is the sacrament: their backs the remembrance of
things past, because (...) ^ch now celebrateth the passion of CHRIST, Iaphet
dwelling in the tents (...) (...), and Cham between them both: it looks now
no more for a passion to (...), but the evil brother is (b) servant to his
good brethren in his son, that is, his work: because the good can make use
of the evil to their increase of wisdom: for there be some (says the
Apostle) that preach not Christ purely, but howsoever Phil. 1, 16 18.
Christ be preached sincerely, or colourably, I do joy, and will joy therein;
For he had planted the vin-yard whereof the Prophet says, The vine-yeard of
the Lord of hosts Is^i. 5
is the house of Israel etc. and he drinks of the wine thereof: whether it
be of that cup whereof it is said. Are ye able to drink of the cup that I
shall drink of? And, O my Mat. 20, 2^ Mat. 26, 39
Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me: wherein doubtless
he meant his passion. Or whether it were signified (seeing that wine is the
fruit of the vi^-yeard) that he took our flesh and blood out of the
vineyard, that is, the house of Israel, and was drunk, and uncovered, that is
suffered the pa^. For there was his nakedness discovered that is his
infirmity, whereof the Apostle says. He was crucified concerning his
infirmity: whereof also he says elsewhere. The weakness of GOD is
stronger then men, 2. Cor. 13 1. Cor. 1, 25
^d the foolishness of GOD, is wiser then men. But the Scripture having said.
He was uncovered, and adding, in the midst of his own house, makes (...) an
excellent demonstration that he was to suffer death by the hands of his own
country men, fellows and kinsmen in the flesh. This passion of CHRIST, the
reprobate preach verbally only: for they know not what ^ey ^each. But the
elect lay up this great mystery within, and there (...) ^our it in their
hearts being GODS infirmity, and foolishness, but far stronger and wiser
then man in his best strength and wisdom. The type of this, is Chams going out
and telling of his brethren what he had seen of his father, and Sems and
Iaphets going in, that is, disposing themselves inwardly, for to cover and
reverence that which he had seen and told them of. Thus as we can we search
the sense of scripture, finding it more congruent to some applications then to
others, yet doubting not, but that every part of it has a farther meaning then
merely historical, and that, to be referred to none but CHRIST and his
church the City of GOD: which was preached from man's first creation, as we
see the euentes do confirm. So then from these two blessed sons of Noah,
and that cursed one betwixt them, down unto the days of Abraham, is no
mention made of any righteous man, which time continued more then one thousand
years. I do not think but there were just men in this time, but that it
would have been too tedious to have rehearsed them all, and rather to have
concerned the diligence of an history, then the substance of a prophecy. The
writer of these divine books (or rather the spirit of GOD in him) goes only
about such things as both declare the things past and prefigure the things to
come, pertinent only to the City of GOD: for what soever is herein spoaken
concerning her opposites, it is all to make her glory the more illustrious by
entering comparison with their iniquity, or to procure her augmentation by
teaching her to observe their ruin, and be warned thereby. Nor are all the
historical relations of these books, mystical, but such as are not, are
added for the more illustration of such as are. It is the plow-share only that
turns up the earth: yet may not the plough lack the (c) other instruments.
The strings only do cause the sound in harpes and other such instruments: yet
must that have pinnes, and the other, frets, to make up the music, and the
(d) organs have other devises lincked to the keys, which the organist touches
not, but only their keys, to make the sound proportionate, and harmonious.
Even so in those prophetique stories, some things are but bare relations, yet
are they adherent unto those that are significant, and in a manner linked to
them.

L. VIVES.
TUrne-coats (a) suttlety] Some read, impatience, and for wisdom, before,
patience: and for their hearts, their first beginning: but this is not so
proper. (b) Seruant] The Latins use P^er, either for a child or a servant, and
so the-Greekes do (...), as the Septuagints for example P^r, used (...) a
(...).
in this place. (...) etc. an household servant shall he be to his brethren.
Chrisippus is idle in his distinction of (...) and (...): as if the first were
a serving man, and the later a sta^e or bondsman: Ammonius is of another mind,
but this is nothing to our purpose. (...) is an ordinary servant in the house.
(c) Other instruments] The culter, and coulter wedges, the teame, the handles
or hailes, the beam, the plough-staffe, the mole-boord etc. (d) Organs,] He
means of all the gins in instruments, it is too tedious to stand teckning of
them here.

Of the generations of the three sons of Noah. CHAP. 3.
NOw must we see what we can find concerning the generations of these
sons, and lay that down in the progress, to show the proceeding of both
(...) Cities in their courses, heavenly and earthly. The generation of Iaphet,
the (...), is the first that is recorded, who had eight sons, two of which
had sea^es further, three the one, and four the other: so that Iaphet, had in
all, (...) sons. Now Cham, the middle brother had four sons, one of which
had ^re, and one of these had two, which in all, make eleauen. These being
reck^, the scripture returns as to the head, saying: And Chush begat Nimrod,
(...) a Giant upon the earth: he was a mighty hunter against the Lord where^
it is said, As Nemrod the mighty hunter against the Lord. (a) And the begin^
(...) his Kingdom was Babylon, and (b) Oreg and (c) Archad, and Chalame (...)
^and of Seimar. Out of that Land came Assure and (d) builded Niniuy, and (...)
(e) Robooth, and Chalesh, and Dasem, between Chalech and Niniuy: (...) great
city. Now this Chus, the giant Nembrods father, is the first of Chams (...) on
that is named, five of whose sons, and two of his grandchildren were (...)
before: But he either begot this giant after all them, or else (and that I
ra^d) the scripture names him for his eminence sake, because his Kingdom i^
(...) also, (whereof Babylon was the head city) and so are the other cities,
(...) ^ons that he possessed. But whereas it is said that Assure came out of
the (...) of Semar, which belonged unto Nimrod, and builded Niniuie and the
o^ee cities, this was long after but named here, because of the greatness
(...) ^yrian Kingdom, which (f) Ninus, Belus his son, enlarged wonderful^
(...) was the founder of the great city Niniuie, which was called after his
(...) ^niuie of Ninus. But Assure, the father of the Assyrians, was none of
(...) ^nes, but of the progeny of Sem, Noah's eldest son. So that it is eur^
some of Sems sons afterward attained the Kingdom of this great (...) went
further then it, and builded other cities, the first of which (...) Niniuie of
Ninus: from this, the scripture returns to another son (...), Mizraim, and
his generation is reckned up: not by particular (...) by seven nations: out
of the sixth whereof, as from a sixth son, (...) Philystiym which make up
eight. Thence it returns back a^ Chanaan in whom Cham was cursed, and his
generation is comprised (...) (...): and all their extents related, together
with some cities. Thus cas^ (...) into one sum, of Chams progeny are one and
thirty descended. N^ (...) remains to recount the stock of Sem, Noah's eldest
son: for the ^ns, began to be counted from the youngest, and so upwards
gra^ him. But it is somewhat hard to find where his race begins to (...)
^ted: yet must we explain it some way: for it is chiefly pertaining to (...).

(...) read it. (g) unto Sem also the father of all the sons of Heber, and
el^ of Iaphet were children borne: the order of the words is this: And (...)
borne unto Sem, and all his children, even unto Sem, who was Iaphets el^. Thus
it makes Sem the Patriarch unto all that were borne, (...) ^ocke whether they
were his sons, or his grand-sonnes, or their (...), or their grand sons,
and so of the rest: for Sem begot not He^ is the first from him in lineall
descent. For Sem (besides others) be^ ^t, he Canaan, Canaan Sala, and Sala was
Hebers father. It is not ^g then that Heber is named the first of Sems progeny,
and before (...) ^nes, being but grandchild to his grandchild, unless it
be that (...) Hebrews had their name from him, quasi Heberewes: as it may be
(...) (...) they were called Hebrews quasi Abrahewes, of Abraham. But true it
is, they were called Hebrews of Heber: and Israel only attained that
language, and was the people wherein Gods City was both prefiguted, and made a
pilgrim. So then Sem first has his six sons reckned, and four other
sons, by one of them: and then another of Sems sons begot a son, and this
son of this last son was father unto Heber. And Heber had two sons, one
called Phalec* that is, division: the scripture adds this reason of his name:
for in his ti^ the earth was divided: which shall be manifested hereafter. Hebers
other son had twelve sons, and so the lineage of Seth were in all seven and
twenty. Thus then the grand sum of all the generations of Noah's three sons,
is three score and thirteen. Fifteen from Iaphet, thirty and one from Cham,
and seven and twenty from Shem. Then the scripture proceeds, saying: These
are the sons of Sem according to their families and their tongues, in their
countries and Nations* And then of them all: These are the families of the
sons of Noah after their generations amongst their people: and out of these
were the Nations of the earth divided after the flood* Whence we gather, that
they were three score and thirteen or rather (as we will show hereafter)
three score and twelve Nations; not seauenty-two single persons: for when the
sons of Iaphet were reckned, it concluded thus* (i) Of these were the Islands
of the gentiles divided in their hands each one according to his tongue and
families in their nations. And the sons of Cham are plainly made the
founders and storers of nations, as I showed before. Mizraim begot all those
that were called the Ludieim, and so of the other six. And having reckned
Chams sons, it concludes in like manner* These are the sons of Cham
according to their tongues and families in their countries and their nations.
Wherefore the Scripture could not (...) many of their sons, because they grew
up, and went to dwell in other countries: and yet could not people whole
lands themselves: for why are b^ two Iaphets eight sons progenies named*
three of Chams four: and two of Sems (...)? Had the other no children? On we
may not imagine that; but the did not grow (...) into Nations worthy
recording, but as they were ioy^ed themselves with other people.

L. VIVES.
ANd (a) the] What those places were in Greek^, Eusebius Pamphilus, and
Josephus (...) whom (...) also agrees with: what we need, we will take
thence: the Reader may The plain of (...)*
(...) the ^est in themselves, for they are common books. The field of Semar
was in Chaldea, in it was built the tower of Babel* (b) Oreg] The Hebrew is
Arach: but thus the seauenty (...) Archad] The Hebrew is Accad, which they say
is Nisibis in (...)* (...) (...) (...) (...) (d) (...)] Tha^ of (...), for
there was another (...) one (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) N^ue
^wards. That of Assyria Pliny calls N^s, being Ni^.
(...) (...) (...) (...) standi^ (...) Tygr^ and lying toward the (...): ^o
says (...) also Diodorus calls it Nina, and says that Ninus* Belus his son
built it, and that there was n^er City since so ^arge within the walls. Their
hight was one hundred foot: they br^ (...) (...) (...) have gone side by side
upon, easily: their compass was four hundred (...) ^ghty (...) and their
post^re, (...) a quadrangle, there were on the walls one thousand (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) ^undred (...) (...)* ((...)) Robooth Hieromes translation
has, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), ^t (...) (...) R^ad only, He built
N^iue, and (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) Unless the (...)
(...) (...). The hebrew has (...) (...) that (...) (...) (...) (...)* (f) Ni^]
(...) following the Phaenician Theology (...) (...) (...) son^ o^ (...) and
calls him Jupiter Belus* Now there was another (...), son to Epaphus king
of Egypt whom Jove begot: unto this Belus, Isis was mother. (...) Eusebius
make him the son of Telegonus who married Isis after Apis was dead: Belus.
(...) reigning as then in Athens. But Belus that was father to Ninus, was a
quiet King of (...) an^ contented with a little Empire, yet had he this
warlike son, whereby he was ^d as a God, and called the Babilonian Jupiter.
This was their Belus say the Egyptians (...) Egiptus, whom they call the son
of Neptune and Lybia, and granchild to Epaphus, (...) ^her. He placed colonies
in Babylon and seating himself upon the banks of Eu^ ^stituted his Priests
there after the Egyptian order. That Belus whom they worshipped ^outly in
Assiria, and who had a temple at Babylon in Plinies time, was (as he says)
(...) ^tor of Astronomy, and the Assirians dedicated a jewel unto him and
called it Belus (...) (...) (g) Unto Sem also.] The seauenty lay it down most
plainly. (h) Hebrews.] Paul, The Hebrews.
(...) of Borgos, a great Hebraician says they were called Hebrews, quasi
travelers, (...) (...) word intends, travelers they were indeed, both in
Egypt and in the land of Canaan. (i) (...) ^ese were.] As Islands are divided
from the continent by the sea, so were they amongst ^es by rivers, mountains,
woods, sands: deserts, and marshes.

Of the confusion of tongues and the building of Babylon. CHAP. 8.
WHereas therefore the Scriptures reckneth those nations each according to his
proper tongue, yet it returns back to the time when they had (...) ^one
tongue, and then shows the cause of the diversity. Then the whole (...) ^th
it) was of one language and one speech. And as they went from the East, (...) a
plain in the land of Semar, and there they aboade: and they said one to (...)
^me let us make brick and burn it in the fire* so they had brick for stone,
(...) ^ch for lime: They said also, come, let us build us a city and (b) a
tower whose (...) reach to the heaven, that we (c) may get us a name, least we
be scattred upon (...) earth. And the Lord came down to see the city and
tower which the (...) (...) men builded. And the Lord said: behold the people
is all one, and have all (...) ^ge, and this they begun to do, neither can they
now be stopped from (...) ^er they have imagined to effect: come on let us
down and confound (...) ^guage there that each one of them understand not his
fellows speech. Babilons confusion.
So (...) Lord scattered them from thence over the whole earth and they (d)
left (...) ^ild* the city and the tower. Therefore the name of it was called
confu^ ^cause there the Lord confounded the language of the whole earth: (...)
(...) thence did the Lord scatter them upon all the earth. This City (...) ^ch
was called confusion is that Babylon, whose wounderfull building (...) ^d even
in profane histories: for Babylon is interpreted confusion, (...) we gather,
that Nembrod the Giant was (as we said before) the builder (...) (...)
scripture saying: the beginning of his kingdom was Babylon, that is, this
(...) metropolitan city of the realm, the kings chamber, and the chief (...)
(...) rest: though it were never brought to that strange perfection that the
(...) and the proud would have it to be, for it was built to heigh, which (...)
^as up to heaven, whether this were the fault of some one Tower which (...)
^ght more upon then all the rest, or of them all under one, as we will (...)
soldiour, or enemy, when we mean of many thousands, and as the (...) of
Frogs and Locusts that plagued Egypt were called only in the (...) number,
the Frogge and Locust: But what intended man's vain presumption herein? admit,
they could have exceeded all the mountains with The power of humility.
their buildings height, could they ever have gotten above the element of air?
and what hurt can elleuation either of body or spirit do unto God? Humility is
the true tract unto heaven, lifting up the spirit unto GOD, but not against
GOD, as that giant was said to be an hunter against the Lord: which some not
understanding, were deceived by the ambiguity of the greek and translated,
before the Lord, (f) (...) being both before, and against: for the Psalm
uses it so: and kneel before the Lord our maker. And it is also in Job: He
has stretched out his hand against God. Thus then (g) is that hunter against
the Lord to be understood. But what is the word, Hunter, but an entrapper,
persecutor and murderer of earthly creatures? So rose this hunter and his
people, and raised this tower against GOD, which was a type of the impiety of
pride: and an evil intent, though never effected deserves to be punished.
But how was it punished? Because that (h) all sovereignty lies in command,
and all command in the tongue, thus pride was plagued, that the commander of
men should not be understood, because he would not understand the Lord, his
commander. Thus was this conspiracy dissolved, each one departing from him whom
he understood not, nor could he adapt himself to any but those that he
understood, and thus these languages divided them into Nations and dispersed
them over the whole earth, as God who wrought those strange effects, had
resolved.

L. VIVES.
ANd (a) pitch] Bitumen, whereof there was great store in those places. (b) A
tower] The like to this do the profane writers talk of the Giants wars
against the Gods, laying mountain upon mountain, to get foote-hold against
heaven the nearer it. Ter sunt conati inponere Pelion Ossae,
Ter pater extructos disiecit fulmine montes.
Pelion on Ossa three times they had thrown,
And thrice Jove's thunder struck the bul-warke down.


Says Uirgil. The story is common: it might be wrested out of this of the
confusion, as diverse other things are drawn from holy writ into heathenisme,
(c) We may get] Let this be a monument of us all. (d) Left off] And the
builders of the city ceased, say the seauenty. (e) Wonderfull] In Pliny,
Solinus, Mela, Strabo, Herodotus, all the geographers, and many of the Poets,
of this elsewhere. (f) (...).] So it is in latin also. (g) Is that hunter]
Josephus writes that Nimrod first taught mankind to iniure GOD, and to grow
proud against him: for Nimrod.
being wondrous valiant, he persuaded them that they might thank themselves,
and not God, for any good that befell them. And so ordained he himself a
souerainty, and to provide that God should not subvert it, fell a building of
this tower, to resist a second deluge if God should be offended. And the
multitude held it a less matter to serve man then God: and so obeying Nimrod
willingly began to build this huge tower, which might stand all waters
uncovered, Of this tower, Sybilla writes saying. When al men were of one
language some fell to build an high tower as though they would pass through it
unto heaven: But God sent a wind, and ouerthr^, and confounded their language
with diverse, so that each one had a several tongue: and therefore that city
was called Babylon. (h) All soueraignty] The Princes words are great attactiues
of the subjects hearts: which if they be not understood, make all his people
avoid him. And therefore Mithridates even when he was utterly overthrown,
had friends ready to succor him, because he could speak to any nation in
their own language.

Of Gods coming down to confound the language of those towre-builders. CHAP.
5.
FOr whereas it is written: The Lord came down to see the city and tower
which the Genesis 11.
sons of men builded, that is not the sons of God, but that earthly minded
(...) which we call the Terrestrial city: we must think that God removed
from no God moves not from place to place.
place for he is always all in all, but he is said to come down, when he
does any thing in earth beyond the order of nature, wherein his omnipotency is
as it were presented. Nor gets he temporary knowledge by seeing, who can
never be ig^ in any thing: but he is said to see and know that which he lays
open to the (...) and knowledge of others. So then he did not see that city, as
he made it be (...) when he showed how far he was displeased with it. We
may say GOD (...) down to it, because his angels came down, wherein he
dwells, as that also ^ch follows. The Lord said, Behold, the people is one,
and they have all one (...) etc. and then, Come on, let us go down, and there
confound their language: (...) a recapitulation, showing how the LORD came
down: for if he were come down already, why should he say Let us go down
etc. he spoke to the angels in whom he came down. And he says not, come,
and go you down, and (...) confound their language, but come, let us go etc.
showing that they are his ^rs, and yet he co-operateth with them and they with
him as the Apostle (...) (...) we labor together with God. 1. Cor. 3


The manner how GOD speaks to his Angels. CHAP. 6.
THat also where God says, Let us (a) make man in our Image, may be meant unto
the angels, because he says not, I will make, but adding, in our Image, it
is (...) to think that God made man in the angels Image, or that Gods and
(...) ^re all one. This therefore is an intimation of the Trinity: which
Trinity being ^thelesse, but one God, when he had said, let us make, he
adioyneth, thus ^ed the man in his Image, he does not say, the Gods created,
nor in the image of (...) Gods: and so here may the Trinity be understood, as
if the Father had said (...) and the Holy Spirit, come on, let us go down,
and there confound there (...): this now, if there be any reason excluding the
Angels in this point: (...) whom it rather befitted to come unto God, in holy
nations and Godly ^ns, having recourse unto the unchangeable truth, the
eternal (...) ^at upper court: for they themselves are not the truth but
pertakers of (...), that created them, and draw to that, as the fountain of
their life, taken (...) of that, what wants in themselves, and this motion of
theirs is firm, (...) to that whence they never depart. Nor does GOD speak to
his God speaks three manner of ways.
(...) we do one to another, or unto GOD: or his angels to us, or we to
(...) God by them to us: but in an ineffable manner, shown to us after our
(...) and his high speech to them before the effect, is the unaltered order of
(...): not admitting sound, or verberation of air, but an eternal power in
(...) working upon a temporal object. Thus does God speak to his angels,
(...) (...) us, being far of him, in a far other manner: and when we
conceive a^ by the first manner, we come near the angels: but I am not here
to dis^e of Gods ways opening his will to others: the unchangeable truth, does
(...) speak ineffably from himself, unto reasonable creatures, or by
reasonable ^ures, mutable, or spiritual, either unto our imagination and
spirit, or to (...) ^dily sense: and whereas it is said: And shall they not
feign many things they (...) this is no confirmation, but rather a question, as
we use in threatening, (...) ^is verse Virgill declares. (b) Non arma
expedient, totaque ex vrbe sequentur
And shall not all my powers take arms, and run? Aenid. 3.



We must therefore take it as a question. Otherwise it shows not as a
threatening: we must needs therefore add the interrogatiue point. Thus then the
progenies of Noah's three sons were seauenty three or rather (as we have
said) three score and twelve Nations, who filled the earth and the Islands
thereof (c) and the number of nations was far above the number of languages:
for now in Africa we have many Barbarous countries that speak all one
language and who doubts that mankind increasing, diverse took ships and
went to inhabit the Islands abroad?

L. VIVES.
LEt (a) us make] Hierome and Augustine do both take this as an intimation of
the Tr^y (b) Non arma] Dido's words in Virgil. Aenead. 3. (c) And the number]
But I think it is ^der to show any one language, then any one nation, but I
do not contend, but only speak my mind.

Whether the remote Isles were supplied with the beasts of all sorts that were
saved in the Arc. CHAP. 7.
But now there is a question concerning those beasts, which man respects not,
and yet are not produced by putrefaction, as frogs are, but only by copulation
of male and female (as wolves etc.) how they after the deluge, wherein al
perished but those in the Arc, could come into those Islands, unless they
were propagate from them that were preserved in the Arc, we may think that
they might some to the nearest Isles: but there are some far in the maine, to
which no beast could swim. If men desired to catch them and transport them
thither, questionless they might do it (a) by hunting; though we cannot deny
but that the angels by Gods command might carry them thither: but if they were
produced from the earth, as at first because God said, let the earth bring
forth the living soul: then is it most apparent that the diversity of beasts
were preserved in the Arc rather for a figure of the diverse Nations, then for
restoration, if the earth brought them forth in those Isles to which they could
not otherwise come.

L. VIVES.
BY (a) hunting] In the Canaries and other new found Isles, there were none of
many creatures that we have in abundance in the continent: but were feign to be
transported thither (...) the like we use in transportation of plants, and
seeds, from nation to nation.

Whether Adams, or Noah's sons begot any monstrous kinds of men. CHAP. 8.
IT is further demanded whether Noah's sons, or rather Adams (of whom all man
kind came) begot any of those (a) monstrous men, that are mentioned in
prophaine histories: as some that have (b) but one eye in their mid forehead:
some with their heels where their toes should be, some with both sexesin one,
and their right pap a man's, and the left a woman's, and both begetting and
bearing children in one body: some without mouths, living only by air and
smelling; some but a cubite high, called (c) pigmies, of the greek word: some,
where the women bear children at the fifth year of their age: some that have
but one leg, and bend it not, and yet are of wonderful swiftness, being
called (d) Sciopodae, because they sleep under the shade of this their foot:
some neck-lesse, with the face of a man in their breasts: and such other as are
wrought in (e) checker-worke in the Seastreete at Carthage, being taken out of
their most curious and exact histories. What shall I speak of the (f)
Cynocephali, that had dogs heads, and barked like dogs? Indeed we need not
believe all the monstrous reports, that run concerning this point. But
whatsoever he be, that is Man, that is, a mortal reasonable creature, be
his form, voice, or what ever, never so different from an ordinary man's, no
faithful person ought to doubt that he is of Adams progeny: yet is the power
of nature shewre, and strangely shown in such: but the same reasons that we
can give for this or that vnordinary shaped-birth amongst us, the same may be
given for those monstrous nations: for GOD made all, and when or how he would
form this or that, he knows best, having the perfect skill how to beautify
this universe by opposition and diversity of parts. But he that cannot
contemplate the beauty of their whole, stumbles at the deformity of the part:
not knowing the congruence that it has with the whole. We see many that have
above five fingers, or toes: and this farther from that, then the other is in
proportion: yet God forbid that any one should be so besotted as to think the
maker erred in this man's fabrike, though we know not why he made him thus. Be
the diversity never so great, he knows what he does: and none must reprehend
him. (g) At Hippon we had one borne with feet like half moons, and hands
likewise: with two fingers only, and two toes. If there were a nation such
now, (h) curious history would ring off it as of a wonder. But must we
therefore say that this creature came not from Adam? an age can seldom be
without an (i) Hermophradite, though they be not ordinary, persons I mean that
are so perfect in both sexes that we know not what to term them, man, or woman:
though custom has given the pre-eminence to the (k) chief, and call them
still, men. For none speak of them in the female sense. In our time (some few
years ago) was one borne, that was two from the middle vp-wardes, and but one
downe-ward. This was in the (l) East: he had two heads, two breasts, four
hands, one belly and two feet: and lived so long that a multitude of men were
eye witness of this shape of his.

But who can reckon all the birthes extraordinary? Wherefore as we may not say
but those are really descended from the first man, so what Nations soever have
shapes different from that which is in most men, and seem (m) to be exorbitant
from the common form, if they be (n) defineable to be reasonable creatures,
and mortal, they must be acknowledged for Adams issue: (if it be true that
their be such diversity of shapes in whole Nations, varying so f^te from
ours.) For if we knew not that Apes (o) Monkeyes, and (p) Babiounes, were not
men but beasts, those brave and curious historiographers would belie them
confidently to be nations, and generations of men. But if they be men of
whom they write those wonders, what if GODS pleasure was to show us in the
creating of whole nations of such monsters, that his wisdom did not like an
imperfect caruer, fail in the framing of such shapes, but purposely formed them
in this fashion? It is no absurdity therefore to believe that there may be
such nations of monstrous men, as well as we see our times are often witnesses
of monstrous births here amongst our selves. Wherefore to close this question
up with a sure lock: either the stories of such monsters are plain lies, or
if there be such, they are either no men, or if they be men, they are the
progeny of Adam.

L. VIVES.
MOnstrous (a) men] Pliny lib. 7. (b) One eye] Such they say are in India. (c)
Pygmees] I do The Pygmees.
not believe that the Pigm^es were but in one place, or that the writers
concerning them, differ so as they seem. Pliny (lib 4.) says they were in
Thrace, near the town Gerrania, and called Catizi, and that the Cranes beat
them away. For there are great store of Cranes there, whereupon they are called
the Strimonian, of Strymon, a river in Thrace. And Gerrania is drawn from the
greek: for (...) is, a Crane. The same author reherseth their opinion that
said Pygmees dwelt by Endon, a river in Caria. Lib. 5. And (lib 6.) he
follows others, and places them in India, amongst the Prasian hills: as
Philostratus does also. Some there be (as Pline says there) that say they are
above the marshes of Nilus: one of those is Aristotle, who says they live in
Ethiopia amongst the Troglodytes, in caves* and therefore are called
Troglodyta: and that their stature, and crane-battells are ^ables. Of these
Homer sung, placing them in the South, where the Cranes live in winter, as they
do in Thrace in summer, going and coming with the seasons. Mela puts the
Pygmees into the in-most Arabia, little wretches they are says he, and fight
for their corn against the Cranes.

Some hold their are no such creatures. Arist. Pliny. (...) in greek, is a
cubite, and (...), says Eustathius, (Homers interpretor) they had their name.
This cubite is half a (...)* (...) A cubite. A foot. An hand-bredth.
is four and twenty fingers by their measure. For a foot, is twelve inshes,
that is* (...) fingers and four hand-breadths. But an hand-bredth is diverse:
there is the (...) (o^ (...) we do mean) being three inshes, the quarter of
the foot: and there is the greater, (...) twelve fingers, called a spanne:
being three parts of the foot, that is nine fingers. There are (says Pliny
lib. 7.) upon those mountains, the Span-men, as they say, or the Pigmee^* A
spanne.
being not above three spannes (that is two foot) high. So says Gellius also
that their highest stature is but two foot. lib. 9. Pliny and Gellius do both
mean, six and th^e fingers. Iuuenall to make them the more ridiculous, says
they were not above a foot high. (d)] Sciopodae] Or, foote-shadowed: (...) is
a shadow. (...)* a foot. (e) Checker-worke] M^siuum opus. Spartian uses it,
and Pliny. It is (says Hermolaus Barbarus upon Plinies Sciopodes a people.
sixth book, and Baptista Egnatius upon Spartian) wrought with stones of
diverse colors, which being rightly laid together, are the portraytures of
images: as is ordinary to be seen in the pauementes at Rome and elsewhere in
old works, for of late it is neglected: Our in-laide works in our chaires,
and tables in Spain have some resemblance thereof. Checker-workes.
Perottus, says it is corrruptly called Musaicum, but the true word is
Mus^acum, of (...), and alleges this place of Pliny: Barbarus seems to be
of his mind also. The ^gar called it musaicum, because it seemed to be a
work of great wit and industry. (...) Cynocephali] Word for word,
Dogges-heads. Solinus makes them a kind of Apes, and possible to be turned
from ever being wild again. Diodorus accountes them wild Cynocephali, a
people.
beasts. (g) At Hippon] Some had added in the Margent, Diaritum, and Zar^tum.
It should be Diarrhytum. Mela, Strabo, Pliny and Ptolomy speak of two (...)
in Africa, (having their names from Knights, or horsemen, for so is the
Greek (...) interpreted:) the one called Hippon Diarrhytus, near Carthage, a
little on this side, and (...) was Augustine Bishop: the other called Hippon
Regius, being farther East, and the (...) ancient seat, as Silius says: Tum
vaga and antiquis dilectus regibus Hippon.
Vaga and Hippon, that old seat of Kings.
Touching at them both. (h) Curious history] Which he spoke on before. (i)
Hermaphrodytes] (...)
Verbally from the Greek is the word Androgyuus, (...), a man, (...), a woman:
But they are called Hermaphrotes, because the son of Hermes and Aphrodite,
that is, Mercury and Venus, was held to be the first halfe-male. (k) The
chiese] The masculine: so says the Latin, Semi-mas. When those were borne,
they were counted prodigies, in old times. L^ Lucane, etc. (l) The East.] In
the East part of Afric, lying toward Nilus and Cyrene, (...) ^le parts
Affricke on the East from Asia. (m) Exorbitant] out of orbita, the right path
of nature. (n) Definable] It is known that the Philosophers defined man to be
a reasonable creature, and added mortal: because they held the most of their
Gods, and the Demones to be reasonable creatures, and yet immortal. (o)
Monkeyes] Cercopitheri, tayled Apes, (...), a Munkeyes.
tail, (...) an Ape. Martial. Callidus admissas eludere Simius hastas,
Si mihi cauda foret, Cercopithecus eram.
I mocked their darted staves withouten fail,
Just like a Monkey had I had a tail.
Aristotle calls those tailed Apes, (...): De animal. lib. 2. But some beasts
there are with Lions faces, and Panthers bodies, as big as an Hind, which
he calls Cepi. lib. 10. There are also a people near the Fennes of Meotis
called Cepi. (p) Babiouns] Sphynga, a creature Sphinxes.
not much unlike an Ape, but bigger, with a face like a woman, and two dugges
dangling before. Solinus faith they live in Ethiope, and are easily taught and
tamed. The Poets give the Sphinx a Virgins face, a Lions paws, and a Griffons
wings.

Whether there be any inhabitants of the earth, called the Antipodes. CHAP. 9.
But whereas they fable of a (a) people that inhabit that land where the sun
rises, when it sets with us, and go with (b) their feet toward ours, it
is incredible. They have no authority for it, but only (c) conjecture that
such a thing may be, because the earth hangs within the orbs of heaven, and
each (e) part of the world is above and below alike, and thence they gather
that the other hemysphere cannot want inhabitants. Now they consider not that
although that it be globous as ours is, yet it may be all covered with Sea:
and if it be bare, yet it follows not, that it is inhabited, seeing that the
Scripture (that proves all that it says to be true, by the true events that
(...) presageth) never makes mention of any such thing. And it were too absurd
to say, that men might sail over that huge Ocean, and go inhabit there: that
the progeny of the first man might people that part also. But let us go and
seek amongst those seauentie two nations and their languages, whether ^ee can
find that City of GOD which remained a continual pilgrim on (...) until the
deluge, and is showed to persevere amongst the sons of (...) after their
blessing, chiefly in Sem, Noah's eldest son, for Iaphets blessing (...) to
dwell in the tents of his brother.

L. VIVES.
PEople (a) that.] All Cosmographers divide the heaven, and consequently the
earth into five The Antipodes.
Zones, the utmost whereof lying under the Poles, and far from the Heavens
motion and the Suns heat are insufferably cold: the mid-most, being in the
most violent motion of Heaven, and heat of the Sun, is intolerably hot: the
two being interposed between both extremes, are habitable: one temperate Zone
lying toward the North and the other toward the South: the inhabitants of
both, are called Autichthones. Now Cleomedes bids us divide those two Zones
into four equal parts: those that dwell in the parts that lie in the same
Zone, are called Periaeci, circumferentiall inhabitants, those that dwell in
diverse, or in an unequal distance from the Poles, and equal from the
equinoctial, are called Antoeci, or opposites: they that dwell in equal
distances from both, are called Antipodes. The Periaeci, differ in their day
and night, but not in seasons of the year; the Antoeci just contrary: the
Antipodes in both. It was an old opinion which Tully, Mela, and other chief
men followed, that never Derep. li. 6.
man had any knowledge of the South. Tully puts the great ocean between it and
us, which no man ever passed: Macrobius discourses at large hereupon. I do but
glance at this for fear of clogging my reader. This was a great persuasion to
Augustine to follow Lactantius, and deny the Antipodes, for the learned men saw
well, that grant men no passage over that great sea unto the temperate
Southern Clymate, (as Tully and other great authors utterly denied them) and
then they that dwell there could not possibly be of Adams stock: so that he
had rather deny them habitation there, then contend in argument against so many
learned opposits: But it is most sure once, that Antipodes there are, and that
we have found away unto them, not only in old times, but even by late sea
masters: for of old, diverse flying into the Persian gulf for fear of
Augustus, sailed by the coast of Ethiopia and the Atlantike sea unto Hercules
pillars. And in the prime of Carthages height, some sailed from thence through
Hercules his straytes, into the red sea of Arabia, and then were not the Bays
of Persia, India, the Eastern sea, Taproban, and the Isles thereabouts all
found out by the power of Alexanders navy? and those you shall find Antipodes
to us, if you mark the posture of the Globe diligently, for they have the same
elevation of their South pole, and be in the same distance from the
occidentall point, that some of the countries in our climat have, of our North
point. (b) Their feet.] As Tully says in Scipios dream. (c) Conjecture.] For
the temperature of the Southern Zone is just like to ours. (d) Each part.] The
world is round, and Heaven is every where a like above it.

Of the generation of Sem, in which the City of God lies down unto Abraham.
CHAP. 10.
SEMS generation it is then that we must follow to find the City of God after
the deulge, as Seth derived it along before. Therefore the Scripture having
shown the Earthly City to be in Babylon, that is, in confusion, returns to
the Patriarch Sem, and carries his generation down until Abraham, counting
every man's years, when he had his son, and how long he lived: where by the
way I think of my promise, of explayning, why one of Hebers sonns was called
Phalech, because in his days the earth was divided: how was it divided? by the
confusion of tongues.

So then the sons of Sem that concern not this purpose, being letten pass,
the Scripture recites those that convey his seed down unto Abraham: as it did
with those that conveyed Seths seed before the deluge, down unto Noah. It
begins therefore thus. These are the generations of Sem: Sem was an hundred
years old and begat (a) Arphaxad, two years after the flood. And Sem lived
after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons and daughters,
and dyed: And thus of the rest, showing when every one begot his son, that
belonged to this generation that descends to Abraham, and how long every one
lived after he had begotten his son, and begot more sons and daughters, to
show us (...) a great multitude might come of one, least we should make any
childish (...) at the few that it names: Sems seed being sufficient to
replenish so (...) kingdoms, chiefly for the Assyrian Monarchy, where Ninus
the subduer (...) the East reigned in majesty, and left a mighty Empire to be
possessed (...) years after by his posterity: But let us not stand upon
trifles longer then (...) must: we will not reckon the number of every man's
years till he dyed, ^ely until he begat the son who is enranked in this
genealogicall roll. (...) gathering these from the deluge to Abraham, we will
briefly touch at other ^ents as occasion shall necessarily import. In the
second year therefore (...) the deluge, Sem being two hundred years old begat
Arphaxat: Arphaxat (...) a hundred thirty five years old begat Canaan: he
being a hundred and (...) years old begat Sala, and so old was Sala when he
begot Heber: Heber (...) hundred thirty and four years old when he begat
Phalec: Phalec a hund^ and thirty and begat Ragau: he one hundred thirty and
two, and begat Se^ruch one hundred and thirty and begot Nachor: Nachor seauenty
and nine (...) got Thara: (b) Thara seauenty, and begot Abram whom God
afterward (...) Abraham. So then from the deluge to Abraham are one thousand
seauenty (...) years, according to the vulgar translation, that is the
Septuagints. But (...) Hebrew the years are far fewer, whereof we can hear
little or no (...) shown.

(...) therefore in this quest of the City of God, we cannot say in this time
(...) those men were not all of one language, (those seauenty and two na^ mean
wherein we seek it) that all mankind was fallen from GODS (...) ^uice: but
that it remained only in Sems generation, descending to (...) by Arphaxad. But
the earthly City was visible enough in that pre^ion of building the tower up
to heaven (the true type of deuillish exal^): therein was it apparent, and ever
after that. But whether this other (...) ^ot before, or lay hid, or rather both
remained in Noah's sons, the godly (...) two blessed ones, and the wicked in
that one accursed, from whom that (...) giant-hunter against the Lord
descended, it is hard to discern, for it may (...) that most likely) that
before the building of Babylon, GOD might have (...) of some of Chams children,
and the deulil, of some of Sems and Iaphets. (...) may not believe that the
earth wanted of either sort. For that, saying: (...) all gone out of the way,
they are all corrupt, there is not one that does good, no Psa. 14. 3. 4. Psa.
52. 3. 4.
(...) even in both the Psalms that have this saying, this follows; Do not
(...) work iniquity know that they eat up my people as it were bread? so
that (...) his people then: And therefore that same, No not one, is meant
restric^ (...) the sons of men, and not the sons of GOD, for he said
before, (...) looked down from heaven upon the sons of men, to see if there
were any (...) ^ld understand and seek GOD? and then the addition that
follows, (...) that it was those, that lived after the law of the flesh, and
not of the (...) ^ome he speaks of.

L. VIVES.
ARphaxad (a)] From him (says Hierome) the Chaldaeans descended. (b) Thara]
The 70. call him (...): the Hebrew, Terah.

Tha the Hebrew tongue (so called afterward of Heber) was the first language
upon the earth, and remained in his family when that great confusion was. CHAP.
11.
Wherefore even as sin wanted not sons when they had all but one language,
(for so it was before the deluge, and yet all deserved to perish therein but
Noah and his family) so when man's presumption was punished with his languages
confusion, whence the City Babylon, their proud work, had the name, Hebers
(a) house failed not but kept the old language still. Whereupon as I said,
Heber was reckoned the first of all the sons of Sem, who begot each of them
an whole nation: yet was he the fifth from Seth in descent. So then because
this language remained in his house, that was confounded in all the rest,
(being credibly held the only language upon earth before this) hence it had
The Hebrew tongue.
the name of the Hebrew tongue, for then it was to be nominally distinct from
the other tongues, as other tongues had their proper names. But when it was the
tongue of all, it had no name, but the tongue or language of mankind, wherein
all men spoke. Some may say: if that the earth was divided by the languages in
Phalechs time, Hebers son, it should rather have been called his name then
Hebers: O but we must understand that (b) Heber did therefore give his son
Phalec such a name, that is, division, because he was borne unto him just at
the time when the earth was divided, so means the Scripture when it says, in
his days the earth was divided. For if Heber were not living when the
confusion befell, the tongue that was to remain in his family should not have
had the name from him: and there we must think that it was first universal,
because the confusion of tongues was a punishment, which Gods people were not
to cast off: Nor was it for nothing that Abraham could not communicate this his
language unto all his generation, but only to those that were propagate by
Jacob, and arising into an evident people of God, were to receive his
Testament, and the Savior in the flesh. Nor did Hebers whole progeny bear
away this language, but only that from whence Abraham descended. Wherefore
though there be no godly men evidently named, that lived at the time when the
wicked built Babylon: yet this concealment ought not to dull, but rather to
incite one to inquire further. For whereas we read that at first, men had all
one language, and that Heber is first reckoned of all the sons of Sem, being
but the fifth of his house downward, and that language which the Patriarchs
and Prophets used in all their words and writings, was the Hebrew: Verily when
woe seek where that tongue was preserved in the confusion (being to be kept
amongst them to whom the confusion could be no punishment) what can we say but
that it was preserved unto this man's family of whom it had the name? and that
this is a great sign of righteousness in him, that where as the rest were
afflicted with the confusion of their tongues, he only and his family was
acquit of that affliction. But yet there is another doubt: How could Heber and
his son Phalec become two several nations, having both but one language? And
truly the Hebrew tongue descended to Abraham from Heber, and so down from him
until Israel became a great people. How then could every son of Noah's
sons progenies become a particular nation when as Heber and Phalec had both
but one lang^? The greatest probability is, that (c) Nembroth became a nation
also, and yet was reckned, for the eminence of his dignity, and corporal
strength, to keep the number of seauenty two nations inuiolate: but Phalec was
not named for growing into a nation, but that that strange accident of the
earths division fell out in (...) days: for of the nation and language of
Heber, was Phalec also. We need not (...) at this, how Nembroth might live just
with that time when Babylon was (...) and the confusion of tongues befell, for
there is no reason, because Heber was the sixth from Noah, and he but the
fourth, but that they might both live unto (...) time and in one time, for this
fell out so before, where they that had the least (...) lived the longest, that
they that had the more, died sooner: or they (...) ^ad few sons had them
later then those that had many, for we must con^ this, that when the earth was
builded, Noah's sons had not only all (...) issue (who were called the
fathers of those nations) but that these also (...) and numerous families,
worthy the name of nations. Nor may we (...) then that they were borne as they
are reckened. Otherwise, how could (...) twelve sons (another son of
Hebers) become of those nations, if he (...) ^ne after Phalec, as he is
reckned? for in Phalecs days was the earth (...).

We must take it thus then, Phalec is first named, but was borne long (...)
brother Ioktan, whose twelve sons had all their families so great that (...)
^ht be sufficient to share one tongue in the confusion, for so might he that
(...) borne, be first reckned, as Noah's youngest son is first named, name^
Cham the second the next, and Shem, the eldest, the last. Now some of (...) ^s
names continued, so that we may know to this day whence they are (...) ^s, the
Assirians of Assure; the Hebrews of Heber, (d) and some con^ of time has
abolished, in so much that the most learned men can (...) find any memory of
them in antiquity. For some say that the Egypti^ they that came of Mizraim (e)
Chams son: here is no similitude (...) at all: nor in the Aethiopians which
they say came of Chus, another (...) Chams. And if we consider all, we shall
find far more names lost (...) ^ayning.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) house.] Some think they consented not unto the building of the
Tower and (...) before had the first language left only to them. Herodotus
writes that Psameti^ ^yptian king, caused two children to be brought up in ^e
woods, without hearing (...) man's mouth, thinking that that language which they
would speak of themselves (...) ^ould be that which man spoke at first: after
three years, they were brought unto (...) ^ey said nothing but Bec, diverse
times. Now Bec is bread in Phrygian, whereupon (...) the Phrygian tongue to be
the first: but it was no marvel if they cried (...) continually brought up
amongst the goats, that could cry nothing else. (...) (...)] Prophesying of
what was to (...), says Hierom. (c) Nembroth became,] (...), it is uncertain:
where he reigned is plain, Genesis 2. In Babylon, and Arach that (...) Hierom)
Edessa, and Accad, that is now called Nisibis, and in Chalah, that (...) ^d
called Seleucia of Seleucus, or else that which is now called Ctesiphon.
Perhaps he was the father (but doubtless the great increaser) of those
nations. (d) And some] So says Hierome of all Ioctans sons. And no marvel,
since that all the mountains, hills, and rivers of Italy, France and Spain,
changed their names quite into barbarous ones within the compass of two
hundred years. (e) Ghams sonne] Nay Egypt (says Hierome) Egypt.
bare Chams own name: for the seauenty put the letter X. for the Hebrew He,
continually, to Ham.
teach us the aspiration dew to the word, and here they translate Cham, for
that which in the Hebrew is Ham, by which name Egypt in the countries proper
language is called unto this day. Thus far Hierome. But it might be that
Egypt was called Mizraim of him that first peopled it, as Hierome says the
Hebrews call it continually. Egypt was also called afterward Aeria, because as
Stephanus says, the air was thick therein: it was called further-more
Neptapolis of the seven cities therein. And lastly Egypt of Egyptus, Belus
his son. Homer calls the river Nilus, Egypt. (f) Ethiopians] The Hebrews
call Ethiopia, Chus. Hieron. It was called Atlantia of Atlas, and Ethiopia
afterward of Ethiops, Uulcans son, as some Aethiopia.
say. But I think rather of the burnt hew of the inhabitants: for (...) in
Greek, is black: Homer that old Poet says, there are two Ethiopa's. Odyss. 1.
(...), etc.
This lies upon the East, that on the West.


There is also a part of the I Will Eubaea called Aethiopon.

Of that point of time wherein the city of God began a new order of succession
in Abraham. CHAP. 12.
NOw let us see how the City of God proceeded from that minute wherein it
began to be more eminent and evident in promises unto Abraham (which now we
see fulfilled in Christ.) Thus the holy Scripture teaches us then, that
Abraham was borne in a part of Chaldaea, which belonged (a) unto the Empire of
the Assyrians. And now had superstition got great head in Chaldaea, as it had
all over else: so there was but only the house of Thara, Abraham's father, that
served God truly, and (by all likelihood) kept the Hebrew tongue pure, though
that (as Iosuah tells the Hebrews) as they were Gods evident people in
Egypt, so in Mesopotamia they fell to Idolatry, all Hebers other sons
becoming other nations, or being commixt with others. Therefore even as in
the deluge of waters Noah's house remained alone to repair mankind, so in
this deluge of sin and superstition, Thares house only remained as the place
wherein GODS City was planted and kept. And even as before the deluge, the
generations of all from Adam, the number of years, and the reason of the
deluge being all reckoned up, before God began to speak of building the Arc,
the Scripture says of Noah: These are the generations of Noah: even so here,
having reckoned all from Sem, the son of Noah, down unto Abraham, he
puts this to the conclusion, as a point of much moment, These are the
generations of Thara. Thara begot Abraham, Nachor, and Aram: And Aram dyed
before (b) his father Thara in the land wherein he was borne, being a part of
Chaldaea. And Abraham and Nachor took them wives: the name of Abraham's wife
was Sarah, and the name of Nachors wife was Melca, the daughter of Aram: who
was father both to Melca and Iesea, whom some hold also to be Sara, Abrams
wife.

L. VIVES.
WHich (a) belonged] For Mela, Pliny, Strabo and others, place Chaldaea in
Assyria: And (...) only a part of that Assyria which the ancient writers
called by the name of Sy^ (...) country, but of that Assyria also which Strabo
calls the Babilonian Assyria. Assyria.
(...) makes a difference between Syria and Assyria. Cyropaed. 1. (b) Before]
In his fa^ (...). So all interpretours take it: Augustine might perhaps
understand it, before his (...) to Charra, which is part of Chaldaea. Charrah
was a city in Mesopotamia, where Charra.
(...) (...) killed Crassus the Roman general.

^hy there is no mention of Nachor, Tharas son, in his departure from
Chaldaea to Mesopotamia. CHAP. 13.
(...) the Scripture proceeds, and declares how Thara and his family left
^ldaea, and came (a) into Mesopotamia, and dwelt in Charra. But of his (...)
^chor there is no mention, as if he had not gone with him. Thus says the
(...). Thus Thara took Abraham his son, and Lot his grandchild, Abra^ Genesis
11.
(...), and Sara his daughter in law, his son Abraham's wife, and he led them
(...) (...) country of Chaldaea, into the land of Canaan, and he came to
Charra and (...) there. Here is no word of Nachor, nor his wife Melcha. But
afterward, (...) Abraham sent his servant to seek a wife for his son Isaac,
we find it (...) thus: So the servant took ten of his masters Camels, and
of his Masters Genesis ^4.
(...) ^th him, and departed and went into Mesopotamia into the city of
Nachor. ^ce, and others beside, do prove, that Nachor went out of Chaldaea
al^ ^led himself in Mesopotamia where Abraham and his father had dwelt. (...)
not the Scriptures then remember him, when Thara went thence to (...) where,
when it makes mention both of Abraham and Lot, that was (...) ^and-childe, and
Sara his daughter in law, in this transmigration? what (...) think but that
he had forsaken his father and brothers religion, and (...) (...) Chaldees
superstition, and afterward, either repenting for his fact, (...) ^secuted by
the country, suspecting him to be hollow-harted, depar^ himself also? for
Holophernes Isreal's enemy in the book of Judith, (...) what nation they were,
and whether he ought to fight against them, (...) answered by Achior captain
of the Ammonites: Let my Lord hear the (...) mouth of his servant, and I will
show thee the truth concerning this people (...) these mountains, and there
shall no lie come out of thy servants mouth. (...) come out of the stock of the
Chaldaeans, and they dwelt before in (...) ^ia, because they would not follow
the Gods of their fathers, that (...) ^us in the land of Chaldaea: but they
left the way of their ancestors and (...) the God of heaven, whom they knew: so
that they cast them out from (...) their gods, and they fled into Mesopotamia,
and dwelt there many (...) their God commanded them to depart from the place
where they (...) to go into the land of Chanaan where they dwelt, and so
forth, as (...) Ammonite relates. Hence it is plain that Thara his family
were per^ the Chaldaeans for their religion, because they worshipped the true
(...) God.

L. VIVES.
Mesopotamia] Mesopotamia quasi (...), between two seas, for it lay all be^
Mesopotamia.
(...) and Euphrates.

Of the age of Thara, who lived in Charra until his dying day. CHAP. 14.
THara dyed in Mesopotamia, where it is said he lived two hundred and five
years, and after his death the promises that God made to Abraham began to be
manifested: Of Thara, it is thus recorded: The days of Thara were two hundred
and five years, and he dyed in Charra. He lived not there all this time, you
must think, but because he ended his time (which amounted unto two hundred and
five years) in that place, it is said so. Otherwise we could not tell how
many years he lived, because we have not the time recorded when he came to
Charra: and it were fondness to imagine that in that Catalogue where all their
ages are recorded, his only should be left out: for whereas the Scripture
names some, and yet names not their years, it is to be understood, that they
belong not to that generation that is so lineally drawn down from man to man.
For the stem that is derived from Adam unto Noah, and from him unto Abraham,
names no man without recording the number of his years also.

Of the time wherein Abraham received the promise from God, and departed from
Charra. CHAP. 15.
But whereas we read, that after Thara's death the Lord said unto Abraham,
Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers
house, etc. We must not think that this followed immediately in the times,
though it follow immediately in the scriptures, for so we shall fall into an
(b) inextricable doubt: for after these words unto Abraham, the Scripture
follows thus: So Abraham departed, as the Lord spoke unto him, and Lot went
with him: and Abraham was seauentie five years old when he went out of
Charra. How can this be true now, if Abraham went not out of Charra until
after the death of his father? for Thara begot him, as we said before, at the
seauentith year of his age: unto which add seauentie five years, (the age of
Abraham at this his departure from Charra) and it makes a hundred forty five
years. So old therefore was Thara when Abraham departed from Charra, that
city of Mesopotamia: for Abraham was then but seauentie two years of age, and
his father begetting him when he was seauentie years old, must needs be a
hundred forty five years old (and no more) at his departure. Therefore he
went not after his fathers death, who lived two hundred and five years, but
before, at the seauenty two years of his own age, and consequently the
hundred forty five of his fathers. And thus the Scripture (in an usual course)
returns to the time which the former relation had gone beyond: as it did
before saying, That the sons of Noah's sons were divided into nations and
languages, etc. and yet afterward adioyneth: Genesis 11. 1.
Then the whole earth was of one language, etc. as though this had really
followed.

How then had every man his nation and his tongue, but that the Scriptures
return back again unto the times ouer-passed. Even so here, whereas it is
said, the days of Thara were two hundred and five years, and he died in
Charra: and then the scriptures returning to that which ouer-passed to finish
the discourse of Thara first: then the Lord said unto Abraham: get thee out of
thy country, etc. after which is added. So Abraham, departed as the Lord spoke
unto him, and Lot went with him: and Abraham was seauenty years old when he
went from Charra. This therefore was, when his (...) was a hundred forty and
five years of age, for then was Abraham, seauenty five. This doubt is also
otherwise dissolved by counting Abraham's seauenty (...) when he went to Charra,
from the time when he was freed from the fire of (...) Chaldaaens and not from
his birth, as if he had rather been borne then. (...) Saint Stephen in the
Acts discoursing hereof, says thus: The God of glory ap^ Act 7. 2. 3.
to our father Abraham in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charra, and said
(...) him, get thee out of thy country from thy kindred and come into the land
which (...) give thee. According to these words of Stephen it was not after
Tharas death (...) ^od spoke to Abraham (for Thara died in Charra) but it was
before he dwelt (...) ^rra, yet was in Mesopotamia. But he was gone out of
Chaldaea first. And ^eas Stephen says, Then came he out of the land of the
Chaldaeans and dwelt in (...): this is relation of a thing done after those
words of God: for he went (...) Chaldaea after God had spoken to him (for he
says, God spoke to him in Mesopotamia) but that word, Then, compriseth all the
time from Abraham's departure until the Lord spoke to him. And that which
follows. After that his father (...) dead God placed him in this land wherein
he now dwells. The meaning of the place is. And God brought him from thence,
where his father dyed afterward, and placed (...) ^ere So then we just
understand, that God spoke unto Abraham being in Meso^tamia, yet not as yet
dwelling in Charra: but that he came in to Charra with ^er, holding Gods
commandment fast, and in the seauenty five year of (...) departed thence:
which was in his fathers a hundred forty five year. Now (...) that he was
placed in Chanaan (not he came out of Charra) after his (...) death, for when
he was dead, he began to buy land there, and became (...) possessions. But
whereas God spoke thus to him after he came from (...) and was in Mesopotamia,
Get thee out of thy country, from thy kindred (...) thy fathers house: this
concerned not his bodily remouall (for that he (...) before) but the
separation of his soul from them, for his mind was (...) ^arted from them if
he ever had any hope to return, or desired it: this ^d desire by Gods command
was to be cut of. It is not incredible (...) ^erwards when as Nachor followed
his father Abraham then fulfilled the and of God, and took Sara his wife and
Lot his brothers son, and so (...) out of Charra.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) inextricable doubt.] So Hierome calls it and dissolueth it
somewhat ^sly from Augustine, although he use three conjectures. (b)
Other-wise dissol^ ^us Hierome dissolueth it out of an Hebrew history: for that
which we read the (...) of Chaldaea, the Hebrew has (...) Ur Shadim, that is,
the fire of the Caldae^ upon the Hebrews have the story: Abraham was taken by
the Chaldaeans, and (...) he would not worship their Idols, namely their
fire, he was put into it; from whence The Chaldeaeans worship the fire,
(...) ^ed him by miracle, and the like story they have of Thara also his
father, that he, (...) he would not adore their images was so served, and so
escaped also: as whereas it is (...) Aram dyed before his father in the land
where he was borne in the country of (...), they say it is, in his fathers
presence in the fire of the Chaldaeans, wherein be^ ^ould not worship it, he
was burned to death. And likewise in other places of y^ text. (...) ^hen he
comes to this point, says: the Hebrew tradition is true, that says that Thara
(...) came out of the fire of the Chaldaees, and that Abraham being hedged
round about in (...) with the fire which he would not worship, was by Gods
power delivered, and from thence are the number of his years accounted,
because then he first confessed the Lord God and contemned the Chaldee Idols:
Thus far Hierome, without whose relation this place of Augustine is not to
be understood. Josephus writes that Thara hating Chaldaea, departed thence
for the grief of his son Arams death, and came to dwell in Charra: and that
Arams tomb was to be seen in Vr of the Chaldees.

The order and quality of Gods promises made unto Abraham. CHAP. 16.
NOw must we examine the promises made unto Abraham: for in them began the
oracles presaging our Lord Jesus Christ the true God, to appear: who was to
come of that godly people, that the prophesies promised. The first of them is
this: The Lord said unto Abraham: get thee out of thy country, and from thy
kindred, Genesis 12.
and from thy fathers house unto the land that I will show thee. And I will
make of thee a great nation, and will bless thee, and make thy name great, and
thou shall be blessed, I will also bless them that bless thee, and curse them
that curse thee, and in them shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
Here we must observe a double promise made unto Abraham: the first that his
seed should possess the land of Canaan, in these words; Go unto the land
that I will show thee, and I will make thee a great nation: the second of far
more worth and moment, concerning his spiritual seed, whereby he is not
only the father of Israel, but of all the nations that follow his faith: and
that is in these words: And in thee shall all the families of the earth be
blessed. This promise was made in Abraham's seauentie five year, as Eusebius
(a) thinks: as if that Abraham did presently there upon depart out of Charra,
because the Scripture may not be controuled, that gives him this many years
at the time of his departure. But if it were made then, then was Abraham with
his father in Charra: for he could not depart from thence, unless he had
first inhabited there. Does not this then contradict Steuens saying; That God
appeared unto him in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charra? But we must
conceive Acts. 7. 2.
that this was in one year, Gods promise to Abraham first; Abraham's dwelling
in Charra next, and lastly his departure: not only because Eusebius his
computation is thus, accounting four hundred thirty years from this year
unto the Israelites freedom out of Egypt, but also because the Apostle (b)
Paul mentions it Galat. 3. 17
like-wise.

L. VIVES.
EUsebius (a) thinketh] These are his words: Arius the fourth reigning in
Assyria, and T^alassion in Sycionia, Abraham being seventy five years old,
was spoken unto by God, and received the promise. (b) Paul] Galat. 3. 17. The
law which was given four hundred and thirty years after the promise made unto
Abraham.

Of the three most eminent kingdoms of the world, the chief of which in
Abraham's time was most excellent of all. CHAP. 17.
AT this time there were diverse famous kingdoms upon earth, that is, society of
men living carnally, and in the service of the apostaticall powers, three of
which were most illustrious, the (a) Sycionians, the (b) Egiptians and the
Assyrians, which was the greatest of all. For Ninus the son of Belus,
conquered al Asia, excepting India only. I do not mean by Asia (c) which is
now but one province of the greater Asia, but that which contained it all,
which some make the third part of the world, dividing the whole earth into
Asia, Europe and Africa, and some (d) make it the Asia.
(...) dividing the whole into two only. Others divide all into three (e)
equal (...) Asia in the East, from the North to the South: Europe (f) from the
(...) to the West, and (g) Africa from the West unto the South: so that Europe
and Afric are but the half of the world, and Asia the other half: but the
(...) first were made two parts, because (h) all the water that comes from
the (...), runs in betwixt them two, making (i) our great sea. So that divide
but the world into two, and Asia shall be one half, and Europe and Africa the
other. Therefore Sicyonia, one of the three eminent kingdoms, was not under
the Assy^ monarchy, for it lay in Europe. But (k) Egypt must needs be inferior
unto (...), seeing that the Assyrians were Lords of all Asia, excepting India.
So (...) city of the wicked kept the chief court in Assyria: whose chief
city (...) ^bylon, most fitly called so, that is, confusion: and there Ninus
succeeded (...) ^her Belus, who had held that souerainty three score and five
years: and (...) ^ne Ninus lived fifty two years, and had reigned forty and
five years (...) Abraham was borne, which was about a thousand two hundred
years be^ ^ome was built, that other Babylon of the West.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) Sicyonians] Sicyon is an ancient city on the left hand as you come
into Pelopone^ ^gialeus (as Pausanias and Eusebius say) was the first King
thereof. Sicyonia is a little (...) in Achaia, but the kings of it ruled
Achaia, and Sycion was their place of abode: It Sicyon.
(...) Achaia, and Aegialia of the Kings thereof in old time. Pliny. And all
Peloponesus (...) there-after. Eusebius. Afterward it was called Apia of king
Apis the fourth, and (...) ^oponesus of Pelops, quasi (...), Pelops I Will, for it
is an half Island. Pausanias Pelopom^sus.
(...) Peloponesus was not called Aegialia, but only that part toward the
sea, quasi (...) ^all, or sea-coasting: and afterward Sicyonia of King Sicyon:
of him hereafter. (...)] The Thebaeans ruled here in those days, a country in
Delta, named so by the rich (...) city of Thebes. (c) That which] Of Asia
minor, hereafter. (d) Some make it] (...) Salust) divided the world but into
two parts, Asia and Europe, making Africa a (...) ^pe. In Bello Iugurth.
There-vpon Sylius says of Lybia, that it was either a great (...), or the
third part of the world: Those that divide not Africa from Europe do (...) the
temperature of the winds, and upon the heavens: as Lucane says, lib (...).
Tertia pars rerum Lybie si credere famae,
Cuncta velis: at si ventos, calumque sequaris
Pars erit Europae: nec enim plus littora Nili
Quam Scythicus Tanais primus a Gadibus absunt.
Lybia's the worlds third part, or authors lie:
But if you ground upon the winds and sky,
It Is part of Europe: Tanais shores and Niles,
Lie a like distant from the Gades Isles.
(...) ^ward upon this question. (e) Equall] Some read unequal: better. For
Afric is (...) Europe, and Asia greater then both: which lies in a larger
quantity to the East, (...), Africa, and the sea between them both contains,
as Mela says: but he fol^ ^olde tradition: for we have now discovered a
great part of Africa toward the (...) ^owne before. (f) Europe from the North]
On the North side, Europe is bounded (...) sea, and the British Ocean. On the
West with the Atlantike Ocean: on the Europe.
(...) ^he Mediterrane sea, and on the East with Hellespont, the two Bosphori,
the (...), and the river of Tanais. (g) Africa] Africa is bounded on the East
(...) on the West with the Atlanticke sea, on the North with our sea, and on
the south (...) ^opian Ocean. But thus the old writers imperfectly limited it,
the Portugalles (...) ^ed it far more fully. (h) All the water] The Bruges
copy reads, because our sea comes from the Ocean between them both. The sea
that the Greeks and Latins call the Mediterrane sea, is ours, for no other
sea comes near them. It stretches (according to Mela) from Hercules his
pillars to the Bay of Issus on the East, to Meotis and Tanais on the North,
lying between Europe and Africa in one-place, and between Europe and Asia in
another. (i) Our great sea] That which flows from the Ocean, upon the coasts
of Europe and Africa, and is broadest between the bays of Liguria and Hippon,
where Augustine dwelt: who therefore calls it, great. (k) Egypt must] Egypt
was not all Asia, but a part of it, lying from Nilus to the East: yet did it
not obey the (...).
Assyrians, but was a mighty kingdom of it self, and made great wars upon
Assyria, and ouer-ran much of it, if we may give credence to their books.

Of Gods second promise to Abraham, that he and his seed should possess the
land of Canaan. CHAP. 18.
SO Abraham at the seventy five year of his own age: and the hundred forty
five of his fathers, left Charra, and took Lot his brothers son with him,
and Sara his wife, and came into the land of Canaan, even unto (a) Sichem,
where he received this second promise: The Lord appeared unto Abraham and said
(...). 1^.
unto thy seed will I give this land. This promise concerned not that seed of
his, whereby he was to become the father of all the nations, but the progeny
of his body only, by Isaac and Israel: for their seed possessed this land.

L. VIVES.
Unto (a) Sichem] This lay in the tribe of Ephraims part, and Abimelech
afterward destroyed i^ Judge. 9. 45. It was called Sicima in Greek and Latin,
and there remained some memo^ (...).
(...) i^ i^ Hieromes time, in the suburbs of Neapolis near unto Joseph's
Sepulcher: there was (...) Sichem also upon mount Ephraim, a city of the
fugitives. Hier. de loc. Hebraec.

How God preserved Saras chastity in Egypt, when Abraham would not be known
that she was his wife but his sister. CHAP. 19.
THere Abraham built an altar, and then departed and dwelt in a wilderness,
and from thence was driven by famine, to go into Egypt, where he called his
wife his sister, and yet (a) lied not. For she was his cousin german, and Lot
being his brothers son, was called his brother. So that he did only
conceal, and not deny that she was his wife: commending the custody of her
chastity unto God, and avoiding man's deceits, as man: for if he should not
have endeavored ^o eschew danger as much as in him lay, he should rather have
become a (b) (...) of GOD, then a truster in him, whereof we have disputed
against (...) (...) Manichee his callumnyes. And as Abraham trusted upon God,
so came it (...) (...) for Pharao the King of Egypt, seeking to have her to
wife, was sore af^, ^d forced to restore her to her husband. Where (c) God
forbid that we should (...) her defiled by him any way: his great plagues that
he suffered would no way permit him to commit any such outrage.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) lied not] For cousin-germaines are called brethren and sisters, as
we showed out of (...). (b) A temple] God would be trusted unto firmly, but
no way tempted. Thou shall not God will not be tempted.
(...) Lord thy God, says Moses in Deuteronomy, which saying our Savior
Christ made (...) of Mat. 4. (c) God forbid] Hierome shows by the example
Hester, that the women (...) a full year, to be prepared fit for the Kings
bed, ere he touched them: so that Pha^ ^ght be plagued, and forced to return
Sara to her husband in the mean time.

Of the separation of Lot and Abraham without breach of charity or love
between them. CHAP. 20.
(...) Abraham departing out of Egypt to the place whence he came, Lot (with
any breach of love between them) departed to dwell in Sodom. For be^ ^th very
rich, their sheppards and heard-men could not agree, and so to a^ that
inconvenience, they parted. For amongst such (as all men are vnper^ ^ere might
no doubt be some contentions now and then arising: which e^ avoid, Abraham
said thus unto Lot: Let there be no strife I pray thee, between Genesis 13. 8,
(...).
(...) me, nor between my heardsmen and thine, for we be brethren. Is (a) not
the (...) and before thee? I pray thee depart from me: if thou will take the
left hand, I (...) to the right, or if thou vvilt go to the right hand, then I
will take the left. ^ce (b) it may be the world got up an honest quiet
custom, that the el^ ^ould euer-more divide the land, and the younger should
choose.

L. VIVES.
(...)] Abraham puttes him to his choice to take where he would, and he would
take (...). (b) Hence it may bee] This was a custom of old, as the declamers
laws con^ ^of this was one. Sen. lib. declam. 6.

Of Gods third promise, of the land of Canaan to Abraham and his seed for ever
CHAP. 21.
(...) ^hen Abraham and Lot were parted, and dwelt several, (for necessities
sake (...) ^ot for discord) Abraham in Canaan, Lot in Sodom, God spoke the
(...) to Abraham, saying: Lift up thine eyes now, and look from the place
where Genesis 13.
(...); Northward and Southward, and Eastward, and to (a) the sea, for all
the (...) see will I give to thee and thy seed for ever: and I will make thy
seed as the (...) the earth: so that if a man may number the sands of the
earth, then shall thy (...) ^bred also: arise walk through the land in the
length and breadth thereof, for (...) it unto thee. Whether these promise
concern his being the fa^ (...) nations, it is not evidently apparent. These
words, I will make (...) the sands of the sea, may have some reference to
that: being a tropi^ of speech which the greeks call (b) Hyperbole. But how
(c) the (...) uses this, and the rest: not that has read them, but
understands. This trope now, is when the words do far exceed the
meaning. For who sees not that the number of the sands is more then all Adams
seed can make, from the beginning to the end of the world? how much more then
Abraham's, though it include both the Israelites, and the believes of all other
nations? compare this later with the number of the wicked, (d) and it is but an
handful: though (e) this handful be such a multitude as holy writ thought to
signify hyperbolically, by the sands of the earth. And indeed the seed
promised Abraham is innumerable unto men, but not unto GOD, (f) nor the sands
neither: and therefore because not only the Israelites, but all Abraham's seed
besides, which he shall propagate in the spirit, are fitly compared with the
sands; therefore this promise includes both. But this, we say is not
apparent, because his bodily progeny alone, in time amounted to such a number
that it filled almost all the world, and so might (by an hyperbole) be
comparable to the sands of the earth, because this multitude is only
innumerable unto man. But that the land he spoke of, was only Canaan, no man
makes question. But some may stick upon this, I will give it to thee and thy
seed for ever: whether he mean, eternally, here or no. But if we understand
this, Ever, to be meant until the worlds end, as we do firmly believe it
is, then the doubt is cleared. For though the Israelites be chased out of
Jerusalem, yet do they possess other cities in Canaan, and shall do until
the end, and were all the land inhabited with christians, there were Abraham's
seed, in them.

L VIVES.
TO the (a) sea] Of Syria, wherein Abraham was, our sea is upon the West, so
that having named the three quarters of the world before, he must needs mean
that for the western Hyperbole, a (...) in (...),
sea which Pliny calls the Phaenician sea. (b) Hyperbole] When our words exceed
our meaning. Quintil. lib. 9. (c) The scriptures] As in Hieremy the twentieth,
an Hyperbole of many verses, says Hierome also. Dan. 4. and Ecclesiastes, 10.
The fowls of the heaven shall carry thy voice. Origin says that that place
Romans 1. 8. your faith is published through all the world; is an hyperbole. This
figure is ordinary in the Gospel also, and used most, to move the hearers.
Aug. contra Julian. lib. 5. [I wonder of some, that had rather have the
scriptures speak rustically then learnedly] (d) It is but] Narrow is the way
that leads unto life: and many are called but few are chosen. Mat. 7. 14. (e)
This handfull] So John says that he saw a multitude which no [The Lo^inists
defective.]
man could number. Apoc. 7. 9. (f) Nor the sands] This the oraculous devil of
Delpho's (amongst other perticulars of God) ascribed to himself: for the
Lydians, whom Crasus sent thither coming into the temple, the Pythia spoke
thus to them from Apollo. N^iego arenarum numerum, spaciumque profundi.
My power can count the sands, and sound the sea.


How Abraham overthrew the enemies of the Sodomites, freed Lot from captivity,
and was blessed by Melchisedech the Priest. CHAP. 22.
ABraham having received this promise, departed and remained in another place,
by the wood of Mambra, which was in Chebron. And then Sodom being spoiled, and
Let taken prisoner by five Kings that came against them, Abraham went to fetch
him back with three hundred and eighteen of those that (...) borne and bred
in his house, and ouer-threw those Kings, and set Lot at li^ and yet would take
nothing of the spoil though the (a) King for whom ^rred proffered it him. But
then was he blessed of Melchisedech, who was (...) of the high God, of whom
there is written in the Epistle to the Hebrews Psalm. 111.
(...) (b) the most affirm to be Paul's though some deny it) many and great
(...). For there the sacrifice that the whole church offers now unto GOD,
(...) apparent, and that was prefigured which was long after fulfilled in
(...), of whom the Prophet said, before he came in the flesh: Thou art a Priest
Genes. 14.
(...)* ^er the order of Melchisedech: not after the order of Aaron, for that
was (...) ^emooued, when the true things came to effect, whereof those were
figures (...)*

L. VIVES.
(...)) King] Basa King of Sodom, whose quarrel Abraham revenged, Genesis 14.
(b) [Which (...) ^st] Hierome, Origin, and Augustine do doubt of this Epistle,
and so do others. The [This the Louanists have left out as erroneous.]
(...) Church before Hierome held it not canonical. Erasmus disputes largely
and learned^ (...) the end of his notes upon it. This bread and wine, was type
of the body and blood of (...) that are now offered in those forms.]

Of Gods promise to Abraham that he ^ould make his seed as the stars of
heaven, and that he was justified by faith, before his circumcision. CHAP. 23.
(...) the word of the Lord came unto Abraham in a vision, who having many
(...) promises made, and yet doubting of posterity, he said that Eliezer his
(...) should be his heir: but presently he had an heir promised him, not
(...) but one of his own body: and beside that his seed should be innume^ as
the sands of earth now, but as the stars of heaven: wherein the Genes. 15.
(...) glory of his posterity seems to be plainly intimated. But as for
their (...) who sees not that the sands do far exceed the stars? herein
you (...) they are comparable, in that they are both innumerable. For we can^
^e that one can see all the stars, but the earnester he beholds them, the
(...) sees: so that we may well suppose that there (a) are some that deceive
(...) ^st eye, besides those that arise in other (b) horizons out of our sight.
(...), ^ch as hold and record one certain and definite number of the stars,
(...) ^us, or (d) Eudoxus, or others, this book ouer-throweth them wholly.
(...) is that recorded that the Apostle recites in commendation of Gods (...)
Abraham believed the Lord, and that was counted unto him for righte^, least
circumcision should exalte it self, and deny the uncircumcised na^ ^esse unto
Christ: for Abraham was uncircumcised as yet, when he belee^, and it was
imputed unto him for righteousness.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) some] In the white circle of heaven, called the milken way, there
are a many Stars invisible (...) our eyes.
(...) (...) eye can distinguish. Arist. and others. (b) Other horizons] There
are some stars that never appear unto us, as those above the South-pole,
Proclus and others. Nor do the Antipodes ever see our Charles wain^, nor our
pole star, nor the less bear, etc (c) Aratus] Two famous men there were of
this name: one a captain, who freed his country Sycione (...).
from the tyrrany of Nico^les, the other a Poet of Pomp^iopolis a city of
Cilicia, nere unto which is this Aratus his tomb, upon which if you throw a
stone, it will leap off. The reason is unknown. He lived in the time of
Antigonus, King of Macedon, and wrote diverse poemes which Suidas reckneth, and
amongst others, his Phenomenon, which Tully when he was a youth, translated
into latin verses, a fragment of which is yet extant. Julius Caesar (says
Firmicus, but the common opinion, and the more true, is, Germanicus) put all
Aratus his works into a p^eme; but perhaps Firmicus calls Germanicus,
Julius. Anien^s, Ruffus in Hieromes time made a latin Paraphrase of it. It is
strange that Tully says he was no Astronomer in the world, and yet wrote
excellent well of the stars, his eloquence was so powerful. De Oratore* lib.
1. (d) Eudoxus] A Carian, borne at Gnidus, an exellent philosopher, and deeply
seen in physic (...).
and the Mathematiques, he wrote verses of Astrology. Suidas. Plutarch says
that Arc^tas and he were the first practical Geometricians. Laertius says he
first devised crooked lines. He went (says Strabo) with Plato into Egypt, and
there learnt Astronomy, and taught in a Rock that bare his name afterward.
Lucane signifies that he wrote calenders, making Caesar boast thus at
Cleopatra's table. Ne^ meus Eudoxi vincetur fastibus annus.
Nor can Eudoxus counts excel my year.


Because he had brought the year to a reformed course.

Of the signification of the sacrifice which Abraham was commanded to offer
when he desired to be confirmed in the things he believed. CHAP. 24.
GOd said also unto him in the same vision: I am the Lord that brought thee out
of the country of the Chaldaeans, to give thee this land to inherit it. Then
said Abraham, Lord, how shall I know that I shall inherit (...)? and God said
unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, a she Goat of three years
old, a (...) of three years old, a Turtle-doue, and a Pidgeon. So he did, and
divided them in Genesis 15
the midst, and laid one piece against another, but the birds he did not
divide. Then came souls, as the book says, and fell on the carcasses, and
fate thereupon, and Abraham (a) sat by them* and abount sunne-set there fell
an heavy sleep upon Abraham, and lo a very fearful darkness fell upon him:
and God said unto Abraham, Know this assuredly that thy seed shall be a stranger
in a land that is not theirs, four hundred years, and they shall serve there,
and shall be evil entreated. But the nation whom they shall serve will I judge,
and afterward they shall come out with great substance. But thou shall go unto
thy fathers in peace, and shall die in a good age: and in the fourth generation
they shall come hither again, for the wickedness of the ^orites is not yet at
full: and when the Sun went down there was a darkness, (...) behold a
smoking furnace, and a firebrand went between those pieces. I^ that same day
the LORD made a covenant with Abraham saying, unto thy seed have I given this
land from the river of Egypt unto the great river of Euphrates, the C^ites,
and the Chenezites, and the Cadmonites, the Hittites, the Perezites, the Re^s,
the Amorites, the Cha^aanites, the Gergesites, and the I^busites: all this did
Abraham hear and see in his vision: to stand upon each particular were
tedious, and from our purpose. Suffices it, that we must know that where^
Abraham believed before, and that was counted unto him for righteousness,
(...) ^ll not from his faith now, in saying, LORD, how shall I know that I
shall inhe^: namely that land which GOD had promised him, he says not, from
^ce shall I know? but how, or where by shall I know, by what similitude (...) I
be further instructed in my belief? Nor did the Virgin Mary distrust, (...)*
How shall this be, seeing I know no man? She knew it would be, but she Luc.
1. 34.
^red of the manner, and was answered thus, The Holy Ghost shall descend (...)
^ee, and the power of the most high shall over shadow thee.

And in this manner had Abraham his simylie in his three beasts, his Heifer,
(...), and Ram, and the two birds, the Turtle-doue and the Pidgeon: (...)
that that was to come to pass thus, which he was firmly persuaded (...) come
to pass some way. Wherefore either the heifer signified the ^s yoke under the
law, the (b) goa^e their offending, and the (c) Ram (...) dominion (which
three creatures were all three years old, because (...) three spaces of time
being so famous which lay from Adam to Noah from (...) to Abraham, and from
Abraham to David, who was the first elected King of Israel (Saul being a
^eprobate) of these three, this third, from ^raham to David contained Israells
full growth to glory): or else they may signify some other thing more
conveniently, but without all doubt, the Turtle-doue and the Pidgeon are types
of his spiritual seed, and therefore i^ is said, them he divided not: for
the carnal are divided between themselves, but the spiritual never: whether
they retire themselves from conuersing with the businesses of man, like the (d)
Turtle-doue, or live amongst them (e) like the Pidgeon.

Both these birds are simple, and hurtlesse, signifying that even in Israel
who s^ possess that land, there should be individual sons of p^omise* and
(...) of the Kingdom of eterni^y. (f) The birds that fell upon ^he sacrifice
(...) nothing but the ayry powers, that feed upon the contentions and di^ of
carnal men. But whereas Abraham sat by them, that signified (...) should be
of the faithful amongst these contentions, even unto (...) of the world: and
the (g) heaviness that fell upon Abraham to^ Sunne-setting: and that fearful
darkness, signifies the sore trouble (...) faithful shall endure toward
the end of this world, whereof ^ST said in the Gospel: Then shall be a great
tribulation, such as (...) ^om the beginning etc. And whereas it was said to
Abraham, know assu^ Mat. 24. (...) Genesis 15
thy seed shall be a stranger etc. This was a plain prophecy of Isra^ in
Egypt. Not that they were to serve four hundred years (...) ^uish
affliction, but that within four hundred years this was (...) them. For as
there where it is written of Thara the father of (...), that he lived in
Charra, two hundred and five years: We must (...) he lived not there all
this while, but that there he ended these (...), so is it here said, They
shall be strangers in a Lan^ that is not theirs, (...) ^dered years, not that
their bondage lasted all this time, but (...) ^as ended at this time: and it is
said four hundred years for the (...) of the number, although there were
some more years in the account, (...) ^ou reckon from Abraham's first receiving
of the promise, or from the (...) son Isaac, the first of the seed unto whom
this was promised; for from (...) seventh year, wherein as I said before he
first received the promise, (...) ^parture of Israel out of Egypt, four
hundred and thirty years, which the Apostle mentions in these words. This I
say, that the law which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot
disanul the covenant which was confirmed of God Galat. 3. 17
before, or make the promise of none effect. Now these four hundred and thirty
years might have been called four hundred because, they are not much more:
especially some of them being past when Abraham had this vision, or when Isaac
was borne unto his father being then one hundred years old: It being five and
twenty years after the promise, so that there remained four hundred and five
years of the four hundred and thirty that were to come, and those it pleased
God to call four hundred. So likewise in the other words of God, there is no
man doubts but that they belong unto the people of Israel. But that which
follows: when the Sun went down there was a darkness, and behold, a
smoking furnace and a firebrand went between the pieces: this signifies, that
in the end, the carnal are to be judged by the fire: for as the great and
exceeding affliction of the City of God, was signified by the heaviness that
fell upon Abraham toward Sunne-set, that is toward this worlds end: even so,
at Sunset, that is, at the worlds end, does this fire signyfie that fire, that
shall purge the righteous and devour the wicked: and then the promise made
unto Abraham, is a plain mention of the Land of Canaan, naming the eleauen
nations thereof from the river of Egypt unto the great river Euphrates. Not
from Nile, the great river of Egypt, but from that little one which divides
Egypt and Palestina, on whose bank the city (h) Rhinocorura stands.

L VIVES.
ABraham (a) sat by them] The vulgar reads, and Abraham drove them away and
so has the Hebrew: Hier. But the Seauenty read it (...), sat by them. (b) The
goat their] This creature is in a perpetual fever. Arist. ex Almaeone (c) The
ramme] This is the leader of the flock or rather that Kingly ram. Dan. 8. (d)
The Turtle-doue] Those (says Pliny) do hide themselves when they cast their
feathers. Neither the Turtle nor the Pigeon (says Aelian) will have to do with
any but their own cock. (e) The Pigeon] That lives tamely with us. (f) The
fowles] This is a type says Josephus of his evil neighbors of Egypt. (g)
Heaviness Some read it sleep, some an ecstasy and so the seauenty do. (h)
Rhinocorura] This word (says Hierome) Rhinocorura.
is not in the Hebrew, but added by the Seauenty to make known the place.
Pliny (lib. 5.) calls it Rhinocolura, and places it in Idumaea. Strabo, in
Phaenicia. But without al question the Jews and the Egyptians claimed it to
themselves, and peopled it with the Ethiopians whom they conquered and cut off
their noses. Actisanes the King of Ethiopia (says Diodorus Siculus. lib. 2.)
having conquered all Egypt partly by force, and part by condition, set up a new
law for thieves, neither acquitting them, nor punishing them with death, but
getting them altogether he punished them thus: first he cut off their noses,
and then forced them to go into the farthest parts of the deserts, and there
he built a city for them called Rhinocorura of there want of noses: and this
stands in the confines of Egypt and Arabia, void of all things fit for the
life of man, for all the water of the country is salt: and there is but one
fountain wtihin the walls, and that is most bitter, and unprofitable. Thus
far Diodorus.

Of Agar, Sara her bond-vvoman, whom she gave as concubine unto Abraham. CHAP.
25.
NOw follow the times of Abraham's sons, one of Agar the bondwoman, the Genesis
16.
other of Sara the freewoman, of whom we spoke also in the last book: b^ now
for this act, Abraham offended not in using of this woman Agar as a concubine:
for he did it for progeny sake, and not for lust, nor as insulting but obeying
his wife: who held that it would be a comfort unto her barrenness if she got
children from her bondwoman by will, seeing she could get none of her self
by nature: using that law that the Apostle speaks of: The husband has not
power of his own body but the wife. The woman may procure her self 1. Cor.
7. 4.
children from the womb of another if she cannot bear none her self. There
is neither luxury nor uncleanness in such an act. The maid was therefore
given by the wife to the hushand for Issues sake, and for that end he took
her: neither of them desire the effects of lust, but the fruits of nature: and
when as the bondwoman being now with child began to despise her barren
mistress, and Sara suspected her husband for bearing with her in her pride,
Abraham showed, that he was not a captiued lover, but a free father in this,
and that it was not his pleasure, but her will that he had fulfilled, and that
by her own seeking: that he meddled with Agar, but yet was no way entangled in
affect unto her: and sowed the seed of future fruit in her, but yet without
yielding to any exorbitant affection to her: for he told his wife: Thy maid is
in thine h^nd: use her as it Genesis 16. 6.
pleases thee. Oh worthy man that could use his wife with temperance and his
servant with obedience, and both without all touch of uncleanness!

Of Gods promise unto Abraham, that Sara (though she were old) should have a
son that should be the father of the nation, and how this promise was sealed
in the mystery of circumcision. CHAP. 26.
AFter this Ismael was borne of Agar in whom it might be thought that GODS
promise to Abraham was fulfilled, who when he talked of making his Steward
his heir, GOD said, Nay, but thou shall have an heir of thine Genesis 1^
(...) body. But least he should build upon this, in the four score and
nineteen year of his age GOD appeared unto him saying: I am the
all-fufficient GOD, (...) before me, and be thou upright: and I will make my
covenant between me, (...) thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly. Then
Abraham fell on his face and GOD talked with him saying: Behold I make my
covenant with thee thou (...) be a father of many nations. Nor shall thy name
be called Abram any more, (...) Abraham: for a father of many Nations have I
made thee. I will make thee ^ding fruitful, and many Nations, yea even Kings
shall proceed of thee: And I ^ill establish my covenant, between me and thee,
and thy seed after thee in their g^tions; for an everlasting covenant to be GOD
to thee and thy seed after thee* (...) will give thee and thy seed after thee
a Land wherein thou art a stranger, even (...) the Land of Canaan for an
everlasting possession, and I w^lbee their GOD: and GOD said further unto
Abraham: thou shall keep my covenant thou and thy seed after thee in their
generations, this is my covenant which thou shall keep between thee and me,
and thy seed after thee* let every man-child ^f you be circumcised: that is,
(...) shall circumcise the fore-skinne of your flesh, and it shall be a sign of
the co^ between me and you. Every man child of eight days old amongst you
shall be ^ised in your generation, as well, he that is borne in thine house, or
he that is (...) of any stranger which is not of thy seed: both must be
circumcised, so my coue^ shall be eternally in you. But the uncircumcised
man-child, and he in whose flesh the (...) ^ne is not circumcised, shall be cut
off from his people, because he has broken my covenant. And God said more unto
Abraham. Sarai thy wife shall be no more called Sarai, but Sarah, and I will
bless her, and will give thee a son of her, and I will bless her and she
shall be the mother of nations, yea even of Kings. Then Abraham fell upon his
face and laughed in his heart, saying: Shall he that is an hundred years old
have a child? and shall Sarah that is ninety years old, bear? and Abraham
said unto God, Oh let Ismael live in thy sight: and GOD said unto Abraham:
Sarah thy wife shall be are a son indeed, and thou shall call his name Isaac,
I will establish my covenant with him as an everlasting covenant, and I (a)
will be his GOD, and the GOD of his seed after him: as concerning Ismael I have
heard thee: for I have blessed him, and will multiply and increase him
exceedingly: twelve Princes shall he beget, and I will make him a great
Nation. But my covenant will I establish with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear
unto the next year by this time. Here now is the calling of the Nations
plainly promised in Isaac, that is in the son of promise signifying grace, and
not nature, for a son is promised unto an old man, by a barren old woman, and
although God works according to the course of nature, yet where that nature
is withered and wasted, there such an effect as this is Gods evident work,
denouncing grace the more apparently: and because this was not to come by
generation, but regeneration afterward, therefore was circumcision commanded
now, when this son was promised unto Sarah: and whereas all children,
servants Circumcision a type o^ regeneration.
unborn, and strangers, are commanded to be circumcised, this shows that
grace belongs unto all the world: for what does circumcision signify but the
putting off corruption, and the renouation of nature? and what does the eight
day signify but Christ that rose again in the end of the week, the sabbath
being fulfilled? (b) The very names of these parents being changed, all
signifies that newness, which is shadowed in the types of the old Testament,
in which the New one lies prefigured: for why is it called the Old Testament,
but for that it shadoweth the New? and what is the New Testament but the
opening of the Old one? Now Abraham is said to laugh, but this was the
extremity of his joy, not any sign of his deriding this promise upon
distrust: and his thoughts being these: Shall he that is an hundred years old
etc. Are not doubts of the events, but admirations caused by so strange an
event. Now if some stop at that where God says, he will give him all the Land
of Canaan for an eternal possession, how this may be fulfilled, seeing that no
man's progeny can inherit the earth everlastingly; he must know, that eternal
is here taken as the Greeks take (...), which is derived of (c) (...), that is
seculum, an age: but the latin translation durst not say seculare, here, least
it should have been taken in an other sense: for seculare and transitorium are
both alike used for things that last but for a little space: but (...), is that
which is either endless at all, or ends not until the worlds end: and in
this later sense is, eternal, used here.

L. VIVES.
I Will Be (a) his God] Or, to be his GOD. (...). a grecisme, hardly expressed in
your latin. (b) The very] The gentiles had also their eight day whereupon the
distinguished the child's name from the fathers. (...)] It is Seculum, aetas,
ann^m, and eternitas in latin. Tully and other great authors translate it all
those ways from the greek.

Of the man-child, that if it were not circumcised the eight day, i^ perished
for breaking of Gods covenant. CHAP. 27.
SOme also may stick upon the understanding of these words. The man child in
whose flesh the fore-skinne is not circumcised, that person shall be cut off from
his people, because he had broaken my covenant. Here is no fault of the childs
who is hereexposed to destruction: he brake no covenant of Gods but his
parents, that looked not to his circumcision, unless you say that the youngest
child has broken Gods command and covenant as well as the rest, in the first
man, in whom all mankind sinned. For there are (a) many Testaments or
Covenants of God, besides the old and new, those two so great ones, that every
one may read and know. The first covenant was this, unto Adam: Whenever thou
eatest thereof thou shall die the death: whereupon it is written in
Ecclesiasticus. All flesh waxes Genesis 2, 19 Eccl. 14. 17
(...) as a garment and it is a covenant from the beginning that all sinners
shall die the death, for whereas the law was afterward given, and that brought
the more light to man's judgment in sin: as the Apostle says, Where no law
is there is no transgression: Romans 4. 15 Psalm. 119.
how is that true that the Psalmist said: I accounted all the sinners of the
earth transgressors, (b) but that every man is guilty in his own conscience of
somewhat that he has done against some law? and therefore seeing that little
children (as the true faith teaches) be guilty of original sin, though not
of actual, whereupon we confess that they must necessarily have the grace of
the remission of their sins; then verily in this, they are breakers of Gods
coue^, made with Adam in paradise: so that both the Psalmists saying, and the
Apostles is true: and consequently, seeing that circumcision was a type of
regeneration, justly shall the child's original sin (breaking the first
covenant that (...) was made between God and man) cut him off from his people,
unless that regeneration engraffe him into the body of the true religion. This
then we must conceive that GOD spoke: He that is not regenerate, shall perish
from ^gst his people, because he has broke my covenant, in offending me in
Adam. For if he had said, he has broke this my covenant, it could have been
meant of nothing but the circumcision only: but seeing he says not what
covenant the child breaks, we must needs understand him to mean of a
covenant liable unto the transgression of the child. But if any one will tie it
unto circumcision, and say that that is the covenant which the uncircumcised
child has broken, let him beware of absurdity in saying that he breaks
their covenant which is not broken by him but in him only. But howsoever we
shall find the child's condemnation to come only from his original sin, and
not from any negligence of his own iucurring this breach of the covenant.

L. VIVES.
THere (a) are many) Hierome has noted that wheresoever the Greeks read
testament, (...) Hebrews read covenant: Berith is the Hebrew word. (b) But
that] There is no man so barbarous, but nature has given him some forms of
goodness in his heart whereby to (...) (...) honest life if he follow them,
and if he refuse them, to turn wicked.

Of the changing of Abram and Sara's names, who being the one too barren, and
both to old to have children, yet by Gods bounty were both made fruitful.
CHAP. 28.
THus this great and evident promise being made unto Abraham in these words: A
father of many nations have I made thee, and I will make thee exceeding Genesis
17. 6, 7.
fruitful: and nations, yea even Kings shall proceed of thee: (which promise
we see most evidently fulfilled in Christ) from that time the man and wife are
called no more Abram and Sarai, but as we called them before, and all the
world calls them: Abraham, and Sarah. But why was Abraham's name changed? the
reason follows immediately, upon the change, for, a father of many nations
have I made thee. This is signified by Abraham: now Abram (his former (a) name)
is interpreted, an high father. But (b) for the change of Sara's name, there is
no reason given: but as they say that have interpreted those Hebrew names,
Sarai is my Princess: and Sarah, strength: whereupon it is written in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, By faith Sarah received strength to conceive seed etc.
Now they were both old as the scripture says, but (c) she was barren also,
and past the age (d) wherein the menstruall blood flows in women, which
wanting she could never have conceived although she had not been barren. And
if a woman be well in years, and yet have that menstruall humor remaining, she
may conceive with a yongman, but never by an old: as the old man may beget
children, but it must be upon a young woman, as Abraham after Sarahs death did
upon Keturah because she was of a youthful age as yet.

This therefore is that which the Apostle so highly admireth, and hereupon he
says that Abraham's body was dead, because he was not able to beget a child
upon any woman that was not wholly past her age of childbearing: but only of
those that were in the prime and flower thereof. For his body was not simply
dead, but respectively; otherwise it should have been a carcass fit for a
grave, not an ancient father upon earth. Besides the gift of begetting
children that GOD gave him, lasted after Sarahs death, and he begot diverse upon
Keturah, and this clears the doubt that his body was not simply dead; I mean
unto generation. But I like the other answer better because a man in those
days was not in his weakest age at an hundred years, although the men of our
times be so, and cannot beget a child of any woman: they might, for they lived
far longer, and had abler bodies then we have.

L. VIVES.
HIs former (a) name] Some Hebrews say that God put a letter of his name (...)
into Abraham's name, to wit, the letter (...) Hierome. (b) For the change]
Hierome out of mo^ of the Hebrews, interprets Sarai, my Princess or Lady:
and Sarah a Princess o^ (...) for she was first Abraham's Lady, and then the
Lady of the nations: and Uirtus, or strengt^ Sarai. Sarah.
often taken by divines for dominion, or principality. Hiero. in Genes.
Augustine uses the word in another sense. (c) She was barren] The physicians
hold women's barrenness to proceed of the defects of the matrix, as if it be
too hard, or brawny, or too loose and spungeous, or too fat, or fleshly:
Plutarch. De phisoph. decret. lib. 5. I ommit the simples that being taken
C^ses of (...).
inwardly procure barrenness, as the berries of black Iuy, Cetarach, or
hearts tongue as Pl^y says etc. The Stoickes say that it is often effected by
the contrariety of qualities in the agent and patient at copulation: which
being coupled with others of more concordance, do easily become fruitful,
which we may not unfitly imagine in Abraham and Sarah, because afterward he
begot children upon Keturah, unless you wind up all these matters with a more
divine interpretation. For Paul calls Abraham, (...), a dead body, exhaust,
and fruitless. (d) Wherein the menstruall] Of the menstrues Pliny says thus:
Some women never have them: and those are barren. For they are the substance
wherein the spermes congeale and ripen: and thereof if they flow, frow women
that are with child, the child borne will be either weak and sickly, or else it
will not live long, as Nigidius says. Thus much out of Pliny. lib. 7.
Aristotle says that all that want these menstruall fluxes are not barren: for
they may retain as much in their places of conception as they do that have
these purgative courses so often. Histor (...). lib. 7.

Of the three men, or angels wherein GOD appeared to Abraham in the plain of
Mambra. CHAP. 29.
GOD appeared unto Abraham in the plain of Mambra in three men, who doubtless
were angels, though some think that one of them was Christ, and that he was
visible before his incarnation. It is indeed in the power of the unchangeable,
vncorporall, and invisible deity to appear unto man visible whenever it
pleases, without any alteration of it self: not in the own but in some
creature subject unto it; as what is it that it rules not over? But if they
ground that one of these three was Christ, upon this, that Abraham when he saw
three men, saluted the Lord peculiarly, bowing to the ground at the door of his
Tabernacle, and saying, LORD if I have found favor in thy sight etc. Why do
they not observe that when two came to destroy Sodom, Abraham spoke yet but
unto one of them that remained (calling him Lord, and entreating him not to
destroy the righteous with the wicked) and those two were entertained by Lot,
who notwithstanding called either of them by the name of Lord? For speaking to
them both, My Lords (says he) I pray you turn in unto your servants house
etc. Genesis 19
and yet afterward we read: and the angels took him and his wife, and his
two daughters by the hands, the Lord being merciful unto him: and they
brought him forth, and set him without the city, and when they had so done,
the angels said, Escape for thy self, look not behind thee, neither tarry in
all the plains, but escape to the mountains least thou be destroyed, and he
said, not so I pray thee my Lord etc. and afterward, the Lord being in these
two angels, answered him as in one, saying: Behold, I have (a) received thy
request etc. and therefore it is far more likely that Abraham knew the Lord to
be in them all three, and Lot in the two, unto whom, they continually spoke in
the singular number, even then when they thought them to be men, then
otherwise. For they entertained them at first only to give them meat and
lodging in charity, as unto poor men: but yet there was some excellent mark
in them whereby their hoasts might be assured, that the Lord was in them, as
he used to be in the Prophets: and therefore they sometimes called them Lords
in the plural number, as speaking to themselves, and sometimes Lord, in the
singular, as speaking to God in them But the scriptures themselves testify
that they were angels, not only in this place of Genesis, but in the Epistle
to the Hebrews where the Apostle commending hospitality: (b) thereby Io^e
(says he) have received angels into their houses unawares: these three men
therefore confirmed the promise of Isaac the second time, and said unto
Abraham: Heb. 132
He shall be a great and mighty nation, and in him shall the nations of the world
be blessed. Here is a plain prophecy both of the bodily nation of the
Israelites, and Genesis 18. 18.
the spiritual nations of the righteous.

L VIVES.
I Have (a) receiued] So reads the vulgar, but not the seauenty. (b) Thereby
some I wo^ how Placuerunt came into the latin vulgar edition: I think the
translators made it Latue^: rather, from the greek (...), but Augustine has
translated it the best of all, putting unawares for it (...), as the Greeks
do often use to speak so.

Lots deliverance: Sodomes destruction: Abimelechs lust, Sarahs chastity. CHAP.
30.
AFter this promise was Lot delivered out of Sodom, and the whole territory of
that wicked city consumed by a shower (a) of fire from heaven: and all those
parts where masculine bestiality was as allowable by custom as any other act
is by other laws. Besides, this punishment of theirs was a type of the day of
judgment: and what does the angels forbidding them to look back, signify,
but that the regenerate must never return to his old courses, if he mean to
escape the terror of the last judgment? Lots wife, where she looked back, there
was Lots wife.
she fixed, and being turned into (b) a pillar of salt, serves to season the
hearts of the faithful, to take heed by such example. After this, Abraham did
with his wife Sarah at Geraris, in King Abimelechs court, as he had done
before in Egypt, and her chastity was in like manner preserved, and she returned
to her husband. Where Genesis 20
Abraham when the King chideth him for concealing that she was his wife,
opened his fear, and withal, told him, saying, she is my sister indeed for she
is my fathers daughter but not my mothers, and she is my wife: and so she was
indeed both these, and withal of such beauty, that she was amiable even at
those years.

L. VIVES.
A Shower (a) of fire] Of this combustion many profane authors make mention
Strabo says that cities were consumed by that fire as the inahbitants
thereabout report: the poole that remains where Sodom stood (the chief
city) is sixty furlongs about. Many of the^ also mention the lake Asphalts
where the bitumen grows. (b) Apiller] Josephus says he did see it.

Of Isaac, borne at the time prefixed, and named so, because of his parents
laughter. CHAP. 31.
AFter this Abraham according to Gods promise, had a son by Sarah, and called
him Isaac, that is, Laughter: for his father laughed for joy and admiration
when he was first promised: and his mother when the three men confirmed this
promise again laughed also, between joy, and doubt: the Angel showing her
that her laughter was not faithful, though it were joyful. Hence had the
child his name: for this laughter belonged not to the recording of reproach,
but to the celebration of gladness, as Sarah showed when Isaac was borne and
called by this name: for she said, God has made me to laugh, and all that
hear me will rejoice with me: and soon after the bondwoman and her son is
cast out of the house in Genesis 21. 6
signification of the old Testament, as Sarah was of the new (as the Apostle
says) and of that glorious City of God, the Heavenly Jerusalem.

Abraham's faith and obedience proo^ in his intent to offer his son: Sarahs
death. CHAP. 32.
TO omit many accidents for brenities sake, Abraham (for a trial) was
commanded to go and sacrifice his dearest son Isaac, that his true obedience
might show it self to all the world in that shape, which GOD knew already that
it bate. This now was an inculpable temptation (and some such there be) and
was to be taken thankfully, as one of Gods trialls of man. And generally man's
mind can never know it self well, but putting forth it self upon trialls,
and experimental hazards, and by their events it learneth the own state,
wherein if it acknowledge Gods enabling it, it is godly, and confirmed in
solidity of grace, against all the bladder-like humors of vainglory. Abraham
would never believe that God could take delight in sacrifices of man's flesh;
though Gods thundering commands are to be obeyed, not questioned upon, yet is
Abraham commended for having a firm faith and belief, that his son Isaac
should rise again after he were sacrificed. For when he would not obey his
wife in casting out the bondwoman and her son, God said unto him: In Isaac
shall thy seed Romans 9.
be called: and adds: Of the bond-womans son will I make a great nation
also, because he is thy seed: How then is Isaac only called Abraham's seed,
when God calls Ismael so likewise? The Apostle expounds it in these words:
that is, they which are the children of the flesh, are not the children of God,
but the children of the promise are accounted for the seed. And thus are the
sons of promise called to be Abraham's seed in Isaac, that is gathered into
the Church by Christ his free grace and mercy. This promise the father holding
fast, seeing that it must be fulfilled in him whom God commanded to kill,
doubted not but that that God could restore him after sacrificing, who had
given him at first beyond all hope. So the Scripture takes his belief to have
been, and delivers it. By faith (a) Hebr. 11.
Abraham offered up Isaac when he was tried: and he that had received the
promises offered his only son: to whom it was said, in Isaac shall thy seed
be called: for he considered that God was able to raise him from the dead:
and then follows, for when he received him also in a sort: in what sort but
as he received his son, of whom it is said; Who spared not his own son,
but gave him to dye for us all: And so did Isaac carry the wood of sacrifice to
the place, even as Christ Romans 8.
carried the cross: Lastly, seeing Isaac was not to be slain indeed, and his
father commanded to hold his hand, who was that Ram that was offered as a full
(and typical) sacrifice? Namely that which Abraham first of all espied
entangled (b) in the bushes by the horns. What was this but a type of Jesus
Christ, crowned with thorns ere he was crucified? But mark the Angels words,
Abraham (says the Scriptures) lift up his hand and took the knife to kill his
son: But the Angel of the Lord called unto him from heaven saying, Abraham?
and he answered, Here Lord: then he said: Lay not thy hand upon thy son, nor
do any thing unto him, for now I know thou fear God, seeing that for my
sake thou have not spared thine only son. Now I know, that is, now I have
made known: for God knew it ere now. And then Abraham having offered the Ram
for his son Isaac, called the place (c) the Lord has seen: as it is said
unto this day: in the mount has the Lord appeared, and the Angels of the Lord
called unto Abraham again out of heaven, saying: By my self have I sworn
(says the Lord) because thou have done this thing and lust not spared thine
only son for me: surely I will bless thee and multiply thy seed as the
stars of heaven or the sands of the sea, and thy seed shall possess the gate
of his enemies: and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed,
because thou have (a) obayed my voice. This is that promise sworn unto by God
concerning the calling of the Gentiles after the offering of the Ram, the type
of Christ. God had often promised before, but never sworn. And what is Gods
oath but a confirmation of his promise and a reprehension of the faithless?
after this died Sara being ahundred twenty seven years old, in the hundred
thirty seven year of her husbands age, for he was ten years elder then she:
as he showed when Isaac was first promised, saying, shall I that am a hundred
years old have a child? and shall Sarah that is four score and ten years
old, bear? and then did Abraham buy a piece of ground and buried his wife in
it: and then (as Stephen says) was he seated in that land: for then began he
to be a possessor, namely after the death of his father who was dead some two
years before.

L. VIVES.
BY (a) faith.] A diversity of reading in the text of Scripture [therefore have
we followed the vulgar.] (b) in the bushes.] This is after the seauenty, and
Theodotion, whose translation Hierome approues before that of Aquila, and
Symachus. (c) The Lord has seen. The Hebrew (says Hierome) is shall see. And
it was a proverb used by the Hebrews in all their God will see in the Mount:
an Hebrew proverb.
extremities, wishing Gods help to say, In the mount, the Lord shall see: that
is, as he pitied Abraham, so will he pity us. And in sign of that Ram
that God sent him, they use unto this day to blow an horn, thus much Hierome.
In Spain this Proverb remains still, but not as Augustine takes it; The
Lord will be altogether seen, but in a manner, that is, his help shall be
seen. (d) Obeyed.] Ob-audisti, and so the old writersvsed to say in steed of
obedisti.

Of Rebecca Nachors niece whom Isaac married. CHAP 33.
THen Isaac being forty years old married Rebecca, niece to his uncle Nachor
three years after his mothers death, his father being a hundred and forty
years old. And when Abraham sent his servant into Mesopotamia to fetch her,
and said unto him, Put thine hand under my thigh, and I will swear thee by the
Lord God of heaven and the Lord of earth that thou shall not take my son
Isaac a wife of the daughters of Canaan: what is meant by this, but the Lord
God of Heaven and the Lord of Earth that was to proceed of those loins? are
these mean prophesies and presages of that which we see now fulfilled in
Christ.

Of Abraham marrying Kethurah after Sarahs death, and the meaning therefore.
CHAP. 34.
But what is meant by Abraham's marrying Kethurah after Sarahs death? God defend
us from suspect of incontinency in him, being so old, and so holy and
faithful: desired he more sons, God having promised to make the seed of
Isaac (...) the stars of Heaven and the sands of the Earth? But if Agar and
Hismaell did signify the mortals to the Old Testament (as the Apostle
teaches) why may not Kethurah and her sons, signify the mortals belonging
to the New Testament. They both were called Abraham's wives, and his concubines
But Sarah was never called his concubine, but his wife only for it is thus
written of Sarahs giving Agar unto Abraham Then Sarah, Abraham's wife took Agar
the Egiptian her maid, after Abraham had dwelled ten years in the land of
Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abraham for his wife. And of Kethurah we
read thus of his taking her after Sarahs death; Now Abraham had taken him
another wife called Kethurah: Here now you hear them both called his wives:
but the Scripture calls them both his concubines also, saying afterward,
Abraham gaeue all his goods unto Isaac, but unto the sons of his concubines
he gave guiftes, and sent them away from Isaac his son (while Genesis 25. (...)
he yet lived) Eastward, into the East country. Thus the concubines sons have
some gifts but none of them attain the promised kingdom, neither the carnal
Jews, nor the heretics, for none are heirs but Isaac: nor are the sons of
the flesh the Sons of God, but those of the promise; of whom it is said: In
Isaac shall be called thy seed: for I cannot see how Kethurah whom he married
after Sarahs death should be called his concubine but in this respect. But he
that will not understand these things thus, let him not slander Abraham: for
what if this were appointed by God, to show (a) those future heretics that
deny second marriage in this great father of so many nations, that it is no
sin to many after the first wife be dead: now Abraham died, being a hundred
seauenty five years old, and Isaac (whom he begat when he was a hundred:)
was seauenty five years of age at his death.

L. VIVES. Second marriage. [The louaine copy defective.]

THose (a) future.] The Cataphrygians, that held second marriage to be
fornication. Aug ad quod vult [Hierome against Iouinian, does not only abhor
second marriage but even disliketh of the first: for he was a single man, and
bare marriage no good will,]

The appointment of God concerning the two twins in Rebeccas womb. CHAP. 33.
NOw let us see the proceedings of the City of God after Abraham's death. So
then from Isaacs birth to the sixtith year of his age (wherein he had children)
there is this one thing to be noted, that when as he had prayed for her
frutefulnes (who was barren) and that God had heard him, and opened her womb,
and she conceived, the two twins (a) played in her womb: wherewith she being
trou, bled, asked the Lords pleasure, and was answered thus: Two nations are in
thy womb, and two manner of people shall be divided out of thy bowels, and the
one Genesis 25.
shall be mightier then the other, and the elder shall serve the younger.
Wherein Peter the Apostle understands the great mystery of grace: in that ere
they were borne, and either done evil or good, the one was elected and the
other rejected: and doubtless as concerning original sin, both were alike,
and guilty, and as concerning actual, both a like and clear. But mine intent
in this work, curbeth me from further discourse of this point: we have
handled it in other volumes. But that saying; The elder shall serve the younger:
all men interpret of the Jews serving the Christians, and though it seem
fulfilled in (b) Idumaea, which came of the elder, Esau or Edom, (for he had
two names) because it was afterward subdued by the Israelites that came of the
younger, yet not-withstanding that prophecy must needs have a greater intent
then so: and what is that but to be fulfilled in the Jews and the Christians?

L. VIVES.
THe two twins (a) played] So say the seauentie, (...) or kicked. Hierome
says moved; mouebantur. Aquila says, were crushed: confringebantur. And
Symmachus compares their motion to an empty ship at sea: (...). (b) Idumaea]
Stephanus deriueth their nation from Idumaas, Semiramis her son, as Iudaea
from Judas, another of her sons: but he is deceived. Idumaea.


Of a promise and blessing received by Isaac, in the manner that Abraham had
received his. CHAP. 36.
NOw Isaac received such an instruction from God, as his father had done
diverse times before. It is recorded thus: There was a famine in the land
besides the first famine that was in Abraham's time: and Isaac went to
Abymelech, king of Genesis 26. 1.
the Philistines in Gerara. And the Lord appeared unto him and said: Go not
down into Egypt, but abide in the land which I shall show thee: dwell in this
land, and I will be with thee and bless thee: for to thee and to thy seed
will I give this land, and I will establish mine oath which I swear to Abraham
thy father: and will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and give all
this land unto thy seed: and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed, because thy father Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my
ordinances, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws: Now this Patriarch had
no wife nor concubine more then his first, but rested content with the two
sons that God sent him at one birth. And he also feared his wives beauty,
amongst those strangers, and did as his father had done before him, with-her,
calling her sister only, and not wife. She was indeed his kinswoman both by
father and mother: but when the strangers knew that she was his wife, they let
her quietly alone with him. We not prefer him before his father tho, in that
he Abraham and Isaac compared.
had but one wife: without all doubt his fathers obedience was of the greater
merit, so that for his sake God says that he will do Isaac that good that
he did him. In thy seed shall all the nations of the world be blessed, says
he, because thy father Abraham obeyed my voice, etc. Again: (says he) the God
of thy father Abraham, fear not: for I am with thee, and have blessed thee,
and will multiply thy seed, for Abraham thy Fathers sake. To show all those
carnally minded men that think Faithful wedlock better then faithless
singleness.
it was lust that made Abraham do as it is recorded, that he did it with no
lust at all, but a chaste intent: teaching us besides that we ought not
compare men's worths by singularity, but to take them with all their qualities
together. For a man may excel another in this or that virtue, who excels
him as far in another as good. And al-be-it it be true that continence is
better then marriage: yet the faithful married man is better then the
continent Infidel: for such (...) one (a) is not only not to be praised for
his continency since he believes not, but rather highly to be dispraised for
not believing, seeing he is continent. But to grant them both good, a married
man of great faith and obedience in Jesus Christ is better then a continent man
with less: but if they be equal, who makes any question that the continent
man is the more exellent.

L. VIVES.
SUch an (a) One is not.] Herein is apparent how fruitless external works
are without the dew of grace do ripen them in the heart, the Bruges copy
reads not this place so well in my judgment.

Of Esau and Jacob, and the mysteries included in them both. CHAP. 27.
SO Isaacs two sons, Esau and Jacob, were brought up together: now the younger
got the birthright of the elder by a bargain, made for (a) lentiles and
potage which Jacob had prepared, and Esau longed for exceedingly, and so sold
him his birthright for some of them, and confirmed the bargain with an oath.
Here now may we learn that it is (b) not the kind of meat, but the gluttonous
affect that hurts. To proceed? Isaac grows old, and his sight failed him, he
would willingly bless his elder son, and not knowing, he blessed the younger,
who had counterfeited his brothers roughness of body by putting goats skins
upon his neck and hands and so let his father feel him. Now least some should
think that this were (c) ^lent deceit in Jacob; the Scripture says before:
Esau was a cunning hunter, (...) ^ed in the fieles, but Jacob was a simple
plain man, and kept at home. (d), (...), ^lesse, one without counterfeyting:
what was the deceit then of this pla^ dealing man in getting of this blessing?
what can the guile of a guiltless, true hearted soul be in this case, but a
deep mystery of the truth? what was the blessing? Behold (says he) the smell
of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord (...) blessed; God give
thee therefore of the dew of heaven and the fatness of earth ^d plenty of
wheat and wine: let the nations be thy servants, and Princes bow down The
blessing of I^cob.
unto thee, be Lord over thy brethren, and let thy mothers children honor
thee: cursed be he that curses thee, and blessed be he that blesses thee.
Thus this blessing of Jacob, is the preaching of Christ unto all the nations.
This is the whole scope, in Isaac is the law and the prophets, and by the
mouths of the Jews is Christ blessed, unknown to them because he knows not
them. The odor of his name fills the world like a field, the dew of heaven, is
his divine doctrine, the fertile ^th is the faithful Church, the plenty of
wheat and wine is the multitude ^ed in Christ by the sacraments of his body and
blood. Him do nations serve and Princes adore. He^ is Lord over his brother,
for his people rule o^r the Jews. The sons of his father that is Abraham's
sons in the faith, do honor him. For he is Abraham's son in the flesh,
cursed be he that curses (...), (...) blessed be he that blesses him:
Christ I mean, our Savior, blessed. That is ^ly ^ught by the Prophets of the
woundring Jews: and is still blessed by o^ of them that as yet erroneously
expect his coming. And now comes (...) ^er for the blessing promised: then is
Isaac afraid, and knows he had blessed the one for the other. He wonders,
and asks who he was, yet complains he not of the deceit, but having the
mystery thereof opened in his heart, he forbeares fretning and confirms the
blessing. Who was he then (says he) that hunted and took venison for me, and
I have eaten of it all before thou came, and I have blessed him, and he
shall be blessed? Who would not have here expected a curse rather, but that
his mind was altered by a divine inspiration? O true done deeds, but yet all
prophetical: on earth but all by heaven! by men, but all for God! whole
volumes would not hold all the mysteries that they conceive: but we must
restrain our selves. The process of the work calls us on unto other
matters.

L. VIVES.
FOr (a) lentiles] There is lenticula, a vessel of oil, and lenticula of
lens, a little fitchie kind of pease: the other comes of lentitas, because the
oil cannot run but gently lent) Lenticula, what it is.
out of the mouth, it is so strait. But the scriptures say, that they were
only read po^ge that Esau sold his birthright for: and therefore he was
called Edom, read. (b) Not the (...) of] This is a true precept of the
Evangelical law. Here I might inscribe much, not allow the commons any
licentiousness, but to teach the rulers diverse things which I must let alone
for once. (c) Fraudulent deceipt] For deceit may be either good or bad.

Of Jacobs journey into Mesopotamia for a wife, his vision in the night, as he
went: his return with four women, whereas he went but for one. CHAP. 38.
Jacobs parents sent him into Mesopotamia, there to get a wife. His father
dismissed him with these words. Thou shall take thee no wife of the daughters
of Canaan: Arise get thee to Mesopotamia to the house of Bathuel, thy mothers
father, (...) thence take thee a wife of the daughters of Laban thy mothers
brother. My GOD bless thee, and increase thee, and multiply thee, that thou
may be a multitude of people: and give the blessing of Abraham to thee and
to thy seed after thee, that (...) may inherit the land (wherein thou art
a stranger) which God gave Abraham. Here we see Jacob, the one half of
Isaacs seed, severed from Esau the other half. For when it was said: in Isaac
shall thy seed be called, that is, the seed pertaining to Gods holy City,
then was Abraham's other seed, (the bond-womans son) severed from this other,
as Kethurahs was also to be done with afterward. But now there was this doubt
risen about Isaacs two sons, whether the blessing belong but unto one, or
unto both: if unto one only, unto which of them? This was resolved when Isaac
said; That thou may be a multitude of people, and God give the blessing of
Abraham unto thee: namely to Jacob. Forward: (...) going into Mesopotamia, had
a vision in a dream, recorded thus: And Jacob ^parted from Beersheba, and came
to Charra: and he came to a certain place and (...) there all the night,
because the sun was down, and he took of the stones of the (...), and laid
under his head, and slept. And he dreamed, and behold a ladder, and the (...)
^f it reached up to heaven, and lo the Angels of God went up and down by it,
and (...) Lord stood above it and said: I am the Lord God of Abraham thy
father, and of (...) fear not: the land on which thou sleep, will I give
thee and thy seed, and thy see^ shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou
shall spread (b) over the sea, the East, (...) North, and the South. And lo I
am with thee and will keep thee wheresoever thou go, and will bring thee
again into this land, for I will not forsake thee, until that I have
performed that I promised unto thee. And Jacob arose from his sleep, and said*
Surely the Lord is in this place and I was not a ware, and he was afraid and
said. O how t^rible is this place! surely this is none other but the house of
God and the gate of heaven. And he arose up and took the stone that he had
laid under his head and set it up like a (c) Title and powered oil upon the
tope of it, and called the name of that place (d) the house of God. This now
was prophetical: he did not Idolatrize in pouring oil on the stone, nor made
it a God, nor adored it, nor sacrificed unto it, but because the (e) name of
Christ was to come of Chrisma, that is unction, of that was this a very
significant mystery. Now for the ladder our Savior himself mentions it in
the gospel, for having said of Nathanael, behold a true Isralite, wherein
there is no guile (because Israel, that is, Jacob saw this ^ight) he adds,
Verrily, verily I say unto you hereafter you shall see heaven open and the
Angels of God Io. 1. 51.
ascending and descending upon the son of man, But forward. Jacob went into
Mesopotamia to seek a wife; where he happened to have four women given him,
of whom he begat twelve sons and one daughter, without affecting any of them
lustfully as the scripture shows, for he came but for one, and being deceived
by (f) one for another, he would not turn her away whom he had unwittingly
known, least he should seem to make her a mocking stock, and so because the
law at that time did not prohibit plurality of wives for increase sake, he
took the other also whom he had promised to marry before: who being barren,
gave him her maid to beget her children upon, as her sister had done, who was
not baren and yet did so to have the more children. But Jacob never desired but
one: nor used any but to the augmentation of his posterity and that by law of
marriage nor would he have done this, but that his wives urged it upon him, who
had lawful power of his body because he was their husband.

L. VIVES.
BErsheba, (a) and.] The seauenty read it the well of the swearing: the Hebrew
interpreted it, Bersabe the well of the oath or of sarurity.
the well of fullness and Aquila and Symmachus do both follow the last:
Hierome. But the well of fullness that Isaacs servants dug is not the same
with the well of swearing that Abra^ dug, and named the well of the oath, or
covenant which he made with Abymilech, gi^ng him seven lambs: for Sheba is
either an oath or seven: yet both these wells were in one city. (b) Over the
sea.] This is no signification of power over the sea by navy or so: but it
sig^eth the West (as I said before) or Syrian sea, next unto ours, to show the
four parts of the world. (c) A title.] The seauenty read, (...), a pillar, and
that is better then a title. (d) The (...) of God.] The next village was called
Bethel, being before called Luz, now the house of God, before a nutte. It was
in the portion of Beniamine, between Bethau, and Gai. (e) The (...) of
Christ.] (...) in Greek is vnctus in Latin: [anoynted in English] and (...)
is, (...). (f) One for an other.] Lea the eldest daughter for Rachel the
younger. Genesis 29.

Jacob enstiled Israel. The reason of this change. CHAP. 39.
OF these four women Jacob begot twelve sons and one daughter. And then came
the entrance into Egypt by his son Joseph, whom his brethren ^ed, and sold
thither, who was preferred there unto great dignity. Jacob was also called
Israel (as I said before) which name his progeny bore after him. The name, the
Angel that wrastled with him as he returned from Mesopotamia, gave him, being
an evident type of Christ. For whereas Jacob prevailed against him, by (a) his
own consent, to form this mystery, is signified the passion of Christ,
wherein the Jews seemed to prevail against him. And yet Jacob got a
blessing from him whom he had overcome: and the changing of his name was that
blessing: for (b) Israel is as much as, seeing God, which shall come to pass
in the end of the world. Now the Angel touched him (prevailing) upon the
breadth of his thigh, and so he became lame: So the blessed and the lame was
all but one Jacob: blessed in his faithful progeny, and lame in the
unfaithful. For the breadth Jacob blessed and lame. Psalm. 11.
of his thigh is the multitude of his issue: of which the greatest part (as the
Prophet says) have halted in their ways.

L. VIVES.
BY his (a) own consent] For otherwise, the Angel could not only have
conquered him, but even have killed him. (b) Israel is as much] Hierome likes
not this interpretation, nor Israel.
to call him the Prince of God, nor the direct of God, but rather the most just
man of God. Josephus takes it to be understood of his prevailing against the
Angel. De Antiquit. Iudaic.

Jacobs departure into Egypt with seauentie five souls, how to be taken,
seeing some of them were borne afterward. CHAP. 40.
IT is said there went with Jacob into Egypt seauentie five souls, counting
himself and his sons, his daughter and his niece. But if you mark well, you
shall find that he had not so numerous a progeny at his entrance into Egypt.
For in this number are Joseph's grandchildren reckoned, who could not then be
with him. For Jacob was then a hundred and forty years old, and Joseph thirty
nine, who marrying (as it is recorded) but at thirty years old, how could his
sons in nine years have any sons to increase this number by? Seeing then
that Ephraim and Manasses, Joseph's sons, had no children, being but nine
years of age at this remove of Jacobs stock, how can their sons sons, or
their sons be accounted amongst the seauentie five that went in this company
unto Egypt? for there is Machir reckoned, Manasses his son, and Galaad,
Machirs son, and there is Vtalaam, Ephraims son reckoned, and Bareth,
Vtalaams son: Now these could not be there, Jacob finding at his coming that
Joseph's children, the fathers and grandfathers of those four last named, were
but children of nine years old at that time. But this departure of Jacob
thither with seauentie five souls, contains not one day, nor a year, but
all the time that Joseph lived afterward, by whose means they were placed
there: of whom the Scripture says; Joseph dwelt in Egypt, and his brethren
with him a hundred years, and Joseph saw Ephraims children even unto the third
generation: that was until he was borne who was Ephraims grandchild: unto
him was he great grandfather. The scripture then proceeds: Machirs sons
(the son of Manasses) were brought up on Joseph's knees. This was Galaad,
Manasses his grandchild: but the scripture speaks in the plural, as it does
of Jacobs one daughter, calling her daughters, as the (a) Latins use to call a
man's only child if he have no more, liberi, children. Now Joseph's felicity
being so great as to see the fourth from him in descent, we may not imagine
that they were all borne when he was but thirty nine years old, at which time
his father came into Egypt: and this is that that deceived the ignorant because
it is written; These are the names of the children of Israel which came into
Egypt with Jacob their father. For this is said because the seauentie five are
reckoned with him, not that they all entered Egypt with him. But in this
transmigration and settling in Egypt, is included all the time of Joseph's life,
who was the means of his placing here.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Latines] Sempronius Asellio called Sempronius Gracchus his only
son, liberi: Liberi, ho^ used by the Latins.
and it was an usual phrase of old. Gell. and Herenn. Digest. lib. 50.

Jacobs blessing unto his son Judah. CHAP. 41.
SO then if we seek the fleshly descent of Christ from Abraham first (for the
good of the City of God, that is still a pilgrim upon earth) Isaac is the
next: and from Isaac, Jacob or Israel, Esau or Edom being rejected: from
Israel, Judah (all the rest being debarred) for of his tribe came Christ. And
therefore Israel at his death blessing his sons in Egypt, gave Judah this
prophetical blessing: Judah (a) thy brethren shall praise thee: thine hand
shall be on the neck of thine enemies: Genesis 49.
thy fathers sons shall adore thee. As a Lions whelpe (Judah) shall thou come
up (b) from the spoil, my son. He shall lie down and sleep as a Lion, or
a Lions whelpe, who shall rouse him? The scepter shall not depart from Judah,
nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloe come, and the people be
gathered unto him He shall bind his Ass fool unto the Vine, and his Asses
colt (c) with a rope of hair: he shall wash his stole in wine, and his garment
in the blood of the grape, his eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth
white with milk. These I have explained against Faustus the Manichee, as
far, I think, as the Prophecy requires. Where Christ's death is presaged in
the word sleep, as not of necessity, but of his power to dye, as the Lion
had to lie down and sleep: which power himself auoweth in the Gospel; I
have Ioh. 10. 17. 18.
power to lay down my life, and power to take it again: no man takes it from
me but I lay it down of my self, etc. So the Lion raged, so fulfilled what
was spoken: for that same, Who shall rouse him? belongs to the resurrection:
for none could raise him again, but he himself that said of his body. Destroy
this temple and in Ioh. 2. 19.
three days I will raise it up again. Now his manner of death upon the high
cross, is intimated in this: shall thou come up: and these words, He shall
lie down and Ioh. 19. 30
^pe, are even these: He bowed down his head and give up the ghost. Or it may
mean the grave wherein he slept, and from whence none could raise him up, as
the Prophets and he himself had raised others, but himself raised himself
as from a sleep. Now his stole which he washes in wine, that is, cleanses
from sin in his blood (intimating the sacrament of baptism, as that
addition, And his garment in the blood of the grape, expresses) what is it but
the Church? and eyes being red with wine: are his spiritual sons that are
drunk with her cup, as the Psalmist says: My cup runs over; and his teeth
whiter then the milk, are his nourishing words wherewith he feeds his
little weaklings as with (...). This is he in whom the promises to Judah were
laid up, which until they (...), there never wanted kings of Israel of the
stock of Judah And unto him ^ll the people be gathered: this is plainer to the
sight to conceive, then the ^gue to utter.

L. VIVES.
IVda (a) thy brethren] Judah is praise or confession. (b) From the spoile]
From captivity says the Judah.
Hebrew: all this is meant of Christ's leading the people captive, his high and
sacred ascension, and the taking of captivity captive. Hierome. (c) With a
rope of hayre] With a rope only Psalm. 6. 5.
say some: and his asses colte unto the best vine, says Hierome from the
Hebrew. And for this Asses colte (says he) may be read the City of God,
(whereof we now speak) the seventy read it (...): to the vine branch, (...)
is the twist of the Vine as Theophrastus says: and thence have Helix.
the two kinds of luy their names. Diosor. Plin. so might cilicium come into
the Latin text that Augustine used, if the Greek were translated Helicium,
otherwise I cannot tell how.

Of Jacobs changing of his hands from the heads of Joseph's sons, when he
blessed them. CHAP. 42.
But as Esau and Jacob, Isaacs two sons, prefigured the two peoples of Jews
and Christians (although that in the flesh the Idumaeans, and not the Jews
came of Esau, nor the Christians of Jacob, but rather the Jews, for thus must
the words, The elder shall serve the younger, be understood) even so was it in
Joseph's two Genesis 25.
sons, the elder prefiguring the Jews, and the younger the Christians. Which
two, Jacob in blessing laid his right hand upon the younger, who was on his
left side, and his left upon the elder, who was on his right side. This
displeased their father, who told his father of it, to get him to reform the
supposed mistaking, and showed him which was the elder. But Jacob would not
change his hands, but said, I know son, I know very well: he shall be a
great people also: but his younger brother shall be greater then he, and his
seed shall fill the nations. Here is two promises now, a people to the one,
and a fullness of nations to the other. What greater proof need we then this,
to confirm, that the Israelites, and all the world besides, are contained in
Abraham's seed: the first in the flesh, and the later in the spirit.

Of Moses his times, Iosuah, the Judges, the Kings, Saul the first, David the
chief, both in merit and in mystical reference. CHAP. 43.
Jacob and Joseph being dead, the Israelites in the other hundred forty four
years (at the end of which they left Egypt) increased wonderfully, though the
Egyptians oppressed them sore, and once killed all their male children for
fear of their wonderful multiplication. But Moses was saved from those
butchers, and brought up in the court by Pharaohs daughter (the (a) name of the
Exodus 2.
Egiptian Kings) God intending great things by him, and he grew up to that
worth that he was held fit to lead the nation out of this extreme slavery, or
rather God did it by him, according to his promise to Abraham. First, he fled
into Madian, for killing an Egiptian in defense of an Israelite: and afterward
returning full of Gods spirit, he foiled the enchanters (h) of Pharao in all
their opposition: and Exodus 8. 9. 10. 11
laid the ten sore plagues upon the Egiptians, because they would not let
Israel depart, namely the changing of the water into blood, Frogs, (c) Lyce,
(d) Gnattes, morren of Cattle, botches and sores, Hail, Grasshoppers,
darkness, and death of all the first borne: and lastly the Israelites being
permitted after all the plagues that Egypt had groned under, to depart, and yet
being pursued afterward by them again, passed over the red Sea dry-foote,
and left all the host of Egypt drowned in the midst: the sea opened before
the Israelites, and shut after them, returning upon the pursuers and
ouer-whelming them. And then forty years after was Israel in the deserts with
Moses, and there had they the tabernacle of the testimony, where God was
served with sacrifices, that were all figures of future events: the law being
now given with terror upon mount Syna: for the terrible voices and thunders
were full prooses that God was there: And this was presently after their
departure from Egypt in the wilderness, and there they celebrated their
Passe-ouer fifty days after, by offering of a Lamb, the true type of Christ's
passing unto his father by his passion Exodus 12.
in this world. For Pascha in Hebrew, is a passing over: and so the fiftith day
after the opening of the new Testament, and the offering of Christ our
Passe^ouer, the Luc. 11.
holy spirit descended down from heaven (he whom the scriptures call the
finger of God) to renew the memory of the first miraculous prefiguration in our
hearts, because the law in the tables is said to be written by the finger of
GOD. Moses being dead, Iosuah ruled the people, and lead them into the land of
promise, dividing it amongst them, And by these two glorious captains, were
Exodus 31. Ios. 1.
strange battles won, and they were ended with happy success: God himself
auouching that the losers sins, and not the winners merits were causes of
those conquests. After these two, the land of promise was ruled by Judges, that
Abraham's seed might see the first promise fulfilled, concerning the land of
Canaan, though not as yet concerning the nations of all the earth: for that was
to be fulfilled by the coming of Christ in the flesh, and the faith of the
Gospel, not the precepts of the law, which was insinuated in this, that it was
not Moses that received the law, but Iosuab (h) (whose name God also changed)
that lead the people into the promised land. But in the Judges times, as the
people offended or obeyed God, so varied their fortunes in war. On unto the
Kings. Saul was the first King of Israel, who being a reprobate, and dead in
the field, and all his race rejected 1. Sam. 10.
from ability of succession, David was enthroned (i) whose son our Savior
Math. 1. Mat. 15. Mat. 20. Luc. 18
is especially called: In him is as it were a point, from whence the people of
God do flow, whose original (as then being in the youthful time thereof) is
drawn from Abraham unto this David. For it is not out of neglect that Matthew
the Evangelist reckons the descents so, that he puts fourteen
generations between Abraham and David. For a man may be able to beget in his
youth, and therefore he begins his genealogies from Abraham, who upon the
changing of his name, was made the father of many nations. So that before him,
the Church of God was in the infancy, as it were: from Noah I mean, unto him,
and therefore the first language, the Hebrew as then was invented for to speak
by. For from the term of ones infancy, he begins to speak, being called an
infant, (k) a non sancto, of not speaking, which age of himself, every man
forgets as fully as the world was destroyed by the deluge. For who can
remember his infancy? Wherefore in this progress of the City of God, as the
last book contained the first age thereof, so let this contain the second and
the third, when the yoke of the law was laid on their necks, the abundance
of sin appeared, and the earthly kingdom had beginning, etc. intimated by
the Heifer, the Goat, ^d the Ram of three years old: in which there wanted
not some faithful persons, as the turtle-doue and the Pidgeon portended.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) name of] To anoyde the supposition that Pharao that reigned in Jacob
and Joseph's Pharao.
time, was all one Pharao with this here named. Pharao was a name of kingly
dignity in Egip^. Hieron. in Ezechiel. lib. 9. So was Prolomy after Alexander,
Caesar and Augustus after the two brave Romans, and Abimelech in Palestina.
Herodotus speaks of one Pharao that was blind. They were called Pharao of
Pharos, an I Will ouer-against Alexandria, called Carpatho^ of old: Proteus
reigned in it. The daughter of this Pharao, Josephus calls Thermuth. (b) Of
Pharao] Which Pharao this was, it is doubtful. Amasis (says Apion Polyhistor,
as Eusebius cites him) reigned in Egypt when the Jews went thence. But this
cannot be, for Amasis was long after, viz. in Pythagoras his time, unto whom he
was commended by Polycrates king of Samos. But Josephus says out of Manethon,
that this was Techmosis, and yet shows him to vary from himself, and to put
Amenophis in another place also. Eusebius says that it was Pharao Cenchres. In
Chron. and that the Magicians names were Iannes and Iambres. Prep. euangel. ex
Numenio. (c) Lyce] So does Josephus say, if Ruffinus have well translated him:
that this third plague was the disease called Phthiriasis, or the lousie evil,
naming no gnattes. Peter denatalibus and Albertus Grotus says, that the
Cyniphes are a kind of fly. So says Cyniphes.
Origin. Albertus says that they had the body of a worm, the wings and head
of a fly, with a sting in their mouth wherewith they prick and draw-bloud,
and are commonly bred in fens and marshes, troubling all creatures, but man
especially. Origin calls them Snipes. They do fly (faith he) but are so
small that he that discerns them as they fly must have a sharp eye; but
when they alight upon the body, they will soon make themselves known to his
feeling, though his sight discern them not. Super Exodus By this creature
Origin understands logic which enters the mind with such stings of undiscerned
subtlety, that the party deceived never perceives till he be fetched over. But
the Latins, nor the Greeks ever used either Cynipes or Snipes, nor is it in
the seauentie either, but (...), Gnat-like creatures, (says Suidas) and such
as eat holes in wood. Psalm. 104. The Hebrew, and Chaldee Paraphrase read lice,
for this word, as Josephus does also. (d) Horse-flyes] Or Dogge-flies, the
vulgar reads flies, only. (e) Grashoppers] The fields plague, much
endamaging that part of Africa that bordereth Dog-flies. Grasshoppers.
upon Egypt. Pliny says they are held notes of Gods wrath, where they exceed
thus. (f) Groned vnder] Perfracti, perfractus, is, thoroughly tamed,
praefractus, obstinate. (g) Passe-ouer] Phase is a passing over: because the
Angel of death passed over the Israelites houses, and smote them not: hence
arose the paschall feast. Hieron. in Mich. lib. 2. not of (...), to suffer, as
if it had been from the passion. In Matthew. (h) Whose name] In Hebrew Iosuah
and Jesus seems all one: Io^ ^d I^s.
both are salvation, and Jesus the son of Iosedech in Esdras is called
Iosuah. (i) Whose sonne] Mat. 1. an (...) all the course of the Gospel; Christ
is especially called the son of two, Abraham or David: for to them was he
chiefly promised. (k) a non fando] And therefore I^.
great fellows that cannot speak, are sometimes called infants: and such
also as stammer (...) their language: [and such like-wise as being express
dolts and sottes in matter of learning, [The lo^ine copy defective.]
will challenge the names of great Artists, Philosophers and Divines.]

Finis lib. 16.
THE CONTENTS OF THE seventeenth book of the City of God.
1. Of the times of the Prophets. 2. At what time Gods promise concerning (...)
Land of Canaan was fulfilled, and Israel ^ed it to dwell in and possess. 3.
The Prophets three meanings: of earthly ^lem, of heavenly Jerusalem, and of
both. 4. The change of the kingdom of Israel. An^ ^uels mother a prophetess:
and a type (...) (...) Church: what she prophesied. 5. The Prophets words unto
Heli the priest, ^g the taking away of Aarons priest^. 6. The promise of the
priesthood of the (...), and their kingdom to stand eternally, ^ed in that
sort, that other promises of (...) ^nded nature are. (...) kingdom of Israel
rent: prefiguring ^all division between the spiritual ^ll Israel. (...) ^ises
made to David concerning his (...) (...) fulfilled in Solomon; but in Christ.
(...) ^phecy of Christ in the 88. psalm, (...) ^s of Nathan, in the book of
Kings. (...) (...) diverse actions done in the earthly Ie^ (...) the kingdom,
differing from Gods (...) to show that the truth of his word con^ ^he glory of
an other kingdom, and an^ ^g. 11. The substance of the people of God, who
(...) Christ in the flesh: who only had power to (...) ^e soul of man from
hell. 12. ^her verse of the former psalm, and (...) (...) to whom it
belongs. 13. Whether the truth of the promised peace may be ascribed unto
Salomons time. 14. Of David's endeavors in composing of the psalms. 15. Whether
all things concerning Christ and his church in the psalms be to be rehearsed
in this work. 16. Of the forty five psalm, the tropes and truths therein,
concerning Christ and the church. 17. Of the references of the hundredth and
tenth psalm unto Christ's priesthood, and the two and twentieth unto his
passion. 18. Christ's death and resurrection prophesied in psalm. 3. et 40. 15.
et 67. 19. The obstinate infidelity of the Jews declared in the 69. psalm.
20. David's kingdom, his merit: his son Solomon, his prophecies of Christ in
Salomons books: and in books that are annexed unto them. 21. Of the Kings of
Israel and Judah after Solomon. 22. How Hieroboam infected his subjects with
Idolatry, yet did God never failed them in Prophets, nor in keeping many from
that infection. 23. The state of Israel and Judah unto both their captiuities
(which befell at different times) diversely altered: Judah united to Israel:
and lastly both unto Rome. 24. Of the last Prophets of the Jews, about the
time that Christ was borne.
FINIS.
THE SEVENTEENTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop
of Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of the times of the Prophets. CHAP. 1.
THus have we attained the understanding of Gods promises made unto Abraham,
and due unto Israel his seed in the flesh, and to all the Nations of earth as
his seed in the spirit: how they were fulfilled the progress of the City of
God in those times, did manifest. Now because our last book ended at the
reign of David, let us in this book, proceed with the same reign, as far
as is requisite. All the time therefore between Samuels first prophecy, and
the returning of Israel from seauenty years captivity in Babylon, to repair
the Temple (as Hieremy had prophesied) all this is called the time of the
Prophets. Hier. 25 Genesis 7.
For although that the Patriarch Noah in whose time the universal deluge
befell, and diverse others living before there were Kings in Israel, for some
holy and heavenly predictions of theirs, may not undeservedly be called (a)
Prophets: especially Genesis 20 D^. 4
seeing we see Abraham and Moses chiefly called by those names, and more
expressly then the rest: yet the days wherein Samuel began to prophecy, 1 Samuel 10 1 Samuel 16
were called peculiarly, the Prophets times. Samuel anointed Saul first, and
afterward (he being rejected) he anointed David for King, by Gods express
command, and from David's loins was all the blood royal to descend, during
that Kingdoms continuance. But if I should rehearse all that the Prophets
(each in his time) successively presaged of Christ during all this time that
the City of God continued in those times, and members of his, I should never
make an end. First, because the scriptures (though they seem but a bare
relation of the successiue deeds of each King in his time, yet) being
considered, with the assistance of Gods spirit, will prove either more, or as
fully, prophecies of things to come, as histories of things past. And how
laborious it were to stand upon each peculiar hereof, and how huge a work it
would amount unto, who knows not that has any insight herein: Secondly,
because the prophecies concerning Christ and his Kingdom (the City of God)
are so many in multitude, that the disputations arising hereof would not be
contained in a far bigger volume then is necessary for mine intent. So that
as I will restrain my pen as near as I can from all superfluous relations
in this work, so will I not ommit any thing that shall be really pertinent
unto our purpose.

L. VIVES.
CAlled (a) Prophets] The Hebrews called them Seers, because they saw the Lord
(in his predictions or prefigurations of any thing:) with the eyes of the
spirit, though not of the dull flesh, hence it is that scriptures call a
prophecy, a vision, and Nathan is called the Seer. 1. Kings. The Greeks
sometimes use the name of Prophet for their priests, poets, or teachers. Adam
was the first man and the first Prophet, who saw the mystery of Christ and his
church in his sleep. Then follows, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and
his children, Moses etc. Yet are not these reckned amongst the prophets, for
none of them left any books of the visions but Moses, whose books concerned
ceremonies, sacrifices and civil orders also. But these were all figures of
future things, nor were those the prophetical times, as those from Samuel
were, wherein there never were prophets wanting, whereas before God spoke but
seldom, and his visions were not so manifest as they were from the first King
unto the captivity: wherein were four great books of prophecies written, and
twelve of the small.

At what time Gods promise concerning the Land of Canaan was fulfilled, and
Israel received it to dwell in and possess. CHAP. 2.
WE said in the last book that God promised two things unto Abraham, one was
the possession of the Land of Canaan, for his seed: in these words: Go into
the Land that I will show thee, and I will make thee a great nation etc. The
other of far more excellence, not concerning the carnal, but the spiritual
seed: nor Israel only, but all the believing nations of the world: in these
words (...) (...) shall all nations of the earth be blessed etc. This we
confirmed by many testi^. Genesis 12.
Now therefore was Abraham's carnal seed (that is, the Israelites) in the (...)
promise: now had they towns, cities, yea and Kings therein, and Gods (...)
were performed unto them in great measure: not only those that he (...)
signs, or by word of mouth unto Abraham, Isaac and Jacob: but even (...) ^so
that Moses who brought them out of the Egyptian bondage, or any (...) him unto
this instant had promised them from God. But the pro^ ^cerning the land of
Canaan, that Israel should reign over it from the (...) Egypt unto the great
Euphrates, was neither fulfilled by Iosuah that wor^ of them into the Land of
promise, and he that divided the whole a^ the twelve tribes, nor by any other
of the Judges in all the time after (...) was there any more prophecies that it
was to come, but at this instant (...) ^ected. And by (a) David, and his son
Solomon, it was fulfilled indeed, and (...) ^gdome enlarged as far as was
promised: for these two, made all (...) ^ations their servants and tributaries.
Thus then was Abraham's seed (...) (...) so settled in this land of Canaan by
these Kings, that now no part of (...) ^ly promise was left unfulfilled: but
that the Hebrews, obeying Gods ^ements, might continue their dominion therein,
without all distur^ in all security and happiness of estate. But God knowing
they would (...), used some temporal afflictions to exercise the few
faithful therein (...) ^ad left, and by them to give warning to all his
servants that the nations (...) ^erwards to contain, who were to be warned by
those, as in whom he (...) ^llfill his other promise, by opening the New
Testament in the death of (...)*

L. VIVES.
B^ ^id] Hierome (epist. ad Dardan.) shows that the Jews possessed not all
the lands (...) promised the^: for in the book of Numbers, it is said to be
bounded on the South by the salt sea and the wilderness of sin, unto that
river of Egypt that ran into the sea by Rhinocorura: on the west, by the sea
of Palestina, Phaenicia, Coele, Syria, and Cylicia, on the North, by Mount
Taurus, and Zephyrius, as far as Emath, or Epiphania in Syria: on the East by
Antioch and the Lake Genesareth, called now, Tabarie, and by Jordan, that
runs into the salt sea, called now, The dead sea. Beyond Jordan half of the
land of the tribes of Ruben and Gad, lay, and half of the tribe of Manasses.
Thus much Hierome. But David possessed not all these but only that within the
bounds of Rhinocorura and Euphrates, wherein the Israelites still kept
themselves.

The Prophets three meanings: of earthly Jerusalem, of heavenly Jerusalem, and
of both. CHAP. 3.
WHerefore, as those prophecies spoken to Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, or any other
in the times before the Kings, so likewise all that the Prophets spoke
afterward, had their double refere^ce: partly to Abraham's seed in the flesh,
and partly to that wherein all the nations of the earth are blessed in him,
being made Co-heires with Christ in the glory and kingdom of heaven, by this
New Testament. So then they concern partly the bondwoman, bringing forth unto
bondage, that is the earthly Jerusalem, which serves with her sons, and
partly to the free City of God, the true Jerusalem, eternal and heavenly,
whose children are pilgrims upon earth in the way of Gods word. And there are
some that belong unto both, properly, to the bondwoman, and figuratively unto
the free woman: for the Prophets have a triple meaning in their prophecies:
some concerning the earthly Jerusalem, some the heavenly, and some, both: as
for example. The Prophet (a) Nathan was sent to tell David of his sin, and to
fortell him the evils that should ensue thereof. Now who doubts that these
words concerned the temporal City, whether they were spoken publicly for the
peoples general 2. Sam. 12
good, or privately for some man's knowledge, for some temporal use in the life
present? But now whereas we read. Behold the days come (says the LORD) that
I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of Judah:
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers when I took them
by the hand to bring them out of the Land of Egypt, which covenant they brake,
although I was an husband unto them, says the Lord: but this is the covenant
that I will make with the house of Israel, after those days (says the LORD) I
will put my law in their minds, and write it in their hearts, and I will be
their GOD, and they shall be my people. This without a^l doubt, is a prophecy of
the celestial Jerusalem, to whom God himself stands as a reward, and unto
which the enjoying of him is the perfection of good. Yet belongs it unto them
both in that the earthly Jerusalem was called Gods City, and his house
promised to be therein, which seemed to be fulfilled in Salomons building of
that magnificent temple. These things were both relations of things acted on
earth, and figures of things concerning heaven, which kind of prophecy
compounded of both, is of great efficacy in the canonical scriptures of the
Old Testament, and does exercise the readers of scripture very laudably in
seeking how the things that are spoken of Abraham's carnal seed are
allegorically fulfilled in his seed by faith: In (b) so much that some held
that there was nothing in the scriptures foretold and effected, or effected
without being foretold, that intimated not something belonging unto the
City of God, and to be referred unto the holy pilgrims thereof upon earth.
But if this be so, we shall tie the Prophets words unto two meanings only, and
exclude the third: and not only (...) Prophets but even all the Old Testament.
For therein must be nothing pe^ to the earthly Jerusalem, if all that be spoken
or fulfilled of that, have a far^ reference to the heavenly Jerusalem: so that
the Prophets must needs (...) but in two sorts, either in respect of the
heavenly Jerusalem, or else of both. (...) I think it a great error in some, to
hold no relation of things done, in the ^res more then mere historical* so
do I ho^d it a (c) great boldness in (...) that bind all the relations of
Scripture unto allegorical reference, and therefore I avouch the meanings in
the Scriptures, to be triple, and not twofold only. This I hold, yet blame I
not those that can pi^ke a good spiritual sense (...) of any thing they read,
so they do not contradict the truth of the history. But what faithful man
will not say that those are vain sayings that can belong (...) to divinity nor
humanity? and who will not avow that these of which (...) speak* are to have a
spiritual interpretation also, or leave them unto those (...) interpret them
in that manner?

L. VIVES.
(...) Prophet (a) Nathan] After David had sent Vriah to be slain in the front
of the battle, (...) married his widow Bersabe. (b) In so much] Hereupon they
say that so much is left out ^g the acts of the Jewish Kings, because they
seemed not to concern the City of (...) that whatsoever the Old Testament
contains or the New either, has all a sure Origin. [The Louaine edition
defective in all this]
(...) unto Christ and his Church, at which they are both leuelled. (c) Great
boldnesse] [As (...) ^d with great rarity of spirit yet keeps he the truth of
the history inviolate: for o^ ^l these relations were vanities: and each one
would s^rue an allegory out of the (...) to live and believe as he list and so
our faith and discipline should be utterly con^ ^herein I wonder at their mad
folly that will fetch all our form of life and religion (...) ^ories,
entangling them in ceremonious vanity, and proclayming all that contra^
heretiques]

(...) ^ange of the Kingdom and priesthood of Israel. Anna, Samuels mother a
prophetess: and a type of the Church: what she prophesied. CHAP. 4.
(...) ^ogresse therefore of the City of God in the Kings time, when Saul was
re^ued, and David chosen in his place to possess the Kingdom of Ierusa^ ^im
and his posterity successively, signifies and prefigureth, that which (...)
not omit, namely the future change concerning the two Testaments, (...) ^d the
New, where the Old Kingdom and priesthood was changed by (...) and eternal
King and Priest, Christ Jesus; for Heli being rejected, Sa^ made both the
priest and the Judge of God: and Saul being rejected, Da^ 1 Samuel 3.
^hosen for the King, and these two being thus seated, signified the change
(...) of. And Samuels mother, Anna, being first barren, and afterward by (...)
^odnes made fruitful, seems to prophecy nothing but this in her song (...)
^ing, when having brought up her son she dedicated him unto God as she (...),
saying: My heart rejoices in the LORD, my horn is exalted in the (...) ^y
mouth is enlarged on mine enemies, because I rejoiced in thy salvation. (...)
holy as the Lord there is no God like our God, nor any holy besides thee, 1.
Sam. 2.
(...) ^ore presumptiously, let no arrogancy come out of your mouth, for the
Lord is (...) ^f knowledge, and by him are enterprises established: the bow of
the (...) (...) ^ee broken, and guirded the weak with strength, they that were
full are hired forth for hunger: and the hungry have passed the land: for the
barren has (...) se^en, and (a) she that had many children is enfeobled, the
Lord kills, and (...): brings down to the grave, and raises up, the Lord
impouerisheth, and enritch^: humbles and exalts, he raises the poor out of
the dust, and lifts the beggar from the dunghill, to set them amongst Princes,
and make them inherit the seat of glory, he gives vows, unto those that vow
unto him, and blesses the years of the just: for in his own might shall no
man be strong: the Lord, the holy Lord shall weaken his adversaries, let not
the wise boast of his wisdom, nor the rich in his riches, nor the mighty in
his might, but let their glory be to know the Lord, and to execute his
judgment Hi^. 9
and justice upon the earth: the Lord from heaven has thundered: he shall
judge the ends of the world, and shall give the power unto our Kings, and shall
exalt the horn of his anointed. Are these the words of a woman giving thanks
for her son? are men's minds so benighted, that they cannot discern a
greater spirit herein then merely humane? and if any one be moved at the
events that now began to fall out in this earthly process, does he not
discern, and acknowledge the very true religion and City of God whose King
and founder is Jesus Christ, in the words of his Anna, who is fitly
interpreted, His grace? and that it was the spirit of grace (from which the
proud decline, and fall, and therewith the humble adhere Anna.
and are advanced as this hymn says) which spoke those prophetical words? If
any one will say that the woman did not prophecy, but only commended and
extolled Gods goodness for giving her prayers a son, why then what is the
meaning of this? The bow of the mighty has he broken, and guirded the weak
with strength? they* that were full are hired forth for hunger, and the hungry
have passed (...) the land? for the barren has borne seven, and she that had
many children, is (...)? Had she (being barren) borne seven? she had borne
but one when she said thus, (b nor had she seven afterward, or six either
(for Samuel to make up seven) but only three sons and two daughters. Again,
there being no King in Israel at that time, to what end did she conclude thus:
He shall give the power unto our Kings, and exalt the horn of his anointed?
did she not prophecy in this? Let the church of God therefore, that fruitful
Mother, that gracious City of that great King, be bold to say that which this
prophetical mother spoke in her person so long before: My heart rejoices in
the Lord (c) and my horn is exalted in the Lord. True joy, and as true
exaltation, both being in the Lord, and not in her self! my mouth is enlarged
over mine enemies, because Gods word is not pent up in straites, (d) nor in
preachers that are taught what to speak. I have rejoiced (says she) in thy
salvation. That was, in Christ Jesus whom old Simeon (in the Gospel) had in
his arms, and knew his greatness in his infancy, saying, Lord L^* 2.
n^w l^ttest thou thy servant depart in peace: for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation. Let the church then say. I have rejoiced in thy salvation: there is
none holy, as the Lord is: no God like to our GOD, for he is holy, and makes
holy: just himself, and iustifyi^ others: none is holy besides thee, for none
is holy but from thee. Finally it followe^: speak no more presumptuously, let
not arragance come out of your mouth, for the Lord is a God of knowledge, and
by him are all enterprises establis^d: ((...)) none knows what he knows:
for he that thinks himself to be some thing, seduceth himself, and is
nothing at all. This now is against the presumptuous* Babilonian enemies unto
Gods City, glorying in themselves and not in God, as also against the carnal
Israelites, who (as the Apostle says) being ignorant of the righte^sse of
God, (that is, that which he being only righteous, R^. 10. (...)
and justifying, gives man) and going about to establish their own
righteousness, (...) as if they had gotten such themselves, and had none of
his bestowing) (...) not themselves unto the righteousness of God: but
thinking proudly, to please (...) ^stice of their own, and none of his, (who
is the God of knowledge, and the (...) of consciences, and the discerner of all
man's thoughts, which being (...) ^eriue not from him) So they fell into
reprobation. And by him (says the (...)) are all enterprises established, and
what are they but the suppression of (...), and the advancement of the humble?
These are Gods intents, as it fol^ the bow of the mighty has he broken, and
guirded the weak with strength* (...)* that is, their proud opinions that then
could sanctify themselves with ^spirations: and they are guirded with
strength that say in their hearts, (...) on me, O Lord, for I am weak. They
that were full, are (f) hired out for (...) that is, they are made lesser then
they were, for in their very bread, that (...) ^ne words, which Israel as then
had alone from all the world* that sa^ ^thing but the taste of earth. But the
hungry nations, that had not the (...) ^ing to those holy words by the New
Testament, they passed over the (...) found, because they relished an heavenly
taste in those holy doctrines, (...)* a savor of earth. And this follows as
the reason: for the barren has (...) ^rth seven, and she that had many
children is enfeebled. Here is the whole (...) opened to such as know the
number of the Jews what it is, to wit, ^ber of the churches perfection, and
therefore John the Apostle writes (...) seven churches, implying in that, the
fullness of one only: and so it (...) ^uely spoken in Solomon. Wisdom has
built her an house and hewn out Prou. 9, 1
(...) pillars: For the City of God was barren in all the nations, until she
(...) that fruit whereby now we see her a fruitful mother: and the earthly
(...) that had so many sons, we now behold to be weak and enfeebled. (...)
the free-womans sons were her virtues: but now seeing she has (...) ^nely
without the spirit, she has lost her virtue and is become (...) ^e Lord
kills, and the Lord quickneth, he kills her that had so many (...)
quickneth her womb was dead before, and has made her bring (...), although
properly his quickening be to be implied upon those whom (...) ^d, for she does
as it were repeat it saying: he brings down to the (...) raises up, for
they, unto whom the Apostle says: If ye be dead with (...) the things that
are above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God: Colloss. 3, 1
(...) ^to salvation by the LORD, unto which purpose he adds. Set your (...)
upon things above, and not on things that are on the earth. For you (...) ^oth
he) behold here how healthful the Lord kills: and then follow^ ^our life is
hid with Christ in God. Behold here how God quickneth. I (...) bring them to
the grave and back again? Yes without doubt, all (...) faithful see that
fulfilled in our head, with whom our life is hid in (...) ^e that spared not
his own son but gave him for us all, he killed (...) manner, and in raising
him from death, he quickened him again. (...) we hear him say in the psalm,
thou shall not leave my soul in the (...) ^ore he brought him unto the grave,
and back again. By his poverty (...) ^ched: for the Lord makes poor, and
enritcheth, that is nothing else (...) humbles, and exalts, humbling the
proud and exalting the (...) ^or that same place* God resists the proud and
gives grace unto the (...) the text whereupon all this prophetesses words have
dependence. (...) which follows. He raises the poor out of the dust and
lifts the beg^ dunghill, is the fittliest understood of him who became poor
for us, whereas he was rich, by his poverty (as I said) to enritch us. For he
raised him from the earth so soon that his flesh saw no corruption: nor is
this sequence, And lifts the beggar from the dunghill, meant of any but him,
(g) for the beggar and the poor is all one, the dunghill whence he was
lifted, is the persecuting route of Jews, amongst whom the Apostle had been
one, but afterward, as he says, that which was advantage unto me I held
loss for Christ's sake: nay not one^ loss, but I judge them all dunge, that I
might win Christ. Thus then was this Philip. 3. 8
poor man raised above all the rich men of the earth, and this beggar was
lifted up from the dunghill to sit with the Princes of the people, to whom he
says, You shall sit on twelve thrones, etc. and to make them inherit the seat
of glory: for those mighty ones had said, Behold we have left all, and followed
thee: this vow had those mighties vowed. But whence had they this vow but from
him that gives vows unto those that vow; otherwise, they should be of those
mighties, whose bow he has broken. That gives vows (says she) unto them
that vow. For none can vow any set thing unto God but he must have it from
God: it follows, and blesses the years of the just, that is that they
shall be with him eternally, unto whom it is written, thy years shall never
fail: for that they are fixed: but here they either pass or perish: for they
are gone ere they come, bringing still their end with them. But of these two,
he gives vows to those that vow and blesses the years of the just: the one
we perform, and the other we receive; but this, always by Gods giving we
receive, nor can we do the other without Gods help, because in his own
might shall no man be strong* The Lord shall weaken his adversaries, namely
such as resist and envy his servants in fulfilling their vows. (h) The greek
may also signify, his own adversaries: for he that is our adversary when we
are Gods children is his adversary also, and is overcome by us, but not by our
strength: for in his own might shall no man be strong. The LORD, the holy
LORD shall weaken his adversaries, and make them be conquered by those whom He
the most Holy has made holy also; (i) and therefore let not the wise glory in
his wisdom, the mighty in his might, nor the rich in his riches, but let
their glory be to know God, and to execute his judgments and justice upon
earth. He is a good proficient in the knowledge of God, that knows that God
must give him the means to know God. For what have thou (says the Apostle)
which thou have not received? that is, what have thou of thine own to boast
of. Now he that does right, executes judgment and justice: and he that
lives in Gods obedience and the end of the command, namely in a pure love, a
good conscience, and an unfeigned faith. But 1. Tim. 1. 5
this love (as the Apostle John says) is of God. Then, to do judgment and
justice, is of God, but what is on the earth; might it not have been left out,
and it have only bin said, to do judgment and justice? the precept would be
more common both to men of land and sea: but least any should think that after
this life there were a time elsewhere to do justice and judgment in, and so
to avoid the great judgment for not doing them in the flesh, therefore, in
the earth is added, to confine those acts within this life: for each man
bears his earth about with him in this world, and when he dies, bequeaths
it to the great earth, that must return him it at the resurrection. In this
earth therefore, in this fleshly body must we do justice and judgment, to do
our selves good hereafter by, when every one shall receive according to his
works done in the body, good or bad: in the body* that is, in the time that the
body lived: for if a man blaspheme in heart though he do no ^urt with any
bodily member yet shall not he be unguilty, because though he did it not in his
body, yet he did it in the time wherein he was in the body* And so many we
understand that of the Psalm, The Lord, our King has wrought (...) in the
midest of the earth before the beginning of the world: that is, the Lord Psa,
72. 13
Jesus our God before the beginning (for he made the beginning) has wrought
salvation in the midst of the earth namely then, when the word became flesh,
and (...) corporally amongst us. But on. Annah having shown how each man ought
to glory, viz. not in himself but in God, for the reward that follows the
great judgment, proceeds thus (l) The Lord went up unto heaven, and has
thundered: he shall judge the ends of the worlds, and shall give the power unto
our Kings, Isa, 5.
and exalt the horn of his anointed. This is the plain faith of a Christian.
He (...) into heaven, and thence he shall come to judge the quick and dead,
for who Mat. 10.
is ^ded says the Apostle, but he who first descended into the inferior parts
of the earth? He thundered in the clouds, which he filled with his holy spirit
in his ^ntion, from which clouds he threatened Jerusalem, that ungrateful vine
to (...) no rain upon it. Now it is said, He shall judge the ends of the
world, that is the ends of men: for he shall judge no real part of earth, but
only all the men thereof, nor judges he them that are changed into good or
bad, in the mean (...), but (m) as every man ends, so shall he beiudged:
whereupon the scripture (...), He that comes unto the end shall be safe, he
therefore that does i^ce in (...) (...) of the earth shall not be condemned,
when the ends of the earth are (...). And shall give power unto our Kings, that
is, in not condemning them by ^gement, he gives them power because they rule
over the flesh like Kings (...) ^quer the world in him who shed his blood for
them. And shall exalt the (...) (...) his anointed. How shall Christ the
anointed exalt the horn of his an^* It is of Christ that those sayings, The
Lord went up to heaven, etc. are all (...) so is this same last, of exalting
the horn of his anointed. Christ there^ exalt the horn of his anointed,
that is, of every faithful servant of his, as (...) (...) (...) first: my
horn is exalted in the Lord, for all that have received the vnc^ (...) (...)
grace, may well be called his anointed* al which, with their head, make (...)
anointed. This Anna prophisied, holy Samuels mother, in whom the (...) of
ancient priesthood was prefigured and now fulfilled, when as the wo^ (...) many
sons was enfeebled, that the barren which brougt forth seven, (...) ^eceiue
the new priesthood in Christ.

L. VIVES.
SHE that (a) had.] Multa in filiis. (b) Nor had she.] The first book of
Samuel agrees with (...), but Josephus (unless the book be falty) says she
had six, three sons and three (...) after Samuel; but the Hebrews reckon
Samuels two sons for Annahs also, being Hie. in Reg. lib, 1.
(...) ^dchildren, and Phamuahs seven children died severally, as Annahs, and
her son (...) ^ere borne. (c) And my horn.] Some read, mine heart, but
falsely, the greek is (...). (...) preachers there are.] Or, nor in such as
are bound by calling to be his preachers; the (...) ^py reads, but in his
called prechers. (e) No man knoweth] Both in his foreknowledge, (...) ^owlege
of the secrets of man's heart. (f) Are hired out.] The seauenty read it, are
(...) (g) For the beggar,] It seems to be a word of more indigence, then
poor: the latin The beggar or the poor.
(...) (...) ^ops, or helpelesse, having no reference in many places to want of
money, but of (...)* G^rg. 1. Terent. Adelpe. Act. 2. scena. 1. Pauper, says
Uarro, is quasi paulus lar. etc. (...) ^gens. (h) The Greek.] (...) is both
his and his own: the Greeks do not distin^ two, as we do. (i) Let not the.]
This is not the vulgar translation of the Kings, but (...) cha. 9. the 70. put
it in them both, but with some alteration. It is an utter subversion (...)* God
respects not wit, power, or wealth, those are the fuel of man's vain glory,
but let (...) (...) ^th (as Paul says) glory in the Lord, and by a modest and
equal thought of himself continually. For so shall he never be pride-swollen:
for the knowledge of God that charity seasoneth, never puffs up, if we
consider his mercies, and his judgments, his love, and his wrath, together
with his majesty. (k) And to do iudgement] The seauenty read this one way in
the book of Samuel, and another way in Hieremy, attributing in the first unto
the man that glories, and in the later unto God. (l) The Lord went vp] This is
not in the vulgar, until you come unto this, and he shall judge: Augustine
followed the LXX. and so did all that age almost in all the churches. (m) As
every man] As I find thee, so will I judge thee.

The Prophets words unto Heli the priest, signifying the taking away of Aarons
priesthood, CHAP. 5.
But this was more plainly spoken unto Heli the priest by a man of God, (a)
whose name we read not, but his ministry proved him a Prophet: Thus it is
written: There came a man of GOD unto Heli, and said unto him: Thus says the 1 Samuel 2, 27
Lord, did not I plainly appear unto the house of thy father when they were
in Egiptin Pharaos house, and I chose him out of all the tribes of Israel to
be my priest, to offer at mine Altar, to burn incense, and to wear (b) an
Ephod, and I gave thy fathers house all the burnt offerings of the house of
Israel, for to eat, Why then have you looked in scorn upon my sacrifices, and
offerings, and (c) honored thy children above me, to (d) bless the first of all
the offerings of Israel in my sight? wherefore thus says the LORD GOD of
Israel: I said, thy house and thy fathers house shall walk before me for
ever: nay not so now: for them that honor me (says the Lord) will I honor,
and them that despise me, will I despise. Behold the days come that I will
cast out thy seed, and thy fathers seed, that there shall not be an (e) old
man in thine house. I will destroy every one of thine from mine Altar, that
thine eyes may fail and thine heart faint, and all the remainder of thy house
shall fall by the sword, and this shall be a sign unto thee, that shall befall
thy two sons, Ophi, and Phinees, in one day shall they both die. And I will
take my self up a faithful Priest that shall do according to mine heart: I
will build him a sure house, and he shall walk before mine Anointed, for
ever. And the (f) remains of thy house shall come and bow down to him for an
halfe-penny of silver, saying: Put me I pray the in some office about the
priesthood, that I may eat a morsel of bread.

We cannot say that this prophecy, plainly denouncing the change of their old
priesthood, was fulfilled in Samuel (g) for though Samuel were of that tribe
that served the Altar, ye was he not of the sons of Aaron, to whose progeny
God tied the priesthood: (and therefore in this, was that change shadowed that
Christ was to perfome, and belonged to the Old Testament, properly, but
figuratively, unto the New: being now fulfilled both in the event of the
prophecy, and the history, that records these words of the Prophet unto
Heli.) For afterward there were Priests of Aarons race, as Abiathar and Zador
in (...) reign, and many more, for the time came wherein the change was to be
effected by Christ. But who sees not now (if he observe it with the eye of
faith) that all is fulfilled, the Jews have no Tabernacle, no Temple, no
Altar, nor any Priest of Aarons pedigree, as GOD commanded them to have. Lust
as this Prop^ said: Thou and thy fathers house shall walk before me for ever.
Nay not so now; for them that honor me, will I honor etc. By his fathers
house he means not Eli his last fathers, but Aarons, from whom they all
descended, as these words: Did I not appear to thy fathers house in Egypt etc.
Do plainly prove. Who was his Father in the Egiptian bondage, and was chosen
priest after their freedom, but Aaron? of his stock then it was here said
there should be no more priests as we see now come to pass. Let faith be
but vigilant, and it shall discern and apprehend truth, even whether it will
or no. Behold (says he) the days do come, that I will cast out thy seed etc.
It Is true: the days are come. Aarons seed has now no Priest: and his whole
offspring behold the sacrifice of the christians goriously offered all the
world through, with failing eyes and fainting hearts: but that which follows;
All the remainder of thine house (...) fell by the sword etc. belongs properly
to the house of Heli. And the death of his sons, was a sign of the change of
the Priesthood of Aarons house: and signified the death of the Priesthood,
rather then the men. But the next place to the priest that Samuel, Heli his
successor, prefigured, I mean Christ the Priest of the New Testament. I will
take me up a faith-full Priest, that shall do all according to mine heart: I
will build him a sure house etc. (This house is the heavenly Jerusalem) and he
shall walk before mine anointed for ever: that is he shall converse with
them, as he said before of the house of Aaron, I said, thou and thine house
shall walk before me for ever. Behold mine anointed, that is (...) anointed
flesh, not mine anointed Priest, for that is Christ himself, the Savior. So
that his house and flock it is that shall walk before him, it may be meant
also of the passage of the faithful from death unto life at the end of their
mortality, and the last judgment. But whereas it is said: He shall do all
according to mine heart, we may not think that GOD has any heart, bee^ (...)
hearts maker, but it is figuratively spoaken of him, as the scripture does
(...) ^er members, the hand of the LORD, the finger of GOD, etc. And least
(...) should think that in this respect, man bears the Image of GOD, the ^re
gives him wings, which man does want: Hide me under the shadow of Psalm. 17.
(...) ^gs: to teach men indeed, tha^ those things are spoken with no true, but
a ^ll reference unto that ineffable essence. On now: and the remains of (...)
^use shall come and bow down unto him, etc. This is not meant of the (...) of
Heli, but of Aarons, of which some were remaining until the coming (...)
^RIST, yea and are unto this day. For that above, the remaynder of thy (...)
shall fall by the sword was meant by Heli his lineage. How then can both (...)
places be true, that some should come to bow down, and yet the sword (...)
devour all, unless they be meant of two, the first of Aarons lineage, and
(...) ^cond of Helies? If then they be of those predestinate remainders
whereof (...) ^ophet says: The remnant shall be saved: and the Apostle, at this
present time is Isay. 10. Romans 11. 5
(...) (...) remnant through the election of grace: which may well be
vnder-stood (...) (...) remnant that the man of GOD speaks off here, then
doubtless they (...) in Christ, as many of their nations (Jews) did in the
Apostles time, and (...) (though very few) do now, fulfilling that of the
Prophet, which follows: (...) down to him, for an half penny of silver: to
whom but unto the great Rom* 9. Psalm. 12. 6
(...), who is God eternal? For in the time of Aarons Priesthood, the people
(...) ^ot to the temple to adore or bow down to the priest. But what is that,
(...) half penny of silver? Only the breuity of the Word of ^aith, as the A^
says, The Lord will make a short account in the earth, that silver is put for
lord, the Psalmist proves, saying, The words of the Lord are pure words, as
sil Psalm. 84. 10
^ied in the fire: what is his words now, that boweth to this Gods Priest, and
(...) ^od and Priest: place me in some of fice about the Priesthood, that I
may eat a more bread? I will not have my fathers honors, they are nothing,
but place me any (...) (...) thy Priesthood. I would feign be a door keeper,
or any thing in thy service and (...) thy people, for Priesthood is put here
for the people, to whom Christ the ^or is the high Priest: which people the
Apostle called, an holy nation and 1 Pet. 29*
a royal Priesthood. Some read (k) Sacrifice in the former place for
Priesthood, all is one, both signify the christian flock. Whereof S. Paul
says: Being many, (...) are all one bread, and one body, and again. (l) Give
up your bodies a living sacrifice. So 1 Cor. 10, 17 Romans 12, 1.
then the addition, that I may eat a morsel of bread, is a direct expression
of the sacrifice, whereof the Priest himself says, the bread which I will
give, is my flesh etc. This is the sacrifice not after the order of Aaron but
of Melchisedech: he that reads, let him understand. So then these words,
Place me in some office about thy priesthood that I may eat a morsel of
bread, are a direct and succinct confession of the faith: this is the half
penny of silver, because it is brief, and it is Gods word, that dwells in
the house of the believer: for having said before that he had given Aarons
house meat of the offering of the house of Israel, which were the sacrifices of
the Jews in the Old Testament, therefore adds he the eating of bread in
this conclusion, which is the sacrifice of the New Testament.

L. VIVES.
HIs (a) name] It was Phinees, ^ay the Jews: or Helias Hierome. (b) An Ephod]
Of this read Hierome. Ad Marcellam, Contra Iouinian. Ad Fabiolam. The Greeks
called it, (...). Joseph. de Antiq. Iud. lib. 3. So do the LXX. Ruffinus
translateth it, Superhumerale and it was open at the sides from the arme-pits
downe-wards. The high Priest only wore such an The Ephod.
one, and it was embrothered with gold and silk of diverse colors. The Leuits
had a garment like it, but that was of linen. Such an one did Anna make for
Samuel: and such an one did [This is too bitter the Louainists like it not but
leave it out]
David dance in, before the Arc. [And hereupon I think our Rabbines, or most
Doctor-like sort of Friars, have got the trick of wearing such ^esture hanging
loose from the shoulders: as a badge of their super-eminent knowledge: and then
your Ciuilian, and P^isitian in emulation of them, got up the like.] But the
Seauenty call it (...). (c) Honorest] [So was it in the time when the Jews
priests grew wealthy, and so is it now with us: for who seeks into the
priesthood for Godliness rather then gain, as the world goes now? and what
son is persuaded by the father unto an ecclesiastical habit, but only in
hope of riches? what ^est thinks he does not well, to sit and spend the
churches goods (as they call them) frankly, with [Louuaynists unless you had
felt your selves touched with this, you would never have razed it out]
his sons if he have them (and have them he will, unless he be an Eunuch)
his brethren, his sisters and his cousins, let the poor go shift where they
can? Thus, thus will it be, whilst riches rule in the hearts of men.] (d) To
blesse] The vulgar is not so: read it* each one has the books, I must
proceed. (e) An old man] (...) an high priest, says Hierome. (f) Romaines] A
diversity of reading, but nihil ad rem. (g) Though Samuel] His father was a
leuite. Chron. 1. 6. his mother of the tribe of Judah. This place Augustine
recalleth, thus: whereas I said, he was not of the sons of Aaron, I should
have said, he was none of the priests sons. And they most commonly succeeded
their fathers in the Priesthood, but Samuels father was of Aarons seed, but
he was no Priest, nor of his seed otherwise then all the Jews were the seed of
Jacob. Retractation. lib. 2. (h) Prophecy and history] And though these words
seemed to another purpose, yet aimed they at Christ. (i) We should thinke] So
thought by the Anthropomorphites. (k) Sacrifi^] (...) is both* but rather,
Priesthood. (l) Give vp] This is not in some copies, yet is it befitting this
place.

The promise of the Priesthood of the Jews, and their kingdom, to stand
eternally not fulfilled in that sort that other promises of that unbounded
nature, are. CHAP. 6.
ALthough these things were the^ as deeply prophesied, as they now are plainly
fulfilled, yet some may put this doubt: how shall we expect all the eue^
therein presaged, when as this that the Lord said; thine house, and thy fathers
(...) shall walk before me for ever, can be no way now effected, the
priesthood being now quite abolished, nor any way expected, because that
eternity is promised to the priesthood that succeeded it? he that obiecteth
this, conceiue^ not that Aarons priesthood was but a type and shadow of the
others future priesthood and therefore that the eternity promised to the
shadow, was due but unto the substance only: and that the change was
prophesied, to avoid this supposition of the shadows eternity, for so the
kingdom of Saul, the reprobate, was a shadow of the kingdom of eternity to
come, the oil wherewith he was anointed, was a great and reverend mystery:
which David so honored, that when he was hid in the dark cave into which
Saul came to ease himself of the burden of nature, he was afraid, and only
cut off a piece of his skirt, to have a token whereby to show him how
causeless he supected him, and persecuted him: he feared, I say for doing
thus much: least he had wronged the mystery of Saul's being anointed: He was
touched in heart (says the Scripture) for cutting off the (a) skirt of his
raiment (b) His men that were with him persuaded him to take his time, Saul was
now in his hands, strike sure. The Lord keep me (says he) from doing so unto
my master the Lords anointed: to lay mine hands on him, for he is the 1. Sam.
22*
anointed of the Lord. Thus honored he this figure, not for it self but for
the thing it shaddowed. And therefore these words of Samuel unto Saul. The
Lord 1. Sam. ^3
had prepared thee a kingdom for ever in Israel, but now it shall not remain
unto thee, because thou have not obayed his voice: therefore will he seek him
a man according to his heart. etc. are not to be taken as if Saul himself
should have reigned for evermore, and then that his sin made God break his
promise afterward (for he knew that he would sin, when he did prepare him
this kingdom) but this he prepared for a figure of that kingdom that shall
remain for euer-more: and therefore he added, it shall not remain unto thee:
it remains and ever shall in the signification, but not unto him, for neither
he nor his progeny were to reign there, ^ingly.

The Lord will seek him a man, says he, meaning either David, or the
mediator, prefigured in the unction of David and his posterity. He does not
say he will seek, as if he knew not where to find, but he speaks as one
that seeks our understanding, for we were all known both to God the father,
and his son, the seeker of the lost sheep, and elected in him also, before
the beginning of the world (c) He will seek, that is he will show the world
that which he himself knows already. And so have we acquiro in the latin,
with a preposition, to attain: and may use quaero, in that sense also: as
questus, the substantive, for gain.

L. VIVES.
T^ (a) skirt.] Or hemme, or edge, any thing that he could come nearest to cut,
the Jews used edged garments much: according to that command in the book of
Numbers. The Greek word, is (...) the wing of his doublet. Ruffinus translateth
it, Summitatem. (b) His (...).] Which were three hundred, says Josephus. lib.
6. (c) He will seek.] A diversity of rea^. I think the words, from. And so
have we acquiro, to the end of the chapter, be some (...) of others.

The Kingdom of Israel, rent: prefiguring the perpetual division between
the spiritual and carnal Israel. CHAP. 7.
SAul fell again by (a) disobedience, and Samuel told him again from God,
Thou have cast off the Lord and the Lord has cast off thee, that thou shall no
more be King of Israel. Now Saul confessing this sin, and praying for
pardon, and that 1. Sam. 15.
Samuel would go with him to entreat the Lord. Not I (says Samuel) thou have
cast off the Lord, etc. And Samuel turned himself to depart, and Saul held
him by the lap of his coat, and it rent. Then, quoth Samuel, the Lord has
rent the Kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and has given it unto thy
neighbor which is better then thee: and Israel shall be parted into two, and
shall no more be united, nor he is not a man that he should repent, etc. Now
he unto whom these words were said, ruled Israel forty years, even as long
as David, and yet was told this in the beginning of his Kingdom; to show us
that none of his race should reign after him, and to turn our eyes upon the
line of David, whence Christ our mediator took his humanity. Now the original
read not this place as the Latins do: The Lord shall rend the Kingdom of
Israel from thee this day, but, the Lord has rent, etc. from thee, that is
from Israel, so that this man was a type of Israel, that was to loose the
Kingdom as soon as Christ came with the New Testament, to rule spiritually,
not carnally. Of whom these words, and has given it unto thy neighbor,
shows the consanguinity with Israel in the flesh, and so with Saul: and that
following, who is better then thee, implies not any good in Saul, or Israel,
but that which the Psalm says: until I make thine enemies thy footstool,
whereof Israel the persecutor (whence Christ rent the Kingdom) was Psa. 110.
2.
one. Although there were Israel the wheat amongst Israel the chafe also:
for the Apostles were thence, and Stephen with a many Martyrs besides, and from
their seed grew up so many Churches as Saint Paul reckons, all glory fiing
God in his conversion. And that which follows, Israel shall be parted into
two, concerning this point assuredly, namely, into Israel Christ's friend, and
Israel Christ's foe: into Israel the free woman and Israel the slave. For
these two were first united, Abraham accompanying with his maid until his
wives barrenness being fruitful, she cried out, Cast out the bondwoman and
her son. Indeed because of Salomons sin, we know that in his son Roboams
time Israel divided it self into two parts, and either had a King, until the
Chaldeans came and subdued and ren-versed all. But what was this unto Saul?
Such an even was rather to be threatened unto David, Salomons father: And now in
these times, the Hebrews are not divided, but dispersed all over the world,
continuing on still in their error. But that division that God threatened unto
Saul, who was a figure of this people, was a premonstration of the eternal
irreuocable separation, because presently it follows: And shall no more be
united, nor repent of it, for it is no man, that it should repent: Man's
threatenings are transitory: but what God once resolves is irremoueable. For
where we read that God repented, it portends an alteration of things out of
his eternal prescience. And likewise where he did not, it portends a fixing
of things as they are. So here we see the division of Israel, perpetual and
irreuocable, Gods repentance, (...).
grounded upon this prophecy. For they that come from thence to Christ, or
contrary, were to do so by Gods providence, though human conc^ cannot
apprehend it: and their separation is in the spirit also, not in the flesh. And
those Israelites that shall stand in Christ unto the end, shall never per^ with
those that stayed with his enemies unto the end, but be (as it is here said)
(...) separate. For the Old Testament of Sina, begetting in bondage, shall do
Gal. 4. 1. Cor. 3.
them no good, nor any other, further then confirms the New. Otherwise; as
long as Moses is read, (d) the veil is drawn over their hearts: and when they
(...) to Christ, then is removed. For the thoughts of those that pass from
(...) to him, are changed, and bettered in their pass: and thence, their
felicity (...) (...) is spiritual, no more carnal. Wherefore the great
Prophet Samuel (...) (...) had anointed Saul, when he cried to the Lord for
Israel, and he ^d him: and when he offered the burnt offering, (the
Philistines coming against Israel, and the Lord thundered upon them and
scattered them, so that they fell before Israel): took (e) a stone, and
placed it between the (f) two 1. Sam 7.
Maspha's, the Old and the New, and named the place Eben Ezer, that is, the
stone of (...): saying, Hitherto the L^ has helped us: that stone, is the
mediation of our (...), by which we come from the Old Maspha to the New, from
the thought of a carnal kingdom in all felicity, unto the expectation of a
crown of spirit glory, (as the New Testamen^ teaches us,) and seeing that
that is the sum ^ope of all, even ^itherto has God helped us.

L. VIVES.
B^) disobedience] For being commanded by Samuel from God, to kill all the
Amalechites (...) and beast, he took Agag the King alive, and drove away a
multitude of Cattle. (...) lap of his coate] Diplois is any double garment.
(c) The Lord has rent] Shall rend, Diplois.
^us: But, has rent, (...), it is in the LXX. (d) The vaile] The veil that
Moi^ ^ed his face, was a tipe of that wherewith the Jews cover their hearts,
until they be (...). 1. Corinthians. 3. (e) Astone] Josephus says, that he
placed it, at Charron, and called (...). lib. 6. (f) The two Maspha's] Maspha
the Old stood between the tribes of Gad Maspha.
(...)* Hier. de loc. Hebraic. There is another in the tribe of Judah, as you
go Northward (...) ^lia, in the confines of Eleutheropolis. Maspha is,
contemplation, or speculation. The (...) write it, (...).

Promises made unto David, concerning his son: not fulfilled in Solomon: but
in Christ. CHAP. 8.
NOw must I relate Gods promises unto David, Sa^ls successor (which change
^gured the spiritual and great one, which all the Scriptures have relation
(...) ^cause it concerns our purpose. David having had continual good for^
^ed to build GOD an house, namely that famous and memorable (...) (...) Solomon
built after him. While this was in his thought, Nathan came (...) from God, to
tell him what was his pleasur^: wherein, when as GOD had (...) David should not
build him an house, and that he had not comman^ (...) (...) time to build him
any house of Cedar: then he proceeds thus* (...) (...) David, that thus
says the Lord: I took thee from the sheep-^e, to (...) 2. Sam. 7. 8. 9. 10.
etc.
(...) my people Israel: and I was with thee where-so-euer thou walked, a^
(...) (...) all thine enemies out of thy sight, and given thee the glory of a
mighty m^n (...). I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant
it, it shall dwell (...), (...) move no more, nor shall wicked people trouble
them any more, as (...) (...) ^ne, since I (a) appointed Judges over Israel.
And I will give thee rest from all thine enemies, and the Lord tells thee
also that thou shall make him an house. It shall be when thy days be
fulfilled, and thou sleep with thy fathers, then will I set up thy seed
after thee, even he that shall proceed from thy body, and will prepare his
kingdom. He shall build an house for my name, and I will direct his throne for
ever. I will be his father, and he shall be my son: if he sin I will
chasten him with the rod of men, and with the plagues of the children of men.
But my mercy will I not remove from him, as I removed it from Saul, whom I
have rejected. His house shall be faithful, and his kingdom eternal before
me: his throne shall be established for ever. He that holds his mighty
promise fulfilled in Solomon, is far-wide. For mark how it lies. He shall
build me an house, Solomon did so: and this he marketh: but, His house shall
be faithful and his kingdom eternal before me: What is this? this he
marketh not. Well let him go to Salomons house, and see the flocks of strange
Idolatrous women, drawing this so wise a King into the same depth of damnation
with them: does he see it? the^ let him neither think Gods promises false, nor
his prescience ignorant of Salomons future peruersion by Idolatry. We need
never doubt here, nor run with the giddy brained Jews to seek had I wist,
and to find one in whom these may be fulfilled, we should never have seen
them fulfilled, but in our Christ, the son of David in the flesh. For they
know well enough; that this son of whom these promises spoke, was not
Solomon: but (oh wondrous blindness of heart!) stand still expecting of
another to come, who is already come, in most broad and manifest appearance.
There was some shadow of the thing to come in Solomon, it is true, in his
Solomon.
erection of the temple, and that laudable peace which he had in the beginning
of his reign, and in his name, (for Solomon is, a peacemaker): but he was (b)
only in his person a shadow, but no presentation of Christ our Savior, and
therefore some things are written of him that concern our Savior; the
scripture including the prophecy of the one, in the history of the other. For
besides the books of the Kings and Chronicles y^ speak of his reign, the 72.
Psalm is entitled with his name. Wherein there are so many things impossible
to be true in him, and most apparent in Christ, that it is evident that he was
but the figure, not the truth it self. The bounds of Salomons kingdom were
known, yet (to omit the rest) that Psalm. 72. 9
Psalm says; he shall reign from sea to sea, and from the river to the
lands end. This is most true of Christ. For he began his reign at the river,
when John baptized and declared him, and his disciples acknowledged him,
calling him Lord and Master. Nor did Solomon begin his reign in his fathers
time (as no other of their Kings did) but only to show that he was not the
aim of the prophecy, that said, It shall be when thy days are fulfilled,
and that thou sleep with thy fathers, then will I set up thy seed after
thee, and prepare his kingdom. Why then shall we lay all this upon Solomon,
because it is said, He shall build me an house; and not the rather
understand, that it is the other peacemaker that is spoaken of, who is not
promised to be set up before David's death (as Solomon was) but after, according
to the precedent text? And though Christ were never so long ere he came, yet
coming after David's death, all is one: he came at length as he was promised,
and built God the Father an house, not of timber and stones, but of living
souls, wherein we all rejoice. For to this house of God, that is, his
faithful people, 1. Cor. 3. 17.
Saint Paul says, The temple of God is holy, which you are.

L. VIVES.
I Appointed (a) Iudges] Israel had thirteen Judges in three hundred and
seauentie years, from Othoniel to Samuel who anointed Saul: and during that
time, they had variable for^ in their wars. (b) Only in] He was a figure of
Christ, in his peaceable reign, and ^ding of the temple: but he was not
Christ himself.

A Prophecy of Christ in the eighty eight Psalm, like unto this of Nathan in
the Book of Kings. CHAP. 9.
THe eighty eight Psalm also, entitled, An (a) instruction to Ethan the
Israelite, reckons up the promises of God unto David, and there is some like
those of N^n, as this: I have sworn to David my servant, thy seed will I
establish for ever: ^s: Then spakest thou (b) in a vision unto thy sons and
said, I have laid help (...) ^e mighty one: I have exalted one chosen out of
my people. I have found David (...) ^ant, with my holy oil have I anointed
him. For mine hand shall help him, and (...) ^me shall strengthen him. The
enemy shall not oppress him, nor shall the wicked Psalm. 89.
(...). But I will destroy his foe before his face, and plague them that hate
him. My (...) ^d mercy shall be with him, and in my name shall his horn be
exalted. I will (...) (...) hand in the sea, and his right hand in the floods,
he shall call upon me, thou ^t (...) father, my GOD, and the rock of my
salvation. I will make him my first borne, (...) then the Kings of the earth:
My mercy will I keep unto him for ever, and my (...) shall stand fast with
him. His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the (...) ^f heaven.
(c) All this is meant of Christ under the type of David, be^ that from a Virgin
of his seed CHRIST took man upon him: (...) ^olloweth it of David's sons, as
it does in Nathans words, meant pro^ ^f Solomon; he said there: If they sin
I will (d) chasten them with the (...) ^f men, and with the (e) plagues of the
sons of men: (that is, correctiue 2. Sam 7.
^ons) but my mercy will I not remove from him. Whereupon it is said. T^ot
mine anointed, hurt them not: And now here in this Psalm (speak^ (...) the
mystical David) he says the like: If his children forsake my law, Psalm 105.
^lke not in my righteousness, etc. I will visit their transgression with
rodds (...) ^eir iniquities with strokes: yet my mercy will I not take from
him. He Psalm. 89.
(...) ^ot from them, though he speak of his sons, but from him, which
being ^ll marked, is as much: For there could no sins be found in Christ,
(...) ^urches head, worthy to be corrected of GOD: with, or without re^ion of
mercy, but in his members, that is his people: Wherefore in the (...) it is
called his son, and in this Psalm, his childrens, that we might (...) all
things spoken of his body, has some reference unto himself; (...) that when
Saul persecuted his members, his faithful, he said from (...), Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? It follows in the said Psalm: ^enant will I not
break, nor alter the thing I have spoaken, 'I have sworn (...) my holiness:
that (f) if I fail David: that is, I will not fail David: (...) Scriptures
usual phrase, that he will not fail in, he adds, saying: (...) (...) shall
remain for ever, and his throne shall be as thee sun before me: (...)
(...) the Moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven.

L. VIVES.
AN instruction. (a) to Ethan the Israelite] The Ezraite] says the Hebrew.
Hierome. This Psalm is spoken by many mouths from the father to the son,
and the son to the father, and the church, the Prophet himself, or the
Apostles. (b) In a vision] (...). (c) A^ this] A diversity of reading all to
one end. (d) Chasten them] I think it is meant of the wa^ that often plague
the nations. (e) Plagues] all the discommodities, that befall man. (f) If I
faile] A negative phrase often used in the scriptures. As Psalm. 95. verse. 11.

Of diverse actions done in the earthly Jerusalem, and the kingdom, differing
from Gods promises, to show that the truth of his words concerned the glory of
another kingdom, and another King. CHAP. 10.
NOw after the confirmation of all these promises, least it should be thought
that they were to be fulfilled in Solomon (as they were not) the Psalm adds:
Thou have cast him off, and brought him to nothing. So did he indeed with
Salomons kingdom in his posterity, even (a) unto the destruction of the
earthly Jerusalem, the seat of that royalty, and unto the burning of that
temple that Solomon built. But yet least God should be thought to fail in his
promise, he adds: Thou have deferred thine anointed: this was not Solomon,
nor David, if the Lords anointed were deferred, for though all the Kings that
were consecrated with that mystical Chrysme, were called anointed, from Saul
their first King: (for so David The Kings anointing, a type of Christ.
calls him) yet was there but one true anointed whom all these did
prefigure, who (as they thought that looked for him in David, or Solomon) was
deferred long, but yet was prepared to come in the time that God had appointed.
What became of the earthly Jerusalem in the mean time where he was expected
to reign, the Psalm shows, saying: Thou have ouer-throwne thy servants
covenant, profaned his crown, and cast it on the ground. Thou have pulled
down his walls, and laid his fortresses in ruin. All passengers do spoil
him, he is the scorn of his neighbors: thou have set up the right hand of
his foes, and made his enemies glad. Thou have turned the edge of his sword,
and given him no help in battle. Thou have dispersed his dignity, and cast
his throne to the ground. Thou have shortened the days (b) of his reign, and
covered him with shame. All this befell Jerusalem the bondwoman, wherein
nevertheless some sons of the freewoman reigned in the time appointed:
hoping for the heavenly Jerusalem in a true faith, being the true sons
thereof in Christ. But how those things befell that kingdom, the history
shows unto those that will read it.

L. VIVES.
Unto the (a) destruction] 2. Kings 25. (b) Of his reigne] The vulgar, and the
Greek, say, of his time: (...).

The substance of the people of God who were in Christ in the flesh: who only
had power to redeem the soul of man from hell. CHAP. 11.
AFter this, the Prophet begins to pray: yet is this prayer a prophecy
also: Lord how long will thou turn away? (thy face) for ever? as is said
elsewhere: Psalm. 89.
H^ long will thou turn thy face from me: Some books read it in the (a)
passive, but it may be understood of GODS mercy also, in the a^iue: For ever,
that is, unto the end: which end, is the last times, when that nation shall
believe in CHRIST, before which time it is to suffer all those myseries that
he bewaileth. Wherefore it follows: Shall thy (...) burn like fire? O
remember of what I am; my substance. Here is nothing fitter to be understood,
then JESUS, the substance of this people: for hence he had his flesh.

Did thou create the children of men in vain? Unless there were one son
of man, of the substance of Israel, by whom a multitude should be saved, they
were all created in vain indeed: For now all the seed of man is fallen by
the first man from truth to vanity: Man is like to vanity (says the Psalm)
his days vanish like a shadow. Yet did not GOD create all Psalm. 1^4* (...)
(...) in vain, for he freeth many from vanity by CHRIST the media^ his
Son, and such as he knows will not be freed, he makes use of, to the
good of the free, and the greater eminence of the two Cities: Thus is there
good reason for the creation of all reasonable creatures.

It follows. What man lives that shall not see death? or shall free his
soul (...) the hand of hell? Why none but CHRIST JESUS the substance of
Israel, and the son of David: of whom the Apostle says: Who being Romans 6.
9.
^ysed from death, dies no more: death has no more dominion over him. ^or he
lives and shall not see death, But freed his soul from the hand of (...),
because he descended into the lower parts to loose some (b) (...) the bonds of
sin: by that power that the Evangelist records of (...). I have power to
lay down my soul, and I have power to take it up Ioh. 10.
(...)*

L VIVES.
IN (a) the passiue] So reads not the vulgar: but in the active. The Greeks
indeed (...) it (...), Will thou be turned away. (b) From the bonds] The
bonds of hell, say (...) ^kes, making this earth an hell unto Christ, being
descended from heaven: but (...) (...) reading is better.

Another verse of the former Psalm, and the persons to whom it belongs.
CHAP. 12.
THE residue of this Psalm, in these words: Lord where are thy old Psalm. 89,
49 50. 51.
mercies which thou sworest unto David in thy truth? Lord remember the (...) of
thy servants, (by many nations that have scorned them,) because they (...)
^oached the foote-steps of thine anointed: whether it have reference (...)
(...) Israelites that expected this promise made unto David, or to the spirit
^sraelites the Christians, it is a question worth deciding. This was written or
spoaken in the time of Ethan, whose name the title of the Psalm bears: which
was also in David's reign, so that these words: Lord where are thine old
mercies which thou swarest unto David in thy truth, could not then be spoaken,
but that the Prophet bare a type of somewhat long after to ensue, to wit at
such time as the time of David wherein those mercies were promised, might seem
ancient. It may further be understood, (b) because that many nations, that
persecuted the Christians, cast them in the teeth with the passion of Christ,
which he calls his change, to wit being made immortal by death.

Christ's change also in this respect may be a reproach unto the Israelites,
because they expected him, and the nations only received him, and this the
believers of the New Testament reproach them for, who continue in the Old: so
that the Prophet may say, Lord remember the reproache of thy servants, because
heere-after (GOD not forgetting to pity them) they shall believe also. But I
like the former meaning better: for the words, LORD remember the reproach of
thy servants, etc. cannot be said of the enemies of CHRIST, to whom it is a
reproach, that CHRIST left them and came to the nations: (Such Jews are no
servants of GOD) but of them only, who having endured great persecutions for
the name of CHRIST, can remember that high kingdom promised unto David's seed,
and say in desire thereof, knocking, seeking, and asking, Where are thine old
mercies Lord which thou swaredst unto thy servant David? Lord remember, etc.
because thine enemies have held thy change a destruction, and vpbraided it in
thine anointed.

And what is, Lord remember, but Lord have mercy, and for my patience, give me
that height which thou swarest unto David in thy truth? If we make the Jews
speak this, it must be those servants of GOD, that suffered the captivity in
Babylon, before CHRIST'S coming, and knew what the change of CHRIST was, and
that there was no earthly nor transitory felicity to be expected by it, such
as Solomon had for a few years, but that eternal and spiritual kingdom,
which the Infidel nations not apprehending as then, cast the change of the
anointed in their dishes, but vnknowinglie, and unto those that knew it. And
therefore that last verse of the Psalm, (Blessed be the Lord for euer-more,
Amen, Amen:) agrees fitly enough with the people of the celestial Jerusalem:
place them as you please, hidden in the Old Testament, before the revelation of
the New, or manifested in the New, when it was fully revealed. For GODS
blessing upon the seed of David, is not to be expected only for a while, as
Solomon had it, but for ever, and therefore follows, Amen, Amen. The hope
confirmed, the word is doubled.

This David understanding in the second of the Kings, (whence we digressed in
this Psalm) says: Thou have spoken of thy servants house for a great while.
And then a little after: Now therefore begin and bless the house of thy
servant (...). (...). 7. 19.
for ever, etc. because then he was to beget a son, by whom his progeny
should descend unto Christ, in whom his house and the house of God should be
one, and that eternal. It is David's house, because of David's seed, and the
same is Gods house, because of his Temple, built of souls and not of stones,
wherein Gods people may dwell for ever, in, and with him, and he for ever in,
and with them, he filling them, and they being full of him: God being all in
all, their reward in peace and their fortitude in war: And whereas Nathan had
said before: thus says the Lord, shall thou beuild me an house? now David
says upon that: thou O Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have revealed unto
thy servant saying, I will build thee an house. This house do we build, by
living well, and the Lord by giving us power to live well, for, unless the
Lord build the house, their labor is (...) lost that build it. And at the last
dedication of this house, shall the word of the Lord be fulfilled, that Nathan
spoke saying: I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant it,
and it shall dwell by it self, and be no more moved, nor shall the (...)
people trouble it any more, as it has done since the time that I appointed
Iudge^ (...) ^y people Israel.

L. VIVES.
THe time of (a) Ethan.] Ethan, and Asaph were players upon the brazen Cymballs
before Ethan.
the Arc, in David's time 1. Chronicles. 15. the Greek and the Latin call
Ethan an Israe^, but I think he was rather an Iezraelite, of the town of
Iezrael in the tribe of Judah and the borders of Isacher between Scythopolis,
and the Legion, or an Ezraite, of Ezran in the trib^ of Assure. Howsoever he
was, Hierome out of the Hebrew, calls him an Ezrait. But (...) question he
was not called an Israelite, for no man has any such peculiar name from his
general nation. (b) Because that many.] There is a diversity of reading in
some other books, but not so good as this we follow.

Whether the truth of the promised peace may be ascribed unto Salomons time.
CHAP. 13.
HE that looks for this great good in this world, is far wrong. Can any one
and the fulfilling of it unto Salomons time? No, no, the scriptures com^ it
exellently, as the figure of a future good. But this one place, the wicked
(...) (...) trouble it any more, dissolueth this suspicion fully: adding this
further, (...) (...) (...) done since the time that I appointed Judges over my
people Israel, for the (...) began to rule Israel before the Kings, as soon as
ever they had attained (...) ^d of promise: and the wicked, that is the enemy;
troubled them sore, and (...) was the chance of war, yet had they longer
peace in those times then (...) ^ey had in Salomons, who reigned but forty
years, ^or under Judge Aod, (...) ^d eighty years peace. Salomons time
therefore cannot be held the fulfil^ of those promises: and much less any
Kings besides his, for no King had ^ce that he had: nor any nation ever had
kingdom wholly acquit from (...) of foe, because the mutability of humane
estate can never grant any (...) an absolute security from all incursions of
hostility. The place therefore (...) this promised peace is to have residence,
is eternal: it is that heavenly ^alem, that freewoman where the true Israel
shall have their blessed a^ the name imports; Jerusalem, (a) that is,
Beholding God: the desire (...) reward must bear us out in Godliness, through
all this sorrowful ^ge.

L. VIVES.
Jerusalem. (a) that is.] Hierome says it was first called Iebus: then,
Salem: thirdly Jerusalem, and (...) Aelia. Salem, is peace: as the Apostle
says unto the Hebrews: Jerusalem Jerusalem
the vision of peace. This was that Salem wherein Melchisedech reigned. Joseph
and Hegesip. It was called Aelia, of Aelius Adrian the emperor that repaired it
after the destruction by Titus, in emulation of his ancestors glory. The
Gentiles called it both Solymae, Solymi, and Jerusalem. Some draw that Solymi,
from the Pisidians in Lycia, called of old, (...) some from the Solymi, a
people of Pontus in Asia, who perished (as Eratosthenes writes) with the
Peleges and Bebricians, Eupolemus (as Eusebius says) derived the name Solymi,
from Solomon, quasi (...) Salomons temple, and some think Homer called it so:
but Josephus (lib. 7.) says it was called Solyma in Abraham's time, And when
David had built a tower in it (the Iebuzites having taken it before) and
fortified it, it was named Hierosolyma, for the Hebrews call a fortification
Hieron, but it was rather called Iebus after it was called Salem, then before,
for it is held that Melchisedech built it, and he called it Salem. And the
Canaanites, whose King he was, dwelt therein: and he was otherwise called the
just King (says Hegesippus:) for so was he named after his father, yet Hierome
(De loc. Hebraic, and ad Damas.) says that Salem was not Jerusalem, but
another City in the country of Sychem (a part of Chanaan) where the ruins of
Melchisedechs palace are yet to be seen, as the memories of a most ancient and
magnificent structure. I omit to relate whence Strabo deriueth the original of
Jerusalem, out of Moses: for Strabo was never in Chanaan. I omit those also
that say that Jerusalem was Luz, and Bethel, Bethel, being a village long
after it, as I said before.

Of David's endeavors in composing of the Psalms. CHAP. 14.
GOds city having this progress, David reigned first in the tipe thereof, the
terrestrial Jerusalem: now David had great skill in songs, and loved music,
not out of his private pleasure, but in his zealous faith: whereby, in the
service of his (and the true) God in diversity of harmonious and proportionat
sounds, he mistically describes the concord and unity of the celestial City
of God, composed of diverse particulars. Al his prophecies (almost) are in his
Psalms. A hundred and fifty whereof, that which we call the book of Psalms,
or the Psalter, contains. Of which, (b) some will have them only to be
David's, that bear his name over their title. Some think that only they that
are entitled, each peculiarly a Psalm of David, ar^ his: the rest, that are
entitled to David, were made by others, and fitted unto his person. But this
our Savior confuteth, his own self: saying that David called Christ in the
spirit his Lord: cyting the hundredth and tenth Psalm that begins thus: The
Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies
thy foote-stoole. Now this Psalm is not entitled, of David, but to David as
many more are. But I like their opinion best that say he made all the 150.
entitling them sometimes with other names, and those pertinent unto some
prefiguration or other, and leaving some others vntituled at all, as God
pleased to inspire these dark mysteries, and hidden varieties (all useful
how-so-euer) into his mind. Nor is it any thing against this that we read the
Psalms of some great Prophets that lined after him, upon some of his Psalms,
as if they were made by them, for the spirit of prophecy might as well foretell
him their names, as other matters that 1. Kin. 13.
^tained to their persons, as the Reign of King Josias was revealed unto a
Prophet, who foretold of his doings, and his very name about three hundred of
years before it came to pass.

L. VIVES.
Diversity of (a) Harmonious and.] The several ^nstruments used in this
harmony are rehearsed. 1. Chron. 15. Augustine, (in Proaem Quinquag.) says of
the instrument called the (...), that it is fit ^or celestial harmony, and to
be used in matters divine, because the (...) of it in the tuning do all ascend
upwards (b) Some will.] James Perez, my countryman, James Perez.
who wrote the last (not so eloquent as learned) large commentaries upon the
Psalms, In the beginning of them disputes a while about the authors of the
Psalms, and affirms that the Jews never made question of it before Origens
time: but all both wrote and believed (...) David wrote them all. But when Origin
began with rare learning and delicate wit to draw all the prophetical sayings
of the Old Testament unto Christ already borne, he made the Jews run into
opinions far contrarying the positions of their old masters, and fall to
dep^ing of the scriptures in all they could, yet were there some Hebrews
afterward that held as the ancents did, that David was the only author of all
the Psalms: Some again held that he made but nine: and that other Prophets
wrote the rest, viz. some of the sons of Corah Ethan Asaph or Idythim. Those
that have no titles they do not know whose they are, only Rabbi. Solomon.
they are the works of holy men they say. Marry Rabby Solomon, (that impudent
Rabbine) makes ten authors of the Psalms: Melchisedech, Abraham, Moses,
the sons of Chora, David, Solomon, Asaph, Ieduthim, and Ethan: but Origin,
Ambrose, Hillary, Augustine and Cas^ make David the author of them all; unto
whom James Perez agrees, confirming it for the truth by many arguments: read
them in himself, for the books are common, I (...) Hieromes words to
Sophronius, and Cyprians, concerning this point, let this suffice at this (...)
(c) To David.] So is the Greek indeed: but I have heard diverse good
Hebraicians s^y that the Hebrews use the dative case for the genitive. (d) As
the reign.] 1. Kings. 11.

Whether all things concerning Christ and his Church in the Psalms; be to be
rehearsed in this work. CHAP. 15.
I see my reader expects now, that I should deliver all the prophecies
concer^ Christ and his Church contained in the Psalms. But the abundance
(...), rather then the want, hinders me from explaning all the rest as I have
(...), and as the cause seems to require. I should be too tedious, in reciting
(...)* (...) fear to choose any part, least some should think I had omitted
any that (...) more necessary. Again, another reason is, because the testimony
we (...) is to be confirmed by the whole body of the Psalter, so that though
all (...) affirm it yet nothing may contrary it: least we should otherwise
seem ^ch out verses for our purpose, like (a) parcells of some (b) retrograde
po^ those intent concerns a theme far different. Now to show this testimo^
one in every Psalm of the book, we must expound the Psalm: (...) to do, how
great a work it is, both others and our volumes wherein we (...) done it, do
expressly declare, let him that can and list, read those, and there ^ll see how
abundant the prophecies of David concerning Christ, and of his Church were
namely concerning that celestial King, and the City which he builded.

L. VIVES.
LIke (e) parcells] Centones are pieces of cloth of diverse colors; used any
way, on the Centones
back, or on the bed. Cic. Cato Mayor. Sisenna, C. Caesar. Metaphorically it
is a poem patched out of other poems by ends of verses, as Homero-centon, and
Uirgilio-centon, diverse, made by Proba, and by Ausonius. (b) Retrograde poeme]
Sotadicall verses: that is verses backward and forwards, as Musa mihi causas
memora, quo numine laesa: and, Laeso numine quo memora causas mihi Musa.
Sotadicall verses may be turned backwards into others also: as Sotadicall
verses.
this Iambick: Pio precare thure caelestum numina: turn it, Numina caelestum
thure precare pi^: it is a P^ntameter. They are a kind of wanton verse (as
Quintilian says) invented, says Strabo, or rather used (says Diomedes) by
Sotades, whom Martial calls Gnidus: some of Augustines copies read it, a
great poem, and it is the fitter, as if one should pick verses out of some
greater works concerning another purpose, and apply them unto his own, as
some Centonists did, turning Uirgils and Homers words of the Greeks and Troyan
wars, unto Christ and divine matters: And Ausonius turns them unto an
Epithalamion.

Of the forty five Psalm*: the tropes, and truths therein, concerning Christ
and the Church. CHAP. 16.
FOr although there be some manifest prophecies, yet are they mixed with
figures; putting the learned unto a great deal of labor, in making the
ignorant understand them, yet some show Christ and his Church at first sight
(though we must at leisure expound the difficulties that we find therein:) as
for example. Psalm. 45. Mine heart has given out a good word: I dedicate my
works to the King. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer: Thou fairer then
the children of men, gr^ is powered in thy lips, for GOD has blessed thee for
ever. Girde thy sword upon thy ^high, thou most mighty: Proceed in thy beauty
and glory: and reign prosperouly Psalm. 45.
because of thy truth, thy justice and thy gentleness: thy right hand shall
guide thee wondrously: Thine arrows are sharp (most mighty) against the
hearts of the Kings enemies: the people shall fall under thee. Thy throne O GOD
is euer-lasting, and the scepter of thy kingdom, a scepter of direction: Thou
love justice, and hate iniquity: therefore GOD even thy GOD has anointed
thee with oil of gladness above thy fellows. All thy garments smell of
Myrrh, Alloes and Cassia, from the I^ry palaces, wherein the Kings daughters
had made thee gl^d, in their honor. Who is so dull that he discerns not
Christ our God, in whom we believe, by this place? hearing him called GOD,
whose throne is for ever, and annoyn^d by GOD, not with visible but with
spiritual Chrisme: who is so barbarously ignorant in this immortal and
universal religion, that he hears not that Christ's name comes of Chrisma,
unction? Here we know CHRIST, let us see then unto the types: How is he
father then unto the sons of men? in a beauty far more amiable then that of
the body. What is his sword, his shaftes, etc. all these are tropicall
characters of his power: and how they are all so, let him that is the subject
to this true, just, and gentle King, look to at his leisure. And then behold
his Church, that spiritual spouse of his, and that divine wed-locke of theirs:
here it is: The Queen stood on thy right hand, her ^lothing was of gold
embrodered with diverse colors. Hea^e Oh daughter, and (...), attend, and
forget thy people and thy fathers house. For the King takes pleasure in thy
beauty: and he is the Lord thy God. The sons of Tire shall adore him (...)
gifts, the rich men of the people shall ^ooe him with presents. The Kings
daughter (...) all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold. The
Virgins shall be brought after her unto the King, and her kinsfolks and
companions shall follow her, with joy and gladness shall they be brought, and
shall enter into the Kings chamber. Instead of fathers (...) shall have
children, to make them Princes through out the earth. They shall remember thy
name O Lord from (a) generation to generation; therefore shall their people
give ^ks unto thee world without end. I do not think any one so besotted as to
think this to be meant of any personal woman: no, no, she is his spouse to
who^ it is said: Thy throne, O God, is everlasting; and the scepter of thy
Kingdom a scepter of direction. (...) have loved justice and hated iniquity,
therefore the Lord thy God has anointed (...) ^ith the oil of gladness
before thy fellows: Namely Christ before the christi^* For they are his
fellows of whose concord out of all nations, comes this Queen, as an other
psalm says: the City of the great King, meaning the spiritual Syon: Syon is
speculation: for so it speculateth the future good that it is to receive, and
thither directs it all the intentions. This is the spiritual Jerusalem,
whereof we have all this while spoken, this is the foe of that deuillish
Babylon, hight confusion, and that the foe of this. Yet is this City, by
regeneration, freed from the Babilonian bondage, and passes over the worst
King for the best that ever was, turning from the devil and coming home to
Christ: for which it is said, forget thy people, and thy fathers house, etc.
The Israelites, were a part of thi^ ^tty in the flesh, but not in that faith:
but became foes both to this great (...) Queen. Christ was killed by them, and
came from them, to (b) those (...) ^euer saw in the flesh. And therefore our
King says by the mouth of the (...) in another place: thou have delivered me
from the contentions of the people, (...) me the head of the heathen: a people
whom I have not known, has served Psalm. 18. 43 44.
(...) as soon as they heard me, obeyed me. This was the Gentiles who never
(...) ^rist in the flesh, nor he them. yet hearing him preached they believed
(...) ^astly, that he might well say: as soon as they heard me, they obeyed
me: for (...) ^es by hearing. This people, conjoined with the true Israel,
both (...) (...) and spirit, is that City of God, which when it was only in
Israel, brought (...) christ in the flesh: for thence was the Virgin Mary,
from whom Christ (...) our manhood upon him. Of this city, thus says
another psalm. (c) (...) ^ll call it, our Mother Sion: he became man therein,
the most high has founded (...) was this most high, but God? So did Christ
found her in his Patriarchs Psalm 87, (...)
(...) ^hets, before he took flesh in her, from the Virgin Mary. Seeing
therefore (...) Prophet so long agoc said that of this City which now we
behold come (...) (...): In steed of fathers thou shall have children, to make
them Princes over all the (...) so has she when whole nations and their
rulers, come freely to con^ (...) proffesse Christ his truth for ever and ever)
then without all doubt, there (...) (...) ^ope herein, how ever understood, but
has direct reference unto these (...) stations.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) generation] So read the 70. whom Augustine ever follows, (...) and
this reduplication is very emphaticall in the Hebrew. (b) To those that he
neuer] Christ while he was on the earth never came, nor preached in any nation
but Israel. Nor matter^ (...) tha^ some few Gentiles came unto him, we speak
here of whole nations. (c) Men shall call it] The seauenty read it thus indeed
but erroneously as Hierome notes In Psalm 89. for they had written it, (...),
what is Sion? which reading, some conceyuing not, rejected, and added (...)
reading it, (...), an other Si^n, and that the rather because it follows, he
was made man therein. But the vulgar follows the Hebrew, and reads it with an
interrogation.

Of the references of the 110. Psalm unto Christ's Priesthood: and the 22.
unto his passion. CHAP. 17.
FOr in that psalm that (as this calls Christ a King) enstileth him a
priest, beginning: The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand until
I make thine enemies thy foote-stoole: we believe that Christ sits at Gods
right hand, but we see it not: nor that his enemies are all under his feet
(which (a) must appear in the end, and is now believed, as it shall hereafter
be beheld): but then the rest: the Lord shall send the rod of thy power out of
Sion, be thou ruler amidst thine enemies. This is so plain that naught but
impudence it self can contradict it. The enemies themselves confess that the
law of Christ came out of Sion, that which we call the Gospel, and avouch to
be the rod of his power. And that he rules in the midst of his enemies,
themselves, his slaves, with grudging, and fruitless gnashing of teeth, do
really acknowledge. Furthermore: the Lord swear and will not repent, (which
proves the sequence eternally established) thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech. The reason is, Aarons priesthood and sacrifice is
abolished, and now in all the world under Christ the priest, we offer that
Genesis 22
which Melchisedech brought forth when he blessed Abraham: who doubts now of
whom this is spoken? and unto this manifestation are the other Tropes of the
psalm referred, as we have declared them peculiarly in our Sermons, and in
that psalm also wherein CHRIST prophecieth of his passion by David's mouth,
saying, they perced my hands and my feet: they counted all my bones, and stood
Psalm. 22
gazing upon me. These words are a plain description of his posture on the
cross, his nayling of his hands and feet, his whole body stretched at length,
and made a rufull gazing stock to the beholders. Nay more: they parted my
garments among them, they cast lots upon my vesture. How this was fulfilled,
let the Gospel tell you. And so in this, there are diverse obscurities, which
not withstanding are all congruent with the maine, and scope of the psalm,
manifested in the passion, chiefly seeing that those things which the psalm
presaged so long before, are but now effected (as it foretold) and even now
are opened unto the eyes of the whole world. For it says a little after: All
the ends of the world shall remember themselves, and turn unto the Lord: all
the kindreds of the earth shall worship before him for the kingdom is the
Lords, and he rules among the nations.

L. VIVES.
Which (a) ^st apeare] In the end, but now is only believed. Saint Paul
writes much of it unto the Corynthians, and Hebrews.

Christ's death and resurrection prophesied in psalm. 3. and 40. and 15. and
67. CHAP. 18.
NEither were the psalms silent of his resurrection: for what is that of the
third psalm: I laid me down, and slept and rose again, for the Lord
sustained me? will any one say that the prophet would record it for such a great
thing, to sleep, and Psalm. 3
to rise, but that he means by sleep, death, and by rising again, the
resurrection? things that were fit to be prophesied of Christ? this, in the
41. psalm is most plain: for David in the person of the mediator, discoursing
(as he uses) of things to come as if they were already past, (because they
are already past in Gods predestination (a) and praescience) says thus. Mine
enemies speak evil of me saying, when shall he die, and his name perish? and
if he come to see, he speaks lies, and his heart he apeth up iniquity within
him: and he goes forth, and tells it, mine ene^ Psalm. 41
whisper together against me, and imagine how to hurt me. They have spoken an
unjust thing upon me, shall not he that sleeps, arise again? this is even as
much as if he had said, shall not he that is dead revive again? the precedence
does show how they conspired his death, and how he that came in to see him,
went for to bewray him to them. And why is not this that traitor Judas, his
disciple? Now because he (...) they would effect their wicked purpose, to kill
him, he to show the fondness of their malice in murdering him that should
rise again, says these words: ^ll not he that sleeps, arise again, as if
he said, you fools, your wickedness procures but my sleep. But least they
should do such a villainy unpunished, he meant to repay them at full: saying,
My friend and familiar, whom I trusted, and who eat of my ^ead, even he has
(b) kicked at me: But thou Lord have mercy upon me, raise me up (...) shall
requite them. Who is he now that beholds the Jews beaten out of (...) and,
and made vagabonds all the world over, since the passion of Christ, (...)
^ceiueth not the scope of this prophecy? for he rose again after they had
(...), and repayed them with temporal plagues, besides those that he re^ for
the rest, until the great judgment: for Christ himself showing his (...) to
the Apostles by reaching him a piece of bread; remembered this verse (...) ^alm,
and showed it fulfilled in himself, he that did eat of my bread, eue^ he has
(...) ^e, the words, in whom I trusted, agree not with the head but with the
^ts properly: for our Savior knew him well, before hand, when he said (c) Luc.
23. 21.
(...) is a devil: but Christ used to transfer the proprieties of his
members (...) ^mselfe, as being their head, body and head being all one Christ.
And ther^ (...) of the Gospel, I was hungry, and you gave me to eat, he
expounds af^ Math. 25. 35
thus: In that (d) you did it to one of these, you did it unto me. He says
there^ ^t he trusted in him, as the Apostles trusted in Judas, when he was
(...) Apostle. Now the Jews hope that their Christ that they hope for The
Jews believe a Christ to come that shall not die at all.
(...) ^er die: and therefore they hold that the law and the Prophets prefig^
(...) (...) ours, but one that shall be free from all touch of death, whom they
do (...) for (and may do, long enough). And this miserable blindness makes
(...) take that sleep and rising again (of which we now speak) in the
literal sense, not for death, and resurrection.

(...) the 16. psalm confounds them, thus. My heart is glad, and my tongue
re^ my flesh also rests in hope, for thou will not leave my soul in hell,
nei^ (...) thou suffer thine Holy one to see corruption. What man could say
(...) (...) flesh rested in that hope that his soul should not be left in
hell, but (...) presently to the flesh to save it from the corruption of a
carcass, excepting him only that rose again the third day? It cannot be said
of David. The sixty eight Psalm says also: Our God is the God that (e)
saves us, and the issues Psalm. 68. 20
of death are the Lords. What can be more plain? Jesus Christ is the God that
saves us: for Jesus is a Savior, as the reason of his name was given in the
Gospel, saying: He shall save his people from their sins: And seeing that
his blood was shed for the remission of sins, the enemies of death ought to
belong Luc. 1.
unto none but unto him, nor could he have passage out of this life, but by
death. And therefore it is said, Unto him belong the (f) issues of death; to
show that he by death should redeem the world. And this last is spoken in an
admiration, as if the Prophet should have said, Such is the life of man, that
the Lord himself leaves it not, but by death!

L. VIVES.
ANd (a) praescience] Some copies add here, quia certa erant, but it seemeeth
to have but crept in, out of some scholion. (b) Kicked at me] Supplantauit me:
taken up mine heels, as wrastlers do one with another. Allegorically it is
(...), to deceive. (c) One of you] The Bruges copy has: One of you shall
betraye me: and one of you is a devil, both: they are two several places in
the Gospel. John. 13. and John. 6. Judas is called a Devil, because of his
deceitful villainy. (d) In that you did it] Or, in as much as (...). (e) That
saves vs] (...). A proper phrase to the Greek tongue, but vnordinary in the
Latin, unless the nowne be used, to say the God of salvation. (f) Issues]
(...).

The obstinate infidelity of the Jews, declared in the sixty nine Psalm.
CHAP. 19.
But all those testimonies and prefigurations being so miraculously come to
effect, could not move the Jews: wherefore that of the sixty nine Psalm was
fulfilled in them: which speaking in the person of Christ, of the accidents in
his passion, says this also among the rest: They gave me gall to eat, and
when I was thirsty they gave me vinegar to drink. And this banquet which they
affoorded Math. 27.
him, he thanketh them thus for. Let their table be (a) a snare for them, and
their Psalm. (...).
prosperity their ruin; let their eyes be blinded that they see not, and
bend their backs for ever, etc. which are not wishes, but prophecies of the
plagues that should befall them. What wonder then if they whose eyes are
blinded, discern not this, and whose backs are eternally bended, to stick
their aims fast upon earth: for these words being drawn from the literal
sense and the body, import the vices of the mind. And thus much of the Psalms
of David, to keep our intended mean. Those that read these and know them all
already, must needs pardon me for being so copious, and if they know that I
have omitted ought that is more concerning mine object, I pray them to forbear
complaints of me for it.

L. VIVES.
A (a) Snare] Saint Augustine calls it here, Muscipula, a Mouse-trappe. The
Greek is (...).

David's Kingdom: his merit, his son Solomon. Prophecies of Christ in
Salomons books: and in books that are annexed unto them. CHAP. 20.
David, the son of the celestial Jerusalem, reigned in the earthly one, and
was much commended in the scriptures, his piety and true humility so conquered
his imperfections, that he was one of whom we might say, with him: Blessed are
th^se whose iniquity is forgiven and whose sins are covered. After him, his
son Sa^ Psalm. 30
reigned in all his Kingdom, beginning to reign (as we said) in his fathers
(...) (a) He began well but he ended badly: prosperity, the moath of wisdom,
did him more hurt, then his famous and memorable wisdom it self, profited
him. He was a prophet, as his works, (b) namely the Proverbs, the Canticles,
and Ecclesiastes, do prove: all which are canonical. But Ecclesiasticus and
the book of wisdom, were only called his, for some similitude between his
style, and theirs. But all the learned affirm them none of his, yet the
churches of the West holds them of great authority, and has done long: and in
the book of (c) Wisdom is a plain prophecy of Christ's passion: for his
wicked murderers (...) brought in, saying, Let us cercumuent the just, for he
displeases us, and is contrary unto our doings, checking us for offending thee
law, and shaming us for our breach Wis. 2. 1^
of discipline. He boasts himself of the knowledge of GOD, and calls
himself the ^ne of the LORD: He is made to reprove our thoughts, it ^reeueth
us to look upon him, for his life is not like other men's: his ways are of
another fashion. He (...) us triflers, and avoideth our ways, as uncleanness:
he commends the ends of (...) just, and boasts that GOD is his father. Let
us see then if he say true: let ^ue what end he shall have: If this just man,
be GODS Son, he will help him, (...) deliver him from the hands of his
enemies: let us examine him with rebukes (...) ^ments, to know his meekness,
and to prove his patience. Let us condemn (...) to a shameful death, for he
says he shall be preserved. Thus they imagine, (...) ^ay, for their malice has
blinded them. In (d) Ecclesiasticus also is the fu^ ^th of the Gentiles
prophesied, in these words. Have mercy upon us, O Eccle. 36
(...) GOD of all, and send thy fear amongst the Nations: lift up thine hand
(...) the Nations that they may see thy power: and as thou art sanctified in us
be^ ^em so be thou magnified in them before us: that they may know thee as we
know (...) that there is no God but only thou O LORD. This prophetical prayer
we see (...) in Jesus Christ. But the scriptures that are not in the Jews
Canon, are (...) ^d proofs against our adversaries. But it would be a tedious
dispute, and (...) far beyond our aim, if I should here stand to refer
all the prophet Salomons three true books that are in the Hebrew Canon, unto
the truth (...) Christ and his church. Although that that of the Proverbs, in
the persons of the wicked: Let us lay wait for the just without a cause, and
swallow them up Pro. 1
(...), (...) they that go down into the pit, let us raze his memory from
earth, and take (...) his rich possession, this may easily and in few words
be reduced unto CHRIST, and his church: for such a saying have the wicked
husbandmen in his evangelical Parable: This is the heir, come let us kill
him, and take his ^tance. In the same book likewise, that which we touched at
before Mat. 21. 3^
^g of the barren that brought forth seven) cannot be meant but of (...)
church of CHRIST, and himself, as those do easily apprehend (...) snow
CHRIST to be called the wisdom of his father; the words are. Wisdom has
built her an house, and has hewn out her seven pillars* she h^th killed her
victuals, drawn her own wine, and prepared her table. She has sent forth
her Pro. 9, 1, 2 etc.
maidens to cry from the higths, saying. He that is simple, come hither to me,
and to the weak witted, she says, Come and eat of my bread, and drink of the
wine that I have drawn. Here we see that Gods wisdom, the coeternall Word
built him an house of humanity in a Virgins womb, and unto this head has
annexed the church as the members; has killed the victuailes, that is
sacrificed the Mattires, and prepared the table with bread and wine, (there is
the sacrifice of Melchisedech:) has called the simple and the weak witted,
for GOD (says the Apostle) has chosen the weakness of the world, to
confound the strength by. To whom notwithstanding 1. Cor. 1, 27
is said as follows: forsake your foolishness, that ye may live; and seek
wisdom, that ye may have life. The participation of that table, is the
beginning of life: for in Eccelasiastes, where he says: It is good (e) for
man to eat and drink, Eccl. 7
we cannot understand it better then of the perticipation of that table which
our Melchisedechian Priest instituted for us the New Testament. For that
sacrifice succeeded all the Old Testament sacrifices, that were but shadows of
the future good: as we hear our Savior speak prophetically in the fortieth
psalm, saying: Psalm. 40, 6
Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, but a body have thou perfited for
me: for his body is offered and sacrificed now instead of all other offerings
and sacrifices. For Ecclesiastes means not of carnal eating and drinking in
those words that he repeateth so often, as that one place shows
sufficiently, saying: It is better to go into the house of mourning then of
feasting: and by and by after, Eccl. 7, 4
the heart of the wise is in the house of mourning: but the heart of fools is
in the house of feasting. But there is one place in this book, of chief note,
concerning the two Cities, and their two Kings, Christ and the devil: Woe to
the land whose King is a child, and whose Princes eat in the morning. Blessed
art thou, O land when thy King is the son of Nobles, and thy Princes eat in
due time for strength and not for drunkenness. Here he calls the devil a
child, for his foolishness, pride rashness, petulance, and other vices
incident to the age of boyish youths. But Christ he calls the son of the
Nobles, to wit, of the Patriarchs of that holy and free City: for from them
came his humanity. The Princes of the former eat in the morning: before their
hour, expecting not the true time of felicity, but will hurry unto the worlds
delights, headlong: but they of the City of Christ expect their future
beatitude, with patience. This is for strength: for their hopes never fail
them, Hope (says Saint Paul) shameth no man. All that hope in thee (says the
psalm) Romans 5, 5
shall not be ashamed. Now for the Canticles, it is a certain spiritual and
holy delight in the marriage of the King and Queen of this city, that is,
Christ and the church. But this is all in mystical figures, to inflame us the
more to search the truth and to delight the more in finding the appearance of
that bridegroom to whom it is said there: truth has loved thee, and of that
bride, that receives this word, love is in thy delights. I ommit many things
with silence, to draw the work toward an end.

L. VIVES.
HE (a) began well] Augustine imitateth Salust. In Bello Catil. (b) Works,
namely] Josephus affirms that he wrote many more. viz. five thousand books
of songs, and harmonies: and three thousand of Proverbs and Parables: for he
made a parable of every plant from the Isope to the Cedar: and so did he of the
beasts, birds and fishes: he knew the depth of nature, and discoursed of it
all, God taught him bands, exterminations and Amulets against the devil, (...)
the good of man, and cures for those that were bewitched. Thus says Josephus
(c) Wisdome] Philo, the (...).
Some say that Philo Iudaeus, who lived in the Apostles time, made this book:
He was the Apostles friend, and so eloquent in the Greek, that it was a
proverb. Philo either Platonized (...) Plato Philonized. (d) Ecclesiasticus]
Written by Jesus the son of Syrach, in the time of (...) Euergetes King of
Egypt, and of Simon the high priest. (e) For man to eate] The Seauenty and
vulgar differ a little here, but it is of no moment.

Of the Kings of Israel and Judah, after Solomon. CHAP. 21.
WE find few prophecies of any of the Hebrew Kings after Solomon, pertinent
unto Christ or the church either of Judah or Israel. For so were the two parts
termed into which the kingdom after Salomons death was divided, for his
sins, and in his son Roboams time: the ten Tribes that Jeroboam, Salomons
servant attained, being under Samaria, was called properly Israel (although
the whole nation went under that name) and the two other Judah and Benjamin,
which remained under Jerusalem, least David's stock should have utterly failed,
were called Judah: of which tribe David was. But Benjamin stuck unto it,
because Saul, (who was of that tribe) had reigned there the next before David:
these two (as I say) were called Judah, and so distinguished from Israel,
under which the other ten tribes remained subject: for the tribe of Leui,
being the Seminary of Gods Priests, was freed from both, and made the
thirteenth tribe. Joseph's tribe, being divided into Ephraim; and Manasses, into
two tribes, whereas all the other tribes make but single ones a piece. But yet
the tribe of Leui was most properly under Jerusalem because of the temple
wherein they served. Upon this division, Roboan King of Judah, Salomons son,
reigned in Jerusalem, and Hieroboam, King of Israel, whilom servant to Solomon,
in Samaria. And whereas Roboa^ vould have made wars upon them for falling
from him; the Prophet forbad him from the Lord, saying; That it was the Lords
deed. So then that it was no sin either in the King or people of Israel but
the Lords will, that was herein fulfilled: which being known, both parts
took up themselves, and rested: for they were only divided in rule, not in
religion.

How Hieroboam infected his subjects with Idolatry: yet did God never fail
them in Prophets, nor in keeping many from that infection. CHAP. 22.
But Hieroboam the King of Israel, fell peruersly from God (who had truly
enthroned him as he had promised) and fearing that the huge resort of all
Israel to Jerusalem (for they came to worship and sacrifice in the Temple,
according to the law) might be a mean to withdraw the from him unto the line
of David (their old King) began to set up Idols in his own Realm, and to
seduce Gods people by this damnable and impious suttlety, yet God never ceased
to reprove him for it by his Prophets, and the people also that obeyed him and
his successors in it for that time were the two great men of God, Helias and
his disciple Heliseus. And when Helias said unto GOD: LORD they have stain thy
Prophets, and dug down thine Altars, and I only am left and now they seek
my life: he was answered that God had yet seven thousand in Israel that had
not bowed down the knee to B^l. 1. Kings 19


The state of Israel and Judah unto both their Captiuities, (which befell at
different times) diversely altered. Judah united to Israel: and lasty, both unto
Rome. CHAP. 23.
NOr wanted there Prophets in Judah (that lay under Jerusalem) in all these
successions: Gods pleasure was still to have them ready, to send out either for
prediction of events, or reformation of manners. For the Kings of Judah did
offend God also (though in far less measure then Israel) and deserved
punishment, both they and their people. All their good Kings have their due
commendations. But Israel had not one good King from thence, but all were
wicked, more or less. So that both these kingdoms, (as it pleased God) had
their reuolutions of fortune, now prosperous, now adverse, through foreign and
civil wars, as Gods wrath, or mercy was moved: until at length, their
sins provoking him, he gave them all into the hands of the Chaldaeans, who
led most part of them captives into Assyria, first the ten Tribes of Israel,
and then Judah also, destroying Jerusalem, and that goodly Temple: and that
bondage lasted 70. years. And then being freed, they repaired the ruined
Temple, and then (although many of them lived in other nations) yet was the
land no more divided, but one Prince only reigned in Jerusalem, and thither
came all the whole land to offer and to celebrate their feasts at the time
appointed. But they were not yet secure from all the nations, for then (a) came
the Romans* and under their subjection must Christ come and find his Israel.

L. VIVES.
THen (a) came] Pompey the great quelled them first, and made them tributaries
to Rome. Cicero and Antony being consulls. And from that time they were ruled
by the Roman Presidents of Syria, and Prouosts of Iudaea. That they paid
tribute to the Romans, both profane histories and that question in the
Gospel (Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar?) do witness.

Of the last Prophets of the Jews, about the time that Christ was borne. CHAP.
24.
AFter their return from Babylon, (at which time they had the Prophets Aggee,
Zachary, and Malachi, and Esdras) they had no more Prophets until our
Saviors birth, but one other Zachary, and Elizabeth his wife: and hard before
his birth, old Symeon and Anna, a widow, and John the last of all, who was
about Christ's years, and did not prophecy his coming, but protested his
presence (a) being before unknown. Therefore says CHRIST, The prophets and
the law prophesied unto John. The prophecies of these five last, we find in
the Gospel, where the Virgin, Our Lords Mother prophesied also before John.
But these prophecies the wicked Jews reject, yet an innumerable company of
them did believe, and received them. For then was Israel truly divided, as was
prophesied of old by Samuel unto Saul: and avouched never to be altered. But
the reprobate Jews also have Malachie, Aggee, Zachary and Esdras in their
Canon, and they are the last books thereof: for their books are as the
others, full of great prophecies: otherwise they were but few that wrote worthy
of cannonicall authority. Of these aforesaid I see I must make some abstracts
to insert into this work, as far as shall concern Christ and his church:
But that I may do better in the next book.

L. VIVES.
BEing (a) before vnknowne] He knew he was come, but he knew not his person
yet, until the Holy Ghost descended like a dove, and God the Father spoke from
heaven, then he ^w him, and professed his knowledge.

THE CONTENTS OF THE eighteenth book of the City of God.
1. A recapitulation of the 17. books past ^rning the two Cities, continuing
unto the time of Christ's birth, the Savior of the ^ld. 2. Of the Kings and
times of the Earthly City, correspondent unto those of Abraham. 3. What Kings
reigned in Assiria and Sicy^, in the hundredth year of Abraham's age, (...)
Isaac was borne, according to the promise: (...) at the birth of Jacob and
Esau. 4. Of the times of Jacob and his son Joseph. 5. Of Apis the Argiue
King, called Sera^ in Egypt: and there adored as a deity. 6. The Kings of Argos
and Assiria, at the (...) of Jacobs death. 7. In what Kings time Joseph died in
E^. 8. What Kings lived when Moses was (...), and what Gods the Pagans had as
then. 9. The time when Athens was built, and the (...) that Varro gives for
the name. 10. Varroes relation of the original of the (...) Areopage: and of
Deucalions deluge. 11. About whose times Moses brought (...) out of Egypt: of
Iosuah, in whose tim^ he (...). 12. The false Gods adored by those Greek^
Princes, which lived between Israells freedom, and (...) death. 13. What
fictions got footing in the nations, when the Judges began first to rule
Israel. 14. Of the theological poets. 15. The ruin of the Argiue Kingdom:
Picus, Saturnes son succeeding him in Laurentum. 16. How Diomedes was deified
after the destruction of Troy, and his fellows said to be turned into birds.
17. Of the incredible changes of men that Varro believed. 18. Of the diuills
power in transforming man's shape: what a christian may believe herein. 19. That
Aeneas came into Italy when Labdon was Judge of Israel. 20. Of the succession
of the Kingdom in Israel after the Judges. 21. Of the Latian Kings: Aeneas
(the first) and Auentinus (the twelf^h) are made Gods. 22. Rome, founded at the
time of the Assirian Monarchies fall, Ezechias being King of Iudaea. 23. Of
the evident prophecy of Sybilla, Erythraea concerning Christ. 24. The seven
Sages in Romulus his time: Israel led into captivity: Romulus dies and is
deified. 25. Philosophers living in Tarquinius Priscus his time, and Zedechias
his, when Jerusalem was taken and the Temple destroyed. 26. The Romans were
freed from their Kings, and Israel from captivity, both at one time. 27. Of
the times of the Prophets, whose books we have, how they prophesied (some of
them) of the calling of the nation, in the declyning of the Assirrian Monarchy,
and the Romans erecting. 28. Prophecies concerning the Gospel, in Osee and
Amos. 29. Esaias his prophecies concerning Christ. 30. Prophecies of Micheas,
Jonas and Joel, correspondent unto the New Testament. 31. Prophecies of Abdi,
Nahum and Abacuc, concerning the worlds salvation in Christ. 32. The prophecy
contained in the song and prayer of Abacuc. 33. Prophecies of Hieremy and
Zephany concerning the former theames. 34. Daniels and Ezechiells prophecies,
concerning Christ and his church. 35. Of the three prophecies of Agge, Zachary
and Malachi. 36. Of the books of Esdras and the Machabees. 37. The Prophets
more ancient then any of the Gentile philosophers. 38. Of some scriptures too
ancient for the church to allow, because that might procure a suspect, that
they are rather counterfit then tru^. 39. That the Hebrew letters have bin ever
continued in that language. 40. The Egiptians (...) (...) claim their wisdom
the age of 10000* (...). 41. The dissension of Philosophers, (...) concord of
canonical scriptures. 42. Of the translations of the Old (...) out of Hebrew
into Greek, by the ordinance (...) God, for the benefit of the nations. 43.
That the translation of the (...) most authentical, next unto the Hebrew. 44.
Of the destruction of Niniuy, which the Hebrew prefixeth forty days unto, and
the ^tuagints but three. 45. The Jews wanted Prophets ever after the repairing
of the Temple, and were afflicted, even from thence until Christ came, to
(...) that the Prophets spoke of the building of the other Temple. 46. Of the
words. Becoming Flesh: (...) Saviors Birth and the dispersion of the Iewe^.
47. Whether any but Israelites before Christ: time, belonged to the City of
God. 48. Aggeis prophecy, of the glory of (...) house, fulfilled in the church,
not in the Temple. 49. The churches increase uncertain because of the
commixtion of Elect and reprobate in this world. 50. The Gospel preached, and
glorious^ confirmed by the blood of the preachers. 51. That the church is
confirmed even by the schisms of heresies. 52. Whether the opinion of some be
credible, that their shall be no more persecutions after ten ten, past, but the
eleauenth, which is that of A^techristes. 53. Of the unknown time of the last
p^secution. 54. The Pagans foolishness in affir^ that christianity should last
but three hundredth sixty five years.
FINIS.
THE EIGHTEENTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop
of Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Arecapitulation of the seauenteene books past, concerning the two Cities,
continuing unto the time of Christ's birth, the Savior of the world. CHAP. 1.
IN my confutations of the perverse contemners of Christ in respect of their
Idols, and the en^ious enemies of christianity (which was all that I did in my
first ten books) I promised to continue my discourse through the original,
progress, and limmites of the two Cities, Gods, and the World^, as far as
should concern the generation of mankind. Of this my triplet promise, one
part, the originalls of the cities, have I declared in the next four books:
part of the second, the progress: from Adam to the deluge, in the fifteenth
book: and so from thence unto Abraham I followed down all the times as they
lay. But whereas from Abraham's fathers time, until the Kingdom of the
Israelites, (where I ended the sixteenth book) and from thence unto our
Saviors birth (where I ended the seventeenth) I have only carried the City
of God along with my pen, whereas both the Cities ran on together, in the
generations of mankind: this was my reason; I desired first to manifest the
descent of those great and manifold promises of God, from the beginning, until
He, in whom they all were bounded, and to be fulfilled, were come to be borne
of the Virgin, without any interposition of ought done in the Worldly city
during the mean space: to make the City of God more apparent, although that
all this while, until the revelation of the New Testament, it did but lie
inuolued in figures: Now therefore m^st I begin where I left, and bring along
the Earthly City, from Abraham's time, unto this point where I must now leave
the heavenly: that having brought both their times to one quantity, their
comparison may show them both with greater evidence.

Viues his Preface unto his commentaries upon the eighteenth book of Saint
Augustine his City of God.
IN this eighteenth book we were to pass many dark ways, and oftentimes
to feel for our passage, daring not fix one foot until we first groped
where to place it, as one must do in dark and dangerous places. Here we
cannot tarry all day at Rome, but must abroad into the worlds farthest corner,
into linages long since lost, and countries worn quite out of memory:
pedegrees long ago laid in the depth of oblivion must we fetch out into (...)
(...) (like Cerberus) and spread them openly. We must into Assyria that old
Monarchy, (...) once named by the Greeks: And Sycionia, which the very Princes
thereof sought to suppress from memory themselves, debarring their very fathers
from having their names set on their tombs, as Pausanias relates, and thence
to Argos, which being held the most antique state of Greece, is all enfolded in
fables: then Athens, whose nimble wits aiming all at their countries honor,
have left truth sick at the heart, they have so cloied it with eloquence: and
wrapped it up in clouds. Nor is Augustine content with this, but here and
there casts in hard walnuts, and almonds for us to crack, which puts us to
shrewd trouble ere we can get out the kernel of truth: their shells are so
thick. And then comes the latin gests* all hackt in pieces by the discord
of authors. And thence to the Romans: nor are the Greek wisemen omitted. It
is fruitless to complain, least some should think I do it causeless. And
here and there, the Hebrew runs, like veins in the body, to show the full
course of the Two Cities, the Heavenly and the Earthly. If any one traveling
through those countries, and learning his way of the cunningest, should for all
that miss his way some times, is not he pardonable I pray you tho, and will
any one think him the less diligent in his travel? none, I think. What then
if chance, or ignorance lead me astray, out of the sight of diverse mean
villages that I should have gone by, my way lying through deserts, and
vntracted woods, and seldom or never finding any to ask the right way of? am
I not to be borne with? I hope yes, Uarro's Antiquities are all lost; And the
life of Rome. None but Eusebius helped me in Assyria, but that Diodorus
Siculus and some others, set me in once or twice. I had a book by me, called
Berosus by the Booke-sellers, and somewhat I had of Ioannes Annius, goodly
matters truly, able to fright away the Reader at first fight. But I let them
ly still, I love not to suck the dregs, or fetch fables out of frivolous
pamphlets, the very rackets wherewith Greece bandieth ignorant heads about. Had
this work been a child of Berosus, I had used it willingly: but it looks
like a bastard of a Greek sire, as Xenopons Aequiuoca are, and many other that
bear their names that never were their authors.

If any man like such stuff, much good do it him: i will be none of his rival.
Through Sicyonia Pausanias and Eusebius, went with me, contenting themselves
only with the bare names, and some other little matters: the Reader shall
partake of them freely. For Iudaea, I see no guides but the scriptures:
sometimes we have put in the minds of the Gentiles hereof, only in those
things that the Prophets touched not in the rest: where the scriptures
concur, we need go no further. That makes me not to trouble Cornelius
Alexander Milesius Polyhistor, for allegations concerning the Jews: for he
goes all by the LXX. interpretours in his computations both in the Hebrew
stories, and others. Concerning Athens, Rome, Argos, Latium, and the other
fabulous subjects, the Reader has heard whatsoever my diversity of reading
affords, and much from the most curious students therein that I could be
acquainted withal. He that likes not this thing, may find another by and by
that will please his palate better, unless he be so proudly testie that he
would have these my pains for the public good, of power to satisfy him
only. The rest, the Commentaries themselves will tell you.

Of the Kings, and times of the Earthly City, correspondent unto those of
Abraham. CHAP. 2.
Mankind therefore being dispersed through all the world far and wide
(differing in place, yet one in nature) and each one following his own
affections, and the thing they desired being either insufficient for one, or
all (being not the true good) began to be divided in it self: the weaker being
oppressed by the stronger: for still the weaker dominion, or freedom, yielded
to the mightier, preferring peace and safety howsoever, so that they (a) were
wo^dred at that had rather perish then serve, for nature cries with one voice
(almost all the world through) It is better to serve the conqueror, then to be
destroyed by war. Hence it is that some are Kings and some are subjects (not
without Gods providence for Prince and subject are unto him, alike, and both in
his power) but in all those earthly dominions, wherein Gods providence the
arbiter of Kingdoms
divided mankind followed each his temporal profit and respect: we find two
more eminent then all the other, first Assiria, and then Rome: several both in
times and places: the one in the East, long before the other, that was in the
West, finally the end of the first was the beginning of the later. The other
kingdoms were but as appendents unto these two. In Assiria, Ninus ruled, the
second King thereof after his father Belus the first, in whose time (b) Abraham
was borne.

Then was Sycionia but a small thing, whence that great scholar Varro begins
his discourse, writing of the Roman nation: and coming from the the
Sicyonians to the Athenians, from them to the latins, and so to the Romans.
But those were trifles in respect of the Assirians, before Rome was built.
Though the Roman Salust say that (c) Athens was very famous in Greece: I
think indeed it was more famous, then fame-worthy, for he speaking of them,
says thus: The Athenians exployts I think were worthy indeed: but short of
their report: as being enhaunced by their eloquence in relations, and so came
the ^ld to ring of Athens, and the Athenians virtues held as powerful in their
acts, (...) their wits were copious in their reports. Besides, the Philosophers
continual abode there-aboutes, and the nourishment of such studies there,
added much ^to the fame of Athens. But as for dominion, there was none in those
times so famous, nor so spacious as the Assirians, for Ninus, Belus his son,
ruled there (d) with all Asia, the worlds third part in number, and half part
in ^ity, under his dominion; out as far as the furthest limits of Lybia (e)
Only the Indians (of all the East) he had not subdued: but his wife (f) ^is
warred upon them after his death. Thus were all the vice-royes of those ^ands
at the command of the Princes of Assiria. And in this Ninus his time was
Abraham borne in Chaldaea. But because we know the state of Greece better then
that of Assiria, and the ancient writers of Romes original have drawn it from
the Greeks to the Latins and so unto the Romans (who are indeed Latins)
therefore must we here reckon only the Assirian Kings as far (...) need
is, to show the progress of Babylon (the first Rome) together with that
Heavenly pilgrim on earth, the holy City of God: but for the things them that
shall concern this work, and the comparison of both Cities, them (...) must
rather fetch from the Greeks and Latins, where Rome (the second Babylon) is
seated.

At Abraham's birth therefore, Ninus was the second King of Assiria, and (h)
(...) of Sicyonia, for Belus was the first of the one and (i) Aegiale^s of the
other: but when Abraham left Cladaea upon Gods promise of that universal (...)
to the Nations in his seed, the fourth King ruled in Assiria, and the (...) in
Sicyonia, for Ninus the son of Ninus, reigned there (k) after his ^ther
Semiramis, (l) whom they say he slew because she bare an incestuous (...)
toward him. Some think (m) she built Babylon: indeed she might (...) it:
but when and by whom it was built our sixteenth book declares. (...) ((...))
this son of Ninus and Semiramis, that succeeded his mother, some call ((...))
Ninus and son Ninius by a deriuatiue from his fathers name. And now (...)
Sycionia governed by (p) Thelxion, who had so happy a reign that when he was
dead, they adored him as a God, with sacrifices, and plays, whereof it is said
they were the first inuentors.

L. VIVES.
THey (a) were wondered at.] As the Numantians, the Saguntines, the Opitergians,
and of particular men, Cato, Scipio, and Crassus, were. (b) Abraham was borne.]
Many profane authors have written of Abraham as well as the Scriptures, as
Hecateus that wrote a particular Abraham.
book of him, (Eusebius. de praepar. Euang.) and Alexander Polyhistor, who makes
him to be borne in the tenth Generation, at Camarine Or Vr (which some call
Vrien) in Chaldaea, called in Greek Chaldaeopolis, that he invented Astrology
there, and was so just, wise and well-beloved of God, that he sent him into
Phaenicia, and there he taught Astronomy and other good Arts, and got into
great favor with the King: Nicholas Damascenus says that Abraham reigned at
Damascus, coming thither out of Chaldaea with an army: and went thence into
Chanaan (afterward called Iudaea) leaving great monuments of his being at
Damascus, by which was a village called Abraham's house. But Chanaan being
plagued with famine, he went into Egypt, and consorting himself with the
Priests there, helped their knowledge, their piety and their policy very much:
Histor. lib. 4. Alexander says he lived a while at Heliopoiis, not professing
the invention of Astronomy, but teaching it as E^och had taught him it, who had
it from his forefathers. Artapanus says that they were called Hebrews of
Abraham, that he was twenty years in Egypt and taught King Pharetates
Astronomy, and went from thence into Syria. Melo in his book against the
Jews, troubles the truth of this history very much, for he makes but three
generations from the deluge unto Abraham: giving him two wives, an Egyptian,
and a Chaldaean, of which Egyptian he begot twelve children, all Princes of
Arabia, and that of the Chaldaean he had but Isaac only, who had twelve
children also, whereof Moyscs was the eldest and Joseph the youngest. But in
this case the Scriptures are most true, as they are most divine. (c) Athens
was.] Their estate was greater in time, then power, for in their greatest
souerainety they ruled only the sea cost (by reason of their navy) from the
inmost Bosphorus, about by the seas of Aegeum and Pamphylia, and that they held
not above seauenty years, as Lysias signifies in his Epitaph. (d) All Asia.]
Dionisius Alexandrinus says that the Assirian Monarchy ruled but a very small
portion of Asia. (e) Only the Indians.] India is bounded on the East with the
East sea, Mar* India.
del Zur: on the South with the Indian sea, Golfo di Bengala: on the West with
the river Indus, (the greatest of the world, says Diodorus, excepting Nilus)
and on the North, with mount Emodus that confineth upon Scythia. There are some
people called Indoscythians: Ptolomy divides India into two, the India without
Ganges, and the India within. Of India many have written, Herodotus, Diodorus,
Strabo. Mela, Stephanus, Pliny, Solinus, Ptolomy, and others that wrote the Acts
of Alexander the great, who led an army over most of them parts, discovering
more then ever traveler did beside. But our mariners of late years have made
a more certain discovery of it all. Diodorus, and Strabo write much of the
happy fertility of it in all things; both of them borrowing of Eratosthenes and
Megasthenes who soiourned with Sadrocotus King of India, and recorded these
things. (f) Semiramis warred,] She had two battles against them, one at the
river Indus, and wanne the field, the other farther in, and lost it, and was
beaten home: Diodor. lib. 3. Megastenes (in Strabo) says the Indians never
sent army forth of their country, nor any ever got into theirs, but those of
Hercules and Bacchus. Neither Sesostris the Egyptian, nor Tharcon the
Ethiopian, though they came to Hercules his pillars through Europe, nor
Norbogodrosor (whom the Chaldeans in some sort prefer before Hercules, and who
came also to these pillars) ever came into India. Idantyrsus also got into
Egypt, but never into India, Semiramis indeed came into it a little, but
perished ere she go out. Cyrus conquered the Massagetes only, but meddled not
with India. (g) But because w^ know.] In the Kings of Sicyonia, we follow
Eusebius, and Pausanias, both Greeks: for the books of Uarro and all the
Latins concerning them, are now lost. Nor do these two g^ any Further then the
names of those Kings: because indeed the Sycionians never set any Epitaphs, but
only the names of the dead, upon their tombs, as Pausanias declares: V^
(...). Nor can any Latin author further us in the affairs of Assiria: they
meddle not with them. The Greeks take a leap almost from Ninus to
Sardanapalus, from the first Assirian Monarch to the last. Some name a few
between them: but they do but name them: for this old monarchy they thrust
into the fabulous times, as Dionisius does in his first book, ^deed it brought
no famous matter to pass, for Ninus having founded it, and Semiramis having
confirmed it, all their successors fell to sloth and easefull delights, living
close in their huge palaces, and taking their pleasures without any control:
that made Ctesias, that old writer, both to record all their names and the
years of their reigns But of the other Kings, Greeks and Latins we shall
have better store to choose in. (h) Europe.] The Sycionians (faith Pausanias)
bordering upon Corynthe, say, that Aegialeus was their first King, that he
Sycioniaus.
came out of that part of Peloponesus that is called Aegialos after him, and
dwelt first in the C^y Aegialia, where the tower stood then, where the temple
of Minerua is now. This is Aegialia in Sicyonia on the sea coast: there is
Aegialia in Paphlagonia also, and elsewhere. Some say that Peloponesus was
first called Aegialia of this King, and then Apia of Apis, then Argos of that
famous city, and lastly Peloponesus of Pelops. But their opinion that (...)
Aegialia to be a sea-coasting city is better. This king, they say begot
Europs, he Telchin ^her to Apis, who grew so rich and mighty that before Pelops
came to Olympia, all the country within Isthmus was called Apias, after him.
He begot Telexion, and he Egyrus, Egyrus, Thurimachus, and he Leucippus, who
had no son, but a daughter called Calchinia upon whom Neptune begot Peratos,
whom Leucippus brought up, and left as King. He begot Plemnaeus, and all
Plemnaeus his children as soon as ever they were borne, and cried, ^ed
presently, until Ceres helped this misfortune, for she, coming into
Aegialia, was in^ayned by Plemnaeus, and brought up a child of his called
Orthopolis who afterward had a daughter called Charysorthe, who had Cornus by
Apollo (as it is said) and he had two sons, C^ax and Laomedon, Corax dying
^ssulesse Epopeus came out of Thessaly just at that time, and got his kingdom,
and in his time they say wars were first set on foot, peace having swayed
all the time before. Thus far Pausanias. Europs reigned forty years, and in
the twenty two (...) of his reign, was Abraham borne. (i) Aegialeus.] The
son of Inachus, the river of (...), and Melia, Oceanus his daughter. Thus say
same Greeks. (k) After his mother Se^is.] Semriramis


Diodorus says much of her* lib. 3. She was the daughter (says he) of nymph
D^to by an unknown man, her mother drowned her-selfe in the lake Ascalon,
because she (...) lost her mayden-head and left Semiramis her child amongst
the rocks where the wild (...) fed her with their milk: and that her mother
was counted a goddess with a woman's (...) and a fishes body, nor would the
Sirians touch the fish of that lake, but held them sacred (...) goddess
Derceto. Now Symnas the Kings sheppard found Semiramis and brought her (...) ^d
being very beautiful, Memnon a noble man married her, and then she came
acquainted (...) King Ninus, and taught him how to subdue the Bactrians, and
how to take the city Bac^ which then he beseged: so Ninus admiring her wit and
beauty, married her, and dying left (...) Empress of Asia, until her young
son Ninus came at age, so she undertook the gouer^, and kept it forty two
years. This now some say, but the Athenians (and Dion after (...)) affirm
that she begged the sway of the power imperial of her husband for five days
(...), which he granting, she caused him to be killed, or as others say, to
be perpetually ^oned.

(l) They say he slew.] She was held wounderous lustful after men, and that
she still mur^ him whom she meddled with: that she tempted her son, who
therefore slew her, (...) for fear to fare as the others had, or else in
abomination of so beastly an act. The (...) say she died not, but went quick
up to heaven.

((...)) ^lt Babilon] Babylon is both a country in Assyria, and a City
therein, built by Semi^, as Diodorus, Strabo, Iustine, and all the ancient
Greeks and Latins held. But Iose^, Ensebius, Marcellinus, and others both
Christians and Jews say, that it was built by (...) ^genie of Noah, and only
repaired and fortified by Semiramis, who walled it about (...) such walls as
are the worlds wonders. This Ovid signifies saying. Coctilibus muris cinxisse
Semiramis vrbem.
Semiramis guirt it with walls of Brick.
And this verse Hierome cites to confirm this, In Ose. Some hold that Belus
her father in law built it. Some, that he laid the foundations only. So
holds Diodorus, out of the Egiptian monuments. Alexander says that the first
Belus, whom the Greeks call (...), reigned in Babylon, and that Belus the
second, and Chanaan were his two sons. But he follows Eupolemus in
allotting the building of Babylon to those that remained after the deluge. Eus.
de pr. Euang. lib. 8. Chaldaea was all over with water (says Abydenus in
Eusebium de praep. Euang. li. 10.) And Belus dreined it dry, and built
Babylon: the walls whereof being ruined by floods, Nabocodronosor repaired,
and those remained unto the time of the Macedonian Monarchy; and then he
reckons the state of this King, impertinent unto this place. Augustine makes
Nemrod the builder of Babylon, as you read before. Hear what Pliny says:
lib. 6. Babylon the chief City of Chaldaea, and long famous in the world, and
a great part of the country of Assyria was called Babilonia, after it, the
walls were two hundred foot high, and fifty foot broad: every foot being
three fingers larger then ours, Euphrates ran through the midst of it, etc.
There was another Babylon in Egypt built by those whom Sesostris brought from
Babylon in Assyria, into Egypt, to work upon those mad works of his, the
Piramides, (n) This sonne] His mother brought him up tenderly amongst her
Ladies, and so he lived a quiet Prince, and came seldom abroad, whereupon
the other Kings his successors, got up an use to talk with few in person, but
by an interpretour, and to rule all by deputies. Diodor. Justin. (o) Ninus]
Some call him Zameis, son to Ninus, (as Josephus and Eusebius) and some
Ninius. (p) Telexion] In the translated Eusebius it is Selchis, whom he says
reigned twenty years. In some of Augustines old copies it is Telxion; and in
some, Thalasion, but it Telexion.
must be Telexion, for so it is in Pausanias.

What Kings reigned in Assyria, and Sicyonia, in the hundredth year of Abraham's
age, when Isaac was borne according to the promise: or at the birth of Jacob
and Esau. CHAP. 3.
IN his time also did Sara being old, barren, and past hope of children, bring
forth Isaac unto Abraham, according to the promise of God. And then reigned (a)
Aralius the fifth King of Assyria. And Isaac being three score years of age,
had (b) Esau and Jacob, both at one birth of Rebecca, Abraham his father being
yet living, and of the age of one hundred and sixty years, who lived fifteen
years longer and then dyed, (c) Xerxes the older, called also Balaeus,
reigning the seventh King of Assyria, (d) and Thuriachus (called by some
Thurimachus) the seventh of Sicyon. Now the kingdom of the Argiues began with
the time of these sons of Isaac; and Inachus was the first King there. But
this we may not forget out of Varro, that the Sycionians used to offer
sacrifices at the tomb of the seventh King Thurimachus. But (e) Armamitres
being the eight King of Assyria, and Leucippus of Sycionia, and (f) Inachus the
first King of Argos, God promised the land of Chanaan unto Isaac for his seed,
as he had done unto Abraham before, and the universal blessing of the nations
therein also: and this promise was thirdly made unto Jacob, afterward called
Israel, Abraham's grandchild, in the time of Belocus the ninth Assyrian
monarch, and Phoroneus, Inachus his son, the second King of the Argiues,
Leucippus reigning as yet in Sycione. In this Phoroneus his time, Greece grew
famous for diverse good laws and ordinances: but yet his brother Phegous,
after his death built a temple over his tomb, and made him to be worshipped as
a God, and caused oxen to be sacrificed unto him, holding him worthy of this
honor, I think, because in that part of the kingdom which he held (for their
father divided the whole between them) he set up oratories to worship the
gods in, and taught the true course and observation of months and years:
which the rude people admiring in him, thought that at his death he was become
a God, or else would have it to be thought so. For so they say (f) that Io was
the daughter of Inachus, she that afterward was called (g) Isis, and honored
for a great goddess in Egypt: though some write that (h) she came out of
Ethiopia to be Queen of Egypt, and because she was mighty and gracious in
her reign, and taught her subjects many good Arts, they gave her this honor
after her death, and that with such diligent respect, that it was death to say
she had ever been mortal.

L. VIVES.
ARalius (a)] In the old copies Argius: in Eusebius, Analius, son to Arrius
the last King before him, he reigned forty years. The son in Assyria ever
more succeeded the father, Uelleius. (b) Esau and Iacob] Of Jacob, Theodotus, a
gentile, has written an elegant poem and of the Hebrew acts. And Artapanus,
and one Philo, not the Jew, but another, Alexander Polyhistor also, who
follows the Scriptures, all those wrote of Jacob. (c) Xerxes the elder]
Aralius his son: he reigned forty years. There were two more Xerxes.
Xerxes, but those were Persian Kings: the first Darius Hidaspis his son, and
the second successor to Artaxerxes Long-hand, reigning but a few months. The
first of those sent the huge armies into Greece. Xerxes in the Persian tongue,
is a warrior, and Artaxerxes a great warrior. Herodot. in Erato. The book
that bears Berosus his name, says that the eight King of Babylon was called
Xerxes, surnamed Balaus, and reigned thirty years, that they called him
Xerxes, Victor, for that he wone twice as many nations to his Empire, as
Aralius ruled, for he was a stout and fortunate soldier, and enlarged his
kingdom almost unto India. Thus says that author, what ever he is. Eusaebius
for Balaeus reads Balanaeus: (...) in Greek, is Balnearius, belonging to the
bathe. (d) Thuriachus] Eusebius has it, Tira^, Thurimachus.
and so has the Bruges old copy: but erroniously, as it has much more.
Egyrus (says Pausanias) was Thelexions son, and Thurimachus his son, in
the seventh year of whose reign Isaacs sons were borne. (e) Armamitres] He
reigned thirty eight years, and Leucippus, the son of Thuriachus forty five,
our counterfeit Berosus calls him Arma^.

(f) Inachus] In Peloponesus there is the Argolican gulf (now called Golfo di
Na^) Inachus.
reaching from Sylla's promontory unto Cape Malea, and the Myrtoan sea (now
called (...) (...) Mandria) containing the Cities Argolis, Argos, and Mycenas,
the rivers of Inachus, and Erasmus, and part of Lycaonia. Here did Inachus
reign at first, and gave his name to the (...) that springs from mount
Lyrcaeus. Some think that both he and Phoroneus reigned at Argos in Thessaly,
but the likeness of the name deceives them. For there is Argos indeed (...)
Thessaly, called Pelasgis by Homer, and there is Pelasgis in Poloponesus, and
Achaei, and (...) in both countries. Strabo says that Pelops came into Apia
with the Phthiots that (...) now in Thessaly, and gave Peloponesus his name
afterward: and that there were some Pelasgi, that were the first inhabitants
of Italy about the mouth of Po, and some Thessalians (...) inhabited Vmbria.
But Pelasgus was the son of Niobe, Phoroneus his daughter and Pelasgus.
(...), and from him came the Achiues and the Peloponnesians that first peopled
Aemonia (afterward called Thessaly) in great multitudes. Dionys. Halicarn.
Achaeus, Phthius and Pelasgus were the sons of Neptune and Larissa, came into
Aemonia, chased out the Barbari^, and divided it into three parts, each one
leaving his name unto his share. I think be^ they would continue the memory of
their old country, having left Achaia, Pelasgis, (...), and Larissa the Argiue
tower, at Argos, here they would renew the names for the me^ and fame of their
nation. Five ages after did the Locrians and Aetolians (then called the Leleges
and Curetes) by the leading of Deucalion, Prometheus his son, chase these
Pelasgiues into the Isles of the Aegean sea, and the shores near adjacent.
Those that light in Epyrus, passed soon after into Italy Homer in his
catalogue of the Greeks ships shows plain that these names were confounded.
But we are too long in this point. Dionysius makes the Argiue state the eldest
of all Greece. In Chron. Axion and others (the most) follow him, making
Aegialeus King of Sycion to be Inachus in Phoroneus his time, and the first
founder of that state then. Now Inachus they say was no man but a river only,
begotten by Oceanus, and father to Phoroneus, and some say, unto Aegialeus
also. Phoroneus being made Judge between Juno and Neptune concerning their
controversy about lands, together with Cephisus, Inachus, and Astecion, judged
on Juno's side, and there-vpon she was called the Argiue Juno, as loving Argos
dearly, and having her most ancient temple between Argos and Mycenas.
Phoroneus did make laws to decide controversies amongst his people, and
therefore is called a Judge. Some think that forum, the name of the pleading
place, came from his name: how truly, look they to that. He drew the wandering
Phoroneus.
people into a City (says Pausanias) and called it Phoronicum. The
Thelcissians and Carsathians made war upon him, whom he ouer-threw, and
drove them to seek a new habitation by the sea. At length they came to Rhodes,
called then Ophinsa, where they seated themselves a hundred and seauenty
years before the building of Rome. Oros. (f) Io] Jove (they say) ravished her,
and least Juno should know it, turned her into a Cow, and gave Io.
her to Juno, who put her to the keeping of the hundred eyed Argus: and this
Cow was Isis: Herodotus, out of the Persian Monuments relates, that the
Phaenicians that traffiqued unto Argos, stole her thence and brought her into
Egypt, which was the first injurious rape, before Hellens. Diodorus says that
Inachus sent a noble Captain called Cyraus to seek her, charging him never to
return without her. Pausanias makes her the daughter of Iasius the sixth
Argiue King, and not of Inachus. Phoroneus he says begot Argos, who succeeded
his grandfather, and gave the City the name of Argos (being before called
Phoronicum) and this Argos begot Phorbas, he Triopas, and Triopas, Iasius and
Agenor. Ualer. Flaccus calls Io, Inachis, and the Iasian vergin, the first
because of the nobility of Inachus, the kingdoms founder, the later, because
Iasius was her father. Argonaut. 4. And this reconcileth the times best. For if
she were Inachus his daughter, how could she live with King Triopas, as
Eusebius says she did? In Chron. and De praep. Euang. l. 10. for he lived
four hundred years after Inachus, being the seventh King of Argos. Though
Eusebius make one Iun in Inachus his time, to sail to Egypt by sea (In Chron.)
but not to swim over the sea. For they had a feast in Egypt for the honor of
Isis her ship. Lactant. lib. 1. And therefore she was held the sailors
goddess, guiding them in the sea. Go (says Jove to Mercury in Lucian) guide
Iun through the sea unto Egypt, and call her Isis, and let them account of her
as a deity: let her carry Nilus as she list, and guide all the voyages by sea,
etc. My worship (says Isis of her feast, in Apuleius) shall be eternal, as
the day follows the night, because I calm the tempests, and guide the ships
through the stormy seas, the first fruits of whose voyages my priests offer
me. (g) Isis] In Egypt they pictured her with horns. Herodot. Diod. Sycul.
Some said she was the daughter of Saturn and Rhea, who was married to her
brother Osyris, that is, Juno to Jove. Others called her Ceres, ((...) in
Greek) because she invented husbandry and sowing of corn, and those called
Osyris, Dionysus. Some called her the Moon, and Osyris the Sun: for Diodorus
will not have Io to be Inachus his daughter. Seruius says Isis is the genius
of Egypt, signifying the ouer-flowing of Nilus, by the horn she bears in her
right hand, and by the bucket she has in her left, the plenty of all human
necessaries. Indeed in the Egiptian tongue, Isis is earth, and so they will
have Isis to be. In Aeneid. 8. (h) She came out of Ethiopia] Whence Egypt had
all her learning, laws, policies, religion, and oftentimes colonies sent from
thence.

Of the times of Jacob and his son Joseph. CHAP. 4.
BAlaeus being the tenth King of Assyria, and Messappus (a) (otherwise (b)
called Cephisus, but yet both these names were by several authors used for one
man) being the ninth of Sycionia, and (c) Apis the third of Argos, Isaac dyed,
being a hundred and eighty years old, leaving his sons at the ages of a
hundred and twenty years: the younger Jacob, belonging to Gods City, and the
elder to the worlds. The younger had twelve sons, one whereof called Joseph,
his brothers sold unto Merchants going into Egypt, in their grandfather
Isaacs time. Joseph lived (by his humility) in great favor and advancement
with Pharao, being now thirty years old. For he interpreted the Kings dreams,
foretelling the seven plentious years, and the seven dear ones, which
would consume the plenty of the other: and for this the King set him at liberty
(being before imprisoned for his true chastity, in not consenting to his
lustful mystresse, but fled and left his raiment with her, who here-vpon
falsely complained to her husband of him) and afterward he made him Vice-roye
of all Egypt. And in the second year of scarcity, Jacob came into Egypt with
his sons, being one hundred and thirty years old, as he told the King.
Joseph being thirty nine when the King advanced him thus, the 7. plentiful
years, and the two dear ones being added to his age.

L. VIVES.
MEssappus (a)] Pausanias names no such: saying Leucyppus had no son, but
Chalcinia, Mesappus.
one daughter, who had Perattus by Neptune, whom his grandfather Leucippus
brought up, and left inthroned in his kingdom. Eusebius says Mesappus reigned
forty seven years. If (...) were Mesappus, then doubtless it was Calcinias
husband, of whom mount Mesappus in Baeotia and Mesapia (otherwise called
Calabria) in Italy, had their names. Virgil makes him Neptunes son, a tamer
of horses, and invulnerable. Aeneid. 7. (b) Cephisus] A river in Boeotia,
Cephisus.
in whose bank stands the temple of Themis, the Oracle that taught Deucalion
and Pyrrha how to restore mankind. It runs from Pernassus through the
countries of Boeotia, and the Athenian territory. And Mesappus either had his
names from this river and that (...), or they had theirs from him, or rather
(most likely) the mount had his name, and he had the rivers, because it ran
through his native soil. (c) Apis] He is not in Pausanias Apis.
amongst the Argiue kings: but amongst the Sycionians, and was there so rich,
that all the country within Isthmus, bare his name, before Pelops came. But
Eusebius (out of the most Greeks) seateth him in Argos.

Of Apis the Argiue King, called Serapis in Egypt, and there adored as a deity.
CHAP. 5.
AT this time did Apis king of Argos sail into Egypt, and dying there, was
called Serapis the greatest God of Egypt. The reason of the changing his name,
says Varro, is this: a dead man's coffin (which all do now call (b) (...)*)
(...) (...) also in Greek: so at first they worshipped at his coffin and
tomb, ere his temple were built, calling him at first Sorosapis, or Sorapis:
and afterward (by change of a letter, as is ordinary) Serapis. And they made a
law, that who-soeuer should say he had been a man, should dye the death. And
because that in all the (c) temples of Isis and Serapis, there was an Image
with the finger laid upon the mouth, as commanding silence, this was (says
Varro) to show them that they must not say that those two were ever mortal.
And (d) the Ox which Egypt (being wonderously and vainly seduced) (e)
nourished in all pleasures and fatness unto the honor of Serapis; because they
did not worship him in a (...), was not called Serapis but Apis: which Ox
being dead, and they seeking (...), and finding another, flecked of color just
as he was: here they thought they had gotten a great God by the foot. It was
not such an hard matter ^deed for the devils, to imprinte the imagination of
such a shape in any Cowes fantasy, at her time of conception, to have a mean
to subvert the souls of men, and the Cowes imagination would surely model the
conception into such a form, as (g) Jacobs ewes did and his she goats, by
seeing the party-colored sticks, for that which man can do with true
colors, the Devil can do with apparitions, and so very easily frame such
shapes.

L VIVES.
AT (a) this time.] Diodorus. lib, 1. recites many names of Osyris as
Dionysius, Serapis, ^e Ammon, Pan, and Pluto. Tacitus arguing Serapis his
original, says that some thought him to Osyris.
be Aesculapius, the Phisitian-god: and others, took him for Osyris, Egypts
ancient est deity. lib. 20. Macrobius takes him for the sun, and Isis for
the earth. Te Serapim Nilus ((...) Marlianus to the sun) Memphis veneratur
Osyrim: Nilus adoreth thee as serapis, a^ Memphis, as Osiris. Some held Serapis
the genius of Egypt, making it fertile and abundant, His statues (says Suidas)
Theophilus Archbishop of Alexandria took down, in the time of ^odosius the
great. This god some called Jove, some Nilus, (because of the measure that he
had in his hand, and the cubite, designing the measures of the water,) and
some, Joseph. Some ^y there was one Apis, a rich King of Memphis, who in a
great famine relieved all Alexandria at his proper cost and charges, whereupon
they erected a Temple to him when he was dead, and kept an Ox therein, (for a
type of his husbandry) having certain spots on his back, and this Ox was
called by his name, Apis. His tomb wherein he was bu^ed, was removed to
Alexandria, and so himself of (...), and Apis, was called Sorapis, and
afterward, ^pis. Alexander built him a goodly temple. Thus much out of Suidas
and the like is in (...), Eccles. Hist. lib. 11. The Argiues King (says
Eusebius Prep. lib. 10 out of Aristippus his ^ry of Arcadia lib. 2.) called
Apis, built Memphis in Egypt: whom Aristeus the Argiue calls Sarapis: and
this man (we know) is worshipped in Egypt as a god. But Nimphodorus,
Amphipolitanus de legib. Asiatic. lib. 3. says that the Ox called Apis,
dying, was put into a ^ffin (called (...) in Greek) and so called first
Sorapis, and then Serapis. The man Apis, ^s the third King after Inachus. Thus
far Eusebius. (b) (...).] That is, the deu^ of flesh. Therefore Pausanias,
Porphyry, Suidas, and other Greeks, call him not Sorapis, but Sarapis, (...)
is a chest, an Arc, or a coffin. (c) Temples of.] Isis and Osyris were buried
at N^a as some think (says Diodorus lib. 1) A city in Arabia, where two
pillars were erected for monuments one for her and another for him, and
epitaphs upon them contained their acts, and inventions. But that which was in
the Priests hands might never come to light for fear of revealing the truth:
and dearly must he pay for it that published it. This God that laid his
finger on his lips in sign of silence, hight Harpocrates, varro de ling lat.
lib. 3. where he affirms that Isis and Serapis were the two great Gods, Earth
and heaven. This Harpocrates Harpocrates
Ausonius calls Sigalion, of (...), to be silent. Pliny, and Catullus mention
him often when they note a silent fellow, and his name is prouerbiall.
Plutarch. (lib. de ^s. and Osyr) says he was their son gotten by Osyris
upon Isis after his death: and because the child died as soon as it was borne,
therefore they picture it with the finger on the mouth, because it never spoke.
I like not this interpretation, it is too harsh and idle. The statue signified
that somewhat was to be kept secret, as the goddess Angerona (in the like
shape) did at Rome. Macro^ Angerona.
Ovid. Metam. 9. Sanctaque Bubastis, variisque coloribus Apis.
Quique premit vocem, digitoque silentia suadet.
Saint Isis and that party colored Ox,
And he whose lips his hand in silence locks.


To this it may be Persius alluded saying, digito compesce labellu^, lay your
finger on your mouth. (d) The Oxe] Apis the Ox. No man I think Greek or
Latin, ever wrote of the Egyptian affairs, but he had up this Ox: but
especially Herodo. Diodo. Stra. Plutar. Eusebius. Suidas, Varro, Apis.
Mela, Pliny, Solinus, and Marcellinus. He was all black, but for a square
spotte of white in his forehead, (says Herodotus) on his right side (says
Pliny): his horns bowed like a Crescent: for he was sacred unto the Moon.
Marcellinus. He had the shape of an Eagle upon his back, and a lump upon his
tongue, like a black-beetle, and his tail was all grown with forked hairs.
When he was dead, they sought another with great sorrow, never ceasing until
they had found a new Apis like him in all respects. Him did Egypt adore as the
chief god, and (as Macrobius says) with astonished veneration, nor might he
live longer then a set time, if he did, the priests drowned him (e) Nourished]
At Memphis (says Strabo) was a temple dedicated unto Apis, and thereby a
goodly park or enclosure, before which was an Hall, and this enclosure was the
dams of Apis, whereinto he was now and then letten in, to sport himself, and
for strangers to see him. His place where he lay, was called the mystical
bed, and when he went abroad, a multitude of vshers were ever about him: all
adored this Oxe-god, the boys followed him in a shole, and he himself now
and then bellowed forth his prophecies. No man that was a stranger might come
into this temple at Memphis, but only at burials. (f) They did not worship]
Some did draw this worship of the Ox from the institution of Isis and Osyris,
for the use that they found of this beast in tillage. Some again say Osyris
himself was an Ox, and Isis a Cow, either because of Io^ or upon some other
ground. Some say besides (as Diodorus tells us) that Osyris his soul went
into an Ox, and remains continually in the Ox Apis, and at the drowning of
this, goes into the next. Some affirm that Isis having found Osyris his
members, dispersed by Typhon, put them into a wodden Ox covered with an Oxes
hide: so that the people seeing this, believed that Osyris was become an Ox,
and so began to adore that, as if it had been himself. This was therefore
the lining Osyris, but the body that lies coffined in the temple, is called
Serapis, and worshipped as the dead Osyris. (h) Jacobs Eewes] Genesis 30. Of this
I discoursed elsewhere. The LXX. do translate this place confusedly. Hierome
upon Genesis explaineth it.

The Kings of Argos and Assyria, at the time of Jacobs death. CHAP. 6.
APis the King of Argos (not of Egypt) dyed in Egypt, (a) Argus his son
succeeded him in his kingdom, and from him came the name of the Argiues. For
neither the City nor the country bare any such name before his time. He
reigning in Argos, and (b) Eratus in Sicyonia, Baleus ruling as yet in Assyria,
Jacob dyed in Egypt, being one hundred forty seven years in age, having
blessed his sons and Nephews at his death, and prophesied apparently of
CHRIST, saying in the blessing of Judah; The Scepter shall not depart from Genesis
49. 10.
Judah, nor the lawgiver from between his feet, until (c) that come which
is promised him: And (d) he shall be the nations expectation. Now in (e)
Argus his time Greece began to know husbandry and tillage, fetching seeds from
others. For Argus after his death was counted a God, and honored with temples
and sacrifices. Which honor a private man one Homogyrus, who was slain by
thunder, had before him, because he was the first that ever yoaked Oxen to the
plough.

L VIVES.
ARgus (a) his sonne] by Niobe, Phoroneus daughter: some call him Apis. It
might be Argus.
Apis that begot him of Niobe, and was reckoned for a King of Argos, because he
ruled for his son until he came to age: and then departed into Egypt,
leaving his son to his own. Eusebius says he left the kingdom to his
brother Aegialus, having reigned seauentie years. There was another Argus,
Arestors son, who kept Io, Iunoes Cow, in Egypt: and another also, surnamed
Amphion, whilom Prince of Pylis and Orchomene in Arcadia. (b) Eratus] Peratus,
says Pausanias, and son to Neptune and Chalcinia, Leucippus his daughter.
Eusebius calls him Heratus, he reigned forty seven years. (c) Until that
which is promised] So read the Septuagints: but Herome reads; Until he come
that is to be sent. The Hebrew, Shiloh. (d) He shall bee] Some copies leave
out shall be, and so does the text of the LXX. (e) In Argus his time] For
Ceres came thither in Phenneus his reign, a little after Peratus and she they
say was the first that ever taught the Athenians husbandry.

In what Kings time Joseph dyed in Egypt. CHAP. 7.
IN Mamitus (a) his time, the twelfth Assyrian King, and (b) Phennaeus his, the
eleventh King of Sicyonia (Argus being alive in Argos as yet) Joseph dyed in
Egypt: being a hundred and ten years old: after the death of him, Gods people
remaining in Egypt, increased wonderfully, for a hundred forty five years
together, until all that knew Joseph were dead. And then because their great
augmentation, was so envied, and their freedom suspected, a great and heavy
bondage was laid upon them, in the which nevertheless they grew up still, for
all that they were so persecuted, and kept under, and at this time the same
Princes ruled in Assyria and Greece, whom we named before.

L. VIVES.
MAmitus (a) his] So does Eusebius call him, but says that he was but the
eleventh King of that Monarchy. He reigned thirty years. (b) Plemneus] So
does Pausanias write this Kings name: he ruled, as Eusebius says, forty eight
years.

What Kings lived when Moses was borne: and what Gods the Pagans had as
then. CHAP. 8.
IN (a) Saphrus his time, the fourteenth Assyrian King, (b) Orthopolus being
then the twelfth of Sicyon, and (c) Criasus the fifth of Argos (d) Moses was
borne in Egypt, who led the people of God out of their slavery, wherein God had
excercised their paciences during his pleasure. In the aforesaid Kings times
(e) Prometheus (as some hold) lived, who was said to make men of earth, because
he (f) taught them wisdom so excellently well (g) yet are there no wise men
recorded to live in his time. (h) His brother Atlas indeed is said to have
been a great Astronomer, whence the fable arose of his supporting heaven upon
his shoulders: Yet there is an huge mountain of that name, whose height may
seem to an ignorant eye to hold up the heavens. And now began Greece to fill
the stories with fables, but from the first unto (i) Cecrops his time (the king
of Athens) in whose reign Athens got that name, and Moses lead Israel out of
Egypt: some of the dead Kings were recorded for Gods, by the vanity and
customary superstition of the Greeks. As Melantonice, Crias his wife (k)
Phorbas there son, the sixth king of Argos, and the son of (l) Triopas the
seventh King, (m) Iasus, and (n) Sthelenas or Sthelenus, or Sthenelus (for he
is diuersely written) the ninth: And (o) in these times also lived Mercury,
Altas his grandchild, borne of Maia his daughter: the story is common. He was
a perfect Artist in many good inventions, and therefore was believed (at least
men desired he should be believed) to be a deity. (p) Hercules lived after
this, yet was he about those times of the Argiues: some think he lived before
Mercury, but I think they are deceived. But how-so-euer, the grauest histories
that have written of them (q) avouch them both to be men, and (r) that for the
good that they did mankind in matter of ciuillity or other necessaries to
humane estate, were rewarded with those divine honors. (s) But Minerua was long
before this, for she (they say) appreaed in Ogigius his time, (t) at the lake
Triton, in a virgins shape, whereupon she was called Trytonia: a woman indeed
of many good inventions, and the likelyer to be held a goddess, because her
original was unknown, for (u) that of Jove's brain is absolutely poetique,
and no way depending upon history. There was in deed (x) a great deluge in
Ogigius his time, not so great as that wherein all perished save those in the
Arc (for that, neither Greek author (y) nor Latin do mention) but greater
then that which befell in Ducalions days. But of this Ogigius his time, the
writers have no certainty, for where Varro be^ his book, I showed before: and
indeed he fetches the Romans origi^ ^o further then the deluge that befell
in Ogigius his time. But our (z) chro^, Ogigius.
Eusebius first, and then Hierome, following other more ancient authors herein,
record Ogigius his Deluge to have fallen in the time of Phoroneus the se^ King
of Argos, three hundred years after the time before said. But howsoever, this
is once sure, that in (a) Cecrops his time (who was either the builder or ^er
of Athens) Minerua was there adored with divine honors.

L. VIVES.
SAphrus. (a)] Machanell (says Eusebius) reigned just as long as his father
Manitus, Saphrus.
forty years; and Iphereus succeeded him and reigned twenty years and in the
eigh^ year of his reign was Moses borne in Egypt. (b) Orthopolus.]
Orthopolis says Eu^, Orthopolis.
and Pausanias, making him the son of Plemneus whom Ceres brought up. The
(...) o^ which you had before.

^sus] Pyrasus says Pausanias, he rayned fifty foureyeares. (d) Moses was
borne] The wri^ Moses.
not about Moses birth. Porphiry says (from Sanchoniata) that he lived in
Semiramis (...) No, but in Inachus his time, says Appion (out of Ptolomy (...)
the Priest) Amosis (...) then King of Egypt. Pol^mon (Hist. Gre.) makes him of
latter times: Making the peo^ led, to depart out of Egypt, and to settle in
Syria, in the time of Apis, Phoroneus his son. (...) Assirius brings a many
several opinions of men concerning this point, some man Moses elder then the
Troyan war, and some equal with it. But the arguments which (...) self
brings proves him to have been before it. His words you may read in Eusebius.
(...) ^ang. lib. 10. Numenius the Philosopher calls Moses Musaeus, and
Artapanus says (...) Greeks called him so, and that Meris, the daughter of
(...) King of Egypt, ha^ child herself, adopted him for her son, and so he
came to great honor in Egypt, because (...) divine knowledge and inventions in
matter of learning and g^rnment. (e) Prometheus] Prometheus
(...) Eusebius. from others, Affricanus I think, who makes Prometheus to live
ninety four years after Ogigius. Porphiry puts Atlas and him in Inachus
his time. But Prometheus was son to Iaepellis, and Asia. Hesiod calls his
mother Clymene. His falling out with Jove (says Higin. hist. Celest. and many
other do touch at this) grew upon this cause: being to small in sacrifices to
offer great offerings, and the poor being not able to offord them, Prometheus
suttely agreed with Jove that half of their sacrifice only should be burnt;
the rest should be reserved for the use of men: Jove consented. Then offers
Prometheus two Bulls unto Jove and puts all their bones, under one of the
skins, and all their flesh under the other, and then bad Jove to choose his
part. Jove, a good plain dealing God, looking for no cousnage, took that was
next to hand, and light on the bones: there at being angry, he took away the
fire from mankind, that they could sacrifice no more. But Prometheus using his
ordinary tricks, stole a cane full of the fire ^elestiall, and gave it unto
man, whereupon he was bound to Caucasus, and an Eagle set to feed continually
upon his liver ever growing again. Some say that Prometheus made those
creatures who have fetched Jove down so often, women. Prometheus his complaint
(in Lucian) is thus answered by Vulcan and Mercury: Thou cousonedst Jove in
sharing, thou stolest the fire, thou made men, and especially women. For so
it is said, that he made men of clay, and then put life into them by the fire
which he had stolen from Jove, whereupon (sath Horace) comes man-kinds
diseases and fevers. Seruius says that Minerua woundted at this man, this
work of Prometheus, and promised to perfect it in all it lackt: and that
Prometheus affirming that he knew not what was best for it, she took him up
to heaven, and setting him by the sonns Chariot, gave him a cane full of the
fire, and sent him down to man with it. Hesiod in one place touches at that
story of Higinus, saying that Jove took away the fire from man, and Prometheus
got it again: to revenge which injury Vulcan by Jove's command made Pandora (a
woman endowed with all heavenly gifts and therefore called Pandora) Pandora.
and sent her down into the earth by Mercury, to be given as a gift unto
Epimetbeus, Prometheus his brother: and being received into his house, she
opened a tun of all the mischiefs that were diffused throughout all
mankind, only hope remaining in the bottom: and Prometheus (as Aeschilus
says) was bound upon Cancasus for thirty thousand years, near to the Caspian
streights, as Lucian says in his Caucasus. Philostratus says that that mount
has two tops of a furlong distance one of the other, and that the
inhabitants say that unto these were Prometheus his hands bound. In vita
Apollon. So says Lucian. This Eag^e, some say was begotten between Typhon and
Echydna, (Higin.) some say between Terra and Tartarus: but the most say that
Uulcan made her, and Hercules killed her with a shaft, so she was set up in the
sky between the tropike of Cancer and the Equinoctial line. But after that
Prometheus had prophesied unto Jove being to lie with Thetis) that the son he
begat should be greater then the father: He was loosed, provided he must ever
wear an iron ring upon his finger, in memory of his bondage: and hence came
the use of rings they say: Lactantius says he first made Idols of Clay: He
stole fire (says Pliny. lib. 7.) that is be taught the way how to strike it
out of the flints, and how to keep it in a cane. It is sure (says Diodorus.
lib. 5.) that he did find out the fuel of fire, at first. The Pelasgiues
(as Pausanias testifies) ascribe the finding of fire unto their Phoroneus, not
unto Prometheus. Theophrastus says this is tropicall and meant of the
inventions of wisdom.

(f) He taught.] Old Iaphets son: the worlds full wisest man does Hesiod call
him: unto Epimetheus his younger brother they say he did willingly resign the
kingdom of Thessaly giving himself wholly unto celestial contemplation, and
for that end ascending the high mount Caucasus to behold the circumuolution of
the stars their postures. etc. And then descending down came and taught the
Caldees Astronomy and policy, to the which I think the fable of the Eagle
feeding upon his liver has reference, and to his doubtful cares arising still
one from another. The interpreter of Apollonius Rhodius, says there is a river
called Aquila, that falling from Caucasus runs through the heart of the
country Promethea, lying close to that mount. Herodotus writes that Prometheus
the King of Scythia knowing not which way to bring the river Aquila to run by
his kingdom, was much troubled until Hercules came and did it for him. Thus
of the river these two agree. Diodorus says that Prometheus was the King of
Egypt, and when Nilus had over flowed the country and drowned many of the
inhabitants, he was about to kill himself, but Hercules by his wisdom found
a mean to reduce the river: to his proper channel: and hereupon Nilus for his
swiftness of course was called Aquila. (g) Yet are.] Yes, Atlas was wise, and
so was Epimetheus, but to late, for Prometheus Alat^.
is one of a forewit, and Epimetheus an after witted man, for he being warned
by his brother Prometheus to take no gift of Jove, neglected this warning, and
took Pandora, and afterward (as Hesiod says) he knew he had received his
hurt. And therefore Augustines reason is ^ong, and acute: How was he such a
great doctor, when we can find no wise men that he left behind him? who can
judge of his wisdom, seeing there was no wise men of his time? for ^ome only
judges of wisdom. (h) His brother Atlas] There were three of this name, (...)
Seruius, in Aeneid l. 8. A Moore; the chief. An Italian, father to Electrae,
and an Arcadian, (...) to Maia the mother of Mercury. These three, the writers
do confound as their use is. For Diodorus lib 4. makes Atlas the Moore, son
to Caelus, and brother to Saturn, father to the Hesperides, and grandfather
to Mercury, a great astronomer, and one who by often ascending the mountain of
his name, from whence he might better behold the course of the heavens, give
occasion of the fable of his sustayning heaven upon his shoulders. Pliny lib.
7. says that (...) the son of Lybia (this Moore assuredly) was the inuentor of
Astrology: and lib. 2. invented the ^here. Alex. Polyhistor thinks that he
was Henoch, the inuentor of that star-skil that A^s taught the Phaenicians and
Egiptians afterward, when he traveled these countries. This knowledge in
Astronomy might well give life to that fable of Heauen-bearing. Some ^e it
arose from the inaccessible hight of mount Atlas, that seems to the eye to
vnder^ the skies (says Herodotus) and reaches above the clouds, nor can the
top be easily dis^d, the clouds being continually about it: this was a great
furtherance to the fiction. The Italian Atlas, was that ancient king of
Fesulae, as it is reported. (i) Cecrops his] Pausanias (...) that Actaeus was
the first King of Attica, and Cecrops, an Egiptian (his step-son) inheri^
Cecrop^
kingdom after him: and he (they say) was a man from his upper parts, and a
beast in (...) ^her: because he by good laws reduced the people from
barbrisme unto humanity: or (...) ^her parts were feminine say some, because
he instituted marriage, in that country, and was as it were the first author
in those parts of father and mother: for before, they begot children at randon,
and no man knew his own father. Affricanus says that Ogyges was the first
(...) of Athens, and that from the deluge in his days, the land was untilled
and ^ay desert 200. y^ter, until Cecrops his time: But for Actaeus and others
named as Kings thereof before (...) ^hey are but bare names: Annal. lib. 4. (k)
Phorbas] Brother to Perasus, says Pausanias, Phorbus.
(...) ^rgus, and father to Triopas. The Rhodians (says Diodorus,) being sore
vexed by ser^ ^nt to the Oracle, and by the appointment thereof, called Phorbas
into their Island, gi^ (...) part thereof, to him and his heirs, and so they
were freed from that plague, for which (...) ^eed that he should after his
death be honored as a God: but this (as seems by Dio^ ^s not Phorbas the
Argiue, nor these of Perasus, or Argus, but a Thessalian, the son of (...).
(l) Triopas] Son to Phorbas. Paus. Diodorus mentions one Triopas, the son
of vn^ Triopas.
parents: some say of Neptune and Canace, some of Apollo. The people hated him
(says (...) ^pouerishing the Temples, and for killing his brother. Higinius
says that some took (...) be that celestial constellation in heaven called
Ophinchus, who is wound about with a (...) for Triopas having taken off the
roof of Ceres temple to cover his own palace withal, (...) ^enged her self
upon him with a bitter hunger: and lastly in his end, a dragon appeared (...)
and afflicted him sore: at last he died, and being placed in heaven he was
figured as if a (...) ^guirt him about. (m) Iasus] Father to Io, of whom Argos
was called Iasium, and the Ar^ ^ians (n) Sthenelas] After Iasus (says Paus.)
Crotopus, Agenors son reigned, and he be^ ^las. (o) Mercury] Tully (as I said
before) reckneth 4. Mercuries. This is the third: son (...) (...) and Maia,
taught by his grandfather, and inuenting many excellent things of himself:
Mercury.
(...) (...) a Magician, as Prudentius writes, and therefore feigned to be the
carier and recarier of (...) and from hell. (p) Hercules] There were 6. of this
name, as Tully says. The 1. and most (...) son to the eldest Jove and
Liscitus, and he contended with Apollo for the Tripos. 2. an E^ Hercules.
son to Nilus, reputed the author of the Phrygian letters. (...). one de^fied
amongst the I^ unto whom they offer sacrifices infernal. 4. Son unto Astery
Latona's sister, honored by (...) ^ians, and Carthage they say was his daughter
5. An Indian called Belus. 6. The third Iu^ (...) by Alcmena. Siculus has but
three of his name. 1. an Egiptian, the worthiest, made (...) of the army by
Osyris, for strength and valor, he traveled most part of the world, (...)
^ed a pillar in Libya: he lived before Hercules Alcmenas son, above 1000
years: that (...) ^mulated him, and therefore he was called Alcaeus, An
helper. The third, was Hercules (...) a famous soldior, and the ordainer of the
Olympian games. Paus. calls him Hercules (...). Seruius reckneth four
Hercules, the Tyrinthian, the Argiue, the Theban, and (...). In Aen. 8. But
indeed the number is uncertain. Uarro reckneth 44. The Lybians by (...) is the
most ancient, and that other worthies did all take their names from him. But
the Author of Kenophons Aequiuoca, says that the most ancient Kings of Noble
families we^ still called Saturnes: their eldest sons, Jupiters, and their
hardiest grandchildren, Her^. Augustine here means of that Hercules that was
son to Jove and Alcmena, who ^ed with the Argonautes, and was one generation
before the Trojan war: and to him do the ambitious Greeks ascribe all the
glory of the rest. So that he brought a greater fame unto po^erity then either
Jove or any other god: as Seneca the Tragaedian writes. Fortius ipse genitore
tuo; fulmina mittes.
With more strength, then thy fire, thou shall flash thunders fire.


He lived after Mercury. For Mercury (as the report goes) waited upon Jove
when he was begotten. But the son of Liscitus was long before Mercury the
Arcadian, and lived in the time of Mercury the Egiptian, being an Egiptian
himself. (q) Both men] Homer makes Ulisses meet Hercules amongst other dead
men. Odyss. 9. and yet he says that his Idol only Minerua.
was in hell, for himself feasted with the gods: but we know what he means by
that Idol. (r) Po^ their good] Mercury found out many good arts, and adorned
the speech with eloquence. Hercules cleansed the world of tyrants and monsters:
and was therefore called (...). (s) Minerua] Tully De not. deor. lib. 5. makes
five Mineruas. 1. mother unto Apollo, begotten by Uulcan 2. daughter of Nilus,
and a goddess of the Saitae in Egypt, third daughter to Jupiter Pallas.
Caelius, fourth begotten by Jove on Coriphe, Oceanus his daughter, whom the
Arcadians called Coria, and affirm, that she invented Chariots. 5. the
daughter of Pallas who killed her father being about to ravish her: and she is
pictured with wings. This Pallas they say was a cruel fellow and she for
killing of him was surnamed Pallas. But the Arcadians tell a tale how Minerua
being yet a little one was sent by Jove to Pallas, Lycaons son, to be brought
up in his house, where she lived with his daughter whom she afterward took
up to Heaven and called her Uictoria, and her self Pallas in memory of her
foster-father. Now their are other deriuations of Pallas, as (...), of shaking
a spear, or (...) etc. of moving her self in Jove's head: or (...) etc. of
bringing Dioynsius his heart panting unto Jove, namely when the Tytans had
torn him in pieces. (t) Triton] Between the two Syrtes in Africa there is a
river, and a fen also, both being called Triton, and thence the inhabitants as
Mela says) suppose the sur-name of Minerua to be derived, who they say was
borne there, and y^ day Lake Triton.
that they think was her birth day they sollemnize with games and sports
amongst the Virgins. Herodotus says there is an I Will in that fenne or lake,
where unto Jason sailed with his Argonautes. The writers greek and latin,
consent in this, that Minerua was called Tritonia from this lake, Silius
implies that there she first found out oil. Solinus says she b^ld her self
therein: it may be then, when seeing her cheeks big with blowing her pipe,
she cast it away. This the Poets say she did by Meander, a river of Ionia. But
which of the Mineruas was this? I think the fifth: for hard by, there is a lake
they call Pallas, and Calimachus who was borne not far thence, viz. in
Cyrene, calls the lake Triton it self Pallantia, and so does Festus. But the
Lybians call it Neptunes, and Tritonis lake: it may be Neptune is Pallas. Some
now (and this I must not ommit) say that Minerua was borne in Boeotia, in
Triton there. For there are diverse Tritons, one in Boeotia, one in Thessaly,
and one in Lybia, and there was Minerua borne. Interpr. Appollon. Rhod. (u)
That of Ioues] Some think Minerua was called Tritonia because in the Boeotian
tongue (...) is an head. But this was only a fiction, because she is called
the goddess of wisdom, and the highest part of the air. (x) A great deluge]
Eusebius, (whence Aug. has most of this) refers all these things unto the
reign of Ph^oneus the Argiue. Ogygius reigned (says he) in Attica Eleusina,
of old, called Acta, and over Ogyges.
many other Cities, the time when the Virgin whom the Greeks call Minerua,
appeared at the lake Tritonis.

In this Kings time there was a great inundation, between which and that of
Deucalions time are reckned one hundred and seauenty years, within a few. But
Solinus says not so. There was (^aith he) six hundred years between
Ogyges and Deucalion, and Ogyges reigned in Acta, and Boeotia, which was called
as Strabo says, Ogygia, before Cecrops ^me, who (as some say) built the
Boeotian Thebes, and therefore the Theban wits were called Ogygi^, and he
was generally held to have been borne in Eleusis in Attica: for other
original of his is unknown; and from his time unto the first Olympiade,
Hellanicus, Philochorus, Ca^, (...) ^lus, (that wrote the acts of the Sirians)
do reckon above a thousand years: and so do^ Diodorus and almost all the
Greeks: unto whom Orosius agrees, making Ogygis, his (...) to befall a
thousand four hundred years before Rome was built. Porphiry in his (...) book
against Christianity, says that Ogyges lived in Inachus his time, and
Affricanus ^ving him, makes Moses and him both of one time, whereas Moses was
long after him. (y) Nor l^tin] Not so in the opinion of Josephus nor Eusebius.
Josephus says, that Berosus the ^ldaean made mention of this general deluge,
as also Mnaseas of Damascus, and Hie^ of Egypt, quoting all their sayings. And
Alexander Polyhistor, Melon, Eupolemus, and (...): do mention it also, as
Eusebius says. Pliny also and Mela affirm, that Ioppe in Egypt was built
before the Inundation of the earth, which cannot be meant of the deluge of O^ or
Deucalion for those did never come so far as Egypt. Nor is it any wonder if
that City ^e built then: for so were a many more besides: yea that deluge which
the poets make (...) to threaten, is no other but this. But they write hereof
so obscurely, as they scarcely (...) what they wrote themselves. Indeed that
which Berosus, Mnaseas, and Eupolemus do (...), belongs unto the Barbarian
histories, and neither to the Greek nor latin, whereof (...) speaks. (z)
Our chroniclers] Christian historigraphers: as Eusebius Bishop of (...) in
Palestina (who by reason of his familiarity with the martyr Pamphilus, was
called Eusebius.
^ilus also,) who as Hierome says wrote an infinite number of volumes, and
amongst the ^st, one general history out of all the chroniclers, as an
abstract or epitome of them all, (...) (...) I think be this which we have of
his yet extant, although the proper names, and (...) of the whole work be
much depraved by the ignorance of the transcribers, from ^se heads the
understanding of those computations was far to seek: nor can those er^ be
reformed, but by the most perfect antiquaries, and therefore the simple are
herein ea^ ^uced. But how necessary this book is for a student, Hierome
himself showed by ^ing it out of the Greek, and putting that holy admiration
of Irenaeus unto the tran^, in the front of it. It was continued by Eusebius
until the second year of Constantine (...), and Hierome made an appendix of
the rest of the time unto Gratian, (a) Attica] It Attica.
(...) ^rey in Greece between Megara and Boeotia, lying upon the sea with the
Haven (...) and the Cape Sunius: a fertile soil both of good fruits, good
laws, and good (...) ^aith Tully. The waves beating upon the shores hereof
(says Capella) do produce a (...) ^onious music: metaphorically spoaken (I
think) of their delightful studies. The ^ey-men call them selves (...),
inbred, nor deriuing from any other nation. Of (...) ^ngs Pausanias says
thus: Actaeus (it is said) reigned first in Attica, then Cecrops his (...) ^n
law: who begot Erisa, Aglaurus, and Pandrosus, daughters, and Erisichthon a
son, ^ed before his father. Cecrops (says Strabo) brought the dispersed
people into twelve (...) Cecropia, Tetrapolis, Epacria, Decelea, Eleusis,
Aphydna, (or Aphydnae) Dorichus, (...), Cytheros, Sphetus, Cyphesia and
Phalerus: and afterward he brought them all (...) into that one now called
Thebes.

The time when Athens was built, and the reason that Varro gives for the name.
CHAP. 9.
OF the name of Athens (a) (coming of (...), which is Minerua) Varro gives
this reason. An Olive tree grew suddenly up in one place, and a fountain burst
(...) ^enly out in another. These prodigies drove the King to Delphos, to know
(...) ^acles mind, which answered him, that the Olive tree signified Minerua,
and (...) ^ntaine Neptune, and that the city might after which of these they
pleased (...) their city. Here-vpon Cecrops gathered all the people of both
sexes to^ (for (c) then it was a custom in that place to call the women unto
(...) ^ations also) to give their voices in this election, the men being for
(...), and the women for Minerua: and the women being more, wone the (...) ^r
Minerua. Here at Neptune being angry, ouer-flowed all the Athe^ lands, (for
the Devils may draw the waters which way they list) and to appease him, the
Athenian women had a triple penalty set on their heads. First they must never
hereafter have voice in council. Second never hereafter be called (e)
Athenians: third nor ever leave their name unto their children. Thus this
ancient and goodly city, the only mother of arts and learned inventions, the
glory and luster of Greece, by a scoff of the devils, in a contention of
their gods a male and female, and (f) by a feminine victory obtained by women,
was enstiled Athens, after the females name that was victor, Minerua: and yet
being plagued by him that was conquered, was compelled to punnish the means of
the victors victory, and showed that it feared Neptunes waters, worse then
Mineruas arms. For Minerua her self was punished in those her women
champions: nor did she assist those that advanced her, so much as to the bare
reservation of her name unto themselves, besides the loss of their voices in
elections, and the leaving of their names unto their sons: Thus they lost the
name of this goddess, whom they had made victorious over a male god: whereof
you see what I might say, but that mine intent carries my pen on unto another
purpose.

L. VIVES.
AThens (a) comming] Whence this name descended it is doubtful, the common
opinion fetches it from Minerua, called (...). The Greeks have this, of the
name both of the Athens.
country and City. Cranaus (says Pausanias) a worthy Athenian, succeeded
Cecrops: and he amongst his other children, had a daughter called Atthis, of
whom the country was called Attica, being called Actaea before. Some (says
Strabo) call it Attica of Actaeon: Some call it Atthis, and Attica of Atthis
Cranaus his daughter of whom the inhabitants were called Cranai. Some call it
Mopsopia, of Mopsopus, Ionia of Ion son to Xuthus, Posidonia, of Posidon, and
Athena of Athena, or Minerua, of Minerua, if you like it in latin, Iustine
(out of Trogus) saithit was not called Athens until the fourth King of Attica,
Cranaus his successor, whom he calls Amphionides, but there is a falt, I
think, the greek is Amphycthyon: and indeed Athens is not named in the number
of Cities that Cecrops founded. That which was called Cecropia and was
after-wards called Athens and built by Theseus, was but the tower of the city.
For this the Greeks say ordinaryly, the tower of Athens was called Cecropia at
first: Interp. Apollon. But note this there were three towns called Athens
(Uarro de analog.) the Athenians inhabited one, the Athenaeans another, and the
Atheneopolitanes a third. The first was Athens in Attica. The second Athens in
the Island Eubaea, (otherwise called Chadae, built by King Cecrops son to
Erichthaeus, and the citizens hereof were called Athenaeans, but that was
only by the Latins, for the Greeks call the Attick Athenians (...)) the
third was a people of Gallia Narbonensis inhabiting Atheneopolis in the
country of Massilia. There is another Athens in the Lacedemonian territory.
(b) Of both sexes] Ovid says that this contention of Neptune and Minerua was
before twelve gods, and Jove him self sat arbiter. Neptune smote the earth
with his mase and brought forth an horse: and Minerua she brought forth an
olive tree, this was the sign of peace, and that of war. So all the gods
liked the sign of peace best, and gave Minerua the pre-eminence. Metamorph. 6.
Some refer this to the contention between sea and land, whether the Athenians
could fetch in more commodity or glory, by war or peace, from sea or land.
Neptunes horse was called by some Syro^, by some Ar^, and by some Scythius,
Seru. in 1. Georgic. Uirg. Ualerius Probus reckons more of his horses then one:
for he gave Adrastus, Arion, and Panthus and Cyllarus unto Juno, and she
bestowed them on Castor and Pollux. But which of the five Mineruas was this.
The second, Nilus his daughter, the Aegiptian, Saietes goddess, as Plato held
In Ti^ Sais is a (...) city in Egypt, in the pronince of Delta, where Amasis
was borne, built by the same M^, who is called Neuth in Egypt, and Athene in
Attica. The Athenians have a month, (...) at the first new Moon in December,
which they call (...): in memory of the contention of Neptune and Pallas. (c)
Then it was] Both there and elsewhere: and Plato requited it in his Repub. (d)
Athenians] Whereupon they were never called but Atticae as Ne^des says: the
men indeed were called (...), but not the women, the reason was (says he)
because their wives in their salutations should not shame the Virgins, for the
woman takes her husbands name and they being called Athenians if the Virgins
should be called Atheni^, they should be held to be married. But Pherecrates,
Philemon, Diphilus, Pindarus, and di^ other old poets call the women of Athens
(...) which word Phrynichus the Bithini^ sophister holds to be no good
Athenian Greek, and therefore wondereth that Pherec^s a man wholly Atticizing,
would use it in that sense. (f) By a feminine] A diversity of reading, but of
no moment.

Varros relation of the original of the word Areopage: and of Deucalions
deluge. CHAP. 10.
But Varro will believe no fables that make against their gods, least he
should disparage their majesty: and therefore he will not derive that (a)
Areopagon, (the place (b) where Saint Paul disputed with the Athenians, and
whence the Judges of the city had their names) from that, that (c) Mars (in
greek (...)) being accused of homicide, was tried by twelve gods in that
court, and quit by six voices: so absolved (for the number being equal on
both sides the absolution is to ouer-poyse the condemnation). But this though
it be the common opinion he reiects, and endeauoreth to lay down another cause
of this name, that the Athenians should not offer to derive Areopagus from (d)
(...) and Pagus: for this were to i^e the gods by imputing broiles and
contentions unto them, and therefore he affirms this, and the goddesses
contention about the golden apple, both a^se: though the stages present them to
the gods as true and the gods take (...) in them, be they true or false. This
Varro will not believe, for fear of ^ing the gods in it: and yet he tells a
tale concerning the name of A^; of the contention between Neptune and Minerua,
(as frivolous as this) and makes that the likeliest original of the cities
name: as if they two contending by prodigies, Apollo durst not be judge
between them, but as Paris was called to decide the strife between the three
goddesses, so he was made an vmpier in this wrangling of these two, where
Minerua conquered by her fautors, and was conquered in her fautours, and
getting the name of Athens to her self, could not leave the name of Athenians
unto them. In these times, as Varro says, (e) Cranaus, Cecrops his successor
reigned at Athens, or Cecrops himself as our Eus^s, and Hierome do affirm:
and then befell that great inundation called the ^d of Deucalion: because it
was most extreme in his Kingdom. But (f) it ^ot nere Egypt nor the confines
thereof.

L. VIVES.
A^gon] In some, Areon Pagon: in others Arion Pagon: in greek (...). Stephanus
^ibus says it was a promontory by Athens where all matters of life and death
were The Areopage.
(...) there were two counsels at Athens (as Libanius the Sophister writes)
one continu^ ^ing of capital matters, always in the Areopage: the other
changing every year and ^ng to the state: called the counsel of the 500. of
the first, our Budaeus has writ large^ (...) (...) both languages. Annot. in
Pandect. (b) Where Saint Paul] Act. 17. (c) Mars called] The common opinion is
so: and Iuuenall thereupon calls the Areopage Mars his Court. Pausanias says
it had that name because Mars was first judged there for killing Alirrhothion,
Neptunes son, because he had ravished Alcippa, Mars his daughter by Aglaura
the daughter of Cecrops. And afterward Orestes was judged there for killing of
his mother, and being quit, he built a Temple unto Minerua Ar^a, or Martial.
(d) (...) and Pagus] I do not think Areopagus is derived hence, as if it were
some village without the town, or street in Pagus is a village, or street.
the City: but Pagus is sometimes taken for a high place or stone, or
promontory as Stephanus calls it. For Suidas says it was called Ariopagus,
because the Court was in a place aloft, upon an high rock: and Arius, because
of the flaughter which it decided, being all under Mars. Thus Suidas, who
touches also at the judgment of Mars for killing of Alirrhothion: out of
Hellanicus lib. 1. As we did out of Pausanias: and this we may not ommit: there
were silver stones in that Court, wherein the plaintifs and the defendants both
stood, the plaintifs was called the stone of Impudence, and the defendants, of
Injury. And hard by was a Temple of the furies. (e) Cranaus] Or Amphyction, as
I said: but Eusebius says Cecrops himself. Cranaus.
But this computation I like not, nor that which he refers to the same.
viz. That Cecrops who sailed into Euboea (whom the Greeks call the son of
Erichtheus) ruled Athens long after the first Cecrops, and of him were the
Athenians called Cranai, as Aristophanes called them. Strabo writes that they
were called Cranai also: but to the deluge, and Deucalion. He was the son of
Prometheus and Oceana, as Dionysius says, and he married Pirrha the Deucalion.
daughter of his uncle Epimetheus and Pandora, and chasing the Pelasgiues out
of Thessaly, got that Kingdom: leading the borderers of Parnassus, the
Leleges, and the Curetes along in his wars with him. And in his days (as
Aristotle says) sell an huge deal of rain in Thessaly, which drowned it and
almost all Greece. Deucalion and Pyrrha saving themselves upon Parnassus went
to the Oracle of Themis, and learning there what to do, restored mankind (as
they fable) by casting stones over their shoulders back-ward: the stones that
the man threw proving men, and Pyrrhas throws bringing forth women. Indeed
they brought the stony and brutish people from the mountains into the plains,
after the deluge and that gave life to the fable.

In Deucalions time (says Lucian in his Misanthropus) was such a shipwreck in
one instant, that all the vessels were sunk excepting one poor skiffe or
cock-boate that was driven to Lycorea. Lycorea is a village by Delphos named
after King Licoreus. Now Parnassus (as Lycorea.
Stephanus writes) was first called Larnassus, of Deucalious (...), or covered
boat, which he made him by the counsel of his father Prometheus, and which
was driven unto this mountain. Strabo says that Deucalion dwelt in Cynos, a
City in Locris near unto Sunnius Opuntius, Parnassus.
where Pirrhas sepulcher is yet to be seen, Deucalion being buried at Athens.
Pausanias says there was a Temple at Athens of Deucalions building and that
he had dwelt there. Yet Dion says that the tomb is in the Temple of Jupiter
Olympius, which he founded. (f) It came not] So says Plato In Timaeo. and
Diodor. Sicul. lib. 1.

About whose times Moses brought Israel out of Egypt. Of Iosuah: in whose
times he died. CHAP. 11.
IN the later end of Cecrops reign at Athens, came Moses with Israel out of
Egypt: Ascarades, (a) Maeathus and Triopas beings Kings of Asiria, Sicyon and
Argos. To Syna did Moses lead them, and there received the law from above
called the old Testament, containing all terrestrial promises: the new one,
containing the spiritual, being to come with Christ our savior: for this order
was fittest (as it is in every man, as S. Paull says) that the natural should
be first, and the spiritual afterward, because (as he said truly) the first
man is of earth, earthly, and the second man is of heaven, heavenly. Forty
years did Moses rule this people in 1 Cor. 10.
the desert, dying a hundred and twenty years old: having prophesied Christ by
innumerable figures in the carnal observations about the Tabernacle, the
Priesthood, the sacrifices, and other mystical commands. Unto Moses was Iosuah
the successor, and he led the people into the land of promise, and by Gods
conduct expelld all the Pagans that swarmed in it, and having ruled seven and
twenty years, he dyed in the time that Amyntas sat as eyghteenth King of
Assiria; Corax the sixteenth of Sicyonia (b) Danaus the tenth of Argos, and
Erichthonius the (...) of Athens.

L. VIVES.
M^rathus] Peratus, says Pausanias. But Eusebius calls him Marathus, he
reigned twenty years. Marathus.
There was one Marathus, Apollo's son, who built a city in Phocis not far
fr^ ^icizza. There was another that served under Castor and Pollux, and of him
did Man (...) Achaia take the name. It may be this was Marathus Apollos son,
for Suidas affirms (...) the country in Attica, so called had the name from
that Marathus. (b) Danaus] An Eg^, Belus his son, he brought the first ship
out of Egypt into Greece. Pliny, for before, Danaue.
they (...) their shipping all in the red sea, among the Isles of King Erithras.
And this Danaus (...) (...) first that dug wells in Argos. Dipsius that is
the drought. The Egiptians bani^, and elected Egiptus for King, of whom the
country (before called Ae^a) was now (...) Egypt. Eusebius. He came to Argos in
the time of Gelanor the son of Sthenelas, whom he (...) of his estate
together with all Agenors progeny. Their contention was ended thus. (...)
being come out of Egypt, fell to contend with Gelanor about the Kingdom, the
(...) being vmpier, much was said on both sides, Danaus seemed to speak as
good reason ^s the ^her, so it could not be decided until the next day: the
next morning, a wolf com^ ^ng into the pasture, and begins a fight with the
chief bull of the Kings heard. T^ (...) the people liken Danaus to the wolf,
and Gelanor to the bull: for as the (...) (...) stranger to man, so was Danaus
unto them. But by and by, the wolf kills the (...) (...) upon this judgment
was given on Danaus his side, wherefore Danaus thinking (...) (...) had sent
this wolf, he dedicated a temple unto Apollo Lycius, that is, Woluish. (...)
(...) dwelt in the Argiue tower, and all the Pelasgiues were called Danai,
after him. (...) (...) the fifty daughters whom poets have so eternized.
Diodorus says he built the Argiue (...) oldest city (one of them) in all
Greece. Others say he built but the tower. He was a (...) King then Greece had
ever had before him.

The false gods, adored by those Greek Princes, which lived between Israells
freedom, and Iosuahs death. CHAP. 12.
BEtwixt the departure of Israel out of Egypt, and the death of Iosuah, who
led them into the land of promise, the Greek Princes ordained many sorts of
sacrifices to their false gods, as solemn memorials of the deluge, and the
freedom of mankind from it, and the miserable time that they had in it, and
upon it (...) being driven up to the hill, and soon after coming down again
into the (...) for this they say the (a) Lupercalls running up and down (b)
the holy (...), does descipher, namely how the men ran up to the mountains
in that ^ndation, and when it ceased, came all down again into the plains.
(...) this time they say that (c) Dionysius (otherwise called (d) father Liber,
and (...) god after his decease) did (e) first show the planting of the vine in
Attica: (...) were there musical (f) plays dedicated to Apollo of Delphos, to
appease (...) they thought had afflicted al Greece with barrenness, because
they de^ not his temple which Danaus in his invasion, burned: and the oracle it
self charged them to ordain those plays. Erichthonius was the first that
presented them in Attica, both unto him and Minerua, where he that conquered,
had a reward of oil, (g) which Minerua they say invented, as Liber had found
out the wine: and in these times did (h) Xanthus King of Crete force (i) away
Europa, and begot (k) Rhadamanthus (l) Sarpedon, (m) and Minos, who are
reported to be the sons of Jove and Europa. But the pagans yield to the
truth of history in this matter of the King of Crete: and this that hangs at
every poets pen, and at every plaiers lyps, they do account as a fable, to
prove their deities wholly delighted in beastly untruths: and now (n) was
Hercules famous at Tire: not he that we spoke of before: (for the more secret
histories say there were many Hercules, and many father Libers) And this
Hercules they make famous for twelve sundry rare exploits (not counting the
death of the African (o) Antaeus amongst the^, for that belongs to the other
Hercules) and this same Hercules do they make to burn himself upon mount (p)
Oeta, his virtue whereby he had subdued so many monsters, failing him now in
the patient toleration of his (q) own pains: and at this time (r) Busyris
(the son of Neptune and Libia daughter to Epaphus) and King or rather Tyrant
of Egypt, used to murder strangers and offer the^ to his gods: O but let us not
think Neptune a whore-maister or father to such a damned son, let the poets
have this scope to fill the stage and please the gods withal! It is said that
Vulcan and Minerua were parents to this (s) Ertchthonius, in the end of whose
reign Iosuah died. (t) But because they hold Minerua a Virgin, therefore (say
they) in their striving together, Vulcan proiected his sperme upon the earth,
and thence came this king as his name shows: for (...) is strife, and (...),
is earth: which joined do make Erichthonius. But indeed the best learned of
them reject this beastliness from their gods, and say that the fable arose
heerevpon, (u) that in the Temple of Vulcan and Minerua, which were both one at
Atthens, there was a (x) little child found with a dragon wound about him,
which was a sign that he should prove a famous man, and because of this
Temples knowing no other parents that he had, they called him the son of
Vulcan and Minerua: But howsoever, that fable does manifest his name better
then this history. But what is that to us when as this is written in true
books, to instruct religious men, and that is presented on public stages to
delight the unclean devils, whom notwithstanding their truest writers honor
as gods, with those religious men? and let them deny this of their gods yet can
they not acquit them of all crime, in affecting the presenting of those
filthinesses, and in taking pleasure to behold those things bestially acted,
which wisdom seems to say might better be denied: for suppose the fables
belie them, yet if they do delight to here those lies of themselves, this
makes their guilt most true.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Lupercalls] The Lupercall was a place on mount Palatine in Rome,
sacred unto Pan lycius, or, the Woluish: whom they say the Arcadians that came
with Euander into Italy, The Lupercalls.
dedicated, by the advice of Carmentis, the prophetess: in the same holy form
that they worshipped him in their country, and Jupiter Lycius upon mount
Lyceum, In the same place where Romulus and Remus sucked, the she Wolf, and
there was a statue representing the same. Therefore was the place called
Lupercall, says Seruius, but the statue of Pan Lyceus had Euander consecrated
long before Romulus was borne. Ovid Fast. Quid vetat Arcadico dictos a monte
luperco^?
Faunus in Arcadia templa Lycaeus habet.
Luperci may the A cadian hills name bear,
Since wolfe-like Faunus has his temple there


(...) ^gil in his Aeneads. lib. 8. -- Gelida monstrat sub rupe lupercal,
Parrhasia dictum panos de monte lycaei.
Lupercall underneath the rock so chill,
So called of wolfe-like Pans Parrhasian hill.


(...) himself was one of the Lupercalls, and was celebrating of that feast
when (...) shepherds took him. Now they used to sacrifice unto Pan all naked
save their (...) which were covered (as Dionys. says) with the skins of the
sacrifices, and so they ran all about the street. They were called
Lupercalls (says Uarro de ling. Lat. 5.) because they sacrificed in the
Lupercall: the orderer of the sacrifice when he proclaimed the monthly feasts,
to be kept upon the nones of February, calls this feast day, a day februate,
that is a day of purgation, etc. Festus seems to ascribe the Lupercall feasts
to the honor of Juno, for on (...) day he says the women were purged with
Iunos mantle, that is, with a goats ski^e, for the women, believed that it
would make them fruitful, to be beaten with a kin of one of the sacrifices
at the Lupercall feasts. And therefore as the Lupercalls ran^e by, they would
hold out their hands for them to strike. They offered a dog also at this
feast, as Plutarch says: whether that were a kind of purgation, or that it
was in token of the d^gges em^ty with the wolves, being sac^ed unto Pan
Lyceus. (b) The holy streete] Uia sacra. (...) reached not (as the vulgar
think) only from the palace to the house of the Master of the Ceremonies
but from that house to the chapel of goddess Strenua, and from the palace,
to the Capitol. The holy (...) in Rome.
V^ de ling. lat. says this: At Strenuas chapel, hard by the Carina beg^eth,
holy street, and (...) reaches to the Capitol for that way do sacrifices go
to the Capitol every month: and that way (...) all Augurs to take their
auguries. But the vulgar know only that part of it, which reaches from the
court to the fore-most descent: It was called holy-steete, for there did Romu^
and Tatius the Sabine King make their union. H^ Ovid ^th they used to sell
apples. It was a steep uneven way, which is the reason of Augustines mention of
it here. (c) Dionysyus] T^* de ^at. deor. 3. We have many Dionysii: one son
to Io^e and Proserpina, another Nilus Dyonisius.
his son, the murderer of Nysa: a third Caprius his son, and King of Asia,
whence the Scythians had there discipline: a fourth son to Jove and Luna to
whom Orpheus his consecrations are dedicate, a fifth, son to Nisus and Thyone,
who i^stituted the Trieterides, (or three years sacrifices) unto Bacchus. Of
the Theban Dionysius the Indian and the Assirian, read Philostratus. Uita
Apollonii. lib. 2. Some held but one Dionysius the finder out of wine, and the
conqueror of many nations: and some again held that there were three, being
in three several times. 1. an Indian, who found out wine. 2. son of Jove and
Ceres, the inuenter of the plough. 3. son to Jove and Semele, an effeminate
fellow, leading whores about with him in his army. (d) Father Liber] Because
(says Macrobius, from Naeuius) he is the sun, and goes freely (Libere)
throughout the skies. Plutarch (in Quaest.) gives other reasons because he
freeth the (...) of drinkers: or, because he fought for the freedom of
Baeotia: or because he freeth one from cares, and secureth them in hardest
acts. Seneca says his name; Liber, comes not a Libera lingua, from a free
tongue, but, quia liber at seruitio curarum animum, because he freeth the
soul from the bondage of care, and gives it vigor in enterprises: for it
thrusts out care, Liber.
and turns the mind up from the bottom, and therefore it is good to drink
now and then. De ^q. anim. (e) First shew] Therefore was he called Dionysius,
quasi (...), giving wine. Pla^ (...) Cratyl. Now Valerius Probus relate^ this
story thus. 1. Georg. Staphylus a shepherd of (...), and keeper of King Oeneus
goats, observed one of them that stra^ed always from the (...), and was more
lusty, and came later to the fold then any other, hereupon he watched him, and
finding him in a secret place, eating of a fruit that was unknown unto him,
he plucked (...) of it, and brought it unto King Oeneus, who delighting in the
juice wrung from it, as (...) as it grew ripe, set it before father Liber, who
was then his guest. Liber teaching him the (...) how to husband it, for a
perpetual* memory of the inuentors, named the juice (...) of Oeneus, and the
grape (...), of Staphylus. Eusebius means one Dionysius the son of
Deucalion, more ancient then that son of Semele, and he (says Eusebius) came
into Attica, and there found out the vine: that he lodged with oue Semacus
unto whose daughter he gave a Roebucks skin: but this was in Cecrops time. But
Eubolus says it was before Cecrops time that wine was found, and that before
that, they used water in their sacrifices in stead of wine. (f) Plays
dedicated to Apollo] Eusebius says that Erichthon, Cecrops son built that
Temple unto Apollo Delius: Apollo had many plays sacred unto him, but there
were two sorts of the chief: the Actian, in Acarnania, sacred unto Apollo
Actius, wherein the Lacedaemonians had Apollos plays.
the pre-eminence: and these were famous all Greece over: and the Delphike, in
Phocis, called the Pythian games, kept every eight year. Censorin. Plutarch
(in Question.) says that the Delphians celebrated three kinds of plays every
ninth year: the Stephateria, the Heroides, and their Chorilae.

But who ordained these games at first, is uncertain. One of Pindarus his
interpetours, says that their Pythian games were of two sorts (as Strabo also
testifies.) the most ancient, invented by Apollo himself upon the killing of
the dragon Python: and in these, diverse Heroes, as Castor, Pollux, Peleus,
Hercules and Telamon were victors, and al crowned with laurel: the later,
ordained by Amphycthions counsel, after the Grecians by the help of
Eurilochus the Thessalian, had conquered their cursed adversaries the
Cirrhaeans: this was in Solons time. Aeschylus makes mention of this war.
Contra Ctesiphont. (g) With Minerua She rather found out the tree then the
fruit. Virg. Minerua, finder of the Olive tree; For Pliny lib. 7. ascribes the
invention of oil, and oyle-presses, unto Aristeus of Athens, he that found
honey out first: nay and wine also, says Aristotle, making him a learned man,
and much beholding to the Muses. Yet Diodorus deriues the drawing of oil from
one of Minerua^ inventions. But that the olive tree is consecrated to Minerua,
all writers do affirm, as is the laurel to Apollo, the oak to Jove, the
myrtle to Venus, and the poplare to Hercules. Virg. Pliny says that the olive
that Minerua produced at Athens was to be seen in his time. lib. 16. And the
conquerors at Athens are crowned with an olive Ghirland. And this use the
Romans had in their lesser triumphs, using crowns of olive and myrtle, and
the troops of soldiers in the Calends of July were crowned with olive
branches, as the victors in the Olympic exercises were with garlands of the
Olive: and the tree whence Hercules had his crown, remained unto Plinies time,
as himself writes. (h) Xanthus,] I think this is that successor of Deucalion
whom Diodorus calls Asterius. lib. 5. Deucalion had Hellenus: Xanthus.
he, Dorus; Dorus, Tectanus, who sailed into Crete, and bare Jupiter three
sons, Rhadamanthus, Minos, and Sarpedon: all which Asterius marying their
mother, having no child by her, adopted for his sons. Eusebius says he
begot them all upon her. But Strabo says that Hellenus, Deucalions son, had
two sons Dorus, and Xuthus, who marrying Creusa, Erichtheus his daughter,
brought collonies into Tetrapolis in Attica, founding Oenoa, Marathon,
Probalinthus, and Tricorythus: Ioannes Grammaticus ((...)) is of his opinion
also: adding one Aeolus, a third son of Hellenus, of whom the Aeolike dialect
came, as the Dorike did of Dorus, and this is more likely. For there are but
four score years between Deucalions flood, and the rape of Europa, namely
from the thirtith year of Cecrops unto the fortith of Erichthonius.

Some Greek authors will not have Dorus and Xuthus to be sons unto
Hellenus, but unto Aeolus, who married Creusa. Of Ion, son to this Panthus,
was the countries name changed from Aegialia, into Ionia: for he planted
Colonies in twelve cities of Asia, as the oracle of Delphos directed him,
according to Utruuius, who emploieth both Xanthus and his son, I^ in this
business, yet did the country bear the sons name. The Athenians had a feast
called (...) or, speedy help: because they being in a dangerous war with
Eumolpus, Neptunes son, Xanthus came to their aid with wonderful celerity:
for which Erichtheus made him his son in law.

Now this Xanthus they think is Asterius also: for Xanthus, and Xuthus are
used both for one: and hence came the claim that Androgeus, son to Minos, and
grandchild to Xanthus, had against Aegeas, Theseus his father, unto the
kingdom of Athens: and be being made away by the treasons of Aegeus, Minos
invaded Attica, and brought them to that straight, that they were saine to pay
him a yearly tribute of seven boys and seven virgin girls. Or^ names one
Asterius, who went in the Argonautes voyage: but that was the brother of Am^,
not this Asterius. (i) Europa] Agenors daughter, stolen by Pirates from Sydon
in Phaenicia, Europa.
and brought into Crete in a ship called the White-Bull: and from her had
this third part of our world, the name: if reports be true. Herodotus says
the Cretans did steal her to avenge the rape of Io, whom the Phaenicians had
borne away before. Then Paris to revenge the Asians went and stole Hellen, and
so began the mischief. Palaephatus Paruus declares it thus. There was one
Taurus, a Gnossian, who making war upon Tyria, took a many Virgins from
them, and Europa for one: and hence came the fable. The Greeks to make
somewhat of the conjunction of Jove and Europa, say that he begot Carnius on
her, whom Apollo loved, and therefore in Lacedomon they had the feasts of
Apollo Carnius, Praxil. (k) Rhadamanthus] The Cretan lawgiver, for his justice
feigned to be judge of hell. Homer calls (...) Rhadamanthus.
that is yellow, or fair Rhadamanthus, and I think he touches at his father
herein: although he call other fair personages (...) also. Plato says he was
son to Asopus by Aegina, on whom Jove begot Adacus, and gave her name unto an
I Will in Greece. In Gorg. (l) Sarpedon] Sarpedon.
H^er will not have him the son of Jove by Europa, but by Laodam^ia,
Bellerophons daughter. He reigned in Cilicia, where there is apromontory of his
name in the utmost part of his Kingdom. Mela, The common report is he was King
of Lycia, and so holds Strabo. lib. 12. writing that Sarpedon brought two
Colonies from Crete thither: where he dwelt, and where the son of Pandion Lycus
reigned afterward, leaving his name to it, which was called Myniae before, and
Solymi afterward, though Homer make two several peoples of them. Sarpedon was
slain by Menelaus before Troy, to the great grief of Jove, who could not
comptroll the destenies herein. (m) Minos] King of Crete, and their lawgiver
also: This some say was Minos the younger, and son to Jupiter. Diodor. l. 5. (n)
Hercules in Tyria] Or in Syria. But indeed Tire is in Minos.
Syria, and all Phaenicia also. For Syria is an huge thing. Six Hercules does
T^ly (as I said) reckon up. Eusebius makes Hercules surnamed Delphinas who was
so famous in Phaenicia, to live Hercules.
in these times: but if it were the Hercules that burnt himself on Oeta, it
was the Argiue, and we must read Tyrinthia in Augustine, and neither Tyria, nor
Syria: Tyrinthia being a city near unto Argos wherein Hercules the Argiue was
brought up, and thereupon called the Tyrinthian^ ^e it was whom the Authors say
did come into Italy and killed all the monsters. But he that came unto the
Gades, was Hercules of Egypt, as Philostratus says. l. 2. (o) Antaeus] Son
unto Terra, he dwelt in Tingen in Mauritania, which was thereupon called
Tingitana; lying over against Spain. His sheeld (says Mela) is there to be
seen, being cut out of the back of an Elephant and of such hugeness, as no
man of earth is able to weeld it: and this the inhabitants affirm with Antaeus.
reverence, that he bore always in fight. There is also a little hill there,
in form of a man lying with his face upward, that, say they, is his tomb,
which when any part of it is dimished, it begins to rain, and never cease
until it be made up again. Eusebius drives the overthrow of Ant^s by
Hercules, unto the former-times, of the first Hercules, who conquered him (as
he ^ith) in wrestling. Nor does Uirgil mention the conquest of Antaeus amongst
the Argiue Hercules labors: but Ovid, Claudian and others, lay all the
exploits of the rest upon him only, that was son to Jove and Alcmena. (p) Oeta]
A mountain in Macedonia. Mela. The Otaean grove was the last ground that
Argiue Hercules ever touched, all the greek and latin books are filled Octa.
with the story of his death: there is nothing more famous. (q) His own
paines] Proceeding of a melancholy breaking into ulcers. Arist. (in probl.
mentions his disease, as Politian has obser^ed in his Centuries. Festus says
he was a great Astronomer, and burned himself in the time of a great eclipse,
to confirm their opinion of his divinity: for Atlas the Moore had taught him
Astronomy, and he showing the Greeks the sphere that he had given him, gave
them occasi^ to feign that Hercules bore up heaven while Atlas rested his
shoulders. (r) Busyris King of Egypt ^e built Busyris and Nomos in an
inhospitable and barren soil, and thence came the fa^ Busyris.
of his killing his guestes: for the heards-men of those parts would rob and
spoil the passengers, if they were to weak for them. Another reason of this
fable was (says Diod. li 2.) for that (...) who slew his brother Osyris, being
red-headed, for pacification of Osyris soul, an order was set down, that they
should sacrifice nothing but read oxen and red-headed men, at his ^be, so that
Egypt having few of those red heads, and other countries many, thence came
there a report that Busyris massacred strangers, where as it was Osyris tomb
that was cause of (...) cruelty. Busyris indeed (as Eusebius. says) was a
theeuish King: but Hercules killing him, set al Erichthonius.
(...) ^d at rest. This assuredly was Hercules the Egiptian. (s) Erichthonius]
Son to Vulcan and the earth. He conspired against Amphiction, and deposed him.
Pausan. (t) But because they hold] Jove having the pains of travel in his
head, prayed Uulcan to take an axe and cleave it: he did so, and out start
Minerua, armed, leaping and dancing. Her did Uulcan ask to wife, in regard of
the mid-wifry that he had afforded Jupiter in his need, as also for making
Jove's thunderbolts, and fire-workes used against the Giants: Jove put it unto
the Virgins choice: and she denies to mary with any man. So Vulcan affring to
force her, (by Jove's consent) in striving he cast out his sperme upon the
ground, which Minerua shaming at, covered with earth: and hence was
Erichthonius borne, having the lower parts of a snake, and therefore he
invented Chariots, wherein he might ride, and his deformity be unseen. Virg.
Georg. 3. Primus Erichthonius currus et quatuor ausus,
Iungere equos, rapidisque rotis insistere victor.
First Erichthonius durst the Chariot frame,
Four horses join, on swift wheels run for fame.


Seruius upon this tells the tale as we do. Higinius says (Hist. caelest.
lib. 2.) that Jove admiring Erichthonius his new invention, took him up to
heaven, naming him (...), that is Waggoner: appointing him to be the driuer of
the 7. stars by the tropike of Cancer. But Erichthonius (says he) invented
wagons, and ordained sacrifices to Minerua, building her Vulcans Temple.
first Temple at Athens. (u) That in the Temple of] Above Ceramicus and Stoa
(called Basileum) is a Temple of Vulcan wherein is a statue of Minerua: and
this gave original to the fable of Erichthonius. Pausan. in Attic. There was
one Minerua that by Uulcan had Apollo, him whom Athens calls Patron. (x) A
little child] Hence was he feigned to be footed like a serpent. Ovid tells a
tale how Minerua gave a box unto Cecrops daughters to keep (in which
Erichthonius was) and warned them not to look in it, which set them more on
fire to know what it was, and so opening it, they saw a child in it, and a
dragon lying with him. Metam. 2. Pandrosas one of the sisters would not consent
to open it, but the other two did, and therefore being stricken with madness,
they brake their necks down from the highest part of the tower. Pausanias.

What fictions got footing in the nations, when the Judges began first to
rule Israel. CHAP. 13.
IOsuah being dead, Israel came to be ruled by Judges: and in those times,
they prospered, or suffered, according to the goodness of Gods mercies or the
deseart of their sins. And (a) now the fiction of Triptolemus was on foot, who
by Ceres apoyntment flew all over the world with a yoke of Dragons, and taught
the use of corn: another fiction also (b) of the Minotaure, shut in (c) the
labirynth, a place which none that entered, could ever get out of. Of the (d)
Centaures also, half men and half horses: of (e) Cerberus, the three-headed
dog of hell. Of (f) Phrixus and Hell who flew away on the back of a Ram.
Of (g) the Gorgon whose hairs were snakes, and who turned all that beheld her
into stones. Of (h) Bellerophon, and his winged horse Pegasus: (i) of Amphion,
and his stone-moouing music on the harp. Of (k) Oedipus, and his answer to
the monster Sphinxes riddle, making her break her own neck from her stand.
Of Antaeus, earthes-sonne killed by Hercules (in the air) for that he never
smote him to the ground but he arose up as strong again as he was when he
fell: and others more that I perhaps have omitted. Those fables, unto the
Trojan war, where Varro ende^h his second book De Gente Romans were by men's
inventions so drawn (l) from the truth of history that their gods were no way
by them disgraced. But as for those that feigned that Jupiter (m) stole
Ganymede, that goodly boy for his lustful use a villainy done by Tantalus and
ascribed unto Jove,) or that he came down to lie with (n) Danae in a shower of
gold (the woman being tempted by gold unto dishonesty): and all this being
either done or devised in those times, or done by others, and sayned to be
Jove's: it cannot be said how mischievous the presumption of those fable-forgers
was, upon the hearts of all mankind, that they would bear with such ungodly
slanders of their gods: which they did notwithstanding and gave them gracious
acceptance, whereas had they truly honored Jupiter, they should severely have
pnnished his slanderers. But now they are so ^arre from checking them, that
they fear their gods anger, if they do not nourish them, and present their
fictions unto a populous audience. About this time Latona bore Apollo, not that
oraculous God before-said: but he that kept the herds of King (o) Admetus with
Hercules: yet was he afterward held a God, and counted one and the same with
the other. And then did (p) father Liber make war in India, leading a crew of
women about with him in his army, called Bacchae, being more famous The
Bacchae.
for their madness then their virtue. Some write that this Liber (q) was
conquered and imprisoned: some, that Perseus slew him in the field, mentioning
his place of burial also: and yet were those damned sacriligious sacrifices
called the Bacchanalls appointed by the unclean devils unto him, as unto a
God. But the Senate of Rome at length (after long use of them) saw the
barbarous filthiness of these sacrifices, and expelled them the city. And in
this time (r) Perseus and his wife Andromeda being dead, were verily believed
to be assumed into heaven, and there upon the world was neither ashamed (s)
nor affraide to give their names unto two goodly constellations, and to form
their Images therein.

L. VIVES.
THe fiction of (a) Triptolemus] His original is uncertain, ignoble, says
Ovid, his mother was Triptolemus.
a poor woman, and he a sickly child: and Ceres lodging in his mothers house,
bestowed his health of him. Lactantius making him son to Eleusius (King of
Eleusis) and Hion^, that Ceres bestowed immortality upon him, for lodging a
night in his fathers house: on the day she fed him in heaven with her milk,
and on the night she hid him in fire. Celeus was his father, says Seruius:
But Eusebius makes him a stranger to Celeus, and landeth him at Eleusis, Cele^
his city out of a long ship. But the Athenians generally held him the son of
Celeus, so did not the Argiues, but of Trochilus Hieropanta who falling out
with Agenor, and flying from Argos, came to Eleusis, there married, and there
had Triptolemus, and Euboles. Some hold him (and so Musaeus did, some say) the
son of Oceanus and Terra: that Eubolis and Triptolemus were Dysaulis sons,
says Orpheus. Chaerilus of Athens deriues him from Rharus, and one of
A^hyctions daughters. Diodorus, from Hercules and Thesprote King Phileus his
daughter. Now Ceres (they say) gave him corn, and sent him with a chariot
(with two wheels only for swiftness sake, says Higin.) drawn by a teame of
Dragons through the air, to go and ^each the sowing of corn to the world:
that he first sowed the field Rharius by Eleusis, and reaped an harvest of it:
wherefore they gathered the Mushromes used in the sacred banquets, from that
field: Triptolemus had his altar also, and his threshing place there. The
pretended truth of this history agrees with Eusebius: for it says that
Triptolemus was son to Elusus King of E^s, who in a great dearth sustained
the peoples lives out of his own granary, which Tr^mus upon the like occasion
being not able to do, fearing the peoples fury, he took along ship called
the Dragon, and sailing thence, within a while returned again with abundance
of corn, and expelling Celeus who had usurped in his abscence, relieved the
people with come, and taught them tillage. Hence was he termed Ceres his
pupil. Some place Lyncus for C^s. He (says Ovid) was King of Scythia, and
because he would have slain Triptolemus, Ceres ^ed him into the beast Lynx,
which we call an Ounce. (b) The Minotaure] Minos of Crete The Minotaure.
^ied Pasiphae the Suns daughter, and he being absent in a war against Attica
about his claim to the ^ingdom, and the killing of his son Androgeus, she fell
into a beastly desire of copulation with a Bull: and Daedalus the Carpenter
framed a Cow of wood, wherein she being enclosed, bad her lust satisfied, and
brought forth the Minotaure, a monster that eat man's flesh. This Uenus was
cause of. Seru. For the Sun bewraying the adultery of Mars and Uenus, Uulcan
came and took them both in a Wyre net, and so shamefully presented them unto
the view of all the gods. Here-vpon Uenus took a deadly malice against all the
Suns progeny: and thus came this Minotaure borne: but Seruius says he was
no monster, but that there was a man either Secretary to Minos, or some
governor of the Soldiers under him called Taurus, and that in Daedalus his
house, Pasiphae and he made Minos Cuckold, and she bringing forth two sons,
one gotten by Minos, and the other by Taurus, was said to bring forth the
Minotaure: as Uirgill calls it; Mistumque genus prolemque biformem.
A mungrell breed, and double formed-birth.
Euripides held him half man and half bull: Plutarch says he was General of
Minos forces, and either in a sea fight or single combat, slain by Theseus,
to Minos his good liking: for he was a cruel fellow, and the world reported
him too inward with Pasiphae: and therefore after that Minos restored all the
tribute-children unto Athens, and freed them from that imposition for ever.
Palephratus writes that Taurus was a goodly youth, and fellow to Minos, that
Pasiphae fell in love with him, and he begot a child upon her: which Minos
afterward understood, yet would not kill it when it was borne, because it was
brother to his sons. The boy grew up, and the King hearing that he injured
the Sheapheards, sent to apprehend him: but he dug him a place in the
ground, and therein defended himself. Then the King sent certain condemned
Malefactors to fetch him out: but he having the advantage of the place, slew
them all, and so ever after that the King used to send condemned wr^ches
thither, and he would qu^ckly make them sure. So Minos sent Theseus thither
unarmed (having taken him in the wars): but Ariadne watched as he entered the
cave, and gave him a sword wherewith he slew this Minotaure. (c) The Labyrinth]
A building so entangled in windings and cyrcles, that it deceives all that
come in it. Four such there were in the world: but in Egypt at Heracleopolis,
near to the Lake Maeris, Herodotus says that he saw it: no marvel for it
The Labirinth.
was remaining in Plinyes and Diod. his time. These two, and Strabo and Mela do
describe it, Mela says Psameticus made it. Pliny recites many opinions of it,
that it was the work of Petesucus, or else of Tithois, or else the palace of
Motherudes, or a dedication unto the Sun, and that is the common belief.
Daedalus made one in Crete like this: Diod. Plin. but it was not like Egypts by
an hundred parts: and yet most intricate. Ovid. 8. Metamorph. Philothorus in
Plutarch, thinks that it was but a prison, out of which the enclosed thieves
might not escape, and so thinks Palaephatus. The third was in Lemnos, made by
Zmilus, Rholus, and Theodorus builders. The ruins of it stood after those of
Crete and Italy were utterly decayed and gone. Plyn. The fourth was in Italy,
by Clusium: made for Porsenna King of Hetru^a. Varro. (d) The Centaures] Ixion,
son to Phlegias the son of Mars, loving Juno, and she telling Jove of it,
he made a cloud like her, on which cloud Ixion begot the Centaures. Sure Ixion.
it is, he was King of Thessaly, where horses were first backed. Plin. lib. 7.
Bridle and saddle did Peletronius invent: and the Thessalians that dwelt by
mount Pelion, were the first that fought on Horseback: Virgil goes not far
from this, saying. Georg. 3. Frena Pelethronii Lapithae girosque dedere,
Impositi dorso, atque equitem docuere sub armis,
Insultare solo, and gressus glomerare superbos.
First Pelethronian Lapiths gave the bit,
And hotted rings, and taught armed horsemen sit:
And bound, and proudly coruet as was fit.


The same has Lucan in his Pharsalia, lib. 6. Primus ab aequorea percussis
cuspide saxis,
Thessalicus sonipes, hellis ferallibus omen
Exiluit, primus Chalybem frenosque momordit,
Spum auit que nouis Lapithae domitoris habenis.
Since Neptune with sea trident stroke the rocks,
First the I hessalian horse with deadly shocks:
A dismal sign, came forth, he first bit bruzed,
And fom'de, at Lapith riders reins unused.
Seruius explaining this place of Uirgill: says thus. The Oxen of a certain
King of Thessaly gadding madly about the fields, he sent his men to fetch them
in: but they being not swift enough for them, got upon horses, and so riding
swiftly after the Oxen, pricked and whipped them home to their stables. Now
some seeing them in their swift course or when they let their horses drink The
Centaures.
at the river Peneus, began this fable of the Centaures: giving them that name,
(...), of pricking the Oxen. Some say this fable was invented to show how
swiftly man's life passes on, (because of the swiftness of an horse.) Thus
far Seruius. Palaephatus has it thus. When the wild Bulls troubled all
Larissa and Thessaly, Ixion proclaimed a great reward to those that could
drive them thence. So the youths of Nephele got upon the horses they had
broken, (for they had wagons in use before) and so drove them away very
easily: and having received their reward, they grew proud, iniuring both Ixion
himself and the Larissaeans (then called Lapithes) for being invited to
Pirrhas his marriage, they fell to rauishing of the virgins. Thus began the
fable of the Centaures, and their horse-like bodies, and of their birth from a
clowd: for Nephele (their cities name) is, a cloud. These Centaures also were
Lapithes, for Nephele was in the Lapithes country, and they are distinct as
the Romans and the Latins were. (e) Cerberus] begotten Cerberus.
by Typhon, he made an hideous noise when he barked, having fifty necks.
Hesiod. in Theogon. Thus Seneca describes him in his Hercules furens. Post
haec auari Dit is apparet domus,
Saeuus hic vmbras territat Stygius canis,
Qui terna vasto capita concutiens sono
Regnum tuetur, sordidum tabo caput
Lambunt colubri, viperis horrent iubae,
Longusque torta sibilat cauda draco,
Par ira formae, sensit vt motus pedum,
Attollit hirtas angue vibrato comas,
Missumque captat aure subiecta sonum,
Sentire and vmbras solitus. --
The haule of greedy hell comes next to sight:
Here the fierce Stygian Dog does souls affright,
Who shaking his three heads with hideous sound,
Does guarde the state; his mattring head around
Snakes lick: his mane with vipers horrid is:
At his wreathd tail a Dragon large does hiss.
Fury, and form, like: when our feet he heard,
Darting a snake, his bristled hairs he reard,
And listened at the noise with lolled ear,
As he is wont even shady souls to hear.
Boccace and others compare him to a covetous man: (and Boccace wrote nothing
so vainly, as the rest of that age did.) Porphyry says, that the badge of
Serapis and Isis, (that is Dis and Proserpina) was a three-headed dog: viz.
that triple kind of devil that haunts the air, the earth, and the water. De
interpr, divine. He was called three-headed (says he) because the sun has
three noted postures, the point of his rising, height, and setting, This
Cerberus, Hercules (they say) did traile from hell up to earth: and that is now
a proverb in all hard attempts. Some say he drew him out under mount Taenarus
(Strab. Senec.) and this is the common belief. for there (say they) lies the
readiest and largest way down unto hell. It is thought that Hercules killed
some venomous serpent there, and that thence the fable had original. Of those
parts we read this in Mela. The Mariandines dwell there in a city that by
report, was given them by the Argiue Hercules, it is called Heraclea: the
proof of this is, because hard by it is the hole called Achereusia, whence
Hercules is thought to have haled Cerberus. Pliny follows Mela. l. 27. The
Herb Aconitum grew (say they) from the froth that fell from Cerberus his lips
when Aconitum.
he was trailed along by Hercules: and therefore it grows about Heraclea,
whence the hole is at which he came up. Ovid assigns no set place for the
growth, but only Pontus at large where C^ was first seen, to cast his froth
upon the cliffes: for it is called Aconitum of (...), a cragge or flint: and he
is called Cerberus, quasi (...), a deuourer of flesh. A^deus the Mollosian King
had a dog of this name, for he being called (...), that is Orcus, named his
wife Ceres, his daughter Proserpina, and his dog Cerberus. Some say he stole
his wife and called her Proserpina: but on with Plutarchs tale. Theseus and
Pirithous coming to steal his daughter, he took the^, and cast Pirithous
unto his dog Cerberus, and kept Theseus in straight prison. Here-vpon came
the fable of their going into Hell to bring away Proserpina. For the country
of Molossus in Epyrus, lying West from Attica and Thessaly, was always
signified by the name of Hell. Homer. Palaephatus tells this tale in this
manner. Hercules having conquered Gerion in Tricarenia, a city of Pontus, and
driving away all his herds, there was a very fierce Mastiffe that followed the
Oxen: they called him Cerberus: so when they came into Peloponnesus, Molossus,
a rich Nobleman of Mycene begged the dog: but Euristheus denying him, he
agreed with the shepherd to shut him into the cave of mount Taenarus, with a
sort of bitches that he had put in there. So Euristheus set Hercules to seek
the dog, and he found him in Taenarus, and brought him away, and this is the
ground of the fable. (f) Phryxus and Helle] Phryxus and Hell.
Brother and sister, the children of Athamas son to Aeolus, a man of Nephele:
who becoming mad, and running into the desers, Athamas married Ino Cadmus his
daughter: who hating Phryxus and Hell, made means by the matrons to spoil
all the fruits of the city: the cause where of they should go and inquire of
the Oracle, and return this false answer, that the children of Nephele must be
sacrificed. But Juno pitying them, sent them a golden fleeced Ram, to ride
over the sea upon. Hell being a young virgin, and not able to guide her self,
sell into the sea, that runs between Asia and Europe, thereupon named
Hellespont (her did Neptune lie with, and she bare him Paeon.) Phryxus passed
over Bosphorus, Propontis, etc. and at last landed at Colchos, where he
sacrificed the Ram unto Jove, and the fleece unto Mars, building him a temple.
Apollonius says he built Mars no temple, but only one unto Jupiter fugius,
the flightguider, (yet some Greek authors say that Deucalion erected the
statue of this deity, presently upon the deluge.) The Ram was bred at
Orchomenon in Boeotia, some say in Thessaly: he was taken to heaven, and made
the first sign in the Zodiak. Now that is obscure (says Eratosthenes) for
when he was to ascend, he put off his golden fleece himself, and gave it unto
Phryxus. There was an Oracle (says Diod. li. 5.) told Aeetas King of Pontus,
that the Ram should dye as soon as a strange ship came to take away this
fleece of the Ram: whereupon he cruelly massacred all strangers, to make them
fear to come thither, and walled the temple about with a triple wall, keeping
a continual guard of Taurians about it, of whom the Greeks told an hundred
lies: that they were Bulls that breathed fire, and that a great dragon watched
the ^leece, etc. But they were called Bulls, of their country name Taurica,
and because they were so cruel, were said to breath fir^. And the keepers name
of the temple being Draco, hence fetched the Poets all their fixions. So
feigned they also of Phryxus, who indeed sailed away in a ship called the
Golden Ram, and Hell being sea-sick, and leaning over the poo^e, fell into the
sea. Others say, that Gambrus the King of Scythia landed at Colchos the time
that Phryxus and his master was taken and that the King liking the youth well,
Aeetas gave him to him, and he brought him up as the heir of his kingdom, and
left him it at his death: but for his master Aries, (for that was his name) he
was sacrificed to the gods, and his skin hung up in the temple, as the custom
was. And then the oracle telling Aeetas that he should dye when strangers came
to demand the Rams skin, he to make the keepers more careful over it, gilded
it over: thus far Siculus. Some refer this to the river of Colchos, in whose
channels there is gold found, which they purge from the sand through siues, and
receive it into skins which they lay under their siues. Some refer it to the
great abundance of gold and silver in that country, as Pliny does in these
words. Now had Salauces and Esubopes reigned in Colchos, who finding the land
in the original purity, dug out much gold and silver in the Sanian
territories: This as Strabo says, first made Phryxus, and then Jason, to
undertake an expedition against it: both which, left some memories of their
being there: Jason, the City Iasonia; and Phryxus, Phryxium; and both of them
matched with Aeetas daughters, Jason with Medea, and Phryxus with Chalciope: by
whom he had Cytissorus, Mela^a, Phontis and Argus, of whom (says Pherecides)
their ship was called Argo. But Eusebius. will have Phryxus, Abas the Argiue, and
Erichtheus of Athens, all of one time. Some writers affirm (says he) that
Phryxus at this time fled with his sister Hell from his step-mothers
treacheries, and was seen go over the sea upon a golden Ram: the ship wherein
he sailed bearing a guilt Ram upon her stem. Palaephatus delivers it thus.
Athamas, Aeolus his son reigning in Phrygia, had a steward called Aries whom
he much trusted. This Aries told Phryxus how his death was plotted: so Phryxus
his sister Hell and this Aries, got a great mass of riches together, and away
they went. Hell died at sea: and so they cast her body ouer-boord, which gave
the name of Hellespont unto the sea; the rest got to Colchos. Phryxus married
Hellespont.
King A^tas daughter, and gave him an Image of a Ram, all of pure gold: which
he ^de of the riches that he brought with him. (g) The Gorgon.] There were
said to be three Gorgons, Steno, Euriale and Medusa, daughters to Phorcus, and
sea monsters. Hesiod says that Gorgons.
of these three Medusa only was mortal, In Theog. Ovid has but two in all.
Met. 4. and both these had but one eye between them, which they used by
course. Over against the West of Ethiopia, are Islands that Mela calls
Gorgones, making them the habitation of these monsters. And Lucan agrees with
him Phars. 9. Over against Hesperoceras a promontory of Egypt their are Islands
(says Pliny) which the Gorgon whilom inhabited; some two days sail Lib. 6.
from the maine: Hanno of Carthage came to them, and took two of the women, al
rough and hairy: the men were too swift for them, but these he got: and their
skins hung up for a monument in Iunos temple, a long time after, at Carthage.
Some took these Gorgons for the Hesperides, but the Hesperides Isles, says
Statius Sebosus ly forty days sail farther then the Gorgons. Diodorus says
that the Gorgons were a warlike nation of women in Lybia, whom Perseus
overthrew, with their leader Medusa. lib. 4.

This Medusa the fables say that Neptune lay withal in Minerua's Temple,
whereat Minerua Medusa.
being angry turned her hayres into snakes, and made them all that beheld her,
become stones: Perseus being armed with Minerua's shield encountered her, and
she beholding herself in the bright sheeld as in a glass grew into an heavy
sleep, and became a stone, but Perseus presently cut of her head, and the
drops of blood that fell from it filled Lybia full of serpents (...) since:
and those that fell upon the twigges of shrubs, turned them into coral: and
from thence (says Ovid and Hesiod) came Pegasus that winged horse: but others
say, from the copulation of Neptune and Medusa. Higinus says that Perseus
overcame the Gorgons thus: Having but one eye between them, he watched the
time that the one took it out to give the other, and then he suddenly came
and snatched it away, and threw it into the lake (...), and so having blinded
them he easily foyld them both. Jupiter being to fight against the (...) was
told that he must wear the Gorgons head if he would be victor: whereupon he
(...) it with a goats skine, and so bare it to the field: Pallas afterward got
it of him. Euhe^ ^th that Pallas slew the Gorgon. In sacr. Hist. It Is commonly
held that this Medusa (...) wonderful fair, and amazed all that beheld her
beauty, and thence was it said she made them stones. The Gorgons came to the
field armed in the skins of mighty serpents. Diod, perhaps they will put some
of this fixion upon the Catoblepae, for they live over against the Isles
Gorgones, in that part of the main. Mela. Pliny. They are no great beasts, but
they are the diuill for dangerous; slow of body, with great heads hanging
always down to the ground: and hurt not with any member but their eyes. No
more does the basiliske against which Basiliske.
(...) go armed with glasses in their shields and brest-plates, that the
serpent may see himself. Palaphatus tells along tale of these things and this
it is. Phorcys was an Ethiopian of Cyrene, which is an Island without the
straight of Hercules, and the inhabitants till the ground of Lybia as far as
the river Amona near to Carthage, and are very rich in gold. So Phorcis
erected a (...) unto Minerua, of three cubits height: but died ere he could
dedicate it. (This goddess now they call Gorgon.) So he left three daughters
behind him Stheno, Euriale, and Medusa: who would none of them marry, but
shared their fathers estate equally: each one had her Island, but for that
statue, they neither consecrated it nor divided it but kept it in the treasury,
and possessed it (...) (...) by course. Now Phorcys had one faithful friend
about him whom he used as if it had (...) his eye. Now Perseus being fled
from Argos, and turned pyrat, hearing that those Islands were full of gold and
empty of men, lurked secretly between Sardinia and Corsica, and watching (...)
faithful messenger whom the sisters used still to send from one to another,
took him in a mes^, (...) learnt of him that there was nothing for him to
take, but Mineruas statue. So the Vir^ ^dring what was become of their servant,
their eye, Perseus landed, and showed them that (...) (...) (...), and would
not restore him, nay further, would kill them, unless they showed him the
(...) ^tue, Medusa would not, and so was slain, the other two did, and had
their eyes again^* (...) (...) set Medusas head upon the prow of his Gally,
naming her the Gorgon, and then rob^ (...), spoiled all the Ilanders of their
wealth, killing, and plaging those that would give him nothing, and d^ding many
of the Striphians, they forsook the city which he entering found nothing but a
many stone statues in the Market place. See (quoth Persius) how my Gorgon
turns men into st^, I would she did not so with our selves. Thus far
Palaephatus: who is far mistaken in the places. I think those Islands the
Syrtes, for they do accord better with Cyrene, Sardinia and Corsica. But there
may be some error in his copies. (h) Bellerophon. Son to Bellerepho^
Glaucus: Sisiphus his son: king of Ephyra (afterward Corinth) until
Praetus the Argiue King deprived him and made him serve him. Now Antia, Praetus
his wife, tempted him to lie with her, which refusing, she slandered him unto
her husband of attepmting it. So he sent him to Ariobatus, Antias father with a
letter aduising him to protect his daughters chastity by killing* Bellerophon.
Ariobatus, sent him against the Chymera which he with the help of the winged
horse Pegasus ouer-came (i) Now this Chymaera (says Hesiod) was a Lion in his
Chymaera.
fore-parts* a Dragon in the midst, and a Goat behind; which hinder parts gave
name to the whole monster, Homer makes it the middle part a goat. Typhon they
said begot it upon (...), it brea^d fire: Uirg. Aen. 6 upon which place Seruius
says that indeed it was a mountain in Ly^ whose top cast forth flames: and
that about the height of it there were Lions: that the middle parts were good
pasture grounds, and that the foot of it swarmed with serpents: and this
Bellerophon made habitable. Pegasus the horse, had as Ovid says, Caelum pro
terra pro pede Pegasus.
penna heaven for earth, and wings for hoofes. Apul^ius says that it was his
fear made him famous, leaping about the Chymaera for fear of hurt, as if he
had flowne. Asini. lib. 8. From this horse, the two chief fountains of the
Muses in Greece had their names. Thus writes Solinus of them. By Thebes is the
wood Helicon, the grove Cytheron, the river Ismenius, and fountaynes, Arethusa,
Oedipodia, Psammate, Derce, and chiefly Aganippe and Hippocreene, both which
Cadmus, the first inuentor of letters, finding as he rode abroad gave the
Poets occasion to saigne that they both sprung from the dints of the winged
horses heels, and both being drunk of, inspired the wit with vigor and
learning. Thus he* Now Bellerophen riding up toward heaven, and looking down,
grew brain-sicke, and down he fell, but Pegasus, kept on his course, and was
stabled amongst the stars. Palaephatus says Bellerophon was a Phrygian, of
the blood of Corynth, and was a cover in the straytes of Asia and Europe,
having a long ship called Pegasus. In Phrygia is Mount Telmisus, and Chymaera
adjoining to it: near that was a cave that vented fire: and upon Mount
Chymaera, were dragons, Lions* etc. that did the husbandmen much hurt. The
whole mountain did Bellerophon set on fire, and so the wild-beasts were all
burnt. (k) Of Amphion.] Brother to Zetus and Calais, Jove's sons by (...).
A^tiope: for which Lynceus her husband, King of Thebes, refused her. The
children being come to age revenged their mothers disgrace, slew Lynceus, and
Dyrce his wife, and chasing out old Cadmus, possessed Thebes themselves.
Amphion they say drew the stones after his music and so built the walls of
Thebes, the stones dancing themselves into order. Horac. de. Arie poet. Dictus
et Amphion Thebanae conditor arcis,
S^a mouere sono testudinis, et prece blanda,
-- Ducere quo uellet.
Amphion builder of the Theban city,
With ^ound of harp and sweet entising ditty,
To move the stones is said, and where he would them lead.
Pliny says he invented Music. lib. 7. Some say the Harp also: and some
say that Mercury gave him the Harp. He was author of the Lydian tones.
Ualerius probus upon Uirgills (...), says that Euripides, and Pacuuius say
that Zetus and Amphion could gather their flocks together with their pipes.
Witness Thebes which they walled about as Apollonius writes. I^ Arg^. But
Zetus b^re the stones to their places, Amphion only piped, or harped them
together. Eusebi^s makes them both the inuentors of Music. Euang. praep.
Pa^yasis, and Alexander say that Mercury gave Amphion the Harp for freeing of
Cynara. Thus far Pro^. Amphion built Thebes, (says Solinus.) not that his
Harp fetched the stones thither, for that i^ not likely, but he brought the
mountayners, and hyland-men unto ciuility, and to help (...) that work. This
is (...) which Horace says: Dictus ^t Amphion Thebanae conditor (...) (...)
(...)* etc. It may be that his song or his eloquence obtained stones for the
work, of (...) ^ghbours. Palaephatus says he paid them for the stones with
his Music, having no (...). But Eusebius makes him and Zetus to live both
together in two several ages, unless (...) ^iber have falsified him. For
first they lived under Linceus his reign, and then in (...) his time
afterward. Niobe (about whose children the writers hold that famous contro^)
was Amphions wife.

((...)) Daedalus] An Attike (says Diod. lib. 5.) son to Eupalamus, who was
grandchild to Daedalus.
(...)* he was a rare statuarie, and an excellent Architect, framing statues
that seemed (...) ^th, and to go, his wit was so admirable. He taught it to
Talus his nephew, who (...) ^ut young* invented the Wimble and Saw, which
Daedalus greeuing at, that the glory (...) Art should be shared by another,
slew the youth, and being therefore condemned he (...) Minos in Creete, who
interteined him kindly: and there he built the Labyrinth. (...). Now Seruius
Aenead. 6. says, that he and his son Icarus being shut in the (...), he
deceived his keepers by persuading them he would make an excellent work (...)
King, and so made him and his son wings, and flew away both. But Icarus
flying (...), the sun melted his waxen joints, and so he fell into the sea
that bears his (...)* (...) lighted at Sardinia, and from thence (as Salust
says) he flew to Cumae, and (...) (...) a temple to Apollo. Thus Seruius.
Diod. and others say, he never came in Sardi^ (...) into Sicilia, whether
Minos pursued him, Cocalus reigning then in Camarina, who (...) ^our of a long
discourse with him in his bathe, held him there until he had choked (...)
^le says, that Crotalus his daughters killed him: but he interprets a ship
and In Poli^.
(...) ^ee his wings, whose speed seemed as if he flew away. Diodorus
reckons many (...) in Sicilia, Cocalus intertaining him with all courtesy,
because of his excellent (...), and that it was a Proverb to call any delicate
building, a Daedalean work. (...). 1. (...), etc.
Under his feet a foote-stoole was, which in Daedalean work did pass.


(...) calls the honey combs, Daedalean houses. Geo. 4. and Circe he
calls Daeda^ (in Polit.) says that the statues he made would go by
themselves. I and run (...) Plato in Memnone) Unless they were bound. He
that had them loose had fu^ ^ts of them. He made a statue of Venus that moved
through quicksilver that (...) Arist. 1. de Anima. Palaephatus referres all
this to the distinction of the feet* all sta^ ^ore him making them alike, He
learnt his skill in Egypt, but he soon was his (...) ^tter. For he alone
made more statues in Greece then were in all Egypt: At Mem^ Vulcans porche, so
memorable a work of his, that he had a statue mounted on it, (...) honors
given him, for the Memphians long after that, had the temple of Daedalus (...)
^nour: which stood in an I Will near Memphis. But I wonder which Cumae the wri^,
when they say he flew to Cumae: whether the Italian or the Ionian, whence the
(...) (...) descended. Most hold of the Italian. For thence he flew into
Sicilia, and of this (...) (...) and Iuuenall mean. Iuuenall where he says,
how Vmbritius went to Cumae, and (...) Aeneas conferreth with Sybilla of Cumae.
But the doubt is, because the Icarian (...) (...) drowned sons name) is not
between Crete and Italy, but between Crete (...) ^re unto Icarus, one of the
Sporades Islands, of which the sea (says Varro) is (...) and the I Will bears
Icarus his name, who was drowned there in a shipwreck, (...) name to the
place. Ovid describes how they flew in their course in these (...)* -- Et iam
Iunonia laua
Part Samos fuerat, Delosque parosque relictae:
Dextra Lebynthos erat, faecundaque melle Calydna.
Now Paros, Delos, Samos, Iunoes land,
On the left hand were left: on the right hand
Lebynth, and hony-full Calydna stand.


^ee ^ew an unknown way to the North. But the Ionian Cumae, and not the Ita^
^th from Crete. But Seruius says, that if you observe the word, he flew to^
^th: but if you mark the history, he flew by the North. So that the fable
has added somewhat besides the truth: unless it were some other Icarus, or
some other cause of this seas name, who can affirm certainly in a thing of
such antiquity. (l) Oedipus.] Oedipus.
Laius, Grandchild to Agenor and son to Labdacus, King of Thebes in Boetia,
married Iocasta Creons daughter: who seeming barren, and Layus being very
desirous of children, went to the oracle which told him he need not be so
forward for children, for his own son should kill him. Soon after Iocasta
conceived, and had a son: the father made holes to be bored through the
feet and so cast it out in the woods: but they that had the charge, gave it to
a poor woman called Polybia, and she brought it up in Tenea, a town in the
Corinthian teritory. It grew up to the state and strength of a man, and being
hardy and high minded he went to the Oracle to know who was his father, for he
knew he was an outcast child. Layus by chance came then from the Oracle, and
these two meeting near Phoris, neither would give the way: so they fell to
words and thence to blows, where Laius was slain or as some say, it was in a
tumulte in Phocis, Oedipus and he taking several parts. Iocast^ was now
widow, and unto her came the Sphynx with a riddle for all her wooers to
dissolve: he that could, should have Iocasta and the Kingdom; he that could
not, must dye the death. Her riddle was: what creature is that goes in the
morning on four feet, at noone on two and at night on three? This cost many a
life, at last came Oedipus and declared it: so married his A ridle.
mother, and became King of Thebes. The Sphynx brake her neck from a cliffe,
Oedipus having children by his mother, at last knew whom he had married, and
whom he had slain: whereupon he pulled out his own eyes: and his sons
went to gether by the ears for the Kingdom. Thus much out of Diod. Strabo,
Sophocles and Seneca: for it is written in tragedyes. He was called Oedipus
quasi, (...), swollen fete. The Sphynx (says Hesiod) was begot betwne Typhon
and the Chymaera. Ausonius (I^ Gryphiis.) makes her of a triple ^ynx.
shape, woman-faced, griffin-winged, and Lyon-footed. His words be these. Illa
etiam thalamos per trina aenigmata querens,
Qui bipes, ^t quadrupes foret, ^t tr^pes omnia solus,
Terruit Aoniam volucris, ^o, virgo triformis,
Sphinx volucris pennis, pedibus fera, front pulla.
A marriage she seeking by ridles three,
What one might two, three, and foure-footed be,
Three-shaped bird, beast, made, she Greece distressed,,
Sphinx maid-fac'd, fetherd-foule, foure-footed beast.


But indeed this Sphynx was a bloody minded woman. All this now fell out (says
Eusebius) In Pandions time, the Argiues, and in the Argonautes time.
Palaephatus says that Cad^s having put away his wife Harmonia, she took the
mountain Sphynx in Boeotia, and from that roust did the Boeotians much
mischief. (Now the Boeotians called treacheries Aenig^, riddles.) Oedipus of
Corynth ouer-came her, and slew her, (l) From the truth of.] For of nothing is
nothing invented, says Lactant and Palaephatus. (m) Ganymed.] Tantalus stole
(...).
him and gave him to Jove, he was a goodly youth: and son to Tros King of
Troy. Io^ made him his cup bearer, and turned him into the sign Aquary. Tros
warred upon Tantalus for this, as Ph^cles the Poet writes. Eusebius. and Oros.
say that he was stolen from (...), which took the name from that fact: it
was a place near the city Parium in Phrygia. Stephan. (n) Danae.] Of her
elsewhere. She was Acrisius his daughter: who shut her and his (...)
son Preseus in a chest, and cast them into the sea, they drove to Apulia,
where Danae was married unto Pilumnus, and bare him Da^nus, of whom Apulia was
called Daunia, (o) Admetus.] The Hell-gods complaining to Jove that Asculapius
diminished their kingdom in reviving dead men, he killed him with a
thunderbolt, at which his father Apollo being mad, shot all the Cyclops (Jove's
thunder-makers (to death, which Jove greatly (...) would have thrust Apollo out
of Heaven: but at Latonas entreaty, he only bound hi^ year prenti^ unto a
mortal. So he came into Thessaly and there was heardsman unto King Admetus,
and therefore was he called Nonius, or Pastoral. Orph. Flacc. in Argonaut. D^
(...)* (...) Higi^s says he killed no^* all the Cyclops but only Steropes.
Admetus sailed with the Ar^tes: Apollo loved him well, and kept his herds
because he lay with his daughter. Lact^. (...) ^ee that Apollo that gave the
Arcadians their laws, who called him Nomius. (...) ^weth the contrary? (p)
Father Liber] As Diodorus, Strabo, Pliny, Philostratus, (...) ^oets almost do
record* Diodor. and Philost. give this reason of that fable of his (...) ^e in
Jove's thigh. His army was sore infected with maladies in India, and he lead
(...) to an higher and more wholesome air, where he recovered them all, and
this (...) ^dians called Femur (a thigh:) and so grew the fable. (q) Was
conquered] Some ((...)) in these times (to wit when Pandion removed the
seat of the Argiue (...) ^o My^s) record the deeds of Liber Pater, the
Indians, Actaeon and (...), and that Persus ouer-came Liber, and slew him as
Dinarc^s* the Poet (...) that will not believe him, let him view the tomb of
Liber at Delphos, near (...) statue of Apollo. He is painted in an ^ffiminate
shape, for he lead women to (...) as well as men, as Philocerus says, liber.
2. Thus far Eusebius. Clemens (Contra ^th that the Tytans pulled him in
pieces, and began to roaste and boil his (...)* but Pallas got them away,
and Apollo by Jove's command buried them on (...)*

^as and] Son to Jove and Danae: of him had Persia the name, for he warred
(...) admirable good fortune. Oros. so hold the Greeks as Xenophon Atticus
for Perseaus.
(...) was daughter to Caephus, Phaenix his son, and Cassiopeia. She (...)
bound Andromeda.
^ke, by the command of Apollo's Oracle, for a Sea Monster to devour, and her
pa^ ^ding and weeping over her: Perseus coming from the Gorgons wars,
hearing ^gs stood* bargained with them that he should marry the Virgin, and so
slew (...) by presenting the Gorgons head unto it. All of them were afterward
placed in (...) ^eus has nineteen stars at the back of Vrsa Minor, and the
circle Arctike (...) in the breast, no part of his constellation ever sets,
but his shoulders: Cassio^ in a chair, and has thirteen stars, and the
milken circle diuides her in the (...) ^he heavens motions turns her heels
upwards (says Higinus) because she (...) was fairer then the Nereides.
Andromeda was deified by Minerua, for prefer^ ^and before her country and
friend: she is next Cassiopeia, and has twenty (...) constellation: her head
is under Pegasus his belly, and the Tropike of Cancer (...) her breast and her
left arm. Perseus has seauenteene stars: his right hand (...) ^e circle
Arctike, and his foot stands upon Arcturus his head. Of these, read Julius
(...) Aratus Solensis. Ioppa in Syria (says Mela. lib. 1.) was built before
the deluge, (...) inhabitants say Cepheus reigned, where they do keep diverse
old altars of his (...) ^her P^ineus with great reverence, as also the huge
bones of the sea monster (...) slew. Hierom. Marcus Scaurus (says Pliny lib.
9. in his Edileship amongst (...) sights, showed the bones of the monster that
should have devoured Andro^ ^ing forty foot more in length, then the longest
Elephants ribbe of India, and La^rence Valla in an error.
(...) thicker in the back bone. This he brought from Ioppe, a town in
Iudaea. (...) writers say that Ioppe is in Iudaea, and therefore I wonder that
Lawrence Ualla (...) of this opinion: for he taxes Jerome of Ignorance for
placing of it in India: (...) had Pliny and Mela on his side, of better credit
in Geographie then Ovid. (...) ^ose verses are not much to the purpose: for the
first of the swartie brown, (...) of Aethiopia or Egypt: and in the later,
Ualla himself mistaketh the sto^ came out of Mauritania to Iudaea and Egypt,
along the coast of Africa. (...) he Andromeda, and from thence he went to
Euphrates, and to that coun^ Greeks call Persia after him, from thence into
India, and then home to Argos (...) (s) Nor affraide] Fearing not to blast
heaven with such impious and fabu^.

Of the Theological Poets. CHAP. 14.
(...) that time lived Poets, who were called Theologians, versifying of (...)
men-made gods: or of the worlds elements (the true GODS ^kes) or the
principalities and powers, (whom GODS will and not their merit, had so
advanced) of these as of Gods did they make their (...)* If their fables
contained any thing that concerned the true God it was ^o laid in hugger mugger
with the rest, that he was neither to be discer^ from their false gods
thereby, nor could they take that direction to give him the whole, his only
due, but must needs worship the creatures as Gods, with God the creator, and
yet could not abstain from disgracing the same their gods with obs^ ^bles.
Such was Orpheus (a) Museus, and Lynus. But those were only the gods servants,
not made gods themselves. Though Orpheus, I know not by what means, has
gotten the (b) ruling of the infernal sacrifices* or rather sacriledges in the
city of the Devil. The (c) wife of (...) also, ^no, cast her self headlong
into the sea with her child Mel^rtes, and yet were reputed gods: as others of
those times were also, as (d) Castor and Pollux. Ino, was called by the Greeks
L^ucothea, and by the latins Mat^, and held a goddess by both parts.

L. VIVES.
ORpheus (a) Musaeus, and Li^s.] They lived all together a little before the
wars of Troy. Orpheus was a Thracian and son to O^ager, or as some say, to
Apollo and Calliope, Orpheus.
but that was afiction, derived from his delicate vain. Artapanus says he
learnt Moses law of a master in Egypt, Diod, says he brought the
bacchanalia from Egypt into Greece, and taught the Thebanes them, because they
used him courteously. Beasts and stones did follow his music, by report, and
his ^armony persuaded the very destenies to return hi^ his Euridice. Thus the
Poets fable. The Bacchae slew him: wherefore, no man knows: some say because
he had seen the sacrifices of Liber: others because in his praises of the
gods, being in hell, he left Liber out. Others, because he judged that
Calliope should lie with Adonis one half year, and Uenus another; and rudged
not all for Uenus: therefore the women fell upon him and killed him. He was
torn in pieces (says Higin* lib. 2.) and (...) harp placed in Heaven, with
the belly toward the circle Arcticke. Aristotle says there was no* such man.
Others say he was of Crotone, and ^d in Pysi^tratus his time, the Tyran of
Athens. Author Argonautic. Linus was son to Mercury and Urania: Hermod^.
Apollos son, says Virgill. He first invented music in Greece. Diod. He
taught Hercules (...).
on the Harp: who being du^le and there-vpon often chiden, and sometimes
stricken by Linus, one time up with his harp and knocked out his masters
brains. Some say he was slain with one of Apolloes shaftes. Suidas reckneth
three Musaei. One borne at Eleusis: son (...).
to Antiphe^s and scholar to Orpheus, he wrote ethi^e verses unto Eumolpus.
Another a Theban, son to Thamyras. He wrote himnes, and odes, before the
wars of Troy. A third far latter, An Ephesian, in the time of Eumenes and
Attalus, Kings: he wrote the ^faires of the Troyans. It is commonly held that
he that was Orpheus scholar was son to (...). L^s says he wrote the
genealogyes of the Athenian gods: invented the sphere* and held one original
of all things, unto which they all returned. He dyed at Phal^ in Attica* as
his epitaph mentions, they say he was Master of the Eleusine ceremonies
when Hercules was admitted to them. Some (as I said before) held that the
Greeks called Moses, (...)* unless Eusebius be herein corrupted (b) Ruling
of the infernal.] Because held to go into hell and return safe: and to
mollify the destenies and make the furies weep. O^ M^* 10. This proved him
powerful in Hell* (c) The wife.] She seeing her husband love an Actolian maid
she had, called Antiphera, fell in love her-selfe with her son (...). And
therefore no servant may come in her temple. The crier of the sacrifices used
to cry: A way (...), and A^lians, man and woman. (...).


At Rome the Matrons led one maid servant only into Mat^tas Temple, and (...)
they be^ (...). P^* Prob. In^ and Melicerta being drowned, had their names
changed* (...) (...) in Greek and Matuta in Latin: Melicerte^ to Palaemon in
Greek, and Por^ ^n Latin: quasi Deus portuum, the God of havens. His temple
was on the whar^e of Portumn^s.
(...) his feasts called Portumalia. Varro. In honor of him the Corinthians
ordained the (...) games. Pausan. (d) Castor and Pollux] Jupiter in the shape
of a Swan, commanding (...) ^o pursue him in the shape of an Eagle* flew into
Laedas lap, who took him, and kept (...) she being a sleep, he got her
with egg, of which came Castor, Pollux, and Helena, Castor and Pollux.
(...) she laid two eggs: (Hor. Art. Poet.) and that Hellen and Clytemnestr^
came of the (...).

(...) say that Helen only and Pollux were the immortal births of the egg:
but (...) was mortal, and begotten by Tyndarus. Isocrates says that Hellen
was thought (...) the Swannes begetting, because she had a long and a white
neck. They were all (...) (...) and Tyndaridae, because they were supposed the
children of Tyndarus, Tyndaridae.
(...) ^sband, and son unto Oebalus, and not of Jove. Yet is a Swanne placed
in heaven ^ment of this holy act (forsooth) and Castor and Pollux are the
sign Gemini which Gemini.
(...) by course: because (says Homer) Castor and Pollux endeavoring to take
away (...) of Lincus and Idas, Idas after a long fight killed Castor, and would
have killed (...), but that Jupiter sent him sudden help, and made him
invulnerable. So Pollux (...) Jove, that his brother might have half of his
immortality, and Jove granted it Castor (...) good horseman, and Pollux a
wrastler. They were called Dioscuri, (...), that is, Dioscuri.
^nnes. Homer says they were buried in Lacedaemon, they were held to be good
for (...), and they appeared like two stars, because they being in the
Argonautes voy^ ^pest arose, whereupon all were terribly afraid, saving
Orpheus who cheered them (...) having prayde to the Samothracian gods, the
tempest immediately began to calm, (...) appearing upon the heads of Castor
and Pollux, which miracle gladded them all, (...) them think that the gods had
freed them: and so it grew to a custom to implore (...) ^f those two, who when
both appeared, were a good sign, but never when they (...)* But the Romans
called their temple most commonly Castors temple: wherein (...) ^yther
ir-religious, or Castor ungrateful, who being made immortal by his (...)
^nes, would take all the glory and honor unto himself, who had been for^
le^t in obscurity but for the other. But Pollux was cause of this, for he
obtey^ should shine one day, and another another day, was cause that they could
never (...) ^others company.

The ruin of the Argiue kingdom: Picus Saturnes son succeeding him in
Laurentum. CHAP. 15.
(...) was the Argiue kingdom translated (a) to Mycaenae, where (b) A^ ^on
ruled: and then (c) arose the kingdom of the Laurentines, (...)) Picus
Saturnes son was the first successor in, (e) Delborah a wo^ ^ng Iudgesse of
the Jews: GODS spirit indeed judged in her, for (...) a Prophetess: (her (f)
prophecy is too obscure to draw unto (...) without a long discourse.) And
now had the Laurentines had a (...) in Italy, (g) from whence, (after their
descent from Greece) the Ro^ pedigree is drawn. Still the Assyrian Monarchy
kept up: Lampares ^ith King ruling there now, when Picus began his kingdom in
Lau^ His father Saturn (the Pagans say) was no man: let the Pagans look (...)
some of them have written that he was, and that he was (h) King ^ore his
son Picus. Ask these verses of Virgill, and they will tell (...) ^id. 8. Is
genus indocile ac dispersum montibus altis Aeneid. 8.

Composuit, legesque dedit, latiumque vocari
Maluit: his quoniam latuisset tutus in oris.
Aureaque vt perhibent illo sub rege fuere. -- Secula.
Th'vndocill sort on Mountains high dispersed
He did compose, and gave them laws, and first
Would call it Latium, when he latent lay,
In whose reign was the golden age men say.
Tush, but these they say are fictions (l) Sterces was Saturnes father, he
that invented (m) manuring of the ground with dung, which of him was called
Stercus.
Stercus: Some say they called him Stercutius: Well howsoever he got the
name of Saturn, he was the same Sterces or Stercutius whom they deified for
his husbandry. And Pyrus his son was deified after him also; (n) a cunning
sooth-sayer, and (o) a great soldier as they report him to be. He begotte (p)
Faunus, the second King of Laurentum, and he was made a Syluane god. All these
men were deified before the Troyan war.

L. VIVES.
TRanslated (a) unto Mycaenae] Pausanias his words here-vppon. All know the
villainy of Danaus daughters upon their cousine Germans, and how Lynceus
succeeded The Argiue Kingdom.
Danaus in the Kingdom: who dying, Abas his sons divided the Kingdom
amongst them. Acrisius had Argoes Praetus, Eraeum, Mydaea and Tyrinthus, and
all that lay to the sea: In Tyrinthus are monuments yet of Praetus his dwelling
there. Afterward Acrisius hearing how his grandchild Perseus was alive, and
of great renown, he retired to Larissa near the river Peneus: Now Perseus
was wonderful desirous to see him, and sought all the means to honor him
that might be, and coming to Larissa to him, they met, and Perseus after a
while began to practice the casting of the quoyte (his own invention) to show
his strength: now Acrisius by chance came under the fall of the quoyte, and so
was brayned according to the Oracle concerning his death. Perseus returning to
Argos, and being ashamed of his grandsiers death, changed Kingdoms with
Megapenthes the son of Praetus: and then built Mycenas, calling it so,
because his swords (...), scabberd Mycenae.
fell off there: which he took for a sign to settle there. Yet some say it
was named so of Mycenae daughter to Inachus the second, and wife to Arestor.
Homer does name such a woman. (b) Agamemnon] Pelops begotte Atreus and Thyestes
on Hippodame, and Atreus begotte Agamemnon and Menelaus of Aerope, as Homer
holds. But Hesiod says they Agamemnon.
were the sons of Plisthenes, Thyestes son, unless we read Thyestes for
Plisthenes, which is more likely. This Agamemnon led all the Heroes against
Troy: Though some say that he was put once from the Empire and Palamedes
crowned, who being slain by the craft of Ulysses, the empire returned to
Agamemnon. (c) Laurentum] The eldest City of Latium: the seat of the
Aborigines where the Kingdom was founded by Saturn: called Laurentum. Picus.
Laurentum of the laurel wood, that grew near it. (d) Picus] Saturnes son
by Fauna. Virg. lib. 7. Ovid. Meta. 14. He married Cyrce, who perceiving that
he loved Pomona, turned him into a bird called a Pie: wherefore the Latins held
that for Mars his bird, and it was oraculous. Dyonis. Alex. Ovid says he was
thus transformed for refusing the love of Cyrce, but she was not his wife. So
holds Seruius also. (l) Delborah] Hierome reads it Deborah, Delborah.
that is (says he) a Be: or a Pratler The Tribe of Nephthalim under her
directions and Baruchs conduct overthrew the mighty army of Sisara, Judge. 4.
Joseph. de antiqui. lib. 5. She ruled the people forty years, and had
peace all the while in Israel, (f) Her prophecy] Iud. 5. (g) From whence] In a
continual succession from the Laurentes unto (...) Aenaeas his wife, to
Syluius Posthumus their son, and so to the Kings of Alba, down unto ^itor,
Amulius, Ilaean Romulus, and Remus. (h) King there] Whereupon it was called
Saturni^ though the ancient poet Eusebius think otherwise. Read his words in
Dion. lib. 1. (i) Uirgil] ^nders words. Ae^id. 8. (k) Golden age] Of this
before. It was such as Plato required in his resp^blica* and that was (...) as
Adam lived in before his fall: so that Eusebius says that Plato had that place
from Moses ^w. (l) Sterces] This they say was Saturn Stercutius.
that taught manuring, call him what they will. Macrob. Saturnal. But Pliny
says that Stercutius who was deified for dung-finding, was Saturnes son. But
there was a Saturn Saturnes many.
long before this, three hundred years before the Troyan war, as Theophilus
writes out of Talus: living in the time of Belus the Babilonian. Alex.
Polyhistor called Belus himself* Saturn: which were it so, either our times
are false accoun^d, or he was eight hundred years before that war. It may
be (as he that wrote the Aequiuoca says) that the (...) of every noble
family were called Saturnes, and their sons Jove's. (m) Manuring] T^ght by
Pliny lib. 16. Uarro, and other writers of husbandry. Cato in Tully, wonders
that H^ ommiteth it, Homer having mentioned it before him. (n) A cunning
sooth-saier] Therefore was he said to be turned into a pie, because he kept
one always for Aug^y: and there^ Virgill says he was painted with the Augurs
staff by him. Aeneid. Ipse Quirinali lituo* paruaque sedebat, Virg. A^nid. li.
7

Succinctus trabea. --
He in a sorry paul did sit,
An augurs crosier joined with it.


((...)) Warriour] Ovid. Met. 14. and Uirgil calls him the Horse-breaker,
which in Greek is (...) ^ch as Warrior: wherefore they feign him changed into
a hardy bird; who pearceth an (...) ^ith her bill: and is holy unto Mars. The
Romans honor it much, and affirm that it ^ed Romulus and Remus from hurt when
they were cast out in their infancy. (p) Faunus] Faunus.
(...) ^as also called Fatuus, and his sister Fauna, and Fatua. Of these we
have spoken before. (...) says that some held Mars to be his great
grandfather, and that the Romans wor^ him as their countries Genius, with
songs and sacrifices. So says Trogus. They say ^e ^d Euander and his few
Arcadians upon mount Palatine; and his wife Fatua (says Tro^) was every day
filled with the spirit of prophecy: so that it grew a proverb to say of pro^,
that they were infatuate, Faunus killing her, she was deified and named Bona
daea and her ^stity is said to be such, as no man living ever saw her, but her
own husband. Varro. from Bona D^a*
this Faunus come all the fawnes, Syluanes, and Satires.

How Diomedes was deified after the destruction of Troy: and his fellows said
to be turned into birds. CHAP. 16.
TRoy (whose destruction the excellent wits of elder times have left recorded
^to all memory, as well as the greatness of it self) being now destroyed in
the reign of (a) Latinus, son to Faunus, (b) (and from him came the Latin
(...),) the Laurentine ceasing): The Grecian victors returning each one to his
(...), (c) were sore afflicted on all sides, and destroyed in great numbers:
yet some (...) them got to be gods. For (d) Diomedes was made one, who never
returned (...), and his fellows they say (e) became birds: this now they have
his^ for, not poetry only, yet neither could his new godhead, nor his in^ of
Jove prevail so much as to turn his fellows unto men again. It (...) (...)
also that he has a Temple (f) in the I Will Diomedea, not far from ^t Gargarus
in Apulia, where these birds continually fly about (...) Temple, and dwell
there with such wonderful obedience, that they will wash the Temple with water
which they bring in their beakes, and when any Grecian comes thither, or any of
a Greek race, they are quiet, and (...) be gentle with them, but if any one
else come they will fly at his face wi^ great fury, and hurt some even to
death, for their beakes are very big ^arpe and strong, as it is said.

L VIVES.
LAtinus (a) Son.] Son to Faunus and Marica. Uirg. Some say this was Circe,
and Latinus.
some held her (says Seruius) to be Uenus: Hesiod makes him the Son of
Circes and Ulysses, and Uirgil touches at that also, But the times allow it
not, therefore we must affirm with Higinus, that there were many Latini.
Dionytinus says that Hercules being in Italy begot Pallas of Lauinia, Euanders
daughter, and Lasius of Hyperboride his hostage; who at his departure to Greece
he married to Faunus King of the Aborigines. Iustine says he was bastard to
Hercules and Faunus daughter. The Greeks called him ^elephus, that is
illustrious. (b) And from him.] The common report is they were first called
Aborigines, and afterward Latins. Dion and others. But Philelphus brings in
Orpheus against this calling them Latins ere Latinus was borne. But let him
look which Orpheus it was that wrote both the Argonautica and the Hymmes: not
the Thracian Orpheus, hold all the learned: but for the Hymmes, the
Pythagorists hold them the works of a certain cobbler. Aristotle says there
never was such a Poet as Orpheus was. But if it be called Latium of Latium.
Saturnes lying hid there, then are they called the Latins of Latium. But
Uarro deriueth it from Latinus. (c) Sore afflicted.] Ulisses his wanderings are
well known. Menelaus was driven into Egypt. Oyleus Ajax into Lybia. The whole
navy was drawn upon the rocks of Caphareus, near Euboea by a false light
Nauplius father to Palamedes hung out. Virgill. lib. 2. Seruius diriues all
this mischief from Mineruas wrath, either for Cassandras rape, or for their
contempt Diomedes.
shown in not sacryficing unto her. (d) Diomedes.] Son to Tydeus and
Deiphile: A soldior before Troy and almost equalized with Achilles by Homer.
He makes him foil Mars, He was King of Aetolia, but would not return
thither, because of his wife Egiale that playde the whore with Cylleborus,
Sthenelus his son, so went he into Apulia, where he built Adria, Argyripa,
Sipunte and Salapia, and there are Diomedes fields which he shared with
Danaus his step-father. There was an elder Diomedes, a bloody King of Thrace
that fed his horses with mans-flesh, and Hercules fed them with himself. His
sister Abdera built that city in Thrace where Democritus was borne: Near unto
which was Diomedes tower, the Greeks say those horses were his filthy
daughters, whom he made strangers to lie withal, and then killed them.
Palaphatus refers it unto the wasting of his patrimony upon horses, Diomedes
fellows become birds.
as Acteon did his upon dogs. (e) Became birds.] Because Agmon Diomedes his
fellow had rayled on Venus. Ou. Met. 4 or, because Diomedes had hurt both Uenus
and Mars, before Troy, the later the likelier. Homer. Ili. 5. Pliny says these
birds are called Cataractae (by Iuba) and that their teeth and eyes are of the
color of fire: their bodies are white, one ever leads the shole, and
another follows it: and they are only seen in the I Will Diomedea, where his
tomb and his Temple is, over against Apulia. If any stranger come there, they
set up a monstrous cry; But if a Greek come, they will play with him, that you
would wounder to see how they seem to acknowledge their countrymen. Origin
says their washing of his temple is but a fable. They were transformed (says
Seruius) through their impatient sorrow after the loss of their leader, and
that they will fly in flocks to the Greeks ships still, as knowing their old
kindred, but do the Barbarians all the Grief they can, for that Diomedes was
killed by the Illyrians. In Geor. 2. yet Aristotle says Aeneas slew him. In
Psyl. Seruius says the Greeks called them (...), which Gaza translateth,
Hearons. Suidas says they were like storkes, or storkes themselves. They may
be like storkes or hearons, or swans as Ovid says, but they are neither
storkes, hearons, nor swans. (f) In the I Will.] Some (as Augustine here, Suidas,
festus. etc.) will have but one I Will thus called: but there are two, in one of
which Diomedes lies buried. Some will have five or six of them. But Pliny and
Strabo do name only two, over against the promontory Garganus which lies three
hundred furlongs into the sea, the one of them is inhabited, but not the other,
in which they say Diomeds was lost and never seen more: so the Venetians both
there and in there own seat, gave him divine honors.

Of the incredible changes of men that Varro believed. CHAP. 17.
VArro, to get credit unto this, reports a many strange tales of that famous
(a) witch Circe, who turned Ulysses his fellows into beasts: and (b) of the
Arcadians, who swimming over a certain lake became wolves, and lived with the
wolves of the woods: and if they eat no man's flesh, at nine years end swimming
(...) the said lake they became me^ again. Nay he names one Daemonetus, who
tas^ of the sacrifices, which the Arcadians (killing of a child) offered to
their (...) ^us, was turned into a wolf, and becoming a man again at ten
years (...) ^ee grue to be a (c) champion, and was victor in the Olympike
games. Nor does he think that Pan (d) and Jupiter were called Lycaei in the
Arcadian history for any other reason then for their transforming of men into
wolves: for this they held impossible to any but a divine power: a wolf is
called (...) in greek, and thence came their name Lycaeus: and the Roman
Luperci (says he) had original from their mysteries.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) famous witch Cyrce] Daughter to the Sun, Aunte unto Medea. Her
mother is vn^ ^ne, some say she was Asteria, Latona's sister. Homer says yt
Persa, Oceanus his daugh^ Circe.
mother. But Diod. tells this tale. Perseus and A^etas, were sons to Phoebus:
Per^ ^ot Hecate, a cruel huntresse, who used to strike men in stead of beasts;
with darts (...) in Aconyt^m, (the use whereof she first found): And she had
Medea, Cyrce and a son (...) Aegias, by her uncle Aetas. Cyrce became an
excellent Herbarist, and could make Phil^ ^-drinks) she married Scytha King of
Sarmatia, and poisoned him when she had done. upon she was chased into a
little desert I Will in the Ocean, or as some say, unto the pro^ that bears her
name. Some think it is an I Will, but indeed it is but a promontory (...)
^insula. Strabo. It was once an I Will, but time has knit it unto the continent,
as it has any more. Seruius. In the bigger I Will of the two Pharmacussae, is
Circes tomb to be (...)* This is she that turned Ulysses his consorts into
beasts; Homer has much of her. So (...) ^ritus, Virgill and many other poets
and Historians. (b) Of the Arcadians] Euantes (...) Pliny lib. 8.) a credible
Greek author writes that the Arcadians used to choose one (...) the family of
one Anteus, and to bring him to a certain lake, where he (putting off his
(...) and hanging them on an oak) swam over, and became presently a wolf,
running (...) ^o the desert, and living nine years amongst the wolves, where
if he eat no man's (...) that space he returned to the lake and swimming over
again, became man as he ^ly nine years elder: Fabius says he had the same
clothes again also. So says (...) Neu^, a people in Scythia, that they have
set times wherein they may turn wolves (...) will, and wherein they may turn
men again if they will. (c) A champion] Properly a (...) with whirlebats: for
that, wrestling, running, leaping, and quoiting were the Greeks (...): and the
practisers of them all were called in greek (...), in lain (...) Pentathli.
Pan and] Upon mount Lycaeus in Arcadia were three gods honored, by the name of
Lycaei.
(...), Bacchus, and hornned Pan. I think the place, (but some others hold
their driving (...) the wolves) gave them their names. Some say they ruled in
this metamorphizing of (...) wolves, and helped them to their native shapes
again.

Of the devils power in transforming man's shape: what a Christian may believe
herein. CHAP. 18.
SOme perhaps will look for our opinion here, touching this deceit of the
devils, (a) [what a christian, should do, upon this report of miracles amongst
the infidells.] What shall we say, but get you out of the midst of Babylon?
this prophetical command wills us, to ply our faiths feet as fast as we can,
and quit our selves of this Worldly City compact of a confused crew of sinners
and evil Angels, and hie us unto the living God. For the greater power we
behold in the deceiuer, the firmer hold must we lay upon our mediator, by whom
we leave the dregs and ascend unto hight of purity. So then if we should say,
all those tales are lies, yet are there some that will avow they have either
hard them for truth, of persons of credit, or have seen them tried
themselves. For when I was in Italy, I heard such a report there, how certain
women of one place there, would but give one a little drug in cheese, and
presently he became an ass, and so they made him carry their necessaries
whether they would, and having done, they reformed his figure again: yet had
he his humane reason still, (b) as Apuleus had in his asse-ship, as himself
writes in his book of the golden ass; be it a lie or a truth that he
writes. Well (c) either these things are false, or incredible, because
unusual. But we must firmly hold Gods power to be omnipotent in all things:
but the devils can do nothing beyond the power of their nature (which is
angelical, although maleuolent) unless he whose judgments are ever secret,
but never unjust, permit them. (d) Nor can the devils create any thing (what
ever shows of theirs produce these doubts) but only cast a changed shape over
that which God has made, altering only in show. Nor do I think the devil
can form any soul or body into bestiall or brutish members, and essences: but
they have an unspeakable way of transporting man's fantasiein a bodily shape,
unto other senses (this running ordinarylie in our dreams through a thousand
several things, and though it be not corporal, yet seems to carry it self in
corporal forms through all these things) while the bodies of the men thus
affected lie in another place, being alive, but yet in an ecstasy far more
deep then any sleep. Now (e) this fantasy may appear unto others senses in
a bodily shape, and a man may seem to himself to be such an one as he often
thinks himself to be in his dream, and to bear burdens, which if they be
true burdens indeed, the devils bear them, to delude men's eyes with the
appearance of true burdens, and false shapes. For one Praestantius told me that
his father took that drug in cheese at his own house, whereupon he lay in
such a sleep that no man Praestantius.
could awake him: and after a few days he awaked of himself and told all he
had suffered in his dreams in the mean while, how he had been turned into
an horse and carried the soldiers victuals about in a (f) budget. Which was
true as he told, yet seemed it but a dream unto him: another told how one
night before he slept, an old acquaintance of his a philosopher came to him and
expounded certain Platonismes unto him, which he would not expound him
before. So afterward he asked him why he did it there which he would not do
in his own house when he was entreated? I did it not quoth the other, indeed I
dreamed that I did it. And so that which the one dreamed, the other in a
fantastical appearance beheld: These now were related by such as I think
would not lie, for had any one told them, they had not been to be believed. So
then those Arcadians, whom the god (nay the devils rather) turned into wolves,
and those fellows of Ulysses (g) being charmed by Circe into Bestiall shapes,
had only their fantasy, occupied in such forms, if there were any such
matter. But for Diomedes birds, seeing there is a generation of them, I hold
them not to be transformed men, but that the men were taken away, and they
brought in their places, as the (h) hind was, in Iphigenias room, Agamemnons
daughter. The devil can play such iugling ^kes with ease, by Gods permission,
but the Virgin being found alive afterward, this was a plain deceit of
theirs to take away her, and set the hind there. But Diomedes, fellows,
because they were never seen, (the evil angels destroying them) were
believed to be turned into (i) those birds that were brought out of their
unknown habitations into their places. Now for their washing of his temple,
their love to the Greeks and their fury against others, they may have all
this by the devils instinct: because it (k) was his endeavor to persuade yt
Diomedes was become a god, thereby to make them iniure the true God, by adoring
fained ones, and dead persons (with temples, altars priests and sacrifices) who
when they lived, (l) had no life: all which honors being rightly bestowed,
are peculiar to that one true and only God.

L. VIVES.
What (a) a Christian] Some copies have not this. (b) As Apuleius] He was a
magitian, doubtless: but never turned into an ass. Augustine saw how
incredible that was, but Apuleius. Lucian.
(...) not red many Greeks, he could not know whence he had his plot ofthe
golden ass: for (...) names none that he follows, as he does in his
cosmography. But Lucian before him (...) ^ow he being in Thessaly to learn
some magike was turned into an ass in stead of a (...) that this was true: but
that Lucian delighted neither in truths, nor truths likelihoods. (...) ^ke did
Apuleius make whole in latin, adding diverse things to garnish it with more
delight to such as love Melesian tales, and here and there sprinckling it with
his antiquaries (...), and his new compositions, with great liberty, yet
somewhat suppressing the absurdity (...) (...) ^ame. But we love now to read
him because he has said some things there in* that (...) dexterity, which
others seeking to imitate, have committed gross errors: for I think (...)
grace of his in that work, is inimitable. But Apuleius was no ass, only he
delights men's (...) ^th such a story, as man's affection is wholly transported
with a strange story. (c) Either (...) (...) l. 8. held them all false, nor may
we believe all the fables affirmed: but the Greeks (...) cruel liers, that
they would not want a witness for the most impudent fiction they (...) (...)
Nor can] To create, is to make something of nothing: this God only can do: as
all the (...) affirm: [but then they dispute whether he can communicate this
power unto a crea^. Saint Thomas has much concerning this, and Scotus seeks
to weaken his arguments to To create what it is. [Louuaine copy defective.
(...) his own: and Occam is against both, and Petrus de Aliaco against him,
thus each (...) ^weth the celestial power into what form he please. How can
manners, be amended, ^ow can truth be taught, how can contentions be
appeased, as long as there is this confused (...) iangling, and this haling too
and froe in matter of divinity, according as (...) (...) ^ands affected? [(e)
This Phantasie] All the world proves this opinion of Augu^ (...). (f) A
budget] Reticulum: the travelers carried their victuals in it, bread, cheese,
(...)* etc. Hor. lib. 1. Sermon. Reticulum panis venales inter onustos,
Forte vehas humero, nihiloplus accipias quam
Qui nihil portarit --
As if you, on your back well burdened, bore
A wallet of sale-bread, you should no more
Receive for food then he: that were from burden free.


It was a net (says Acron) wherein bread was borne to the slaves that were
to be sold. Thus I conjecture (says he) (g) Charmed] Virg. Pharmaceutr. (h)
The Hinde] Iphigenia was daughter to Agamemnon and Clitemnestra. The Army being
at Aulis in Boeotia, Iphigenia.
Agamemnon killed a Stag of Dianas, for which deed the navy was sore beaten
with storms, and infected with pestilence: to the Augury they went: Calchas
answered, Diana must be appeased Calchas.
with Agamemnons blood. So Ulisses was sent to Mycenae for Iphigenia, under
coulor of a marriage, and being brought to the Altar, and ready to bleed, she
was sent away, and a Hind set in her place, she being carried into Taurica
Chersonnesus, to King ^hoas, where she was made Priest unto Diana Taurica, who
had men sacrificed unto her. So Orestes hi^ brother coming thither, they two
conspired together and slew the King, and then sailed away to Aricia in Italy
(i) Those birds] A diversity of reading. (k) It was his indeauor] Many a fond
note was there, on this work here-tofore. An ass, that is, a creature so
called: he spoke, that is, he said, I was silent, that is, I said nothing:
and such an one was crept into the text here but we have left it out. (l) Had
no true life] For the souls true life i^ God* whom the soul leaving, dies.
This the Pagan Philosophers taught as well as we Christians that all things
the farther they were from GOD, the less life had they, and so of the
contrary. This is common in Plato and sometimes in Aristotle. The Stoikes said
that a wiseman only lived, and was a man; the rest were nothing but plain
apes. So said Socrates.

That Aeneas came into Italy when Labdon was Judge of Israel. CHAP. 19.
Troy being now taken and razed, (a) Aeneas with ten ships filled with the
remaynes of Troy came into Italy, Latinus being King there, (b) Mnestheus at
Athens, Poliphides in Syrion, (d) Tautanes in Assyria, and (e) Labdon judging
Israel. Latinus dying, Aeneas reigned three years in the same time of the
same Kings, excepting that (f) Pelasgus was King of Sycion, and (g) Sampson
Judge of the Hebrews, who was counted Hercules for his admired strength.
Aeneas (h) being not to be found after his death (i) was canonized for a God
by the Latins. So was Sangus or Sanctus by the Sabines. And at this time
Codrus the King of Athens, went in^disguise to be slain of the Peloponesians
the Athenians enemies; and so he was: hereby delivering his country from
ruin. For the Peloponesians had an Oracle told them that they should conquer
if they killed not the Athenian King. So he deceived them by his disguise, and
giving them evil words, provoked them to kill him, whereof Virgill says: Aut
iurgi^ Codri. And (k) him the Athenians sacrificed unto as a God* Now in the
reign of Syluius the fourth Latin King (Aeneas, his son by Lauina, not by
Creusa, nor brother to Ascanius)* Oneus the nine and twentieth of Assyria (l)
Mclanthus the A^ead, 8.
sixteenth of Athens, and Heli the Priest judging Israel, the Sicyonian
Kingdom^ fell to ruin, which endured (as it is recorded) 959 years.

L. VIVES.
Aeneas (a)] How he escaped out of Troy, it is diversely related. Dionys. lib.
1. For Aeneas.
some say that he keeping a Tower, and setting all the Grecians on fire
against that place, mean time packt away all the vnnecessaries, old men, women
and children into the ships, and then breaking through the foes, increased
his powers and took the strengths of Ida, which they held almost a year: but
the Greeks coming against them, they made a peace, upon condition to depart
out of Phrygia without disturbance of any man whatsoever, until they were
settled some-where. Thus says Helanicus, a famous, but a fabulous author.
M^ucerates Xanthius says Aeneas betrayed Troy, and therefore the Greeks freed
him: the reason of this treason was, for that Paris scorned him and made him a
mocking stock to the Troyan Lords: some say he was in the haven when Troy was
ta^n* others, that he was admiral of Pri^s navy: the Latins say that Antenor
and he were preserved because they had always persuaded the restoring of
Hellen, and were of old acquaintance in Greece. How he came into Italy,
Virgill sings at full, mixing false notes with (...), as poets commonly use* I
will quote no more from others, for this is the most like to truth. He came
first into Thrace, staid there all winter, and had many fled unto him out of
Asia: there he built a City and called it Aenea (Dionys.) or Aenon: (Mela and
Plin.) And there says Virgil was P^lidorus buried. Aen. 3. -- Feror huc et
littore curuo
Maenia prima loco, fatis ingressus iniquis:
Aeneadesque meos nomen de nomine fingo.
I hither driu'n, by crosse-fates in I came,
And on crook't shore first walls did found and frame*
And named them Aeneads by mine own name.


This City Salust calls Aenon, though Homer says that Aenon sent arms
against Troy. Seru. in Aen. 3. Euphorion and Callimachus say that Ulysses his
companion was buried there, going forth to forage, and dying: and thence it had
the name. It stood until the Macedonian monarchy, and then King Cassander
razed it, and removed the townsmen to Thessalonica which he then built. From
Thrace Aeneas went to Delos, then to Cythera, then to his kinsmen in Arcadia,
thence to Zacynthus, so to Leucadia, and thence to Ambracia where there was a
City on the river Achelons bank, called Aenea, but it was left vn-peopled
afterward. Thence went Anchises to Butrotum in Epyrus, and Aeneas to Dodona to
the oracle, with all speed, and thence returning to his father, they came to
Drepanum in Sicily, where Anchises died. (Yet Strabo says Anchises came into
Italy: and died (says Dionys.) a year before Aeneas) T^ came Aeneas into
Italy, into the quarters of Laurentum, in the five and thirty year of (...)
his reign, two years after his departure from Asia. Nor came his whole Navy
hither. (...) ^e landed in Apulia, and some in other places of Italy, of whose
arrival there are monu^ unto this day. Some of them leaving Aeneas in Italy,
returned to Phrygia again. The (...) place that Aeneas held in Latium, they
named Troy. It was four furlongs from the sea. (b) (...)] Son to Ornius,
Erichtheus his son; he stirred the people against Theseus (...) (...)
absence, saying that he had brought the free people of Attica into one city,
as into a (...) Now Theseus was held in most strait prison by Orchus the
Molossian King: and he had (...) the ravished Hellen at Aphydna, which Castor
and Pollux took, freed their sister and (...) Mnestheus King of Athens, for
that he left them soldiers. So Theseus being freed by ^es, and making means
for the recovery of his Kingdom, went into Scyros, where (...) Lyconides slew
him. So ruled Mnestheus quietly at Athens: for Theseus his children (...) but
young, and in the hands of Elpenor in Euboea, Mnestheus respected them not.
They (...) come to years went with Elpenor to that universal war of Troy,
and Mnestheus (...) also with his forces, and returning died in Melos, and
Demophon Theseus son succeeded him. Plut. Paus. Eusebius. So that Mnestheus was
dead a little before Aeneas came into Italy. (...) Polyhistor says that
Demophon reigned at Athens when as Troy was destroyed. (c) Po^] So says Eusebius.
but Pausanias relates it thus. Sycion had a daughter, called Echtho^, on her
did Mercury (they say) beget Polybus, Phlias, Dionysius his son married her
afterward, and had begot Androdanas on her. Polybis married his daughter
Lysianassa to Ta^, son to Bias King of Argos. At this time Adrastus fled from
Argos to Polybus in Sicy^* and Polybus dying was King there. He returning to
Argos, Ianiscus one of Clytius Laome^ posterity came from Attica thither and
got their Kingdom, and dying, left it to Phaestus, a (...) of Hercules. He
being called by Oracle into Crete, Euxippus son to Apollo and (...) Syllis,
reigned, and he being dead, Agamemnon made war upon Sycionia, and Hippo^ ^ne
to Rhopalus the son of Phaestus, fearing his power, became his tributary,
upon ^ion. This Hippolitus, had issue Lacestades and Phalces. Now Tamphalces
son to (...) came with his Dorikes in the night and took the city, yet did
no harm, as being ^ed from Hercules also, only he was joined fellow in this
Kingdom with him. From (...) the Sycionians were called Dorians, and made a
part of the Argiue Empire. (d) Tauta^ (...) reigned in the time of the Trojan
wars. Eus. Diod. says that Priam (who held his crown (...) (...) as from his
sovereign) in the beginning of the siege sent to entreat some help of him:
who sent him 10000. Ethiopians: 10000. Susians, and twenty chariots o^ (...)
^gons, under the conduct of Memnon, son to Duke Tython his dearest associate.
Ho^ mentions this Memnon, for he was slain in this war. He was a youth of an
hardy and ^que spirit, as his valourous performances did witness in abundance.
(e) Labdon] So does Eusebius: Labdon.
call him. The Bible has it Abdon. Iud. 12. 13. Son he was to Hylo the
Ephraite, who had forty sons, and they had fifty sons al good horsemen and he
left them al living at his death. Io^. (...) (f) Pelasgus] The old books, read
Pelagus. My friend Hieronimo Buffaldo (a^ vnwear^ed Hieromino. Buffaldo.
student, a true friend, and an honest man) says that in one copy he had read
it Pelagus, Pausanias puts other names in this place quite different: he
gives us no light here. (g) Sampson] Iud. 13. His deeds excelled all those of
Hercules, Hector, or Milo. They are known: I will not stand to rehearse them.
(h) Being not to be] Mezentius King of Hetruria warred against the Latins, and
Aeneas (their King) joining battle with him near Lauinium, they had a (...)
Mezent us.
fought field: and being parted by night, next morning Aeneas was not to be
found: some said he was indenized, some, that he was drowned in Numicus, the
river. The Latins built him A^as deified.
a Temple, and dedicated it: TO OUR HOLY FATHER AND TERRESTRIAL GOD* GOVERNOR
OF THE WATERS OF NVMICVS. Dionys. Some say be built it himself, Festus says,
Ascanius his son did. He died three years after his step-father Latinus, (so
long was he King) and seven years after the dissolution of Troy. He has
toumbes in many nations, but those are but for his honor, (...), empty
monuments, his true one is by the river Numicus. Liu. They call him Jupiter
indiges, so Ascanius named him when he deified him: Indiges, is a mortal made
a Deity. Some say it is only spoken of those, whom it is sacrilege to name,
Indiges, what it is.
as the patron-gods of cities, and such like. But I think Indiges be as much
as in-borne or inliuing; that is, meaning them that dwelt or were borne in the
soil, where they are deified. Such did Lucane mean when he said. Indigites
fleuisse deos vrbisque laborem,
Testatos sudore lares --
The towne-gods wept, the house-hold-gods with sweat
Witnes^, the Cities labor should be great.


And therefore he was both Jupiter indiges, and Jupiter Latialis. But this I
may not ba^e: Aeneas had his swinging places in Italy, as Erigone Icarus his
daughter had in Greece: for Svvinging games.
thus says Festus Pompeius. These swinging-games had original from hence,
because Aeneas, being lost (no man knew how in his wars against Mezentius
King of the (...)) was held deified, and called Jove Latiall. So Ascanius sent
out all his subjects bond and free six days to seek him in earth and air:
and so ordained swinging to show the form of man's life, how he might mount to
heaven, or fall from thence to earth, and the perpetual revolution of fortune.
Thus Festus. (i) By the Latines] And the Sicilians also in E^yma, a city that
he built. Ou. Met. 14. (k) Sangus] Or Xanthus, or Sanctus, or Sancus, but
Sangus is the truth. Porcius Sangus
Cato (says Dionys.) wrote that the Sabines had their name from Sabinus, son
to Sangus the god of the Sabines, otherwise called Pistius. Him (says
Lactantius) do the Sabines adore, as the Romans do Quirinus, and the
Athenians Minerua. Hereof he that list may read A^nius. Codrus.
^equester Uibius, in his description of Rome, mentions this Genius Sangus. (l
Codrus* ^on to Melanthus the Messenian; in whose time the Kings of Peloponnesus
(descended from Hercules) warred upon Athens, because they feared the
abundance of exiles there, and Codrus reiging at Athens, they feared both the
Corinthians, because of their bordering upon them (for Isthmus wherein Corynth
stood, joins on Megara) and the Messenians also, because of Melanthus, Codrus
his father, being King there. So the blood royal of Peloponnesus (...) to the
oracle, and were answered that the victory and the Kings death should fall both
(...) one side: hereupon they conceiled the Oracle, and withal, gave a strict
change that (...) should touch Codrus. But the Athenians hearing of this
Oracle, and Codrus being desirous of glory, and the good of his country,
disguised himself, went into the Laconian camp, and falling to brable with
the soldiers, was slain. So they lost the field, and all their Kingdom
besides, excepting only Megara. (m) An Oracle] Either that the Laconians
should conquer if they killed not Codrus: (Trog.) or that the Athenians should
conquer if Codrus were killed. Tusc. quaest. lib. 3. Seruius delivers it, as
we did but now. (n) Him the Athenians] If these be gods (says Tully Denat.
Deor. (...).) then is Erichtheus one, whose priest and temple we see at Athens:
if he be a god, why then is not Codrus, and all those that fought and died for
their countries glory, Gods also? which if it (...). (...).
be not probable, then the ground whence it is drawn, is false. These words of
Tully seem to auerre that Codrus was held no god at Athens rather then
otherwise. (o) Creusa] Daughter to Priam and Hecuba, wife to Aeneas, mother to
Ascanius. But Aeneas in Italy had Syluius by Cre^.
(...), and he was named Posthumus because his father was dead ere he were
borne. Some think that Lauinia, after Aeneas his death swaied the state till
Syluius came to years, and then ^igned to him. Some say Ascanius had it though
he had no claim to it from Lauinia by whom it came: but because that she had
as yet no son, and withal, was of too weak a sex to manage that dangerous
war against Mezentius and hisson Lausus (leaders of the Hetrurians) therefore
she retired into the country, and built her an house in the woods where she
brought up her son, calling him thereupon Syluius. Now Ascanius having
ended the war fetched them out of the woods, and used them very kindly, but
dying he left his Kingdom to his son I^lius, between whom and his uncle
Syluius there arose a contention about the Kingdom, which the people decided,
giving Syluius the Kingdom, because he was of more years, and discretion, and
withal, the true heir by Lauinia: and making Iulus chief ruler of the
religion, a power next to the sovereigns. Of this Caesar speaks, both in
Lucane, and in Suetonius. And this power remained to the Julian family until
Dionys. his time. I remember I wrote before, that because of Neptunes prophecy
in Homer, some thought that Aeneas returned into Phrygia having seated his
fellows in Italy, and that he reigned over the Trojans th^re, at their ^ome:
(perhaps stealing from that battle with Mezentius, and so shipping away
thither.) But ^f that Homer mean the Phrygian Troy, then he likewise speaks
of Ascanius, whom many hold did reign there again. Dionysius says that
Hellenus brought Hectors children back to l^, and Ascanius came with them and
chased out Antenors sons whom Agamemnon had ^de viceroies there at his
departure. There is also a Phrygian City called Antandron, where Ascanius
(they say) reigned buying his liberty of the Pelasgiues, for that town,
whereupon it had the name. So that it is a question whether Aeneas left him in
Phrygia, or that his father being dead in Italy, and his stepmother ruling
all, he returned home again. Hesychius names Ascania, a city in Phrygia of
his building* Steph. It may be this was some other son of Aeneas Ascania, a
City.
^s, then that who was in Italy. For I beeeue Aeneas had more sons of that
name ^en one: It was rather a sur-name amongst them then otherwise; for that
Ascanius that is (...) to rule in Italy, properly hight Euryleon. (p)
Melanthus,] Codrus his father. How he got Melanthus.
this Kingdom, is told by many: but specially by Suidas in his Apaturia. This
feast (says he) was held at Athens in great sollemnity, three days together:
and Sitalcus his son (the ^ing of Thrace) was made free of the City. The
first day they call Dorpeia, the supping day, for that day their feast was at
supper: the second Anarrhysis, the riot, then was the excessive ^crifices
offered unto Jupiter Sodalis, and Minerua: the third, Cureotis, for their bo^es
and wen^s played all in companies that day. The feasts original was thus. The
Athenians having ^es with the Baeotians about the Celenians, that bordered them
both; Xanthus the Boe^an challenged Thimetus the King of Athens: he refusing,
Melanthus the Messenian (...) to Periclymenus, the son of Neleus, being but
a stranger there, accepted the combat (...) was made King. Being in fight
Melanthus thought he saw one stand behind Xanthus (...) a black goats skin,
whereupon he cried out on Xanthus that he brought help with him to (...)
field. Xanthus looking back, Melanthus thrust him through. Hereupon was the
feast (...) the deceiuer ((...)) ordained, and a Temple built to Dyonisius
Melanaiges, that Apaturia.
(...) black-skind. Some say that the name of these feasts came of their
fathers gathering to^er to inscribe their sons into the rolls of their men,
and give them their toga virilis, their (...) of man's estate. Thus far Suidas.

Of the succession of the Kingdom in Israel after the Judges. CHAP. 20.
Soon after (in those Kings times) the Judges ceased, and Saul was anointed
first King of Israel, in Samuel the prophets time: and now began the Latin
kings to be called Syluij of Syluius Aeneas his son: all after him, had their
proper names several, and this sur-name in general, as the Emperors that (a)
succeeded The Slyuii.
Caesar, were called Caesar's long after. But Saul and his progeny being
rejected, (b) and he dead, David was crowned, (c) forty years after Saul
began his reign. (d) Then had the Athenians no more kings after Codrus, but
began an Aristocracy. (e) David reigned forty years, and Solomon his son
succeeded him, he that built that goodly Temple of God at Jerusalem. In his
time the Latins built Alba, and their kings were thence-forth called Alban
kings, though ruling in Latium. Alba.
(f) Roboam succeeded Solomon, and in his time Israel was divided into two
kingdoms, and either had a king by it self.

L. VIVES.
THat (a) succeeded Caesar] Not Julius, but Augustus (and so have some copies)
for it was from him that Augustus, and Caesar became Imperial surnames. He was
first called C. Octa The Caesar's whence.
uius, but Caesar left him heir of his goods, and name. (b) He dead,] Samuel
had anointed him long before, but he began not to reign until Saul's death, at
which time God sent him into Hebron. 2. Sam. 2. (c) Forty yeares] So long ruled
Saul, according to the scriptures, and Josephus. But Eupolemus that wrote the
Hebrew gests, says, but 22. (d) Then had the] They set a rule of (...),
princes, magistrates, or what you will. The Latins call them Archons, using
the Greek. Cic. 1. de fato. Spartian. in Adriano. Vell. Paterc. etc. They had
nine magistrates at Athens Archons, a kind of Magistrates
(says Pollux. lib. 8.) first the Archon, elected every year new. Then the
president, then the general for war: then the chief Justice, and five other
Counselors or Lawiers with him. These last heard and decided matters in the
Court. The Archon, he was to look to the ordering of Bacchus his sacrifices,
and Appollo's games in the spring: commanding all then: he was chief also of
the Court where causes of violence, slander, defraudations of wards, elections
of guardians, letting out of the fatherless childrens houses, etc. were
dispatched, all these must pass his seal. Thus Pollux. Before Solons laws,
they might not give judgment but each in a several place. The president, he
sat at the Bucolaeum, not far from the Councellhouse. The General in the
Lycaeum, the Counselors in the Thesmotium. The Archou at the brazen statues,
called Exonimi, where the laws were fixed ere they were approved (e) Dauid]
There was never such a pair of men in the world, princes or private men as
were these two, David.
David and Solomon, the father and the son, the first for humility, honesty,
and prophecy: the second for wisdom. Of him and of the Temple he built,
Eupolemus and Timochares, (profane Authors) do make mention. Lact. Inst. diu.
lib. 4. says that he reigned one hundred and forty years before the Troyan
war: whereas it was just so long after it ere he began to reign. Either
the author, or the transcriber are far mistaken. (f) Roboam. In him, was the
proverb fulfilled, a good father has oftentimes a badde son: for he like
a Roboam.
fool, fallen quite from his fathers wisdom would needs hold the people in
more awe then his father had done before him, and so lost ten tribes of his
twelve; and they chose them a King, calling him King of Israel, leaving the
name of the King of Judah to him and his posterity, that reigned but over that,
and the tribe of Benjamin: for Leui, belonging to the temple of God, at
Jerusalem, was free.

Of the latian Kings: Aeneas (the first) and Auentinus (the twelfth) are made
gods. CHAP. 21.
LAtium, after Aeneas their first deified king had eleauen more, and none of
them deified. But Auentinus the twelfth, being slain in war, and buried on
that hill that bears his name, he was put into the calender of their men gods.
Some say he was not killed, but vanished away, and that mount Auentine (a) had
not the name from him but from another: after him was no more gods made in
Latium but Romulus the builder of Rome, betwixt whom and Auentine were two
Kings: one, Virgil names saying. Proximus ille Procas Troianae gloria gentis.


In whose time because Rome was now upon hatching, the great monarchy of
Assyria took end. For now after one thousand three hundred and five years
(cou^ting Belus his reign also in that little Kingdom at first) it was
removed to the Medes. Procas reigned before Amulius. Now Amulius had made
Rhea, (or Ilia) his brother Numitors daughter, a vestall Virgin, and Mars they
say lay with her (thus they honor her whore-dome) and begot two twins on her,
who (for a proose of their foresaid excuse for her) they say were cast out,
and yet a she-wolfe, the beast of Mars came and fed them with her dugges: as
acknowledging the sons of her Lord and Master. Now some do say that there
was an whore found them when they were first cast out, and she sucked them up.
(Now they called whores, Lupae, she wolves, and the stews unto this day are
called Lupa^:) Afterward Fastulus a shep-heard had them (say they) and his
wife Woluish whores.
Acca brought them up. Well, what if GOD, to tax the bloody mind of the
King that commanded to drown them, preserved them from the water and sent this
beast to give them nourishment? is this any wonder? Numitor, Romulus, his
grand-sire succeeded his brother Amulius in the Kingdom of Latium, and in the
first year of his reign was Rome built, so that from thence forward, he and
Ro^s reigned together in Italy.

L. VIVES.
AVentine (a) had not] It has many deriuations (says Uarro.) Naeuius deriueth
it ab auibus from the birds that flew thence to Tyber. Others, of Auentinus the
Alban King, there Auentine.
buried. Others, ab aduentu hominum, of the resort of men, for there stood
Dianas temple, com^ to all Latium. But I think it comes rather ab aduectu, of
carrying to it: for it was whi^ severed from all the city, by fennes, and
therefore they were feign to be rowed to it in ^pes. And seeing we do
comment somewhat largely in this particular book, for cu^ heads, take this
with ye too: Auentine was quite without the precinct of Rome, either because
that the people encamped there in their mutiny, or because that there came no
fortu^ birds unto it in Remus his Augury.

Rome, founded at the time of the Assyrian Monarchies fall, Ezechias being King
of Judah. CHAP. 22.
BRiefly Rome (a) the second Babylon, daughter of the first (by which it
pleased God to quell the whole world, and fetch it all under one sovereignty)
was now founded. The world was now full of hardy men, painful and well
practiced in war. They were stubborn, and not to be subdued but with
infinite labor and danger. In the conquests of the Assyrians over all Asia,
the wars were of far lighter account, the people were to seek in their
defenses, nor was the world so populous. For it was not above a thousand years
after that universal ^luge wherein all died but Noah and his family, that
Ninus conquered all Asia excepting India. But the Romans came not to their
monarchy with that ease that he did: they spread by little and little, and
found sturdy lets in all their proceedings. Rome then was built when Israel
had dwelt in the land of promise 718. years. 27. under Iosuah, 329. under the
Judges, and 362. under the Kings until Achaz, now King of Judah, or as others
count, unto his successor Ezechias, that good and Godly king, who reigned
(assuredly) in Romulus his time: Osee in the mean time being king of Israel.

L. VIVES.
ROme the (a) second Babilon] Saint Peter calls Rome Babylon as Hierome says
(in Uita Marci.) who also thinks that John in the Apocalips means no other
Babylon but Rome called Babilo^. [Ah (say the Louaynists) this bites, leave it
out, and so they do.]
Rome. Ad Marcellam. [But now it has put off the name of Babylon: no confusion
now: you cannot buy any thing now in matter of religion without a very fair
pretext of holy law for the selling of it, yet may you buy or sell (almost) any
kind of cause, holy, or hellish, for money.]

Of the evident prophecy of Sybilla Erithraea concerning Christ. CHAP. 23.
IN those days Sybilla Erythrea (some say) prophesied: there were many (a)
Sybilis (says Varro) more then one. But this (b) Sybille of Erithraea wrote
some apparent prophecies of Christ, which we have read in rough latin verses,
not correspondent to the greek, the interpretor well learned afterward, being
none of the best poets. For Flaccianus, a learned and eloquent man (one that
had been Consulls deputy) being in a conference with us concerning Christ,
showed us a greek book, saying they were this Sybills verses, wherein in one
place, he showed us a sort of verses so composed, that (c) the first letter of
every verse being taken, they all made these words (...). Jesus Christus, Dei
Filius, Saluator, JESUS CHRIST, SON OF GOD THE SAVIOVR. Now (d) these verses,
as some have translated into latin, are thus. The English of them you shall
have in the Comment following, in an acrostike out of the Greek.

(e) Iudicii signo tellus sudore madescet.
Ec^lo rex adueniet per s^cla futurus:
(f) Scilicet in carne presens vt iudicet orhem.
Unde Deum cernent incredulus atque fidelis
Celsum cum sanctis, ^ui iam termino in ipso.
(g) Sic anim^ cum carne aderunt, quas iudicet ipse.
Cum iacet incultus densis in vepribus orbis.
Reiicient simulachra viri, cunctam quoque Gazam.
(h) Exuret terras ignis, pontumque, polumque
Inquirens, tetri portas effringet Auerni.
(i) Sanctorum sed enim cunctae lux libera carni
Tradetur, sontes aeternum flamma cremabit.
(k) Occultos actus retegens, tunc quisque loquetur
Secreta, atque Deus reserabit pectora luci.
Tunc erit et luctus, stridebunt dentibus omnes:
Eripitur solis Iubar, et chorus interit astris.
Soluetur caelum lunaris splendour obibit.
Deiiciet colles, valles extollet ab imo.
Non erit in rebus hominum sublime, vel altum.
Iam equantur campis montes, et caerula ponti.
Omnia cessabunt, tellus confracta peribit.
Sic pariter fontes torrentur. fluminaque igni.
Sed tuba tunc sonitum tristem dimittet ab alto
Orb, gemens facinus miserum, variosque labores:
Tartareumque Chaos monstrabit terra de^iscens.
Et coram hic domino reges sistentur ad vnum.
Decidet e caelis ignisque et sulphuris amnis.
Now this translator could not make his verses ends meet in the same sense
that the Greek meet in: as for example, the Greek letter v, is in the head
of one verse, but the Latins have no word beginning with v, that could fit
the sense. And this is in three verses, the fifth, the eighteenth and the
nineteenth. Again we do not take these letters from the verses heads in
their just number, but express them 5. words, Jesus Christus, Dei Filius,
saluator. The verses are in all, 27. which make a trine, fully (m) quadrate,
and solid. For 3. times 3. is 9. and 3. times 9. is 27. Now take the 5. first
letters from the 5. first words of the Greek sentence included in the verses
heads, and they make (...) a fish, a mystical name of Christ, who could be in
this mortal world, as in a deep Sea, without all sin. Now this Sibilla
Erythraea, or (as some rather think) Cumana, has not one word in all her
verses (whereof these are a parcel) tending to Idolatry, but all against the
false gods and their worshippers, so that she seems to me to have been a
citizen of the City of God. (f) Lactantius also has prophecies of Christ out
of some Sibille, but he says not from which. But that which he dilateth in
parcels, do I think good to lay together, and make one large prophecy of his
many little ones. This it is. Afterward he shall be taken by the ungodly, ^d
they shall strike God with wicked hands, and spitte their venomous spirits in
his face. He shall yield his holy back to their strokes, and take their
blows with silence, least they should know that he is the word, or whence he
came to speak to mortals. They shall crown him with thorn, they gave him
gall in stead of vinegar to eat, this table of hospitallity they shall afford
him. Thou foolish nation that knewst not thy God, ^t crowned him with thorn,
and feasted him with bitterness. The veil of the Temple shall rend in two,
and it shall be dark three hours at noone day. Then shall he (...) and
sleep three days, and then shall he arise again from death and show the
first fruits of the resurrection to them that are called. All this has
Lactantius used in several places* as he needed, from the the Sybill: We have
laid it together, distinguishing it only by the heads of the chapters, if the
transcriber have the care to observe and follow us. Some say Sybilla Erythraea
lived in the Troyan ^rre long before Romulus.

L. VIVES.
MAny (a) Sybils] Prophetesses. Diod. lib. 5. Seru. in 4. Aeneid. Lactant. Diu.
inst. The Sybils.
say that Sybilla comes of (...) God, (in the Aeolike Dialect) and (...)
counsel, Suidas (...) that it is a Roman word and signifies a Prophetess.
How many of the Sibils there were and when they lived, is uncertain: we will
hear the best authors hereof* Martianus (...) there were but two Sybills, one
called Erophila, daughter to Marmasus the Troyan (and (...) he says was that
of Phrygia and Cumae) the other Symmachia, daughter to an Hippone^, borne at
Erythra, and prophesying at Cumae also. There were three statues of three
Sybils, in the pleading court at Rome. Plin. the first erected by Pacuuius
Taurus Aedile, and the rest by M. Messala. These (says Solinus) were the
Cumane, the Delphike, and the Erithr^an Eriphila. Aelian (hist. vari.) names
four: Erythraea, Samia, Egyptia, Sardiana. Others add two more Iudaea, and
Cumaea. Varro makes them up ten. De re diu^* ad C^s. The Greeks thought to do
with them as they did with the Jove's and Hercules, making a many all into one,
and writ much of one Sybilla: some make her daughter to Apollo and (...): son
to Aristocrates and Hydole: some to Crimagoras, or to Theodorus. Some make her
borne at Erythra, some in Sicily, some in Sardinia, Gergethia, Rhodes, Lybia,
or Leucania, and all these concern the Erythrean Sibyll, who lived before the
sack of Troy, say they. But now to Uarro's ten Sybills, as Lactantius reckens
them, adding the fit assertions of Greeks, or Latins by the way. The first
was a Persian, mentioned by Nicander, the Chronicler of Alexanders acts. This
some say was a Chaldean, and some a Jew, her name being Samb^tha, borne in Noe,
a city near the read sea, of one Berossus and his wife Tymantha, who had
four and twenty children between them. She prophesied abundantly of Christ,
and his coming, with whom the other Sybills do fully accord. The second was
a Lybian. Eur^* Prolog. in Lamiam. The third a Delphian, (Chrysip. de Diuinat.)
borne at Delphos, called Themis, living before the siege of Troy. Homer
inserted many of her verses into his Rapso^ie. This says Diodorus was Daphne,
Tyresias daughter, whom the Argiues conquering Thebes, sent to Delphos, where
growing cunning in Apollo's mysteries, she expounded the Oracles, to them that
sought to them, and therefore was called Sibylla. There was another Daphne,
daughter to Ladom the Arcadian, Apollo loved her, and she is feigned to be
turned into a Laurel in flying from him. The fourth a Cumaean in Italy. Naeu.
de bello Punic. Piso in ^nnal. Some say she was borne in Cymerium a town in
Italy near Cumae. The fifth an Erythraean: Apollodorus says he and she were
borne both in a town. She prophesied to the Greeks, going to Troy, that
they should conquer, and that Homer should write lies. But the common opinion
is, she lived before the siege of Troy: yet Eusebius draws him to Romulus his
time. Indeed Strabo makes more then one Erythream Sibyll: saying there was
one ancient one, and another later called Athenais, living in Alexanders time.
Lactantius says Sibylla Erythraea was borne at Babylon, and chose to be
called Erythraea. The sixth was a Samian, Eratosth. says he found mention of
her in the Samian Annals: she was called Phito the seventh, a Cumane, called
Amalthea, and by other Herophile, or Demophile. Suidas Tarquinius Priscus.
calls her Hierophile, and says she brought nine books to King Tarquinius
Priscus, and asked him three hundred angels for them, which he denying and
laughing at her, she burnt three of them before his face, and asked him the
whole sum for the rest. He thinking she was mad or drunk indeed, scoffed
at her again: she burned other three, and asked still the whole sum for the
three remaining: then the King was moved in mind, and gave it her. This is
recorded by Pliny, Dionys. Solin. Gellius, and Seruius, concerning Tarquin the
proud, not the other. Pliny says she had but three books, burning two, and
saving the third. Suidas says she had nine books of private oracles, and
burnt but two of them: her tomb (says Solinus) may be seen yet in Sicilia.
But he calls her not Eriphile, for that he gives to the Erythraean Sybill,
who was more ancient then the Cumane. Eusebius thinks that Hierophile was
neither the Erythrean, nor Cumane, but the Samian, that she lived in Numa's
time, L^ocrates being Archon of Athens. The wife of Amphiaraus was called
Eriphile also. The eight was of Hellespont, borne at Marmissum near Troy,
living in the time of Solon and Cyrus. Heracl. Pontic. The ninth was a
Phrygian, and prophesied at Aucyra. The tenth a Tyburtine, called Albumea,
worshipped at Tybur, as a goddess on the bank of the river Anienes, in whose
channel her Image was found, with a book in the hand of it. These are Varro's
Sybills. There are others named also, as Lampusia, Calchas his daughter, of
Colophon, whose prophecies were whilom extant in verse: and Sybilla Elyssas
also with them. Cassandra also, Priams daughter, who prophesied her countries
ruin, was counted for a Sybill: there was also Sybill of Epirus, and Mant^
Tyresias daughter: and lastly Carmentis Euanders mother, and Fatua, Faunus his
wife, all called Sybills. Didi^s Grammaticus is in doubt whether Sapho were a
Sybill or no. S^. de stud. liberal. Yet some in this place read Publica for
Sybilla. But which Sybill it was that wrote the verses containing the Romans
fate, Varro himself they s^y could not tell. Some said it was Sybilla Cumana,
as Virgill does, calling her Deiphobe daughter to Glaucus, who was a Prophet,
and taught Apollo the art: unless you had rather read it (...), for she (as
some say) brought the books to Tarquin Priscus who hid them in the Capitol:
She lived in Rome (says Solinus) in the fifteenth Olympiad. If that be so, it
was Tarqum Priscus, and not the Proud, that bought her books: For Priscus
dyed, and Seruius Tullus began his reign the fourth year of the fifteenth
Olympiade, Epitelides of La^aedemon being victor in the Games, and
Archestratides being Archon of Athens. That therefore is likelier that U^rro
and Suidas affirm of Priscus, then that which others said of Superbus, if
Solinus his Account be true. Her Chapel was to be seen at Cumae, but Varro
thinks it unlikely that the Sybill that Aeneas talked with, should live unto
the fist King of Romes time: and therefore he thinks it was Erythraea that
sung the Romans destinies. Yet Dionys. says it was to her that Aeneas went.
lib. 4. Varro has this further ground, that when Apolloes Temple at Erythraea
was burnt, those very verses were found there. Even this is she whom Uirgill
calls Cumaea, for she prophesied at Cumae in Italy, says Capella, and so
think I; There is Cumae in Ionia, by Erythrea, but Aristotle says directly,
there is a Cave in Cumae a City of Italy, in which Sybilla dwelt. She whom
others called Erythraea, the Cumaeans for glory of their country call Cumaea:
Otherwise they mean some other. For it was not Virgils Sybill that Cumane
Sybilla, that sold Tarquin the books. Nor says Uirgill, nor think we that
there were no verses in those books, but of One Sybils. This Tacitus shows
saying of Augustus, that, whereas there were many fables spread under the Sybils
names, he sent into Samos, Erythrea, Ilium, Afric, and to all the Italian
Colonyes, to be at Rome with their verses at a day appointed, where a
judgment was past by the Quindecimuers, and a censure upon all that should
have of these verses in private: Antiquity having decreed against it before.
And the Capitol being repaired (says Lactantius out of Varro) they came
thither from all places (and chiefly from Erythraea) with Sybills verses. This
also Fe^estella (a dilligent Author) records, and that P. Gabinius, M.
Octacilius, and Luc. Valeriu^ went to Erythraea purposely about it, and brought
about a thousand verses to Rome, which private men had copyed forth. Thus far
Lactantius. Stilico Honorius his step-father, de^ring to move the people
against his son in law, made away all the Sybills books: Of which fact,
Claudian writes thus: Nec tantum Geticis grassatus proditor armis
Ante Sybillinae fata cremauit opis.
Nor only raged the Traitor in Goths arms,
But burnt the fates of Sybils help from harms.
And thus much of the Sybills. (b) Sybill of Erythraea] Lactantius cites some
of those verses from another Sybill: it is no matter indeed which Sybills they
are. One Sybils they are sure to be, and because she was the most famous, to
her they assign them. (c) The first letter* That the Sybils put mysteries in
their verses heads, Tully can testify. Their Poems says he* proo^h them not
mad, for there is more cunning then turbulency in them: being all conveyed
into Acrosticks, as Ennius also had done in some, Showing a mind rather (...)
then (...). De diuinat. lib. 2. Virgill also Aegl. 4. Ultima Cumaei venit iam
carminis aetas:
The Sybils prophecies draw to an end.
N^ly the time that she included in her prophetical Acrosticks. (d) Those
verses] The Greek verses in Eusebius are these. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...)*
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...)*
(...).
(...).
In sign of Dommes-day, the whole earth shall sweat:
Ever to reign, a King, in heavenly seat,
Shall come to judge all flesh. The faithful, and
Unfaithful too, before this God shall stand,
Seeing him high with Saints, in Times last end.
Corporeal shall he sit; and, thence, extend
His doom on souls. The earth shall quite lie wast,
Ruined, ore-growne with thorns, and men shall cast
Idols away, and treasure. Searching fire
Shall burn the ground, and thence it shall inquire,
Through seas, and sky, and break Hells blackest gates:
So shall free light salute the blessed states
Of Saints; the guilty lasting flames shall burn.
No act so hid, but then to light shall turn;
Nor breast so close, but GOD shall open wide.
Each where shall cries be heard, and noise beside
Of gnashing teeth. The Sun shall from the sky
Fly forth; and stars no more move orderly.
Great Heaven shall be dissolved, the Moon deprived
Of all her light; places at height arrived
Deprest; and valleys raised to their seat:
There shall be naught to mortals, high or great.
Hills shall lie level with the plains; the sea
Endure no burden; and the earth, as they,
Shall perish cleft with lightning: every spring
And river burn. The fatal Trumpe shall ring
Unto the world, from heaven, a dismal blast
Including plagues to come for ill deeds past.
Old Chaos, through the cleft mass, shall be seen,
Unto this Bar shall all earths Kings conueene:
Rivers of fire and Brimstone flowing from heaven.
(e) Iudicii signo] Act. 1. 11. This Jesus who is taken up to heaven, shall so
come as you have seen him go up into heaven. (f) Scilicet] This verse is not
in the Greek, nor is it added here, for there must be twenty seven. (g)
Sicanimae] The Greek is, then shall all flesh come into free heaven, and the
fire shall take away the holy and the wicked for ever, but because the sense is
harsh, I had rather read it (...), and so make it agree with the Latin
interpretation. (h) Exuret.] The books of consciences shall be opened, as it
is in the Revelation: Of those here-after (i) Sanctorum] Isay. 40. 4. Every
valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be laid low:
the crooked shall be straight, and the rough places plain.

(k) Occultos] High and (...) shall then be all one, and neither offensive;
pomp* height and glory shall no more domineere in particular: but as the
Apostle says. Then shall all principalities and powers be annihilated, that
GOD may be all in all. For there is no greater plague then to be under him
that is blown big with the false conceit of greatness: he grows rich
and consequently proud: he thinks he may domineere, his father ^as, I marry
was he: his pedigree is always in his mouth, and (very likely) a thief, a
Butcher or a Swin-heard in the front of this his noble descent.

Another Tarre-lubber bragges that he is a soldier, an aid unto the state
in affairs military, therefore will he rear and tear, down go whole
Cities before him (if any leave their own seats and come into his way, or to
take the wall of him, not else): A quadrate number, plain and solid.
(l) No word] For the Greek (...), beginning a word, is always aspirate: now
if we bring it into Latin, aspirate we must put H. before it, and this
deceiues the ignorant. (m) Quadrate and solid] A plain quadrate is a number
multiplied once by it self, as three times three, then multiply the product by
the first, and you have a solid: as three times three is nine. Here is your
quadrate plain, three times nine is twenty seven, that is the quadrate
Lactant. lib. 4 cap. 18.
solid. (n) Lactantius] Lactantius following his Master Arnobius, has
written seven most excellent and acute volumes against the Pagans, nor have
we any Christian that is a better Ciceronian then he. (...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
To th'faithlesse unjust hands then shall he come,
Whose impure hands shall give him blows, and some
Shall from their foul mouths poisoned spittle send,
He to their whips his holy back shall bend.
(...)
(...).
(...)*
Thus beat he shall stand mute, that none may ken
Who was, or whence, the word, to speak to men*
And he shall bear a thornie crown --
(...).
(...).
They gave him for drink Vinegar, and Gall for meat,
This table of in-hospitalitie they set.


This is likewise in another verse of Sybills: the Greek is: (...),
(...)
(...).
Thy God (thy good) thou brainlesse senseless did not know,
Who past and played in mortal words and works below:
A crown of thorns, and fearful gall thou did bestow.


In the next Chapter following: the words are these. (...) Chap. 19.

(...).
The Temples veil shall rend in twain, and at midday
Prodigious darkened night for three full hours shall stay.


In the same Chapter. (...).
(...)
(...).
Death shall shut up his date with sleeping for three days
Then rising from the dead, he turns to the Sun rays:
The resurrections first-fruites to the elect displayes,


(o) Of the resurrection] Making away for the chosen, by his resurrection, so
the Greek implies, Christ as the Apostle says, being the first borne of many
brethren, and the first fruits of those that sleep.

The seven Sages in Romulus his time: Israel lead into captivity: Romulus
dies and is deified. CHAP. 24.
IN Romulus his time lived Thales, one of those who (after the Theological
Poets in which Orpheus was chief) were called the Wisemen, or Sages. And (a)
now did the Chaldaeans subdue the ten Tribes of Israel, (fallen before from
Judah) and lead them all into Chaldaea captive, leaving only the tribes of Judah
and Benjamin free, who had their Kings seat at Jerusalem. Romulus dying, and
being not to be found, was here-vpon deified, which use was now almost given
over, so that (b) in the Caesar's times they did it rather upon flattery then
error, and Tully commends Romulus highly in that he could deserve those in so
wise and learned an age, though Philosophy were not yet in her height of
subtle and acute positions and disputations. But although in the later days
they made no new Gods of men, yet kept they their old ones still, and gave not
over to worship them: increasing superstition by their swarms of Images,
whereof antiquity had none: and the devils working so powerfully with them,
that they got them to make public presentations of the gods shames, such as if
they had bin vn-dreamed of before, they would have shamed to invent as then.
After Romulus reigned Numa, who stuffed all the City with false religion, yet
could he not shape a Godhead for himself out of all this Chaos of his
consecrations. It seems he stowed heaven so full of gods that he left no
room for himself. He reigning at Rome, and Manasses over the Hebrews (that
(c) wicked King that-killed the Prophet Isaias) Sybilla (d) Samia lived, as it
is reported.

L. VIVES.
NOw (a) did] By the conduct of Senacharib, or Salmanazar, King of Chaldaea, in
Osee^ time. They were transported into the Mountains of Media, after they had
been ruled by ^gs 250. years. Senacherib sent colonies out of Assyria into
Iudaea to possess and keep it* and they followed the Jewish law, and were
called Samaritanes, that is, keepers. (b) In the Samaritanes.
Caesar's time] Tully in his Phillippikes rattles up Caesar's deity, Seneca
derides that of Claudius, and Lucan the divine honors given to all the
Caesar's. (c) That wicked King that killed] So (...) did and set up an Idol
with five faces. Esaias was a Prophet of the blood royal. He prophesied under
Manasses who made him be sawen in two. He was buried under the oak Ro^ll* near
to the spring that Ezechias damned up. Hierome. (d) Samia] Called Herophi^
Esaias.
and living in Samos. Eusebius.

Philosophers living in Tarquinius Priscus his time, and Sedechias, when
Jerusalem was taken, and the Temple destroyed. CHAP. 25.
SEdechias ruling over the Hebrews, and Tarquinius Priscus (successor to Ancus
Martius) over the Romans, the Jews were carried captive to Babylon,
Jerusalem was destroyed, and Salomons temple razed. (b) The Prophets had told
them long before that their wickedness would be the cause of this, chiefly
Hieremy (c) who told them the very time that it would hold: (d) about this time
lived (e) Pittacus of Mitylene, another of the sages. And the other five also
(which with Thales and this Pittacus make seven) lived all (as Eusebius says)
(f) within the time of the Israelites captivity in Babylon. Their names were
(g) Solon of Athens (h) Chilo of Lacedaemon (i) Periander of Corinth (k)
Cleobulus of Lindum, (l) and (...) of Prienaeum. These were all after the
Theolgicall Poets, and were more famous for their (m) better discipline of
life, then others observed, and for that they ^ue sundry (n) good instructions,
touching the reformation of manners. But they left (o) no records of their
learning to posterity, but only Solon that left the Athe^ns some laws of his
making. Thales was a Naturalist, and left books of his opini^ns: and in this
time also lived Anaximander, Anaximenes and Xenophanes, al natural,
Philosophers, and Pythagoras also from whom Philosophy seemed to take beginning.

L VIVES.
SEdechias (a)] Nabuchodrosor (or (...)) warred with three Kings of Judah, first
^ith Ioachim, and him he made his (...) which (...), and him he carried (...)
Nab^codrosor.
three months war, unto Babylon, (...) (...) lury, and l^auing (...) (whom he
named ^s) Iechonias his uncle, Provost (...) (...): he charged his name to make
him remember (...) place, but he disobeyed him upon his depature, and so pulled
the weight of a great war vp^ him. For the Chaldaean cam^ in (...)* burned and
^lew all up before him, besieged Hie^, took it through famine ^w Sedechias
(...) children before his face, put out his eyes, and ^d him captive to
Babylon, with all his people ^ith him, and razed the city to the ground. (...)
The Prophets] Hieremy began to prophecy the third year of Josias, son of
Ammon, King of (...), as he declares in the (...) of his prophecy (...) says,
not until the tenth year. (...) and his prophecy thus writes Alex. Polyhist.
In Ioachims time, he was sent by God to Hieremy.
Prophecy, and finding the Jews adoring of their Idol Baal, he there-vppon
(...) (...) Cities ruin and their captivity, where-vppon Ioachim commanded to
burn him* (...) (...) them that with the same pieces of wood should they
(being captive) dig and (...) (...) Tigris and Euphrates. This Nabuchodrozor
heard off, and gathering his power, came and (...)* Iudaea, Jerusalem, and the
Temple, taking the Arc and all away with him. (c) Who tola Seauenty years he
said it would endure, and so it did. (d) Pittacus] Eusebius* says that (...) The
'capti^ty of Judah. Thales
were seven wise men of Greece in Cyrus his time. Euang. Prep. lib. 10. But
indeed (...) times cannot be brought unto one, some were before other some.
Thales assuredly sp^ke with Cyrus, so did Solon and Pittacus with Craesus who
warred with Cyrus. But (...) time began but a little before his ended. For
Cyrus lived from the fortith to the (...) Olympiade. Some say to the fifty one,
fifty two, fifty three, yea and some to the fifty eigh^* Eusebius says Thales
lived in the beginning of Romulus his time. But either the author or the
transcriber is in a foul fault, yet Augustine follows them. For how could
(...) come to Cyrus his time then? From the eighth Olympiad unto the five and
fifteeth, very near two hundred years? Thales by the longest account lived
but ninety: So (...) Sosicrates, but ordinarily he has but seauenty allowed
him, Laert. And Eusebius makes the seven sages to live but in Seruius his
first beginning of his reign: and Thales in the first of Ancus Martius; that
is Olymp. thirty five, whom he said lived unto Olymp. fifty eight: then must
he not be referred to Romulus his time. And the Greeks have exceeding ado
about their sages, every one being vayne-gloryous for his own side, for they
had wo^ in old time to call all their Artists, Sages, as we call them
knowing men. The Poets (...) Wise men and sages at first a general name to
A^st and Poets.
were called so: as Hesiod and Homer. And then Thales, Bias, Pittacus, and
Solon got a^l this name. For these says Dicaearchus, were assuredly such.
But whom to add to (...) now there lies the doubt. It is the greatest and
most noble question that is handle^ in profane matters. The three that
Augustine names, are commonly added. Laert. Plato, reiectes Periander, and
puts one Mison in his place, whose country is unknown. In protag. Plato
makes him a Cheuean, a man-hater as Tymon, and (...) was. Le^drius for him and
Cleobulus, putts Leop hantus of Ephesus, and Epimenedes of Crete. (...) puttes
Anacharsis the Sythian in Perianders place. Others ad Aristodemus Pamphilus,
and Strabras the Argiue, Hermippus reckons seauenteeene wise men: Solon,
Thales, ^acus, Bias, Cleobulus* Chilo, Periander, Anacharsis, Acusilaus,
Epimenides, Cleophantus* Pherecides, Aristodemus, Pythagoras, Latius, Hermion
and Anaxagoras. (e) (...)] Son to Hircadius the Thracian as it is reported:
borne at Mytelene in Lesbos: a lover of his countries Pittacus.
freedom* for which he slew the Tyrant Melanchrus: he was very valiant (for
(...) fought hand to hand with Phrymon of Athens who had been victor in the
(...)* (...) slew him) and most just, for being made a judge between Athens
and Mitylene in a controversy concerning lands, he judged on the Athenians
side: and therefore the Mitylenians made him President of their state, which
he held until he had settled it and then gave it over. He dyed, Olymp. fifty
one, in the seauentith year of his age; ten years after he had reformed
the state. (f) Within the time] Eusebius. Praep. Euang. and in Chronic. (whom^
Augustine follows much in this work) In Cyrus his time were the Israelites
freed, and in the beginning of his reign the seven sages flourished. (g)
Solon] born in Salaminia, under the dominion Solon.
of Athens, and son of Exestides one descended from the bloud-royall of Codrus
the ^lified Draco his bloody laws, and gave the Athenians better: for Draco
wrote his with blood and not with ink, as Demades said: al crimes great and
small, yea even idleness it self was (...) of death. Solon hated his cousin
Pisistrates his affectation of a Kingdom, who attaining it, (...) got him into
Aegipt, and from thence to Craesus, King of Lydia: then to Cilicia where he
(...) Solos (afterward called Pompeiopolis) because there Pompey overcame the
p^rates, thence to Cyprus and there he died, being 70. years old. He was
Archon of Athens, Olymp. 46. in the third year thereof. For they elected now
every year, not every tenth year as they had done before. The Athenians
offered him their Kingdom which he stoutly refused, and exhorted them earnestly
to stand in their liberty. Laertius and Plutarch recite some of his laws,
which the Romans put into their twelve tables. (h) Chilo] His fathers name was
Damagetes; he was one of the Ephori (Magistrates much like the Roman
Tribunes) for he first ordained the ^yning Chilo.
of the Ephori with the Kings: he was a man of few words, and brief in phraze
as the L^ans were naturally. He dyed at Pisa, embracing his son coming
victor from the The Ephori, a Magi^acy*
Olympicks. He had an epigram under his statue, that called him the wisest of
the seven (i) (i) Periander.] I see no reason he should have this honor, for
he was a tyrant, most furious, vicious, covetous, and abhominably incestuous.
These are no parts of wisdom, therefore (...).
many do put him out of this number. But Sotion and Heraclitus say that the
wise Periander was not he of Corynth, but an Ambracian borne. Aristot, says
he was borne at Corinth: and ^-germaine to the Tyrant. Plato says no. (k)
Cleobulus.] Borne at Lindus in Rhodes, some Cleobulus,
say, in Caria. Du^is. His father was called Euagoras, the most beauteous and
valorous person of his time. He learnt his knowledge in Egypt, his daughter
Cleobul^a was a famous prophetess, etc. (l) Bias.) His fathers name was
Teuta^us. Prie^ia is in Ionia. To him they say the golden Tripos was brought,
and he sent it unto Hercules of Thebes. He freed his Bias,
country from the great war of Craesus the Lydian, his was that phrase, Omnia
^ea me^ porto: Mine own, and all mine own, I bear about me. Cic. Paradox. I
wonder the Greeks make no mention of this in his life. They speak not of
Prienes taking in all his whole life: Tully I believe was deceived in this, nor
is this his only error. Seneca seems to give it more truly to Stilpo of
Megara, for Demetrius as then took Mega^a. Bias died sweetly with his head in
the lap of his grand child by his daughter. The Prienmans built a chapel to
him. Satyrus prefers him before all the other Sages. (m) Better discipline.]
They were not learned, nor Philosophers (says Dicaearchus) but they were hardy
men and good politi^s. And so says Tully. De Amicit. (n) good instructions.]
We have Greek sentences under there names: Ausonius has made some of them
into verse. Thales his motto was, Nosce te: know thy self. Pittacus his, Nosce
occasionem: take time while time is. Solons, Nihil nimis: the mean is the
best. Chilons. Sponsioni non deest iactura: Bargains and losses are
inseparable, or he that will adventure must loose. Perianders, Stipandus
Imperator dediturus non est armis sed bene^lentia, love and not arms guard him
that would rule. Cleobulus, ca^ i^micorum insidias, a^corum The motts of ^he
seven Sages.
inuidias, beware of your foes emnity and your friends envy. Bias, Plure^ mali.
The worse are the more. So agree Augustine and Eusebius who says that their
inventions were nothing but short sentences, tending to the instituting of
honest disciplines into men's hearts. Prep. Euang. liber. 10. (o) No records.]
Yet Solon and Bias they say left some verses.

The Romans were freed from their Kings, and Israel from captivity both at
one time. CHAP. 26.
AT the same time (a) Cyrus King of Persia, Caldaea, and Assyria, gave the
Jews a kind of release, for he sent 50000. of them to re-edifie the Temple,
and these only built the Altar, and laid the foundations* for their foes
troubled them with so often incursions that the building was left of until
Darius his time. (b) The story of Judith, fell out also in the same times:
which they say the Jews receive not into their cannon. The seauenty years
therefore being expired in Darius his reign, (the time that Hieremy (c) had
prefixed) The ^ewes had their full freedom: Tarquin the proud being the
seventh King of Rome: whom the Romans expelled, and never would be subject
to any more Kings. Until this time, had Israel prophets, in great numbers,
but indeed we have but few of their Prophecies cannonicaly recorded. Of these I
said in ending my last book, that I would make some mention in this, and here
it is fittest.

L. VIVES.
CYrus (a) King.] Son to Mandanes, Astiaeges his daughter, the Median King,
and Cambyses one of obscure birth: he was called Cyrus, after the river Cyrus
in Persia Cyrus*
nere to which he was brought up. He foiled his grandfather in war, and
took the Monarchy from the Medes, placing it in persia. He conquered Chaldaea
also. For the Me^ having gotten the Monarchy to themselves after Sardanapalus
his death* had their Kings all crowned at Babylon, and Nabuchodrosor was their
most royal ruler: his exploytes they extol above the Chaldean Hercules acts:
saying that he had a conquering a^mye, as far as the Gades. Strabo ex
Megasthene. Megasthenes, (says Alphaeus) affirms that Nabuchodrosor was a
stouter soldier then Hercules, and that he conquered all Libya and Asia as
far as Armenia, and returning to his home, he cried out in manner of
prophesying: O Babilonians, I presage that a great misfortune shall befall you,
which neither B^lus, nor any of the gods can resist: The Mule of Persia shall
come to make slaves of you all! Having thus said, presently he vanished away,
Milina Rudocus his son succeeded him, and was slain by Iglisares who reigned
in his place, and left the crown to his son Babaso Arascus, who was slain
by treason, Nabiuidocus was made King. Him did Cyrus, taking Babylon, make
Prince of Carmania. Thus far Alphaeus. Alexander Polyhistor differs
somewhat from this but not much. Josephus says there were two Nabuchodrosors:
and that it was the son that* Megasthenes pre^erres before Hercules, and the
father that took Bab^lon. The son dying left his crown to Amilmadapak, or
Abimatadok* and he freed Iechonias and made him Computation of years
one of his Courtiers. Amilmadapak dyed having reigned eighteen years, and
left his son Agressarius to inher^te, who reigned forty years, and his son
Labosordak succeeded him, who dyed at the end of nine months, and Balthazar
otherwise called Noboar had his crown, and him did Cyrus chase out of his
Kingdom when he had reigned seauenteene years. Now if this account be true,
there are more then an hundred years between the beginning of the Jews
captivity and Cyrus the Persian. But sure an error there ^s, either in the
author or in the transcriber. Now Cyrus being moved by the Prophecy of Esaias,
who had Is^ prop^ecyed 210* years before Cyrus.
foretold the original of his Empire twenty years ere it came to pass, set
the Jews free and sent them to build the Temple, restoring all the vessels
that Nabuchodrosor had brought away. This was now forty years after the
beginning of their captivity, Eusebius. So they went and built, but their enemies
troubled them so that they were feign to let it alone until the second year
of Darius his reign, the son of Histaspis, who expelled the Magi, and was
King alone. For he in favor of Zorobabell, sent all the Jews home, and
forbad any of his subjects to molest them. So in the seauentith year after
their captiuation they returned home. This is after Eusebius his account, unto
whom Clement (...), saying. The Jews captivity endured ^eauenty years unto
the second year of Darius King of Persia, Egypt and Assyria, in whose time,
Aggee, Zachary and one of the 12. called Angelus, prophesied; and Jesus the son
of Iosedech was high Priest. That Darius his second year, and the seauentith
of the captivity, were both in one, Zachary testifies Chap. 1. 1. 12. But
Josephus The authority of the book of Judith.
makes seauenty years of the Captivity to be run in Cyrus his time. (b) The
sto^y of Iudith] This book (says Hierome) has no authority in matter of
Controversy: But yet the synod of Nice has made it canonical. Bid says
that Cambysis son to the elder Cyrus was called by the Jews the second
Nabuchodrosor, and that the fact of Judith was done in his time. (c) Had
profixed] Chap. 25. 11.

Of the times of the Prophets whose books we have: How they prophesied (some
of them) of the calling of the nation, in the declyning of the Assyrian
Monarchy, and the Romans erecting. CHAP. 27.
TO know the times well, let us go back a little. The prophecy of Ozee, the
first of the twelve begins thus. The word of the Lord that came to Ozee, in
the days of Ozias, Ioatha^, Achaz, Ezechias, Kings of Judah (b) Amos write^h
also that y^ prophecy in Ozias his days, (c) adding that Hieroboam lived in
those times also, as ^e did indeed. (...) also the son of Amos (either the
Prophet or some other, (...) this later is more generally held) names the
four in the beginning of his ^phecy, that Osee named. So does (d) Micheas
also. All these their prophet prove to have lived in one time: together with
(e) Jonas, and (f) Joel, the (...) under Ozias, and the later under his son
Ioathan. But we find not the ^es of the two later, in their books, but in
the Chronicles. Now (g) these times reach from Procas or Auentinus his
predecessor, King of the Latins, unto Romulus now King of Rome, nay even unto
Numa Pompilius, his successor: For so long reigned Ezechias in Judah. And
therefore in the fall of the Assyrian Empire and the rising of the Roman, did
these fountains of prophecy break ^th: that even as Abraham had received the
promise of all the worlds being ^ed in his seed, at the first original of
the Assyrian estate: So likewise might (...) ^stimonies of the person in whom
the former was to be fulfilled, be as fre^ both in word and writing in the
original of the western Babylon. For (...) prophets that were continually in
Israel, from the first of their Kings, (...) all for their peculiar good, and
no way pertaining to the nations. (h) But (...) ^e more manifest prophecies,
which tended also to the nations good, it (...) ^te they should begin, when
that City began that was the Lady of the (...).

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) days of Ozias] The surest testimony of the Prophets times, are in
their works O^.
(...) have not omitted to record when they prophesied, so that it were
superfluous to (...) ^ddition of any other confirmations, then those of their
own. Osee prophesied too, (...) ^ose three Kings of the two tribes, the
father, the son, and the sons son, in the (...) whose days, Salmanazar
led the Israelites away captive. So that Osee (as Hierome (...) ^id both
presage it ere it came, and deplore it when it came. Ozias lived in that memo^e
of the Assyrian Empire, by the rebellion of the Medes. Some call this King
Aza^) Amos] Amos (says Hierome) the next Prophet after Ioell, and the third of
the (...) was not he that was the Prophet Esays father. For his name is
written (...), Amos.
(...) and Tsade being the first and last letters of his name, which is
interpreted, strong and (...): but this Prophets name is written (...): with
Ain and Samech, and is translated ^ed people. Mem and Ua^, both of them have
alike. To us now that have no difference (...), nor of the letter S, which the
Hebrews have triple, these words seem all one: (...) can discern them, by
the propriety of the vowels and accents. This Prophet Amos (...) in Thecue,
six miles South from holy Betheleem where our Savior was borne: and ^d that
is neither village nor cottage: such an huge desert lies between that and the
(...) sea, reaching even to the confines of Persia, Aethiopia, and India. But
because the (...) is barren and will bear no corn, therefore all is full of
sheapheards, to countervaile (...) ^lesnesse of the land, with the abundance
of cattle. One of these sheapheards was (...), rude in language but not in
knowledge. For the spirit that spoke in them all, spoke also (...) him. Thus
far Hierome. Wherefore I wonder that the Prologue unto Amos says di^ that he
was father to Esaias; perhaps it was from some Hebrew tradition, who say that
(...) (...) Prophets fathers, or grandfathers, that are named in any part of
their works titles, (...) Prophets also. Hier. in Sophon. (c) Adding that
Hieroboam] Not he that drew the (...) tribes from Roboam, for he was a
hundred and sixty years before this other, who (...) his son. (Micheas] He
prophesied (says Hierome) in the time of Ioathon, (...) Ozias. The seauenty
make him third Prophet of the twelve, and the Hebrews the Michaeas.
(...)) Ionas] So says Eusebius, of the times of Azarias, or Ozias. So says
Hierome al^ ^ommentaryes upon Ozee: and in his prologue upon Jonas he
receyteth the opini^ Jonas,
(...) that held Amathi the father of Jonas, to be the widow of Sarephta's
son, (...) Elias restored to life, where-vppon she said: Now I know that
thou art a man of (...) that the word of God in thy mouth is truth, and
therefore her child was so named. For Amithi, in our language is truth. (f)
Ioell] In our tongue Beginning. Hierome. He prophesied in the times of the
other prophets. (g) These times*] Auentinus reigned thirty ^uen Joel,
years, and in the two and thirtith of his reign began Azarias or Ozias to
reign in Judah. Eusebius. Eutropius differs not much from this, so that by both
accounts Ezechias his time fell to the beginning of Numa his reign. (h) But
for the] For these prophets prophesied of the calling of the Heathens, as he
will show afterward.

Prophecies concerning the Gospel, in Osee and Amos. CHAP. 28.
OSee is a Prophet as divine as deep. Let us perform our promise, and see
what he ^ayth: In the place where it was said unto them, you are not my
people, it shall be said, ye are sons of the living God, This testimony the
(a) Apostles Hose, 1. 10.
^m-selues interpreted of the calling of the Gentiles: who because they are the
spiritual sons of Abraham, and therefore (b) rightly called Israel: it
follows of them thus: Then the children of Judah and the children of Israel
shall be gathered together and appoint themselves one head, and they shall
come up out of the land. If we seek for farther exposition of this, we shall
^loy the sweet taste of the Prophets eloquence. Remember but the corner stone,
and the two walls, the Jews and the Gentiles, either of them under those
several names, being founded upon that one head, and acknowledged to mount
up from the land. And that those carnal Israelites that believe not now
shall once believe (being as sons to the other, succeeding them in their
places) the same Prophet auouche^h, saying: The children of Israel shall sit
many days without a King, without a Hose, (...). 4.
Prince, without an offering, without an Altar, without a Priesthood, and
without (c) manifestations, who sees not that these are the Jews? Now mark
the sequel. Afterward shall the children of Israel convert, and seek the
Lord their God, and David their King, and shall fear the Lord and his
goodness in these later days. Nothing can be playner spoken, here is Christ
meant by David, as he was the son of David in the flesh (says the Apostle) Nay
this Prophet foretold the third day of his resurrection also: Hear him else:
After two days will he revive us, and in the third day he will raise us up.
Just in this key spoke Saint Paul saying: If ye be risen with Hose, 6. 2.
Colo^, 3. 1. (...)* 4. 1^
Christ, seek the things which are above. Such a prophecy has Amos also:
Prepare to meet thy God O Israel, for lo, I form the thunder; and the
winds, and declare mine anointed in men: and in another place: (d) In that
day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen down, and close up
the breaches thereof, and will raise up his ruins, and build it as in the
days of old: that the residue of mankind, and a^ the heat^, ^ay seek me,
because my name is called upon them, says the Lord that does this.

L. VIVES.
THE (a) Apostles] Pet. 1. 2. 10. (b) Rightly called Israell] For all that
follow truth and righteousness are of Abraham's spiritual seed. Wherefore such
as descend from him in the flesh, the scriptures call Judah, because that tribe
stuck to the old Priesthood, temple and sacrifices: and such as are not
Abraham's children by birth, but by faith, are called Israel. For the ten
tribes that fell from Iu^ahs King, the Jews named Israel, and they differed
not much from (...): for they left their fathers religion, and became
Idolaters: Wherefore the Jews hated (...)*
(...) (...) much as they did the (...), who had no claim at all of descent
from Abrah^. (c) Manifestations] So do the seauenty read it. The hebrew has
it Ephod. The seauenty (...) at that intimation of the loss of their prophecy,
doctrine and wisdom: the greatest loss (...) could befall a city. The
hebrew, at the abolition of their priesthood, dignity, and orna^* (d) In the
day] This place Saint James in the Acts testifies to be meant of the calling
of (...) Nations Act. 15. 15. 16. The Apostles there avowing it, who dares
gainsay it?

Esaias his prophecies concerning Christ. CHAP. 29.
ESaias (a) is none of the twelve prophets. They are called the small prophets
because their prophecies are brief, in comparison of others that wrote large
^mes, of whom Esaias was one, whom I add here, because he lived in the times
(...) two aforementioned. In his precepts against sin, and for goodness, and his
pro^cies of tribulation for offending, he forgets not also to proclaim
Christ (...) his Church more amply then any other, in so much that (b) some
call him an ^gelist rather then a Prophet. One of his prophecies hear in
brief because I (...) stand upon many. In the person of God the Father, thus
he says: (c) Be^ Isay 52, 13 14
my son shall understand: he shall be exalted and be very high: as many were
astonished (...) (thy form was so despised by men, and thy beauty by the sons of
men) so shall ma^ions admire him, and the kings shall be put to silence at his
sight: for that which they Is. 53, 1, 2 etc.
(...) not heard of him, shall they see, and that which has not been told
them, they shall ^stand. Lord who will believe our report? to whom is the Lords
arm revealed? we (...) ^clare him, as an infant and as a root out of a dry
ground: he has neither form ^ty, when we shall see him he shall have
neither goodlinesse nor glory: but his (...) ^albe despised and rejected before
all men. He is a man full of sorrows, and has ^ce of infirmities. For his
face is turned away: he was despised and we esteem^ not. He has borne our
sins and sorroweth for us: yet did we judge him as (...) of God, and smitten
and humbled. But he was wounded for our transgressions, (...) broken for our
iniquities: our peace we learned by him, and with his stripes we are (...). We
have all straied like sheep: man ha^ lost his way, and upon him has GOD (...)
our guilt. He was afflicted, vet never opened he his mouth: he was led as a
sheep (...) slaughter* and as (...) Lamb before the shearer, is dumb, so was
he and opened not his (...): he was out from prison unto judgment: O who
shall declare his generation? (...) shall be taken out of life. For the
transgression of my people was he plagued: and ^l give the wicked for his
grave, and the rich for his death: because he has (...) wickedness, nor was
there any (d) deceit found in his mouth! The LORD (...) (...) him from his
affliction: (e) If you give your soul for sin, you shall see the (...)
^tinue long, and the LORD shall take his soul from sorrow: to show him light
^firme his understanding, to justify the righteous, serving many, for he bare
their ^ties. Therefore I will give him a portion with the great: he shall
divide the (...) of the strong, because he has powered out his soul unto
death: He was recko^ ^ith the transgressors, and has borne the sins of
many, and was betrayed ^ir trespasses. Thus much of CHRIST, n^ what says he of
his church? (...) O barren that bear not: break forth and cry out for joy,
tho^ that bring Isai. 54, 1, 2 etc.
^th: for the desolate has more children then the married wife. Enlarge thae
(...) (...) thy tents, and fasten the (f) curtains of thy Tabernacles: spare
not, stretch out ^des and make fast thy stakes: spread it yet further to the
right hand and thy (...) thy seed shall possess the Gentiles, and dwell in the
desolate Cities: fear not, because thou ^t shamed: be not afraid because thou
art vp-brayded, for thou shall forget thi^ everlasting shame, and shall not
remember the reproach of thy widdow-hood any more, for the Lord that made thee
is called the Lord of Hosts, and the redeemer, the holy one of Israel shall be
called the God of all the world. etc. Here is enough, needing but a little
explanation, for the places are so plain that our enemies themselves are
forced (despite their hearts) to acknowledge the truth. These then suffice.

L. VIVES.
ESaias (a) is.] A noble man worthily eloquent, more like an Evangelist then a
Prophet, he (...).
prophesied in Jerusalem and Jury. Hier. ad Eustoch. and Paulam. Manasses King
of Judah made him be sawen a two, with a wooden saw, of him is that meant in the
Hebrews. chp. 11. verse. 37. They were sawen asunder. The causes of his death
Hierome relates, comm^n, in Esa. lib. (...). (b) Some.] Hierome ad Paul and
Eustoch. for he speaks not in mystical manner of things as if they were to
come, but most plainly, as if they were present, or past which is not ordinary
in the other prophets. (c) Behold.] All this quotation out of the 52. 53. and
54. chapters of Isay, the Septuagints (whom Saint Augustine follows) do
sometimes differ from the Hebrew truth: But the scope aims all at one end,
namely the passion of Christ: we will not stand to decide perticulars,
Augustine himself says all is plain enough, and omits to stand upon them,
to avoid tediousness. (d) Deceit found.] The seauenty, leave out found (e) If
you give your soul.] The seauenty read it, if you give (him) for sin, your
soul shall see your seed of long continuance. (f) The curtains.] The vulgar,
and the seauenty read, the skins.

Prophecies of Michaeas, Jonas, and Ioell, correspondent unto the
New Testament. CHAP. 30.
THe Prophet Michaeas prefiguring Christ by a great mountain, says thus (a)
In the last days shall the mountain of the Lord be prepared upon the tops
of (...). 4, (...). (...).
the hills, and shall be exalted above the hills: and the nations shall have them
to it saying: Come let us go up into the mountain of the Lord, into the house
of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways and we will walk in his
paths, for the law shall go forth of Sion and the word of the Lord from
Hie^salem. He shall judge amongst many people and rebuke mighty nations a
far of. The same prophet foretells Christ birth place also saying, (b) And
thou Bethleem (c) of Ephrata, art little to be amongst the thousands of Judah:
yet out of thee shall a (d) captain come forth unto me that shall be the Prince
of Israel, (e) whose goings forth have been everlasting. Therefore (f) will he
give them up until the time that the childbearing woman do travel, and the
(g) remnant of her brethren shall return unto the children of Israel. And he
(h) shall stand and look, and feed his flock in the strength of the Lord: in
the hon^or of Gods (...) shall they continue: for now shall he be magnified
unto the worlds end. Now (i) Jonas prophesied Christ rather in suffering, then
in speaking, and that most manifestly considering the passion and resurrection.
For why was he 3. days in the whals belly and then let out, but to signify
Christ's resurrection from the depth of hell, upon the third day? Indeed Ioels
prophecies of Christ and the Church, require great explanation, yet one of his,
(and that was remembered by the (k) Apostles, at the descending of the Holy
Ghost upon the faithful, as Christ had promised) I will not o^it. Afterward
(^ith he) I will power out my spirit upon all flesh: your sons and daughters
shall Prophecy, and your old men shall dream dreams, and your young men (...)
visions: even upon the servants and the maids in those days will I pour my
spirit.

L VIVES.
IN (a) The last days.] The same is in Esaias. 2. 2. (b) And thou Bethelem.]
Augustine, and the seauenty do differ here from the Hebrew. S. Matthew reads
it thus. And thou Bethleem (...) the land of Judah art not the least among the
Trinces of Judah, for out of thee shall come the g^rnor that shall feed my
people Israel. S. Hierome upon Michaeas (lib. 2.) says that this quo^ion of
Matthew accords neither with the Hebrew nor the seauenty. This question put^g
the holy father to his plunges, he is feign to say that either the Apostle
cited it not ha^g the book before him, but out of his memory, which some-time
does err: or else (...) he cited it as the priests had given it in answer to
Herod: herein showing their negli^, the first he affirms as the opinion of
others. It is an hard thing to make the Apostle ^ke just contrary to the
prophet: Neither Prophyry nor Celsus would believe this in a matter (...)
concerned not themselves. But the scope of both being one, makes this
conjecture in^de the more tolerable: But it is a weak hold to say the Priest
spoke it thus, it were ^ly absurd in their practice of the scriptures to alter
a Prophecy, intending especially show the full aim of it. But before the
Apostle (nay the spirit of God) shall be taxed with (...) an error, let the later
conjecture stand good, or a weaker then it, as long as we can find (...)
stronger. But if we may lawfully put in a guess, after Hierome (that worthy)
in the ex^tion of those holy labyrinths, to grant that the Hebrew and the
seauenty read this place ^matiuely and the Evangelist negatiuely: read the
place with an interrogation, and they (...) both reconciled: I mean with an
interrogation in the Prophet, as is common in their ^es, and befitting the
ardor of their affections: but in the Evangelist the bare sense is ^y fit to be
laid down without figure or affection. (c) Of Ephrata.] The country where
Ephrata. Bethleem.
^leem stood, which the Priests omitted, as speaking to Herod a stranger that
knew Judah (...). The Evangelist gave an intimation of Christ whence he was to
come, by putting in (...) for Ephrata; there was another Bethleem in Galilee,
as it is in Iosuah. Hierome upon (...) show notes it as the transcribers falt
to put Judea for Judah, for all the Bethlems that are, (...) (...) Judea
Galelee, where the other is, being a part thereof. And the like falt it may be
is in (...) which follows; But when he heard that Archelaus reigned in
Iudaea, for Judah, but ^ed Iudaea after the return from Captivity, kept not the
old bounds, but was contracted (...) country about Jerusalem, the
metropolitan city thereof. (d) A captain.] The Bru^ copy leaves out, a
captain, and so do the seauenty. But the putting of it in, alters not (...)
sense. (e) Whose goings out.] This excludes all mortal men from being meant
of in this ^ecy: inculding only that eternal Savior, whose essence has
been from all eternity. (...) Will he give them.] The gentiles shall rule,
until the body of their states do bring forth ^en unto the Lord (g) The
remnant.] The brethren of the people Israel, and the spirit seed of Abraham,
etc. they shall believe on that Christ that was promised to the true (...). (h)
He shall stand.] Here shall be rest, and security, the Lord looking unto all his
sheep (...) ^eeding them with his powerful grace. (i) Jonas.] Being cast
ouer-bord by the sailors Iona^.
^orme, he was caught up by a Whale, and at the third days end was cast a
shore by him: (...) was he the Image of Christ him-sefe unto the tempting
Jews. Mat. 12. 39. 40. (k) By (...) Apostles.] Act. 2. 17. 18.

Prophecies of Abdi, Naum and Abacuc, concerning the worlds salvation in
Christ. CHAP. 31.
Therefore the small prophets (a) Abdi, (b) Naum, and (c) Abacuc (...) never
mention the times: nor does Eusebius or Hierome supply that ^ct. They place (d)
Abdi and Michaeas both together, but not ^re where they record the time of
Michaeas his prophesying (e) which the negligence of the transcribers I think
was the only cause of. The two other, we cannot once find named in our
copies: yet since they are cannonicall, we may not omit them. Abdi in his
writing is the briefest of them all, he speaks against Idumaea, the reprobate
progeny of Esau, the elder son of Isaac, and grandchild of Abraham. Now if we
take Idumaea, by a Synechdoche partis, (g) for all the nations, we may take
this prophecy of his to be meant of Christ: Upon Mount Syon shall be salvation,
and it shall be holy, and by and by after. They that (h) shall be saved, shall
come out of Sion (that is the believer in Christ, the Apostles, shall come out
of Judah) to defend mount Esau. How to defend it, but by preaching the Gospel,
to save the believers, and translate them into the kingdom of GOD out of the
power of darkness as the sequel shows? And the Kingdom shall be the Lords.
For Mount Syon signifies Judah, the storehouse of salvation, and the holy
mother of Christ in the flesh: and (i) Mount Esau, is Idumaea, prefiguring the
church of the Gentiles, whom they that were saved came out of Syon to defend,
that the kingdom might be the Lords. This was unknown ere it were done, but
being come to pass, who did not discern it? Now the Prophet Naum (nay God in
him) says. I will abolish the graven and molten Image, and make them thy Naum 1
(k) grave. Behold upon the feet of him that declares and publishes peace. O
Judah keep thy sollemne feasts, perform thy vows* for the wicked shall no
more pass through thee, he is utterly cut off. He that breaths in thy face,
and freeth thee from tribulation, ascends. Who is this that does thus?
remember the Holy Ghost, remember the Gospel. For this belongs to the New
Testament whose feasts are renewed, never more to cease. The Gospel we see
has abolished all those graven and molten Images, those false Idols, and has
laid them in oblivion, as in a grave. Herein we see this prophecy fulfilled.
Now for Abacuk, of what does he mean but of the coming of Christ, when he
says? The Lord answered saying, write the vision, and make it plain on tables
that he may run that reads it. For the vision is yet for an appointed time,
but at the last it shall speak and not lie, though it tarry: Ab^ 2
awaite, for it shall come surely, and shall not stay.

L. VIVES.
ABdi (a)] The Hebrews (says Hierome) say this was he that in the persecution
under Achab and Iezabel, fed one hundred prophets in caves, that never bowed
the knee unto Abdi.
Baal, and those were part of the seven thousand whom Elias knew not. His
sepulchr^e is next unto Heliseus the prophets, and John Baptists, in Sebasta,
otherwise called Samaria. This man got the spirit of prophecy because he fed
those prophets in the wilderness, and of a warrior, became a teacher. Hier.
in Abdi. He was in Iosaphats time, before any of the other. Tiber being king of
the Latins. (b) Naum] He lived in Ioathans time, the king of Judah. Joseph.
lib. 9. (c) Abacuc] Of him is mention made in Daniel. c. 14. that he brought
Daniel his dinner from Judah Naum. Abacuc. [Louaine copy defective.]
to Babylon. [But Augustine uses not this place to prove his times, because,
that history of ^el, and all this fourteenth chapter together with the history
of Susanna are Apocryphal, neither written in Hebrew nor translated by the
seauenty.] Abacuc prophesied (says Hierome) when Nabucodrosar led Judah and
Benjamin into captivity, and his prophecy is all against Babylon. (d) Abdi and]
Eusebius places Addi and Michaeas both under Iosaphat. It is true that Abdi
lived then, but for Michaeas, his own words (cited before by Augustine) do
disprooue it. For his visions befell him in the times of Ioathan, Achaz, and
Ezechias, long after Iosaphat. (e) Which she negligence] I assure you there is
error in Eusebius, very dangerous both to the ignorant and the learned. (f)
Idumaea] It adioyneth to Palestina, and is the next country beyond Idumaea.
Arrabia. Pliny Joseph. Hierom. The Greek and Latin authors call them
Nabathei, inhabiting the City Petra. The land has the name of Esau, who was
otherwise called Edom, for diverse causes (g) For all the nations] Idumaea is no
part of israel, but yet they descended both from Isaac. Yet was it a foe unto
Judah, and the Jews called the Romans, Idumaeans. Idu^ signifies flesh, which
fights against the spirit, (b) Shall Be saued] The hebrew is, shall (...). (i)
Mount Esau] The Mountains in Idumaea are called Seir. Joseph. Iosuah. chap.
24* Seir, the mountains of Idumaea*
because they are rugged and rough, as Esau was. (k) Thy graue] The hebrew
adds. For thou at vile. Saint Paul had not his quotation. Romans 10. 15. from
hence, but from the fifteeneth of Esaias.

The prophecy contained in the song, and prayer of Abacuc. CHAP. 32.
ANd in his prayer and song, who does he speak unto but Christ saying. O Lord
I heard thy voice, and was afraid, Lord I considered thy works, and was
terrified. What is this but an ineffable admiration of that sudden and
unknown salvation of man? In the midst of two, shall thou be known, what are
those two? the two Testaments; the two thieves, or the two prophets Moses and
Elias. In the approach of years shall thou be known: this is plain, it needs
no exposition. But that which follows: My soul being troubled therewith, in
thy wrath remember mercy: is meant of the Jews, of whose nation he was: who
being mad in their wrath and crucifying Christ, he remembering his mercy,
said, Father forgive them, they (...) not what they do. God shall come from
Theman and the holy one from the thick and dark mountain: from (a) Theman
(say some) that is from the (b) South: signifies the heat of charity, and the
light of truth. The thick dark mountain, may be taken diversely, but I
rather choose to hold it meant of the depth of the holy scriptures prophesying
Christ: for therein are many depths for the industrious to exercise themselves
in: and which they find out when they find him whom they concern: His glory
covers the heavens, and the earth is full of his praise: that is just as the
psalm says. Exalt thy self O GOD above the heavens and let thy glory be
above all the earth: His brightness was as the light: His glory shall
enlighten the nations: He had horns coming out of his hands: that was his
extension on the cross: there was the hiding of his power, this is plain.
Before him went the word, and followed him into the field: that is, he was*
prophesied ere he came, and preached after his departure: he stood, and the
earth moved, he stood to save, and earth was moved with believing in him: He
beheld the nations, and they were dissolved: that is he pitied, and they
repented: He brake the mountains with violence, that is, his miracles amazed
the proud: the eternal his did bow: the people were temporally humbled, to
be eternally glorified: For my pains, I saw his goings in: that is, I had the
reward of eternity for my labors in charity: the tents of Ethiope trembled:
and so did they of Madian: that is even those nations that were never under
Rome, by the terror of thy name and power preached, shall become subject to
Christ. Was the Lord angry against the rivers or wa^ thine anger against the
sea? this implies that he came not to judge the world, but to save it: thou
rodest upon horses, and thy Chariot brought saluati^: The Evangelists are his
horses, for he rules them, and the Gospel his Chariot, salvation to all
believers: thou shall bend thy bow above scepters* thy judgment shall
restrain even the Kings of the earth, thou shall cleave the earth with rivers,
that is, thine abundant doctrine shall open the hearts of men to believe them:
unto such it is said. Rend your hearts and not your garments. The people shall
see thee, and tremble; thou shall spread the ^aters as thou go, thy
preachers shall power out the streams of thy doctrine on all sides. The deep
made anoise: the depth of man's heart expressed what it saw: the hight of his
fantasy, that is the deep gave out the voice, expressing (as I said*) what
it saw. This fantasy was a vision, which he conceiled not, but proclaimed at
full. The Sun was extolled, and the Moon kept her place. Christ was assumed
into heaven, and by him is the church ruled: thine arrows flew in the light.
Thy word was openly taught, and by the brightness of thy shining arme^, thine
arrows flew: For Christ himself had said, What I tell you in darkness, that
speak in the light. Thou shall tread down the land in anger, thou shall
humble M^. 10, 27
high spirits by afflicting them. Thou shall thresh the heathen in displeasure,
that is, thou shall quell the ambitious by thy judgments: thou wentest forth
to save thy people and thine anointed, thou laidest death upon the heads of
the wicked: all this is plain: thou have cut them off with amazement: thou
have cut down bad, and set up good, in wonderful manner: the mighty shall
crown their heads; which marvel at this: they shall gape after thee as a
poor man eating secretly. For so diverse great men of the Jews being hungry
after the bread of life, came to eat secretly, fearing the Jews, as the
Gospel shows: thou pu^test thine horses into the sea, who troubled the
waters; that is, the people* for unless all were troubled, some should not
become fearful conuertes, and others furious persecutors. I marked it and my
body trembled, at the sound of my lips: fear came into my bones, and I was
altogether troubled in my self. See, the hight of his prayer and his
prescience of those great events amazed even himself, and he is troubled with
those seas, to see the imminent persecutions of the church whereof he lastly
avoucheth himself a member, saying, I will rest in the da^e of trouble, as if
he were one of the hopeful sufferers, and patient reioycers: that I may go
up to the people of my pilgrimage: leaving his carnal kindred that wander
after nothing but worldly matters, never caring for their supernall country:
^or the figtree shall not fructify nor shall fruit be in the vines: the
olive shall fa^le and the fields shall be fruitless. The sheep have left their
meat, and the oxen are not in their stalles. Here he sees the nation that
crucified CHRIST, deprived of all spiritual goods, prefigured in those
corporal fertilities, and because the countries ignorance of God had caused
these plagues, forsaking Gods righteousness through their own pride, he
adds this: I will rejoice in the Lord, and joy in God my Savior: the Lord my
God is my strength, he will establish my feet: he will set me upon high
places, that I may be victorious in his song. What song? even such as the
psalmist speaks of: he has set my feet upon the rock: and ordered my
goings: and has put into my mouth a new song of praise unto GOD. In such a
song (and not in one of his own praise) does Ah^cuc conquer, glorying in the
Lord his God. Some books read this place better. ((...)) I (...) joy in my
LORD JESUS. But the translators had not the name it self in Latin other-wise
we like the word a great deal better.

L. VIVES.
FRom (a) Theman] Aquila, Symmachus, and the fifth edition (says Hierome) put
the very Theman.
word so. Only T^tion* expresses it, from the South, etc. Theman is under
Edo^, in the land of G^bal, named so by Theman* son to Elyphaz the son of
Esau, and it holds the name unto this day: lying five miles from Petra where
the Roman garrison lies, and where Eliphaz King of the Thebans was borne.
One also of the sons of Isaacs, was called Theman. Indeed the Hebrews call
every Southern Province, Theman. Hieron. loc. Hebraic. (b) S^th] Such is that
place also in the Canticles. (c) The thick dark mountaine] S^ say the LXX. but
the Hebrews, from mount Paran, which is a town on the far side of Arabia,
joining to the Sarazens. The Israelites went by it when they left Sina. The
LXX. rather expressed the adiacents, then the place it self. (d) Never under
Rome] India, Persia, and the new sound lands. (e) I will ioy] So does the
Hebrew read it: indeed. Jesus, (...) and Savior, are all one. In Tullyes time
they had not the Latin word Saluator. Act. (...). in Verr. but Lactantius.
Au^, and many good Latinists do use it since. Read Hierome of this verse if
you would Saluator.
know further.

Prophecies of Hieromie, and Zephany, concerning the former themes. CHAP. 33.
HIeremy (a) is one of the greater Prophets: so is Isay^, not of the small: of
some of whom I now spoke. He prophesied under Iosia King of Judah, Ancus Martius
being King of Rome, hard before Isreal's captivity, unto the fifth month of
which he prophesied, as his own book proves. Zephany (b) a small prophet,
was also in his time, and prophesied in Josias time also (as himself says)
but how long he says not. Hieremies time lasted all Ancus Martius his, and
part of Tarquinius Priscus his reign, the fifth Roman King. For in the
beginning of his reign, the Jews were captiued. This prophecy of Christ we
read in Hieremy. The breath of our mouth, the anointed our Lord was taken in
our sins. Here he (...) briefly both Christ his deity and his sufferance
for us. Again. This is (...) G^d, nor is there any besides him: he has found
all the ways of wisdom, and taught (...) to his servant Jacob, and to Israel
his beloved: Afterward was he seen upon earth, and he conuersed with men.
This, some say, is not Hieremyes but (d) Baruchs his transcribers. But the most
hold it Hieremies. He says further. Behold, the Hier 23 (...).
(...) (...) come (says the Lord) that I will raise unto David a just branch,
which shall (...) as King, and be wise: and shall exetute justice and judgment
upon the earth. (...) (...) days shall Judah be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely, and this is the name that they shall call him: The Lord our
righteousness. Of the calling of the Gentiles (which we see now fullfilled) he
says thus. O Lord my God and refuge in the day of (...) (...) thee shall the
Gentiles come from the ends o^ the world, and shall say: Our father^ have
adored false Images wherein there was no profit. And because the Jews would
no^ acknowledge Christ, but should kill him: the Prophet says. (e) The (...)
(...) (...) in all things, he is a man and who shall know him? His was the
testimo^ (...) of the New Testament and Christ the mediator, which I recited
in my (...) Book: for he says. Behold, the days come that I will make a new
covenant (...) the house of Israel* etc. Now Zephany, that was of this time
also, has this of (...) Wait upon me (says the Lord) in the day of my
resurrection, wherein my Zeph. 2.
^dgement shall gather the nations: and again: The Lord will be terrible unto
(...): he will consume all the gods of the earth: every man shall adore him
from his (...) ^en all the Isles of the Heathen: and a little after: Then will I
turn to the peo^ pure language, that they may all call upon the Lord, and
serve him with one con^, and from beyond the rivers of Ethiopia shall they
bring me offerings. In that day (...) the not be ashamed for all thy works
wherein thou have offended me, for then (...) ^use thee of the wicked that
have wronged thee: and thou shall no more be proud of mine holy mountain,
and I will leave a meek and lowly people in the minds of thee, and the
remnant of Israel shall reverence the name of the Lord. This is the remnant
that is prophesied of elsewhere, and that the Apostle mentions saying: there
is a remnant at this present time through the election of grace. For a remnant
of that nation believed in Christ.

L. VIVES.
HIeremy (a)] Of him, already. (b) Zephany] He was a prophet, and father to
prophets, and had prophets to his grandfather and great grandfather, say the
Hebrews. Chusi was his Zephany.
father, who was son to Godolias, the son of Amaria^ the son of Ezechias,
all prophets: for all the prophets progeny named in their titles, were prophets,
say the Hebrew doctors. (c) The annointed] There are many anointed, and many
Lords: but that breath of our mouth, this anointed is none but CHRIST our
SAVIOVR the SON of GOD: by whom we breath, we move, and have our being: who if
he leave us, leaves us less life, then if we lackt our souls. (d) Baruch^]
He was Hieremies servant (as Hieremies prophecy shows) and wrote a little
prophecy, allowed by the Church, because it much concerned Christ, and those
later times. (e) The heart] (...).
This is the Septuagints interpretation. Hierome has it otherwise from the
hebrew.

Daniels, and Ezechiels prophecies, concerning Christ, and his Church. CHAP. 34.
NOw in the captivity it self (a) Daniel and (b) Ezechiel, two of the greater
prophets prophesied first. Daniel foretold the very number of years until
the coming of Christ, and his passion. It is too tedious to perticularize, and
others have done it before us. But of his power and glory; this he said: I
beheld a vision by night, and behold, the son of man came in the clouds of
heaven, and approached Dan. 7, 13
unto the ancient of days, and they brought him before him and he gave him
dominion and honor, and a Kingdom, that all people, nations and languages
should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting dominion, and shall never be
taken away: his Kingdom shall never be destroyed: Ezechiel also prefiguring
Christ by David (as the prophets use) because Christ took his flesh, and the
form of a servant from David's Ezech. 34
seed: in the person of GOD the Father does thus prophecy of him. I will set
up a sheapheard over my sheep, and he shall feed them, even my servant
David, he shall feed them and be their sheapheard. I the Lord will be their God,
and my servant David shall be Prince amongst them: I the LORD have spoaken it.
And again: One (...). 37
King shall be King to them all: they shall be no more two peoples, nor be divided
from thence-forth into two Kingdoms: nor shall they be any more polluted in
their Idols, nor with their abominations, nor with all their transgressions:
but I will save them out of all their dwelling places, wherein they have
sinned, and will cleanse them: they shall be my people and I will be their GOD: and
David my servant shall be King over them, and they all shall have one sheapheard.

L. VIVES.
DAniel (a)] He was one of the capti^ed sons of Judah, and so Daniel, was
named Daniel.
Balthazar* by the Kings Eunuch that had charge of the children. His wisdom
made him highly esteemed of Balthazar the last King of Babylon, and after that,
of Darius the Monarch of Media, as Daniel himself and Josephus lib. 10. do
testify* Methodius, Apollinaris, and Eusebius Pamphilus defended this prophet
against the callumnies of Porphiry. (b) Ezechiel* A priest, and one of the
captivity with Daniell, as his writings do record.

Of the three prophecies of Aggee, Zachary and Malachy. CHAP. 35.
Three of the small prophets, (a) Aggee, (b) Zachary, and (c) Malachy, all
prophesying in the end of this captivity, remain still. Aggee prophecyeth of
Christ and his church, thus, diversely and plainly: Yet a little while and I
will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land: and I
will move all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come, says the
Lord of hosts. This prophecy is partly come to effect, and partly to be
effected at the consumation of all. The Angels, and the stars are witness,
of heavens moving at Christ's birth. The miracle of a Virgins childbirth,
moved the earth, the preaching of Christ in the Isles and the continent, moved
both sea and dry land: The nations we see are moved to the faith. Now the
coming of the desire of all nations, that we do expect, at this day of
judgment* for first he must be loved of the believers and then be desired of
the expecters. Now to Zachary. Rejoice greatly O daughter of Syon (says he of
Christ and his church) shoute for joy O daughter of Jerusalem: behold thy King
comes to thee, he is just, and thy Savior: poor, and riding upon an ass,
and upon (d* a colt, the fool of an ass: his dominion is from sea to sea, and
from the ri^er to the lands end. Of Christ's riding in this manner, the Gospel
speaks: where this prophecy (as much as needs) is recited: In another
place, speaking prophetically of the remission of sins by Christ, he says
thus to him. Thou in the blood of thy testament have loosed thy prisoners out
of the lake wherein is no water. This lake may be diversely interpreted without
iniuring our faith. But I think he means that barren, bondlesse depth of
human myseries, wherein there is no stream of righteousness, but all is
full of the mudde of iniquity: for of this is that of the psalm meant: He
has brought me out of the lake of misery, and Psalm. 40. 2.
(...) of the my^y clay.

Now Malachi prophesying of the church (which we see so happily propagate by
our Savior Christ) has these plain word, to the Jews in the person of God:
I have no pleasure in you, neither will I accept an offering at your hand: for
fr^ the rising of the Sun unto the setting my name is great amongst the
Gentiles, (...) in every place shall be (e) incence offered unto me, and a pure
offering unto my (...): for my name is great among the heathen, says the LORD.
This we see offered in every place by Christ's priesthood after the order of
Melchisedech: but the sacrifice of the Jews, wherein God took no pleasure but
refused, that they cannot deny is ceased. Why do they expect an other Christ,
and yet see that this prophecy is fulfilled already, which could not be but by
the true Christ? for he (...) by and by after in the person of God: My covenant
was with him of life and peace: I (...) him fear, and he feared me, and was
afraid before my name. The law of truth was (...) his mouth: he walked with me
in peace and equity, and turned many away, from ini^* for the priests lips
should preserve knowledge, and they should seek the law at his (...): for he
is the messenger of the Lord of hosts. No wonder if Christ be called (...) as
he is a servant because of the servants form he took, when he came to men: so
is he a messenger, because of the glad tidings which he brought unto men. For
Euangelium in greek, is in our tongue, glad tidings, and he says again of
him. Behold I will send my messenger and he shall prepare the way before me:
the Lord whom you seek, shall come suddenly into his Temple, and the messenger
of the covenant whom you desire: behold he shall come, says the Lord of
hosts: but who man abide the day of his coming? who shall endure when he
appears? This place is a direct prophecy of both the commings of Christ: of
the first: He shall come suddenly into his temple his flesh, as he said
himself: Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it again. Of
the second: Behold, he shall come, says the LORD of hosts, but who may abide
the day of his coming? etc. But those words the Lord whom you seek, and the
messenger of the covenant whom you desire, imply that the Jews, in that manner
that they conceive the scriptures, desire and seek the coming of CHRIST. But
many of them acknowledged him not, being come, for whose coming they so
longed: their evil deserts having blinded their hearts.

The covenant, named both here, and there where he said, My covenant was with
him, is to be understood of the New Testament whose promises are eternal, not
of the Old, full of temporal promises: such as weak men esteeming too highly,
do serve GOD wholly for, and stumble when they see the sinne-full to enjoy
them. Wherefore the Prophet, to put a clear difference between the bliss of
the New Testament, peculiar to the good, and the abundance of the Old
Testament, shared with the badde also, adioyneth this, Your words have been
stout against me (says the Lord) and yet you said, wherein have we spoken
against thee? you have said it is in vain to serve GOD; and what profit have
we in keeping his commandments, and in walking humbly before the LORD GOD of
hosts? and now we have blessed others: they that work wickedness are set
up, and they that oppose God, they are delivered. Thus spoke they that scared
the Lord: each to his neighbor, the Lord hearkened, and heard it, and wrote a
book of remembrance in his sight, for such as fear the Lord, and reverence
his name. That book insinuates the New Testament. Hear the sequel: They
shall be to me says the Lord of hosts, in that day wherein I do this, for a
slocke: and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves him.
Then shall you return, and discern between the righteous and the wicked, and
between him that serves GOD, and him that serves him not. For behold the day
comes that shall burn as an oven: and all the proud and the wicked shall be as
stubble, and the day that comes, shall burn them up, says the LORD of
Hosts, and shall leave them neither root nor branch. But unto you that fear
my name shall the son of righteousness arise, and health shall be under his
wings, and you shall go forth and grow up as fat Calves. You shall tread
down the wicked, they shall be as dust under the soles of your feet in the day
that I shall do this says the LORD of Hosts. This is that day that is called
the day of judgment, whereof if it please God, we mean to say somewhat, in
place convenient.

L. VIVES.
AGgee (a) Zachary] Esdras names them. chap. 6. 1. where he calls Zachary
the son (...) Addo, whom Zachary himself says was his grandfather, and
Barachiah, his father. The (says Hierome) was doubtless that Addo that was
sent to Hieroboam the son of Naba^ in whose time the Altar cleft, and his
hand withered, and was restored by this Adds prayers Kings. 1. 1^. and Chro.
2. 12. But he is not called Addo in either of these (...) the Kings omit his
name, the Chronicles call him Semeius. But a prophet of that time must be
great great grandfather at least to a son of the captivity. This Zachary was
not the son of (...) whom Ioash the King of Judah kiiled. Cbr. 2. 34. 21. he
whom Christ said was killed between the Temple and the Altar. Mat. 23. 35.
(b) Malachi.] His name interpreted is, His Angel, Malachi
and so the seauenty called him, whereupon Origin upon this prophet says that
he thinks it was an Angel that prophesied this prophecy, if we may believe
Hieromes testimony herein. Others call him Malachi, for indeed, names are not
to be altered in any translation. No man calls Plato, Broad: Or Aristotle
good perfection, or Iosuah, the Savior, or Athens, (...) (...). (...) (...)
change no names.
Minerua. Names are to be set down in the proper Idiome* other-wise, the names
of famous men, being translated into several tongues, should obscure their
persons fame, by being the more dispersed, which makes me wonder at those that
will wring the Greek names etc. unto their several Idiomes, wherein their
own conceit does them gross wrong, Caesar was wise, to deal plainly in
giving the french and German, each his contries names, only making them
declinable by the Latin. But to Malachi. Some by concordance of their stides,
say that he was Esdras: and prophesied under Darius the son of Histaspis. Of
Esdras in the next chapter (c) Rejoice greatly.] This whole quotation, and the
rest differ much from our vulgar translation. (d) Upon a colt.] The Evangelist
S. Matthew reads it: upon a colt, and the fool of an ass ^sed to the yoke.
cha. 21. ver. 5. The Jews that were yoaked under so many ceremonies were
prefigured herein. But the free and young colt (as the seauenty do translate it)
was the type, of the Gentiles, take which you will: God sits upon both, to
cure both from corruption and to bring both salvation. (e) Shall Be incense
offered.] The seauenty, read it, is offered: because the Prophets often speak of
things to come, as if they were present yea and sometimes as if they were
past. The translation of the seauenty is somewhat altered in the following
quotation.

Of the books of Esdras, and the Machabees. CHAP. 36.
AFter Agee, Zachary and Malachy, the three last Prophets, in the time of the
said captivity, (a) Esdras wrote, but he is rather held an Historiographer then
a Prophet: As the book of (b) Hester is also, containing accidents about those
times; all tending to the glory of God. It may be said that Esdras prophesied
in this, that when the question arose amongst the young men what thing was most
powerful, one answering Kings, the next, wine, and the third women, for they
often command Kings, (c) yet did the third add more, and said that truth
conquered althings. Now Christ in the Gospel is found to be the truth. From
this time, after the temple was re-edified the Jews had no more kings but
princes unto (d) Aristobulus his time. The account of which times we have not
in (...) canonical scriptures, but in the others, (e) amongst which the books
of the Machabees are also, which the church indeed holds for canonical (f)
because of the vehement and wonderful sufferings of some Martires for the law
of God before the coming of Christ. Such there were that endured intolerable
^ments, yet these books are but Apocryphal to the Jews.

L. VIVES.
[(...) (a)] A most skillful scribe of the law he was, and Hierom says he was
that Iosedech whose Esdras.
(...) Jesus was priest. He, they say, restored the law, which y^ Chaldaees had
burnt, (not without (...) assistance) and changed the hebrew letters to
distinguish the^ from the Samaritanes, Gentiles which then filled Judea. Eusebius.
The Jews afterward used his letters, only their accents differed from the
Samaritans, which were the old ones that Moses gave them. (b) Hester* (...)
^tory ^ter. Artaxerxes, ^ong-hand.
fell out (says Josephus) in the time of Artaxerxes, other-wise called Cyrus:
for Xerxes was the son of Darius Histaspis, and Artaxerxes surnamed
Long-hand, was son to him, in whose time the Jews were in such danger by
means of Haman, because of Mardochee, Hesters uncle, as there book shows.
This Nicephorus holds also. But Eusebius says this could not be, that the
Jews should be in so memorable a peril, and yet Esdras who wrote their
fortunes under Artaxerxes never once mention it. So that he makes this
accident to fall out long after, in the time of Artaxerxes Mnemon, bastard
son to Darius, and him the Hebrews called Assuerus, (says he), Indeed,
Bid is of this mind also. But I fear Eusebius his account is not so sure as
Josephus, but in this we recite opinions only, leaving the judgment. (c) Yet
did the third.] This was Zarobabel that said truth was about all. Esd. 33. los.
Ant. lib. 11. but the third and fourth book of Esdras are Apocryphal, Hierome
rejects Zorobabel. Aristobulus
them as dreams. (d* Aristobulus.] Son to Ionathas, both King and Priest, he
wore the first diadem in Iudaea, four hundred eighty and four years after
the captivity under Nabucadonosor. (e) Machabees.] Hierome saw the first of
those books in Hebrew, the latter he knew to be penned first in Greek by
the style: Josephus wrote the history of the Machabees as Hierome says Contra
Pellagian. I cannot tell whether he mean the books that we have for
scripture, or another Greek book that is set forth several and called
Ioseph^ad Machabeos, There is a third book of the Machabees, as yet
untranslated into Latin that I know of: that I think the Church has not
received for canonical. (f) Because of.] ^or there were seven brethren who
rather then they woold break the law, endured together with their mother to be
flayed quick, rather then to obey that foul command of Antiochus, against God.

The Prophets more ancient then any of the Gentile Philosophers. CHAP. 37.
IN our (a) Prophets time (whose works are now so far diuulged) there were
no Philosophers stirring as yet, for the first of them arose from (b)
Pithagoras of Samos, who began to be famous at the end of the captivity. So
that all other Philosophers must needs be much later (c) for Socrates of
Athens, the chief Moralist of his time, lived after Esdras, as the Chronicles
record. And ^o one after was Plato borne, the most excellent of all his
scholars. To whom if we ad also the former seven, who were called sages, not
Philosophers, and the Naturalists that followed Thales his study, to wit
Anaximander, Anaximenes, Anaxagoras, and others before Pythagoras professed
Philosophy, not one of these was before the Prophets, for Thales the most
ancient of them all, lived in Romulus his time, when this Prophetical doctrine
flowed from the fountain of Israel, to be derived unto all the world. Only
therefore the Theological Poets, Orpheus Linus, Musaeus and the others (if
there were anymore) were before our canonical prophets. But they were not more
ancient then our true divine Moses, who taught them one true God, and whose
books are in the front of our Canon, and therefore though the learning of
Greece warmeth the world at this day, yet need they not boast of their
wisdom, being neither so ancient nor so excellent as our divine religion, and
the true wisdom: we confess, not that Greece, but that the Barbarians, as
Egypt for example, had their peculier doctrines before Moses time, which they
called their wisdom: Otherwise our scripture would not have said that Moses
was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians: for there was he borne,
adopted, and brought up worthily ((...)) by the daughter of Pharao. But their
wisdom could not be before our prophets, for Abraham himself was a prophet.
And what wisdom could there be in Egypt. before Isis their supposed goddess
taught them letters? This Isis was daughter to Inachus King of Argos, who
reigned in the times of Abraham's Grandchildren.

L. VIVES.
IN our (a) prophets] Here Augustine proves the Old Testament ancienter then
all the philosophy of the greeks. This question Josephus handles worthily
against Ap^on, so does Eusebius. prep. euang. and Justin. Martyr Ad Gentes. The
case is plain enough by our allegations upon other chapters of this book. (b)
Pythagoras] Tully says he lived in his progenitor Seruius Tullus his time, and
so says Liuy lib. 1. True in his later years, and in the whole time of Cyrus
Pythagoras.
the Persian: for he flourished Olympiade sixty, wherein Tarquin the proud
began his (...). He died (according to Eusebius) Olymp. 70. after the Jews
were freed from captivity and lived quietly at Jerusalem. (c) Socrates] He
lived Olymp. 77. says Apollodorus, almost forty ^res after Darius sent the
Jews to the reparation of the temple. (d) Son after was] In the eighty eight
Olympiad. Apollod. (e) By the daughter] Maenis the daughter of Chenephres King
(...) Egypt, having no children, adopted a Jewish child called in hebrew
Moses, in greek Mu^. Moses.
This Eusebius lib. 9. praep. cites out of Artapanus.

Of some scriptures too ancient for the Church to allow, because that might
procure suspect that they are rather counterfeit then true. CHAP. 38.
NOw if I should go any higher, there is the Patriarch Noah, before the great
deluge: we may very well call him a prophet, for his very Arc, and his escape
in that flood, were prophetical references unto these our times. What was
Enoch, the seventh from Adam? Does not the Canonical Epistle of Jude s^y that
he prophesied? The reason that we have not their writings, nor the Jews
neither, is their to great antiquity: which may procure a suspect that they are
rather feigned to be theirs, then theirs indeed. For many that believe a^ they
like, and speak as they list, defend themselves with quotations from books.
But the cannon neither permits that such holy men's authority should be
rejected, nor that it should be abused by counterfeit pamphlets. Nor is it any
marvel that such antiquity is to be suspected when as we read in the histories
of the Kings of Judah and Israel (which we hold canonical) of many things
touched at there which are not there explaned, but are said (a) to be found in
other books of the prophets, who are sometimes named, and yet those works we
have not in our Canon, nor the Jews in theirs? I know not the reason of this,
only I think that those prophets whom it pleased the holy spirrit to inspire,
wrote ^e-things historically as men, and other things prophetically as from the
^outh of God, and that these works* were really distinct: some being held
their own, as they were men, and some the Lords, as speaking out of their
bosoms: so that the first might belong to the bettring of knowledge and the
later to the con^ming of religion, to which the Canon only has respect,
besides which if there be any works going under prophets names, they are not
of authority to better the knowledge, because it is a doubt whether they are
the works of those prophets or no: therefore we may not trust them,
especially when they make against the canonical truth, wheein they prove
themselves directly false birthes.

L. VIVES.
TO be found in (a) other. For we read: Concerning the deeds of David. etc.
they are written in the book of Samuel the Seer, and in the book of Nathan
the prophet, and of Gad etc. Chron. 1. 29. 29. and so likewise of Salomons
Chron. 29. 29. And of Iosaphats. Chronic. 2. ^0. 34.

That the Hebrew letters have been ever continued in that language. CHAP. 39.
WE may not therefore think as some do, that the hebrew tongue only was
derived from Heber to Abraham, and that (a) Moses first gave the hebrew
letters with the law: no, that tongue was derived from man to man successively
by letters as well as language. For Moses appointed men to teach them, before
the law was given. These the scriptures call (b) Grammaton Isagogos, that is
introductors of letters, because they did as it were bring them into the hearts
of men, or rather their hearts into them. So then no nation can ouer-poise our
Prophets and Patriarchs in antiquity of wisdom, for they had divine
inspirations, and the Egyptians themselves that use to give out such extreme
and palpable lies of their learnings, are proved short of time in comparison
with our Patriarchs. For none of them dare say that they had any excellence of
understanding before they had letters, that is, before Isis came and taught
them. And what was their goodly wisdom think you? Truly nothing but (c)
Astronomy, and such other sciences as rather seemed to exercise the wit, then
to eleuate the knowledge. For as for morality, it stirred not in Egypt until
Trismegistus his time, who was indeed long before (d) the sages and
Philosophers of Greece, but after Abraham, Philosophy
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, vea and Moses also: for at the time when Moses was
borne, was Atlas, Prometheus his brother, a great Astronomer living, and he
was grandfather by the mother-side to the elder Mercury, who begot the father
of this Trismegistus.

L. VIVES.
Moses (a) first gaue] It is the common opinion both of the Jews and
Christians that Moses did give the first letters to that language. Eupolemus,
Artapanus, and many other profane Moyse.
authors, affirm it also: and that the Phaenicians had their letters thence.
Artapanus thinks that Moses. gave letters to the Egyptians also: and that he
was that Mercury, whom all affirm did first make the Egyptian language
literate. If any one ask then in what letter that wisdom of Egypt, that
Moses learned was contained, he shall be answered, it went partly by tradition,
and partly was recorded by Hierog^yphicks: Philo the Jew says, Abraham
invented the Hebrew letters. But that they were long before Abraham it seems
by Josephus, who says that the sons of Seth, erected two pillars, one of
stone, and another of brick, whereon the arts that they had invented were
engraven: and that the stone pillar was to be seen in Syria in his time.
Antiq. lib. 1. These Augustine seems here to take for the Hebrew letters.
Pillars erected by the sons of Seth.
(b) Grammato isagogos] Hierome translateth it, Doctors, and Masters and
Scribes. They taught only the letter of the scriptures, and declined not from
it an inch: but the greater professors were the Pharisees, of Phares, division,
for they severed themselves from others, as all others betters. Both sorts
taught the law out of^ Moses chair, the scribes the litterall sense, and the
Pharisees the mysteries. (c) Astronomy] Geometry, Arithmetic and Astronomy,
were the ancient Egyptians only studies. Necessity made them Geometers, for
Nilus his in-undations every year took away the bounds of their lands, so
that each one was feign to know his Scribes. Pharases.
own quantity, and how it lay and in what form, and thus they drew the
principles of that art. Now aptness made the^ Astronomers, for their nights
were clear, and never cloud came on their land, so as they might easily
discern all the motions, stations, rising and fall of every star: a ^udy both
wondrous delectable, and exceeding profitable, and beseeming the excellence of
(...): now these two arts, could not consist without number, and so Arithmetic
got up for the third. (d) Before the sages] A diversity of reading rather
worth nothing then noting.

The Egyptians abominable lyings, to claim their wisdom the age of 100000.
years. CHAP. 40.
IT* is therefore a monstrous absurdity to say, as some do, that it is above
100000. years since Astronomy began in Egypt. What records have they for
this, that had their letters but two thousand years ago (or little more) from
Isis. Varro's authority is of worth here, agreeing herein with the holy
Scriptures. For seeing it is not yet six thousand years from the first man
Adam, how ridiculous are they that overrun the truth such a multitude of
years? whom shall we believe in this, so soon as him that foretold what
now we see accordingly effected? The dissonance of histories, gives us leave
to lean to such as do accord with our divinity. The citizens of Babylon
indeed, being diffused all the earth over, when they read two authors of like
(and allowable) authority, differing in relations of the eldest memory, they
know not which to believe. But we have a divine history to vnder-shore us, and
we know that what so ever seculer author he be, famous or obscure, if he
contradict that, he goes far ^ay from truth: But be his words true or
false, they are of no value to the at^ement of true felicity.

The dissension of Philosophers, and the concord of the Canonical Scriptures.
CHAP. 41.
But to leave history, and come to the Philosophers whom we left* long ago:
their studies seemed wholly to aim at the attainment of beatitude. Why did the
scholars then contradict their masters, but that both were whirled away with
human affects: wherein (a) although there might be some spice of vaineglory,
each thinking himself wiser and quicker conceited then other, and affecting
to be an Arch-dogmatist himself, and not a follower of others:
notwithstanding to grant that it was the love of truth, that carried some (or
the most of them) from their teachers opinions, to contend for truth, were it
truth or were it none? what course, what act can mortal misery perform to the
obtaining of true blessedness, without it have a divine instruction? as for
our Canonical authors, God forbid that they should differ. No they do not: and
therefore Worthily did so many nations believe that God spoake either in them
or by them: this the multitude in other places, learned and unlearned do auow,
though your petty company of ianglers in the schools deny it. Our Prophets
were but few, ^east being more, their esteem should have been less, which
religion ought ^ghly to reverence, yet are they not so few but that their
concord is justly to be admired. Let one look amongst all the multitude of
philosophers writings, and if he find two that tell both one tale in all
respects, it may be registered for a rari^. It were two much for me to stand
ranking out their diversities in this work. (...) what Dogmatist in all this
Hierarchy of Hell has any such privilege that (...) may not be controuled,
and opposed by others, with gracious allow^ to both parts: were not the
Epi^urists in great accoumpt at Athens, ^ing that GOD had naught to do with
man? And were not the Stoikes their opponents, that held the Gods to be the
directors of all things, even as gracious as they? Wherefore I marvel that (b)
Anaxagoras, was accused for saying the sun was a fiery stone, denying the
godhead thereof: Epicurus being allowed and graced in that City, who divided
both deities of sun, stars, yea of Jove himself (c) and all the rest, in
all respect of the world, and man's supplications unto them: was not Aristippus
there with his bodily summum bonum, and Antisthenes with his mental? Both
famous Socratists, and yet both so far contrary each to other in their
subjects of beatitude. The one bad a wise man fly rule, the other bad him take
it, and both had full and frequent audience. Did not every one defend his
opinion in public, in the town (d) g^llery, in (e) schools, in (f) gardens,
and likewise in all private places? One (g) held one world: another a thousand:
some hold that one created: some, not created: some hold it eternal, some not
eternal: some say it ruled by the power of God, others by chance. Some say the
souls are immortal: others mortal: some transfuse them into beasts: others
deny it: some of those that make them mortal, say they dye presently after the
body: others say they live longer, yet not for ever: some place the cheifest
good in the body, some in the soul, some in both: some draw the external
goods to the soul and the body: some say the senses go alwaie true, some say
but sometimes, some say never. These and millions more of dissentions do the
Philosophers bandy, and what people, state, kingdom or city of all the
diabolical socyety has ever brought them to the test, or rejected these and
received the other? But has given nourishment to all confusion in their very
bosoms, and vpheld the rabble of curious ianglers, not about lands, or cases in
law, but upon main points of misery and bliss? Wherein if they spoke true,
they had as good leave to speak false, so fully and so fitly sorted their
society to the name of Babylon, which (as we said) signifies confusion. Nor
cares their King the devil how much they iangle, it procures him the larger
harvest of variable impiety. But the people, state, nation and City of Israel
to whom Gods holy laws were left, they used not that licentious confusion of
the false Prophets with the the true, but all in one consent held and
acknowledged the later for the true authors, recording Gods testimonies. These
were their Sages, their Poets, their Prophets, their teachers of truth and
piety. He that lived after their rules, followed not man, but God; who spoke
in them. The sacrilege forbidden there, God forbids: the commandment of
honor thy father and mother, God commands. Thou shall not commit adultery,
nor murder, nor shall steal: Gods wisdom pronounces this, not the wit of
man. For (h) what ^xod. ^0.
truth soever the Philosophers attained and disputed off amidst their falsehood
as namely, that God framed the world, and governed it most excellently, of the
honesty of virtue, the love of our country, the faith of friendship, just
dealing, and all the appendances belonging to good manners: they knew not to
what end the whole was to be referred: The Prophets taught that from the mouth
of God in the persons of men, not with inundations of arguments, but with
apprehension of fear and reverence of the Lord in all that understood them.

L VIVES.
ALthough (a) there be] Vainglory led almost all the ancient authors wrong,
stuffing arts with infamous errors, gross and pernicious: each one seeking to
be the proclamer of his own opinion, rather then the preferrer of another.
Blind men! they saw not how laudable it is to obey Good council, and to agree
unto truth. I knew a man once (not so learned as arrogant) who professed that
he would write much, and yet avoid what others had said before him* as he
would fly a serpent or a Basiliske: for that he had rather wittingly affirm a
lie, then assent unto the opinion. (b) Anaxagoras.] A stone fell once out of
the air into Aegos, ariuer in Thracia, and Anaxagoras (who had also presaged
it) affirmed that heaven was made all of stones and that the son was a fiery
stone: whereupon Euripides his scholar calls it a Anaxagoras
golden turfe. In Phaetonte: for this assertion Sotion accused him of impiety,
and Pericles his scholar pleaded for him, yet was he fined at five talents,
and perpetual banishment. Others say otherwise. But the most say that Pericles
who was great in the City, saved his life being condemned: whereupon the
Poets feigned that Jove was Angry at Anaxagoras and threw a thunderbolt at
him, but Pericles stepped between, and so it flew another way. (c) And all the
rest.] Epicurus held Gods, but excluded them from meddling in humane affairs,
and hearing Epicuras.
us: indeed his under aim was Atheism, but the Areopage awed him from
professing it: for farewell such Gods as we have no need on says Cotta in
Tully (d) Town gallery.] There taught the stoikes. (e) Schools.] As the
Peripatetiques in the Lycaeum. (f) Gardens.] As the Ep^cureans did (g) Some
held.] Of these we spoke at large upon the eight book. (h) What truth soever.]
Euse. de praep. Euang proves by many arguments that Plato had all his
excellent position out of the scriptures.

Of the translations of the Old Testament out of Hebrew into Greek, by the
ordinance of God for the benefit of the nations CHAP. 42.
THese scriptures one (a) Ptolomy a king of Egypt desired to understand, for
after the strange and admirable conquest of Alexander of Macedon, surnamed the
great, wherein he brought all Asia and almost all the world under his
subjection, partly by fair means and partly by force, (who came also into
Iudaea) his nobles after his death making a turbulent division or rather a
dilaceration of his monarchy, Egypt came to be ruled by Ptolomyes. The first of
which was the soon of Lagus, who brought many Jews captive into Egypt: the
next was Philadelphus, who freed all those captives, sent gifts to the temple,
and desired Eleazar the Priest to send him the Old Testament whereof he had
hard great commendations, and therefore he meant to put it into his famous
library: Eleazar sent it in Hebrew, and then he desired interpretours of him,
and he sent him seauenty two, six of every tribe all most perfect in the
Greek and Hebrew. Their translation do we now usually call the Septuagints.
(b) The report of their divine concord therein is admirable: for Ptolomy having
(to try their faith) made each one translate by himself, there was not one
word difference between them, either in sense or order, but al was one, as if
only one had done them all: because indeed there was but one spirit in them
all. And God gave them that admirable gift, to give a divine commemdation to
so divine a work, wherein the nations might see that presaged, which we all see
now effected.

L VIVES.
ONe (a) Ptolomy.] The Kings of Egypt were all* called Pharaos until Cambyses
added that Ptolomies.
kingdom unto the Monarchy of Persia. But after Alexander, from Ptolomy sonof
Lagus, they were al called Ptolomies, until Augustus made Egypt a province.
Alexander was abroad Alexander the great.
(...) an army 21. years; in which time he subdued al Asia, but held it but a
while, for in the 32. (...) of his age, he died, and then his nobles ran all
to share his Empire as it had bin a bro^ filled with gold; every one got what
he could, and the least had a Kingdom to his (...). Antigonus got Asia;
Seleucus Chaldaea, Cassander Macedonia, each one somewhat, and Pto^ Egypt,
Phaenicia and Ciprus; he was but of mean descent. Lagus his father was one of
Alexanders guard, and he from a common soldior, got highly into the favor of
his Prince for his valor, discretion, and experience. Being old, and addicted
to peace, he left his crown Philadelphus.
to his son Philadelphus, who had that name either for loving his sister
Arsinoe or for hating her afterward, a contrario. He freed all the Jews whom
his father had made captives and set Iudaea free from a great tribute: and
being now grown old, and diseased (by the persuasion of Demetrius Phalereus,
whom envy had chased from Athens thither) he betook himself to study,
gathered good writers together, buylt that goodly library of Alexandria,
wherein he placed the Old Testament, for he sent to Eleazar for translators
for the law and Prophets, who being mindful of the good he had done to
Iudaea, sent him the seauenty The septu agi^.
two interpretours whom from breuity sake we call the seauenty, as the
Romans called the hundred and five officers, the Centumuirs. In Josephus are
the Epistles of Ptolomy to Eleazar, and his unto him. lib. 12. There is a book
of the seauenty interpreters that goes under his name, but I take it to be a
false birth. (b) The report of.] Ptolomy honored those interpreters, highly. To
try the truth by their Agreement (says Iustine) he built seauenty two
chambers, placing a translator in every one, to write therein, and when they
had done, conferred them all and their was not a letter difference. Apologet.
ad Gent. The ruins of these Iustine says he saw in Pharos, the tower of
Alexandria. Menedemus the Philosopher admired the congruence in the
translation, Tertull. Aduers. gentes [Hierome sometimes extolls [The Louaine
copy fails here.]
their translation as done by the holy spirit, and sometimes condemns it for
evil, and ignorant: as he was vehement in all opposition] that story of their
chambers, ^e scoffeth at for this he says: I know not what he was whose lies
built the chambers for the seauenty at Alexandria, where they might write
several, when as Aristeas one of Ptolomies guard, says that they all wrote in
one great palace: not as Prophets: for a prophet is one thing, and a
translatour another, the one speaks out of inspiration, and the other
translateth out of understanding. Prolog. in Pentateuch.

That the translation of the Seventy is most authentical, next unto the
Hebrew. CHAP. 43.
THere were other translators out of the Hebrew into the Greek as Aquila,
Symmachus, Theod^tion, and that namelesse interpetor whose translation is
called the fifth Edition. But the Church has received that of the seauenty, as
if there were no other, as many of the Greek Christians, using this wholly,
know not whether there be or no. Our Latin translation is from this also.
Although one Hierome, a learned Priest, and a great linguist has translated
the same scriptures from the Hebrew into Latin. But (a) although the Jews
affirm his Hierome a Priest.
learned labor to be al truth, and avouch the seauenty to have oftentimes
erred, yet the Churches of Christ hold no one man to be preferred before so
many, especially being selected by ye high Priest, for this work: for although
their concord had not proceeded from their unity of spirit but from their
collations, yet were no one man to be held more sufficient then they all. But
seeing there was so divine a demonstration of it, truly whosoever translateth
from the Hebrew, or any other tongue, either must agree with the seauenty, or
if he dissent, we must hold by their prophetical depth. For the same spirit
that spoke in the prophets, translated in them. And that spirit might say
other-wise in the translation, then in the Prophet, and yet speak alike in
both, the sense being one unto the true understander though the words be
different unto the reader. The same spirit might add also, or diminish, to
show that it was not man's labor that performed this work, but the working
spirit that guyded the labors. Some held it good to correct the seauenty, by
the Hebrew, yet durst they not put out what was in them and not in the Hebrew,
but only added what was in that and not in them, (b) marking the places with
(c) Asteriskes at the heads of the verses, and noting what was in the seauenty,
and not in the Hebrew, with (...), as we mark (d) ounces of weight withal:
And many Greek and Latin ^pies are dispersed with these marks. But as for
the alterations, whether the difference be great or small, they are not to be
discerned but by conferring of the books. If therefore we go all to the spirit
of God and nothing else, as is fittest, whatsoever is in the seauenty, and not
in the Hebrew, it pleased God to speak it by those latter prophets, and not by
these first. And so contrary-wise of that which is in the Hebrew and not in the
seauenty, herein showing them both to be ^phets, for so did he speak this by
Esaias, that by Hieremy, and other things by oaths as his pleasure was. But what
we find in both, that the spirit spoke by both: by the first as Prophets, by
the later as prophetical translations: for as there was one spirit of peace in
the first who spoke so many several things with discordance, so was there in
these who translated so agreeably without conference.

L VIVES.
ALthough (a) the Jews.] No man now a days shows an error, and leaves it.
Mankind is not so wise. Again, time gayneth credit unto many: and nothing but
time unto some. But it is admirable to see how gently he speaks here of
Hierome: whose opinion he followed not in this high controversy. O that we
could immitate him! (b) Marking.] of this Hierome speaks Prolog. in Paralip.
Origin was the first that took the pains to con^ Hierome.
the translation, and he conferred the seauenty with Theodotion, Hier. ep. id
August. where he inueigheth at what he had erst commended: saying that the
book is not corrected but rather corrupted by those asteriskes, and spits.
[But this he said because Augustine would not meddle with his translation, but
held that of the seauenty so sacred, this power oftentimes [The Louaine copy
defective.]
(...) affection in the holiest men.] (c) Asteriskes.] Little stars (d)
Ounces.] It seems the o^ce in old times was marked with a spits character.
Isido^e says it was marked with the Greek Gamma, and our o: thus (...), and
the half scruple with a line thus -- they noted those places with a spit, thus
(...) to signify that the words so no^ed, were thrust through as ad^,
falsefiing the text. It was Aristarchus his invention used by the Grammarians
in their (...) of books and verses. Quinti. lib. 1. Which the old Grammarians
used with such severity (...) they did not only tax false places, or books
hereby, but also thrust their authors either (...) of their rank or wholly from
the name of Grammarians. Thus Quintilian. Seneca did ele^ call the rasing out
of bastard verses, Aristarchus his notes.

Of the destruction of Niniuy* which the Hebrew perfixeth forty days unto,
and the Septuagints but three. CHAP. 44.
(...) will some say, how shall I know whether Jonas said, yet forty days and
Ni^ shall be destroyed, or yet three days? who sees not that the Prophet
presaging (...) destruction could not say both: if at three days end they were
to be des^, then not at forty: if at forty then not at three. If I be asked
the question, I answer for the Hebrew. For the LXX. being (...) after, might
say otherwise, and yet not against the sense, but as pertinent to the matter as
the other, though in another signification: aduising the reader not to leave
the signification of the history for the circumstance of a word, no^ to
contemn either of the authorities: for those things were truly done ((...)) at
Ni^ie, and yet had a reference farther then Niniuie: as it was true that the
Prophet Nin^uie, a figure of the Church
was three days in the Whales belly, and yet intimated the being of the Lord
of all the Prophets three days in the womb of the grave. Wherefore if the
Church of the Gentiles were prophetically figured by Niniuie, as being
dest^oyed in repentance, to become quite different from what it was: Christ
doi^g this in the said Church, it is he that is signified both by the forty
days, and by the three: by forty, because he was so long with his disciples
after hi^ resurrection, and then ascended into heaven: by three, for on the
third day he aro^e again: as if the Septuag^nts intended to stir the reader
to look further into the matter then the mere history, and that the prophet
had intended to intimate the depth of the mystery: as if he had said: Seek
him in forty days whom thou shall find in three: this in his resurrection,
and the other in his asce^sion Wherefore both numbers have their fit
signification, both are spok^n by one spirit, the first in Jonas, the latter in
the translators. Were it no^ for ^diousnesse I could reconcile the LXX. and the
Hebrew in many places wherein they are held to differ. But I study breuity, and
according to my talent have followed the Apostles, who assumed what made for
their purposes out of both the copies, knowing the holy spirit to be one in
both. But forward with our purpose.

L. VIVES.
YEt (a) forty dayes] Hierome wonders that the seauenty would translate three,
for forty, the Hebrew having no such similitude in figure or accent. In these
straites is the excellent wit of Saint Augustine now ^n angl^d, nor can he
well acquit himself of them (b) At Ni^iuie] A city in Assyria, built by
Ninus. We have spoaken of it already.

The Jews wanted Prophets ever after the repayring of the Temple, and were
afflicted even from thence until Christ came: to show the Prophets spoke of
the building of the other Temple. CHAP. 45.
AFter the Jews were left destitute of Prophets, they grew daily worse and
worse: namely from the end of their captivity, when they hoped to grow into
better state upon the repaying of the Temple. For so that carnal nation
understood Agees Prophecy, saying; The glory of this last house shall be
greater then the first: which he shows that he meant of the New Testament
Agge. 2.
in the words before, where he promises CHRIST expressly, saying: I will
move all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come. Where the LXX.
used a sense rather applyable to the members then the head, saying: And they
that are GODS elect shall come* out of all Nations, to wit, the men of whom
Christ said in the Gospel. Many are called, but few are chosen. For those
chosen, is the house of GOD built by the New Testament, of living stones, far
more glorious then that which was built by Solomon, and repaired after the
captivity. Therefore from thence had this nation no more Prophets, but were
sore afflicted by aliens, even by the Romans themselves, to teach them that
Agge meant not of that house which they had repaired. For (b) (...) (...) to
Go^, (...) (...) should
Alexander came soon after that, and subdued them: who although he made no
massacre of them (for they durst do no other but yield at his first book) yet
there was the glory of that Temple proved inferior to what it had been in
their own free Kings times. For in the Temple did Alexander sacrifice, not in
any true worship unto GOD, but giving him a place in the adoration of his false
deities. (c) Then came the forenamed Ptolomey son to Lagus, after Alexa^ders
death, and h^e lead many of them captive into Egypt, yet his son Philadelphus
did courteously free them afterward, and had the seauentie to translate the
Old Testament for him, as I said before: from whence it came to our hands.

After all this, the wars mentioned in the Machabees, lay upon them. And in
(d) process of time, Ptolomy King of Alexandria sudbued them, (he that was
called Epiphanes) and then were they extremely plagued, forced to offer to
Idols, and their Temple filled with sacriligious pollution by Antiochus King of
Syria, whose powers not-with-standing Judas Machabeus utterly subue^ted, and
restored the Temple to the ancient dignity.

Within a while after. did Alchimus (a man borne out of the Priests blood) by
ambition aspire to the Priesthood: and then about fifty years after, all
which were passed under the variable chance of war, did Aristobulus assume a
diadem, and became both King and Priest. For all the time before, ever since
the captivity, they had no Kings but Captains and Generals, or Princes
(though a King may be called a Prince, because of his pre-eminence, but all
that are Captains and Princes, (f) are not Kings, as Aristobulus was). To him
(g) did Alexander succeed both in the kingdom and the Priesthood, and is
recorded for a tyrant over his people. He left the regality to his wife
Alexandra, and from Alexandr^.
thence began the Jews extremities of affliction. For (h) her two sons
Aristobulus and Hircanus contending for the Principality, called the Roman
forces to come against Israel, by the means of Hircanus demanding their aid
against his brother. Then had the Roman* conquered all Afric and Greece,
and having commanded over a multitude of other nations, (i) the state seemed
too heavy for it self, and brake it self down with the own burden. For now
had sedition gotten strong hold amongst them, breaking out into confederacies,
and civil wars, wherewith it was so maimed, that now all declined unto a
Monarchike form of government. But Pompey the great general of Romes forces,
brought his powers into Iudaea, took Jerusalem, opened the Temple Pompey
prophaneth the temple.
doors (not to go in to pray unto God, but to prey upon God rather) and not
as a worshipper, but as a prophaner, entered the (k) sanctum sanctorum, a place
only lawful for the high Priest to be seen in. (l) And having seated
Hircanus in the priesthood, and made Antipater provost of the province, he
departed carrying Aristobulus away with him, prisoner. Here began the Jews to
be the Romans Cassius spoils the temple.
tributaries. Afterward came Cassius and spoiled the Temple. (m) And within a
few years after, Herod an Alien was made their governor, and in his time was
our Savior CHRIST borne. For now was the fullness of time come which the
Patriarch prophetically employed, saying, The Scepter shall not depart from
Judah, nor the lawgiver from between Genesis 49. 10
his feet, until Shilo come, and he shall gather the nations unto him. For
the Jews had never been without a Prince of their blood, until Herod's time,
who was their first Alien King. Now then was the time of Shiloh come, now was
the New Testament to be promulgate, and the nations to be reconciled to the
truth. For it were impossible that the nations should desire him to come in his
glorious power to judge, (as we see they do) unless they had first been
united in their true belief upon him, when he came in his humility to suffer.

L. VIVES.
THey that (a) are Gods elect] (...). (b) Alexander came] In the time of
Dariu^, Alexander.
son to Arsamus, Olymp. 112. which is a little more then two hundred years
after. F^r Alexander besieging Tire: and sending for help to Iaddus the
Priest, commanding him as (...) were Lord of Asia, seeing he had now chased
Darius thence, the Priest answered, that he ought him no service as long as
Darius lived, with whom he was in league. A wise answer, and befitting an
Israelites faith: it enflamed the valarous young King, who having taken Tire,
made straight to Galilee through Palestina, took Gaza, and set forward to
Jerusalem, where the Priests met him in all their ceremonial robes, and
saluted him: so he was pac^fied and adored the Priest, saying that he was the
Priest of the God of Nature, who had appeared unto him in his sleep at
Macedon, and told him he should attain this Empire. So took he Iudaea into
his protection. Joseph. lib. 11. Antiq. (c) Ptolomy son to Lagus] Under
color Ptolomy.
of desiring to sacrifice in the Temple upon a Sabbath, he took the town.
Joseph. (d) Epiphanes] That is, Illustrious. He succeeded his Father
Philopater, and warred with Antiochus Epiphanes.
Epiphanes, until they bo^ were wearied, and then he married Cleopat^,
Antiochus his daughter, and had Iudaea for his dowry, etc. (e) Antiochus] Of
him read the Machabees 2. 7, and 8. and Joseph. lib. 13. (f) Are not Kings] For
King is a greater name then Prince, or Captain, bringing larger license to the
ruler, and stricter bondage to the s^biect. ((...)) Alexander] Aristobulus kept
his brothers prisoners during his life, but being dead, his (...) Saloni
(whom the Greeks call Alexandra) set them at liberty, and made Alexander (one
of them) King, whom Ptolomy, Demetrius, and Antiochus foiled in many fights.
At length being sickly by often surfeiting, he dyed. He was a forward
spirit^d and a valorous tyrant, but ever unfortunate, and unwise. He left the
kingdom to* Alexandra his wife, who held it nine years, letting the Pharisees
rule all as befitted a woman, to do.

(h) Her two sonnes] Their war was worse then civil, and befell (says
Joseph) in the Aristobolus. (...) and Hircanus
Consulship of Q, Hortensius, and Q. Metellus Creticus, Olymp. a hundred eighty
three. Alexander and his wife had left Antipas (afterward called Antipater the
^ch) an ^maean Antipater.
prefect of Idumaea, who was factious and stirring, and favored Hircanus above
Aristobulus, and set Aretes King of Arabia against Aristobolus, and for
Hircanus. He soon assented, and besieged Aristobulus in Jerusalem. Then
warred Pompey the great in Africa, and his Legate Aemil. Scaurus lead part of
his forces into Syria, and him did Aristobolus Pompey.
implore in his aid: Scaurus raised the siege, and afterward the brethren
contending for the kingdom before Pompey at Damascus, were both dismissed.
Afterward, Aristobolus offending him, he marched into Iudaea, took him
prisoner, and turned Judah a into a Province of Rome, Tully and C. Antonius
being Consuls. Joseph. lib. 15. (i) The state seemed too heauie] So said Liuie
of it indeed. (k) The sanctum sanctorum] The Romans (...) The sanct^
sanctorum.
earnestly to see what God the Hebrews worshipped, thinking they had some
statue of him in the Temple. So Pompey, and a few with him, entered even to this
place (which the Jews he^ a sacrilege for any man but the priest to do,)
where he found nothing but a golden table, a many tasters, a great deal of
spices, and 2000. talents in the holy treasury: of this envy of his Tacitus
speaks, Annal. 21. and says that upon this it was given out that the Jews
had no Images of their gods but worshipped in void rooms and empty
sanctuaries. (l) And having seated] By the sending of Aulus Gabinius, who
divided also all the land into five parts, Hircants.
and set rulers over them all. Josephus says that in Caesar's war against
Ptolomy, Hircanus and Antipater sent him aid, whereupon having ended the war
he made Hircanus high priest, and Antipater (according to his choice) provost
of the whole land. De bello Iu^. lib. 1. and in Antiq. lib. (m) And within a
few] Antipater dying, made his son Hircanus, (a dull and Herod.
sloathfull youth) governor of Jerusalem, and Herod (being as then scarcely
fi^teene year old) ruler of Galilee, who by his virtues, surmounting his age,
quickly got the hearts of all the Syrians, and so by a brib^ (paid by them)
got the government of Syria from Sextus (...) (...) as then held it: and
afterward helping Octauius and Antony greatly, in the war o^ (...) and
Cassius, got the style of King of Iudaea, given him by the S^nate, he being
(...) (...) borne. So was Jacobs prophecy at his death, fulfilled, which alone
might be of power ^ufficient to show the Messiah to the Jews, but that their
eyes by Gods secret judgments are so wholly sealed up, and enclowded.

Of the words becoming flesh, our Saviors birth* and the dispersion of Jews.
CHAP. 46.
HErod reigning in Iudaea, Romes government being changed, and (a) Augustus
Caesar being Emperor, the world being all at peace, Christ (according to the
precedent prophecy) was borne in Bethelem of Judah, being openly man of his
Virgin Mother, and secretly God, of God his father* for so the Prophet had
said: (b) Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a son: and she shall
call his name, Emanuel, that is, God with us. Now he showed his deity by many
miracles, which as far as concerns his glory and our salvation, are
recorded in the Gospel. The first is his miraculous birth, the last his as
miraculous as^ension. But the Jews who rejected him, and slew him (according
to the needfulnesse of his death, and resurrection) after that were miserably
spoiled by the Romans, chased all into the slavery of strangers, and dispersed
over the face of the whole earth. For they are in all places with their
Testament, to show that we have not forged those prophecies of Christ, which
many of them considering, both before his passion and after his resurrection,
believed in him, and they are the remnant that are ^aued through grace. But the
rest were blind, as the psalm says, Let their table be made a snare before
them, and their prosperity their ruin: let their eyes be blinded that they see
not, and make their loins always to tremble. For in refusing to believe our
scriptures, their own (which they read with blindness) Psalm. 69 22. 23
are fulfilled upon them.

(c) Some may say that the Sybills prophecies which concern the Jews, are but
fictions of the christians: but that suffices us that we have from the books
of our enemies, which we acknowledge in that they preserve it for us against
their wills, themselves and their books being dispersed as far as GODS
Church is extended and spread; in every corner of the world, as that prophecy
of the psalm which they themselves do read, fore-telleth them. My merciful
GOD will prevent me, GOD will let me see my desire upon mine enemies: slay
them Psalm. 59, (...) 11
not least my people forget it, but scatter them abroad with thy power, here
did GOD show his mercy to his church even upon the Jews his enemies, because
(as the Apostle says) through their fall comes salvation to the Gentiles.
And therefore he (...) them not, that is he left them their name of Jews
still, although they be the Romans slaves, least their utter dissolution
should make us forget the law of GOD concerning this testimony of theirs. So it
were nothing to say* Slaye them not, but that he adds, Scatter them abroad:
For if they were not dispersed through-out the whole world with their
Scriptures, the Church should want their testimonies concerning those
prophecies fulfilled in our Messiah.

L. VIVES.
AUgustus (a) Caesar] In the forty and two year of his reign, and of the
world five thousand one hundred ninety and nine, was Christ borne. Himself,
and M. Plautius being Consulls. Eusebius. Cassiodorus refers it to the year
before, Cn. Lentulus, and M. Messala being Consuls. (b) Behold a Uirgin] Shall
take a son into her womb, say the seauentie. (c) Some may say] But not
truly: for Lactantius and Eusebius cited them when the books were common in
all men's hands. Where if they had quoted what those books contained not, it
would both have been impudence on their parts, and disgrace to the cause of
Christ. Besides Ovid and Uirgil use many of the Sybills verses, which can
concern none but Christ, as Uirgills whole fourth Aeglogue is, and his
digression upon the death of Caesar. Georg. 1. And likewise in Ovid we read
these. Esse quoque in fatis (...) affore terris
Quo ^are, quo tellus corrept aque regia (...),
Ardeat et mundi moles operosa laboret.
There is a time when heaven (men say) shall burn,
When air, and sea, and earth, and the whole frame,
Of this ^ge (...) shall all to ashes turn.


And likewise this. Et Deus (...) lustrat sub imagine terras.
God takes a view of earth in human shape.
And such also has Luca^ in his Pharsalian war. liber 12. Now if they say
that all the assertions of ours (recorded by great Authors) be fictions, let
me hear the most direct ^th that they can affi^, and I will find one
Academike or other amongst them that shall ^ke a doubt of it.

Whether any but Israelites, before Christ's time, belonged to the City of God.
CHAP. 47.
^erefore any stranger be he no Israelite borne, nor his works allowed for
(...) ^onicall by them, if he have prophesied of Christ, that we can know or
(...), (...) be added unto the number of our testimonies: not that we need
(...) (...), but because it is no error to believe that there were some of the
Gen^, (...) whom this mystery was revealed, and who were inspired by the spirit
of prop^ to declare it: were they elect or reprobate, and taught by the evil
spi^, whom we know confessed Christ being come, though the Jews denied him.
(...) do I think the Jews dare auerre, that (a) no man was saved after the
pro^ of Israel, but Isralites: Indeed there was no other people properly cal^
(...) people of God. But they cannot deny that some particular men lived in
(...) ^orld and in other nations that were belonging to the Heavenly hierarchy.
(...) deny this, the story of (b) holy Job conuinceth them, who was neither a
(...) Isralite, nor (c) a proselite, adopted by their law, but borne and buried
(...) ^aea: and yet (d) is he so highly commended in the scriptures, that
(...) was none of his time (it seems) that equalled him in righteousness,
whose (...) though the Chronicles express not, yet out of the canonical
authority of (...) own book we gather him to have lived in (e) the third
generation after (...). Gods providence (no doubt) intended to give us an
instance in him, that there might be others in the nations that lived after the
law of God, and in his ^ice thereby attaining a place in the celestial
Jerusalem: which we must (...) none did but such as fore-knew the coming of
the Messiah, mediator be^ God and man, who was prophesied unto the Saints of
old that he should (...) just as we have seen him to have come in the flesh:
thus did one faith unite (...) ^he predestinate into one city, one house, and
one Temple for the living God. (...) what other Prophecies soever there pass
abrod concerning Christ the vici^ may suppose that we have forged, therefore
there is no way so sure to batter (...) all contentions in this kind, as by
citing of the prophecies contained (...) (...) Jews books: by whose
dispersion from their proper habitations all over (...) world, the Church of
Christ is hapily increased.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) No man.] Nature being unpolluted with vicious opinion might possibly
guid^ (...) to God as well as the law of Moses, for what these get by the law,
those might get ^out it, and come to the same perfection that the Jews came,
seeking the same end: nor (...) (...) difference other then if one traveler
should carry an I^erary of his way with him, The Louaine copy defective in all
this.]
(...) ^he other trust only his memory, [So may he also now a days, that
lives in the faith^ of the Ocean, and never heard of Christ, attain the glory
of a Christian by keeping (...) abstracts of all the law and the Prophets,
perfect love of God and his neighbor: such (...) is a law to man, and
according to the Psalmist. He remembers the name of the (...) (...) the night,
and keeps his law. This has he that sees the Lords righteousness: so
(...) blessing is it to be good, although you have not one to teach you
goodness. And (...) wants here but water? ^or here is the holy spirit as
well as in the Apostles: as Peter (...) of some who received that, before ever
the water touched them. So the na^ that have no law but natures, are a law to
themselves, the light of their living well is (...) (...) of God coming from
his son, of whom it is said. He is the light which lights (...) (...)
that comes into the world.] (b) Holy Ioh.] His holy history, says he was of
the (...) of Huz. Hierome says Huz buylt Damascus, and Traconitide and ruled
between Pales^ and Caelosiria: this the seauenty intimate in their
translation. Huz was of the son of (...), the brother of Abraham. There was
an other Uz descended from Esau but Hierom (...) him from Jobs kindred,
admitting that son of Aram, for that (says he) it is (...) and of the book
where he is said to be the forth from Esau, is because the book was (...) out
of Syrian, for it was not written in the Hebrew. Phillip the Priest, the next
(...) upon Job after Hierom says thus: ^uz and B^z were the sons of Nachor,
Abra^ ^ther begot of Melcha, sister to Sarah. It is credible that this holy man
(Job) dwelt Job.
(...) (...) (...) bore his fathers name: and that he was rather of the stock
of Nachor (...)* though some suspect the contrary, but the three Kings (to wit
Eliphaz; Bildad; (...)) were of the generation of Esau. Thus says Phillip. So
that Job was son (...), by Melcham. Origin follows the vulgar, and says
that he was an Vzzite borne and bred, and there lived. Now they, and the
Minaeites, and Euchaeites and the Themanites, are all of the race of Esau, or
Edom, Isaacs son: and all Idumaea was as then called Edom: but now they are
all called Arabians, both the Idumaeans, Ammonites and Moabites. This is the
opinion of Origin, and the vulgar, and like-wise of some of the Gentiles, as of
Aristeus Hist. Iudaic. etc. (c) A proselite] Coming from heathenisme to the
law of (...), to come to A proselyte.
(d) So highly commended] In the book of Job, and Ezech. 14. (e) In the third
generation] Some think that Genesis mentions him under the name of Iasub,
but there is no certenty of it. Hierome says that Eliphaz, Esau's fonne by
Adah, is the same that is mentioned in the book of Job: which if it be so, Job
lived in the next generation after Jacob.

Aggees prophecy of the glory of Gods house, fulfilled in the Church, not in
the Temple. CHAP. 48.
THis is that House of God more glorious then the former for all the precious
compacture: for Aggees prophecy was not fulfilled in the repayring of the
Temple, which never had that glory after the restoring that it had in Salomons
time: but rather lost it all, the Prophets ceasing, and destruction ensuing,
which was performed by the Romans as I erst related. But the house of the New
Testament is of another luster, the workmanship being more glorious, and the
stones being more precious. But it was figured in the repair of the old
Temple, because the whole New Testament was figured in the old one. Gods
prophecy therefore that says, In that place will I give peace, is to be meant
of the place signified, not of the place significant: that is, as the restoring
that house prefigured the church which Christ was to build, so GOD, said in
this place, (that is in the place that this prefigureth) will I give peace, for
all things signifying, seem to support the persons of the things signified, as
Saint Peter said: the Rock was Christ: for it signified Christ. So then, far
is the glory of the house of the New Testament above the glory of the Old, as
shall appear in the final dedication. Then shall the desire of all nations
appear (as it is in the hebrew): for his first coming was not desired of all
the nations, for some knew not whom to desire, nor in whom to believe. And then
also shall they that are Gods elect out of all nations come (as the LXX. read
it) for none shall come truly at that day but the elect, of who^ the Apostle
says As he has elected us in him, before the beginning of the world: for the
Architect himself, that said, Many are called but few are chosen* he spoke not
of those that were called to the feast and then cast out: but meant to show
that Ephesians, (...), 4
he had built an house of his elect, which times worst spite could never
ruin. But being altogether in the church as yet, to be hereafter sifited, the
corn from the chafe; the glory of this house cannot be so great now, as it
shall be then where man shall be always there where he is once.

The Churches increase uncertain, because of the commixtion of elect and
reprobate in this world. CHAP. 49.
THerefore in these mischievous days, wherein the church works for his fu
ture glory in present humility, in fears, in sorrows, in labors and in
temptations, ioying only in hope when she ioyeth as she should, many
rebroba^e live amongst the elect: both come into the Gospells Net, and both
swim at randon in the sea of mortality, until the fishers draw them to shore,
and then the (...) own from the good, in whom as in his Temple, God is all in
all. We acknowledge therefore his words in the psalm, I would declare and
speak of them, (...) are more then I am able to express, to be truly
fulfilled. This multiplication Psalm. 40, 5
(...) at that instant when first John his Messenger, and then himself in
person (...) to say, Amend your lives for the Kingdom of God is at hand. He
chose him dis^, and named the Apostles: poor, ignoble, unlearned men, that
what great (...) soever was done he might be seen to do it in them. He had
one, who abused his goodness, yet used he this wicked man to a good end, to
the fulfilling of his passion, and presenting his church an example of patience
in tribulation. And having sown sufficiently the seed of salvation, he
suffered, was buried and (...) again; showing by his suffering what we ought
to endure for the truth, and (...) resurrection what we ought for to hope of
eternity, (a) besides the ineffa^ament of his blood, shed for the remission of
sins. He was forty days (...) with his disciples afterward, and in their
sight ascended to heaven, ^es after sending down his promised spirit upon
them: which in the coming* gave that manifest and necessary sign of the
knowledge in languages of (...), to signify that it was but one Catholic
church, that in all those nati^ ^uld use all those tongues.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) the ineffable] For Christ's suffrance, and his life has not only
leaft us the virtue (...) Sacraments, but of his example also, whereby to
direct ourselves in all good courses

(...) Gospel preached, and gloriously confirmed by the blood of the
preachers. CHAP. 50.
(...) then, as it is written, The law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of
(...) Lord from Jerusalem, and as Christ had foretold, when as (his disciplies
^onished at his resurrection) he opened their understandings in the scrip^ told
them that it was written thus: It behooved Christ to suffer, and to rise (...)
the third day, and that repentance, and remission of sins should be preached
in Luke 24, 46 47
(...) amongst all nations beginning at Jerusalem: and where they asked him of
(...) coming, and he answered, It is not for you to know the times and seasons
(...) father has put in his own power: but you shall receive power of the
Holy (...) he shall come upon you and you shall be witnesses of me in
Jerusalem, and in (...) in Samaria, and unto the utmost part of the earth:
First the church spread (...) ^om Jerusalem, and then through Iudaea, and
Samaria, and those lights (...) world bare the Gospel unto other nations: for
Christ had armed them, (...) Fear not them that kill the body but are not able
to kill the soul: they had Mat. 10, 25
(...) of love that kept out the cold of fear: finally, by their persons who
(...) him alive, and dead, and alive again: and by the horrible persecuti^ by
their successors after their death, and by the ever conquered (to (...)
^conquerable) tortures of the Martires, the Gospel was diffused (...) all the
habitable world: GOD going with it in Miracles, in virtues, and (...) of the
Holy Ghost: in so much that the nations believing in him who (...) for their
Redemption, in christian love did hold the blood of those Martires in
reverence, which before, they had shed in barbarousnesse, and the Kings whose
edicts afflicted the church came humbly to be warriors under that banner which
they cruelly before had sought utterly to abolish: beginning now to persecute
the false gods, for whom before they had persecuted the servants of (...) true
GOD.

That the Church is confirmed even by the schisms of Heresies. CHAP. 51.
NOw the devil seeing his Temples empty and al running unto this Redeemer, set
heretics on foot to subert Christ, in a christian vizar, as if there were y^
allowance for them in the heavenly Jerusalem which their was for contrariety of
Philosophers in the devils Babilo^. Such therefore as in the church of God do
distaste any thing, and (a) being checked and advised to beware, do obstinately
oppose themselves against good instructions, and rather defend their
abominations then discard them, those become Heretics, and going forth of
Gods House, are to be held as our most eager enemies: yet they do the members
of the Catholic Church this good, that their fall makes them take better hold
upon God, who uses evil to a good end, and works all for the good of those
that love him. So then the churches enemies whatsoever, if they have the power
to impose corporal affliction, they exercise her patience: if they bait her
with with opposition only verbal, they practice her in her sapience: and she
in loving these enemies excerciseth his benevolence, and bounty, whether she
go about them with gentle persuasion or severe correction: and therefore
though the devil hor chief opponent, move all his vessels against her
virtues, cannot iniure her an inch. Comfort she has in prosperity, to be
confirmed, and constant in adversity: and excercised is she in this, to be
kept from corrupting in that: Gods providence managing the whole: and so
tempering the one with the other that the psalmist said fitly. In the multitude
of the cares of mine heart thy comforts have ioyed my soul. And the Apostle
also: Rejoicing in hope and patient in tribulation. Ps^. 94, 19 Rom 12, 12
(...) Tim. 3
For the same Apostles words saying, All that will live Godly in Christ shall
suffer persecution, must be held to be in continual action: for though ab
externo, abroad, all seem quiet, no gust of trouble appearing, and that is a
great comfort, to the weak especially: yet at home, ab intus, there do we
never want those that offend and molest the Godly pilgrim by their deuillish
demeanor, blaspheming Christ and the Catholic name, which how much dearer the
Godly esteem, so much more grief they feel to hear, if less respected by
their pernicious brethren then they desire it should be: and the Heretics
themselves, being held to have Christ, and the Sacraments amongst them, grieve
the hearts of the righteous extremely, because many that have a good desire to
christianity, stumble at their dissentions, and again many that oppose it,
take occasion hereby to burden it with greater calamities: the Heretics
bearing the name of christians also. These persecutions befall Gods true
servants by the vanity of others errors, although they be quiet in their
bodily estate: this persecution touches the heart, and (...) body: as the
psalm says, in the multitude of the cares of mine heart: not of my body. But
then again, when we revolue the immutability of Gods promises, who as the
Apostle says, knows who be his, whom he has predestinate to (b) be made
like the Image of his Son, their shall not one of these be (...) ^fore the
psalm adds. Thy comforts have ioyed my soul. Now the sor^ the Godly feels
for the perverseness of evil, or false christians, is (...) their own souls,
if it proceed of charity, not desyring their destruc^ the hindrance of their
salvation: and the reformation of such, yeeld^ comfort to the devout soul,
redoubling the joy now, for the grief The sorrow of the Godly.
that it felt before for their errors. So then in these malignant days, not
only (...) Christ and his Apostles time, but even from holy Abell whom his
wicked brother slew, so along unto the worlds end, does the church travel on
her pilgrimage, now suffering worldly persecutions, and now receiving divine
^ons.

L. VIVES.
(...) (a) checked] Heretics are first to be quietly instructed by the
church, and letten know (...) their positions are unchristian: which if they
obstinately aver, then their contumacy is (...) to their souls as their
doctrine. (b) To be made] Made, is not in Saint Paul's text.

Whether the opinion of some, be credible, that there shall be no more
persecutions after the ten, past, but the eleauenth, which is that of
Antichrists. CHAP. 52.
(...) think that that is not to be rashly affirmed, which some do think
viz. (...) the church shall suffer no more persecutions until Antichrists
(...) the ten already past, that his shall be the eleauenth and last. The (a)
first (...) Nero, the (b) second by Domitian, the third by Traian, the (c)
fourth by ^s, the (d) fifth by Seuerus, the (e) sixth by Maximinus, the (f)
seventh by De^ (g) eight by Valerian, the (h) ninth by Aurelian, the (i) tenth
by Diocletian, (...). For some hold (k) the plauges of Egypt being ten in
number before (...) ^dome, to have reference unto these, Antichrists eleauenth
persecution (...) the Egyptians pursuit of Israel in the read sea, in which
they were all (...). But I take not those events in Egypt to be any way
pertinent unto ^er as prophecies, or figures, although they that hold
other-wise have (...) ^ry ingenious adaptation of the one to the other, but not
by the spirit ^cy, but only by human conjecture, which sometimes may err,
as (...) for what will they that hold this affirm of the persecution where^
was killed? What rank shall that have amongst the rest? If they except (...)
^old that such only are to be reckned as belong to the body and not to (...),
what say they to that after the ascension, where Steven was stoned, and (...)
brother of John beheaded, and Peter shut up for the slaughter, but that (...)
freed him? where the brethren were chased from Jerusalem, and (...) ^wards made
an Apostle and called Paul) played the pursiuant amongst ^ing them out to
destruction? and where he himself also being conuer^ ^eaching the faith which
he had persecuted, suffered such afflictions as (...) ^es he had laid upon
others, wheresoever he preached, unto Jews or (...) why do they begin at
Nero, when the church was never without perse^ ^f all the time before, whereof
it is too tedious to recount the perticulars. If they will not begin but at
persecutions by a King, why (l) Herod was a King, who did the church extreme
injury after Christ's ascension? Again (m) why are not Iulians villainies
reckned amongst the ten? was not he a persecutor that (n) forbad to teach the
christians the liberal arts? was not (o) Valentinian the elder (who was the
third Emperor after him) deprived of his generallship, for confessing of
Christ? to (p) leave all the massacres begun at Antioche, by this wicked
Apostata, until one faithful and constant young man lying in tortures an
whole day, continually singing psalms, and praising of GOD, did with his
patience so terrify the persecuting Atheist that he was both afraid and
ashamed to proceed. Now lastly (q) Valens, and Arrian, brother to the
aboue-named Valentinian, has not he afflicted the eastern church with all
extremity, even now before our eyes? What a lame consideration is it to
collect the persecutions endured by an universal church under one Prince, and
in one nation, and not in another? cannot a church so far diffused, suffer
affliction in one particular nation but it must suffer in all? perhaps they
will not have the christians persecution in Gothland, (r) by their own King
for one, who martired a many true Catholics, as we heard of diverse brethren
who had seen, it living in those parts when they were children: and (s) what
say they to Persia? Has not the persecution there, chased diverse even unto the
towns of the Romans? It may be now quiet, but it is more then we can te^ll.
Now all these considerations laid together, and such like as these are, makes
me think that the number of the churches persecutions is not to be defined:
but to affirm that there may be many inflicted by other Kings before that
great and assured one of Antichrist; were as rash an assertion as the other:
let us therefore leave it in the midst, neither affirming nor contradicting,
but only controwling the rashness of both in others.

L. VIVES.
THe first (a) was] Of these writes Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. of this first Suetonius
and Tacitus make mention, Suetonius calling the christians men of new and
pernicious superstition. in Ner^, Suetonius and Tacitus against the christians.
And Tacitus calls them, Hated for their wickedness, guilty, and worthy of
utmost punishment. lib. 15. Oh senseless men, Tacitus and Suetonius! Can your
bestiall and luxurious Jove seem a God unto you, and Christ seem none? call
you an union in innocence, execrable superstition, and hold you them worthy of
punishment whose chief laws is, to do no man hurt, and all men good? If you
have not read our laws why condemn you us? If you have, why reprove you us,
seeing we embrace those virtues which your best writers so highly admire. (b)
The second] Nero's three ended under Uespasian, who suffered the christians to
live in quiet, and so did his son Titus after him. But Domitianus Caluus
Nero, to prove himself right Nero, begun the persecution again, banishing
Saint John into Pathmos: This, and the third of Traian, is all one: for
Domitian begun it and it lasted unto Traian, successor unto Nerua, who
succeeded Domitian, and held the Empire little more then a year. There is an
Domitian.
Epistle extant unto Traian from Pliny the younger, Regent of Asia, asking how
he woul have him to use the christians, seeing he saw no hurt in them,
reckning up their hurtlesse meetings, prayers, hymns, communions, etc. and
affirming that the name spread so far that the altars o^ the gods cooled, and
the priests were almost starued. Traian bids him not seek them out, but if
they be accused unto him punish them, unless they will recant etc. [O would
we christians could use this moderation unto others.] In this persecution was
Simon Cle^ second Bishop of Jerusalem, martired. (c) The fourth] For Adrian
was a secret favorite (...) (...). (...).
Christ, and would have deified him amongst his other gods, but that some told
him, all the (...) would go down if Christ once came up, Antoninus Pius also
did lighten their affliction by ^ict. But this Antonine that caused the forth
persecution was the Philosopher who ru^ S Pol^carpe Pionius martires. Iu^.
Seuerus.
with Antonius ver^s: In this persecution were Policarpe and Pionius martyred
in Asia: (...) many in France, whose sufferings are left recorded. Iustine
martyr also suffered at this time (...) lib. 4. Hist. Eccl. (d) The fifth by
Se^eus.] He had good fortune to become Emperor, for he (...) an African, a
fierce and bloody fellow. He forbad Christianity upon a deadly penalty. (Ael.
(...).) and plagued the Christians all Egypt over, chiefly in Thebais. Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. lib. (...). Alexander Bishop of Hieusalem was martyred at this
time. (e) The s^t.] Maximinus was a ^ian borne, his father a Goth, his mother a
Scythian: barbarous in descent, body and Maximinus
(...). His strength preferred him from a common soldior to a commander. And
Alexander M^ea her son being killed, the soldiers made him Emperor. He was
most proud and ^ll. He persecuted the priests, as the especial causers of
christianity Euse. (f) By Decius.] Decius,
^e in Bubalia, a part of the lower Pannonia. He foiled Philip the Emperor in a
civil fight, and he then succeeded in his place: hating the Christians so much
more because Phillip favored them, and putting them to exquisite torments: S.
Laurence, he broyled. Eutrop. Yet ruled he but one year, what would he have
done had he continued? Fabian also the Bishop of S Laurence Fabian B. of Rome.
Valerian.
Rome was martyred under him. (g) By Valerian.] Who was crowned three years
after Decius He was most unfortunate: for Sapor King of Persia took him in
fight, and made him his (...) to mount his horse by. Galien and he were joint
Emperors, under whom the Empire (...) greatly to decay: no marvel, being both
dejected, sluggish lvmpes. In this persecution (...) S. Cyprian Bishop of
Carthage martired. (h) By Aurelian.] Third Emperor after Galien. A Cyprian.
Aurelian.
D^e; very fortunat in war, but bloody and Barbarous, fit for an Empire, and
for nothing else* hated, (and so slain) by his own friends, who killed him as
he went from Byzance to Herculea. (i) Diocletian.] Son to Salon, a dalmatian,
he aspired to the Empire by the contentions Diocletian, Maximinus
of others, and joined Maximianus Herculeus with him, the better to withstand
the ^ent war. He was subtle, and cruel, and could easily lay his butcheries
on another (...). Maximian was Barbarous, and brutish even in Aspect, and
served for Diocletians hang^, who grew to such pride that he commanded
himself to be adored as a God, and that (...) (...) should be kissed, whereas
before, they used but to kiss their hands: he presecuted (...) Church and on
Easter-weeke, the ninteenth year of his reign, commanded all the Churches to
be pulled down, and the Christians to be killed. Decius his persecution was
the greatest, but this was the bloudiest. (k) The Plagues of Egypt.] This is
Orosius his opinion. lib. 7.

(l) Herod.] His son under whom Christ was borne. (m) Julian.] The Apostata,
first Julian the Apostata,
a Christian, and after-wards an Atheist. He shed no Christian blood, but used
wounderfull (...) to draw men from Christ: a bitter kind of persecution, taking
more hearts from God by that one means, then all the violence before had done.
(n) Forbad to teach the liberal (...)*] His edict was torn in pieces by S.
John. There was one Prohaeresius a Sophister of Caesarea, who coming to Athens
was received with great applause of the people, to whom he made an extemporall
oration in a frequent audience. Julian allowed leave only unto him to teach
the Christians: but the learned man hating that Barbarous edict, forsook the
town (...) scholars, to the great grief of the students. (o) Ualentinian.] An
Hungarian, captain Valentinian the elder,
(...) (...) ^gatyers, and saluted Emperor by the soldiers. Being a Christian
under Julian, he was commanded either to sacrifice unto the Idols or to resign
his place, which he resigned will, and soon after Julian being slain, and
Iouinian dead, he reigned Emperor, receiving (...) for his captaine-ship that
he had lost for Christ's sake. Eutrop. His son, Ualentinian the younger ruled
first with Gratian and then with Theodosius the great. (p) At Antioche.] Julian
(...) the Christians remove the tomb of the martire Babylas to some other
place, so they went (...) it singing the Psalm When Israel went out of etc.
Which Julian hearing was vexed, and Psa, 114.
(...) diverse of them to be put to torments. Salustius was he that had the
charge, who took a (...) man called Theodorus, and put him to most
intolerable torments, yet he never mo^* (...) with a joyful countenance
continually sung the Psalm that the Church sung the (...), which Salust
seeing, he returned him to prison, and went to Julian, telling (...) (...)
(...) he tortured any more of them, it would redownd to their glory and his
shame* ^-vpon he ceased. Eusebius says that himself talked with this
Theodorus at Antioch (...) asked him if he felt no pain; who told him no: for
there stood a young man behind me in a white raiment, who oftentimes sprinkled
cold water upon me, and wiped my sweat a way with a towell as white as snow, so
that it was rather pain to me to be taken from the rack. (q). Ualens] An
Arrian: when Augustine was a youth, this Emperor made a law that Monks should
go to the wars, and those that would not, he sent his soldiers to beat
Valens.
them to death with clubbes. An huge company of those Monks lived in the
deserts of Egypt. Eusebius. Eutrop. Oros (r) By their owne] Immediately after
Ualens his death: Arianisme as then raging in the church. (s) In Persia] Under
King Gororanes, a deuillish persecutor who raged because Abdias an holy bishop
had burnt down all the Temples of the Persians great Gororanes.
god, their fire. Cassiod. Hist. trip. lib. 10. Sapor also persecuted sore in
Constantines time, a little before this of Gororanes.

Of the unknown time of the last persecution. CHAP. 53.
THe last persecution under Antichrist, Christ's personal presence shall
extinguish. For, He shall consume him with the breath of his mouth, and abolish
him with the brightness of his wisdom, says the Apostle. And here is an
usual question: 2 Thessalonians. 2 (...).
when shall this be? it is a saucy one. If the knowledge of it would have done
us good, who would have revealed it sooner then Christ unto his disciples? for
they were not bird-mouthed unto him, but asked him, saying: Lord will thou at
this time (a) restore the Kingdom to Israel. But what said he? It is not for
you to know the (b) times or seasons which the Father has put in his own
power. They asked him not of the day or hour, but of the time, when he
answered them thus. In vain therefore do we stand reckning the remainder of
the worlds years, we hear the plain truth tell us, it befits us not to know
them. Some talk how it shall last 400. some five hundred, some a thousand
years after the Ascension, every one has his vie, it were in vain to stand
showing upon what grounds; In a word, their conjectures are all humane,
grounded upon no certenty of scripture. For he that said, It is not for you to
know the times etc. stoppes all your accounts and biddes you leave your
calculations.

But (c) this being an Evangelical sentence, I wonder not that it was not of
power to respresse the audacious fictions of some infidels touching the
continuance of christian religion. For those, observing that these greatest
persecutions A damnable fiction accusing Peter of sorcery.
did rather increase then suppress the faith of CHRIST, invented a sort of
greek verses (like as if they had been Oracle) containing how CHRIST was
clear of this sacreledge, but that Peter had by magike founded the worship of
the name of CHRIST for three hundred three score and five years, and at that
date, it should utterly cease. Oh learned heads! Oh rare inventions! fit to
believe those things of CHRIST since you will not believe in CHRIST: to wit,
that Peter learned magike of CHRIST: yet was he innocent: and that his disciple
was a witch, and yet had rather have his Masters name honored then his own,
working to that end with his magike, with toil, with perils, and lastly with
the effusion of his blood! If Peter's witch craft made the world love CHRIST so
well, what had CHRIST'S innocence done that Peter should love him so well? Let
them answer, and (if they can) conceive that it was that supernall grace that
fixed CHRIST in the hearts of the nations for the attainment of eternal
bliss: which grace also made Peter willing to endure a temporal death for
CHRIST, by him to be received into the said eternity. And what goodly gods are
these that can presage these things and yet not prevent them? but are forced by
one witch and (as they affirm) by one (c) child-slaughtring sacrifice, to
suffer a sect so miurious to them to prevail against them so long time, and to
bear down all persecutions by bearing them with patience, and to destroy
their Temples, Images, and sacrifices? which of their gods is it (none of ours
it is) that is compelled to work these effects by such a damned oblation? for
the verses say that Peter dealt not with a devil, but with a god, in his
magical operation. Such a god have they, that have not CHRIST for their GOD.

L. VIVES.
AT this time (a) restore] So it must be read, not represent. (b) It is not
for you] He forbids Against calculators.
all curiosity, reserving the knowledge of things to come only to himself.
Now let my figure-flingers, and mine old wives, that hold Ladies and scarlet
potentates by the ears, with tales of thus and thus it shall be; let them all
go pack. Nay sir he does it by Christ's command: why very good, you see what
Christ's command is. Yet have we no such delight as in lies of this nature, and
that makes them the bolder in their fictions, thinking that we hold their
mere desire to tell true, a great matter in so strange a case. (c)
Euangelicall] Spoken by Christ, and written by an Evangelist. Indeed Christ's
ascension belongs to the Gospel and that Chap. of the Acts had been added
to the end of Lukes Gospel but that his preface would have made a separation.
(d) Child-slaughtering* The Pagans used to vpbraid Killing of children cast in
the christians teeth. Cataphrygians.
the Christians much with killing of Children. Tertull Apologet. It was a
filthy lie. Indeed the Cataphrygians and the Pepuzians, two damned sects of
heresy, used to prick a young childs body all over with needles, and so to
wring out the blood, wherewith they tempered their past for the Eucharisticall
bread. Aug ad Quodvultd. So used the Eu^hitae and the Gnostici, for to drive
away devils with. Psell. But this was ever held rather villainies of magike
then rites of christianity.

The Pagans foolishness in affirming that Christianity should last but 365.
years. CHAP. 54.
I Could gather many such as this, if the year were not past that those lies
prefixed and those fools expected. But seeing it is now above three hundred
sixty five years, since Christ's coming in the flesh, and the Apostles
preaching his name, what needs any plainer confutation. For to ommit Christ's
infancy and childhood where in he had no disciples, yet after his baptism in
Jordan, by Ihon, as soon as he called some disciples to him, his name
assuredly began to be ^lged, of whom the Prophet had said, he shall rule from
sea to sea, and from the (...) to the lands end. But because the faith was not
definitiuely decreed until (...) his passion, to wit, in his resurrection; for
so says Saint Paul to the Athenians: Now he admonishes all men every where,
to repent, because he has appoin^da day in which he will judge the world in
righteousness by that man in whom Act. 17, 30
^ee has appointed a faith unto all men, in that he has raised him from the
dead: We shall do better for the solution of this question, to begin at
that time, chiefly because then the Holy Spirit descended upon that society
wherein the second law the New Testament was to be professed, according as
Christ had promised. For the first law, the Old Testament was given in Sina by
Moses, but the later which Christ was to give was prophesied in these words:
The law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem.
Therefore he said himself that it was fit that repentance should be preached
in his name throughout all nations, yet beginning at Jerusalem. There then
began the belief in CHRIST crucified and risen again. There did this faith
heat the hearts of diverse thousands already, who sold their goods to give to
the poor and came cheerfully to CHRIST and to voluntary poverty, withstanding
the assalts of the bloodthirsty Jews with a patience stronger then an armed
power.

If this now were not done by Magike, why might not the rest, in all the world
be as clear? But if Peter's magike had made those men honor Christ, who both
crucified him and derided him being crucified, then I ask them when their
three hundred three scorce and five years must have an end? CHRST died in the
(a) two Gemini's consulshippe, the eight of the Calends of April: and rose
again the third day, as the Apostles saw with their eyes, and felt with their
hands: forty days after ascended he into Heaven, and ten days after (that
is fifty after the resurrection) came the Holy Ghost, and then three thousand
men believed in the Apostles preaching of him. So that then his name began to
spread, as we believe, and it was truly proved, by the operation of the Holy
Ghost: but as the Infidels feign, by Peter's magike. And soon after five
thousand more believed through the preaching of Paul, and Peter's miraculous
curing of one that had been borne lame and lay begging at the porch of the
Temple: Peter with one word. In the name of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, set him
sound upon his feet. Thus the church got up by degrees. Now reckon the
years by the Consulls from the descension of the Holy Spirit that was in the
Ides of May, unto the consulshippe of (b) Honorius, and Eutychian, and you
shall find full three hundred three score and five years, expired. Now in
the next year, in the consulship of (c) Theodorus Manlius when christianity
should have been utterly gone (according to that Oracle of devils, or fiction
of fools:) what is done in other places, we need not inquire, but for that
famous city of Carthage we know that Iouius and Gaudentius, two of Honorius
his Earls, came thither on the tenth of the Calends of April, and brake down
all the Idols, and pulled down their Temples.

It is now thirty years ago since, (almost) and what increase christianity
has had since, is apparent enough: and partly by a many whom the expectation
of the fulfilling of that Oracle kept from being reconciled to the truth, who
since are come into the bosom of the church, discovering the ridiculousnesse
The christians believe not in Peter but in CHRIST.
of that former expectation. But we that are christians re and ^re, indeed and
name, do not believe in Peter, but in (f) him that Peter believed in. We are
edifyed by Peter's sermons of Christ, but not bewitched by his charms nor
deceived by his magike, but furthered by his religion. CHRIT, that taught Peter
the doctrine of eternity, teaches us also. But now it is time to set an end
to this book, wherein as far as need was we have run along with the
courses of the Two Cities in their confused progress the one of which, the
Babylon of the earth, has made her false gods of mortal men, serving them and
sacrificing to them as she thought good, but the other, the heavenly Jerusalem
she has stuck to the only and true GOD, and is his true and pure sacrifice
her self. But both of these do feel one touch of good and evil fortune, but
not with one faith, nor one hope, nor one law: and at length, at the last
judgment they shall be severed for ever, and either shall receive the
endless reward of their works. O^ these two ends we are now to discourse.

L. VIVES.
IN the (a) two] First, sure it is, Christ suffered under Tyberius the Emperor.
Luke the Evangelist The time of Christ's death.
makes his baptism to fall in the fifteenth year of Tyberius his reign. So
then his passion must be in the eighteenth or ninteenth, for three years he
preached salvation. Hier. So ^ith Eusebius, alleging heathen testimonies of
that memorable eclips of the Sun, as namely our of Phlegon, a writer of the
Olympiads: who says that in the fourth year of the two hundred and two
Olympiade (the eighteenth of Tyberius his reign) the greatest eclips befell,
that ever was. It was midnight-darke at noonday, the stars were all
visible, and an earthquake shook down many houses in Nice a city of
Bythinia. But the two Gemini, Ru^, and Fusius, were Consulls in the fifteenth
year of Tyberius, as is easily proved out of Tacitus lib. 5. and out of
Lactantius lib. 4. cap. 10. where he says that in that year did Christ
suffer, and him does Augustine follow here. But Sergius Galba (afterward
Emperor) and L. Sylla were Consulls in the eighteenth year. (b) Honorius and*
In the consulship of these two, (...) drove the Goths and Vandals into Italy.
Honorius the Emperor being Consul the fourth time. Prosper says this was not
until the next year, Stilicon and Aurelian being (...). (c) Theodorus]
Claudian made an exellent Panegyrike, for his consulship, wherein he shows
that he had been Consul before. Prosper makes him Consul before Honorius
his fourth Consulship, but I think this is an error in the time, as well as in
the copy. For it must be read, Being the second time Consul. Eutropius the
Eunuch was made Consul with him, but soon after he was put to death.
Whereupon it may be that Eutropius his name was blotted out of the registers,
and Theodorus Manlius (having no fellow) was taken for two, Theodorus and
Manlius, as Cassiodorus takes him, but mistakes himself. Yet about that time,
they began to have but one Consul. (d) Now 30. yeares] Unto the third year of
Theodosius Junior, wherein Augustine wrote this. (e) In him that Peter] For who
is Paul, and who is Apollo? the ministers by whom you believe.

Finis lib. 18.
THE CONTENTS OF THE nineteenth book of the City of God
That Varro observed 288. sects of the Philophers, in their question of the
perfection of goodness. 2. Varro his reduction of the final good out of al
these differences unto three heads, and three definitions, one only of which
is the true one. 3. Varro his choice amongst the three forenamed sects,
following therein the opinion of Antiochus, author of the old Academicall sect.
4. The Christians opinion of the cheifest good and evil, which the
Philosophers held to be within themselves. 5. Of living sociably with our
neighbors: how fit it is, and yet how subject to crosses. 6. The error of
human judgments in cases where truth is not known. 7. Difference of
language an impediment to human society. The miseries of the iustest wars. 8.
That true friendship cannot be secure, amongst the incessant perrills of this
present life. 9. The friendship of holy Angels with men, indiscernable in this
life, by reason of the devils, whom all the Infidells took to be good powers
and gave them divine honors. 10. The rewards that the Saints are to receive
after the passing of this worlds afflictions. 11. The beatitude of eternal
peace, and that true perfection wherein the Saints are enstalled 12. That the
bloudiest wars chief aim is peace: the desire which is natural in man. 13. Of
that universal peace which no perturbances can seclude from the law of nature;
Gods just judgments disposing of every one according to his proper desert. 14.
Of the law of Heaven and Earth, which swayeth human society by council, and
unto which council human society obeys. 15. Natures freedom and bondage,
caused by sin; in which man is a slave to his own affects, though he be not
bondman to any one besides. 16. Of the just law of souerainty. 17. The grounds
of the concord and discord betwixt the Cities of Heaven and Earth. 18. That the
suspended doctrine of the new Academy opposes the constancy of Christianity
19. Of the habit and manners belonging to a Christian. 20. Hope, the bliss of
the heavenly Citizens, during this life. 21. Whether the City of Rome had ever
a true commonwealth according to Scipio's definition of a commonwealth in
Tully. 22. Whether Christ the Christians God be he unto whom only sacrifice
is to be offered. 23. Porphery his relation of the Oracles touching Christ. 24.
A definition of a people, by which, both the Romans and other kingdoms may
challenge themselves commonweals. 25. That there can be no true virtue, where
true religion wants. 26. The peace of Gods enemies, useful to the piety of
his friends, as long as their Earthly pillgrimage lasts. 27. The peace of
Gods servants; the fulness whereof it is impossible in this life to comprehead
28. The end of the wicked.
FINIS.
THE NINETEENTH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop
of Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
That Varro observed 288. sects of the Philosophers in their question of the
perfection of goodness. CHAP. 1.
WHereas I am now to draw my discourse (from the progress) unto the
consummation of the state of those two hierarchies, the celestial and the
terrestrial, I must therefore first lay down their arguments (as far as the
quantity beseeming this volume may permit) who intend to make themselves up a
beatitude extant even in the continual misfortunes of man's temporal
mortality: wherein my purpose is to parallel their vain positions with our
assured hope which GOD has given us, and with the object of that assurance,
namely the true blessedness which he will give us: that so, confirming our
assertions both with holy scriptures, and with such reasons as are fit to be
produced against Infidels, the difference of their grounds and ours, may be
the more fully apparent. About that question of the final good, the
Philosophers have kept a wonderful coil amongst themselves: seeking in every
cranke and cauerne thereof, for the true beatitude: for that is the final
good, being only desired for it self, all other goods having in their
seize a reference unto that alone. We do not call that the final good,
which ends goodness, that is, which makes it nothing: but that which
profits it, which gives it fullness of perfection; nor do we call that the
end of all evil, whereby it cease to be evil, but that point which
mischief arises unto, still reserving the mischievous nature, that we call
the end of mischief. So then the great good and the greatest evil, are the
ends of all good and evil: the final goodness, and the final badnesse.
About which two there has been wonderful inquisition, to avoid the final
evil and attain the final good: this was the daily endeavor of our worldly
Philosophers: who though they were guilty of much exorbitance of error, yet the
bounds of nature were such limits to their Aphorisms that they sought no
further then either the body, the mind, or both, wherein to place this summum
bonum of theirs. From this tripartite foundation has M. Varro in his book De
Philosophia, most wittily and diligently observed 288. sects to have original,
not in esse, but in posse, so many several positions may be drawn from those
three fountains: of which to make a brief demonstration, I must begin with
that which he rehearses in the book before named. viz. That there are four
things which every one desires Four things desired by man in nature.
by nature, without help of master or industry, or that habit of life which
is called (a) virtue, and is learned by degrees: namely, either sensible
pleasure, or sensible rest, or both, (b) (which Epicurus calls by one name of
pleasure) or (c) the universal first positions of nature, wherein these and
the rest are included, as in the body, health and strength, and in the mind,
sharpness of wit, and soundness of judgment: these four therefore,
pleasure, rest, both, and natures first positiues, are in the fabric of man
under these respects, that either virtue (the effect of doctrine) is to be
desired for them, or for it self, or they for virtue or for themselves. And
here are foundations for twelve ^ects, for by this means they are all tripled.
I will show it in one, and that will make it apparent in all the rest. Bodily
pleasure, being either set under virtue, above it, or equal with it, gives
life to three diverse opinions. It is under virtue when virtue rules it and
uses it, for it is a virtue to live for our countries good, and for the same
end to beget our children: neither of which can be excluded from corporal
delight, for without that we neither eat, to live, nor use the means of
carnal generation. But when this pleasure is preferred before virtue, then is
it affected in mere respect of it self, and virtues ataynement is wholly
referred unto that, that is all virtues acts must tend to the production of
corporal pleasure, or else to the preservation of it: which is a deformed kind
of life, because therein, virtue is slave to the commands of voluptuousnes:
(though indeed, that cannot properly be called virtue that is so.) But yet
this deformity could not want patronage and that by many Philosopers. Now
pleasure and virtue are joined in equallity when they are both sought for them
selves, no way respecting others. Wheresore, as the subjection, pre-eminence,
or equality of virtue unto voluptuousness, makes three sects, so does rest,
delight and rest, and the first positiues of nature make three more in this
kind, for they have their three places under, above, or equal to virtue, as
well as the other: thus does the number arise (d) unto twelve. Now add but one
difference, to wit, society of life, and the whole number is doubled: because
whosoever follows any one of these twelve sects, either does follow it as
respecting himself or his fellow, to whom he ought to wish as well as
himself: So there may be twelve men that hold those twelve positions each one
for their own respect, and other twelve that hold them in respect of others,
whose good they desire as much as their own. Now bring in but your (e) new
Academikes, and these twenty four sects become forty eight, for every one of
these positions may be either maintained Stoically to be certain (as that of
virtue, that it is the sole good) or Accademically as uncertain, and not so
assuredly true, as likely to be true. Thus are there twenty four affirming
the certain truth of those positions, and twenty four standing wholly for
their uncertainty. Again each of these positions may be defended either in the
habit of any other Philopher or (f) of a Cynike, and this of forty eight
makes the whole ninety six: Again these may either be disputed of by such as
profess mere Philosophy no way entermedling with affairs of state, or by
such as love argumentation, and yet nevertheless keep a place in politic
directions and employments of the weal public, or by such as profess both,
and by a certain vicissitude, do now play the mere Philosophers, and now the
mere politicians: and thus is the number trebled, amounting to two hundred
eighty and eight. Thus much, as briefly as I could out of Varro, laying down
his doctrine in mine own forms. But to show how he confesses all the rest
but one, (g) and chooses that, as peculiar to the old Academikes of Platos
institution, (continuing to defend certain Aphorisms from him to (h) Polemon
the forth that succeeded him) who are quite different from the new
nought-affirming Academikes, instituted by (i) Archesilas, Polemons success:
to show Varros opinion in this, that the old Academikes were free both of
uncertainty and error. It is too tedious to make a full relation of it, yet may
we lawfully (nay and must necessarily) take a view of it in some part: first
therefore he remou^th all the differences procuring this multitude of sects his
reason is, they aim not at the perfection of goodness. For he holds not
that worthy the name of a sect in Philosophy, (k) which differs not from all
others in the maine ends of good and evil: the end of all Philosophy being
only beatitude; which is the maine end and perfection of all goodness. This
then is the aim of all Philosophers: and such as do not level at this are
unworthy that name. Wherefore in that question of society in life, whether a
wise man should respect the perfection of goodness in his friend as much as in
himself, or do all that he does for his own beatitudes sake: this now does no
way concern the good it self, but the assuming or not assuming of a companion
into the participation of it, not for ones own sake, but for his sake that is
admitted, whose good the other affects as he does his own. And likewise in
these new Academicismes, whether all these assertions be to be held as
uncertain, or with that assurance that other Philosophers defended them: the
question medleth not with the nature of that which we are to attain, as the
end of all good, but it asks whether there be such a thing or no, auerring a
doubt hereof rather then an affirmation: that is (to be more plain) the
controversy is, whether the follower of this perfection may affirm his final
good to be certain, or only that it seems so, but may be uncertain, and
yet both these intend one good. And likewise again, for the Cynicall habit,
the reality of the good is not called in question, but whether it be to be
followed in such a fashion of life and conversation or no. Finally there have
been Philosophers that have affirmed diversely of the final good, some placing
it in virtue, and some in pleasure, and yet have all observed one Cynicall
habit and form of carriage: so that the cause of their being enstiled so, had
no manner of reference to the perfection that they studied to attain. For if
it had, then should that end be peculiar to that habit, and not be
communicated with any other.

L VIVES.
ANd (a) is learned] The old Philosophers have a great ado about virtues in
man: whether it be by laborious acquisition, or natural infusion! Some hold
the later, and some the first: Virtue.
Plato is variable. Assuredly virtue is not perfited in any one without both,
nature and exercise. Three things (...), nature, reason and practice, are as
necessary in the attaining of arts and all good habites, as a fat soil, a
good seed, and a painful husbandman, are unto the obteining of a fruitful
harvest. Plutarch has a little work, proouing virtue to be ex industria. (b)
Which Epicurus] He called both sensible delight, and rest-full quiet by one
Pleasure.
only name, Pleasure. For so does Tully make Torquatus an Epicure avouch, in
his first book De finibus. (c) The vniuersall] These are most frequent and
peculiarly used by the Stoikes. Cicero uses them in many places. (d) Unto
twelue] Omit but virtue in some of those references, and the number will arise
to a far greater sum: comparing pleasure with rest, and then with natures
first positiues, and then compare rest with them, but indeed there was never
Philosopher so impudent, as to exclude virtue from the seat of felicity,
though he gave the pre-eminence unto pleasure. (e) New Academicks] Herein he
observes the vulgar opinion. For Varro in Tully says, that he thinks that
Socrates instituted that Academy of Archesilas, that it was the elder, and that
Plato confirmed it, and recorded the positions. Eusebius adds a third Academy
of Carneades his institution called the middle Academy. Praep. euang. lib. 14.
But Laertius makes Plato the founder of the old one, Archesilas of the middle
one, and Lacyd^ (his scholar) of the new one. (f) Of a Cynicke] Antisthexes,
Scholar to Socrates, an earnest hater of pleasure, founded this sect: Such
were most of the Cynikes after him, yet some were great voluptuaries,
whereupon Origin compares the dogge-flye unto their sect, who to draw others
unto the same damnation with them, avouch lust and carnal (...) to be the true
beatitude. In Exodus Now it were strange that this should be meant of all, the
old Cynikes having this proverb continually in their mouths, I had rather
run m^e then enjoy delight: It may be that Hierome follows Origin, in
calling Aristippus and the Cynikes, the proclamers of voluptuousness. In
Ecclesiast. But we have put Cyrenaikes for Cynikes, for that makes the better
sense. Note that Laertius says the Cynickes are a true and ^ust sect of
Philosophers, not molifyed, nor deniable upon any respect. (g) And chooses
that] Which Tully also approoueth above all, as almost pure Aristotelian. De
fin. lib. 5. For Aristotle had most of his morality that was worth ought, from
his master Plato. (h) Polemon] Speusippus, sisters son to Plato, was made
Platos successor in the school, but he growing diseased, resigned the place
to Xenocrates, who by one oration converted this Polemon from a lewd and
luxurious youth, to become an honest and earnest obseruer of patience: and
after Xenocrates death, he taught in his place. Ualer. Maximus cites him, as
an example of sudden change of manners. There was another Polemo surnamed
Hellanicus, an Historiographer, we have used his authorities elsewhere. A
third also of this name there was, a sophister in Laodicia. (i) Archesilas]
Borne in Pitane in Aeolia, a Socratist in matter and form: leaving no more
records of his doctrine himself, then Socrates did. (k) Which differs not]
He that amongst the old Philosophers differed from any other in the summum
bonum, was forthwith reputed of a contrary sect, though he agreed with them in
all positions besides.

Varro his reduction of the final good out of all these differences unto three
heads and three definitions, one only of which is the true one. CHAP. 2.
THerefore in these three sorts of life, the contemplative, the active, and the
mixed, if our question be, which of these we should observe, we do not meddle
with the final good, but with the easy or hard attainement of that good,
which accompanies those three several courses: for being attained, the
final good does immediately make the attainer blessed. But it is neither
contemplation, nor action, nor these two proportioned together, that makes a
man blessed for one may live in any of these three fashions, and yet be far
wide from the true course to beatitude. So then, the questions touching the end
of goodness, which distinguish all those sects, are far different from those
of society of life, Academicall uncertainty cynicall carriage, and that of the
three courses of conversation, Philosophical, politic, and neuter. For none
of all these do once meddle with the natures of good and evil. Wherefore
Varro having recited the last four, whereby the whole sum of opinions
amounts to two hundred eighty eight, because they are not worthy the name of
sects, in that they (a) make no mention of the good that is chiefly to be
desired, he leaves them all, and returns to their first twelve, whose
controversy is about the maine point, Man's chief good: out of these will he
gather one direct truth, and show all the rest to be false. For first he
remooues the three sorts of life, and they carry two parts of the number with
them: so there remains but ninety six. Then go the Cynikes, and they carry
forty eight with them: so there remains but forty eight, then send away the
new Academikes with their parts, so there remains but thirty six. And then
the sociall conversation, with the multitude that it brought, so there remains
only twelve, which no man can deny to be twelve several sects. For their
only difference is the highest parts of good and evil. For the ends of good
being found, the evils lie directly opposite. So these twelve sects are
produced by the triplication of these four, Pleasure, rest, both, and (b)
natures primitive affects and habites, which Varro calls Primogenia. For they
all are made either virtues inferiors, and desired only in respect of her, or
her superiors, and she desired only for their sake: or equals, and both are
affected for their own sakes: thus do they accrue unto twelve several
positions. Now of these four heads, Varro takes away three: pleasure, rest,
and both united: not that he disprooues them, but that they are already
included in the fourth: namely the first positiues of nature, as well as many
things more are, and therefore what need they keep a number in this rank? So
then of the three remaining deducted from the fourth head, his discourse must
wholly be framed, to know which of them is the truth: there can be but one true
one by reason, be it in these three, or in some other thing, as we will see
afterward. Mean time let us briefly see Varro's choice of the three: which
are these; Whether Natures first positive affects, be to be desired for
virtues sake, or virtue for theirs, or both for them selves.

L. VIVES.
THey (a) make no] For though their true use seem to hinder, or further the
chiefest good, yet have they no essential reference thereunto. (b) Natures
primitiue] As health, strength, perfection of the senses, freedom from sorrow,
vigor, beauty, and such like: like unto which are the first seeds of virtue in
our minds, which if depraved opinions would suffer to come to maturity, they
alone were sufficient to guide us to beatitude.

Varro his choice amongst the three forenamed sects, following therein the
opinion of Antiochus, author of the old Academicall sect. CHAP. 3.
THus he begins to show in which of them the truth is contained. First,
What man is.
because the question concerns not the beatitude of Gods, or beasts, or
trees, but of man, he holds fit to examine what man is. Two things he finds
in his nature, body and soul, whereof the soul he affirms to be the far
more excellent part. But whether the soul be only man, and that the body be
unto it, as the horse is to the horseman, that he makes another controversy
of: (for (a) the horseman, is the man alone not the horse and man both
together: yet is it the man's reference to the horse, that gives him that
name.) Or whether the body only be the man, having that respect unto the
soul that the cup has to the drink, (for it is not the cup and the drink
both that are called (b) poculum in Latin, but the cup only: yet only in
respect that it contains the drink:) or whether it be both body and soul
conjoined, and not several, that is called man, and these two are but his
parts, as two Oxen are called a yoke, (which though it consist of one on this
side, and another on that, yet call we neither of them seperately a yoke, but
both combined together). Now of those three positions he chooses the last,
calling the essence composed of body and soul, man, and denying the
appellation unto either of them, being severally considered. And therefore
(says he) man's beatitude must be included in the goods that belong jointly
both to body and soul: so that the prime gifts of nature are to be desired
for themselves, and that virtue which doctrine does gradually ingraffe in a
good mind, is the most excellent good of all. Which virtue or method of life,
having received those first gifts of nature (which not-with-standing had
being, before that they had virtue) it now desires all things for it self,
and the own self also: using all things together with it self, unto the own
pleasure and delightful fruition, (d) more or less, making a liking use of
all, and yet if necessity require, rather refusing the smaller goods, for the
attainment or preservation of the greater, then otherwise. (e) But euer-more
holding it self in higher respect then any other good what-so-euer, mental or
corporal: For it knows both the use of it self and of all other goods that
makes a man happy. But where it wants, be there never so many goods, they
are none of his that has them, because he cannot give them their true natures
by good application of them. That man therefore alone is truly blessed, that
can use virtue, and the other bodyly and mental goods which virtue cannot be
without, all unto their true end. If he can make good use of those things
also that virtue may easily want, he is the happier in that. But if he can
make that use of all things what-so-euer, to turn them either to goods of the
body or of the mind, then is he the happiest man on earth: for life and
virtue are not all one. The wise-mans life only it is, that deserves that name
for some kind of life may be wholly void of virtue, but no virtue can be
without life. And so likewise of memory, reason, and other qualities in man:
all these are before learning, it cannot be without them, no more then
virtue, which it does teach. But swiftness of foot, beauty of face, strength
of body, and such, may be all without virtue, and all of them are goods of
themselves, without virtue, yet is virtue desired for it self nevertheless,
and uses these goods as befitteth. Now (f) this blessed estate of life they
hold to be sociable also, desiring the neighbors good as much as their own,
and wishing them in their own respects, as well as it self: whether it be the
wives and children, or fellow citizen, or mortal man what-so-euer, nay
suppose it extend even to the Gods whom they hold the friends of wisemen, and
whom we call by a more familiar name, Angels. But of the ends of the good and
evil they make no question, wherein only (they say) they differ from the new
Academikes: nor care they what habit, Cynicall, or what-so-euer a man bear,
so he auerre their ends. Now of the three lines, contemplative, active, and
mixed, they choose the last. Thus (says Varro) the old Academikes taught: (g)
Antiochus master to him and Tully, being author hereof, though Tully make him
rather a Stoike then an old Academike in most of his positions. But what is
that to us? we are rather to look how to judge of the matter, then how others
judge of the men.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) horsman] But eques has been of old time used for equus. Gell.
Marcell. Macrob. and Seruius, all which do prove it out of Ennius, Annal.
lib. 7. and Uirgil Aenead. 3. And it was the old custom to say, that the horse
rode, when the man was on his back, as well as the man himself. Macrob.
Saturnal. 6. (b) Poculum] Poculum is also the thing that is in the vessel, to
be drunk, especially in the Poets. Uirg. Georg. 1. (c) Virtue or methode]
Which ripening out of the seeds infused by nature, grows up to perfection,
and then ioynes with the first positiues of nature, in the pursuit of true
beatitude; thus held the Academikes, he that will read more of it, let him
look in Aristotle's Morality, and Tullyes de finib. lib. 5. Unless he will
fetch it from Plato, the labor is more, but the liquor is purer. (d) More or
lesse] Bodily goods less then mental, and of the first, health more then
strength, quickness of sense more then swiftness of foot. (e) But euer-more]
Nor is it arrogance in virtue to have this knowledge of her-selfe, and to
discern her only excellence surmounting all. (f) This blessed] The Stoikes
placed it in a politic manner of life, but their meaning Seneca explaineth
(De vita beata) making two kin^ of common wealths, the one a large and comely
public one, containing GOD and Man, and this is the whole world: the other, a
lesser, whereunto our (...) has bound us, as the Athenian state or the
Carthaginians: Now some follow the greater commonweal, living wholly in
contemplation, and others the lesser, attending the state and action of that,
and some apply them selves to both. Besides, a wise man oftentimes abandoneth
to govern, because either the state respects him not, or the manners thereof
are vnreformable. The latter made Plato live in private, the first, Zeno,
Chrysippus and diverse other. (g) Antiochus An Ascalonite: he taught Uarro,
Lucullus, Tully, and many other nobles of Rome, all in form of the ancient
Academy, together with some inclination to Zeno, yet calling the men of his
profession rather reformed Academikes then renewed Stoikes, and therefore
Brutus who was an auditor of his brother Aristius, and many other Stoikes, did
greatly commend his opinion of beatitude. Indeed it was very near Stoicisme
(as we said elsewhere) and their difference was rather verbal then
material. Some few things only were changed, which Antiochus called his
reformations of the old discipline.

The Christians opinion of the chiefest good, and evil, which the Philosophers
held to be within themselves. CHAP. 4.
IF you ask us now what the City of God says, first to this position of the
perfection of good, and evil, it will answer you presently, eternal life is
the perfection of good and eternal death the consummation of evil, and that
the aim of all our life must be to avoid this, and attain that other.
Therefore is it written, The just shall live by faith. For we see not our
greatest good, and therefore are to believe and hope for it, nor have we power
to live accordingly, unless our belief and prayer obtain help of him who
has given us that belief and hope that he will help us. But such as found
the perfection of felicity upon this life placing it either in the body, or in
the mind, or in both: or (to speak more apparently) either in pleasure or in
virtue, or in pleasure, and rest together, or in virtue, or in both, or in
natures first affects, or in virtue, or in both: fondlye and vainly are these
men persuaded to find true happiness here. The Prophet scoffs them, saying:
The Lord knows the thoughts of men, or (as Saint Paul has it, of the wise,)
that they are vain. For who can discourse exactly of the miseries of this
life? Tully (a) upon his daughters death, did what he could. But what could
he do? in what person can the first affects of nature be found without
alteration? what has not sorrow and disquiet full power to disturb the
pleasure and quiet of the wisest* So strength, beauty, health, vigor and
actiuity, are all subverted by their contraries, by loss of limbs,
deformity, sickness, faintness, and vnweeldinesse. And what if a member fall
into some tumor or other affect? what if weakness of the back bend a man
down to the ground, making him near to a foure-footed beast? is not all the
grace of his posture quite gone? and then the first gifts of nature, whereof
sense and reason are the two first, because of the apprehension of truth, how
easily are they lost? how quite does deafness or blindness take away hearing
and sight? and then for the reason, how soon, is it subverted by a
phreneticall passion, a Lethargy or so? Oh it is able to wring tears from our
eyes to see the actions of phrenetique persons so wholly different, nay so
directly contrary unto reasons direction! what need I speak of the D^moniakes,
whose understanding the devil wholly dulleth, and uses all their powers of
soul and body at his own pleasure? and what wise man can fully secure
himself from these incursions? Again, how weak is our apprehension of truth
in this life, when as we read in the true book of wisdom, the corruptible
body is heavy unto the soul, and the earthly mansion keeps down the mind
that is Wisdom 9.
full of cares?

And that same (b) (...), that violent motion unto action, (c) which they
reckon for one of natures first positiues in good men: is it not that that
effects those strange and horrible acts of madness when the reason and sense
are both besotted and obnubilate? Besides, virtue, which is not from nature but
comes after wards from industry, when it has gotten the highest stand in
humanity, what other workehath it, but a continual fight against the inbred
vices that are inherent in our own bosoms not in others? chiefly that (d)
(...) that temperance which suppresseth the lusts of the flesh, and curbeth
them from carrying the mind away into mischief? for that same is a vice when
(as the Apostle says) the flesh lusts against the spirit, and that contrary
is a virtue, when the spirit lusts after the flesh, for they (says he) are
contrary, so that you cannot do what you would. And what would we? what is our
desire in this perfection of God, but that the flesh should not lust against
the spirit, and that there were no vice in us against which the spirit should
lust? which since we cannot attain in this life, would we never so feign, let
us by God grace endeavor this, that we do not subject our spirit unto the
concupiscence of our flesh, and so seal unto the bond of sin with a free
consent.

So that far be it from us ever to think that we have attained the true
happiness whilst we live here. Who is so wise, but has now and then diverse
fights against his own lusts? what is the office of prudence? is it not to
discern between things to be chosen, and things to be refused, to the end
that no error be incurred in either? This testifies that there is evil in us
and that we are in evil. It teaches us that it is evil to assent unto sin,
and good, to avoid it. But yet neither can prudence nor temperance rid our
lives of that evil which they fore-warne us of and arm us against. And what
(e) of Justice, that gives every one his due? and the just order of nature is
that the soul be under God, the flesh under the soul, and both together
under God. Is it not plain that this is rather continually labored then
truly attained in this life? for the less that the soul both meditate of
God, the less it serves him, and the more that the flesh lusts against the
soul, the less command has the soul over it, wherefore as long as we are
objected unto this languour and corruption, how dare we say we are safe, or (if
not safe, much more) blessed by the perfection of attained bless? Now there is
also Fortitude, another authentical testimony of human miseries endured with
Patience.

I wonder with what face the Stoikes deny these to be evils, of which (f)
they confess that if a wise man cannot, or ought not to endure them, he may
lawfully (nay he must needs) kill himself, and avoid this life. To this hight
is their proud stupidity grown (building all there beatitude upon this life)
that if their wise man (g) were blind, deaf, lame, and made the very hospital
of all agonies and anguish, which shouldly so sore on him that they should
force him be his own death, yet this life that is environed with all those
plagues, are not they ashamed to call blessed. Osweete and blessed life, which
it is requisite that death do conclude! for if it be blessed why then keep it
still: but if those evils make it avoydable, what is become of the bliss? or
what are these but evils, that have such power to subvert the good of
fortitude? making i^ not only guilty of deiection, but of dotage, in affirming
that one and the same life is blessed, and yet must be avoided: who is so blind
that sees not that if it be the one, it cannot possibly be the other? O but
(say they) the auoydance is caused by the effect of the ouerpressing infirmity:
why may they not as well bid adue to obstinacy, and confess that it is
wretched? was it patience that made Cato kill him self? no he would not have
done it but that he took Caesar's victory so impatiently: where was his
fortitude now? gone, it yielded, and was so trodden down that it fled both
light and life, as blessed as it was. Was not his life then blessed? why then
it was wretched. Why then are not they true evils that can make ones life so
wretched and so to be avoided? And therefore the Peripatetiques and old
Academikes (whose sect Varro stands wholly for) did better in calling these
accidents, plainly evil. But they have one foul error to hold his life that
endures these evils, blessed, if he rid himself from them by his own
voluntary destruction. The pains and torments of the body are evil, say they,
and the greater the worse, which to avoyde, you must willingly betake your
self to death, and leave this life: what life? this, that is so encombred with
evils. What is it then blessed amongst so many evils that must be avoided,
or call you it blessed, because you may abandon these evils when you list, by
death? what if some power divine should hold you from dying, and keep you
continually in those evils, then you would say this were a wretched life
indeed? well, the soon leaving of it makes not against the misery of it:
because if it were eternal, your self would judge it miserable. It is not
quit of misery therefore because it is short, nor (much less) is it happiness
in that the misery is short. It must needs be a forcible evil, that has
power to make a man (nay and a wise man) to be his own executioner, it being
truly said by themselves, that it is as it were natures first and most
forcible precept, that a man should have a dear respect of himself, and
therefore avoyde the hand of death, by very natural instinct: and so
bee-friend himself, that he should still desire to be a living creature,
and enjoy the conjunction of his soul and body. Mighty are the evils that
subdue this natural instinct, which is in all men to desire to aviod death, and
subduing it so far, that what was before abhorred, should now be desired, and
(rather then wanted) effected by a man's own hand. Mighty is the mischief that
makes fortitude an homicide, if that be to be called fortitude which
yields so to these evils, that it is feign to force him to kill himself to
avoid these inconveniences whom it has undertaken to defend against all
inconveniences.

Indede a wise man is to endure death with patience, but that must come ab
externo, from another man's hand and not from his own. But these men teaching
that he may procure it to himself, must needs confess that the evils are
intolerable which ought to force a man to such an extreme inconvenience. The
life therefore that is liable to such a multitude of miseries can no way be
called happy, if that men to avoid this infelicity be feign to give it place
by killing of themselves, and being convinced by the certainty* of reason are
feign in this their quest of beatitude, to give place to the truth, and to
discern, that the perfection of beatitude is not resident in this mortal
life, when in man's greatest gifts, the greater help they afford him against
anguish, dangers and dolours, the surer testimonies are they of human
miseries. For if true virtue can be in none in whom there is no true piety,
then do they not promise any many in whom they are, any assurance from
suffering of temporal sorrows. For true virtue may not dissemble, in
professing what it cannot perform: but it aims at this only, that man's life
which being in this world, is turmoyled with all these extremes of sorrows,
should in the life to come be made pertaker both of safety and felicity. For
how can that man have felicity that wants safety? It is not therefore of the
unwise, intemperate, impacient or unjust that Saint Paul speaks, saying, We
are saved by hope, but of the son of truepiety, and obseruers of the real
virtues: Hope that is seen, is not hope, for how can a man hope for that which
he sees? But if we hope for that we see not, Romans 8. 25
we do with patience abide for it. Wherefore as we are saved, so are we
blessed by hope, and as we have no hold of our safety, no more have we of o^
felicity, but by hope, patiently expecting it; and being as yet in a desert of
thornie dangers, all which we must constantly endure until we come to the
paradise of all ineffable delights, having then passed all the perils of
encombrance. This security in the life to come, is the beatitude we speak of,
which the Philosophers not beholding will not believe, but forge themselves an
imaginary bliss here, wherein the more their virtue assumes to it self, the
falser it procues to the judgment of all others.

L. VIVES.
TUlly (a) vpon] He had two children, Mark a son, and Tullia a daughter,
married first to Piso-frugus Crassipes, and afterward to Cornel. Dolabella,
and dyed in childbed. Tully took her death with extreme grief. Pompey,
Caesar, Sulpitius, and many other worthy men sought to comfort him, both by
letters and visitation, but all being in vain, he set up his rest to be his
own comforter, and wrote his book called Consolatio, upon this subject: which
is not now extant, yet it is cited often, both by him and others. There-in he
says he bewailed the life of man in general, and comforted himself in
particular. Tusc. quest. 1.

(b) (...), is, to go to any act with vehemency and vigor, to go roundly to
work. (...), is the violence of passion that carries every creature headlong
to affect or to avoid: and are conversant only about things naturally to be
affected, or avoided, as the Stoikes say, and Cato for one, in Tully. (c) Which
they] The instinct where-by we affect our own preservation is of as high
esteem as either the wit or memory: for turn it away, and the creature
cannot live long after. (d) (...)] Of this before. (e) Of Iustice] It
comprehends both that distributive change of estate, and also unto the line
of reason and religion. (f) They confesse] Cic. de fin. lib. 3. and Tusc.
quaest. 4. (g) Were blinde] It is a wise man's duty (says Cato the Stoike in
Tully) sometimes to renounce the happiest (...). So says Seneca often. (h)
Ouer-passing infirmitie] A diversity of reading in the texts of Bruges and
Basil: but it is not to be stood upon. (i) Natures first] Cic. off. 1. and De
(...). 3. and 5.

Of living sociably with our neighbor: how fit it is, and yet how subject to
crosses. CHAP. 5.
WE do worthily approve their enioyning a wise man to live in mutual
society: for how should our Celestial City (the nineteen book whereof we
now have in hand) have ever come to original, to prolation or to perfection,
but that the Saints live all in sociable union? But yet what is he that can
recount all the miseries incident unto the societies of mortals? Here what the
Comedian says, with a general applause. (a) I married a wife (b) O what
misery wanted I then! I begot children: so, there is one care more. And those
inconveniences that Terence pins on the back of love, as (c) injuries,
enmities, war, and peace again, do not all these lackey our mortality
continually? do not these foot some times into the friendliest affections? and
does not all the world, keep these examples in continual renouation as war,
I mean injuries and enmities. And our peace is as uncertain, as we are
ignorant of their affects with whom we hold it, and though we nigh know to
day what they would do, to morrow we shall not. Who should be greater friends
then those of one family? yet what a many secret plots of malice lie even
amongst such, to expel security? their firmer peace becoming fouler malice:
and being reputed most loyal, whereas it was only most craftily feigned: the
far spread contagion of this made Tully let this saying run out with his
tears: Treason is never so close carried, as when it lurketh under the name of
duty, or affinity. An open foe is easily watched: but this your secret serpent
both breeds and strikes ere ever you can discover it. Wherefore that which the
holy scripture says, (d) A man's enemies are the men of his house, this we
hear with great grief: for though a man have fortitude to endure it, or
prevention to avoid it, yet if he be a good man, he must needs take great
grief at the badnesse of those so near him: be it that they have been used
unto this viperous dissimulation of old, or have learnt it but of late. So then
if a man's own private house afford him no shelter from these incursions, what
shall the city do, which as it is larger, so is it fuller of brables, and
suits, and quarrels, and accusations, to grant the absence of seditions and
civil contentions, which are too often present: and whereof the Cities are in
continual danger, when they are in their safest estate?

L. VIVES.
I (a) have maried] Ter. Adelph. Act. 3. sc. 4. Demea's words. (b) O what] Some
books have it not as Terence has it, but they have been falsely copied. (c)
Iniuries] Parmeno his words unto Phadria. (d) A man's enemies] Mich. 7. and
Matthew. 10.

The error of human judgments, in cases where truth is not known. CHAP. 6.
ANd how lamentable and miserable are those men's judgments whom the Cities
must perforce use, as Magistrates, even in their most settled peace, concerning
other men? they judge them whose consciences they cannot see, and therefore are
often driven to wring forth the truth by (a) tormenting of innocent witnesses.
And what say you when a man is tortured in his own case, and tormented, even
when it is a question whether he be guilty or no? and though he be (b)
innocent, yet suffers assured pains when they are not assured he is faulty.
In most of these cases the Judges ignorance turns to the prisoners misery.
Nay which is more lamentable, and deserves a sea of tears to wash it away;
the Judge in torturing the accused, least he should put him to death being
innocent, oftentimes through his wretched ignorance kills that party being
innocent, with torture, whom he had tortured to avoid the killing of an
innocent. For if (according unto their doctrine) he had rather leave this life
then endure those miseries, then he says presently that he did the thing
whereof he is clear indeed. And being there-vpon condemned, and executed,
still the Judge cannot tell whether he were guilty or no. He tortured him
least he should execute him guiltless, and by that means killed him ere he
knew that he was guilty. Now in these mists of mortal society, whether shall
the Judge sit or no? Yes he must sit: he is bound to it by his place,
which he holds wickedness not to discharge, and by the states command,
which he must obey. But he never holds it wickedness to torture guiltless
witnesses in other men's causes, and when the tortures have ore-come the
patience of the innocent, and made them their own accusers to put them to
death as guilty, whom they tortured but to try, being guiltless: nor to let
many of them dye even upon the very rack it self, or by that means, if they
do escape the hangman. Again, what say you to this, that some bringing a
just accusation against this man or that, for the good of the state, the
accused endures all the tortures without confession, and so the innocent
plaintiffes being not able to prove their plea, are by the Judges ignorance
cast and (c) condemned* These now, and a many more then these, the Judge
holds no sins, because his will is not assenting unto them, but his service
to the state compells him, and his ignorance of hurt it is that makes him do
it, not any will to hurt. This now is misery in a man: if it be not malice in
a wise man, is it the troubles of his place and of ignorance that cause those
effects, and does not he think he is not well enough in being free from
accusation, but he must needs sit in beatitude? (d) how much more wisdom
and discretion should he show in acknowledging his mortality in those
troubles, and in detesting this misery in himself, crying out unto GOD (if
he be wise) with the Psalmist: Lord take me out of all my troubles.

L. VIVES.
TOrmenting (a) of] For in the cause pertaining them, the servant still is
called in question, and so is the guiltless commonly brought to the torment.
This kind of Trial is often mentioned in Tully. It was once forbidden. Ci^ pro
deiotar. and Tacit. l. 2, (b) Yet sufficient] It was a true tyrant, (were it
Tarquin the proud, or whosoever) that invented torments to try the truth; for
neither he that can endure them will tell the truth, nor he that cannot
endure them. Pain (says one) will make the innocent a liar. (c) Condemned] By
that law, that says, Let the accuser suffer the pains due to the accused, if
he cannot prove hi^ accusation. (d) How much more] A needelesse difference
there is here in some copyes (but I may well omit it).

Difference of language, an impediment to humane society. The miseries of the
iustest wars. CHAP. 7.
AFter the city, follows the whole world, wherein the third kind of humane
society is resident, the first being in the house, and the second in the
city. Now the world is as a flood of waters, the greater, the more dangerous:
and first of all, difference of language (a) diuides man from man] For if two
meet, who perchance light upon some accident craving their abiding together,
and conference, if neither of them can understand the other, you may sooner
make two brute beasts, of two several kinds sociable to one another then
these two men. For when they would common together, their tongues deny to
accord, which being so, all the other helps of nature, are nothing: so that a
man had rather be with his own dog, then with another man of a strange
language. But the great (b) western Babylon endeavors to communicate her
language to all the lands she has subdued, to procure a fuller society, and a
greater abundance of interpretours on both sides. It is true, but how many
lives has this cost? and suppose that done, the worst is not past: for
although she never wanted stranger nations against whom to lead her forces, yet
this large extention of her Empire procured greater wars then those, named
civil and confederate wars, and these were they that troubled the souls of
mankind both in their heat, with desire to see them extinct, and in their
pacification, with fear, to see them renewed. If I would stand to recite the
massacres, and the extreme effects hereof, as I might (though I cannot do it
as I should) the discourse would be infinite. (c) yea but a wise man (say
they) will wage none but just war. He will not! As if the very remembrance
that himself is man, ought not to procure his greater sorrow in that he has
cause of just war, and must needs wage them, which if they were not just,
were not for him to deal in, s^ that a wise man should never have war: For
it is the other men's wickedness that works his cause just that he ought to
deplore, whether ever it produce wars or no: Wherefore he that does but
consider affectionately of all those dolorous and bloody extremes, must needs
say that this is a mysery, but he that endures them without a sorrowful
affect, or thought thereof, is far more wretched to imagine he has the
bliss of a God, when he has lost the sense of a man.

L. VIVES.
Diversity (a) of language] Plin. lib. 7. (b) Western imperious Babilon] Rome:
called imperious for her sovereignty that was so large, and because her
commands were so peremptory, he alludes to the surname of Titus Manlius, who
was called imperious, for executing his some. The Romans endeavored to have
much latin spoken in their Provinces, in so much that Spain and France did
wholly forget their own languages, and spoke all latin. Nor might any
Embassage be preferred to the Senate but in latin. Their endeavor was most
glorious, and useful herein, whatsoever their end was. (c) Yea but] Here he
disputes against the Gentiles, out of their own positions.

That true friendship cannot be secure, amongst the incessant perils of this
present life. CHAP. 8.
But admit that a man be not so grossly deceived (as many in this wretched
life are) as to take his foe for his friend, nor contrariwise, his friend for
his foe: what comfort have we then remaining in this vale of mortal miseries,
but the unfeigned faith and affection of sure friends? whom the (a) more they
are, or the further of us, the more we fear, least they be endamaged by some
of these infinite casualties attending on all men's fortunes. We stand not only
in fear to see them afflicted by famine, war, sickness, imprisonment, or
so, but our far greater fear is, least they should fall away through
treachery, malice, or deprauation. And when this comes to pass, and we
hear of it, (as they more friends we have, and the farther off withal, the
likelier are such news to be brought us) then who can decypher our sorrows
but he that has felt the like? we had rather hear of their death, though that
we could not hear of neither, but unto our grief. For seeing we enjoyed the
comfort of their friendships in their life, how can we but be touched with
sorrows affects at their death? he that forbids us that, may as well
forbid all conference of friend and friend, all sociall courtesy, nay even all
humane affect, and thrust them all out of man's conversation: or else prescribe
their uses no pleasurable ends. But as that is impossible, so is it likewise
for us not to bewail him dead whom we loved being alive. For the (b) sorrow
thereof is as a wound, or ulcer in our heart, unto which bewaylements do serve
in the stead of fomentations, and plasters. For though that the sounder ones
understanding be, the sooner this cure is effected, yet it proves not but that
there is a malady that requires one application or other. Therefore in all our
bewayling more or less, of the deaths of our dearest friends or companions,
we do yet reserve this love to them, that we had rather have them dead in
body, then in soul, and had rather have them fall in essence, then in manners,
for the last, is the most dangerous infection upon earth, and therefore it was
written, Is not man's life a (b) temptation upon earth? Whereupon our Savior
said: Woe be to the world because of offenses, and again: Because iniquity
shall be increased, Job. 7, 1 Mat. 18 Mat. ^4
the love of many shall be cold. This makes us give thanks for the death of our
good friends, and though it make us sad a while, yet it gives us more
assurance of comfort ever after, because they have now escaped all those
mischieues which oftentimes, seize upon the best, either oppressing, or
perverting them, endangering them how-soeuer.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) more they are] Aristotle's argument against the multitude of friends.
(b) Temptation] The vulgar reads it, Is there not an appointed time to man
upon earth? Hierom has it a warfare, for we are in continual war with a
subtle fox, whom we must set a continual watch against, least he invade us
unprovided.

The friendship of holy Angels with men: indiscernable in this life, by reason
of the devils, whom all the Infidells took to be good powers, and gave them
divine honors. CHAP. 9.
NOw the society of Angels with men (those whom the Philosophers called the
gods guardians, Lars, and a number more names) they set in the fourth place,
coming as it were from earth to the whole universe, and here including heaven.
Now for those friends (the Angels) we need not fear to be affected with sorrow
for any death, or deprauation of theirs, they are impassible. But this
friendship between them and us, is not visibly apparent as that of man's is:
(which adds unto our terrestrial misery) and again, the devil (as we
read) often transformes himself into an Angel of light to tempt men, some
for their instruction, and some for their ruin: and here is need of the great
mercy of God, least when we think we have the love and fellowship of good
Angels, they prove at length pernicious devils, fained friends, and subtle
foes, as great in power as in deceit. And where needs this great mercy of
GOD, but in this worldly misery, which is so enveloped in ignorance, and
subject to be deluded. As for the Philosophers of the reprobate city, who said
they had gods to their friends, most sure it was they had devils indeed whom
they took for deities; all the whole state wherein they lived, is the devils
monarchy, and shall have the like reward with his, unto all eternity. For their
sacrifices, or rather sacriledges, wherewith they were honored, and the
obscaene plays which they themselves exacted were manifest testimonies of
their diabolical natures.

Thereward that the Saints are to receive after the passing of this worlds
afflictions. CHAP. 10.
YEa the holy and faithful servants of the true GOD are in danger of the
devils manifold ambushes: for as long as they live in this frail, and foul
browed world, they must be so, and it is for their good, making them more
attentive in the quest of that security where their peace is without end, and
without want. There shall the Creator bestow all the gifts of nature upon
them, and give them not only as goods, but as eternal goods, not only to the
soul, by reforming it with wisdom, but also to the body by restoring it in
the resurrection. There the virtues shall not have any more conflicts with the
vices, but shall rest with the victory of eternal peace, which none shall ever
disturb. For it is the final beatitude, having now attained a consummation to
all eternity. We are said to be happy here on earth when we have that little
peace that goodness can afford us: but compare this happiness with that
other, and this shall be held but plain misery. Therefore if we live well
upon earth, our virtue uses the benefits of the transitory peace, unto good
ends, if we have it: if not, yet still our virtue uses the evils that the
want thereof produces, unto a good end also. But then is our virtue in full
power and perfection, when it refers it self, and all the good effects that
it can give being unto either upon good or evil causes, unto that only end,
wherein our peace shall have no end, nor any thing superior unto it in
goodness or perfection.

The beatitude of eternal peace, and that true perfection wherein the Saints
are installed. CHAP. 11.
WE may therefore say that peace is our final good, as we said of life
eternal: because the psalm says unto that city whereof we write this
laborious work: Praise thy LORD O Jerusalem, praise thy LORD O Zion: for he
has made fast the bars of thy gates, and blessed thy children within thee;
he has made peace thy borders. When the bars of the gates are fast, as none
can come in, so none can go out. And therefore this peace which we call
final, is the borders and bounds of this city: for the mystical name hereof,
Jerusalem, signifies, A vision of peace, but because the name of peace is
ordinary in this world where eternity is not resident, therefore we choose
rather to call the bound where in the chief good of this city lies, life
eternal, rather then peace. Of which end the Apostle says. Now being freed
from sin, and made servants to Romans 6. 22
GOD, you have your fruit in holiness, and the end, everlasting life. But on
the other-side because such as are ignorant in the scriptures, may take this
everlasting life, in an ill sense, for the life of the wicked which is
eternally evil, either as some Philosophers held, because the soul cannot
die, or as our faith teaches, because torments cannot cease (yet should not
the wicked feel them eternally but that they have also their eternal life):
therefore the maine end of this cities aim, is either to be called eternity
in peace, or peace in eternity, and thus it is plain to all. For (a) the good
of peace is generally the greatest wish of the world, and the most welcome when
it comes. Whereof I think we may take leave of our reader, to have a word or
two more, both because of the cities end, whereof we now speak, and of the
sweetness of peace, which all men do love.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) good of peace] Nothing is either more pleasant or more profitable:
more wished, or more welcome. Peace is the chief good, and war the chief
evil. Xenoph. (...). And the peace of mind is that which Democritus called
the great faelicity. The Stoikes make concord one of beatitudes chiefest goods.

That the bloudiest wars chief aim is peaces they desire which is natural
in man. CHAP. 12.
Which he that marketh but man's affairs, and the (a) general form of
nature, will confess with me. For joy and peace are desired a like of all men?
The warrior would but conquer: wars aim is nothing but glorious peace: what
is victory but a suppression of resistants, which being done, peace follows?
So that peace is wars purpose, the scope of all military discipline, and the
limmite at which all just contentions level. All men seek peace by war, but
none seeks war by peace. For they that perturbe the peace they live in, do
it not for^e of it, but to show their power in alteration of it. They would not
disanull it, but they would have it as they like; and though they break into
seditions from the rest, yet must they hold a peace full force with their
fellows that are engaged with them, or else they shall never effect what they
intend. Even the thieves themselves that molest all the world besides them, are
at peace amongst themselves. Admit one be so strong, or subtle that he will
have no fellow, but plaieth all his parts of roguery alone, yet such as he can
neither cut off, nor li^ to make known his facts unto, with those he must
needs hold a kind of peace. And at home, with his wife and family, there must
he needs observe quietness, and questionless delights in their obedience
unto him, which if they fail in, ^e chafes, and chides and strikes, setting
all in order by force if need be, or by cruelly: which he sees he cannot do,
unless all the rest be subjected under one head, which is himself. And might
he have the sway of a city, or province in such sort as he has that of his
house, he would put off his theeuish form, and put on a Kings, albeit his
covetousness and malice remained unchanged. Thus then you see that all men
desire to have peace with such as they would have live according to their
liking. For those against whom they wage war, they would make their own if
they could, and if they conquer them they give them such laws as they like.
(b) But let us imagine some such insociable fellow as the poets fable
records, calling him (c) Halfe-man, for his inhumaine barbarism.

Now he although his Kingdom lay in a lightlesse cave, and his villainies so
rare that they gave him that great name of (d) Cacus, which is, Evil though
his wife never had good word of him, he never played with his children, nor
ruled them in their manlier age, never spoke with friend, not so much as with
(e) his father Vulcan (then whom he was far more happy in that he begot no
such monster, as Vulcan had, in begetting him) though he never gave to any,
but robbed and reaued all that he could gripe from all manner of persons, yea
and (f) the persons themselves, yet in that horred dungeon of his, whose flore
and walls were always danke with the blood of new slaughters, he desired
nothing but to rest in peace therein, without molestation. He desired also to
be at peace with himself, and what he had, he enjoyed, he ruled over his
own body, and to satisfy his own hungry nature that menaced the separation
of soul and body, he fell to his robberies with celerity, and though he were
barbarous and bloody, yet in all that, he had a care to provide for his life
and safety: and therefore if he would have had that peace with others, which
he had in the cave with himself alone, he should neither have been called
Halfe-man nor Monster. But if it were his horrible shape and breathing of fire
that made men avoid him, than was it not will, but necessity that made him
live in that cave and play the thief for his living. But there was no such
man, or if there were, he was no such as the poets faigne him. For unless
they had mightily belied Cacus, they should not sufficiently have (h) commended
Hercules. But, as I said, it is like that there was no such man, no more then
is truth in many other of their fictions: for the very wild beasts, (part of
whose brutishness they place in him) do preserve a peace each with other (i)
in their kind, begetting, breeding and living together amongst themselves,
being otherwise the insociable births of the deserts: I speak not here of
Sheep, Dear, Pigeons, Stares or Bees, but of Lions, Foxes, Eagles and Owls.
For what Tiger is there that does not nousle her young ^s, and sawn upon them in
their tenderness? what Kite is there, though he fly so^ily about for his prey,
but will tread his female, build his nest, sit his eggs, seed his young, and
assist his fellow in her motherly duty, all that in him lies? Far stronger
are the bands that bind man unto society, and peace with all that are
peaceable: the worst men of all do fight for their fellows quietness, and
would (if it lay in their power) reduce all into a distinct form of state,
drawn by themselves, whereof they would be the heads, which could never be,
but by a coherence either through fear or love. For herein is perverse pride
an Imitator of the goodness of GOD, having equality of others with it self
under him, and laying a yoke of obedience upon the fellows, under it self,
in stead of him: thus hates it the just peace of God, and builds an unjust
one for it self. Yet can it not but love peace, for no vice how ever
unnatural, can pull nature up by the roots. But he that can discern between
good and bad, and between order and confusion, may soon distinguish the
Godly peace from the wicked. Now that perverse confusion must be reformed by
the better disposing of the thing wherein it is, if it be at all, as for
example: hang a man up with his head downwards, al his posture is confounded,
that which should be lowest, having the highest place, and so contrary this
confusion disturbes the flesh, and is troublesome to it. But it is the souls
peace with the body that causes the feeling of that disturbance. Now if the
soul leave the body by the means of those troubles, yet as long as the bodies
form remains it has a certain peace with it self, and in the very manner
of hanging, shows that it desires to be placed in the peace of nature, the
very weight, seeming to demand a place for rest, and though life be gone, yet
very nature swayeth it unto that order wherein she placed it. For if the dead
body be preserved by putrefaction, by unguents, and embalmings, yet (n) the
peace of nature is kept, for the bodies weight is applied thereby to an earthly
simpathizing site, and convenient place for it to rest in. But if it be not
(o) embalmed, but left to natures dissoluing, it is so long altered by (p) ill
tasting vapors, until each part be wholly reduced to the particular natures
of the elements, yet is not a tittle of the Creators al-disposing law
controlled: for if there grow out of this carcass, a many more living
creatures, each body of these, serves the quantity of life that is in it,
according to the same law of creation. And if that it be devoured up, by
other ravenous beasts or birds, it shall follow the ordinance of the same law,
disposing al things congruently, into what form of nature soever it be changed.

L. VIVES.
General (a) forme] Or community of nature. [Our scholians say that we must
never respect words in matter of divinity or Philosophy: this they avouch,
hand-smooth, and yet one of their great men at Paris, brought these words of
Augustine, (in a question of Philosophy) to confirm the communities of nature,
which Occam had written against. So likewise, [Louuaine copy defective.]
many of them will have Tully, Seneca, Hierome, Augustine, Pliny and others,
speaking of common sense, to mean that which Aristotle makes the judge over
all the senses corporal, whereas they, and all latin authors take common
sense, for a thing that is universally inherent, as for a mother to love her
child. And natures community is those general inclinations that are in all
men. This missinterpretation of words has made foul work in arts, first
cankring and then directly killing them] (b) Imagine some such] This was
Uirgils Cacus. Aeneid. 8. He was overcome (says Dionysius) by Hercules, he
dwelt in an impregnable place, from whence he plagued all that dwelt near
him: and hearing that Hercules was encamped nere him, he stole out and drove
away a great prey: but the greeks injured him in his strength. He dwelt (says
Solinus) at Salinae, where port Trigemina stands now. Being put (says
Gellius) into prison by Tarchon the Tyrrhene Prince, whilst he was ambassador
for ^ales the Phrigian who ruled with Marsias, he brake prison and came home,
and fortifying all Vulturnum and Campania, he presumed to encroch upon the
Arcadians whom Hercules protected, who thereupon slew him. Thus out of these.
Seruius says: the fable reported him the son of Uulcan, that he breathed
fire, and destroyed all that he came near, but the truth of all is, he was a
theeuish and villenous servant of Euanders, his sister Caca betrayed him, and
therefore had a chapel erected unto her, wherein the vestalls offered
sacrifice. Lactant. (c) Halfe-man] Uirgil, and Seruius call him so. (d) Cacus]
Diodorus says his proper name was L^uius, if his copy be true. lib. 5. (e)
His father Vulcan] Virg. Ovid. Fast. and others call him so because he burnt
up the corn, and wasted their fields, with fire. (f) The persons] Whose heads
he set up at the mouth of his cave. Uirg, and Ovid (g) Breatheing of]
Fire-breathing Cacus, did Uirgil call him. (h) Commended Hercules] One of whose
labors the death of Cacus was for Cacus stole part of his Spanish kine, and
drew them into his cave by their tails, least they should tract them by their
steps. But Hercules discovering them by their bellowing, brake into the Cave,
and killed him, Liuy, Dionys. Virg. Ovid, and a many more, the story is common.
(i) In their kinde] By that law which the lawyers call natural. Ulpian 1. lib.
Pandect. (k) Tyger] A fierce beast. Virg. and Ovid use it as the emblem of
bloudinesse. (l) Nousle her yong] She loves her young dearly. Plin. l. 8. (m)
Kite] A ravenous and meager foul. It is not seen in winter, and at the
Solisticies, it has the gout in the feet. Plin. l. 10. Aristotle has one
strange note of the Eagles breed, that some of them go out of their kind, and
are hatched Ospreyes: the Osprey hatcheth not Ospreyes but the fowls called
(...), Boane-breakers, and they hatch kites, who do not breed birds of their
own kind, but others, which die and never bring forth any other. (n) The
peace of] Empedocles held all things to consist by concord, and to dissolve by
discord, putting them two as the first qualities of the four elements. (o)
Embalmed] As they use to preserve bodies the longer from putrefaction, drying
up the Viscous humidity, so that thereby the carcases become dry, and at length
turn to plain powder of dust. (p) Ill tasting] For as a good sent delights
the sense, so does a rank one offend it: nature holding a correspondent
affection unto things that delight, and an inherent distaste of things
offensive to it.

Of that universal peace which no perturbances can seclude from the law of
nature, Gods just judgments disposing of every one according to his proper
desert. CHAP. 13.
THe bodies (a) peace therefore is an orderly dispose of the parts thereof: the
unreasonable souls, a good temperature of the appetites thereof: the
reasonable souls, a true harmony between the knowledge, and the performance.
The bodies, and souls both, a temperate and vndiseased habit of nature in the
whole creature. The peace of mortal man with immortal GOD, is an orderly
obedience unto his eternal law, performed in faith. Peace of man and man, is a
mutual concord: peace of a family, an orderly rule and subjection amongst the
parts thereof: peace of a city, an orderly command, and obedience amongst the
citizens: peace of Gods City a most orderly coherence in God, and fruition of
GOD: peace of althings, is a well disposed order. For order, is a good
disposition of discrepant parts, each in the fittest place, and therefore the
miserable, (as they are miserable) are out of order, wanting that peace-able
and vnperturbed state which order exacteth. But because their own merits have
incurred this misery, therefore even herein they are imposed in a certain set
order howsoever. Being not con-ioyned with the blessed, but severed from them
by the law of order, and being exposed to miseries, yet are adapted unto the
places wherein they are resident, and so are digested into some kind of
methodicall form, and consequently into some peaceful order. But this is
their misery, that although that some little security wherein they live, exempt
them from present sorrows, yet are they not in that state which secludeth
sorrow for ever, and affords eternal security. And their misery is far
greater if they want the peace of nature: and when they are offended, the part
that grieueth is the first disturber of their peace: for that which is neither
offended, nor dissolved, preserues the peace of nature still. So then as one
may possibly live without grief, but cannot possibly grieve unless he live:
so may there be peace without any war or contention: but contention, cannot
be without some peace, (not as it is contention, but) because the contenders
do suffer and perform diverse things herein according to natures prescript,
which things could not consist, had they not some peaceful order amongst them.
So that there may be a nature (you see) wherein no evil may have inherence,
but to find a nature utterly void of goodness, is utterly impossible. For
the very nature of the devils (consider it as nature) is most excellent, but
their own voluntary perverseness depraved it. The devil abode not in the
truth, yet escaped he not the sentence of the truth: for he transgressed the
peaceful law of order, yet could not avoid the powerful hand of the orderer.

The good which GOD had bestowed on his nature, cleared him not from GODS heavy
judgment which allotted him to punishment. Yet does not GOD herein punish the
good which himself created, but the evil which the devil committed: nor did
he take away his whole nature from him, but left him part, whereby to bewail
the loss of the rest: which lamentation, testifyeth both what he had and what
he has: for had he not some good left, he could not lament for what he had
lost. For his guilt is the greater that having lost all his uprightness,
should rejoice at the loss thereof. And he that is sick, if it benefit him
nothing yet greeueth at the loss of his health. For uprightness and health
being both goods, it behooves the loosers of them to mourn, and not to
rejoice, unless this loss be repaired with better recompense, as
uprightness of mind is better then health of body: but far more reason
has the sinner to lament in his suffering then to rejoice in his
transgression. Therefore even as to rejoice at the loss of goodness in
sining, argues a depraved will: so likewise lament for the same loss, in
suffering, proves a good nature. For he that bewaileth the loss of his
natural peace, has his light from the remainders of that peace, which are
left in him, keeping his nature and him in concord.

And in the last judgment, it is but reason that the wicked should deplore the
loss of their natural goods, and feel GODS hand justly heavy in depriving
them of them, whom they scornefully respected not in the bestowing them upon
them. Wherefore the high GOD, natures wisest creator, and most just disposer,
the parent of the worlds fairest wonder (mankind) bestowed diverse goods upon
him, which serve for this life only, as the worldly and temporal peace, kept
by honest cohaerence and society: together with all the adiacents of this
peace, as the visible light, the spirable air, the potable water; and all the
other necessaries of meat drink and clothing: but with this condition, that
he that shall use them in their due manner, and reference unto (b) human
peace, shall be rewarded with guiftes of far greater moment, namely with the
peace of immortality, and with vnshaded glory, and full fruition of GOD, and
his brother, in the same GOD: (c) but he that uses them amiss, shall neither
partake of the former nor the later.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) bodies peace] Saint Augustine in this chapter proves althings to
consist by peace and concord: so that consequently, discord must needs be the
fuel to all ruin and confusion. Wherefore I wonder at the perverse nature of
men that love dissentions and quarrels, as their own very souls, hating
peace, as it were a most pernicious evil; Surely they had but there due, if
their bosoms within, and their states without, were wholly fraught with this
their so dearly affected darling, war. (b) Humane peace] But men do turn
all these goods now a days into contentious uses, as if they were ordained for
no other end; never thinking that there is a place of eternal discord prepared
for them to dwell in hereafter, where they may enjoy their damned desires for
ever. The whole goodness of peace, and of that especially which CHRIST left us
as his full inheritance, is gone, all but for the name and an imaginary shade
thereof, all the rest we have lost: nay we have made a willing extrusion of
it, and expelled it wittingly, and of set purpose, imagining our whole felicity
to consist in the tumults of wars and slaughters. And oh so we brave it,
that we have slain thus many men, burnt thus many towns, sacked thus many
cities! Founding our principal glories upon the destruction of our fellows.
But I may begin a plaint of this here, but I shall never end it. (c) But
hee] A diversity of reading in the copies, rather worth nothing then noting.

Of the law of Heaven and Earth, which swaieth humane society by counsel, and
unto which counsel humane society obeys. CHAP. 14.
ALL temporal things are referred unto the benefit of the peace which is
resident in the Terrestrial City, by the members thereof: and unto the use
of the eternal peace, by the Citizens of the Heavenly society. Wherefore if
we wanted reason, we should desire but an orderly state of body, and a good
temperature of affects: nothing but fleshly ease, and fullness of pleasure. For
the peace of the body augmenteth the quiet of the soul: and if it be a
wanting, it procures a disturbance even in brute beasts, because the affects
have not their true temperature.

Now both these combined, add unto the peace of soul and body both, that is,
unto the healthful order of life. For as all creatures show how they desire
their bodies peace, in avoiding the causes of their hurt: and their souls, in
following their appetites when need requires: so in flying of death; they
make it as apparent how much they set by their peace of soul and body. But man
having a reasonable soul, subiecteth all his communities with beasts, unto the
peace of that, to work so both in his contemplation and action, that there may
be a true consonance between them both, and this we call the peace of the
reasonable soul. To this end he is to avoid molestation by grief,
disturbance by desire, and dissolution by death, and to aim at profi^e
knowledge, where unto his actions may be conformable. But least (...) own
infirmity, through the much desire to know, should draw him into any pestilent
inconvenience of error, he must have a divine instruction, to whose directions
and assistance, he is to assent with firm and free obedience. And because
that during this life, He is absent from the LORD, he walks by faith, and
not by sight, and therefore he refers all his peace of body, of soul, and
of both, unto that peace which mortal man has with immortal 2. Cor. 5. 7
GOD: to live in an orderly obedience under his eternal law, by faith.

Now GOD, our good Master, teaching us in the two chiefest precepts the love
of him, and the love of our neighbor, to love three things, GOD, our
neighbor, and our selves, and seeing he that loves GOD, offends not in
loving himself: it follows, that he ought to counsel his neighbor to love
GOD, and to provide for him in the love of GOD, sure he is commanded to love
him, as his own self. So must he do for his wife, children, family, and all
men besides: and wish likewise that his neighbor would do as much for him, in
his need: thus shall he be settled in peace and orderly concord with all the
world. The order whereof is, first (a) to do no man hurt, and secondly, to
help all that he can. So that his own, have the first place in his care, and
those, his place and order in humane society affords him more conueniency to
benefit. Whereupon Saint Paul says, He that provides not for his own, and
namely for them that be of his household, denies the faith, and is worse then
an 1. Tim. 5. 8
Infidel. For this is the foundation of domestical peace, which is, an
orderly rule, and subjection in the parts of the family, wherein the
prouisors are the Commanders, as the husband over his wife; parents over their
children, and masters over their servants: and they that are provided for,
obey, as the wives do their husbands, children their parents, and servants
their masters. But in the family of the faithful man, the heavenly pilgrim,
there the Commanders are indeed the servants of those they seem to command:
ruling not in ambition, but being bound by careful duty: not in proud
sovereignty, but in nourishing pity.

L. VIVES.
FIrst (a) to do no] Man can more easily do hurt, or forbear hurt, then do
good. All men may iniure others, or abstain from it. But to do good, is all
and some. Wherefore holy writ bids us first, abstain from injury, all we can:
and then, to benefit our christian brethren, when we can.

Natures freedom, and bondage, caused by sin: in which man is a slave to his
own affects, though he be not bondsman to any one besides. CHAP. 15.
THus has natures order prescribed, and man by GOD was thus created. Let them
rule (says he) over the fishes of the sea, and the fowls of the air, end
over every thing that creeps upon the earth. He made him reasonable, Genesis 1.
26
and LORD, only over the unreasonable, not over man, but over beasts.
Whereupon the first holy men were rather shep-heards then Kings, GOD showing
herein what both the order of the creation desired, and what the merit of sin
exacted. For justly was the burden of servitude laid upon the back of
transgression. And therefore in all the scriptures we never read the word,
Servant, until such time as that just man Noah (a) laid it as a curse upon his
offending son. So that it was guilt, and not nature that gave original unto
that name. (b) The latin word Seruus, had the first deriuation from hence:
those that were taken in the wars, being in the hands of the conquerours to
massacre or to preserve, if they saved them, then were they called Serui, of
Seruo, to save. Nor was this effected beyond the desert of sin. For in the
iustest war, the sin upon one side causes it; and if the victory fall to
the wicked (as some times it may) (c) it is GODS decree to humble the
conquered, either reforming their sins herein, or punishing them. Witness,
that holy man of GOD, Daniel, who being in captivity, confessed unto his
Creator, that his sins, and the sins of the people were the real causes of
that captivity.

Sin therefore is the mother of servitude, and first cause of man's subjection
to man: which notwithstanding comes not to pass but by the direction of the
highest, in whom is no injustice, and who alone knows best how to
proportionate his punnishment unto man's offenses: and he himself says:
Whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin, and therefore many
religious Io. 8. 34.
Christians are servants unto wicked masters, (d) yet not unto freemen, for
that which a man is addicted unto, the same is he slave unto. And it is a
happier servitude to serve man then lust: for lust (to ommit all the other
affects) practices extreme tirany upon the hearts of those that serve it, be
it lust after sovereignty, or fleshly lust. But in the peaceful orders of
states, wherein one man is under an other, as humility does benefit the
servant, so does pride endamage the superior. But take a man as GOD created him
at first, and so he is neither slave to man nor to sin. But penal servitude
had the institution from that law which commands the conservation, and
forbids the disturbance of natures order: for if that law had not first
been transgressed, penal servitude had never been enjoined.

Therefore the Apostle warns servants to obey their Masters and to Ephe. 6
serve them with cheerfulness, and good will: to the end that if they cannot
be made free by their Masters, they make their servitude a free-dome to
themselves, by serving them, not in deceiptfull fear, but in faithful love,
until iniquity be ouerpassed, and all man's power and principality disanulled,
and GOD only be all in all.

L. VIVES.
NOah (a) laid it] Genesis 9. (b) The latine] So says Florentinus the Ciuilian,
Institut. lib. 4. And they are called Mancipia (quoth he) of manu capti, to
take with the hand, or, by force. This you may read in Justinians Pandects
lib. 1. The Lacaedemonians observed it first. Plin. lib. 7. (c) It is Gods
decree] Whose providence often produces wars against the wills of either
party. (d) Yet not unto free] Their Masters being slaves to their own
passions, which are worse masters then men can be.

Of the just law of sovereignty. CHAP. 16.
WHerefore although our righteous forefathers had servants in their families,
and according to their temporal estates, made a distinction betwixt their
servants and their children, yet in matter of religion (the fountain whence
all eternal good flows,) they provided for all their household with an equal
respect unto each member thereof. This, natures order prescribed, and hence
came the name of, The Father of the family, a name which even the worst
Masters love to be called by. But such as merit that name truly, do care
that all their families should continue in the service of GOD, as if they were
all their own children, desyring that they should all be placed in the
household of heaven, where command is wholly unnecessary, because then they are
past their charge, having attained immortality, which until they be installed
in, the Masters are (a) to endure more labor in their government, then the
servants in their service. If any be disobedient, and offend this just peace,
he is forthwith to be corrected, with strokes, or some other convenient
punishment, whereby he may be re-ingraffed into the peace-full stock from
whence his disobedience has torn him. For as it is no good turn to help a
man unto a smaller good by the loss of a greater: no more is it the part of
innocence by pardoning a small offense, to let it grow unto a fouler. It is the
duty of an innocent to hurt no man, but withal, to curb sin in all he
can, and to correct sin in whom he can, that the sinners correction may be
profitable to himself, and his example a terror unto others. Every family
then being part of the city, every beginning having relation unto some end,
and every part, tending to the integrity of the whole, it follows apparently,
that the families peace adhereth unto the cities, that is the orderly command,
and obedience in the family, has real reference to the orderly rule and
subjection in the city. So that the Father of the family may fetch his
instructions from the cities government, whereby he may proportionate the
peace of his private estate, by that of the Common.

L. VIVES.
THe Masters (a) are to endure] It is most difficult and laborious to rule
well, and it is as trouble-some to rule over unruly persons.

The grounds of the concord, and discord betweenethe Cities of Heaven and
Earth. CHAP. 17.
But they that live not according to faith, angle for all their peace in the
Sea of temporal profittes: Whereas the righteous live in full expectation of
the glories to come, using the occurences of this world, but as pilgrims, not
to abandon their course toward GOD for mortal respects, but thereby to
assist the infirmity of the corruptible flesh, and make it more able to
encounter with toil and trouble. Wherefore the necessaries of this life are
common, both to the faithful and the Infidel, and to both their families: but
the ends of their two vsages thereof are far different.

The faythlesse, worldly city, aymeth at earthly peace, and settleth the self
therein, only to have an uniformity of the Citizens wills in matters only
pertaining till mortality. And the Heavenly city, or rather that part thereof,
which is as yet a pilgrim on earth and lives by faith, uses this peace also:
as befitteth unto, it leave this mortal life wherein such a peace is requisite
and therefore lives (while it is here on earth) as if it were in captivity,
and having received the promise of redemption, and diverse spiritual gifts, as
seals thereof, it willingly obeys such laws of the temporal city as order
the things pertaining to the sustenance of this mortal life, to the end that
both the Cities might observe a peace in such things as are pertinent
hereunto. But because that the Earthly City has some members, whom the holy
scriptures utterly disallow, and who standing either to well affected to the
devils, or being illuded by them, believed that each thing had a peculiar
deity over it, and belonged to the charge of a several God: as the body to
one, the soul to another, and in the body it self the head to one, the neck
to another, and so of every member: as likewise of the soul, one had the wit,
another the learning, a third the wrath, a forth the desire: as also in other
necessaries or accidents belonging to man's life, the cattle, the corn, the
wine, the oil, the woods, the moneys, the navigations, the wars, the
marriages, the generations, each being a several charge unto a particular
power, whereas the citizens of the Heavenly state acknowledged but one only
God, to whom that worship, which is called (...) was peculiarly and solly
due: hence came it that the two hierachies, could not be combined in one
religion, but must needs dissent herein, so that the good part was feign to
bear the pride and persecution of the bad, but that their own multitude
sometimes, and the providence of GOD continually stood for their protection.

This celestial society while it is here on earth, increases it self out of
all languages, never respecting the temporal laws that are made against so
good and religious a practice: yet not breaking, but observing their diversity
in diverse nations, all which do tend unto the preservation of earthly peace, if
they oppose not the adoration of one only GOD. So that you see, the Heavenly
city observes and respects this temporal peace here on Earth, and the
coherence of men's wills in honest morality, as far as it may with a safe
conscience, yea and so far desires it, making use of it for the attaynement
of the peace eternal: which is so truly worthy of that name, as that the
orderly and uniform combination of men in the fruition of GOD, and of one
another in GOD, is to be accounted the reasonable creatures only peace, which
being once attained, mortality is banished, and life then is the (a) true life
indeed, nor is the carnal body any more an encombrance to the soul, by
corruptibility, but is now become spiritual, perfected, and entirely subject
unto the souerainety of the will.

This peace is that unto which the pilgrim in faith refers the other which
he has here in his pilgrimage, and then lives he according to faith, when
all that he does for the obteining hereof is by himself referred unto God,
and his neighbor with-all, because being a citizen, he must not be all for
himself, but sociable, in his life and actions.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) true life] Ennius used the Latin phrase Uita vitalis, to which
Augustine alludeth. Cicero.

That the suspended doctrine of the new Academy opposes the constancy of
Christianity. CHAP. 18.
AS for the new Academians, whom Varro auoutcheth to hold no certeinty but
this, That all things are uncertain: the Church of God detesteth these doubts,
as madnesses, having a most certain knowledge of the things it apprehends,
although but in small quantity, because of the corruptible body which is a
burden to the soul, and because as the Apostle says, We know (but) in part.
Besides, it believes the sense in objects, of which the mind judges by the
sensitive organs, because he is in a gross error that takes all trust from
them: It believes also the holy canonical scriptures, both old and new, from
which the just man has his faith, by which he lives, and wherein (a) we all
walk without doubt, as long as we are in our pilgrimage, and personally
absent from God: and this faith being kept firm, we may lawfully doubt of all
such other things as are not manifested unto us either by sense, reason,
scripture, nor testimony of grounded authority.

L. VIVES.
WE all walk (a) without doubt] We have no knowledge of it, but believe it as
firmly as what we see with our eyes.

Of the habit, and manners belonging to a Christian. CHAP. 19.
IT is nothing to the City of God what attire the citizens wear, or what
rules they observe, as long as they contradict not Gods holy precepts, but each
one keep the faith, the true path to salvation: and therefore when a
Philosopher becomes a Christian, they never make him alter his habit, nor
his manners, which are no hindrance to his religion, but his false opinions.
They respect not Varro's distinction of the Cynikes, as long as they forbear
unclean and intemperate actions. But as concerning the three kinds of life,
active, contemplative, and the means between both, although one may keep the
faith in any of those courses, yet there is a difference between the love of
the truth, and the duties of charity. One may not be so given to
contemplation, that he neglect the good of his neighbor: nor so far in love
with action that he forget divine speculation. In contemplation one may not
seek for idleness, but for truth: to benefit himself by the knowledge
thereof, and not to grudge to impart it unto others. In action one may not aim
at highness or honor, because all under the sun is mere vanity: but to
perform the work of a superior unto the true end, that is, unto the benefit
and salvation of the sub ect, as we said before. And this made the Apostle
say: If any man desire the office of a Bishop, he 1. Tim. 3. 1.
desires a good work: what this office was, he explaineth not; it is an
office of labor, and not of honor. (a) The Greek word signifies that he
that is herein installed, is to watch over his people that are under him:
Episcopus a Bishop, comes of (...) which is, over, and (...), which is, a
watching, or an attendance: so that we may very well translate (...), a
superintendent, to show that he is no true Bishop, who desires rather to be
Lordly himself, then profitable unto others. No man therefore is forbidden to
proceed in a lawdable form of contemplation. But to affect sovereignty, though
the people must be governed, and though the place be well discharged, yet
notwithstanding is (b) taxable of indecencie. Wherefore the love of truth
requires a holy retiredness: and the necessity of charity, a just employment,
which if it be not imposed upon us, we ought not to seek it, but be take our
selves wholly to the holy inquest of truth: but if we be called forth unto a
place, the law and need of charity binds us to undertake it. (c) Yet may we
not for all this, give over our first resolution, least we loose the
sweetness of that, and be surcharged with the weight of the other.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Greek word] of this before. lib. 1. cap. 9. (...) comes either of
(...), to consider, or of (...), which is, to visit. The Scripture, where the
seauenty translated (...) do read it, a watchman, as in Ezechiel, and Osee,
chap. 5. [where the Lord complains [The Louaine copy defective
that they had been a snare in their watching, and a net upon mount Thabor. As
if he had spoken of the Bishops of these times, who set snares for benefices,
and spread large netts for money, but not too wide wasted, least the coin
should scatter forth. (b) Taxable of indecencie] O but some fine brains have
now brought it so about, that bishoprics may not only be sued for, but even
bought and sold without any prejudice at all unto this law.] (c) Yet may we
not] He shows that a Bishop should converse with the holy scriptures thus
far.]
often, and draw himself home unto God now and then, from all his
businesses, living (if he did well) as a pilgrim of Gods in this life, and one
that had a charge of Gods, and his own souls in hand, not any temporal
trash, and yet ought he not to forsake his ministry, to which he should be
preserred by an heavenly calling, and not by an heavy pursse.

Hope, the bliss of the heavenly Citizens, during this life. CHAP. 20.
THen therefore is the good of the Holy society perfect, when their peace is
established in eternity: not running any more in successions as mortal men do
in life and death, one to another: but confirmed unto them together with their
immortality for ever, without touch of the least imperfection. What is he
that would not account such an estate most happy, or comparing it with that
which man has here upon earth, would not avouch this later to be most
miserable, were it never so well fraught with temporal conueniences? yet he
that has the latter in possession, and applies it all unto the use of his
hope^ firm and faithful object: the former, may not unfitly be called happy
already, but that is rather in his expectation of the first, then in his
fruition of the later. For this possession without the other hope, is a false
beatitude, and a most true misery. For herein is no use of the minds truest
goods, because there wants the true wisdom, which in the prudent discretion,
resolute performance, temperate restraint, and just distribution of these
things, should refer his intent in all these, unto that end, where God shall
be all in all, where eternity shall be firm, and peace most perfect and
absolute.

Whether the Cit^y of Rome had ever a true commonwealth, according to Scipio's
definition of a commonwealth, in Tully. CHAP. 21.
NOw it is time to perform a promise which I passed in the second book of
this work: and that was, to show that Rome never had a true commonwealth, as
Scipio defines one in Tullyes book De Repub. his Definition was, A
commonwealth is the estate of the people. Respub. est res populi. If this be
true, Rome never had any, for it never had an estate of the people, which he
defines the commonwealth by: For, he defines the people to be a multitude,
united in one consent of law and profit: what he means by a consent of
law, he shows himself: and shows there-by that a state cannot stand
without justice: so that where true justice wants, there can be no law. For
what law does, justice does, and what is done unjustly, is done unlawfully.
For we may not imagine men's unjust decrees to be laws: all men defining law
to (a) arise out of the fountain of justice; and that that same unjust
assertion of some, is utterly false: (b) That is law which is profitable unto
the greatest. So then, where justice is not, there can be no society united
in one consent of law, therefore no people, according to Scipios definitions
in Tully. If no people, then no estate of the people, but rather of a confused
multitude, unworthy of a peoples name. If then the commonwealth be an estate
of the people, and that they be no people that are not united in one consent
of law: nor that no law, which groundeth not upon justice: then follows it
needs, that where no justice is, there no commonwealth is. Now then ad
propositu^: Justice is a virtue distributing unto every one his due. What
justice is that then, that takes man from the true God, and gives him unto
the damned fiends? is this distribution of due? is he that takes away thy
possessions, and gives them to one that has no claim to them guilty of
in-iustice, and is not he so likewise, that takes himself away from his
Lord God, and gives himself to the service of the devil? There are witty
and powerful disputations in those books De repub. for justice against
in-iustice. Wherein, it having first been argued for in-iustice, against
justice, and auerred that a state could not stand without in-iustice; and this
brought as a principal confirmation hereof, that it is in-iustice for man to
rule ouer-man, and yet if the City whose dominion is so large, should not
observe this form of in-iustice, she could never keep the provinces under.
Unto this it was answered on the behalf of justice, that this was a just
course, it being profitable for such to serve, and for their good, to wit,
when the power to do hurt is taken from the wicked, they will carry themselves
better being curbed, because they carried themselves so badly before they were
curbed. To confirm this answer this notable example was alleged, as being
fetched from nature it self: If it were vn^t, to rule, why does God rule over
man, the soul over the body, reason over lust, and all the ^des other vicious
affects? This example teaches plain that it is good for some to serve in
particular, and it is good for all to serve God in general. And the mind
serving God, is lawful Lord over the body: so is reason being subject unto
God, over the lusts and other vices. Wherefore if man serve not God, what
justice can be thought to be in him? seeing that if he serve not him the
soul has neither lawful souerainty over the body, nor the reason over the
affects: now if this justice cannot befound in own man, no more can it then in
a whole multitude of such like men. Therefore amongst such there is not that
consent of law which makes a multitude a people, whose estate makes a
commonwealth; What need I speak of the profit, that is named in the
definition of a people? for although that none live profitably that live
wickedly, that serve not God, but the Devils (who are so much the more wicked
in that they being most filthy creatures, dare exact sacrifices as if they were
gods:) yet I think that what I have said of the consent of law may serve to
show that they were no people whose estate might make a weale-publike, having
no justice amongst them. If they say they did not serve Devils, but holy gods,
what need we rehearse that here which we said so often before? who is he that
has read over this work unto this chapter, and yet doubts whether they were
devils that the Romans worshipped or no? unless he be either senslessly
blockish, or shamelessely conten^s? But to leave the powers that they offered
unto, take this place of holy ^it for all: He that sacrifices unto gods,
shall be rooted out, but unto one God alone. He that taught this in such
threatening manner will have no gods sacrificed unto, be they good or be they
bad.

L. VIVES.
LAw to (a) arise.] Cic, de leg. lib. 1. It was not the peoples command (says
he) nor Princes decrees, nor judges sentences, but the very rule of nature that
gave original unto law. And again. lib. 2. I see that the wisest men held
that law came neither from man's inventions nor ^ar decrees, but is an eternal
thing, ruling all the world by the knowledge of commanding and forbidding: and
so they auoutched the high law of all to be the intellect of that great God who
sway^ all by compulsion and prohibition. Thus Tully, out of Plato, and thus the
Stoikes held ^st Epicurus who held that nature accounted nothing just, but
fear did. Seen. Epist. 16. (...) holy law that lies recorded in every man's
conscience, the ciuilians call right and reason (...) and bonum.

So that Ulpian defines law to be aers aequi and boni, an art of right and
reason, making him ^ly a Lawyer that can skill of this right and reason, and
such that as Tully saydof Sulpitius, ^re, all unto equity, and had rather end
controversies then procure them, that peace (...) be generally kept amongst
men, and each be at peace with himself, which is the (...) joy of nature.

^ely the lawyers of ancient times were appointed for this end, to decide and
finish con^s, as when I was little better then a child, I remember I hard mine
uncle Henry (...) read in his admired lectures upon Justinians Institutions.
Francesco Craneueldio and I had much talk hereof, of late, who is a famous and
profound ciuilian, and in truth he made a great complaint in my hearing of the
quirkes, and cousonages that the lawyers of this age do hatch and bring forth.
Truly he is a man of a rare conceit, and of that harmless carriage withal,
that converse with him seven years, and yet you shall never hear offensive
term come out of his mouth. Mark Laurino, Deane of S. Donatians in Bruges
was with us now and then: if learning had many such friends as he, it would
bear an higher sail then it does. John Fennius also, of the same house, was
with us sometimes, a youth naturally ordained to learning, and so he applies
himself. (b) That is law.] So did Thrasibulus define law. Plato de Rep. lib.
1. where Socrates confuteth him, but truly the law that is in ordinary
practice, is most of this nature.

Whether Christ, the Christians God be he unto whom only sacrifice is to be
offered. CHAP. 22.
But they may reply: who is that God? or how prove you him to be worthy of all
the Romans sacrifices, and none besides him to have any part? oh it is a
sign of great blindness, to be yet to learn who that God is! It is he whose
prophets foretold what our own eyes saw effected: it is he that told
Abraham, In thy seed shall all the nations be blessed, which the remainders of
the haters of Christianity do know, whether they will or no, to have been
fulfilled in Christ, ^escended from Abraham in the flesh. It is that God whose
spirit spoke in (...) whose prophecies the whole Church beholds fulfilled:
the whole C^ spread over the face of the whole earth, beholds them, and in that
were t^ (...) filled, which I related in my former books. It is that God whom
Varro cal^h the Romans Jove, though he know not what he says, yet this I
add because that so great a scholar thought him to be neither no God at all,
nor one of the meanest, for he thought that this was the great God of all.
Briefly, it is eu^n that God whom that learned Philosopher Prophiry (albeit he
was a deadly foe to Christianity) acknowledged to be the highest God, even by
the Oracles of those whom he called the inferior gods.

Porphiry his relation of the Oracles touching Christ. CHAP. 23.
FOr he in his books which he entitleth (...), The divinity of Philosopoy
wherein he sets down the Oracles answers in things belonging to
Philosophy, has something to this purpose, and thus it is, from the Greek:
One went (says he) unto the Oracle, and asked unto what God he should
sacrifice for to obtain his wives conversion from Christianity: Apollo
answered him thus: Thou may sooner write legible letters upon the water, or
get thee wings to fly through air like a bird, then revoke thy wife from her
polluted opinion. Let her run after her mad opinions, as long as she list:
let her honor that dead God with her false lamentations, whom the wise and
well advised judges condemned, and whom a shameful death upon the cross
dispatched. Thus far the Oracle, the Greek is in verse but our language will
not bear it. After these verses, Prophiry adds this: Behold how remedylesse
their erroneous belief is: because as Apollo said (quoth he) the Jews do
receive God with means greater then others. Hear you this? he disgraceth and
obscureth Christ, and yet says, the Jews receive God, for so he interprets
the oracles verses, where they say that Christ was condemned by well advised
judges, as though he had been lawfully condemned and justly executed. This
lying Priests oracle let him look unto, and believe if he like it: but it may
very well be that the Oracle gave no such answer, but that this is a mere
fiction of his. How he reconciles the oracles, and agrees with himself, we
shall see by and by. But by the way, here he says, that the Jews, as the
receivers of God, judged aright in doing Christ to so ignominious and cruel a
death. So then to the Jews God said well in saying, He that sacrifices unto
many Gods shall be rooted out, but unto one God only. But come on, let us go
to more manifest matter, and here what he makes of the Jews God: He asked
Apollo which was better, the word, or the law: And he answered thus (says
he) and then he adds the answer, I will relate as much of it as needs):
Upon God the Creator, and upon the King before all things, who makes heaven
and earth, the sea, and hell, yea and all the Gods to tremble: the law is
their father, whom the holy Hebrews do adore. This glory does Porphyry give
the Hebrew God, from his God Apollo, that the very deities do tremble before
him. So then this God having said, He that sacrifices unto many Gods shall
be rooted out, I wonder that Porphyry was not afraid to be rooted out for
offering to so many Gods. Nay this fellow speaks well of Christ afterward,
as forgetting the reproach he offered him before: as if in their dreams, his
Gods had scorned CHRIST, and being awake, commended him, and acknowledged his
goodness. Finally, as if he meant to speak some marvelous matter: It may
exceed all belief (says he) which I am now to deliver: the Gods affirmed
CHRIST to be a man most godly, and ^ortalized for his goodness, giving him
great commendations: but for the Chri^ns, they auouche them to be persons
stained with all corruption and error: and give them all the foul words that
may be. Then he relates the Oracles which blaspheme the Christian religion,
and afterward, Hecate (says he) being asked if Christ were GOD, replied
thus: His soul being severed from his body became immortal; but it wandereth
about void of all wisdom: it was the soul of a most worthy man, whom now
those that forsake the truth, do worship. And then he adds his own sayings
upon this oracle, in this manner. The goddess therefore called him a most
godly man, and that the deluded Christians do worship his soul, being made
immortal after death, as other godly souls are. Now being asked why he was
condemned then? she answered: His body was condemned to torments, but his
soul sits above in heaven, and gives all those souls unto error by
desteny, who cannot attain the gifts of the Gods, or come to the knowledge of
immortal love. And therefore are they hated of the Gods, because they neither
acknowledge them, nor receive their gifts, but are destined unto error by him:
now he himself (...) godly, and went up to heaven as godly men do.
Therefore blaspheame not him, but pity the poor souls whom he has bound
in error.

What man is there so fond that cannot observe that these oracles are either
directly feigned by this crafty foe of Christianity, or else the Devils own
^kes to this end, that in praising of Christ, they might seem truly to
repre^d the Christian profession? and so if they could; to stop man's entrance
into Christianity, the sole way unto salvation? for they think it no prejudice
to their ^y-formed deceit, to be believed in praising of Christ as long as
they be bel^ed also in dispraysing the Christian, so that he that believes
them, must be a commender of Christ, and yet a contemner of his religion. And
thus although he honor Christ, yet shall not Christ free him from the
clutches of the Devil, because they give Christ such a kind of praise, as who
so believes to be true, shall be far from true Christianity, and rather
then other-wise, of (b) Photinus his heresy, who held Christ to be but only
man, and no God at all: so that such a believer should never be saved by
Christ, nor cleared of the devils fowling nets.

But we will neither believe Apollo in his deprauation, nor Hecate in her
commendation of Christ. He will have Christ a wicked man, and justly condemned,
she will have him a most godly man, and yet but only man. But both agree in
this, they would have no christians, because all but christians are in their
clutches. But let this Philosopher, or they that give credence to those oracles
against christianity, if they can reconcile Apollo and Hecate, and make them
both tell one tale, either in Christ's praise or dispraise. Which if they could
do, yet would we avoid them, as deceitful devils both in their good words
and in their bad. But seeing this God and this goddess cannot agree about
Christ, truly men have no reason to believe or obey them in forbidding
christianity. Truly either Porphyry or Hecate in these commendations of Christ,
affirming that he destinied the christians to error, yet goes about to show
the causes of this error; which before I relate, I will ask him this one
question: If Christ did predestinate all christians unto error, whether did he
this wittingly, or against his will? If he did it wittingly, how then can he
be just? if it were against his will, how can he then be happy? But now to
the causes of this error. There are some spirits of the earth, (says he)
which are under the rule of the evil Daemones. These, the Hebrews wise men,
(whereof JESUS was one, as the divine Oracle, declared before, does testify)
forbad the religious persons to meddle with-all, aduising them to attend the
celestial powers, and especially God the Father, with all the reverence they
possibly could. And this (says he) the Gods also do command us, as we have
already shown, how they admonish us to reverence GOD in all places. But the
ignorant and wicked, having no divine gift, nor any knowledge of that great
and immortal Jove, nor following the precepts of the gods or good men, have
cast all the deities at their heels, choosing not only to respect, but even
to reverence those depraved Daemones. And where-as they profess the service of
GOD, they do nothing belonging to his service. For GOD is the father of all
things, and stands not in need of anything: and it is well for us to exhibit
him his worship in chastity, justice, and the other virtues, making our whole
life a continual prayer unto him, by our search and imitation of him. (c) For
our search of him (quoth he) purifieth us, and our imitation of him, deifieth
the effects in our selves. Thus well has he taught God the Father unto us,
and us how to offer our service unto him. The Hebrew Prophets are full of such
holy precepts, concerning both the commendation and reformation of the Saints
lives. But as concerning Christianity, there he erreth, and slandereth, as
far as his devils pleasure is, whom he holds deities: as though it were
so hard a matter, out of the obscenities practiced and published in their
Temples, and the true worship and doctrine presented be fore GOD in our
Churches, to discern where manners were reformed and where they were ruined.
Who but the devil himself could inspire him with so shameless a
falsification, as to say, that the Christians do rather honor then detest the
Devils whose adoration was forbidden by the Hebrews? No, that God whom the
Hebrews adored, will not allow any sacrifice unto his holiest Angels, (whom
we that are pilgrims on earth, do not-with-standing love and reverence as
most sanctified members of the City of heaven) but forbids it directly in
this thundering threate: He that sacrifices unto Gods, shall be rooted (...),
and least it should be thought he meant only of the earthly spirits, whom
this fellow calls the lesser powers, (d) and whom the scripture also calls
gods, (not of the Hebrews, but the Heathens) as is evident in that one place,
Psalm. 96. verse 5. For all the Gods of the Heathen, are Devils: least any
should imagine that the foresaid prohibition extended no further then these
devils, or that it concerned not the offering to the celestial spirits, he
adds: but unto the Lord alone, but unto one God only: Some may take the
words, nisi domino soli, to be unto the Lord, the sun: and so understand the
place to be meant of Apollo, but [the ori^ ^nd] the (e) Greek translations
do subvert all such misprision. So then the Hebrew God, so highly commended by
this Philosopher, gave the Hebrews a ^awe in their own language, not obscure
or uncertain, but already dispersed through-out all the world, wherein this
clause was literally contained. He that sacrifices unto Gods shall be rooted
out, but unto the Lord alone. What need we make any further search into the
law and the Prophets concerning this? nay what need we search at all, they are
so plain and so manifold, that what need I stand aggravating my disputation
with any multitudes of those places, that exclude all powers of heaven and
earth from perticipating of the honors due unto God alone? Behold this one
place, spoaken in brief, but in powerful manner by the mouth of that GOD
whom the wisest Ethnicks do so highly extol; let us mark it, fear it, and
observe it, least our eradication ensue. He that sacrifices unto more gods
then that true and only LORD, shall be rooted out: yet God himself is far
from needing any of our services, but (f) all that we do herein is for the
good of our own souls. Here-vpon the Hebrews say in their holy Psalms* I
have said unto the Lord, thou art my GOD, my well-dooing ^th not unto thee: No,
we our selves are the best and most excellent sacrifice Psalm. 16. 2.
that he can have offered him. It is his City whose mystery we celebrate
(...) ^ch oblations as the faithful do full well understand, as I said once
already. For the ceasing of all the typical offerings that were exhibited by
the Jews, and the ordeyning of one sacrifice, to be offered through the whole
world from East to West (as now we see it is) was prophesied long before, from
GOD, by the mouths of holy Hebrews: whom we have cited, as much as needed,
in convenient places of this our work.

Therefore, to conclude, where there is not this justice that GOD rules all
alone over the society that obeys him by grace, and yields to his pro^tion
of sacrifice unto all but himself, and where in every member belong^ to this
heavenly society, the soul is lord over the body, and all the bad af^ thereof,
in the obedience of GOD, and an orderly form, so that all the (...) (as well
as one) live according* to faith (g) which works by love, in ^ch a man loves
GOD as he should, and his neighbor as himself: (...) this justice is not,
is no society of men combined in one uniformity of (...) and profit:
consequently, no true state popular, (if that definition hold ^ch) and finally
no commonwealth; for where the people have no certain (...), the general
has no exact form.

L. VIVES.
(...).] That is of Oraculous Phisosophy, in which work he recites Apollos
Orracles, and others, part whereof we have cited before. (b) Photinus.] He
was condemned by the counsel of Syrmium, being confuted by Sabinus Bishop of
Ancyra. Cassiod. Hist tripart. He followed the positions of Samosatenus, so
that many accounted of both these heresies all as one. (c) For our search.]
Search is here a mental inquisition, whereby the mind is illustrate, and
purged from dark ignorance, and after it has found God, studieth how to grow
pur^, and divine, like him. (d) And whom the scripture.] The name of God, is
principally his, of whom, by whom, and in whom, al things have their
existence: showing (in part) the nature and virtue of that incomprehensible
Trine. Secondly and (as one may say) abusiuely, the Scripture calls them,
gods, unto whom the word is given, as our Savior testifies in the Gospel:
and so are the Heavenly powers also called, as seems by that place of the
Psalm: God stands in the assembly of the gods. etc. Thirdly and (not
abusiuely but) falsely, the Devils are called gods also. All the gods of the
heathen, are Devils. Origin, in Cantie. This last question Augustine takes
from the seauenty, for Hierome translateth it from the Hebrew, Idols, and not
Devils. Psa 96. 5. (e) The Greek.] Where we read (...) nor is this
superfluously added of Augustine, for many Philosophers, and many nations both
held and honored the Sun only for God, and referred the power of all the
rest unto it alone, Macrob. (f) All that we do.] Our well doing benefiteth not
God, nor betters him, so that there is nothing due unto us for being good: but
we our selves owe God for all, by whose grace it is that we are good. (g)
Which works by.] It is dead, and lacks all the power, and vigor, when it
proceeds not in the works of charity.

A definition of a people, by which, both the Romans and other kingdoms may
challenge themselves commonweals. CHAP. 24.
But omit the former difinition of a people, and take this: A people is a
multitude of reasonable creatures conjoined in a general communication of those
things it respects: and them to discern the state of the people, you must
first consider what those things are. But what ever they be, where there is a
multitude of men, conjoined in a common fruition of what they respect, there,
may fitly be said to be a people: the better that their respects are, the
better are they themselves, and other-wise, the worse. By this definition,
Rome had a people, and consequently a commonweal: what they embraced at the
first, and what afterward, what goodness they changed into bloudinesse, what
concord they forsook for seditions, confederacies and civil wars, History
can testify, and we (in part) have already related? Yet this does not bar
them the name of a people, nor their state of the style of a commonwealth, as
long as they bear this our last definition vnin-fringed. And what I have said
of them, I may say of the Athenians, the Greeks in general, the Egyptians,
and the Assirian Babilonians, were there dominions great or little, and so of
all nations in the world. For in the City of the wicked, where GOD does not
govern and men obey, sacrificing unto him alone, and consequently where the
soul does not rule the body, nor reason the passions, there generally wants
the virtue of true justice.

That there can be no true virtue, where true religion wants. CHAP. 25.
FOr though there be a seeming of these things, yet if the soul, and the
reason serve not God, as he has taught them how to serve him, they can never
have true dominion over the body, nor over the passions: for how can that soul
have any true mean of this decorum, that knows not God, nor serves his
greatness, but runs a whoring with the unclean and filthy devils? No,
those things which she seems to account virtues, and thereby to sway her
affects, if they be not all referred unto God, are indeed rather vices then
virtues. For although some hold them to be real virtues, (a) when they are
affected only for their own respect, and nothing else; yet even so they
incur vainglory, and so loose their true goodness. For as it is not of the
flesh, but above the flesh, that animates the body. So it is not of man, but
above man, which deifies the mind of man, yea, and of all the powers of the
heavens.

L. VIVES.
WHen (a) they] The Stoikes held virtue to be her own price, content with it
self, and to be affected only for it self. This is frequent in Seneca, and
in Tullies Stoicysmes, and Plato seems to confirm it. Tully setts down two
things that are to be affected merely for themselves: perfection of internal
goodness, and that good which is absolutely external, as parents, children,
friends, etc. These are truly dear unto us, in themselves, but nothing so as
the others are. De finib. lib. 5. It is a question in divinity, whether the
virtues are to be desired merely for themselves. Ambrose affirms it. In
Epist. ad Galat. Augustine denies it. De Trinit. lib. 13. Peter Lumbard holds
them both to be worthy of love in themselves, and also to have a necessary
reference unto eternal beatitude. But indeed, they are so bound unto Gods
precepts, that he that puts not Gods love in the first place, cannot love
them at all. Nor can he so love them for themselves, that he prefer them
before God their author, and their founder, or equal the love of them, with
the love of him: their nature is to lift the eyes of him that admireth them,
unto GOD, so that he that seeks for themselves, is by them even led and
directed unto him, the consummation unto which they all do tend. But Saint
Augustine in this place, speaks of the Gentiles, whose virtues desiring
external rewards, were held base and ignominious: but if they kept
themselves, content with their own sole fruition, then were they approved.
but this was the first step to arrogance, by reason that hereby they that
had them, thought none so good as themselves.

The peace of Gods enemies, useful to the piety of his friends as long as
their earthly pilgrimage lasts. CHAP. 26.
WHerefore, as the soul is the fleshes life, so is God the beatitude of man,
as the Hebrews holy writ affirms (a) Blessed is the people whose God is
Psa. 144. 15
the Lord: wretched then are they that are strangers to that GOD, and yet (...)
those a kind of allowable peace, but that they shall not have for ever,
because they used it not well when they had it. But that they should have it
(...) this life is for our good also: because that during our commixtion with
Babylon, we our selves make use of her peace, and faith does free the people
of God at length out of her, yet so, as in the mean time we live as pilgrims
in her. And therefore the Apostle admonished the Church, to pray for the Kings
and Potentates of that earthly City, adding this reason; That we may lead a
quiet life in all godliness and (b) charity. And the Prophet Hieremy,
foretelling the captivity 1. Tim 2. 2
of Gods ancient people commanding them (from the Lord) to go peaceably and
patiently to Babylon, advised them also to pray, saying, For in her peace,
shall be your peace, meaning that temporal peace which is common both to good
and bad.

L. VIVES.
BLessed (a) is] Psalm. 144. 15. Where the Prophet having reckoned up all the
goods of fortune, children, wealth, peace, prosperity, and all in abundance,
at length he concludes thus: [they have sayd] Blessed are the people that be
so: yea, [but] blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. (b) Charity] In
the Apostle, it is honesty, (...).

The peace of Gods servants, the fullness whereof, it is impossible in this
life, to comprehend. CHAP. 27.
But as for our proper peace, we have it double with God: here below by faith,
and here-after above (a) by sight. But all the peace we have here, be it
public, or peculiar, is rather a solace to our misery, then any assurance of
our felicity. And for our righteousness, although it be truly such, because
the end is the true good whereunto it is referred, yet as long as we live
here, it consists (b) rather of sins remission, then of virtues perfection,
witness that prayer which all Gods pilgrims use* and every member of his holy
City, crying daily unto him; Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them
that trespass against us. (c) Nor does this prayer benefit them whose faith,
wanting works, is dead, but them whose faith works by love: for, because our
reason though it be subject unto God yet as long as it is in the corruptible
body, which burdeneth the soul, cannot have the affects under perfect
obedience, therefore the iustest man stands in need of this prayer. For though
that reason have the conquest, it is not without combat. And still one touch of
infirmity or other, creeps upon the best conqueror, even when he hopes that
he holds all viciousness under, making him fall either by some vain word, or
some inordinate thought, if it bring him not unto actual error. And therefore
as long as we overrule sin, our peace is imperfect: because both the affects
not as yet conquered, are subdued by a dangerous conflict, and they that are
under already, do deny us all security, and keep us doing in a continual
and careful command. So then, in all these temptations (whereof God said in a
word: (d) Is not the life of man a temptation upon earth?) who dare say he
lives so, as he need not say to God, Forgive us our trespasses? none but a
proud soul. Nor is he mighty, but madly vainglorious, that in his own
righteousness will resist him, who gives grace to the humble, whereupon it
is written, God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble. Man's
justice therefore is this: to have God his Lord, and himself his subject, his
soul master over his 1. Pet. 4.
body, and his reason over sin, either by subduing it or resisting it: and to
entreat God both for his grace for merit, and his pardon for sin, and
lastly to be grateful for all his bestowed graces. But in that final peace
unto which all man's peace and righteousness on earth has reference,
immortality and incorruption do so refine nature from viciousness, that there
we shall have no need of reason to rule over sin, for there shall be no
sin at all there, but GOD shall rule man, and the soul the body: obedience
shall there be as pleasant and easy, as the state of them that live shall be
glorious, and happy. And this shall all have unto all eternity, and shall be sure
to have it so, and therefore the blessedness of this peace, or the peace of
this blessedness, shall be the fullness and perfection of all goodness.

L. VIVES.
BY (a) sight] Being then, face to face with GOD. (b) Rather of sinnes] For the
greatest part of our goodness is not our well doing, but Gods remission of our
sins. (c) Nor does this] For as a medecin, otherwise wholesome) cannot
benefit a dead body: so this parcel of prayer can do him as little good that
says it, if in the mean while he be not friends with his brother. (d) Is
not mans] Our vulgar translation is. Is there not an appointed time for man
upon earth, but Saint Aug. follows the LXX. as he uses. To live (says
Seneca) is to wage continual war. So that those that are tossed up and
down in difficulties, and adventure upon the roughest dangers, are valourous
men, and captains of the camp: whereas those that sit at rest whilst others
take pains, are tender turtles, and buy their quiet with disgrace.

The end of the wicked. CHAP. 28.
But on the other side, they that are not of this society, are desteined to
eternal misery, called the second death, because there, even the soul, being
deprived of GOD, seems not to live, much less the body, bound in everlasting
torments. And therefore, this second death shall be so much the more cruel, in
that it shall never have end. But seeing war is the contrary of peace, as
misery is unto bliss, and death to life, it is a question what kind of war
shall reign as then amongst the wicked, to answer and oppose the peace of the
Godly. But mark only the hurt of war, and it is plainly apparent to be nothing
but the adverse dispose, and contentious conflict of things between
themselves. What then can be worse then that, where the will is such a foe to
the passion, and the passion to the will, that they are for ever
in-suppressible, and ir-reconcileable? and where nature, and pain shall hold
an eternal conflict, and yet the one never master the other? In our conflicts
here on earth, either the pain is victor, and so death expels sense of it,
or nature conquers, and expells the pain. But there, pain shall afflict
eternally, and nature shall suffer eternally, both enduring to the continuance
of the inflicted punishment. But seeing that the good, and the badde, are in
that great judgment to pass unto those ends, the one to be sought for, and
the other to be fled from: by Gods permission and assistance I will in the
next book following, have a little discourse of that last day, and that
terrible i^gement.

Finis lib. 19.
THE CONTENTS OF THE twentieth book of the City of God.
1. Gods i^dgments continually effected: his last judgment the proper subject
of this book following. 2. The change of human estates, ordered by Gods
unsearchable judgments. 3. Salomons disputation in Eclesiastes, concerning
those goods, which both the just, and unjust do share in. 4. The Authors
resolution, in this dicourse of the judgment, to produce the testimonies of
the New Testament first, and then of the Old. 5. Places of Scripture proouing
that there shall be a day of judgment at the worlds end. 6. What the first
resurrection is, and what the second. 7. Of the two Resurrections; what may be
thought of the thousand years mentioned in Saint John's revelation. 8. Of the
binding and loosing of the devil. 9. What is meant by Christ's reigning a
thousand year with the Saints, and the difference between that, and his
eternal reign. 10. An answer to the objection of some, affirming that
resurrection is proper to the body only and not to the Soul. 11. Of Gog and
Magog, whom the devil (at the worlds end) shall stir up against the church
of God. 12. Whether the fire falling from heaven, and devouring them, imply the
last torments of the wicked. 13. Whether it be a thousand years until the
persecution under Antechrist. 14. Satan and his followers condemned: a
recapitulation of the Resurrection, and the last judgment. 15. Of the dead,
whom the sea, and death, and hell, shall give up to judgment. 16. Of the new
Heaven and the new Earth. 17. Of the glorification of the church, after death,
for ever. 18. Saint Peter's doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. 19. Saint
Paul's words to the Thessalonians* Of the manifestation of Antechrist, whose
times shall immediately fore-run the day of the LORD. 20. Saint Paul's doctrine
of the resurrection of the dead. 21. Esaias his doctrine concerning the
judgment and resurrection. 22. How the Saints shall go forth to see the pains
of the wicked 23. Daniels prophecy of Antichrist; of the judgment, and of the
kingdom of the Saints. 24. David's prophecies of the worlds end, and the last
judgment. 25. Malachies prophecy of the judgment, and of such as are to be
purged by fire. 26. Of the Saints offerings, which God shall accept of, as in
the old time, and the years before. 27. Of the separation of the good from the
bad* in the end of the last judgment. 28. Moses law to be spiritually
understood, for fear of dangerous error. 29. Helias his coming to convert the
Jews before the judgment. 30. That it is not evident in the Old Testament, in
such places as say, God shall judge: that it shall be in the person of Christ,
but only by some of the testimonies, where the LORD GOD speaks.
FINIS.
THE TVVENTITH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine Bishop of
Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Gods judgments continually effected: His last judgment the proper subject of
this book following. CHAP. 1.
BEing now to discourse of the day of GODS last judgment, against the
faithless, and the wicked, we must lay down holy scriptures first, for the
foundation of our following structure: Which some believe not, but oppose them
with fond and frivolous arguments, wresting them either quite, unto another
purpose, or utterly denying them to contain any thing divine. For I do not
think that man lives, who understanding them as they are spoken, and
believing that GOD inspired them into sanctified men, will not give his full
assent unto what they auerre, but he must needs profess as much, be he
never so ashamed or afraid to avouch it, or never so obstinate that he would
conceal it, and study to defend mere and known falsehood against it.
Wherefore, the whole church believes, and professes, that Christ is to come
from heaven to judge both the quick and the dead, and this we call the day of
GODS judgment, the last time of all: for how many days this judgment will
hold, we know not, but the scripture uses Day for Time, very often, as none
that uses to read it but well discerns it. And we, when we speak of this
day do add last, the last day, because that GOD does judge at this present
and has done ever since he set man forth of paradise, and chased our first
parents from the tree of life for their offenses, nay from the time that he
cast out the transgressing Angels, whose envious Prince does all that he
can now to ruin the souls of men. It is his judgment that both men and
devils do live in such miseries and perturbations in air and earth, fraught
with nothing but evils and errors.

And if no man had offended, it had been his good judgment that man and all
reasonable creatures had lived in perfect beatitude and eternal coherence with
the LORD their GOD. So that he judges not only men, and devils, unto misery,
in general, but he censureth every particular soul for the works it has
performed out of freedom of will. For the devils pray that they may not be
tormented, neither does GOD unjustly either in sparing them or punnishing them.
And man, sometimes in public, but continually in secret, feels the hand of
Almighty GOD, punnishing him for his trespasses and misdeedes, either in this
life, or in the next: though no man can do well* without the help of GOD,
nor any diuill can do hurt, without his just permission. For as the Apostle
says: Is there unrighteousness in GOD? GOD forbid: and in another place.
Unsearchable Romans 9. 14. Romans 11, 33.
are his judgments, and his ways past finding out. I intend not therefore in
this book to meddle with Gods ordinary daily judgments, or with those at
first, but with that great and last Judgment of his, (by his gracious
permission) when CHRIST shall come from heaven, To judge both the quick* and
the dead, for that is properly called the Iudgement-day: because (a) there
shall be no place for ignorant complaint, upon the happiness of the bad and the
misery of the good. The true and perfect felicity in that day shall be assured
only to the good, and eternal torment shall then show it self as an
everlasting inheritance only for the evil.

L. VIVES.
THere (a) shall be no place for] In this life, many men stumble at the good
fortunes and prosperity of the badde, and the sad misfortunes of the good; They
that know not that fortunes goods are no goods at all, (as the wicked do
believe they are) do wonder at this. But indeed, the wicked never enjoy true
good, nor does true evil ever befall the good. For the names of goods and
evils, that are given to those things that these men admire, are in far
other respect then they are aware of, and that makes* their fond judgments
condemn the ordering of things. But at the last Judgment of CHRIST, where the
truth of good and bad shall appear, then shall good fall only to the
righteous, and bad to the wicked: and this shall be there, universally
acknowledged.

The change of humane estates, ordered by Gods unsearchable judgments. CHAP.
2.
But here on earth, the evils, endured by the good men instruct us to endure
them with patience, and the goods enjoyed by the wicked, advise us not to
affect them with immoderation. Thus in the things where GODS judgments are not
to be discovered, his counsel is not to be neglected. We know not why GOD
makes this bad man rich, and that good man poor: that he should have joy
whose deserts we hold worthier of pains, and he pains, whose good life we
imagine to merit content: that the Judges corruption or testimonies falsenesse
should send the innocent away condemned, much more vn-cleared; and the
injurious foe should depart, revenged, much more unpunished: that the wicked
man should live sound, (...) the Godly lie bedde-ridde: that lusty youths
should turn thieves, and those that never did hurt in word, be plagued with
extremity of sickness* That silly infantes, of good use in the world, should
be cut off by vntime^ (...), while they that seem unworthy ever to have
been borne, attain long (...) happy life: that the guilty should be
honored, and the Godly oppressed, and such like as these; Oh who can stand to
collect or recount them!

These now* albeit they kept this seemingly absurd order continually, that in
(...) whole life (wherein as the Prophet says in the Psalm, Man is like to
(...), and his days like a shadow that vanishes) the wicked alone should pos^
Psalm. 144* 4
those temporal goods, and the good only suffer evils, yet might this (...)
referred to GODS just judgments, yea even to his mercies: that such (...)
^ught not for eternal felicity, might either for their malice, be justly
(...) by this transitory happiness, or by GODS mercy be a comfort unto the
good, and that they being not to loose the bliss eternal, might for (...)
while be excercised by crosses temporal, either for the correction of (...),
or (a) augmentation of their virtues.

(...) now, seeing that not only the good are afflicted, and the badde ex^
(which seems injustice) but the good also often enjoy good, and the (...),
evil; this proves GODS judgments more inscrutable, and his (...) more
unsearchable. Although then we see no cause why GOD ^ld do thus or thus; he
in whom is all wisdom, and justice, and no ^nesse, nor rashness, nor
injustice: yet here we learn that we may (...) esteem much of those goods,
or misfortunes, which we see the badde share with the righteous. But to seek
the good, peculiar to the one, and to a^ the evil reserved for the other.

And when we come to that great judgment, properly called the day of doom,
(...) (...) consummation of time; there we shall not only see all things
apparent, but ^ledge all the judgments of GOD from the first to the last, to
be firme^ ^ded upon justice. And there we shall learn, and know this also,
why (...) judgments are generally incomprehensible unto us, and how just his
^nts are in that point also: although already indeed it is manifest unto
^full, that we are justly, as yet, ignorant in them all, or at least in the
(...) them.

L. VIVES.
(...) augmentation] That virtue might have means to exercise her powers, for
she (...) ^ction, and leaving that, she languisheth, nay even perishes, as
fire does, which (...) ^ell to work upon, dies. But practice her upon objects
of adverse fortune, and she (...) out her own perfection.

Salomons disputation in Ecclesiastes, concerning those goods which both the
just and the unjust do share in. CHAP. 3.
(...), the wisest King that ever reigned over Israel, begins his book cal^
(a) Ecclesiastes, (which the Jews themselves hold for Canonical) in this
Eccl. 1. 2
(...): (b) Vanity of Vanities, all is vanity. What remains unto man of all
^uells which he suffers under the Sun? Unto which, he annex^ torments
and tribulations of this declining world, and the short ^ift courses of time,
wherein nothing is firm, nothing constant. (...) vanity of althings under the
Sun, he bewayleth this also (...), that seeing (c) There is more profitte in
wisdom then in folly, (...) light is more excellent then darkness: and
seeing the wise-mans eyes, are in his head, when the fool wallketh in
darkness, yet, that one condition, one estate, should befall them both as
touching this vain and transitory life: meaning hereby, that they were both a
like exposed to those evils that good men and bad do sometimes both a like
endure. He says further, that the good shall suffer as the bad do: and the
bad shall enjoy goods, as the good do; in these words: There is a vanity which
is done upon the earth, that there be Ecd^* 8. 14
righteous men to whom it comes according to the work of the wicked, and
there be wicked men to whom it comes according to the work of the just: I
thought also that this is vanity. In discovery of this vanity, the wise man
wrote all this whole work, for no other cause but that we might discern that
life which is not vanity under the sun, but truth, under him that made the
sun. But as (d) touching this worldly vanity, is it not Gods just judgment
that man being made like it, should vanish also like it? yet in these his days
of vanity, there is much between the obeying, and the opposing of truth: and
between partaking and neglecting of Godliness and goodness? but this is not
in respect of attayning or avoiding any terrestrial goods or evils, but of
the great future judgment, which shall distribute goods, to the good, and evils
to the evil to remain with them for ever. Finally the said wise King
concludes his book thus: fear God and keep his commandments, for this is
the whole (duty) of man, for GOD will bring every work unto judgment (...)*
13. 13
(e) of every dispisedman, be it good or be it evil, how can we have an
instruction more brief, more true, or more wholesome? fear God (says he) and
keep his commandments for this is the whole (duty) of man, for he that does
this, is full man, and he that does it not, is in account, nothing, because he
is not reformed according to the Image of truth, but sticks still in the
shape of vanity: for God will bring every work, that is every act of man in
this life, unto judgment, be it good or evil, yea the works of every
despised man, of every contemptible person that seems not t^ be noted at all,
God sees him, and despises him not, neither ouer-passeth him in his judgment.

L. VIVES.
ECclesiastes (a).] Or the Preacher. Many of the Hebrews say that Solomon wrote
this in the time of his repentance for the wicked course that he had run.
Others say that he foresaw the division of his kingdom under his son
Rehoboam, and therefore wrote it, in contempt of the worlds unstable vanity (b)
Uanity of.] So the seauenty read it, but other read it (...) (...), smoke of
fumes, Hierome (c) There is more.] Wisdom and folly are as much opposed as
light and darkness. (d) Touching this.] But that GOD instructs our
understanding in this vanity, it would vanish away, and come to naught,
conceyuing falsehood for truth; and lying all consumed with putrifiing sin, at
length like a fume it would exhale a way unto che second death. (e) Of every
despised man.] Our translations read it; with every secret thing Hierome has
it, Pro omni errato.

The authors resolution in this discourse of the judgment, to produce the
testimonies of the New Testament first, and then of the old. CHAP. 4.
THe testimonies of holy Scriptures by which I mean to prove this last
judgment of God, must be first of all taken out of the New Testament, and
then out of the Old. For though the later be the more ancient, yet the former
are more worthy, as being the true contents of the later. The former then
shall proceed first, and they shall be backed by the later. These, that is, the
old ones, the law and the prophets afford us, the former, (the new ones) the
Gospells, and the writings of the Apostles. Now the Apostle says; By the law
comes the knowledge of sin. But now is the righteousness of GOD made
manifest without Romans 3, 20 21, 22
the law, having witness of the law and the Prophets, to wit, the
righteousness of GOD, by the faith of JESUS CHRIST unto all and upon all that
believe. This righteousness of GOD belongs unto the New Testament, and has
confirmation from the Old, namely the law and the prophets. We must therefore
first of all propound the cause, and then produce the confirmations, for CHRIST
himself so ordered it, saying: Every scribe which is taught unto the kingdom
of heaven is like unto an householder which brings out of his treasury things
both new Mat: 13, (...)
and old. He says not, both and new, but if he had not respected the order of
dignity more then of antiquity, he would have done so, and not as he did.

Places of Scripture proving that there shall be a day of Judgment at the
worlds end. CHAP. 5.
Our Savior therefore, condeming the cities, whom his great miracles did not
induce unto faith, and preferring aliens before them; tells them this, Isay
unto you, it shall be easier for Tyrus (a) and Sydon at the day of judgment then
for Mat. 11, 22
you. And by and by after, unto another city: Isay unto you, that it shall be
easier for them of the Land of Sodom, in the day of judgment then for thee.
Here is a Ibid 24 Mat. 12, 41 42
plain prediction of such a day. Again: The men of Niniuie (says he) shall
arise in judgment with this generation, and condemn it, etc. The Queen of
the south shall rise in Judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it,
etc. Here we learn two things 1. that there shall be a judgment 2. that it
shall be when the dead do arise again. For Our Savior speaking of the
Ninevites, and of the Queen of the South, speaks of them that were dead long
before. Now (b) he said not, shall condemn, as if they were to be the
judges, but that their comparison with the aforesaid generation shall justly
procure the judges condemning sentence. Again, speaking of the present
commixtion of the good and bad, and their future separation, in the day of
Judgment, he uses a simily of the sown wheat, and the tares, sown
afterward amongst it, which he expounds unto his disciples. He that sows
the good seed is the Son of Man: the field is the world: the good seed they
are the children of the Mat. 13, 37 35, 34, 40 41, 42, 43
Kingdom: the tares are the children of the wicked, the enemy that sows that
is the devil: the harvest is the end of the world, and the reapers be the
Angels. As then the tares are gathered and burned in the fire, so shall it be
in the end of this world: the Son of Man shall send forth his Angels and
they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend, and they which
do iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire: there shall be weeping
and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the just men shine as the Sun in the
Kingdom of their Father. He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

He names not the Judgment day here: but he expresses it far more
plainly by the effects, and promises it to befall at the end of the world.
Furthermore; he says to his disciples; Verily I say unto you, that when the
Son of Man shall sit in the Throne of his Majesty, then ye which followed
me in their regeneration, shall sit also upon twelve thrones and judge the
twelve tribes of Israel. Here we see that Christ shall be judge, together
with his Apostles. Whereupon he said unto the Jews in another place: If I
through Beelzebub cast out devils, by whom do your children cast them out?
therefore they shall be your judges. But now, in that he speaks of twelve
thrones, we may not imagine that he, and one twelve more with him shall be the
worlds Judges. The number of twelve, includes the whole number of the Judges,
by reason of the two parts of seven, which number signifies the total, and
the universe: which two parts, four and three multiplied either by other, make
up twelve, three times four, or four times three, is twelve. (besides others
reasons why twelve is used in these words of our Savior,). Otherwise, Mathias
having Judas his place, Saint Paul should have no place left him to sit as
Judge in, though he took more pains then them all: but that he belongs
unto the number of the Judges, his own words do prove: Know ye not that we
shall judge the Angels? The reason of their judgments 1 Cor. 6, 3
also is included in the number of twelve. For Christ in saying, To judge the
twelve tribes of Israel, excludes neither the tribe of Leui, which was the
thirteenth, nor all the other Nations besides Israel, from vnder-going this
judgment.

Now whereas he says, In the regeneration hereby assuredly he means the
resurrection of the dead. For our flesh shall be regenerate by incorruption, as
our soul is by faith. I omit many things that might concern this great day,
because inquiry may rather make them seem ambiguous, or belonging unto other
purpose then this: as either unto CHRIST'S daily coming unto his church in his
members, unto each in particular, or unto the destruction of the earthly
Jerusalem, because Our Savior speaking of that, uses the same phrase that he
uses concerning the end of the world, and the last judgment, so that we can
scarcely distinguish them but by conferring the three Evangelists, Matthew,
Mark, and Luke, together, in their places touching this point. For one has it
somewhat difficult, and another, more apparent, the one explayning the intent
of the other. And those places have I conferred together in one of mine
Epistles unto Hesychius, (of blessed memory) Bishop of Salon, the Epistle is
entitled, De fine seculi, of the worlds end. So that* I will in this place,
relate only that place of Saint Matthew, where CHRIST (the last judge, being
then present) shall separate the good from the badde. It is thus.

When the Son of Man comes in his glory, and all the holy Angels with him,
Mat. 25, 31 32, 33 etc.
then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory, and before him shall be gathered
all nations, and he shall separate them one from another as a shepherd
seperateth the sheep from the goats, and he shall set the sheep on his
right hand, and the goats on his left. Then shall the King say to them on his
right hand: come ye blessed of my father inherit ye the Kingdom prepared
for you from the foundations of the world. For I was an hungered, and you gave
me meat; I thirsted, and you gave me drink, I was a stranger, and you
lodged m^: I was naked, and ye clothed me, I was sick and ye visited me,
I was in prison and ye came unto me. Then shall the righteous answer him
saying; LORD when saw we thee an hungered and fed thee, or a thirst, and gave
thee drink, etc. And the King shall answer, and say unto them, Verily I say
unto you in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall he say unto them on the left
hand; Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for
the devil and his Angels: for I was an hungered and ye ga^e me no meat: I
thirsted, and ye gave me no drink, etc. Then shall they also answer him
saying: LORD when saw we thee hungery, or a thirst, or a stranger; or naked,
or in prison, or sick, and did not minister unto thee? Then shall he answer
them, and say, Verelie I say unto you in as much as ye did it not unto one of
the least of these, ye did it not unto me. And these shall go into
everlasting fire, and the righteous into life eternal.

Now John the Evangelist shows plainly that CHRIST foretold this Io. 5, 22,
23, 24
judgment to be at the resurrection. For having said, The Father judges no
man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son; Because all men should
honor the Son as they honor the Father, he that honors not the Son,
the s^e honors not the Father that sent him: He adds forthwith. Verelie,
verelie I say unto you, he that hears my Word and belee^eth in him that
sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into (c) judgment, but
shall pass from death to life. Behold, here he (...) directly that the
faithful shall not be judged. How then shall they by his judgment be
severed from the faithless, unless judgment be used here for condemnation?
For that is the judgment into which, they that hear his word and believe in
him that sent him, shall never enter.

L. VIVES.
TYrus (a) and Sydon] Two Cities on the Coast of Phoenicia, [called now, Suri,
and Sai^ Postell Niger. (b) He said not] The accusers of the guilty persons
are said to condemn him, as well as the Judges. (c) Judgment but shall passe]
Our translation reads it, condemnation, but has passed, Hierome reads it,
transiet.

What the first resurrection is, and what the second. CHAP. 6.
THen he proceeds, in these words: Verily* verelie I say unto you, the hour
Io. 5. 25, 26
shall come, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
GOD, and they that hear it shall live. For as the father has life in
himself, so likewise has ^ee given unto the Son to have life in himself.

He does not speak as yet of the second resurrection, of that of the bodies,
which is to come, but of the first resurrection, which is now. For to
distinguish these two he says, the hour shall come, and now is: Now this is
the souls resurrection, not the bodies; for the souls have their deaths in
sin, as the bodies have in nature; and therein were they dead, of whom Our
Savior said, let the dead bury the dead, to wit let the dead in soul, bury
the dead in body. So then these words, The hour shall come and now is, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of GOD, and they that hear it,
shall live. They that hear it, that is, they that obey it, believe it, and
remain in it. He makes no distinction here, between good and evil, none
at all. For it is good for all to hear his voice, and thereby to pass out of
the death of sin and impiety, unto life and eternity. Of this death in sin
the Apostle speaks, in these words: If one be dead for all, then were all
dead, and he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which 1 Cor. 5 14, 15
died for them and rose again.

Thus then, all were dead, in sin, none excepted, either in original sin,
or in actual: either by being ignorant of good, or by knowing good and not
performing it: and for all these dead souls, one living Son came, and died;
living, that is, one without all sin, that such as get life by having their
sins remitted, should no more live unto themselves, but unto him that
suffered for all our sins, and rose again for all our iustifications, that
we which believe upon the iustifier of the wicked, being justified out of
wickedness, and raised (as it were) from death to life, nay be assured to
belong unto the first resurrection, that now is. For none but such as are
heirs of eternal bliss, have any part in this first resurrection: but the
second, is common both ^o the blessed and the wretched. The first is mercies
resurrection: the second, judgments. And therefore the Psalm says: I will
sing mercy and judgment unto thee O LORD! With this judgment the Evangelist
proceeds, thus: An^ Psalm. 101, 1 Io. 5, 27
has given him power also to execute Judgment, in that he is the Son of
Man. Lo here now, in that flesh, wherein he was judged, shall he come to
be the whole worlds judge. For these words, In that he is the Son of Man,
have a direct aim at this. And then he adds this: Marvel not at this, for
the hour shall come in the which, all that are in the graves shall hear Io.
5, 28
his voice; and they shall come forth, which have done good, unto the
resurrection of life; but they that have done evil unto the resurrection of
judgment.

This is that judgment which he put before, for condemnation, when he said,
He that hears my Word, etc. shall not come into judgment, but shall pass
from death to life, that is, he belongs to the first resurrection, and that
belongs to life, so that he shall not come into condemnation, which he
understands by the word Judgment in this last place, unto the resurrection
of Judgment. Oh Rise then in the first resurrection all you that will not
perish in the the second. For the hour will come, and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of GOD, and they that hear it shall live:
that is, they shall not come into condemnation, which is called the second
death: unto which they shall all be cast headlong after the second
resurrection, that arise not in the first. For the hour will come: (he says
not that hour is now, because it shall be in the worlds end) in the which all
that are in the graves shall hear His voice, and shall come forth: but he
says not hear as he said before, and they that hear it, shall live: for
they shall not live all in bliss, which is only to be called life, because
it is the true life. Yet must they have some life, otherwise they could neither
hear nor arise in their quickened flesh.) And why they shall not all live? he
gives this subsequent reason.

They that have done good shall come forth unto the resurrection of life: and
these only are they that shall live* they that have done evil, unto the
resurrection of condemnation, and these (GOD wot) shall not live, for they
shall die the second death. In living badlie they have done badly, and in
refusing to rise in the first resurrection they have lived badly, or, at least
in not continuing their resurrection unto the consummation. So then, as there
are two regenerations, one in faith by Baptism, and another in the flesh, by
incorruption; so are there two resurrections, the first (That is now) of the
soul, preventing the second death. The later (Future) of the body, sending
some into the second death, and other some into the life that despises and
excludes all death whatsoever.

Of the two resurrections: what may be thought of the thousand years mentioned
in Saint John's Revelation. CHAP. 7.
SAint John the Evangelist in his Revelation speaks of these two
resurrections in such dark manner, as some of our divines, exceeding their
own ignorance in the first, do wrest it unto diverse ridiculous
interpretations. His words are these. And I saw an Angel come down from
Heaven having the Apo^* 2^* etc.
keye of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, And he took
that Dragon, that old Serpent which is the devil and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years, ^d he cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up,
and sealed the doors upon him, that he should deceive the people no more, till
the thousand years were fulfilled. For after he must be loosed for a little
season. And I saw seats, and they set upon them, and judgment was given unto
them, and I saw the souls of them which were slain for the testimony of
JESUS, and for the word of GOD, and worshipped not the beast, nor his Image,
neither had taken his mark upon their foreheads, or on their hands: and they
lived and reigned with CHRIST a thousand years. But the rest of the dead men
shall not live again until the thousand years be finished: this (...) the
first resurrection. Blessed and Holy is he that has his part in the first
resurrection, for on such the second death has no power, but they shall be the
Priests of GOD and of CHRIST, and reign with him a thousand years.

The chiefest reason that moved many to think that this place implied a
corporal resurrection, was drawn from (a) the thousand years, as if the
Saints should have a continual Sabbath enduring so long, to wit, a thousand
years vacation after the six thousand of trouble, beginning at man's creation
and expulsion out of Paradise into the sorrows of mortality, that ^ce it is
written, One day is with the LORD as a thousand years, and a thous^d years
as one day, therefore six thousand years being finished, (as the six
days) the seventh should follow, for the time of Sabbath, and last a thousand
years also, all the Saints rising corporally from the dead to ^elebrate it.

This opinion were tolerable, if it proposed only spiritual deights unto the
Saints during this space (we were once of the same opinion our selves*; but
seeing the auouchers hereof affirm that the Saints after this resurrection
shall do nothing but revel in fleshly banquettes, where (b) the cheer shall
exceed both modesty and measure, this is gross, and fit for none but carnal
men to believe. But they that are really and truly spiritual, do call those
Opinionists, (c) Chiliasts; the word is greek, and many be interpreted,
Millenaryes, or Thousand-yere-ists.

To confute them, here is no place, let us rather take the texts true sense
along with us. Our LORD JESUS CHRIST says: No man can enter into (...) strong
man's house, and take away his goods, unless he first bind the strong Mark.
3, 27
man, and then spoil his house: meaning by this strong man, the devil,
because he alone was able to hold mankind in captivity: and meaning by the
goods he would take away, his future faithful, whom the devil held as his
own in diverse sins and impieties. That this Stong-man therefore might be
bound, the Apostle saw the Angel coming down from heaven, having the keye
of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand: And he took, (says
he) the Dragon that old serpent, which is, the devil and Satan and bound
him a thousand years, that is, restrained him from seducing or withholding
them that were to be set free. The thousand years, I think may be taken two
ways, either for that this shall fall out in the last thousand, that is, (d)
on the sixth day of the works continuance, and then the Sabbath of the Saints
should follow, which shall have no night, and bring them blessedness which
has no end: So that thus the Apostle may call the last part of the current
thousand (which make the sixth day) a thousand years, using the part for the
whole: or else a thousand years is put for eternity, noting the plenitude of
time, by a number most perfect. For a thousand, is the solid quadrate of ten:
ten times ten, is one hundred, and this is a quadrate, but it is but a
plain one. But to produce the solid, multiply ten, by a hundred, and there
arises one thousand.

Now if an hundred be sometimes used for perfection, as we see it is in
CHRIST'S words concerning him that should leave all and follow him, saying: He
shall receive an hundered-fold more; (which the Apostle seems Mat. 19, 29 2
Cor. 6, 10
to expound, saying, As having nothing and yet possessings althings, for he
had said before, unto a faithful man the whole world is his riches) why then
may not one thousand, be put for consummation, the rather, in that it is the
most solid square that can be drawn from ten? And therefore we interpret
that place of the Psalm, He has always remembered his covenant Ps. 105, 8
and promise that he made to a thousand generations, by taking a thousand, for
all in general. On. And ^ee cast him into the bottomless pit, he cast the
devils into that pit that is, the multitude of the wicked, whose malice unto
GODS Church is bottomless, and their hearts a depth of envy against it: he
cast him into this pit, not that he was not there before, but because the
devil being shut from amongst the Godly, holds faster possession of the
wicked: for he is a most sure hold of the devils, that is not only cast out
from GODS servants, but pursues them also with a causeless hate: forward. And
shut him up, and sealed the door upon him, that he should deceive the people
no more till the thousand years were expired, he sealed, that is, his will was
to keep it unknown, who belonged to the devil, and who did not. For this is
unknown unto this world, for we know not whether he that stands shall fall,
or he that lies along shall rise again. But how-so-euer this bond restrains
him from tempting the nations that are Gods selected, as he did before. For God
chose them before the foundations of the world, meaning to take them out of the
power of darkness, and set them in the kingdom of his sons glory, as the
Apostle says. For who knows not the devils daily seducing and drawing of
others unto eternal torment, though they be none of the predestinate? Nor is
it wonder i^ the devil subvert some of those who are even regenerate in
Christ, and walk in his ways. For God knows those that be his, and the
devil cannot draw a soul of them unto damnation. For this God knows, as
knowing all things to come, not as one man sees another, in presence, and
cannot tell what shall be-come either of him he sees, or of himself
here-after. The devil was therefore bound and locked up, that he should no
more seduce the nations (the Churches members) whom he had held in error and
impiety, before they were united unto the Church. It is not said, that he
should deceive no man any more, but, that he should deceive the people no more,
whereby questionless he means the Church. Proceed: until the thousand
years be fulfilled, that is, either the remainder of the sixth day, (the last
thousand) or the whole time that the world was to continue. Nor may we
understand the devil so to be barred from seducing, that at this time
expired, he should seduce those nations again, whereof the Church consists,
and from which he was forbidden before. But this place is like unto that of
the Psalm, Our eyes wait upon the Lord until he have mercy upon us, (for
the servants of God take not their eyes from beholding, Ps. ^23, (...)
as soon as he has mercy upon them) or else the order of the words is this,
He ^t him up, and sealed the door upon him until a thousand years were
fulfilled, all that comes between, namely, that he should not deceive the
people, having no necessary connection hereunto, but being to be severally
understood, as if it were added afterward, and so the sense run thus: And he
shut him up, and sealed the door upon him until a thousand years were
fulfilled, that he should not seduce the people, that is, therefore he shut
him up so long, that he should seduce them no more.

L. VIVES.
FRom the (a) thousand] John's mention of a thousand years in this place, and
Christ's words, I will not drink henceforth of the fruit of the vine, until
that day that I drink it new with Mat 26, 29
you in my Fathers kingdom, together with many Prophecies touching Christ's
kingdom in Jerusalem, made some imagine that Christ would return into the
world, raise the Saints in their bodies, and live a thousand years here on
earth in all joy, peace, and prosperity, far exceeding the golden age of the
Poets, or that of Sybilla and Esayas. The first Author of this opinion was
Papias Bishop of Jerusalem, who lived in the Apostles times. He was seconded
by Irenaeus, Apollinarius, Tertullian (lib. de fidelium,) Victorinus (...), and
Lactantius. (Divine. Instit. lib. 7.) And although Hierome deride and scoff at
this opinion in many places, yet in his fourth book of his Commentaries upon
Hieremy, he says that he dare not condemn it, because many holy martyrs and
religious Christians held it, so great an authority the person sometimes
gives to the position, that we must use great modesty in our dissension with
them, and give* great reverence to their godliness and gravity. I cannot
believe that the Saints held this opinion in that manner that Cerinthus the
heretic did, of whom we read this in Eusebius. Cerinthus held that Christ
would have an earthly kingdom in Jerusalem, after the resurrection, where the
Saints should live in all society of human lusts and concupiscences.
Besides, against all truth of scripture, he held that for a thousand years
space this should hold, with reuells and marriage, and other works of
corruption, only to de^iue the carnal minded person. Dionisius disputing of
S. John's revelation, and reciting some ancient traditions of the Church, has
thus much concerning this man. Cerinthus (quoth he) the author of the
Cerinthian heresy, delighted much in getting his sect authority by wresting of
scripture. His heresy was, that Christ's Kingdom should be terrestrial and
being given up unto lust and gluttony himself, he affirmed nothing but such
things as those two affects taught him. That all should abound with banquets
and belly-chere and (for the more grace to his assertions) that the feasts of
the law should be renewed, and the offering of carnal sacrifices restored.
Irenaeus publishes the secrecy of this heresy in his first book: they that
would know it may find it there. Thus far Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3.
wherefore this was not Papias his opinion, whose original Hierome would
otherwise have ascribed unto Cerinthus, who was more ancient then Papias, a
little, though both lived in one age: nor would Iraeneus have written against
Cerinthus, for he allowed of Papias his opinion, neither did all the sects
agree in one as touching this thousand years: but each one taught that which
seemed likeliest unto himself, and no wonder, in so vain a fiction.
Dionisius of Alexandria (as Hierome affirms, In Esai. lib. 18.) wro^ an
elegant work in derision of these Chiliasts, and there Golden Jerusalem,
their reparation of the temple, their blood of sacrifices, there Sabbath, there
circumsitions, there birth, there marriages, there banquets, there
soueraignties, their wars, and tryumphs. etc. (b) The cheer shall exceed.]
So says Lactantius: The earth shall yield her greatest faecundity, and yield
her plenty untilled. The rockie mountains shall sweat honey, the rivers shall
run wine, and the fountains milk. (To omit Cerinthus his relations which
are far more odious. (c) Chiliast.] (...), is a thousand. (d) On the sixth
day.] There is a report that in the books of Elias the Prophet it was recorded
that the world should last 6000. years, 2000. under vanity, unto Abraham,
2000. under the law unto Christ. and 2000. under Christ, unto the judgment.
This by the Hebrews account: for the LXX. have above 3000. years from Adam to
Abraham. And in Augustines time the world lackt not 400 years of the full
6000. So that now, our Vulgar accoumpt is above 6700. years. Namely, from Our
Savior, 1522. Whom Eusebius and such as follow the LXX. affirm to have been
borne in the year of the world 5100. and somewhat more. Therefore Augustine
says that the later end of the 6000. years, passed along in his time. And
Lactantius, who lived before Augustine, under Constantine, says that in his
time there was but 200. of the 6000. years to run.

Of the binding and loosing of the Devil. CHAP. 8.
AFter that (says S. John) he must be loosed for a season. Well, although the
Devil be bound and locked up that he should not seduce the Church, shall he
therefore be looosed to seduce it? God forbid. That Church which God
predestined, and settled before the worlds foundation, whereof it is written,
God knows those that be his, that, the Devil shall never seduce: and yet it
shall be on earth even at the time of his loosing, as it has continued in
successiue estate ever since it was first erected, for by and by after, he
says that, the Diuill shall bring his seduced nations in arms against it,
whose number shall be as the sea sands: And they went up (says he) unto the
plain of the earth, and compassed the tents of the Re^* 20, 9, 10,
Saints about, and the beloved city, but fire came down from God out of
Heaven, and devoured them. And the Devil that deceived them was cast into a
lake of fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false Prophets shall be
tormented even day and night for evermore.

But this now belongs to the last judgment, which I thought good to recite,
least some should suppose that the Devil being let loose again for a season
should either find no Church at all, or by his violence and seducements should
subvert all he finds. Wherefore the Devils imprisonment during the whole
time included in this book (that is from Christ's first coming to his last) is
not any particular restraint from seducing the Church, because he could not
iniure the Church were he never so free: other-wise if his bondage were a set
prohibition from seduction what were his freedom but a full permission to
seduce? which God forbid should ever be! No his binding is an inhibition of his
full power of tempration, which is the means of man's being seduced, either by
his violence or his fraudulence. Which if he were suffered to practice in that
long time of infirmity, he would pervert and destroy the faith of many such
souls as Gods goodness will not suffer to be cast down. To avoid this
inconvenience, bound he is; And in the last and smallest remainder of time
shall he be loosed: for we read that he shall rage in his greatest malice
only three years and six months, and he shall hold wars with such foes
as all his emnity shall never be able either to conquer or iniure. But if he
were not let loose at all, his maleuolence should be the less conspicuous,
and the faithfulls patience the less glorious; briefly it would be less
apparent unto how blessed an end GOD had made use of his cursednesse, in not
debarring him absolutely from tempting the Saints (though he be utterly cast
out from their inward man) that they might reap a benefit from his badnesse:
and in binding him firmly in the hearts of such as vow themselves his
^ectators, least if his wicked envy had the full scope, he should enter in
amongst the weaker members of the Church, and by violence and subtilty
together, deter and diswade them from their faith, their only mean of
salvation. Now in the end, he shall be loosed, that the City of GOD may see
what a potent adversary she has conquered by the grace of her Savior and
redeemer, unto his eternal glory.

O what are we, and compare us unto the Saints that shall live to see this!
when such an enemy shall be let loose unto them as we can scarcely resist
although he be bound! (although no doubt but Christ has had some soldiors in
these our times, who if they had lived in the times to come, would have avoided
all the Devils trapps by their true discrete prudence) or have withstood them
with undaunted patience.) This binding of the Devil began when the Church began
to spread from Judea into other regions, and lasts yet, and shall do until
his time be expired: for men even in these times do refuse the chain wherein
he held them, infidelity, and turn unto GOD, and shall do no doubt unto the
worlds end. And then is he bound in respect of every private man, when the
soul that was his vassal, clears her self of him, nor cease his shutting
upon, when they dye wherein he was shut: for the world shall have a continual
succession of the haters of Christianity, whilst the earth endures, and in
their hearts the devil shall ever be shut up. But it may be a doubt whether
any one shall turn unto GOD, during the space Mat, 12, 29
of his three years and an halfes reign, for how can this stand good, How can
a man enter into a strong man's house and spoil his goods, exept he first bind
the strongman, and then spoil his house, if he may do it when the strong man
is loose? This seems to prove directly that during that space, none shall be
converted, but that the devil shall have a continual fight with those that are
in the faith already, of whom he may perhaps conquer some certain number, but
none of Gods predestinate, not one. For it is not idle that John the Author of
this Revelation, says in one of his Epistles, concerning some Apostatas, They
went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us they
would have continued with us. But what then shall become of the children? for
it is incredible, that the Christians 1. Ioh. 2. 19
should have no children during this space: or that if they had them, they
would not see them baptized by one means or other. How then shall these be
taken from the devil, the spoil of whose house no man can attain before he
bind him? So that it is more credible to auouche, that the church in that time
shall neither want decrease nor augmentation, and that the parents in standing
stiffly for their childrens baptism, (together with others that shall but even
then become believers) shall beat the devil back in his greatest liberty:
that is, they shall both wittily observe and warily avoid his newest
stratagems, and most secret underminings, and by that means keep themselves
clear of his mercylesse clutches. Not-with-standing, that place of Scripture,
How can a man enter into a strong man's house, etc. is true, for all that: and
according thereunto, the order was, that the strong should first be bound,
and his goods taken from him out of all nations, to multiply the church in such
sort, that by the true and faithful understanding of the Prophecies that were
to be fulfilled, they might take away his goods from him when he was in his
greatest freedom: for as we must confess, that because iniquity increases,
the love of many shall be cold, and Mat. 24. 12
that many of them that are not written in the book of life shall fall before
the force of the raging newly loosed devil: So must we consider what
faithful shall as then be found on the earth, and how diverse shall even then
fly to the bosom of the Church, by Gods grace, and the Scriptures
plainness: wherein amongst other things, that very end which they see
approaching is presaged: and that they shall be both more firm in belief of
what they rejected before, and also more strong to with-stand the greatest
assault and sorest batteries. If this be so, his former binding left his good
to all future spoil* be he bound or loose, unto which end, these words, How
can a man enter into a strong man's house, etc. do principally tend.

What is meant by Christ's reigning a thousand years with the Saints, and the
difference between that and his eternal reign. CHAP. 9.
NOw doubtless whilst the devil is thus bound, Christ reigns with his Saints
the same thousand years, understood both after one manner, that is, all the
time from his first coming, not including that kingdom whereof he says,
Come you blessed of my Father, inherit you the kingdom prepared for you: for
if there Mat. 24. 34
were not another reigning of Christ with the Saints in another place, whereof
himself says; I am with you always unto the end of the world: the Church now
upon earth should not be called his kingdom, or the kingdom of heaven: for
Mat. 28. 20
the Scribe that was taught unto the kingdom of God, lived in this thousand
years. And the Reapers shall take the tares out of the Church, which grew
(until harvest) together with the good corn: which Parable he expounds,
saying, The Mat. 13. 52
^est is the end of the world, and the reapers are the Angels, as then the
tares are Mat. 13. 39 40, etc.
gathered and burned in the fire: so shall it be in the end of the world. The
son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of his
kingdom all things that offend. What does he speak hear of that kingdom
where there is no offense? No, but of the Church, that is here below. He
says further: Who-so-euer shall break one of these least commandments and
teach men so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but
who-so-euer shall observe and teach them, the same shall be called great in
the kingdom of heaven. Thus both these are done in the kingdom of heaven,
both the breach of the commandments, and the keeping of them.

^hen he proceeds: Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees (that is of such as break what they teach, and as
Christ (...) elsewhere of them, Say well but do nothing) unless you exceed
these, that is, ^th teach and observe, you shall not enter into the kingdom of
heaven. Now the kingdom where the keeper of the commandments, and the
contemner were (...) said to be, is one, and the kingdom into which, he that
says and does not, shall not enter, is another. So then where both sorts are,
the church is, that now is: but where the better sort is only, the church is,
as it shall be here-after, utterly exempt from evil. So that the church now on
earth is both the kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of heaven. The Saints
reign with him now, but not as they shall do here-after: yet the tares reign
hot with them though they grow in the Church ^ngst the good seed. They reign
with him who do as the Apostle says: If ye Colos^ 3, (...).
(...) be risen* with Christ, seek the things which are above, where Christ
sits at the (...) ^d of God: Set your affections on things which are above,
and not on things (...) are on earth, of whom also he says, that their
conversation is in heaven. ^ly they reign with Christ who are with all his
kingdom where he reigns. (...) how do they reign with him at all, who
continuing below, until the worlds (...)* until his kingdom be purged of all
the tares, do neuer-the-lesse seek their (...) pleasures, and not their
redeemers? This book therefore of Saint John's ^th of this kingdom of malice,
wherein there are daily conflicts with the ^my, sometimes with victory, and
sometimes with foil, until the time of that most peaceable kingdom
approach, where no enemy shall ever show his (...); this, and the first
resurrection are the subject of the Apostles Revelation. For having said that
the devil was bound for a thousand years, and then was to be loosed for a
while, he recapitulateth the gifts of the Church during the said thousand
years.

And I saw seats, (says he) and they sat upon them, and judgment was given
unto them. This may not be understood of the last judgment: but by the seals
are (...) the rulers places of the Church, and the persons themselves by whom
it is governed: and for the Judgment given them, it cannot be better explaned
then in these words, what-so-euer ye bind on earth shall be bound in heaven,
and what-so-euer Mat. 18, 18
ye loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven. Therefore says Saint Paul:
(...) have I to do to judge them also that be without? do not ye judge them
that (...) within? On. And I saw the souls of them which were slain for the
witness of Jesus 1. Cor 5, 12
(...) for the word of God: understand that which follows: they reigned with
Christ a (...) years. These were the martires souls, having not their bodies
as yet, for (...) souls of the Godly are not excluded from the Church, which
as it is now is (...) kingdom of God. Otherwise she should not mention them,
nor celebrate their ^ories at our communions of the body and blood of Christ:
nor were it necessary (...) ^in our perils, to run unto his Baptism, or to be
afraid to die without it; nor to seek reconciliation to his church, if a man
have incurred any thing that exacteth repentance, or burdeneth his conscience.
Why do we those things, but that even such as are dead in the faith, are
members of Gods Church? Yet are they not with their bodies, and yet
neuer-the-lesse, their souls reign with Christ, the whole space of this
thousand years. And therefore we read elsewhere in the same book. Blessed
are the dead which dye in the Lord: Even so says the spirit, for they rest
from their labors; and their works follow them. Thus then the Church Apo. 14.
13
reigns with Christ, first in the quick and the dead: for Christ (as the
Apostle says) that he might thence-forth rule both over the quick and the
dead. But the Apostle here names the souls of the martyrs only, because
their kingdom is most glorious after death, as having fought for the truth
until death. But this is but Romans 14
a taking of the part for the whole, for we take this place to include all the
dead that belong to Chrsts kingdom, which is, the Church: But the sequel, And
which did not worship the beast, neither his Image, neither had taken his mark
upon their foreheads, or on their hands: this is meant both of the quick and
dead. Now although we must make a more exact inquiry what this beast was, yet
is it not against Christianity to interpret it, the society of the wicked,
opposed against the com pany of Gods servants, and against his holy City. Now
his image, that is, his dissimulation, in such as profess religion, and
practice infidelity. They faigne to be what they are not, and their show (not
their truth) procures them the name of Christians. For this Beast consists
not only of the professed enemies of Christ and his glorious Hierarchy, but of
the tares also, that in the worlds end are to be gathered out of the very
fields of his own Church. And who are they that adore not the beast, but those
of whom Saint Paul's advise takes effect, Be not 2. Cor. 6, 14.
[vnequally] yoaked with the Infidells? These give him no adoration, no
consent, no obedience, nor take his mark, that is, the brand of their own
sin, upon their foreheads, by professing it, or on their hands, by working
according to it. They that are clear of this, be they living, or be they dead,
they reign with Christ all this whole time, from the union unto him, to the
end of the time employed in the thousand years. The rest (says Saint John)
shall not live, for now is the Ioh. 5, 25.
hour when the dead shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that
he are it shall live, the rest shall not live: but the addition; until the
thousand years be finished; implies, that they shall want life all the time
that they should have it, in attayning it, by passing through faith from death
to life. And therefore on the day of the general resurrection, they shall rise
also, not unto life, but unto judgment, that is, unto condemnation, which is
truly called the second death, for he that lives not before the thousand
years be expired, that is, he that hears not the Saviors voice, and passes
not from death to life, during the time of the first resurrection, assuredly
shall be thrown both body and soul into the second death, at the day of the
second resurrection. For Saint John proceeds plainly: This (says he) is the
first resurrection. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first
resurrection, and part of it is his, who does not only arise from death in
sin, but continues firm in his resurrection. On such (says he) the second
death has no power: But it has power over the rest of whom he said before,
The rest shall not live until the thousand years be finished: because that
in all that whole time meant by the thousand years, although that each of them
had a bodily life (at one time or other) yet they spent it, and ended it
without arising out of the death of iniquity, wherein the devil held them:
which resurrection should have been their only mean to have purchased them a
part in the first resurrection, over which the second death has no power.

An answer to the objection of some, affirming that resurrection is proper to
the body only, and not to the soul. CHAP. 10.
SOme object this, that resurrection pertains only to the body, and
therefore the first resurrection is a bodily one: for that which falls (say
they) that may rise again: but the body falls by death, (for so is the word
Cadauer, a carcass, derived of Cado, to fall*) Ergo* rising again belongs
soly to the body, and not unto the soul. Well, but what will you answer the
Apostle, that in as plain terms as may be, he calls the souls bettring, a
resurrection: they were not revived in the outward man, but in the inward, unto
whom he said, If ye then be risen with Christ, seek the things which are
above: which he explaineth elsewhere, saying; Romans 6. 4.
Like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the father, so we
also should walk in newness of life. Hence also is that place: Awake thou
that sleep, Ephesians. 5 14
and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. Now whereas they
say, none can rise but those that fall, ergo, the body only can arise, why can
they not hear that shrill sound of the spirit. Depart not from him least you
fall, and again, Iosuah 22. Romans 14. 4* 1. Cor. 1^* ^2.
H^ stands or falls to his own master: and further, Let him that thinks
he s^eth, take heed least he fall: I think these places mean not of bodily
falls, but (...) the souls. If then resurrection concern them that fall, and
that the soul ^y also fall; it must needs follow, that the soul may rise
again. Now Saint (...) having said, On such the second death shall have no
power, proceeds thus: But (...) shall be the Priests of God and of Christ,
and shall reign with him a thousand ^es: Now this is not meant only of those
whom the Church peculiarly calls Bishops and Priests, but as we are all
called Christians, because of our mystical Chrisme, our unction, so are we
all Priests in being the members of ^e Priest. Whereupon Saint Peter calls
us, A royal Priesthood, an holy nation* And mark how briefly Saint John
insinuates the deity (a) of Christ in these 1. Pe^. 2, 9.
words, of God, and of Christ, that is of the Father and of the Son, yet as
he was made the son of man, because of his servants shape, so in the same
respect was he made a Priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedech,
whereof we have spoken diverse times in this work.

L. VIVES.
DEity (a) of Christ] For it were a damnable and blasphemous injury to God to
suffer any one to have Priests, but him alone: the very Gentiles would by no
means allow it. (...) Philippic. 2.

Of Gog and Magog, whom the Devil (at the worlds end) shall stir up against
the Church of God. CHAP. 11.
ANd when the thousand years (says he) are expired, Satan shall be loosed
out R^* 2 (...)* (...)
of his prison and shall go out to deceive the people which are in the four
quarters of the earth, even God and Magog, to gather them together into Battle
whose number is as the sand of the sea. So then the aim of his decept shall be
this war, for he used diverse ways to seduce before, and all tended to evil.
He shall leave the dens of his hate, and burst out into open persecution;
This shall be the last persecution, hard before the last judgment, and the
Church shall suffer it, all the earth over: the whole city of the Devil shall
afflict the City of God at these times in all places.

This Gog and this Magog are not to be taken for (a) any particular Barbarous
nations, nor for the Getes and Messagetes, because of their litterall affinity,
nor for any other Countries beyond the Romans jurisdiction: he means all
the earth when he says, The people which are in the four quarters of the
Earth, and then adds that they are Gog and Magog. (b) Gog, is, an house: and
Magog, of an house: as if he had said, the house and he that comes of the
house. So that they are the nations wherein the Devil was bound before and now
that he is loosed, comes from thence, they being as the house, and he as
coming out of the house. But we refer both these names unto the nations,
and neither unto him, they are both the house, because the old enemy is hid and
housed in them: and they are of the house, when out of secret hate they burst
into open violence. Now where as he says: They went up into the plain of the
Earth, and compassed the tents of the Saints about, and the beloved City, we
must not think they came to any one set place, as if the Saints tents were in
any one certain nation, or the beloved City either: no, this City is nothing
but Gods Church, dispersed throughout the whole earth, and being resident in
all places, and amongst all nations, as them words, the plain of the Earth, do
insinuate: there shall the tents of the Saints stand, there shall the beloved
Ctty stand: There shall the fury of the presecuting enemy guirt them in with
multitudes of all nations united in one rage of persecution: there shall the
Church be hedged in with tribulations, and shut up on every side: yet shall
she not forsake her warfare, which is signified by the word, Tents.

L. VIVES.
ANy (a) particular Barbarous.] The Jews (says Hierome) and some of our
Christians also following them herein, think that Gog is meant of the Huge
nation of the Scythians, beyond Caucasus and the fens of Maeotis, reaching as
far as India and the Caspian Sea, and that these (after the Kingdom has
lasted a thousand years at Jerusalem) shall be stirred up by the Devil to
war against Israel and the Saints, bringing an innumerable multitude with
them, first out of Mossoch, which Josephus calls Cappadocia, and then out of
Thubal, which the Hebrews affirm to be Italy, and he holds to be Spain.
They shall bring also the Persians, Ethiopians and Lybians, with them of Gomer
and Theogorma, to wit, the Galatians and Phrigians, Saba also and Dedan, the
Carthaginians, and Tharsians. Thus far Hierome. In Ezch. lib. 11. (b) Gog is
an house.] So says Hierome. So that these two words imply all proud and false
knowledge that exalts it self against the truth.

Whether the fire falling from heaven, and devouring them, imply the last
torments of the wicked. CHAP. 12.
But his following words, fire came down from GOD out of heaven, and devoured
them, are not to be understood of that punishment, which these words imply:
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire: for then shall they be cast
into the fire; and not fire be cast down upon them. But the first fire
insinuates the firmness of the Saints, that will not yield unto the wills of
the wicked: for heaven is the firmament, whose firmness shall burn them up
for very zeal and vexation, that they cannot draw the servants of God unto the
side of Antichrist. This is the fire from God that shall burn them up, in that
God has so confirmed his Saints, that they become plagues unto their
opposites. Now whereas I said zeal, know that zeal is taken in good part or
in evil: in good, as here; The zeal of Psalm. 69.
thine house has eaten me up: in evil, as here: Zeal has possessed the
ignorant people. And now the fire shall eat up these opposers, but not that
fire of the last judgment. Besides if the Apostle by this fire from heaven do
imply the plague that shall fall upon such of Antichrists supporters, as Christ
at his coming shall find left on earth, yet not-with-standing this shall not
be the wickeds last plague, for that shall come upon them afterward, when they
are risen again in their bodies.

Whether it be a thousand years until the persecution under Antichrist. CHAP.
13.
THis last persecution under Antichrist (as we said before, and the Prophet
Daniell proves) shall last three years and an half: a little space! but
whether it belong to the thousand years of the devils bondage, and the Saints
reign with Christ; or be a space of time more then the other fully accounted,
is a great question. If we hold the first part, then we must say that the
Saints with Christ reigned longer then the devil was bound. Indeed the Saints
shall reign with him in the very heat of this persecution, and stand out
against the devil, when he is in greatest power to molest them. But why then
does the Scripture confine both their reign and the devils bondage to the just
sum of a thousand years, seeing the devils captivity is out three years
and six months sooner then their kingdom with Christ? well, if we hold the
later part, that these three years and a half, are beyond the just thousand,
to understand Saint John that the reign of the Saints with Christ, and the
devils imprisonment ended both at once; (according to the thousand years which
he gives alike unto both) so that the said time of persecution belongs
neither to the time of the one, nor the other: then we must confess, that
during this persecution, the Saints reign not with Christ. But what is he dare
affirm, that his members do not reign with him, when they do most firmliest
of all, keep their coherence with him? at such ^e as when the wars do rage,
the more apparent is their constancy, and the more frequent is the ascent from
martyrdom to glory? If we say they reign not because of the affliction that
they endure, we may then infer, that in the times already past, if the
Saints were once afflicted, their kingdom with their Savior ceased: and so
they whose souls this Evangelist beheld, namely of those who were slain for
the testimony of JESUS, and for the word of God, reigned not with Christ in
their persecutions, nor were they the kingdom of Christ, who were Christ's most
excellent possessions. Oh this is absurd and abominable! No, the victorious
souls of the glorious martyrs, subduing all earthly toils and tortures, went
up to reign with Christ (as they had reigned with him before) until the
expiration of the thousand years, and then shall take their bodies again, and
so reign body and soul with him for evermore. And therefore, in this sore
persecution of three years and an half, both the souls of those that
suffered for Christ before, and those that are then to suffer, shall reign
with him until the worlds date be out, and the kingdom begin that shall
never have end. Wherefore assuredly the Saints reign with Christ, shall
continue longer then Satan's bondage, for they shall reign with God the son
their King, three years and an half after Satan be loosed. It remains
then, that when we hear that, The Priests of God and of Christ, shall reign
with him a thousand years, and that after a thousand years the devil shall
be loosed, we must understand that either the thousand years are decretiuely
meant of the devils bondage only, and not of the Saints kingdom: or that the
years of the Saints kingdom are longer, and they of the devils bondage
shorter, or that seeing three years and an half is but a little space,
therefore it was not counted, either because the Saints reign had more then it
conceived, or the devils bondage less; as we said of the four hundred
years in the sixteen book. The time was more, yet that sum only was set
down, and this (if one observe it) is very frequent in the Scriptures.

Satan and his followers condemned: A recapitulation of the resurrection, and
the last judgment. CHAP. 14.
AFter this rehearsal of the last persecution, he proceeds with the success
of the devil and his congregation at the last judgment. And the devil (says
he) Romans 20. 11
that deceived them, was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where the
beast and the false Prophet shall be tormented even day and night for
euer-more. The beast (as I said before) is the city of the wicked: his false
Prophet is either Antichrist, or his image, the figmet that I spoke of before.
After all this, comes the last judgment, in the second resurrection, to wit,
the bodies, and this he relates by way of recapitulation, as it was revealed
unto him, I saw (says he) a great white throne, and one that sat on it, from
whose face flew away both the earth and heaven, and their place was no more
found. He says not, and heaven and earth flew away from his face [as importing
their present flight] for that befell not until after the judgment, but, from
whose face flew away both heaven and earth, namely afterward, when the
judgment shall be finished, then this heaven and this earth shall cease, and a
new world shall begin. But the old one shall not be utterly consumed, it shall
only pass through an universal change; and therefore the Apostle says. The
fashion of this world goes away, and I would have you without care. The
fashion goes away, not the 1. Cor. 7, 31.
nature. Well, let us follow Saint John, who after the sight of this throne,
etc. proceeds thus. And I saw the dead both great and small stand before
God, and the books were opened, and another book was opened which is the
book (a) of life, and the dead were judged of those things which were written
in the books, according to their works.

Behold, the opening of books, and of one book! This what it was, he
shows: which is the book of life. The other are the holy ones of the Old and
New Testament, that therein might be showed what God had commanded: but in the
book (b) of life were the commissions and omissions of every man on ^th,
particularly recorded. If we should imagine this to be an earthly book, (...)
as ours are, who is he that could imagine how huge a volume it were, or how
long the contents of it all, would be a reading? Shall there be as many Angels
as men, and each one recite his deeds that were committed to his guard? then
shall there not be one book for all, but each one shall have one. I but the
Scripture here mentions but one in this kind: It is therefore some divine power
^ed into the consciences of each peculiar, calling all their works
(wonderfully and strangely) unto memory, and so making each man's knowledge
accuse or excuse his own conscience: these are all, and singular, judged in
themselves. This power divine is called a book, and fitly, for therein is read
all the facts that the doer has committed, by the working of this he
remembers all: But the Apostle to explain the judgment of the dead more
fully, and to show how it compriseth great and small, he makes at it were a
return to what he had omitted (or rather deferred) saying, And the sea gave up
her dead which were within (...), and death and Hell delivered up the dead
which were in them. This was before that they were judged and yet was the
judgment mentioned before so that as I said, he returns, to his intermission,
and having said thus much. The sea gave up her dead. etc. As before, he now
proceeds in the true order, saying, And they were judged every (...)
according to his works. This he repeateth again here, to show the order
(...) was to manage the judgment whereof he had spoken before in these words,
And the dead were judged of those things which were written in the books, ac^g
to their works.

L. VIVES.
OF (a) life] So reads Hierome, and so reads the vulgar, we find not any
that reads it, Of the life of every one, as it is in some copies of
Augustine. The Greek is just as we ^d, (...), of life, without addition.

Of the dead, whom the Sea, and death, and hell shall give up to Judgment.
CHAP. 15.
But what dead are they that the Sea shall give up? for all that die in the sea
are not kept from hell, neither are their bodies kept in the sea: Shall we say
that the sea keeps the death that were good, and hell those that were evil,
horrible ^dity! Who is so sottish as to believe this? no, the sea here is fitly
understood to imply the whole world. Christ therefore intending to show that
those whom he found on earth at the time appointed, should be judged with
those that were to rise again, calls them dead men, and yet good men, unto
whom it was (...)* (...) are dead, and your life is hidden with Christ in God.
But them he calls evil of whom he said, Let the dead bury their dead.
Besides, they may be called dead, in that their bodies are deaths objects:
wherefore the Apostle says: The (...) is dead, because of sin, but the
spirit is life for righteousness sake: show that Romans 8. 12
in a mortal man, there is both a dead body and a living spirit, yet said he
not, the body is mortal, but dead, although according to his manner of speech,
he had called bodies, mortal, but alittle before. Thus then the sea gave up
her dead; the world wave up all mankind that as yet had not approached the
grave. And death and hell (quoth he) gave up the dead which were in them. The
sea gave up his, for as they were then so were they found: but death and hell
had theirs first called to the life which they had, left and then gave them up.
Perhaps it were not sufficient to say death only, or hell only, but he says
both, death and hell, death for such as might only die, and not enter hell,
and hell for such as did both, for if it be not absurd to believe that the
ancient fathers believing in Christ to come, were all at rest (a) in a place
far from all torments, (and yet within hell) until Christ's passion, and
descension thither set them at liberty: then surely the faithful that are
already redeemed by that passion, never know what hell means, from their
death until they arise and receive their rewards. And they judged every one
according to their deeds: a brief declaration of the judgment. And death and
hell (says he) were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second death,
Death and Hell, are but the devil and his angels, the only authors of death
and hells torments. This he did but recite before, when he said, And the
Devil that deceived them was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone: But his
mistical addition, Where the beast and the false Prophet shall be tormented,
etc. That he shows plainly here: Whosoever was not found written in the book
of life was cast into the lake of fire. Now as for the book of life, it is not
meant to put God in remembrance of any thing; least he should forget, but it
shows who are predestinate unto salvation, for God is not ignorant of their
number, neither reads he this book to find it: his prescience is rather
the book it self wherein all are written, that is fore-knowen.

L. VIVES.
IN a (a) place.] They call this place Abraham's bosom: wherein were no pains
felt as Christ shows plainly of Lazarus Luc. 16. and that this place was
far from the dungeon of the wicked: but where it is, or what is meant hereby,
S. Augustine confesses that he cannot define. Sup. Genes. lib. 8. These are
secrets all unneedful to be known, and all we unworthy to know them.

Of the new Heaven, and the new Earth CHAP. 16.
THe judgment of the wicked being past as he foretold, the judgment of the
good^ust follow, for he has already explained what Christ said in brief They
shall go into everlasting pain: now he must express the sequel: And the
righteous Mat. 25.
into life eternal. And I saw (says he) a new heaven and a new earth. The
first heaven and earth were gone, and so was thesea, for such was the order
described before by him when he saw the great white throne, and one sitting
upon it, from whose face they fled. So then they that were not in the book of
life being judged, and cast into eternal fire, what, or where it is, I hold is
unknown to (a) all but those unto whom it please the spirit to reveal it
then shall this world loose the figure by worldly fire, as it was erst
destroyed by earthly water. Then (as I said) shall all the worlds corruptible
qualities be burnt away, all those that held correspondence with our
corruption, shall be agreeable with immortality, that the world being so
substantially renewed, may be fittly adapted unto the men whose substances are
renewed also. But for that which follows, There (...) no more sea, whether it
imply that the sea should be dried up by that universal conflagration, or be
transformed into a better essence, I cannot easily determyne. Heaven and Earth,
were read, shall be renewed but as concerning the sea, I have not read any such
matter, that I can remember: unless that other place in this book, of that
which he calls as it were a sea of glass, like unto crystal, import any
such alteration. But in that place he speaks not of the worlds end, neither
does he say directly a sea, but, as a sea. Notwithstanding it is the Prophets
guise to speak of truths in mystical manner, and to mix truths and types
together: and so he might say, there was no more sea, in the same sense that
he said, the sea shall give up her dead, intending that there should be no
more turbulent times in the world, which he insinuates under the word, Sea.

L. VIVES.
Unknown (a) to all] [To all? nay (Saint Augustine) it seems you were never
at the schoole-mens lectures. There is no freshman there, at least no graduate,
but can tell [No word of this in Louuaine copy.]
that it is the elementany fire which is between the sphere of the moon, and
the air, that shall come down, and purge the earth of dross, together with
the air and water. If you like not this, another will tell you, that the
beams of the Son kindle a fire in the midst of the air, as in a burning
glass, and so work wonders.

But I do not blame you: fire was not of that use in your time that it is now
of, when e^y Philosopher (to omit the divines) can carry his mouth, his hands
and his feet full of fire (...) in the midst of Decembers cold, and Iulies
heat. Of Philosophers they become divines, and yet keep their old fiery
forms of doctrine still, so that they have far better judgment (...) (...)
hot case then you or your predecessors ever had.]

Of the glorification of the Church, after death, for ever. CHAP. 17.
AND I John (says he) saw that Holy City, new Jerusalem, come down R^ue.
21. 2 3, etc.
from GOD out of Heaven, prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband. And I
heard a great voice out of Heaven, saying, behold, the Tabernacle of GOD is
with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and he
himself shall be their GOD with them. And GOD shall wipeawaie all tears from
their eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither tears, neither crying,
neither shall there be any more pain, for the first things are passed. And
he that sat upon the Throne said, behold, I make althings new, etc.

This city is said to come from Heaven, because the grace of GOD that founded
it is heavenly, as GOD says in Esaias. I am the LORD that made thee. Esa. 45
This grace of his came down from heaven even from the beginning, and since,
the citizens of GOD have had their increase by the same grace, given (...) the
spirit, from heaven, in the fount of regeneration. But at the last Judgment of
GOD by his Son Christ, this only shall appear in a state so glorious, that
all the ancient shape shall be cast aside: for the bodies of each member shall
cast aside their old corruption, and put on a new form of immortality. For it
were too gross impudence to think that this was (...) of the thousand years
afore-sayd: wherein the Church is said to reign with Christ: because he says
directly, GOD shall wipe away all tears from their eyes: and there shall be no
more death, neither sorrows, neither crying, neither shall there be any more
pain. Who is so obstinately absurd, or so absurdly obstinate as to aver,
that any one Saint (much less the whole society of them) shall pass this
transitory life without tears or sorrows, or ever has passed it, clear of
them? seeing that the more holy his desires are, and the more zealous his
holiness, the more tears shall bedew his Orisons. Is it not the Heavenly
Jerusalem (that says,) My tears have been my meat day Psalm. 42, 3 (...) 6,
6
and night? And again: I cause my bed every night to swim, and water my
couch with tears and besides: My sorrow is renewed? Are not they his Sons
that bewail that which they will not forsake? But be clothed in it that
their Romans 8, 23
mortality may be re-inuested with eternity? and having the first fruits of
the spirit do sigh in themselves, waiting for the adoption, [that is] the
redemption of their bodies? Was not Saint Paul one of the Heavenly City, nay
and that the rather in that he took so great care for the earthly Israelites?
And when (a) shall death have to do in that City, but when they may say: Oh
death, where is thy sting? Oh hell, where is thy (b) victory? The sting of
death is sin. This 1 Cor. 15 55
could not be said there where death had no sting: but as for this world,
Saint John himself says: If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and there is no truth in us. And in this his Revelation, there are many
things written for 1 John 1
the excercising of the readers understanding, and there are but few things,
whose understanding may be an induction unto the rest: for he repeteth the
same thing, so many ways, that it seems wholly pertinent unto another purpose:
and indeed it may often be found as spoken in another kind. But here where
he says: GOD shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, etc: this is
directly meant of the world to come, and the immortality of the Saints, for
there shall be no sorrow, no tears, nor cause of sorrow or tears; if any one
think this place obscure let him look for no plainness in the Scriptures.

L. VIVES.
THy (a) victory?] Some read, contention: but the original is, Victory, and so
do Hierom and Ambrose read it, often. Saint Paul has the place out of Osee.
chap. ^3. ver. 14. and uses it. 1. Cor. 16. ver. 55. (b) When shall death] The
City of GOD shall see death, until the words that were said of Christ after
his resurrection, Oh hell, where is thy victory? may be said of all our
bodies, that is, at the resurrection, when they shall be like his glorified body.

Saint Peter's doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. CHAP. 18.
NOw let us hear what Saint Peter says of this Judgment. There shall come
(says he) in the last days, mockers, which will walk after their lusts, and
say, Where is the promise of his coming? For since the fathers died, all
things continue (...) Pet. 3, 4, 5, 6 etc.
alike from the beginning of the creation. For this, they (willingly) know not,
that the heavens were of old, and the earth that was of the water, and by the
water by the word of GOD, wherefore the world, that then was, perished,
ouer-flowed with the water. But the heavens and earth that now are, are kept by
the same word in store and reserved unto fire against the day of judgment; and
of the destruction of ungodly men. Dearcly beloved be not ignorant of this,
that one day with the LORD is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as
one. day. The LORD is not flack concerning his promise, (as some men count
slackenesse) but is pacient toward us, and would have no man to perish, but
would have all men to come to repentance. But the day of the LORD will come as
a thief in the night, in the which the heavens shall pass away with a noise,
and the elements shall melt with (...), and the earth with the works that are
therein shall be burnt up. Seeing therefore all these must be dissolved, what
manner of persons ought you to be in holy conversation and Godliness, longing
for, and hasting unto the coming of the day of GOD, by the which, the heavens
being on fire shall be dissolved and the elements shall melt with heat. But
vve-looke for a new heaven, and a new earth according to his promise wherein
dwells righteousness. Thus sarre. Now here is no mention of the
resurrection of the dead: but enough concerning the destruction of the world,
where his mention of the worlds destruction already past, gives us sufficient
warning to believe the dissolution to come. For the world that was then
perished (says he) at that time: (not only the earth, but that part of the
air also which the watter (a) possessed, or got above, and so consequently
almost all those ayry regions, which he calls the heaven, or rather (in the
plural) the heavens) but not the spheres wherein the Sun and the Stars
have their places, they were not touched: the rest was altered by humidity, and
so the earth perished, and lost the first form by the deluge. But the heavens
and earth (says he) that now are) are kept by the same word in store, and
reserved unto fire against the day of judgment, and of the destruction of
ungodly men. Therefore the same heaven and earth that remained after the
deluge, are they that are reserved unto the fire aforesaid, unto the day of
judgment and perdition of the wicked. For because of this great change he
sticks not to say, there shall be a destruction of men also, whereas indeed
their essences shall never be anni^e, although they live in torment. Yea but
(may some say) if this old heaven and earth shall at the worlds end be burned
before the new ones be made, where shall the Saints be in the time of this
conflagration, since they have bodies and therefore must be in some bodily
place? We may answer, in the upper parts, whither the fire as then shall no
more ascend, then the water did in the deluge. For at this day the Saints
bodies shall be mooueable whither their wills do please: nor need they fear the
fire, being now both immortal and incorruptible: (b) for the three children
though their bodies were corruptible, were notwithstanding preserved from
loosing an hair by the fire, and might not the Saints bodies be preserved by
the same power?

L. VIVES.
THe (a) water possessed] For the two upper regions of the air do come just
so low that they are bounded with a circle drawn round about the earthly,
highest mountains tops. Now the water in the deluge being fifteen cubits
higher then the highest mountain, it both drowned that part of the air
wherein we live, as also that part of the middle region wherein the birds do
usually fly: both which in Holy writ, and in Poetry also are called Heavens.
(b) The three] Sidrach, Misach, and Abdenago, at Babylon, who were cast into a
^nace for scorning of Nabuchadnezzars golden statue. Dan. 3.

Saint Paul's words to the Thessalonians: Of the manifestations of Antichrist
whose times shall immediately fore-runne the day of the Lord. CHAP. 19.
I See I must ouer-passe many worthy sayings of the Saints, concerning this
day; least my work should grow to too great a volume: but yet Saint Paul's I
may by no means omit. Thus says he. Now I beseech you brethren by the
coming 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. etc.
of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, and by our assembling unto him, that you be not
suddenly moved from your mind, nor troubled neither by spirit, nor by word,
nor by letter, as if it were from us, as though the day of CHRIST were at hand.
Let no man deceive you by any means, for that day shall not come except there
come (a) a fugitive first, and that that man of sin be disclosed, even the
son of perdition: which is an adversary, and exalts himself against all is
called god, or that is worshipped: so that he sits as God in the Temple of
God, showing himself that he is God. Remember ye not that when I was yet with
you, I told you these things? And now ye know what withholdeth that he might
be revealed in his due time. For the mystery of iniquity does already work:
only he which now withholdeth, shall let till he be taken out of the way: and
the wicked man shall be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of
his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightness of his coming: even him
whose coming is by the working of Satan, with all power, and signs, and
lying wonders, and in all deceiuablenesse of unrighteousness amongst them that
perish, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be
saved. And therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe lies; that all they might be damned which believe not in the truth,
but had pleasure in unrighteousness. This is doubtless meant of Antichrist
and the day of judgment. For this day he says shall not come, until that
Antichrist be come before it, he that is called here a fugitive from the face
of the Lord: for if all the ungodly deserve this name ^y not he most of all?
But in what temple of God he is to sit as God, it is doubtful: whether it be
the ruined Temple of Solomon, or in the church. For it cannot be any heathen
temple. Saint Paul would never call any such the Temple of God. Some therefore
do by Antichrist understand the devil and all his domination, together with
the whole multitude of his followers: and imagine that it were better to say,
he shall sit (b) in Templum dei, as the Temple of God, that is, as though he
were the church: as we say (c) Sedet in amicum, he sits as a friend, and so
forth. But whereas he says, And now ye know what withholds, that is, what
staieth him from being revealed; this implies that they knew it before, and
therefore he does not relate it here. Wherefore we that know not what they
knew, do strive to get understanding of his knowledge of the Apostle, but we
cannot; because his addition makes it the more mystical. For what is this:
The mystery of iniquity does already work, only he that withholdeth shall
let till he be taken out of the way? Truly I confess, that I am utterly
ignorant of his meaning: but what others conjectures are hereof I will not be
silent in. Some say Saint Paul spoke (d) of the state of Rome, and would not
be plainer, least he should incur a slander that he wished Romes Empire
evil fortune, whereas it was hoped that (e) it should continue for ever. By
the mystery of iniquity they say he meant Nero, whose deeds were great
resemblances of Antichrists, so that some think that he shall rise again and
be the true Antichrist. Others think he (f) never died, but vanished, and that
he lives (in (g) that age and vigor wherein he was supposed to be slain)
until the time come that he shall be revealed, and restored to his Kingdom.

But this is too presumptuous an opinion. Only these words: He that
withholdeth shall let till he be taken out of the way. May not unfitly be
understood of Rome, as if he had said. He that now reigns shall reign until
he be taken away, And then the wicked man shall be revealed. This is
Antichrist, no man doubts it. Now some understand these words, Now ye know
what withholdeth, and, the mystery of iniquity does already work; to be meant
only of the false christians in the church, who shall increase unto a number
which shall make Antichrist a great people: this, say they, is the mystery of
iniquity, for it is yet unrevealed: and therefore does the Apostle animate the
faithful to preseuere, saying let him that holds, hold (for thus they take
this place) until he be taken out of the way, that is, until Antichrist and
his troops, (this unrevealed mystery of iniquity) depart out of the midst of
the church. And unto this do they hold Saint John's words to belong: Babes it
is the last time: And as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now
there are many Antichrists, whereby we know that it 1 Ioh. 2, 18, 19
is the last time. They went out from us but they were not of us: for if they
had been of us, they would have continued with us. Thus (say they) even as
before the end in this time which Saint John calls the last of all, many
heretics (whom he calls many Antichrists) went out of the church, so
likewise hereafter all those that belong not unto CHRIST but unto the last,
Antichrist shall depart out of the midst of CHRIST'S flock, and then shall
the man of sin be revealed. Thus one takes the Apostles words one way, and
another another way, but this he means assuredly, that CHRIST will not come
to judge the world until Antichrist be here before him to seduce the world:
(although it be GODS secret judgment that he should thus seduce it) for his
coming shall be (as it is said) by the working of Satan with all power, and
signs, and lying, wonders, and in all deceiuiablenesse of unrighteousness
amongst them that perish. For then shall Satan be let loose, and work by
this Antichrist unto all men's admiration, and yet all in falsehood. Now here is
a doubt, whither they be called lying wonders because he does but delude the
eyes in these miracles, and does not what he seems to do, or because that
although they may be real actions, yet the end of them all is to draw
ignorant mankind into this false conceit that such things could not be done
but by a divine power, because they know not that the devil shall have more
power given him then, them ever he had had before? For the fire that fell from
Heaven, and burnt the house and goods of Holy Job, and the whirlewind that
smote the building and slew his children, were neither of them false
apparitions: yet were they the devils effects, by the power that GOD had given
him.

Therefore, in what respect these are called lying wonders, shall be then more
apparent. Howsoever, they shall seduce such as deserve to be seduced, because
they received not the love of truth that they might be saved: whereupon the
Apostle adds this. Therefore shall GOD send them strong delusion that they
should believe lies. GOD shall send it: because his just judgment permittes
it, though the devils maleuolent desire performs it. That all they might be
damned which believe not in the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness.
Thus being condemned, they are feduced, and being seduced, condemned. But
their seducement is by the secret judgment of God, justly secret, and secretly
just; even his that has judged continually, ever since the world began. But
their condemnation shall be by the last and manifest judgment of JESUS CHRIST,
he that judges most justly and was most unjustly judged himself.

L. VIVES.
A (a) Fugitiue] The greek is (...), a departing, and so the vulgar reads it.
(b) In templum dei] So does the greek read it. (c) Sedet in amicum] The common
phrase of scripture. Esto mihi in deum: be thou my God, etc. (d) Of the state
of Rome] Lactant. lib. 7. It was a general opinion, that toward the end of
the world, there should ten Kings share the Roman Empire amongst them, and
that Antichrist should be the eleauenth and overcome them all. Hier. in Daniel.
But these are idle conjectures. (e) It should continue for ever.] As the old
Romans dreamed. So says Jupiter in Uirgil. His ego nec metas rerum, nec
tempora pon^,
Imperium sine fine dedi. --
I bound these fortunes by no time, or place,
Their state shall ever stand. --


(f) Never died] His death in deed was secret; for upon Galba's approach he
fled in the night with four only in his company (and his head covered) unto
his country house between via Salaria and Momentana, and there stabd himself,
and was buried by his nurses and concubine, in the Sepulcher of the Domitii
near to the field. Sueton. (g) In that age] Being two and thirty years old.

Saint Paul's doctrine of the resurrection of the dead. CHAP. 20.
But the Apostle says nothing of the resurrection of the dead in this place
mary in another place he says thus, I would not have you ignorant (brethren)
1 Thessalonians. 4, 13, 14, etc.
concerning those which sleep, that ye sorrow not even as those which have no
hope: for if we believe that JESUS is dead, and is risen again, even so, them
which sleep in JESUS, will GOD bring with him. For this we say unto you by
the word of the LORD that we which live and are remaining at the coming of
the LORD, shall not prevent those that sleep. For the LORD himself shall
descend from heaven with as^te, with the voice of the Arch-angell, and with the
trumpet of GOD, and the dead in CHRIST shall arise first: then shall we which
live and remain be caught up with them also in the clouds to meet the LORD
in the air, and so shall we ever be with the LORD. Here the Apostle makes a
plain demonstration of the future resurrection, when CHRIST shall come to sit
in judgment over both quick and dead. But it is an ordinary question whether
those whom CHRIST shall find alive at his coming (whom the Apostle admits
himself and those with him to be) shall ever die at all, or go immediately in
a moment up with the rest to meet CHRIST, and so be forth with immortallized.
It is not impossible for them both to die and live again in their very
ascension through the air. For these words; And so shall we even be with the
LORD, are not to be taken as if we were to continue in the air with him, for
he shall not stay in the air, but go and come through it. We meet him
coming, but not staying but so shall we ever be with him, that is, in
immortal bodies, where ever our stay be. And in this sense the Apostle seems
to urge the understanding of this question to be this, that those whom Christ
shall find alive, shall neuer-the-lesse both dye and revive, where he says.
In Christ shall all be made alive: and upon this, by and by 1. Cor. 15. 51.
after; That which thou sowest, is not quickened except it dye. How then shall
those whom Christ shall find alive be quickened in him by immortality, unless
they do first dye, if these words of the Apostle be true? If we say that the
sowing is meant only of those bodies that are returned to the earth, according
to the judgment laid upon our transgressing forefathers: Thou art dust, and
to dust Genesis 3. 19
shall thou return: then we must confess, that neither that place of Saint
Paul nor this of Genesis concerns their bodies whom Christ at his coming
shall find in the body: for those are not sown, because they neither go to
the earth, nor return from it, how-so-euer they have a little stay in the
air, or other-wise taste not of any death at all. But now the Apostle has
another place of the resurrection. 1. Cor. 15. 22. 36.
(a) We shall all rise again, says he, or (as it is in some copies) we
shall all sleep.

So then, death going always before resurrection, and sleep in this place
implying nothing but death, how shall all rise again, or sleep, if so many as
Christ shall find living upon earth, shall neither sleep nor rise again? Now
therefore, if we do but avouch that the Saints whom Christ shall find in
the flesh, and who shall meet him in the air, do in this rapture leave their
bodies for a while, and then take them on again; the doubt is cleared both in
the Apostles first words; That which thou sowest is not quickened, except it
dye: as also in his later, We shall all rise again, or we shall all sleep:
for they shall not be quickened unto immortality, unless they first taste of
death: and consequently have a share in the resurrection by means of this
their little sleep. And why is it incredible that those bodies should be
sown, and revived immortally in the air, when as we believe the Apostle,
where he says plainly, that the resurrection shall be in the twinkling of
an eye, and that the dust of the most aged body, shall in one moment concur
to retain those members, that thence-forth shall never perish: Nor let us
think that that place of Genesis, Thou art dust, etc. concerns not the
Saints, for all that their dead bodies return not to the earth, but are both
dead and revived whilst they are in the air.

To dust shall thou return, that is, thou shall by loss of life, become that
which thou wast ere thou had life. It was earth in whose face the LORD
breathed the breath of life, when man became a living soul: So that it might
be said. Thou art living dust, which thou wast not, and thou shall be ^lesse
dust, as thou wast. Such are all dead bodies even before putrefaction, and such
shall they be (if they dye) where-so-euer they dye, being void of life,
which not-with-standing they shall immediately return unto. So then shall they
return unto earth, in becoming earth, of living men; as that returns to
ashes which is made of ashes, that unto putrefaction which is putrified, that
into a pot which of earth is made a pot, and a thousand other such like
instances. But how this shall be, we do but conjecture now, (...) shall know
till we see it.

That (b) there shall be a resurrection of the flesh at the coming of Christ
to judge the quick and the dead, all that are christians must confidently
believe: nor is our faith in this point any way frivolous, although we know
not how this shall be effected. But, as I said before, so mean I still, to
proceed in laying down such places of the Old Testament now, as concern this
last judgment, as far as need shall be; which it shall not be altogether so
necessary to stand much upon, if the reader do but aid his understanding with
that which is passed before.

L. VIVES.
WE shall (a) all rise againe] The greek copies read this place diversely
(Hier. ep. ad Numerium:) for some read it, We shall not all sleep, but we
shall all be changed. Eras Annot. Non. Testam, et in Apolog. Hence I think,
arose the question whether all should die, or those that lived at the judgment
day be made immortal without death. Petrus Lumbardus Sent. 3. did. 40,
showing the difference hereupon between Ambrose and Hierome, dares not
determine, because Augustine leans to Ambrose, and most of all the greek
fathers to Hierome, reading it, we shall not all sleep. And for Ambrose,
Erasmus shows how he stagreth in this assertion. Mean while we do follow
him whom we explane. (b) There shall be a resurrection.] This we must stick to,
it is a part of our faith. How it must be, let us leave to GOD, and yoke our
selves in that sweet obedience unto Christ. It suffices for a christian to
believe this was, or that shall be, let the means alone to him who concealeth
the plainest works of nature from our apprehensions.

Esaias his doctrine concerning the judgment and the resurrection. CHAP. 21.
THe dead (says the prophet Esaias) shall arise again; and they shall arise
again that were in the graves; and all they shall be glad that are in the earth:
for the Is. 26. 19
Dew that is from thee, is health to them, and the Land (or earth) of the
wicked shall fall. All this belongs to the resurrection. And whereas he says
the land of the wicked shall fall, that is to be understood by their bodies
which shall be ruined by damnation. But now if we look well into the
resurrection of the Saints, these words, The dead shall arise again, belong
to the first resurrection, and these, they shall arise again that were in the
graves, unto the second. And as for those holy ones whom CHRIST shall meet in
their flesh, this is fittely pertinent unto them: All they shall be glad that are
in the earth: for the dew that is from thee, is health unto them: By health in
this place, is meant immortality, for that is the best health, and needs no
daiely refection to preserve it.

The same prophet also speaks of the judgment, both to the comfort of the
Godly, and the terror of the wicked. Thus says the Lord: Behold, I will
incline unto them as a flood of peace: and the glory of the Gentiles like a
flowing stream: Then shall ye suck: ye shall be borne upon her shoulders, and
be joyful upon her knees. As one whom his mother comfort so will I comfort
you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem. And when ye see this your hearts
shall rejoice and your bones shall flourish as an herb: and the hand of the
Lord shall be known unto his servants, and his indignation against his enemies.
For be hold the Lord will come with fire, and his chariots like a whirle-winde,
that he may recompense his anger with wrath, and his indignation with a flame
of fire, for the LORD will judge with fire, and with his sword, all flesh, and
the slain of the LORD shall be many. Thus you hear, as touching his promises to
the good, he inclines to them like a flood of peace: that is in all peaceful
abundance; and such shall our souls be watered withal at the worlds end:
(but of this in the last book before) This he extends unto them to whom he
promises such bliss that we may conceive that this flood of beatitude does
sufficently bedewe all the whole region of Heaven, where we are to dwell. But
because he bestows the peace of incorruption upon corruptible bodies,
therefore he says he will incline, as if he came downe-wards from above, to
make mankind equal with the Angels.

By Jerusalem we understand not her that serves with her children, but our
free mother (as the Apostle says) which is eternal, and above; where after
the shockes of all our sorrows be passed, we shall be conforted, and rest
like infants in her glorious arms, and on her knees. Then shall our rude
ignorance be invested in that vn-accustomed blessedness; then-shall we see
this, and our heart shall rejoice: what shall we see? it is not set down. But
what is it but GOD, that so the Gospel might be fulfilled: Blessed are the
pure in heart for they shall see GOD. And all that bliss which we now believe
but, like fraile-men, in far less measure Mat. 5.
then it is, we shall then behold and see: Here we hope, there we shall
enjoy. But least we should imagine that those causes of joy concerned,
only the spirit; he adds, And your bones shall flourish as an herb. Here
is a plain touch at the resurrection, relating as it were, what he had
omitted.

These things shall not be done even then when we do see them; but when they
are already come to pass, then shall we see them. For he had spoken before
of the new heaven and earth in his relations of the promises that were in the
end to be performed to the Saints, saying, I will create new Heavens, and a
new Earth, and the former shall not he remembered nor come into mind: but be
you glad and rejoice therein; for behold I will create Jerusalem as a
rejoicing, and her people as a joy, and I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy
in my people, and the voice of weeping shall be heard no more in her, nor the
voice of crying, etc. This now some apply to the proof of Chiliasme: because
that the Prophets manner is to mingle tropes with truths, to exercise the
Reader in a fit inquest of their spiritual meanings, but carnal sloth
contents it self with the litterall sense only, and never seeks further.
Thus far of the Prophets words before that he wrote what we have in hand:
now for-ward again. And your bones shall flourish like (...) herb: that he
means only the resurrection of the Saints in this, his addition proves:
And the hand of the LORD shall be known amongst his servants. What is this,
but his hand, distinguishing his servants from such as scorn him? of those it
follows. And his indignation against his enemies: or (as another interprets
it) (a) against the unfaithful. This is no threatening, but the effect of all
his threatenings. For behold (says he) the LORD will come with fire, and his
chariots like a whirle-winde that he may recompense his anger with wrath, and
his indignation with a flame of fire. For the LORD will judge with fire, and
with his sword, all flesh, and the slain of the LORD shall be many, whither
they perish by fire or sword, or whirle-winde, all denounce but the pain of
the Judgment, for he says that GOD shall come as a whirle-winde, that is,
unto such as his coming shall be penal unto. Again his chariots, being spoke
in the plural, employ his ministering Angels. But whereas he says that all
flesh shall be judged by this fire and sword, we do except the Saints, and
imply it only to those which mind earthly things, and such minding is
deadly: and such as those of whom GOD says, My spirit shall not alwaie
strive with man, because he is but flesh. But these words. The Phil. 3 Genesis 6
slain (or wounded) of the LORD shall be many; this implies the second death.

The fire, the sword, and the stroke, may all be understood in a good sense:
for GOD has said he would send fire into the world: And the Holy Ghost
descended in the shape of fiery tongues. Again, I came not (says CHRIST) to
send peace, but the sword. And the scripture calls GODS Word a two edged
sword; because of the two Testaments. Besides, the church in the Canticles,
says that she is wounded with love, even as shot, with the force of love.
So that this is plain, and so is this that we read, that the LORD shall come
as a Revenger, etc.

So then the Prophet proceeds with the destruction of the wicked, under the
types of such as in the old law forbear not the for bidden meats, rehearsing
the gratiousnesse of the New Testament from CHRIST'S first coming, even unto
this Judgment we have now in hand. For first, he tells how GOD says that he
comes to gather the nations, and how they shall come to see his glory. For
all have sinned (says the Apostle) and are deprived of the glory of GOD. He
says also that he will leave signs amongst them to induce them to believe in
him, and that he will send his elect into many nations, and far Islands that
never heard of his name, to preach his glory to the Gentiles, and to bring
their brethren, that is the brethren of the elect Israel (of whom he
spoke) into his presence: to bring them for an offering unto GOD in chariots,
and upon horses; that is by the ministry of men or angels, unto holy
Jerusalem, that is now spread through-out the earth in her faithful Citizens.
For these when GOD assisteth them, believe; and when they believe, they come
unto him. Now GOD in a simily compares them to the children of Israel that
offered unto him his sacrifices with psalms in the Temple: as the church does
now in all places: and he promises to take of them for priests and for
levites, which now we see he does. For he has not observed fleshly kindred
in his choice now, as he did in the time of Aurons priesthood: but according
to the New Testament where CHRIST is priest after the order of Melchisedech,
he selecteth each of his priests according to the merit which GODS grace has
stored his soul with: as we now behold: and these (b) Priests are not to be
reckned of for their places (for those the unworthy do often hold) but for
their sanctities, which are not common both to good and bad.

Now the prophet having thus opened Gods mercies to the church, adds the
several ends that shall befall both the good and bad in the last judgment, in
these Is. 66, 22, 23, (...).
w^ds: As the new heavens and the new earth which I shall make shall remain
before me, says the LORD: even so shall your seed and your name. And from
month to month, and from Sabbath to Sabbath shall all flesh come to worship
before me, says the LORD: And they shall go forth and look upon the members
of the men that have transgressed against me; for their women shall not die,
neither shall their fire be quenshed; and they shall be an abhorring unto all
flesh. Thus ends the Prophet his book, with the end of the world. Some in
this place for members, read (c) carcass, hereby intimating the bodies evident
punishment, though indeed a carcass is properly nothing but dead flesh: but
those bodies shall be living, otherwise, how should they be sensible of pain?
unless we say, they are dead bodies, that is, their souls are fallen into
the second death, and so we may fitly call them carcasses. And thus is the
Prophets former words also to be taken; The land of the wicked shall fall:
Cadauer, a carcass, all knows, comes of Cado to fall: Now the translators
by saying the carcasses of the men, do not exclude women from this damnation,
but they speak as by the better sex, being that woman was taken out of man.
But note especially, that where the Prophet speaking of the blessed, says, all
flesh shall come to worship; He means not all men (for the greater number
shall be in torments) but some shall come out of all nations, to adore him in the
Heavenly Jerusalem. But as I was a saying, since here is mention of the good by
flesh, and of the bad, by carcasses; Verelie after the resurrection of the
flesh, our faith whereof, these words do confirm, that which shall confine
both the good and bad unto their last limits, shall be the judgment to come.

L. VIVES.
AGainst (a) the vnfaithfull] Hierome, out of the hebrew, and the seauenty
reads it, Against his enemies. (b) Priests are not to be] It is not
priesthood, nor orders that makes a man any whit respected of GOD; for these
dignities both the Godly and ungodly do share in: but it is purity of
conscience, good life, and honest carriage, which have resemblance of that
immense, that incorruptible nature of GOD, those win us favor with him. (c)
Carkasses] So does Hierome read it. But mark Saint Augustines uprightness,
rather to give a favorable exposition of a translation to which he stood not
affected, then any way to cavil at it.

How the Saints shall go forth to see the pains of the wicked. CHAP. 22.
But how shall the good go forth to see the bad plagued? Shall they leave
their blessed habitations, and go corporally to hell, to see them face to
face? God forbid: no, they shall go in knowledge. For this implies that the
damned shall be without, and for this cause the Lord calls their place, utter
darkness, opposite unto that ingresse allowed the good servant in these
words, Enter into thy Masters joy: and least the wicked should be thought to
go in to be seen, rather then the good should go out by knowledge to see
them, being to know that which is without: for the tormented shall never know
what is done in the Lords Joy: but they that are in that Joy, shall know what
is done in the utter darkness: Therefore says the Prophet, they shall go
forth; in that they shall know what is without, for if the Prophets through
that small part of divine inspiration could know these things before they came
to pass: how then shall not these immortalls know them being passed, seeing
that in them the Lord is al in all? Thus shall the Saints be blessed both in
seed, and name. In seed, as Saint John says, And his seed remains in him. In
name, as Isaias says, So shall your name continue; from month to month, and
from Sabbath to Sabbath shall they have rest upon rest: passing thus from old
and temporal types to new and everlasting truths. But the pains of the
wicked, that eternal worm, and that never dying fire, is diversely expounded,
either in reference to the body only, or to the soul only, or the fire to
belong to the body reallie, and the worm to the soul figuratively, and this
last is the likeliest of the three. But here is no place to discuss
peculiars. We must end this volume, as we promised, with the judgment, the
separation of good from badde, and the rewards and punishments accordingly
distributed.

Daniels prophecy of Antichrist; of the judgment, and of the Kingdom of the
Saints. CHAP. 23.
OF this Judgment Daniel prophecieth, saying, that Antichrist shall fore-run
it: and so he proceeds to the eternal Kingdom of the Saints: for having in
a vision beheld the four beasts, types of the four Monarchies, and the fourth
ouer-throwne by a King which all confess to be Antichrist; and then seeing
the eternal Empire of the Son of man (CHRIST) to follow:] Daniell (says
he) Was troubled in spirit, in the midst of my body, and the visions of Dan.
7.
mine head made me affraide. Therefore I came to one of them that stood by,
and asked him the truth of all this: so he told me and showed me the
interpretation of these things. These four great beasts are four Kings, which
shall arise out of the earth, and they shall take away the Kingdom of the most
high, and possess it for ever, even for ever and ever. After this, I would
know the truth of the fourth beast which was so unlike the other, very
fearful, whose teeth were of Iron, and his nails of Brass, which devoured,
brake in pieces and stamped the rest under his feet. Also to know of the
ten horns that were on his head, and of the other that came up, before
whom three fell, and of the horn that had eyes, and of the month that spoke
presumptuous things, whose look was more stout then his fellows: I beheld,
and the same horn made battle against the Saints, yea and prevailed against
them, until the Ancient of days came, and Judgment was given to the Saints
of the most high: and the time approached that the Saints possessed the
Kingdom.

All this Daniel inquired, and then he proceeds. Then he said, the fourth
beast shall be the fourth Kingdom on the earth, which shall be unlike to all the
Kingdoms and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down and shall
break it in pieces. And the ten horns are ten Kings that shall rise, and
another shall rise after them, and he shall be unlike to the first, and he
shall subdue three Kings, and shall speak words against the most high, and
shall consume the Saints, of the most high, and think that he may change
times and laws; and they shall be given into his hand until a time, and half
a time.

But the judgment shall sit and they shall take away his dominion, to consume
and destroy it unto the end: And the kingdom, and dominion, and the greatness
of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven shall be given unto the holy people of the
most high whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom, and all powers shall serve
and obey him. Even this is the end of the matter. I Daniell had many
cogitations which troubled me, and my countenance changed in me but I kept the
matter in mine heart. These four Kingdoms, some hold to be (a) those of the
Assirians, Persians, Macedonians, and Romans.

How fittly, read Hieromes commentaries upon Daniel, and there you may have
full instruction. But that Antichrists Kingdom shall be most cruel against the
Church (although it last but a while) until the Saints receive the
Sovereignty, none that reads this place, can make question of. The time, times
and half a time is three years and a half: a year, two years and half a
year, and this is declared by a number of days afterward, and by the numbers
of months in other places of the Scriptures. Times in this place seems
indefinite; but the (b) duall number is here used by the LXX. which the Latins
have not: but both the Greeks and (c) Hebrews have. Times then stands but
for two times. Now I am afraid (indeed) that we deceive our selves in the ten
Kings whom Antichrist shall find, as ten men, by our account, but there are
not so many Kings in the Roman Monarchy, so that Antichrist may come upon us
ere we be aware. What if this number imply the fulness of regality, which
shall be expired ere he come, as the numbers of a thousand, a hundred, seven,
and diverse more do oftentimes signify the whole of a thing? I leave it to
judgment. On with Daniel, There shall be a time of trouble (says he chap. 12)
such as never was since there began to be a nation unto that same time, and at
that time thy people shall be delivered, every one that shall be found written in
the book. And many that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake: some to
everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. And they that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn to
righteousness shall shine as the stars, for ever and ever. How like is this
place unto that of the Gospel concerning the resurection? that says: They
that are in the graves: This, they that are in the dust of the Earth that
says, shall come forth: this, shall awake, that, they that have done good, unto
eternal life, and they that have done evil unto everlasting damnation: this,
some to everlasting life, and some to perpetual shame and contempt. Nor think
they differ in that the Gospel says, all that are in the graves, and the
Prophet says ^t Many: for the Scripture sometimes uses many for all. So was
it said unto Abraham, thou shall be a father of many nations, and yet in
another place, in thy seed shall all nations be blessed. Of this resurrection,
it was said thus to Daniell himself a little after; Go thou thy way till the
end be: for thou shall rest, and stand up in thy lot at the end of the days.

L. VIVES.
THose of the (a) Assirians.] For the first beast was like a Lioness, bloody
and lustful and like an Eagle, proud, and long lived: and such was the Assirian
Empire: The second like a Bear, rough and fierry, such was Cyrus founder of
the Persian Monarchy. The third like a winged Leopard, headlong, bloody, and
rushing upon death: such was the Macedon, who seemed rather to fly to
souerainety then go on foot: for how soon did he bring all Asia under? the
forth, the strangest, strongest, bloudiest. etc. Of all: such was the Roman
Empire, that exceeded Barbarism in cruelty, filling all the world with the
rust of her own breeding, with bones of her massacring, with ruins of her
causing. (b) The Duall] The ancient Greeks had but singular and plural: the
duall was added afterward, which the Latins would not imitate. (Dionys.
Grammat.) yet the Greek Poets do often use the plural for the duall, as ye
may observe in Homer, etc. (c) Hebrews haue] So says Hierome upon Daniel.

David's Prophecies of the worlds end, and the last judgment. CHAP. 24.
TOuching this last judgment, we find much spoken of it in the Psalms, but I
omit the most of it, yet the plainest thereof, I cannot but rehearse. Thou
before time laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of
thy hands. They shall perish, but thou shall endure: they shall all wax old as
does a garment; as a Psalm. 101. 25. 26.
vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed: but thou art the
same, and thy years shall not fail. What reason now has Porphyry to praise
the Hebrews for their adoration of the greatest God, and yet blame the
Christians for auoutching that the world shall have an end, seeing that these
books of the Hebrews, whose God he confesses to be terrible to all the
rest, do directly auerre it? They shall perish: what? the heavens: the
greatest, the safest, the highest part of the world shall perish, and shall not
the lesser, and lower do so too? If Jove do not like this, whose oracle (as
Porphyry says) has condemned the Christians credulity, why does he not
condemn the Hebrews also, for leaving this doctrine especially recorded in
their holiest writings: But if this Jewish wisdom which he does so commend,
affirm that the heavens shall perish, how vain a thing is it, to detest the
Christian faith, for auouching that the world shall perish, which if it perish
not, then cannot the heavens perish. Now our own scriptures, with which the
Jews have nothing to do, our Ghospels and Apostolic writings, do all affirm
this. The fashion of this world goes away. The world passes away. Heaven and
earth shall pass away. But I think that passes away, does not imply so much
as perishes. But in Saint Peter's Epistle, where he says, how the world
perished being ouer-flowed with water, is plainly set down both what he meant
by the world, how far it perished, and what was reserved for fire, and the
perdition of the wicked. And by and by after, The day of the Lord will come as
a thief in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass away with a noise,
the elements shall melt with heat, and the earth with the rocks that are
therein shall be burnt up; and so concludes, that seeing all these perish,
what manner persons ought ye to be? Now we may understand that those heavens
shall perish which he said were reserved for fire, and those elements shall
melt which are here below in this mole of discordant natures; wherein also he
says those heavens are reserved, not meaning the upper spheres that are the
seats of the stars: for whereas it is written that the stars shall fall from
heaven, it is a good proof that the heavens shall remain untouched; (if these
words be not figurative, but that the stars shall fall indeed, or some such
wondrous apparitions fill this lower air, as Virgil speaks of, Stella (a)
facem ducens multa cum luce cucurrit.
A tailed Star flew on, with glistring light. Aeneid. 2.



And so hid it self in the woods of Ida.) But this place of the Psalm seems
to exempt none of all the heavens from perishing. The heavens are the works of
thine hands: they shall perish: thus as he made all, so all shall be
destroyed. Psalm. 101.
The Pagans scorn (I am sure) to call Saint Peter to defend that Hebrew
doctrine which their gods do so approve; by alleging the figurative speaking
hereof pars pro toto: all shall perrish, meaning only all the lower parts: as
the Apostle says there, that the world perished in the deluge, when it was
only the earth, and some part of the air. This shift they will not make,
least they should either yield to Saint Peter, or allow this position, that the
fire at the last judgment may do as much as we say the deluge did before:
their assertion, that all mankind can never perish, will allow them neither
of these euasions. Then they must needs say that when their gods commended the
Hebrews wisdom, they had not read this Psalm: but there is another Psalm as
plain as this: Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence: a fire shall
devour before him, and a mighty tempest shall be moved round about him: He
shall call the heaven above, and the earth to judge his people. Gather my
Saints together unto me, those that make a covenant with me with sacrifice.
This is spoken of Christ, whom we believe shall come from heaven to judge
both the quick and the dead. He shall come openly, to judge all most justly,
who when he came in secret was judged himself most unjustly. He shall come
and shall not be silent, his voice now shall confound the judge before whom
he was silent, when he was lead like a sheep to the slaughter, and as a
lamb before the shearer is dumb, as the Prophet says of him, and as it was
fulfilled in the Gospel. Of this fire and tempest we spoke before, in our
discourse of Isaias prophecy touching this point. But his calling the heavens
above (that is the Saints) this is that which Saint Paul says: Then shall we
be caught up also in the clouds, to meet the Lord in the ^yre. For if it
meant not this, how could the Heavens be called above, as though they could
be any where but above? The words following; And the earth, if you add not,
Above here also, may be taken for those that are to be judged, and the
heavens for those that shall judge with Christ. And then the calling of the
heavens, above implies the placing of the Saints in seats of judgments, not
their raptures into the air. We may further understand it to be his calling
of the Angels from their high places, to descend with him to judgment, and by
the earth, those that are to be judged. But if we do understand Above at
both clauses, it intimates the Saints raptures directly: putting the heavens
for their souls, and the earth for their bodies: to judge (or discern) his
people, that is, to separate the sheep from the goats, the good from the bad.
Then speaks he to his Angels, Gather my Saints together unto me: this is
done by the Angels ministry. And whom gather they? Those that make a covenant
with me with sacrifice: and this is the duty of all just men to do. For
either they must offer their works of mercy (which is above sacrifice, as the
Lord says, I will have mercy and not sacrifice) or else their works of mercy
is the sacrifice it Osee. 6.
self that appeaseth Gods wrath, as I proved in the ninth book of this
present volume. In such works do the just make covenants with God, in that
they perform them for the promises made them in the New Testament. So then
Christ Mat. 25.
having gotten his righteous on his right hand, will give them this well-come.
Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundations of the world: for I was an hungered and you gave me to eat: and
so forth of the good works, and their eternal rewards which shall be returned
for them in the last judgment.

L. VIVES.
SStella (a) facem ducens] Virg. Aeneid. 2. Anchises being unwilling to leave
Troy, and Aeneas being desperate, and resolving to dye, Jupiter sent them a
token for their flight, namely this tailed star: all of which nature (says
Aristotle) are produced by vapors enflamed in the airs mid region. If their
forms be only lineall, they call them (...), that is, lamps, or torches. Such
an one says Plynie glided amongst the people at noone day, when Germanicus
Caesar presented his Sword-players prize: others of them are called Bolidae,
and such an one was seen at Mutina. The first sort of these fly burning only
at one end, the latter burns all over. Thus Pliny lib. 2.

Malachies Prophecy of the judgment, and of such as are to be purged by fire.
CHAP. 25.
THe Prophet (a) Malachiel or Malachi, (other-wise called the Angel, and held
by some as Hierome says, and namely by the Hebrews, (b) to be Esdras the
Priest that wrote some other parts in the Canon) prophesied of the last
judgment in these words. Behold he shall come, says the Lord of Hoastes: but
who may Mal. 3, 12.
abide the day of his coming? and who shall endure when he appears? for he
is like a purging fire, and like Fullers Soap: and he shall sit down to try
and fine the silver, he shall even fine the sons of Leui, and purify them
as gold and silver, that they may bring offerings to the Lord in
righteousness. Then shall the offerings of Judah, and Jerusalem be
acceptable unto the Lord as in old time, and in the years before. And I will
come near unto you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the
Soothsayers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and
against those that wrong fully keep back the hirelings wages, and vex the
widow and the fatherless, and fear not me, says the Lord of Hoastes: for
I am the Lord, I change not. These words do seem evidently to imply a
purification of some, in the last judgment. For what other thing can be meant
by this, He is like a purging fire, and like Fullers soap, and he shall sit
down to try and fine the silver, he shall Isa 4. 4.
fine the sons of Leui, and purify them as gold or silver? So says Esayas:
The Lord shall wash the filthiness of the daughters of Zion, and purge the
blood of Jerusalem ont of the midst thereof, by the spirit of judgment, and
by the spirit of burning. Perhaps this burning may be understood of that
separation of the polluted from the pure in that paenall judgment, the good
being to live ever after, without any commerce with the bad. But these words;
He shall even fine the sons of Leui, and purify them as gold and silver,
that they may bring offerings to the Lord in righteousness, do intimate a
purgation even of the good, who shall now be cleansed from that in-iustice
wherein they displeased the Lord, and being cleansed, and in their perfection
of righteousness, they shall be pure offerings themselves unto him their
Lord. For what better or more acceptable oblation for him, then them selves?
But let us leave this theme of paenall purgation unto a more fit opportunity.
By the sons of Leui, Judah and Jerusalem, is meant the Church of God, both
of Hebrews and others: but not in that state that it stands now in: (for as
we are now, if we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves and the truth
is not in us:) but as it shall be then, like a threshing-flore cleansed by the
fan of the last judgment, all being penally purged, that needed such a
purification, so that now there shall need no more sacrifice for sin, for all
that offer such, are in sin, for the remission of which they offer to be
freed from it by Gods gracious acceptance of their offering.

L. VIVES.
MAlachiel or (a) Malachi.] I never read that Malachi was ever called
Malachiel. Malachi, is in Hebrew, his Angel: and therefore he was called
Malachi, for if it were Malachiel, it should be interpreted, the Angel of the
Lord: I think therefore it should be read here, Malachi. (b) To be Esdras.] Of
this lib. 18.

Of the Saints offerings, which God shall accept of, as in the old time, and
the years before. CHAP. 26.
To show that the City of God should have no more such custom, it is said
that the sons of Leui: shall bring offerings to the Lord in righteousness:
therefore not in sin, and consequently not for sin, we may therefore
gather by the words following, viz. Then shall the offerings of Judah and
Jerusalem be acceptable unto the Lord, as in old time and in the years before;
that the Jews are deceived in believing the. restaurations of their old legal
ceremonies: for all the sacrifices of the old Instrument were offered in sin,
and for sin, the priest himself (who we must think was the holiest) was
expressly commanded by the Lord to offer first for his own sins, and then for
the people: we must therefore show how these words, As in old time and in the
years before, are to be taken. They may perhaps imply the time of our first
parents being in paradise, for they were then pure, and offered themselves as
unspotted oblations to the Lord. But they transgressing, and being therefore
thrust out, and all mankind being depraved and condemned in them, since their
fall no (a) man but the worlds redeemer, and little baptized infants were ever
pure from sin: no not the infant of one days age.

If it be answered that they are worthily said to offer in righteousness that
offer in faith, in that the just lives by faith, though if he say, he has no
sin he deceiues himself, and therefore he says it not, because he lives
by faith: I say again, is any one so far deceived as to pararell these times
of faith with those of the last judgment, wherein those that are to offer those
oblations in righteousness are to be purged and refined: Nay, seeing that
after that purgation, there shall be no place for the least imperfection of sin:
assuredly the time wherein there shall be no sin is not to be compared with
any, saving with the time before our first parents fall in Paradise, wherein
they lived in spotless felicity. So that this it is which is meant by the old
time, and the years before, for such another passage is there in Esaias: After
the promise of a new Heaven and a new Earth, amongst the other allegorical
promises of beatitudes to the Saints (which study of breuity enforced us to let
pass vnexpounded) this is one. As the days of the of tree life, shall the
days of my people be. This tree, who is it that has read the Scriptures and
knows not y^ God planted it, and where, and how our first parents Is 25. 22.
by sin were debarred from eating of the fruit thereof, and a terrible guard
set upon it for ever after? some may say the Prophet by that, meant the days
of Christ his Church that now is, and that Christ is that tree, (according to
that of Solomon concerning wisdom. She is a tree of life to them that lay hold
on her) and again, that our first parents lived but a small while in Paradise,
seeing that they had no children during that space, and therefore when we
speak of the time that they were there, we can not speak of any years, as
this place does, In old time and in the years bofore: well this question is
too intricate to discuss at this time, and therefore let it pass.

There is another meaning of these words also, (besides this) which does also,
exclude the interpretation of this place by the legal and carnal sacrifices
as though the restoring of them were such a benefit, for those offerings of the
old law being made all of unpolluted beasts, and purely exhibited, did signify
spotless and holy men, such as Christ himself only was and no other. Seeing
therefore that in the judgment all being cleansed that need clensing, there
shall not be any sin left in the Saints, but each shall offer himself in
righteousness unto God, as an immaculate and pure oblation: thus shall it be
then as in the years before, when that was represented typically which at this
day shall be fulfilled truly, for then shall that purity be real in the Saints,
which erst was prefigured in the sacrifices. And thus of that. Now as for those
that are not worthy of being cleansed, but condemned, thus says the Prophet: I
will come to you in judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the
South-sayers, and against the adulterers, etc. for I am the Lord, and change
not: as if he said your fault has now made you worse, and my grace once made
you better: but I change not. He will be witness himself, because he shall
in that judgment need no other. Swift, because he will come on a sudden,
unlooked for, and when he is thought to be farthest of: and again because he
will convince the guilty conscience without making any words. Inquisition
shall be made in the thoughts of the ungodly, says the Wisd. 1. 9.
wise man. Their conscience also bearing witness (says the Apostle) and their
thoughts accusing one another or excusing, at the day when God shall judge the
secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my Gospel. Thus then shall God be
a swift witness in calling that presently unto the thoughts which shall
forthwith condemn them.

L. VIVES.
NO (a) man except.] [The question of the Uirgin Mary was not yet a foot: but
grew afterward [None of this in the Louaine copy.
between two orders of friars, both fiery, and led with undaunted generals,
the Dominicans by Thomas of Aquin, and the Franciscans by John Duns Scotus. Now
the council of Basil decred that she was wholly pure from all touch of sin.
But the Dominicans objected that this was no lawful counsel, and the
Minorites of the other side avowed that it was true and holy, and called the
Dominicans heretics for slandering the power of the Church: so that the
matter had come to a shrewd pass, but that Pope Sixtus forbad this theme to
be any more disputed of. Thus do these men esteem counsels or canons, be
they again their pleasures, just as an old wives tale in a Flaxe-shope or at
an Alehouse Gossiping.]

Of the separation of the good from the bad in the end of the last judgment.
CHAP. 27.
THat also which I alleged (to another purpose) in the eighteenth book, out
of this Prophet belongs to the last judgment: They shall be to me, says the
Lord of Hosts, in that day that I shall do this, as a flock, for I will spare
them as a Malachy. 3
man spares his own Son that serves him: then shall you return and
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God
and him that serves him not, for behold the day comes, that shall burn as
an Oven, and all the proud, yea and all that do wickedly shall be stuble, and the
day that comes shall burn them up says the Lord of Hosts, and shall leave
them neither root nor branch. But unto you that fear my name shall the sun
of righteousness arise, and health shall be under his wings, and ye shall go
forth and grow up as fat Calves. And ye shall tread down the wicked, for they
shall be dust under the souls of your feet in the day that I shall do this,
says the Lord of Hosts. This distance of rewards, and punishments, seuering
the just from the unjust, is not seen by the transitory light of this worldly
sun, but when it appears before that sun of righteousness, in the
manifesation of the life to come, then shall there be such a judgment as
never was before.

Moses Law, to be spiritually understood, for fear of dangerous error. CHAP.
28.
But whereas the Prophet proceeds, saying: Remember the law of Moses my
Malachi.
servant, which I commended unto him in Horeb for all Israel with the statutes
and judgments, this is fittly added, both to follow the precedent distinction
between the followers of the law and the contemners of it, as also to imply
that the said law must be spiritually interpreted, that Christ, the
distinguisher of the good and bad, may therein be discovered; who spoke not
idly himself, when he told the Jews saying: Had ye believed Moses, ye
would have believed me, for Io. 5. 46.
be wrote of me, for these men conceyuing the Scriptures in a carnallience and
not apprehending those earthly promises as types of the eternal ones, fell
into those damnable murmurings that they durst be bold to say, (a) It is in
vain to serve Mal. 3. 14.
God, and what profit is it that we have kept his commandment, and that we
walked humbly before the Lord of Hosts? Therefore (b) we count the proud
blessed, even they that work wickedness are set up. etc. These their words
seem even to compel the prophet to foretell-the last judgment, where the
wicked shall be so far from all shadow of happiness, that they shall be
apparently wretched, and the good, so acquit from all lasting misery, that
they shall not be touched with any the most transitory, but fully and freely be
enthroned in eternal blessedness. For their words before seem to say thus,
all that do evil, are good in Gods eye, and please him. These grumblings
against God proceeded merely of the carnal understanding of Moses law.
Whereupon the Psalmist says that he had like to have fallen himself, and
that his feet slipped, through his fretting at the foolish, seeing the
prosperity of the wicked, in so much that he says: How does God know it, or is
there knowledge in the most high? and by and by after: Have I cleansed mine
heart in vain, and washed mine hands in innocence? but to clear this
difficulty, how it should come to pass that the wicked should be happy, and
the just miserable, he adds this: Then thought I to know this, but it was too
painful for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God and then understood I
their end. At the day of the Lord it shall not be so, but the misery of the
wicked, and the happiness of the Godly shall appear at full, in far other
order then the present world can discover.

L. VIVES.
IT is (a) in vain.] A wicked, fond and absurd complaint, of such as only
(like brute beasts) conceive and respect nothing but what is present: look but
into the conscience of the wicked and you shall find their hearts torn in
pieces: look but upon the time to come, and you shall see a shole of plagues
prepared for them, which you may think are slow, but heaven assures you,
they are sure. (b) We count the wicked] Your account cannot make them
fortunate.

Helias his coming to convert the Jews, before the judgment. CHAP. 29.
NOw the Prophet having advised them to remember the law of Moses, because he
fore saw that would here-after miss-interprete much thereof, he adds: Behold
I will send you (a) Heliah the Prophet before the coming of the great and
fearful day of the Lord: and he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the
children and of the children to the fathers, least I come and smite the earth
with cursing. That this great and mighty Prophet Elias shall convert (b) the
Jews unto Christ before the judgment, by expounding them the law, is most
commonly believed and taught of us Christians, and is held as a point of
infallible truth. For we may well hope for the coming of him before the
judgment of Christ, whom we do truly believe to live in the body at this
present hour, without having ever tasted of death. He was taken up by a
fiery chariot body and soul from this mortal world, as the scriptures plainly
avouch. Therefore when he comes to give the law a spiritual exposition,
which the Jews do now understand wholly in a carnal sense, Then shall he
turn the hearts of the fathers unto the children, (or, the heart of the father
unto the child: for the LXX. do often use the singular number for the
plural.) that is, the Jews shall then understand the law as their holy
forefathers had done before them, Moses, the Prophets, and the rest. For the
understanding of the fathers being brought to the understanding of the
children, is the turning of the fathers heart unto the children, and the
childrens consent unto the understanding of the fathers, is the turning of
their heart unto the fathers. And whereas the LXX. say: (c) And the heart of a
man unto his kinsman: fathers and children are the nearest of kindred, and
consequently are meant of in this place. There may be a farther and more choice
interpretation of this place, namely that Helias should turn the heart of the
father unto the child; not by making the father to love the child, but by
teaching that the father loves him, that the Jews who had hated him before,
may henceforth love him also. For they hold that God hates him now, because
they hold him to be neither God nor the Son of God: but then shall his heart
(in their judgments) be turned unto him, when they are so far turned
themselves as to understand how he loves him. The sequel, And the heart of
man unto his kinsman; means, the heart of man unto the man Christ, for he
being one God in the form of God, taking the form of a servant, and becoming
man, vouchsafed to become our kinsman. This then shall Heliah perform. Least I
come and smite the earth with cursing. The earth, that is, those carnal
thoughted Jews, that now are, and that now murmr at the Deity, saying, that
he delighted in the wicked, and that it is in vain to serve him.

L. VIVES.
HEliah (a) the Of him read the King. 1. 2. The Jews out of this place of
Malachi believe that he shall come again before the Messiah, as the Apostles
do show in their question concerning his coming, Matt. 17. to which our
Savior in answering that he is come already, does not reprove the Scribes
opinion, but shows another coming of Heliah before himelfe, which the
Scribes did not understand. Origin, for first he had said that Helias must
first come and restore all things.

But it being generally held that Helias should come before Christ, and it
being unknown before which coming of Christ, our Savior to clear the doubt
that might arise of his deity in that the people did not see that Helias was
come said, Helias is come already meaning John, of whom he himself had
said, If ye will receive it, this is Helias; As if he had said; be not moved
in that you think you saw not Helias before me, whom you doubt whether I be
the Messiah or no. No man can be deceived in the believing that John, who came
before me was that Helias who was to come: not that his soul was in John, or
that Helias himself in person were come, but in that John came in the spirit
and power of Helias to turn the hearts of the fathers unto the children, to
make the unbelievers righteous, and to prepare me a perfect people, as the
Angel promised of him Luc. 1. 17, This great mystery the Lord being willing to
point at, and yet not laying it fully open, he eleuates the hearts of the
audience with his usual phrase upon such occasions, He that has ears to
hear let him hear.

And truly John's life came very near Helias his. Both lived in the
wilderness, both wore girdles of skins, both reproved vicious Princes and were
persecuted by them, both preached the coming of Christ: fittly therefore might
John be called another Helias to forerunne Christ's first coming, as Helias
himself shall do the second. etc. (b) Convert the Jews.] Therefore said
Christ, Helias must first come. etc. to correct (says Chrysostom) their
infidelity and to turn the hearts of the fathers unto the children, that is
unto the Apostles. And then he makes a question; If Helias his coming shall
do so much good, why did not our Savior send him before his first coming?
Answ. because as then, they held our Savior himself to be Helias, and yet
would not believe him, whereas when at the worlds end Helias shall come, after
all their tedious expectation, and show them who was the true Messiah, then
will they all believe him. (c) And the heart of man.] Hierome (and our English
vulgar) read it other-wise.

That it is not evident in the Old Testament in such places as say, God shall
judge, that it shall be in the person of Christ, but only by some of the
testimonies where the Lord God speaks. CHAP. 30.
TO gather the whole number of such places of Scripture as prophecy this
judgment, were too tedious. Suffices we have proved it out of both the
Testaments. But the places of the Old Testament are not so evident for the
coming of Christ (a) in person as them of the New be; for whereas we read in
the Old, that the Lord God shall come, it is no consequent that it is meant of
Christ: for the Father, the Son. and the holy Ghost are all both Lord and
God: which we may not omit to observe. We must therefore first of all make a
demonstration of those places in the prophets as do expressly name the Lord
God, and yet herein are evidently meant of Jesus Christ, as also of those
wherein this evidence is not so plain, and yet may be conveniently understood
of him nevertheless. There is one place in Isaias, that has it as plain as
may be. Here me O Jacob and Israel (says the said Prophet) my called, I am, I
am the first, and I am the last: surely my hand has laid the foundation of the
earth, and my right Isa 48. 12. 13.
hand has spanned the Heavens: when I call them, they stand together. All you
assemble your selves, and hear: which amongst them has declared these things?
The Lord has loved him: he will do his will in Babble, and his arm shall be
against the Chaldaeans. I, even I have spoken it and I have called him: I have
brought him and his ways shall prosper.

Come near unto me, hear ye this: I have not spoke it in secret from the
beginning, from the time that the thing was, I was there, and now the LORD GOD
and his spirit has sent me. This was he that spoke here as the LORD GOD: and
yet it had not been evident that he was Christ, but that he adds the last
clause, the LORD GOD and his spirit has sent me. For this he spoke of that
which was to come, in the form of a servant using the preterperfect tense for
the future, as the Prophet does elsewhere saying, he was led, as a sheep to
the slaughter, he does not say, He shall be led, but puts the time past for
the time to come, according to the usual phrase of prophetical speeches.

There is also another place in Zachary, as evident as this: where the
Almighty sent the Almighty: and what was that, but that the Father sent the
Son? the words are these: Thus says the Lord of Hoastes: After this glory
has he Zach. 2
sent me unto the nations, which spoiled you, for he that touches you,
touches the Apple of his eye. Behold, I will lift my hand upon them; and they
shall be a spoil to those that served them, and ye shall know that the Lord
of Hoastes has sent me. Behold here, the LORD of hoastes says, that the LORD
of hoastes has sent him. Who dare say that these words proceed from any but
from Christ, speaking to his lost sheep of Israel? for he says so
himself: I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of Israel: those he
compares here unto the Apple of Mat. 15
his eye, in his most fervent love unto them, and of those lost ones, the
Apostles were a part themselves; but after this resurrection, (before which the
Holy Ghost (says John) was not yet given, because that JESUS was not yet
glorified) Ioh. 7
he was also sent unto the gentiles in his Apostles, and so was that of the
psalm fulfilled; Thou have delivered me from the contentions of the people:
thou Psalm. 18
have made me the head of the heathen: that those that had spoiled the
Israelites and made them slaves, should spoil them no more but become their
slaves. This promised he to his Apostles saying, I will make you fishers of
men, and again, unto one of them alone, from henceforth thou shall catch men.
Thus shall the nations Mat. 4 Luc. 5
become spoils, but unto a good end, as vessel taken from a strong man that is
bound by a stronger.

The said Prophet also in another place says (or rather the LORD by him says)
In that day will I seek to destroy all the nations that come against
Jerusalem, and I will power upon the house of David and upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the Zach. 12
spirit of grace and of compassion, and they shall look upon me whom they
have pierced, and they shall lament for him as one mourns for his only
son, and be sorry for him as one is sorry for his first borne. Who is it but
GOD that shall rid Jerusalem of the foes that come against her, that is, that
oppose her faith, or (as some interpret it) that seek to make her captive?
who but he can power the spirit of grace and compassion upon the house of
David and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem? This is Gods peculiar, and spoken
by God himself in the prophet: and yet that this GOD, who shall do all the
wonderful works is CHRIST, the sequel shows plainly: they shall look
upon me whom they have pierced, and be sorry etc. For those Jews who shall
receive the spirit of grace and compassion, in the time to come, shall repent
that ever they had insulted over CHRIST in his passion, when they shall see him
coming in his Majesty, and know that this is he whose base-nesse of parentage
they had whilom ^owted at. And their forefathers shall see him too, upon whom
they had exercised such impiety, even him shall they behold, but not unto their
correction, but unto their confusion. These words there, I will power upon the
house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and
compassion, etc. do no way concern them, but their progeny only, whom the
preaching of Helias shall bring to the true faith. But as we say to the Jews,
You killed Christ, though it were their predecessors, so shall the progeny of
those murderers bewail the death of Christ themselves, though their
predecessors, (and not they) were they that did the deed. So then though they
receive the spirit of grace and compassion, and so escape the damnation of
their forefathers, yet shall they grieve, as if they had been pertakers of
their predecessors villainy, yet shall it not be guilt, but zeal that shall
enforce this grief in them. The LXX. do read this place thus, They shall
behold me, over whom they have insulted, but the Hebrews read it, whom they
have pierced, which gives a fuller intimation of the crucifying of Christ. But
that insultation in the LXX. was continued even through the whole passion of
Christ; Their taking him, binding him, judging him, apparelling him with
sot-like habites, crowning him with thorn, striking him on the head with
reeds, mocking him with fained reverence, enforcing him to bear his own
cross, and crucifying him, even to his very last gasp, was nothing but a
continuate insultation. So that laying both the interpretations together (as
we do) we express at full, that this place implies Christ and none other.

Therefore, when-so-euer we read in the Prophets that God shall judge the
world, though there be no other distinction; that that very word, Judge, does
express the Son of man, for by his coming it is, that Gods judgment shall
be executed. God the Father in his personal presence will judge no man, but
has given all judgment unto his Son, who shall show himself as man, to
judge the world even as he showed himself as man to be judged of the world.
Who is it of whom God speaks in Esaias under the name of Jacob and Israel,
but this son of man that took flesh of Jacobs progeny? Jacob my servant, I
will stay Isa. 42.
upon him. Israel mine elect in whom my soul delights, I have put my spirit
upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment unto the Gentiles. H^ shall not cry
nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets. A bruised Reed
shall he not break, and the smoking Flax shall he not quench: he shall
bring forth judgment in truth. He shall not fail nor be discouraged until
he have settled judgment in the earth, and the Isles shall hope in his name.

In the Hebrew there is no (b) mention of Jacob, nor of Israel, but the LXX.
being desirous to show what he meant by his servant; namely that same form of
a servant wherein the highest was humbled, added the name of the man, From
whose stock he was to derive that servile form. The spirit of God came upon
him in form of a Dove, as the Gospel testifies. He brought forth judgment
to the Gentiles, in fore telling them of future things which they never knew of
before. He did not cry out, yet ceased he not to preach: Nor was his voice
heard with out (or in the street) for such as are cut off from his fold never
hear his voice. He neither broake down nor extinguished those Jews his
persecutors, whose lost integrity, and abandoned light, made them like bruised
Reeds, and (c) smoking flax; he spared them, for as yet he was not come to
judge them, but to be judged by them. He brought forth judgment in truth, by
showing them their future plagues, if they persisted in their malice. His face
s^one on the mount, his fame in the whole world, he neither failed nor
fainted, in that both he and his Church stood firm against all persecutions.
Therefore his foes never had, nor ever shall have cause to think that
fulfilled which they wished in the Psalm, saying; When shall he dye and his
name perish? until he Psalm. 4. 1.
have settled judgment in the earth: Lo, here is that we seek. The last
judgment, is that which he shall settle upon earth; coming to effect it out
of heaven. As for the last words, the Isles shall hope in his name, we see it
fulfilled already.

Thus then by this which is so vn-deniable, is that proved credible, which
impudence dares yet deny. For who would ever have hoped for that which the
unbelievers themselves do now behold, as well as we, to their utter
heartbreaking and confusion? (d) Who did ever look that the Gentiles should
embrace Christianity, that had seen the Author thereof bound, beaten, mocked,
and crucified? That which one thief durst but hope for upon the cross, in
that now do the nations far and wide repose their utmost confidence, and
least they should incur eternal death, are signed with that figure
whereupon he suffered his temporal death. Let none therefore make any doubt
that Christ shall bring forth such a judgment as the Scriptures do promise,
except he believe not the Scriptures, and stand in his own malicious
blindness against that which has enlightened all the world.

And this judgment shall consist of these circumstances, partly precedent and
partly adjacent: Helias shall come, the Jews shall believe, Antichrist shall
persecute, Christ shall judge, the dead shall arise, the good and bad shall
sever, the world shall burn, and be renewed. All this we must believe shall
be, but in what order, our full experience then shall exceed our imperfect
intelligence as yet. Yet verily I do think they shall fall out in order as I
have rehearsed them. Now remains there two books more of this theme, to the
perfect performance of our promise: the first of which shall treat of the
pains due unto the wicked, and the second of the glories bestowed upon the
righteous; wherein if it please GOD, we will subvert the arguments which
foolish mortals, and miserable wretches make for themselves against GODS holy
and divine pre mises, and against the sacred nutriment given to the soul, by
an unspotted faith, thinking themselves the only wisemen in these their
ungracious cauills, and deriding all religious instructions as contemptible and
rid^culous. As for those that are wise in GOD, in all that seems most
incredible unto man, if it be avouched by the holy Scriptures (whose truth we
have already sufficiently proved) they lay hold upon the true and omnipotent
deity, as the strongest argument against all opposition, for he (they know)
cannot possiblye speak false in those Scriptures, and with-all, can by his
divine power effect that which may seem more then most impossible to the un
believers.

L. VIVES.
GHrist (a) in person] According to this judgment of Christ, did the Poets
faigne the Judges of hell: for holding Jove to be the King of Heaven, they
auoutched his son to be judge of hell: yet none of his sons that were wholly
immortal at first, as Bacchus, Apollo or Mercury was, but a God that had
been also a mortal man, and a just man withal: such as Minos, Aeacus, or
Rhadamanthus was. This out of Lactantius lib. 7. (b) No mention] Hierom. in 42.
Esai (c) Smoking flaxe] It was a custom of old (says Plutarch in
Quaestionib.) never to put out the snuff of the lamp, but to let it die of it
self, and that for diverse reasons; first because this fire was somewhat like
in nature to that inextinguible immortal fire of heaven, secondly they held
this fire to be a living creature, and therefore not to be killed but when it
did mischief. (That the fire was aliuing creature, the want that it has of
nutriment, and the proper motion, besides the groan it seems to give when it
is quenshed, induced them to affirm). Thirdly, because it is unfit to destroy
any thing that belongs to man's continual use, as fire, or water etc. But we
ought to leave them to others when our own turns are served. Thus far
Plutarch. The first reason tends to religion, the second to mansuetude, the
third to humanity. (d) Who did ever looke] Christ was not ignora^ of the time
to come, nor of the eternity of his doctrine, as his leaving it to the
publishing of only twelve weak men, against the malicious opposition of all
Judea, and his commanding them to preach it throughout the whole world, does
sufficiently prove, besides his prophesying to the Apostles that they should
all abandon him and he be led to death that night, and yet again he
promises them to be with them, to the end of the world.

Finis lib. 20.
THE CONTENTS OF THE ONE and twentieth book of the City of God.
1. Why the punishment of the damned is here disputed of before the happiness
of the Saints. 2. Whether an earthly body may possibly be incorruptible by
fire. 3. Whether a fleshly body may possibly endure eternal pain. 4. Natures
testimonies that bodies may remain undiminished in the fire. 5. Of such things
as cannot be assuredly known to be such, and yet are not to be doubted of.
6. All strange effects are not natures, some are man's devises, some the
devils. 7. Gods omnipotency the ground of all belief in things admired. 8.
That the alteration of the known nature of any creature, unto a nature
unknown, is not opposite, unto the laws of nature. 9. Of Hell, and the
quality of the eternal pains therein. 10. Whether the fire of hell, if it be
corporal, can take effect upon the incorporeal devils. 11. Whether it be not
justice that the time of the pains should be proportioned to the time of the
sins and cri^es. 12. The greatness of Adams sin, inflicting eternal
damnation upon all that are out of the state of grace. 13. Against such as hold
that the torments after the Judgment, shall be but the means whereby the souls
shall be purified. 14. The temporal pains of this life afflicting al mankind.
15. That the scope of Gods redeeming us, is wholly pertinent to the world to
come. 16. The laws of Grace, that all the ^regenerate are blessed in. 17. Of
some christians that held that hells pains should not be eternal. 18. Of those
that hold that the Intercession of the Saints shall save all men from damnation.
19. Of such as hold that heretics shall be saved, in that they have pertaken of
the body of Christ. 20. Of such as allow this deliverance only to wicked and
revolted Catholics 21. Of such as affirm that all that abide in the Catholic
faith shall be saved for that faith. 22. Of such as affirm that the sins
committed amongst the works of mercy, shall not be called into Judgment. 23.
Against those that exclude both men and devils from pains eternal. 24. Against
those that would prove al damnation frustrate by the prayers of the Saints. 25.
Whether that such as being baptized by heretics, become wicked in life, or
amongst Catholics, and then fall away into heresies and schisms, or
contynuing amongst Catholics be of vicious conversation, can have any hope of
escaping damnation, by the privilege of the Sacraments. 26. What it is to have
Christ for the foundation: where they are, that shall be saved (as it were) by
fire. 27. Against those that think those sins shall not be laid to their
charge, wherewith they mixed some works of mercy.
FINIS.
THE ONE AND TVVENTITH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD: Written by Saint Augustine
Bishop of Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Why the punishment of the damned is here disputed of before the happiness of
the Saints. CHAP. 1.
SEEing that by the assistance of Our LORD and SAVIOVR JESUS CHRIST, the Judge
of the quick and the dead we have brought both the Cities (the one whereof is
GODS and the other the devils,) unto their intended consummation, we are now
to proceed (by the help of GOD) in this book, with the declaration of the
punishment due unto the devil and all his confederacy. And this I choose to
do before I handle the glories of the blessed, because both these and the
wicked are to undergo their sentences in body and soul, and it may seem more
incredible for an earthly body to endure undissolved in eternal pains, then
without all pain, in everlasting happiness. So that when I have shown the
possibility of the first, it may be a great motive unto the confirmation of
the later. Nor does this Method want a president from the Scriptures
themselves, which sometimes relate the beatitude of the Saints fore-most, as
here, They that have done good, unto the resurrection of life, but they that
have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation and some times
afterward, as here, The Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they
shall gather out of his Kingdom al things that offend, and them which do
iniquity, and shall cast them into a furnace of fire, there shall be wayling and
gnashing of teeth: Then shall the just shine like the Sun, in the Kingdom of
the Father, and again, And these shall go into everlasting pain, and the
righteous into life eternal? Besides, he that will look into the Prophets
shall find this orde^ often observed* it were too much for me to recite all:
my reason why I observe it here, I have set down already.

Whether an earthly body may possibly be incorruptible by fire. CHAP. 2.
WHat then shall I say unto the vn-beleeuers, to prove that a body carnal and
living, may endure undissolved both against death and the force of eternal
fire. They will not allow us to ascribe this unto the power of God, but urge
us to prove it to them by some example. If we shall answer them that there
are some creatures that are indeed corruptible, because mortal and yet do
live untouched in the midst of the fire: and likewise, that there are a kind
(a) of Worms that live without being hurt in the fervent springs of the hot
bathes, whose hear sometimes is such as none can endure; and yet those worms
do so love (...) live in it, that they cannot live without it; this, either
they will not believe unless they see it; or if they do see it, or hear it
affirmed by sufficient authority, then they cavil at it as an insufficient
proof for the proposed question; for that these creatures are not eternal
howsoever, and living thus in this heat, nature has made it the mean of
their growth, and nutriment, not of their torment. As though it were not more
incredible that fire should nourish any thing rather then not consume it. It is
strange for any thing to be tormented by the fire, and yet to live: but it is
stranger to live in the fire and not to be tormented. If then this later be
credible, why is not the first so also?

L. VIVES.
A Kind (a) of wormes] There are some springs that are hot in their eruptions
by reason of their passages by veins of sulphurous matter under ground.
Empedocles holds that the fire which is included in diverse places of the earth,
gives them this heat Senec. Quaest. not. lib. 3. Their waters are good for
many diseases. Many of those natural bathes there are in Italy, and likewise
in Germany, whereof those of Aquisgrane are the best. Of these bathes read
Pliny lib. 1. and 32. In these waters do the worms live that he speaks of.

Whether a fleshly body may possibly endure eternal pain. CHAP. 3.
YEa but (say they (a) there is no body that can suffer eternally but it must
perish a^ length. How can we tell that? Who can tell whether the (b) devils
do suffer in their bodies when as the confess they are extremely tormented?
If they answer that there is no earthly soul, and visible body, or (to speak
all in one) no flesh, that can suffer always and never die, what is this but
to ground an assertion upon mere sense, and appearance? for these men know no
flesh but mortal, and what they have not known and seen, that they hold
impossible. And what an argument it this, to make pain the proof of death,
when it is rather the testimony of life? for though our question be, whether
any thing living may endure eternal pain and yet live still, yet are we sure
it cannot feel any pain at all unless it live, pain being inseperably
adherent unto life, if it be in any thing at all. Needs then must that live
that is pained, yet is there no necessity that this or that pain should kill
it: for all pain does not kill all the bodies that perish. Some pain indeed
must, by reason that the soul and the body are so conjoined that they cannot
part without great torment, which the soul gives place unto, and the mortal
frame of man being so weak that it cannot withstand this (c) violence,
thereupon are they severed. But afterward, they shall be so reioyned again,
that neither time nor torment shall be able to procure their separation.
Wherefore though our flesh as now be such that it cannot suffer all pain,
without dying; yet then shall it become of another nature, as death also then
shall be of another nature. For the death then shall be eternal, and the soul
that suffers it shall neither be able to live, having lost her God and only
life, nor yet to avoid torment, having lost all means of death. The first
death forces her from the body against her will, and the second holds her in
the body against her will. Yet both are one in this, that they enforce the
soul to suffer in the body against her will. Our opponent will allow this,
that no flesh as now can suffer the greatest pain, and yet not perish: but
they observe not that there is a thing above the body, called a soul, that
rules and guides it, and this may suffer all torment and yet remain for ever.
Behold now, here is a thing, sensible of sorrow, and yet eternal: this power
then that is now in the souls of all, shall be as then in the bodies of the
damned. And if we weigh it well, the pains of the body are rather referred
to the soul. The soul it is, and not the body that feels the hurt inflicted
upon any part of the body.

So that as we call them living, and sensitive bodies, though all the life and
sense is from the soul; so likewise do we say they are grieved bodies,
though the grief be only in the soul. So then, when the body is hurt, the
soul grieueth with the body. When the mind is offended by some inward
vexation, then the soul greeueth alone, though it be in the body; and
further, it may grieve when it is without the body, as the soul of the rich
glutton did in hell, when he said, I am tormented in this flame. But the body
wanting a soul grieueth not, nor having a soul, does it grieve without the
soul. If therefore it were meet to draw an argument of death, from the
feeling of pain, as if we should say, he may feel pain: ergo, he may die,
this should rather infer that the soul may die, because it is that which is
the feeler of the pain.

But seeing that this is absurd and false, how then can it follow that those
bodies which shall be in pain, shall therefore be subject unto death? Some (d)
Platonists hold that those parts of the soul wherein fear, joy, and grief
were resident, were mortal, and perished: whereupon Virgill said, Hinc metuunt
cupiuntque, dolent, gaudent, hence (that is, by reason of those mortal parts
of the soul) did fear, hope, joy, and grief possess them. But touching
this we proved in our foureteenth book, that after that their souls were
purged to the uttermost, yet remained there a desire in them, to return unto
their bodies: and where desire is, there grief may be. For hope being
frustate and missing the aim, turns into grief and anguish. Wherefore if
the soul which does principally, or only suffer pain, be notwithstanding
((e) after a sort) immortal, then does it not follow that a body should perish
because it is in pain. Lastly, if the body may breed the souls grief, and
yet cannot kill it, this is a plain consequent that pain does not necessarily
infer death. Why then is it not as credible that the fire should grieve those
bodies and yet not kill them, as that the body should procure the souls
^nguish and yet not the death? Pain therefore is no sufficient argument to
prove that death must needs follow it.

L. VIVES.
THere is (a) no body] A common proposition of Aristotle, Plato, Epicurus,
Zeno, Cicero, Seneca, and all the ancient Philosophers. (b) Whether the
deuills] The Platonists dispute among themselves whether the bodies of the
Damones have feeling. Some say thus, the feeling lies only in the Nerves and
sinews. The Daemones have now sinews: ergo. Others (as the old Atheists) say
that the feeling is not in the sinews but in the spirit that engirteth them,
which if it leave the sinew, it becomes stupid, and dead: therefore may the
bodies of these Daemones both feel and be felt, and consequently be hurt, and
cut in pieces by a more solid body, and yet notwithstanding they do presently
reioyne, and so feel the less pain, though they feel some, the more
concrete and condensate that their bodies are, the more subject are they to
suffer pain, and therefore they do some of them fear swords, and threatenings
of casting them down headlong. Mich. Psell. and Marc. Ch^rrones. Hence it is
(perphaps) that Virgil makes Sibylla bid Aeneas draw his sword, when they went
down to hell. Aeneid. 6. (c) Uiolence] Pain (says Tully Tusc. quaest. 2.) is
a violent motion in the body, offending the senses, which if it exceed,
oppresses the vitalls and brings death: whether it arise of the
super-abundance of some quality of the body, of heat, moisture, the spirits,
the excrements, or of the defect of any of them, or ab externo, which three are
generally the causes of pain. (d) Some Platonists] Aristotle affirms as much
De anima lib. (e) After a sort] For it was not from before the beginning, and
yet shall be everlasting: it shall never be made nothing though it shall suffer
the second death, and endure, eternally dying.

Natures testimonies that bodies may remain undiminished in the fire. CHAP. 4.
IF therefore the (a) Salamander live in the fire (as the most exact
naturalists record) and if there be certain famous hills in (b) Sicily that
have been on fire continually, from beyond the memory of man, and yet remain
whole and unconsumed, then are these sufficient proofs to show that all does
not consume that burns, as the soul proves that all that feels pain,
does not perish. Why then should we stand upon any more examples to prove the
perpetuity of man's soul and body, without death, or dissolution in everlasting
fire and torment? That GOD that endowed nature with so many several and (c)
admirable qualities, shall as then give the flesh a quality whereby it shall
endure pain and burning for ever. Who was it but he, that has made the flesh
of a (d) dead Peacock to remain always sweet, and without all putrefaction?
I thought this impossible at first, and by chance being at meat in Carthage, a
boiled Peacock was served in, and I to try the conclusion, took of some of the
Lyre of the breast and caused it to be laid up. After a certain space
(sufficient for the putrefaction of any ordinary flesh) I called for it, and
smelling to it, found no ill taste in it at all. Laid it up again, and thirty
days after, I looked again, it was the same I left it. The like I did an whole
year after, and found no change, only it was somewhat more dry and solid?
Who gave such cold unto the chafe, that it will keep snow vnmelted in it, and
withal, such heat, that it will ripen green apples? who gave the fire that
wonderful power to make althings that it burns black, it self being so
bright, and to turn a shining brand into a black coal? Neither does it
always thus. For it will burn stones until they be white, and though it be
read, and they whitish, yet does this their (e) white agree with the light as
well as black does with darkness. Thus the fire burning the wood, to bake
the stone, works contrary effects upon objects which are (f) not contrary.
For stone and wood are different but not opposite, whereas white and black
are, the one of which colors the fire effects upon the stone, and the other
upon the wood, enlighting the first, and darkening the later, though it could
not perfect the first but by the help of the later.

And what strange things there are in a cole? it is so brittle, that a little
blow turns it to powder, and yet so durable that no moisture corrupts it, no
time wastes it, so that they are wont to (g) lay coals under bounders, and
marke-stones for lands, to convince any one that should come hereafter and say
this is no bound-stone. What is it that makes them endure so long in the
earth, where wood would easily rot, but that same fire that corrupts
althings? And then for lyme, besides that it is whitened by the fire, it
carries fire in it self, as taken from the fire, and keeps it so secret,
that it is not discouerable in it by any of our senses, nor known to be in it
but by our experience. And therefore we call it quick lyme, the invisible fire
being as the soul of that visible body. But the wonder is that when it is
killed it is quickened. For, to fetch out the fire from it, we cast water upon
it, and being could before, that enflameth it, that cools all other things
being never so hot. So that the lump dying as it were, gives up the fire
that was in it, and afterward remains cold if you water it never so: and then
for quicke-lyme we call it quenshed lyme. What thing can be more strange?
yes. If you power oil upon it in stead of water, though oil be rather the
feeder of fire, yet will it never alter, but remain cold still. If we should
have heard thus much of some Indian stone, that we had not, nor could not get
to prove it, we should surely imagine it either to be a stark lie, or a
strange wonder.

But things occurrent unto daily experience, are debased by their frequency,
in so much that we have left to wonder at some-things that only India (the
farthest continent of the world) has presented to our view. The diamond is
common amongst us, chiefly our Iewellers and Lapidaries: and this is (i) so
hard that neither fire, stone, nor steel can once dint it, but only the blood
of a goat. But do you think this hardness so much admired now as it was by
him that first of all descried it? Such as know it not, may peradventure not
believe it, or believing it, one seeing it, may admire it as a rare work of
nature: but daily trial ever takes off the edge of admiration. We know that
(k) the loade-stone draws Iron strangely: and surely when I observed it at
the first, it made me much aghast. For I beheld the stone draw up an Iron
ringe and then as if it had given the own power to the ring, the ring drew
up an other and made it hang fast by it, as it hung by the stone. So did a
third by that, and a fourth by the third, and so until there was hung as it
were a chain of rings only by touch of one another, without any
inter-linking. Who would not admire the power in this stone, not only inherent
in it, but also extending it self through so many circles, and such a
distance? Yet stranger was that experiment of this stone which my brother and
fellow Bishop Seuerus, Bishop of Mileuita showed me.

He told me that he had seen Bathanarius (sometimes a Count of Africa)
when he feasted him once at his own house, take the said stone and hold it
under a silver plate upon which he laid a piece of Iron: and still as he
moved the stone under the plate, so did the Iron move above, the plate not
moving at all, and just in the same motion that his hand moved the stone, did
the stone move the Iron. This I saw, and this did I hear him report, whom I
will believe as well as if I had seen it my self. I have read further-more of
this stone, that (l) lay but a diamond near it, and it will not draw Iron at
all, but puts it from it as soon as ever the diamond comes to touch it.
These stones are to be found in India. But if the strangeness of them be now
no more admired of us, how much less do they admire them where they are as
common as our lyme, whose strange burning in water (which uses to quensh the
fire,) and not in oil (which feeds it) we do now cease to wonder at because
it is so frequent.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) Salamander] Of this creature you may read in Aristotle and Pliny. I
have written of it elsewhere. It quensheth fire with the touch, and is in
shape like a Lizart. (b) In Sicily] As Aetna, and Hiera, commonly called
Volcania, as also in Theon Ochema in Aethiope, Vesuuius in Campania, Chimaera
in Lycia, and in certain places about Hercules pillars, besides Hecla in
Island, etc. (c) Admirable qualities] Truly admirable, for they are easy to
be wondered at, but most intricate to be searched out. (d) A dead peacock]
Many of these examples here are beyond reason, and at the most but explanable
by weak conjectures, which we will omit, least we should seem rather to
oppose Saint Augustine then expound him. (e) White agree] It is a light
color, and offends the eye as much as the light: black is the darkest, and
strengthens the power visuall, like the darkness. (f) Not contrary]
Contraries are two opposites of one kind, as black and white, both colors:
moist and dry, both qualities, etc. but Substances have no contraries in
themselves. (g) To lay coales] As Ctesiphon did under the foundations of
Diana's temple in Ephesus. Plin. lib. 36. I think it should be Chersiphron,
and not Clesiphon. For so say all the Greeks, and Strabo lib. 14. (h) Quick
lyme] Bernard Valdaura.
Sen. Not. quaest. li. 3. (i) So hard that neither] Plin. lib. vlt. cap. 4.
Notwithstanding Bernard Ualdaura showed me diamonds the last year that his
father broake with a hammer. But I think they were not Indian nor Arabian
diamonds, but Cyprians, or Syderites, for there are many sorts. (k) The
Lodestone.] Hereof read Pliny. lib. 36. cap. 16. Sotacus makes five sorts of
it: the Ethiopian, the Macedonian, the Baeotian, the Alexandrian, and the
Androlitian. This last is much like silver, and does not draw Iron. There is a
stone (says Pliny) called the Theamedes, just opposite in nature to the
loade-stone expelling all Iron from it. (l) Lay but a diamond] Plin. lib. vlt.
(m) In India] And in other places also. But in India they say there are Rocks
of them that draw the ships to them if they have any Iron in them, so that such
as sail that way, are feign to join their ships together with pinnes of wood.

Of such things as cannot be assuredly known to be such, and yet are not to
be doubted of. CHAP. 5.
But the Infidels hearing of miracles, and such things as we cannot make
apparent to their sense, fall to ask us the reason of them, which because it
surpasses our humane powers to give, they deride them, as false and
ridiculous; but let them but give us reason for all the wondrous things that
we have seen, or may easily see hereafter, which if they cannot do, then let
them not say that there is not, nor can be any thing without a reason why it
should be; thus seeing that they are convinced by their own eye sight, I will
not therefore run through all relations of authors, but try their cunning in
things which are extant for any to see, that will take the pains, (a) The salt
of Agrigentum in Sicily, being put in fire melts into water, and in water,
it crackleth like the fire.

(b) The Garamantes have a fountain so cold in the day that it cannot be
drunk often: so hot in the night that it cannot be touched. (c) In Epyrus is
another, wherein if you quensh a toarch, you may light it again thereat. The
Arcadian (b) Asbest being once enflamed, will never be quenshed. There is a
kind of fig tree in Egypt whose wood (e) sinketh, and being thoroughly steeped,
(and the heavier, one would think) it rises again to the top of the water.

The apples of the country of (f) Sodom, are fair to the eye, but being
touched, fall to dust and ashes. The Persian (g) Pyrites pressed hard in the
hand, burns it, whereupon it has the name. (h) The Selenites is another
stone wherein the waxing and waning of the Moon is ever visible. The (i) Mares
in Cappadocia conceive with the wind, but their foales live but three years.
The trees of (k) Tilon, an I Will in India, never cast their leaves. All these,
and thousands more, are no passed things, but visible at this day, each in
their places; it were too long for me to recite all, my purpose is otherwise.
And now let those Infidels give me the reason of these things, those that will
not believe the scriptures, but hold them to be fictions, in that they seem
to relate incredible things, such as I have now reckned! Reason (say they)
forbids us to think that a body should burn, and yet not be consumed,
that it should feel pain, and yet live everlastingly. O rare disputers! You
that can give reason for all miraculous things, give me the reasons of those
strange effects of nature before named, of those few only; which if you knew
not to be now visible, and not future, but present to the view of those that
will make trial, you* would be (l) more incredulous in them, then in this
which we say shall come to pass hereafter. For which of you would believe us
if we should say (as we say that men's bodies hereafter shall burn and not
consume, so likewise) that there is a salt that melts in fire, and crackleth
in the water? of a fountain intollerably hot in the night, and intollerably
cold in the day? or a stone that burns him that holds it hard, or another,
that being once fired, never quensheth; and so of the rest? If we had said,
these things shall be in the world to come, and the infidells had bidden us give
the reason why, we could freely confess we could not, the power of GOD in
his works surpassing the weakness of humane reason: and yet that we knew
that GOD did not without reason in putting mortal man by these, past his
reason: We know not his will in many things, yet know we that what he
wills is no way impossible, as he has told us, to whom we must neither
impute falsenesse nor imperfection. But what say our great Reasonists unto
those ordinary things which are so common, and yet exceed all reason, and seem
to oppose the laws of nature? If we should say they were to come, then the
Infidells would forthwith ask reason for them, as they do for that which we
say is to come. And therefore seeing that in those works of GOD, man's reason
is to seek, as these things are such now, and yet why, no man can tell, so
shall the other be also hereafter, beyond humane capacity and apprehension.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) salt] Hereof read Pliny, lib. 21. (b) The Garamantes] Plin. lib. 5.
Near unto this fountain is Hammons well, of which you may read more in
Diodorus, Lueret: Mela, Ovid, Silius, Solinus etc. (c) In Epirus] Pomp. Mela
lib. 2. and Plin. lib. 2. It is called the fountain of Jupiter Dodonaeus. (d)
Asbest] A stone of an Iron color. Plin. l 38. (e) Sinketh] Plin. lib. 13.
cap. 7. (f) Sodome] Five cities perished in the burning of Sodom. Sodom,
Gomorrha, Adama, Seborin and Segor, whereof this last was a little one but all
the rest were very large. Paul, Oros. hereof you may read in Solinus his
Polyhistor, as also of these apples. Tacitus seems to give the infection of
the earth and the air from the lake, for the reason of this strange effect
upon the fruits. lib. vltimo, Vide Hegesip. lib. 4. Ambros. interpret. (g)
Tyrites] So says Pliny, lib. vlt. Pur, in greek, is fire. Some call the
Coral pyrites, as Pliny wittnesseth. lib. 36. but there is another Pyrites
besides, of the color of brass. (h) The Selenites] Plin. lib. vlt. out of
Dioscorides, affirms this to be true. (i) Mars] So says Solinus in his
description of Cappadocia. And it is commonly held that the Mares of Andaluzia
do conceive by the south-west wind, as Homere, Uarro, Columella, Pliny, and
Solinus, Plinies Ape do all affirm. (k) Tilon] Pliny and Theophrastus affirm
that it lies in the read sea. Pliny says that a ship built of the wood of
this Island, will last two hundred years. lib. 16. (l) More incredulous] For
some will believe only what they can conceive, and hold althings else,
fictions, nay some are so mad, that they think it the only wisdom to
believe just nothing but what they see, despising and deriding the secrets of
GOD and nature, which are wisely therefore concealed from the vulgar, and the
witless ear.

All strange effects are not natures: some are man's devises: some the devils.
CHAP. 6.
PErhaps they will answer, Oh, these are lies, we believe them not, they are
false relations, if these be credible, then believe you also if you list, (for
one man has relared both this and those) that there was a temple of Venus
wherein there burned a lamp which no wind nor water could ever quensh, so
that it was called the inextinguible lamp. This they may object, to put us to
our plunges, for if we say it is false, we detract from the truth of our
former examples, and if we say it is true we shall seem to avouch a Pagan
deity. But as I said in the eighteenth book, we need not believe all that
Paganism has historically published, their histories (as Varro witnesses)
seemeing to conspire in voluntary contention one against an other: but we may,
if we will, believe such of their relations as do not contradict those books
which we are bound to believe. Experience, and sufficient testimony shall
afford us wonders enough of nature, to convince the possibility of what we
intend, against those Infidells. As for that lamp of Venus it rather gives
our argument more scope then any way suppresseth it. For unto that, we can
add a thousand strange things effected both by humane invention and Magical
operation. Which if we would deny, we should contradict those very books
wherein we believe. Wherefore that lamp either burned by the artificial
placing (a) of some Asbest in it, or it was effected by (b) art magike, to
procure a religious wonder, or else some devil having honor there under the
name of Venus, continued in this apparition for the preservation of men's
misbeleefe. For the (c) devils are allured to inhabit some certain bodies,
by the very creatures of (d) God and not their delighting in them, not as other
creatures do in meats, but as spirits do in characters and signs ad-apted
to their natures, either by stones, herbs, plants, living creatures, charms
and ceremonies. And this allurement they do sutly entice man to procure them,
either by inspiring him with the secrets thereof, or teaching him the order in
a false and flattering apparition, making some few, scholars to them, and
teachers to a many more. For man could never know what they love, and what they
loathe but by their own instructions, which were the first foundations of art
Magike. And then do they get the fastest hold of men's hearts (which is all
they seek and glory in) when they appear like Angels of light. How ever,
their works are strange, and the more admired, the more to be avoided, which
their 1. Cor. 11
own natures do persuade us to do; for if these foul devils can work such
wonders, what cannot the glorious angels do then? Nay what cannot that GOD
do, who has given such power to the most hated creatures? So then, if humane
art can effect such rare conclusions, that such as know them not would think
them divine effects: (as there was an Iron Image hung (e) in a certain temple,
so strangely that the ignorant would have verily believed they had seen a
work of GODS immediate power, it hung so just between two loade-stones,
(whereof one was placed in the roof of the temple, and the other in the
floor) without touching of any thing at all,) and as there might be such a
trick of man's art, in that inextinguible lamp of Venus, if Magicians, (which
the scriptures call sorcerers and enchanters) can do such are exploytes by the
devils means as Virgil that famous Poet relates of an Enchantresse, in these
words. (f) Haec se carminibus promittit soluere mentes
Quas velit, ast aliis dur as immittere curas,
Sistere aquam fluuiis, and vertere sydera retro,
Nocturnosque ci^t manes, mugire videbis
Sub pedibus terram, and descendere montibus Ornos.
She said her charms could ease ones heart of pain,
Even when she list, and make him grieve again.
Stop floods, bring back the stars, and with her breath,
Rouse the black fiends, until the earth beneath
Groaned, and the trees came marching from the hills etc.


If all this be possible to those, how much more then can the power of GOD
exceed them in working such things as are incredible to infidelity, but easy
to his omnipotency, who has given virtues unto stones, wit unto man, and
such large power unto Angels? his wonderful power exceeds all wonders, his
wisdom permits and effects all and every particular of them, and cannot
he make the most wonderful use of all the parts of that world that he only
has created?

L. VIVES.
PLacing (a) of some Asbest] Or of a kind of flax that will never be
consumed, for such there is. Plin. lib. 19. Piedro Garsia and I saw many lamps
of it at Paris, where we saw also a napkin of it thrown into the midst of a
fire, and taken out again after a while more white and clean then all the
soap in Europe would have made it. Such did Pliny see also, as he says
himself. (b) By art magique] In my fathers time there was a tomb ^ound,
wherein there burned a lamp which by the inscription of the tomb, had been
lighted therein, the space of one thousand five hundred years and more.
Being touched, it fell all to dust. (c) Devils are allured] Of this read
more in the eight and tenth books of this present work, and in Psell. de
Daem. (d) And not theirs] The Manichees held the devils to be the creators of
many things, which this denies. (e) In a certain temple] In the temple of
Serapis of Alexandria. Ruf^n. Hist. Eccl. lib. 21. (f) Haee se] Aeneid. 4.

Gods omnipotency the ground of all belief in things admired CHAP. 7.
Why then cannot (a) GOD make the bodies of the dead to rise again, and the
damned to suffer torment and yet not to consume, seeing he has filled heaven,
earth, air and water so full of inumerable miracles, and the world; which he
made, being a greater miracle then any it contains? But our adversaries,
believing a God that made the world and the other gods, by whom he governs
the world, do not deny, but auoutch that there are powers that effect wonders
in the world, either voluntarily, or ceremonially and magically, but when we
give them an instance wrought neither by man nor by spirit, they answer us, it
is nature, nature has given it this quality. So then it was nature that made
the Agrigentine salt melt in the fire, and crackle in the water. Was it so?
this seems rather contrary to the nature of salt, which naturally dissolueth
in water, and crakleth in the fire. I but nature (say they) made this
particular salt of a quality just opposite. Good: this then is the reason also
of the hear and cold of the Garamantine fountain, and of the other that puts
out the torch and lights it again, as also of the A^beste, and those other,
all which to rehearse were too tedious: There is no other reason belike to be
given for them, but, such is their nature. A good brief reason verily, and (b)
a sufficient. But GOD being the Author of all nature, why then do they exact
a stronger reason of us, when as we in proouing that which they hold for an
impossibility, affirm that it is thus by the will of Almighty GOD, who is
therefore called Almighty because he can do all that he will, having created
so many things which were they not to be seen, and confirmed by sufficient
testimony, would seem as impossible as the rest, whereas now we know them,
partly all, and partly some of us. As for other things that are but reported
without ^estimony, and concern not religion, nor are not taught in scripture,
they may, be false, and a man may lawfully refuse to believe them. I do not
believe all that I have set down, so firmly that I do make no doubt of some
of them, but for that which I have tried, as the burning of lyme in water and
cooling in oil; the loade-stones drawing of Iron and not moving a straw; the
incorruptibility of the Peacoks flesh, whereas Platoes flesh did putrify; the
keeping of snow and the ripening of apples in chafe; the bright fire making
the stones of his own col^our, and wood of the just contrary, these I have
seen and believe without any doubt at all: Such also are these, that clear
oil should make black spots, and white silver drawn a black line: that
coals should turn black, from white wood, brittle of hard ones, and
incorruptible of corruptible pieces: together with many other which
tediousness forbids me here to insert. For the others, excepting that
fountain that quensheth and kindles again, and the dusty apples of Sodom, I
could not get any sufficient proofs to confirm them. Nor met I any that had
beheld that fountain of Epyrus, but I found diverse that had seen the like,
near unto Grenoble in France. And for the Apples of Sodom, there are both
grave authors, and eyewitnesses enough alive, that can affirm it, so that I
make no doubt thereof. The rest I leave indifferent, to affirm, or deny; yet I
did set them down because they are recorded in our ad^ersaries own histories,
to show them how many things they believe in their own books, without all
reason, that will not give credence to us, when we say that God Almighty will
do any thing that exceeds their capacity to conceive. What better or
stronger reason can be given for any thing then to say, God Almighty will do
this, which he has promised in those books wherein he promises as strange
things as this, which he has performed. He will do it, because he has said
he will: even he, that has made the incredulous Heathens believe things
which they held mere impossibilities.

L. VIVES.
WHy then (a) cannot God] Seeing the scope of this place is divine, and
surpasses the bounds of nature, as concerning the resurrection, judgment,
salvation, and damnation, I [No word of this in the Louaine copy.]
wonder that Aquinas, Scotus, Occam, Henricus de Gandauo, Durandus and Petrus
de Palude dare define of them according to Aristotle's positions, drawing
themselves into such labyrinths of natural questions, that you would rather
say they were Athenian Sophisters, then Christian divines.] (b) Sufficient]
Man's conceit being so slender and shallow in these causes of things, in so
much that Virgil said well, Faelix, qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas: (c)
Grenoble] It was built by Gratian, and called Gratianopolis, Valens being
Emperor of the East. It stands in Daulphine, and reteineth part of the old
name.

That the alteration of the known nature of any creature, unto a nature
unknown, is not opposite unto the laws of nature. CHAP. 8.
IF they reply that they will not believe that man's body can endure perpetual
burning, because they know it is of no such nature, so that it cannot be said
of it, that nature has given it such a quality, we may answer them out of the
scriptures, that man's body before his fall was of such a nature that it could
not suffer death: and yet in his fall was altered unto that mortal misery
wherein now all mankind lives, to dye at length: and therefore at the
resurrection it may undergo such another alteration, unknown to us as yet.
But they believe not the Scriptures that relate man's estate in Paradise, if
they did, we should not need to stand long with them upon this theme of the
pains of the damned: whereas now we must make demonstration out of their own
authors, how it is possible that there may be a full alteration of nature in
any one object, from the kind of being that it had before, and yet the laws
of nature be kept vnviolated. Thus we read in Varro's book De Gente Pop. Romans
Castor (says he) relates, that in that bright star of Venus (a) which
Plautus calls Hesperugo and Homer the glorious (b) Hesperus, befell a most
monstrous change both of color, magnitude, figure and motion: the like never
was before nor since: and this says Adrastus Cyzicenus, and Dion Neapolites
(two famous Astronomers) befell in the reign of Ogyges. A monstrous change,
says Varro, and why, but that it seemed contrary to nature: such we say, all
portents to be, but we are deceived: for how can that be against nature which
is effected by the will of God the Lord and maker of all nature? A portent
therefore is not against nature, but against the most common order of nature.
But who is he that can relate all the portents recorded by the Gentiles? Let
us seek our purpose in this one. What more decretall law has God laid upon
nature in any part of the creation, then he has in the motions of the
heavens? what more legal and fixed order does any part of nature keep? and
yet you see, that when it was the pleasure of Natures highest sovereign, the
brighest star in all the firmament, changed the color, magnitude and
figure, and which is most admirable, the very course and motion. This made a
foul disturbance in the rules of the Astrologians (if there were any then)
when they observing their fixed descriptions of the eternal course of the
stars, durst affirm that there never was, nor never would be any such
change as this of Venus was. Indeed we read in the Scripture that the Sun
stood still at the prayer of Iosuah, until the battle was done, and went back
to show Hezechias that the Lord had added fifteen years unto his life. As for
the miracles done by the virtues of the Saints, these Infidels know them well,
and therefore auerre them to be done by Magic: whereupon Virgil says as I
related before of the witch, that she could Sistere aquam fluuiis and vertere
syder a retro: Virg. Enid. 4.

Stop floods, bring back the stars, etc.
For the river Jordan parted, when Iosuah lead the people over it, and when
Heliah passed it, as likewise when his follower Heliseus divided it with Heliah
his cloak, and the sun as we said before went back in the time of
Hezechiah. But Varro does not say that any one desired this change of Venus.
Let not the faithless therefore hood winck themselves in the knowledge of
nature, as though Gods power could not alter the nature of any thing from what
it was before unto man's knowledge, although that the known nature of any thing
be fully as admirable, but that men admire nothing but rarieties. For what
reasonable man does not seee, that in that greatest likeness and most numerous
multitude of one work of nature, the face of man, there is such an admirable
quality, that were they not all of one form, they should not distinguish man
from beast, and yet were they all of one form, one man should not be known
from another? Thus likeness and difference are both in one object. But the
difference is most admirable, nature it self seeming to exact an uniformity in
the proportion thereof, and yet because it is rarieties which we admire, we
do wonder far more when we see two (c) so like that one may be easily and
is oftentimes deceived in taking the one for the other. But it may be they
believe not the relation of Varro, though he be one of their most learned
Historians, or do not respect it, because this star did not remain long in
this new form, but soon resumed the former shape and course again. Let us
therefore give them another example, which together with this of his, I think
may suffice to convince, that God is not to be bound to any conditions in the
allotting of particular being to any thing, as though he could not make an
absolute alteration thereof into an unknown quality of essence. The country of
Sodom was whilom otherwise then it is now: it was once like the rest of the
land, as fertile and as fair, if not more then the rest, in so much that the
Scripture compares it to Paradise. But being smitten from lieauen (as the
Paynim stories themselves record, and all travelers cou^ me) it now is as a
field of foot and ashes, and the apples of the soil being fair without are
naught but dust within. Behold, it was not such, and yet such it is at this
day. Behold a terible change of nature wrought by natures Creator? and that it
remains in that foul estate now, which it was a long time ere it fell into.
So then, as God can create what he will, so can he change the nature of what
he has created, at his good pleasure. And hence is the multitude of monsters,
visions, pertents, and prodigies, for the particular relation whereof, here is
no place. They are called (d) monsters, of Monstro, to show, because they
betoken somewhat: And portents and prodiges of portendo, and porro dico, to
presage and foretell somewhat to enshew. But whether they, or the devils,
whose care it is to inueigle and entangle the minds of the imperfect, and such
as dese^ve it, do delude the world either by true predictions, or by stumbling
on the truth by chance, let their obseruers and interpreters look to that. But
we ought to gather this from all those monsters and prodigies that happen or
are said to happen against nature (as the Apostle implied when he spoke of the
(e) engraffing of the wild Olive into the Garden Olive, whereby the wild one
was made partaker of the root and fatness Romans ^1.
of the other,) that they all do tell us this, that God will do with the bodies
of the dead, according to his promise, no difficulty, no law of nature can or
shall prohibit him. And what he has promised, the last booked declared out of
both the Testaments, not in very great measure, but sufficient (I think) for
the purpose and volume.

L. VIVES.
VEnus (a) with.] Here of already. Some call this star Uenus, some Juno.
Arist. De mundo. Some Lucifier, some Hesperus. Higin. lib. 2. It seems the
biggest star in the firmament. Some say it was the daughter of Cephalus and
^rocris, who was so fair that she contended with Uenus, and therefore was
called Uenus Eratasthen. It got the name of Lucifer and Hesperus from rising
and setting before and after the Sun. Higinus places it above the Sun the
Moon and Mercury, following Plato, Aristotle the Egiptians, and all the Old
Astronomers. (b) Hesperus.] So does Cynna in his Smirna. Te matutinis flentem
conspexit Eous,
Et flentem paulo vidit post Hesperus idem.
The day star, saw thy cheeks with tears bewet,
So did it in the evening, when it set.


That this was both the day star and the Euening-^arre, Pythagoras, or (as
some say) Parmenides was the first that observed. Plm. lib. 2. Suidas. (c) Two
so like.] Such two twins had Seruilius. Cie. Acad. Quaest 4. Such were the
Menechmi in Pluatus supposed to be, whom their very mother could not
distinguish, such also were the Twins that Quintilian declameth of. And at
Mechlin at this day Petrus Apostotius, a Burguer of the town, mine host, has
two toward, and gracious children, so like, that not only strangers, but even
their own mother has mistook them, and so does the father like-wise to this
day, calling Peter by his brother John's name, and John by Peter's. (d)
Monsters.] Thus does Tully expound these words. De diuinat* (e) Engraffing.]
The wild olive is but a bastard fruit and worse then the other: but it is not
the use to engraffe bad slips in a better stock, to mar the whole, but good
ones in a bad slocke to better the fruit. So that the Apostles words seem to
imply a deed against nature.

Of Hell and the qualities of the eternal pains therein. CHAP. 9.
AS God therefore by his Prophet spoke of the pains of the damned, such shall
they be: Their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenshed Our
Savior to commend this unto us, putting the parts that scandalize a man, for
man's right members, Isa. 66. 24.
and bidding him cut them of, adds this: better it is for thee to enter into
life maimed, then having two hands to go into Hell into the fire that never
shall be quenshed, where their worm dies not, and their fire never goes out,
and likewise of the foot: Mar. 9. 47.
Better for thee to go halting into life, then having two feet to be cast
into Hell etc. And so says he of the eye also, adding the Prophets words three
several times. O whom would not this thunder from the mouth of God strike a
chill terror into, sounding so often? Now as for this worm and this fire, they
that make them only mental pains, do say that the fire implies the burning of
the soul in grief and anguish, that now repents to late for being severed
from the sight of God: after the manner that the Apostle says: who is offended
and I burn not? And this anguish may be meant also by the worm, say they, as
it is written, As the moth is 1. Cor. 11. 29.
to the garment, and the worm to the wood, So does sorrow eat the heart of a
man. Now such as hold them both mental and real, say that the fire is a
bodily plague to the body, and the worm a plague of conscience in the soul.
This seems more likely in that it is absurd to say, that either the soul or
body shall be clear of pain; yet had I rather take part with them that say they
are both bodily, then with those that say that neither of them is so; and
therefore that sorrow in the Scriptures though it be not expressed so, yet it
is understood to be a fruitless repentance con^oyned with a corporal
torment, for the scripture says: the vengeance of the (flesh of the) wicked is
fire and the worm: he might have said more Eccl. 7.
briefly, the vengance of the wicked, why did he then ad of the flesh, but to
show that both those plagues, the fire and the worm, shall be corporal? If he
added it because that man shall be thus plagued for living according to the
flesh, (for it is therefore that he incurreth the second death, which the
Apostle means of when he says, If ye live after the flesh ye die:) but
every man believe as he like, either giving the fire truly to the body, and
the worm figuratively to the soul, or both properly to the body: for we have
fully proved already that a creature may burn and yet not consume, may live in
pain and yet not dye: which he that denies, knows not him that is the
author of all natures wonders, that God who has made all the miracles that I
erst recounted, and thousand thousands more, and more admirable, shutting them
all in the world, the most admirable work of all. Let every man therefore
choose what to think of this, whether both the fire and the worm plague the
body, or whether the worm have a metaphorical reference to the soul. The
truth of this question shall then appear plain, when the knowledge of the
Saints shall be such as shall require no trial of it, but only shall be fully
satisfied and resolved by the perfection and plenitude of the divine sapience.
We know but now in part, until that which is perfect be come, but yet may we
not believe those bodies to be such, that the fire can work them no anguish
nor torment.

L. VIVES.
THeir (a) worm.] Is. 66. 24. this is the worm of conscience. Hierome upon
this place. Nor is there any villainy (says Seneca) how ever fortunate, that
escapes unpunished, but is plague to it self by wringing the conscience with
fear and distrust. And this is Epicurus his reason to prove that man was
created to avoid sin, because having committed it, it scourges the
conscience, and makes it fear, even without all cause of fear. This out of
Seneca, ^pist. lib. ^6. And so sings Iuuenall in these words: Exemplo
quod^unque malo committitur, ipsi
D^splicet auctori: prima est haec vltio, quod se
Iudice nemo nocens absoluitur. -- etc.
Each deed of mischief first of all dislikes
The authout: with this whip Revenge first strikes,
That no stained thought can clear it self, -- etc.


And by and by after: -- Cur tamen hos tu^
Euasisse putes, quos diriconscia facti,
Men's habet ^ttionitos* and surdo verbere caedit,
Occultum quatiente animo tortore flagellum.
Poena autem vehemens, and multo saeuior illis,
Quas and Ceditius grauis inuenit, and Rhadamanthus
Nocte dieque suum gestare in pectore testem.
-- But why should you suppose
Them free, whose soul blackt ore with ougly deeds
Affrights and tears the conscience still, and feeds
Revenge, by nousling terror, fear and war,
Even in it self. O plagues far lighter far,
To bear guilts blisters in a breast unsound,
Then Rhadamant, or stern Ceditius found.


Nay the conscience confounds more then a thousand witnesses. Tully holds
there are no other hell furies then those stings of conscience, and that the
Poets had that invention from hence. In l. Pis. and Pro Ros^. Amerin. Hereof
you may read more in Quintilians Orations.

Whether the fire of hell if it be corporal, can take effect upon the
incorporeall devils. CHAP. 10.
But here now is another question: whether this fire, if it plague not
spiritually, but only by a bodily touch, can inflict any torment upon the
devil and his Angels? they are to remain in one fire with the damned,
according to our Saviors own words: Depart from me you cursed into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels. But the
devils according as some learned men suppose, have bodies of condensate air,
such as we feel in a wind; and this air is passible, and may suffer
burning, the heating of bathes proves, where the air is set on fire to heat
the water, and does that which first it suffers. If any will oppose, and say
the devils have no bodies at all, the matter is not great, nor much to be
stood upon. For why may not vnbodyed spirits feel the force of bodily fire, as
well as man's incorporeall soul is now included in a carnal shape, and shall
at that day be bound into a body for ever. These spiritual devils therefore or
those deuillish spirits, though strangely, yet shall they be truly bound in
this corporal fire, which shall torment them for all that they are
incorporeall. Nor shall they be so bound in it, that they shall give it a
soul as it were, and so become both one living creature, but as I said, by a
wonderful power shall they be so bound that in steed of giving it life, they
shall fr^o it receive intolerable torment, although the coherence of spirits
and bodies, whereby both become one creature, be as admirable, and exceed all
human capacity. And surely I should think the devils shall burn them, as
the rich glutton did, when he cried, saying, I am tormented in this flame,
but that I should be answered that that fire was such as his tongue was, to
cool which, he seeing Lazarus a far of, entreated him to help him with a
little water on the tippe of his finger. He was not then in the body but in
soul only; such likewise (that is incorporeall) was the fire he burned in,
and the water he wished for, as the dreams of those that sleep and the
vision of men in ecstasies are, which present the forms of bodies, and yet are
not bodies indeed. And though man see these things only in spirit, yet
thinks he himself so like to his body, that he cannot discern whether he
have it on or no. But that hell, that ^ake of fire and brimstone, shall be
real, and the fire corporal, burning both men and devils, the one in flesh
and the other in air: the one i^ the body adhaerent to the spirit, and the
other in spirit only adhaerent to the fire, and yet not infusing life, but
feeling torment for one fire shall torment both men and Devils, Christ has
spoken it.

Whether it be not justice that the time of the pains should be proportioned
to the time of the sins and crimes. CHAP. 11.
But some of the adversaries of Gods city, hold it injustice for him that has
offended but temporally, to be bound to suffer pain eternally, this (they say)
is ^ly vn^. As though they knew any law chat adapted the time of the punishment
to the time in which the crime was committed. Eight kind of punishments does
Tully affirm the laws to inflict: Damages, imprisonment, whipping, like for
like, public disgrace, banishment, death, and bondage, which of these can be
performed in so little time as the offense is, excepting (a) the fourth, which
yields every man the same measure that he meateth unto others, according to
that of the law, An eye for an eye, and a to^th for a tooth? Indeed one may
loose his eye by this law, in as small a time as he put out another man's by
violenc^. (...) is a man kiss another man's wife, and be therefore adjudged to
be whipped, is not that which he did in a moment, paid for by a good deal
longer sufferance? is (...) (...) pleasure repaide with a longer pain? And
what for imprison^ (...) ^ry one judged to lie there no longer then he was a
doing his villa^ (...) (...) servant that has but violently touched his
master, is by a just law (...) (...) many years imprisonment. And as for
damages, disgraces, and (...) (...), are not many of them darelesse, and
lasting a man's whole life, where be (...) a proportion with the pains
eternal. Fully eternal they cannot (...) (...) the life which they afflict is
but temporal, and yet the sins they (...) are all committed in an instant,
nor would any man advise that the conti^ (...) (...) penalty should be measured
by the time of the fact, for that, be it (...) (...) (...)* (...), or what
villainy so-euer, is quickly dispatched, and (...) (...) (...) (...) to be
weighed by the length of time, but by the foulness of the crime. (...) for
him that deserves death by an offense, does the law hold the time that (...)
(...) (...) ^ing, to be the satisfaction for his guilt, or his being taken
away from the fellowship of men, whether? That then which the terrestrial
City can do by the first death, the celestial can effect by the second, in
clearing her self of malefactors. For as the laws of the first, cannot call a
dead man back again into their society, no more do the laws of the second
call him back to salvation that is once entered into the second death. How then
is our Saviors words (say they) With what measure ye mete, with the same
shall men mete to you again. Luc. 6.
if temporal sins be rewarded with eternal pains? O but you mark not that
those words have a reference to the returning of evil for evil in our nature,
and not in one proportion of time: that is, he that does evil, shall suffer
evil, without limitation of any time: although this place be more properly
understood of the judgments and condemnations whereof the Lord did there
speak. So that he that judges unjustly, if he be judged unjustly, is paid in
the same measure that he meated withal, though not what he did: for he did
wrong in judgment, and such like he suffers: but he did it unjustly, mary he
is repaid according to justice.

L. VIVES.
EXcepting the (a) fourth] This was one of the Romans laws in the twelve
tables, and hereof does Phauorinus dispute with Sep. Caecilius, in Gellius.
lib. 20.

The greatness of Adams sin, inflicting eternal damnation upon all that are
out of the state of Grace. CHAP. 12.
But therefore does man imagine, that this infliction of eternal torment is
injustice, because his frail imperfection cannot discern the horriblenesse of
that offense that was the first procurer thereof. For the fuller fruition man
had of God, the greater impiety was it for him to renounce him, and therein was
he worthy of euer-lasting evil, in that he destroyed his own good, that
otherwise had been everlasting. Hence came damnation upon all the stock of
man, parent and progeny vnder-going one curse, from which none can be ever
freed, but by the free and gracious mercy of God, which makes a separation of
mankind, to show in one of the remainders the power of grace, and in the other
the revenge of justice. Both which could not be expressed upon all mankind,
for if all had tasted of the punishments of justice, the grace and mercy of the
redeemer had had no place in any: and again, if all had been redeemed from
death, there had been no object left for the manifestation of Gods justice:
But now there is more left, then taken to mercy, that so it might appear what
was due unto all, without any impeachment of Gods justice, who not-withstanding
having delivered so many, has herein bound us for ever to praise his gracious
commiseration.

Against such as hold, that the torments after the judgment shall be but the
means whereby the souls shall be purified. CHAP. 13.
SOme Platonists there are who though they assign a punishment to every sin,
yet hold they that all such inflictions, be they human or divine, in this
life or in the next, tend only to the purgation of the soul from enormities.
Whereupon Virgil having said of the souls; Hinc metunt cupiuntque, etc.
Hence fear, desire, etc,


And immediately: Quin vt supremo cum lumine vita reliquit,
Non tamen omne mal^m miseris, nec funditus omnes
Corporeae excedunt pestes, penitusque necesse est,
Multa diu concreta modis inolescere miris.
Ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt, aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensa ad ventos, aliis sub gurgite vasto
Insectum eluitur scelus, aut exuritur igni.
For when the souls do leave the bodies dead,
Their miseries are not yet finished:
Nor all their times of torment yet complete:
Many small crimes must needs make one that's great.
Pain therefore purges them, and makes them fair
From their old stains: some hang in duskie air,
Some in the deep do pay the debt of sin,
And fire is chosen to cleanse others in.
They that hold this, affirm that no pains at all are to be suffered after
death, but only such as purge the souls, and those shall be cleared of all
their earthly contagion by some of the three upper elements, the fire, the
air, or the water. The air, in that he says, Suspensae ad ventos: the water,
by the words Sub gurgite vasto; the fire is expressly named, aut exuritur igni.
Now indeed we do confess that there are certain pains during this life,
which do not properly afflict such as are not bettred but made worse by them,
but belong only to the reforming of such (...) take them for corrections. All
other pains, temporal and eternal are laid upon every one as God pleases,
by his Angels good or bad, either for some sin past, or wherein the party
afflicted now lives, or else to exercise and declare the virtue of his
servants. For if one man hurt another (a) willingly, or by chance, it is an
offense in him to do any man harm, by will or through ignorance, but God
whose secret judgment assigned it to be so, offends not at all. As for
temporal pain, some endure it here, and some here-after, and some both here
and there, yet all is past before the last judgment. But all shall not come
into these eternal pains, (which not-with-standing shall be eternal after
the last judgment, unto them that endure them temporally after death.) For some
shall be pardoned in the world to come that are not pardoned in this, and
acquitted there and not here from entering into pains eternal, as I said
before.

L. VIVES.
Willingly (a) or by] Willingly, that is, of set purpose, or through a wrong
persuasion that (...) does him good when he hurts him, as the torturers and
murderers of the martyrs believed. These were all guilty, nor wa^ their
ignorance excuseable: which in what cases it may be held pardonable, Augustine
disputes in Quaest. vet. and Nou. Testam.

The (...) all pains of this life afflicting all mankind. CHAP. 14.
BUT few the^ (...) that endure none of these pains until after death. Some
indeed I have known and heard of that never had hours sickness until their
dying day, and lived very long, though notwithstanding man's whole life be a
pain in that it is a temptation and a warre-fare upon earth as Holy Job says,
for ignorance is a great punishment, and therefore you see that little children
are forced to a avoid it by stripes and sorrows, that also which they learn
being such a pain to them, that sometimes they had rather endure the
punishments that enforce them learn it, then to learn that which would avoyde
them (a). Who would not tremble and rather choose to die then to be an infant
again, if he were put to such a choice? We begin it with tears, and therein
presage our future miseries. Only (b) Zoroastres smiled (they say) when he
was borne: but his prodigyous mirth boded him no good: for he was, by report,
the first inuentor of Magike, which notwithstanding stood him not in a pins
stead in his misfortunes, for Ninus King of Assiriaouer came him in battle and
took his Kingdom of Bactria from him. So that it is such an impossibility
that those words of the Scripture, Great travel is created for all men and an
heavy yoke upon the sons of Adam from the day that they go out of their
mothers womb, until the day that they return unto the mother of all things,
should not be fulfilled, that the very infants, being Baptized, and therein
quitte from all their guilt, which then is only original, are notwithstanding
much and often afflicted, yea even sometimes by the incursion of Devils, which
notwithstanding cannot hurt them if they die at that tenderness of age.

L. VIVES.
WHo (a) would.] Some would think themselves much beholding to God if they
might begin their days again, but wise Cato in Tully was of another mind.
(b) Zoroastres smiled.] He was king of Bactria, the founder of Magique. He
lived before the Trojan war 5000. years says Hermodotus Platonicus. Agnaces
taught him. He wrote 100000. verses, Idem. Eudoxus makes him live 5000. years
before Plato his death, and so does Aristotle. Zanthus Lydius is as short as
these are over in their account, giving but 600, between Zoroastres, and
Xerxes passage into Greece. Pliny doubts whether there were many of this name.
But this lived in Ninus his time; he smiled at his birth, and his brain beat
so that it would lift up the hand; a presage of his future knowledge. Plin. He
lived twenty years in a desert upon cheese, which he had so mixed, that it
never grew moldy nor decayed.

That the scope of Gods redeeming us is wholly pertinent to the world to come.
CHAP. 15.
But yet notwithstanding in this heavy yoke that lies upon Adams children from
there birth to their burial, we have this one means left us, to live sober,
and to weigh that our first parents sin has made this life but a pain to us,
and that all the promises of the New Testament belong only to the Heritage
laid up for us in the world to come: pledges we have here, but the performance
due thereto we shall not have till then. Let us now therefore walk in hope and
profiting day by day let us mortify the deeds of the flesh, by the spirit, for
God knows all that are his, and as many as are led by the spirit of God, are
the sons of God, but by grace, not by nature, for Gods only son by nature,
was made the son of man for us, that we being the sons of men by nature might
become the sons of God in him by grace, for he remaining changelesse, took
our nature upon him, and keeping still his own divinity, that we being
changed, might leave our frailety and apnesse to sin, through the
participation of his righteousness and immortallity and keep that which he
had made good in us, by the perfection of that good which is in him: for as we
all fell into this misery by one man's sin, so shall we ascend unto that
glory by one (deified) man's righteousness. Nor may any imagine that he has
had this pass, until (...) be there where there is no temptation but all
full of that peace which we seek by these conflicts of the spirit against the
flesh, and the flesh against the spirit. This war had never been, had man
kept his will in that right way wherein it was first placed. But refusing that,
now he fights in himself, and yet this inconvenience is not so bad as the
former, for happier far is he that strives against sin then he that
allows it soueraygnty over him. Better is war with hope of eternal peace,
then thraldom without any thought of freedom. We wish the want of this war
though, and God inspireth us to aim at that orderly peace wherein the
inferior obeys the superior in althings: but if there were hope of it in
this life (as God forbid we should imagine) by yielding to sin, (a) yet
ought we rather to stand out against it, in all our miseries, then to give over
our freedoms to sin, by yielding to it.

L. VIVES.
YEt (a) ought we.] So said the Philosophers, even those that held the souls
to be mortal: that virtue was more worth then all the glories of a vicious
estate, and a greater reward to it self: nay that the virtuous are more happy
even in this life, then the vicious, and there^ Christ animates his servants
with promises of rewards both in the world to come, and in this that is present

The laws of grace, that all the regenerate are blessed in. CHAP. 16.
But Gods mercy is so great in the vessels whom he has prepared for glory,
that even the first age of man, which is his infancy, where the flesh rules
without control, and the second, his childhood, where his reason is so weak
that it gives way to all ^nticements, and the mind is altogether incapable of
religious precepts; if notwithstanding they be washed in the fountain of
regeneration, and he dye at this or that age, he is translated from the powers
of darkness to the glories of Christ, and freed from all pains, eternal and
purificatory. His regeneration only is sufficient clear that, after death
which his carnal generation had contracted with death. But when he comes to
years of discretion, and is capable of good counsel, then must he begin a
fierce conflict with vices least it allure (...) to damnation* Indeed the
fresh water soldiour is the more easily put to (...) (...) practice will make
him valourous, and to pursue victory with all his (...) (...) which he must
evermore assay by a weapon called the (a) love of true righ^ (...) ^is is kept
in the faith of Christ, for if the command be present, and the (...) absent,
the very forbidding of the crime enflameth the perverse flesh to (...) (...)
^er into it, sometimes producing open enormities, and sometimes (b) sects
ones, farre-worse then the other, in that pride, and ruinous self conceit
perswade^ (...) that they are virtues. Then therefore sin is quelled, when it is
beaten down by they love of God, which none but he and that he does only, by
Jesus Christ the mediator of God and man, who made himself mortal, that we
might be made eternal: few are so happy to pass their youth without taynt of
some damnable sin or other, either in deed, opinion, or so; but let them
above all, seek to suppress by the fulness of spirit all such evil motions
as shall be incited by the looseness of the flesh. Many, having betaken
themselves to the law, becoming preuaricators thereof through sin, are
afterward feign to fly unto the law of grace assistant, which making them both
truer penitents, and stouter opponents, subiecteth their spirits to God, and so
they get the conquest of the flesh. He therefore that will escape hell fire,
must be both Baptized and justified in Christ, and this is his only way to
pass from the Devil unto him. And let him assuredly believe that there is no
purgatory pains but before that great and terrible judgment. Indeed it is
true that the fire of Hell shall be (c) more forcible against some then against
others, according to the diversity of their deserts, whether it be adapted in
nature to the quality of their merits, or remain one fire unto all, and yet
be not felt alike of all.

L. VIVES.
THe (a) love of.] This made Plato advise men to use their children only to
virtuous delights, and to induce a hate of bad things into their minds, which
were it observed, out love would then be as much unto virtue as now it is unto
carnal pleasures, for custom is another nature: and a good man likes virtue
better then the voluptuary does sensuality. (b) Secret ones far worse. Plato
having feasted certain Gentlemen, spread the Room with mats and dressed his
banqueting beds handsomely. In comes Diogenes the Cynicke, and falls presently
a trampling of the hangings with his durty feet. Plato coming in, why how now
Diogenes quoth he? Nothing said the other, but that I tread down Platoes
Pride. Thou do indeed (says Plato) but with a pride far greater, for
indeed this was a greater vainglory and arrogance in Diogenes that was poor,
then in Plato that was rich, and had but prepared these things for his friends.
So shall you have a many proud beggars think themselves holyer then honest
rich men, only for their name sake, as if God respected the goods, and not
there minds. They will not be rich, because they think their poverty makes
them more admired Diogenes had wont to do horrible things to make the people
observe him, and one day in the midst of winter he fell a washing himself in
a cold spring, whither by and by there gathred a great multitude, who seeing
him, pitied him, and prayed him to for-beare: O no, says Plato aloud, if you
will pity him, get ye all gone: for he saw it was not virtue, but vainglory
that made him do thus. (c) More forcible.] According to the words of Christ,
(...) Mat. 11.
^be easier for Tire and Sydon. etc.

Of some Christians that held that Hells pains should not be eternal. CHAP.
17.
NOw must I have a gentle disputation with certain tender hearts of our own
religion, who think that God, who has iu^ doomed the damned unto (...) fire,
will after a certain space, which his goodness shall think fit for the merit
of each man's guilt, deliver them from that torment. And of this opinion was (a)
Origin, in far more pitiful manner, for he held that the devils themselves
after a set time* (...), should be loosed from their torments, and become
bright (...) (...) (...), ^hey were before. But this, and other of his
opinions, chiefly* (...) (...) (...) ^-volution of misery and bliss which he
held that all (...) should run in, gave the church cause to pronounce him
Anathema: (...) (...) had lost this seeming pity, by assigning a true misery,
after a while, and (...) bliss, unto the Saints in heaven, where they (if they
were true) could never (...) (...) to ^aine. But far other-wise i^ their
tenderness of heart, which ^old that this freedom out of hell shall only be
extended unto the souls of the (...) after a certain time appointed for every
one, so that all at length shall (...) to be Saints in heaven. But if this
opinion be good and true, because it is (...) (...) (...) the farther it
extends, the better it is: so that it may as well (...) (...) (...) freedom
of the devils also, after a longer continuance of time. W^ (...)* (...) it
with man kind only, and excludes them? ^ay but it dares (...) (...)* they
dare not extend their pity unto the devil. But if any one (...) (...)* go^
beyond them, and yet sins in erring more deformedly, and (...) (...) ^ly
against the express word of GOD, though he think to show the more pity
herein.

L. VIVES.
Origin (a) in] Periarch lib. Of this already. (b) Include the freedome] So did
Origin, (...) likewise made good Angels become devils in process of time,
according to his ima^ circum-^.

Of those that hold that the intercession of the Saints shallsaue all men from
damnation. CHAP. 18.
(...) (...) with some that seem to reverence the Scriptures, and yet are no
(...) (...), who would make God far more merciful then the other. For as
(...) the wicked, they confess, that they deserve to be plagued, but mercy
shall (...) (...) (...) hand when it comes to judgment: for God shall give
them all (...) the prayers and intercession of the Saints, who if they prayed
for them (...) they (...) over them as enemies, will do it much more now when
they (...) prostrate a^ their feet like slaves. For it is incredible (say
they) that (...) (...) (...) mercy when they are most holy and perfect, who
prayed (...) their foes, when they were not without sin themselves: Surely
then they (...) pray for them being now become their suppliants, when as they
have no (...) at (...) left in them. And will not God hear them, when their
prayers have (...) (...)? Then bring they forth the testimony of the Psalm*
which the (...) that held the saving of all the damned after a time, do
allege also, but (...) that it makes more for them: the words are these: Has
God for^ (...) will be (...) up his (...) in displeasure? His displeasure (say
(...) (...) all that (...) un (...) of eternal life, to eternal torment. But
(...) (...) (...)* little or long, how can it be then that the Psalm (...)
(...) up (...) (...) in displeasure? It says not, Will he shut^ (...) v^
(...)* (...) (...) that he will not shut them up at all. Thus do they (...)
(...) (...) (...) of GOD is not false, although he condemn none, no more then
his threatening to destroy Niniuy was false, though it was not effected (say
they) notwithstanding that he promised it without exception. He said not, I
will destroy it unless it repent, but plainly* without addition, Niniuy
shall be destroyed. This threa^g do they hold true, because GOD foretold
plainly what they had deserved, though he pake not that which he meant to do*
for though he spared them, yet knew he that they would repent: and yet did
he absolutely promise their destruction. This therefore (say they) was true in
the truth of his severity, which they had deserved, but not in respect of his
mercy, which he did not shut up in displeasure, because he would show mercy
unto their prayers, whose pride he had threatened to punish. If therefore he
showed mercy then (say they) when he knew he should thereby grieve his holy
prophet, how much more will he show it now when all his Saints shall entreat
for it? Now this surmise of theirs they think the scriptures do not mention,
because men should be reclaimed from vice by fear of tedious or eternal
torment, and because some should pray for those that will not amend: and yet
the scriptures (say they) do not utterly conceal it: for what does that of
the Psalm intend, How great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for
them that fear thee! Thou keep them secret in thy tabernacle from the
strife of tongues. That is, say Psalm. 31 19, ^0
they, this great sweetness of GODS mercy it kept secret from us, to keep us
in the more awe, and therefore the Apostle says GOD has shut up all in
unbelief, that he might have mercy on all, to show that he will condemn
none. To. 11, 32
Yet these Opinionists will not extend this general salvation unto the
devils, ^t make mankind the only object of their pity, promising impunity
to their own bad lives withal, by pretending a general mercy of GOD unto the
whole generation of man: and in this, they that extend Gods mercy unto the
devil and his angels, do quite exceed these later.

Of such as hold that heretics shall be saved, in that they have pertaken of
the body of CHRIST. CHAP. 19.
OThers there are, that clear not hell of all, but only of such as are
baptized and pertakers of Christ's body, and these (they say) are saved, be
their lives or doctrines whatsoever, whereupon CHRIST himself said, This is
the bread which comes down from heaven that he which eats of it should not
die* I am the Ioh. (...)
^ing bread which came down from heaven. Therefore (say these men) must all
such (...) saved of necessity, and glorified by everlasting life.

Of such as allow this deliverance only to wicked and revolted Catholics.
CHAP. 20.
ANother sort restrain the former position only to Catholics, line they
never so vilely, because they have received CHRIST truly and bin (...) in his
body: of which the Apostle faith; We that are many, are one bread, 1 C^. 10 17.
(...) one body, because we all are pertakers of one bread. So that fall they
into never ^o (...) afterward, yea even into Paganism, yet because they
received the Baptism of Christ in his Church, they shall not perish for ever,
but shall (...) (...) life, (...) shall their guilt make their torments
euer-lasting, (...) temporal* though they may last a long time, and be
extremely (...)*

Of such as affirm that all that abide in the Catholic faith, shall be saved
for that faith ^ly, be their lives never so worthy of damnation. CHAP. 21.
THere (...) some* who because it is written* He that endures to the end, he
shall (...) 24.
(...) (...) do affirm that only they that continue Catholics (how-soeuer
they live) shall be saved by the merit of that foundation, whereof the Apostle
(...), Other foundation can no man try, then that which is laid, which is
Christ (...). C^. 3.
(...) And if any man build on this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones,
tim^* (...) (...) stubble; every man's work shall be made manifest, for the
day [of the Lord] shall declare it, because it shall be revealed by the fire,
and the fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is. If any man's work
that he has built upon abide, he shall receive wages. If any man's work
burn, he shall lose, (...) he shall be* (...) himself, yet as it were by
fire. So that all Christian Ca^ (...) say ^hey) having Christ for their
foundation (which no heretics (...) off from his body) be their lives good
or bad, (as those that (...) (...), or stubble upon this foundation) shall
neuer-the-lesse be sa^ (...) (...) i^, shall be delivered after they have
endured the pains of the (...) which punishes the wicked in the last judgment.

Of such (...) affirm that the sins committed amongst the works of mercy,
shall not be called into judgment. CHAP. 22.
ANd some I have met with, that hold that none shall be damned eternally,
(...) (...) a^ neglected to satisfy for their sins by almes-deedes:
alleging (...) (...) (...)* The shall be judgment merciless unto him that
shows no mercy. (...)
(...) (...) (...) (say they) though he amend not his life, but live sin^
(...) (...) full works, shall neuer-the-lesse have so merciful a iudg^, (...)
(...) shall either not be punished at all, or at least be freed from his
(...) after his sufferance of them for some certain space, more or less. And
(...) the judge of quick and dead would mention no other thing in his (...)
(...) those on both sides of him, for the salvation of the one part, and the
(...) of the other, but only the almes-det^s which they had either done (...).
To which also (say they) does that part of the Lords prayer per^ (...) (...)
trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. For he (...) an
offense done to him, does a work (a) of mercy: which Christ (...) ^ee said: If
ye do forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly fa^ (...) but if ye do
not forgive men their trespasses, no more will (...)
(...) (...) forgive you (...) trespasses. So that hereunto belongs also
(...)
(...) (...) (...) There shall be judgment merciless, etc. The LORD said
not, Your small trespasses (say they) nor your great, but, generally, your
trespasses, and therefore they hold that those that live never so viciously
until their dying day, have notwithstanding their sins absolutely pardoned
every day by this prayer used every day, if withal they do remember, freely
to forgive all such as have offended them, when they entreat for pardon, when
all those errors are confuted, I will GOD willing make an end of this present
book.

L. VIVES.
A (a) Work of mercy] For (...), is the properly, mercy of (...), to have
mercy, as (...), come of (...), and in diverse more examples.

Against those that exclude both men and devils from pains eternal. CHAP. 23.
FIrst then we must show why' the church has condemned them that affirm that
even the very devils after a time of torment, shall be taken to mercy. The
reason is this, those holy men, so many and so learned in both the laws of
GOD, the Old and the New, did not envy the mundification and beatitude of those
spirits, after their long, and great extremity of torture, but they saw well,
that the words of Our Savior could not be untrue, which he promised to
pronounce in the last judgment, saying: Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his Angels. Hereby
showing Mat. 25
that they should burn in everlasting fire: likewise in the Revelation; The
devil that deceived them was cast into a lake of fire and brimstone, where the
beast and the false prophet shall be tormented even day and night for evermore.
There he says, everlasting, and here for evermore, in both places excluding
all termination Apo^. 20
and end of the time. Wherefore there is no reason either stronger or plainer
to assure our belief that the devil and his angels shall never more return
to the glory and righteousness of their Saints, then because the scriptures,
that deceive no man, tell us directly and plainly, that GOD has not spared
them, but (...) them down into hell, and delivered them unto chains of
darkness, there to be (...) unto the damnation in the just judgment, then
to be cast into eternal fire, and there to burn for evermore. If this be
true, how can either all, or any men be 2 Pet. (...)
^iuered out of this eternity of pains, if our faith whereby we believe the
de^ to be everlastingly tormented, be not hereby infringed? for if those
(either all or some part) to whom it shall be said, Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire which is prepared for the devil and his angels, shall
not continue for e^ in the fire, what reason have we to think that the devil
and his angels (...)? Shall the word of GOD spoken alike both to men and
devils, be proved (...) upon the devils and not upon the men? So indeed
should man's surmises ^of more certainety then Gods promises. But seeing that
cannot be, they (...) desire to escape this pain eternal, must cease to
argue against GOD, and (...) his yoke upon them while they have time. For what
a fondness were it to value the pains eternal by a fire only of a long
conti^* but yet to believe assuredly that life eternal has no end at all,
seeing (...) the LORD in the same place including both these parts in one sen^
(...) ^plainely, These shall go into everlasting pains, and the righteous
into life (...). Thus does he make them parallells: here is everlasting pains,
and there (...) eternal life. Now to say this life shall never end, but that
pain shall, were gro^sly absurd. Wherefore seeing that the eternal life of
the Saints shall be without end, so therefore is it a consequent that the
everlasting pain of the damned shall be as endless as the others beatitude.

Against those that would prove all damnation frustrate by the praters of the
Saints. CHAP. 24.
THis is also against those who under color of more pity, oppose the
express word of GOD: and say that GODS promises are true in that men are
worthy of the plagues he threatens, not that they shall be laid upon them. For he
will give them (say they) unto the entreaties of his Saints, who will be the
readier to pray for them then, in that they are more purely holy, and their
prayers will be the more powerful, in that they are utterly exempt from all
touch of sin and corruption. Well, and why then in this their pure holiness,
and powreful^se of prayer will they not entreat for the Angels that are to be
cast into everlasting (...), that it would please GOD to mitigate his sentence,
and set them free from that intolerable fire? Some perhaps will pretend that
the holy Angels (...) join with the Saints (as then their follows) in prayer
both the Angels and men also that are guilty of damnation, that God in his
mercy would be pleased to pardon their wicked merit. But there is no sound
christian that ever held his, or ever will hold it: for otherwise, there were
no reason why the Church should not pray for the devil and his Angels, seeing
that her LORD GOD has willed her to pray for her enemies. But the same cause
that stays the Church for praying for the damned spirits (her known enemies)
at this day, the ^ame shall hinder her for praying for the reprobate souls, at
this day of judgment, notwithstanding her fullness of perfection. As now, she
prays (...) her enemies in mankind, because this is the time of wholesome
repentance, and therefore her chief petition for them, is, that GOD would
grant them peni^ (...). Tim. 2.
and escape from the snares of the devil, who are taken of him at his will, as
the Apostle ^aith. But if the church had this light that she could know any of
those w^ (though they live yet upon the earth, yet) are predestined to go
with the devil into that everlasting fire; she would offer as few prayers for
them, as she does for him. But seeing that she has not this knowledge,
therefore prays (...) for all her foes in the flesh, and ye is not heard for
them all, but only for those who are predestined to become her sons,
though they be as yet her (...) (...). If any shall die her impenitent foes,
and not return into her bo^ (...), does she pray for them? No, because they
that before death are not (...) into CHRIST, are afterward reputed as
associates of the devil: And (...) the same cause that forbids her to pray for
the reprobate souls as then, stopp^ ^er for praying for the Apostaticall
Angels as now: and the ^ame reason (...) why we pray for all men living, and
yet will not pray for the wicked, nor (...), being dead. For the prayer either
of the Church, or of some Godly persons is heard (a) for some departed this
life: but for them which being regenerat in Christ, have not spent their life
so wickedly, that they may be judged unworthy of such mercy: or else so
devoutly, that they may be found to have no need of such mercy. Even as also
after the resurrection there shall be some of the dead, which shall obtain mercy
after the punishments, which the spirits of the dead do suffer, that they be
not cast into everlasting fire. For otherwise that should not be truly spoken
concerning some. That they shall not be forgiven neither in this world, nor in
the world to come: unless there were some, who although Math. 12, 32
they have no remission in this, yet might have it in the world to come. But
when it shall be said of the Judge of the quick, and the dead. Come ye blessed
of my father, possess the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the
world: and Math. 25, 34, 41
to others on the contrary, Depart from me, ye curssed into everlasting fire,
which is prepared for the devil, and his angels: it were too much presumption
to say, that any of them should escape everlasting punishment, whom the Lord
has condemned to eternal torments, and so go about by the persuasion of this
presumption, either also to despair, or doubt of eternal life. Let no man
therefore so understand the Psalmist, when he says, Will God forget to have
mercy, or will he shut up his loving kindness in displeasure: that he suppose
that the sentence of GOD is Psalm. 7. 7
true concerning the good, false concerning the wicked, or that it is true
concerning good men, and evil angels: but concerning evil men to be false?
For that which is recorded in the Psalm, belongs to the vessels of mercy,
and to the sons of the promise, of which the Prophet himself was one, who
when he had said, Will God forget to have mercy: will he shut up his loving
kindness in displeasure? straigth-way adds And I said, it is mine own
infirmity, I will remember the years (...) the right hand of the highest.
Verily he has declared what he meant by these words. Will the LORD shut up
his loving kindness in displeasure? For truly this mortal life, is the
displeasure of God, wherein man is made like unto vanity, and (...) days pass
away like a shadow. In which displeasure nevertheless GOD will not Psalm. 14,
3, 4. Math. 5. 45
forget to be gracious by causing his sun to shine upon the good, and the
evil, and the (...) to fall upon the just, and unjust: and so he does not shut
up his loving kindness in displeasure, and especially in that, which the psalm
expresses here saying. I will remember the years of the right hand of the
highest: because in this most miserable life, which is the displeasure of God,
he changes the vessels of mercy into a better state, although as yet his
displeasure remains in the misery of this corruption: because he does not
shut up his mercies in his displeasure. When as therefore the verity of this
divine song may be fulfilled in this manner, it is not necessary, that it
should be understood of that place, where they which pertain not to the City
of GOD, shall be punished with everlasting punishment. But (...) which please to
stretch this sentence even to the torments of the damned, at least let them so
understand it, that the displeasure of GOD remaining in them which is due to
eternal punishment, yet nevertheless that God does not shut up his loving
kindness in this his heavy displeasure, and causes them not to (...)
tormented with such rigor of punishments, as they have deserved: [Yet not (...)
that they may (b) escape,] or at any time have an end of those punish^, but
that they shall be more easy then they have deserved. For so both (...) ^tch of
GOD shall remain, and he shall not shut up his loving ^dnesse in his
displeasure. But I do not confirm this thing, because I do (...) contradict
it.

(...) not only I, but the sacred and divine Scripture does reprove, and
convince them most plainly and fully, which think that to be spoken rather
by the way of threatening, then truly, when it is said. Depart from me ye
wicked, (...). 25
into ^sting fire, and also. They shall go into everlasting punnishment: and
their (...) shall not die, and the fire shall not be extinguished* etc. For
the Ninevites (...). 20 (...). 66 (...). 3.
(...) fruitful repentance in this life as in the field, in which GOD would
have that to be sown with tears, which should after-ward be reaped with
joy. And yet who will deny that to be fulfiled in them which the LORD, had
spoken before, unless he cannot well perceive, that the Lord does not only
overthrow sinners in his anger, but likewise in his mercy? for sinners are
confounded by two manner of ways, either as the Sodomits, that men suffer
punishments for their sins, or as the Niniuits, that the sins of men, be
destroyed by repenting. For Niniuy is destroyed which was evil, and good
Niniuy is built, which was not. For the walls, and houses standing still, the
City is overthrown in her wicked (...): And so though the Prophet was
grieved, because that came not to (...), which those men feared to come by his
propehcy: nevertheless that was ^ought to pass, which was foretold by the
foreknowledge of God: because (...), which had fore-spoken it, how it was to
be fulfilled in a better manner. But that they may know who are merciful
toward an obstinat sinner, what that means which is written. How great, oh
LORD, is the multitude of thy sweetness, which thou have hidden for them that
fear thee? let them also read that, which follows. But thou have performed
it to them which hope in thee. For what is, Thou (...) hidden for them which
fear thee, Thou have performed to them which hope in thee: but that the
righteousness of GOD is not sweet unto them because they know it (...) which
establish their own righteousness for the fear of punishments, which
righteousness is in the law? For they have not tasted of it. For they (...)
(...) themselves, not in him, and therefore the multitude of the sweetness of
GOD (...) hidden unto them, for truly they fear GOD but with that servile
(...), which is not in love, because perfect love casts away fear. Therefore
he performs his sweetness to them which hope in him by inspiring his love
into them, that when they glory with chaste fear, not in that which love
casts away, but which remains for ever and ever, they may glory in the
LORD. For Christ is the righteousness of God. Who unto us of GOD, (as the
Apostle says) is made wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption. That (...) C^. 1, (...)
(...) it is written. Let him which rejoices, rejoice in the LORD. They which
will establish their own righteousness, know not this righteousness, which
grace (...) C^. 10, (...).
does give without merrits, and therefore they are not subject to the
righteousness of GOD which is CHRIST. In which righteousness there is great
a^ (...) of the sweetness of GOD, wherefore it is said in the Psalm: Taste
(...). (...)* (...)*
(...) (...) how sweet the Lord is. And we truly having a taste, and not our
fill of it in this (...) pilgrimage, do rather hunger, and thirst after it,
that we may be sa^ (...) it afterward, when we see him as he is, and that
shall be fulfilled which (...) (...). I shall be satisfied when thy glory shall be
manifested. So CHRIST ef^ abundance of his sweetness to those which hope in
him. But if (...). ^7, 15
(...) (...)* sweetness which they think to be theirs for them which fear
(...) (...) (...) will not condemn the wicked, that not knowing this thing,
and (...) (...) (...) they might live well, and so there may be some which may
pray (...) wicked, how then does he perform it to them which hope in him?
seeing, that, (...) they dream, by this sweetness he will not condemn them
which do not hope in him. Therefore let us seek that sweetness of his, which
he performs to them which hope in him, and not that which he is thought to
effect unto them which contemn and blaspheme him. (c) In vain therefore man
inquireth that, when he is departed out of the body, which he has neglected
to obtain to himself being in the body. That saying also of the Apostle,
(d) For God has shut up all in unbelief, that he may have mercy on all, is
not spoken to that end that he will condemn none, but it appears before in
what sense it was spoken. For when as the Apostle spoke unto the Gentiles, to
whom now believing, he wrote his Epistles, concerning the Jews, who should
afterward believe: As ye, (says he) in time past have not believed GOD. Yet
now have obtained mercy through their unbelief: even so now have they not
believed by the mercy showed unto you, that they may also obtain mercy. Then
he adds, whereby they flatter themselves in their errors, and says, For GOD
has shut up all in unbelief, Romans 11. 32
that he may have mercy on all. Who are they all, but they of whom he did
speak, saying, as it were Both ye and they? Therefore GOD has shut up both
Gentiles, and Jews all in unbelief, whom he fore-knew, and predestined to
be made like the Image of his Son: that being ashamed and cast down by
repenting for the bitterness of their unbelief, and converted by believing,
unto the sweetness of the mercies of GOD, might proclaim that in the Psalm.
How great is the multitude of thy sweetness, Oh Lord, which thou have laid up
for Psalm. 30.
them which fear thee: but have performed it to them which hope, not in
themselves, but in thee. Therefore he has mercy on all the vessels of mercy,
What means of all? That is to say, of those of the Gentiles, and also of
those of the Jews whom he has predestined, called, justified, glorified,
not of all men, and will con^mne none of those.

L. VIVES.
FOr (a) some departed this life.] In the ancient books printed at Bruges and
Coline, those ten or twelve lines which follow are not to be found: for it
is written in this manner, For the prayer either of the Church or of some godly
persons is heard for some departed this ^fe, but for them whose life has not
been spent so wickedly being regenerate in Christ, etc. Those things which
follow are not extant in them, neither in the copies printed at Friburge.
Neuer-the-lesse the style is not dissonant from Augustines phrase; peradventure
they are either wanting in some books, or else are added here out of some
other work of Augustine, as the first Scholion, afterward adjoined to the
context of the speech. Yet not so that they may (b) escape.]. The particle of
negation is to be put foremost, that we may read it, yet not so that they may
undergo those punishments at any time. In vain (c) therefore man] In the
Bruges copy it is read thus. In vain therefore does man inquire that after
this body which he has neglected to get in the body. (d) For GOD has shut up
all in vnbeleefe] Commonly we read all things in the Greek (...), that is to
say, all men. Paul signifies that no man has any occasion to boast that he
is glorious unto GOD by his own merits, (...) that it is wholly to be
attributed to the goodness and bounty of GOD.

Whether that such as being baptized by heretics, become wicked in life, or
amongst Catholics, and then fall away into heresies and schisms, or
continuing amongst Catholics, be of vicious conversation, can have any hope
of escaping damnation, by the privilege of the Sacraments. CHAP. 12.
NOw let us answer those, who do both exclude the devils from salvation, (as
the other before do) and also all men besides whatsoever, excepting such (...)
are (...) in CHRIST, and made pertakers of his body and blood, and these they
will have saved, be their lives never so spotted by sin or heresy. (...)
^ostle does plainly control them, saying, The works of the flesh are (...),
which are adultery, fornication, uncleanness, wantonness, Idolatry, etc. (...)
such like whereof I tell you now as I told you before that they which do such
things (...) not inherit the Kingdom of GOD. This were false now, if that
such men should become Saints, at any time whatsoever. But this is true
scripture, and therefore that shall never come to pass. And if they be never
made (...) of the joys of heaven, then shall they be euer-more bound in the
^ines of (...), for there is no medium, wherein he that is not in bliss,
might ^ue a pla^ free from torment. (...)


And therefore it is fit, we see how our Saviors words may be understood
^ere he says: This is the bread that came down from heaven that he (...). 6
(...) (...) of it, should not die. I am the living bread which came down from
hea^ (...) of this bread, he shall live for ever etc. Those whom we (...)
answer by and by, have gotten an interpretation for these places, somewhat
more restrained then those whom we are to answer at this present. For those
other do not promise delivery to all that receive the Sacraments, but only to
the Catholics (of what manner of life soever) for they only are those that
receive the body of CHRIST, not only sacramentally, but (...) al^, ((...)
they) as being the true members of his body, whereof the Apostle says, (...)
(...) (...) are one bread and one body. He therefore (...).
that is in this ^ity of CHRIST'S members in one body, the sacrament whereof
the faithful do daily communicate, he is truly said to receive (...)
body, and to drink the blood of CHRIST. So that Heretics and (...) who are
cut off from this body, may indeed receive the same (...), (...) in (...) them
no good, but a great deal of hurt, in that great (...) it will both make their
pains more heavy, and their continuance (...). For they are not in that unity
of peace, which is expressed (a) in (...) (...).

But ^ow these that can observe, that he that is not in CHRIST, cannot receive
his body (...) do ouer-shoote themselves in promising absolution (at one time
or other) to all the ^ators of superstition, Idolatry, or heresy. First,
because they ought (...) observe how absurd, and far from all likely hood
(...), that those (be they more or less) that have left the church and become
(...) heretics, should be in beer estate then those whom they (...) (...)
to be heretics with them, before that they were Catholics, (...) (...)
church, if to be baptized, and to receive CHRIST'S body in the church, be the
causes of those arch-heretiques delivery. For an Apostata, (...) (...) of the
faith he has once professed, is worse then he that op^ that he did never
profess. Secondly, in that the Apostle himself (...) them, concluding of the
works of the flesh, that, They which (...) ^ll (...) the Kingdom of GOD.

(...) therefore, and wicked men, secure themselves by their continuance (...),
(...) it is written. He the endures to the end, he shall be saved; nor by (...)
^quity renounce Christ, their justice, in committing fornication, and either
(...) any part of those fleshly works which the Apostle re^) counts, or such
vncleanesses as he would not name: for of all such, he ^aith expressly, they
shall not inherit the Kingdom of GOD. Wherefore the doers of such deeds
cannot but be in eternal pains, in that they are excluded from the
everlasting joys. For this kind of perseverance of theirs, is no perseverance
in CHRIST, because it is not a true perseverance in his faith, which the
Apostle defines, to be such as works by love. And love (as he says
elsewhere) works not evil. So then these are no true receivers of CHRIST'S
body, in that they are none of his true members. For (to omit other
allegations) they cannot be both the members of CHRIST and the members of an
harlot. And CHRIST himself saying he that eats my flesh and drinks my
blood, dwells in me and I in him, shows what it is to receive Christ (not
Ioh. 6.
only sacramentally, but) truly: for this is to dwell in Christ and Christ in
^m. For thus he spoke as if he had said He that dwells not in me, nor I
in him, cannot say he eats my flesh, or drinks my blood. They therefore
that are not members of CHRIST, are not in him: they that make themselves the
members of an harlot, are no members of CHRIST, unless they purge away their
badnesse by repentance, and return to his goodness by a true reconciliation.

L. VIVES.
EXpressed (a) in this sacrament.] For all partake of one bread, which is a
great bond of (...). Again, this mystical bread is made of many grains of
corn, loosing their proper forms to be all incorporated into one mass or
body. So, many are received into the church, and at the entrance, they put off
their own proper enormities, and being linked to the rest (...) love, and
charity, seem now no more what they were before, but are incorporate into one
body, the church. Baptism makes us both brethren, and one also: and mutual
charity gives form, color, taste, and perfection* to the whole body. So
that there could not have bin given a more fit type of the Church, then that
which CHRIST gave in his institution.

What it is to have CHRIST for the foundation: who they are, that shall be saved
(as it were) by fire. CHAP. 26.
I But christian Catholics (say they) have CHRIST for their foundation, from
whom they fell not, though they built badly upon it, in resemblance of timber,
straw, and stubble. So that faith is true, which holds CHRIST the foundation,
and though it bear some loss, in that the things which are built upon it,
burn away, yet has it power to save him that holds it, (after some time of
suffrance.) But let Saint James answer these men in a word; If a man say he
^th faith, and have no works, can the faith save him? Who then is that (say
they) of whom Saint Paul says: He shall be safe himself, nevertheless (as it
were) (...) (...)? well, we will see who that is: but surely it is no such as
these would have (...), for else, the Apostles condradict one another. For if
one says, though a man have lived wickedly, yet shall he be saved by faith,
through fire: and the other, If he have no works, can his faith save him?
Then shall we soon find who it is that shall be saved by fire, if first of all,
we find what it is to have Christ for the foundation. Togather which, first,
from the nature of the simyly, there is no work in building before the
f^dation. Now every one has CHRIST in his heart thus far, that (...) ^ct of
temporal things, (and sometimes of things unlawful) still ^eth Christ for
the foundation thereof. But if he prefer these things (...) CHRIST, though
he seem to hold his faith, yet CHRIST is no foundation unto him, in that he
preferres those vanities before him. And if ^ee both contemn good
instructions, and prosecute badde actions, how much the sooner shall he be
convinced to set Christ at nothing, to esteem him at no value in vainer
respects, by neglicting his command and allowance, and in preuarication of
both, following his own lustful exorbitances: wherefore, if any christian
love an her lot, and become one body with her by coupling with her, he has
(...) Cor. (...)
not Christ f^ his foundation. And if a man love his wife, according to Christ,
who can deny but that he has Christ for his foundation? Admit his love be
(...), worldly, concupiscentiall, as the Gentiles loved, that knew not Christ*
all this the Apostle does bear with, and therefore still may Christ be such a
man's foundation. For if he prefer not these carnal affects before Christ,
though he build straw and stubble upon his foundation, yet Christ is that
still, and therefore such a man shall be saved by fire. For the fire of
tribulation shall purge away those carnal and worldly affections, which the
bond of marriage does acquit from being damnable: and unto this fire, all the
calamities accident in this kind, as, barrenness, loss of children, etc.
have reference. And in this case, he that builds thus, shall loose, because
his building shall not last, and these losses shall grieve him in that their
fruition did delight him. Yet shall the worth of his foundation save him, in
that if the persecu^ should put it to his choice, whether he would have
Christ, or these his (...) he would choose Christ, and leave all the rest. Now
shall you hear (...) describe a builder upon this foundation with gold,
silver, and (...) (...) (...). The unmarried (says he) cares for the things
of the LORD, (...). 7. ^2
(...) (...) (...) the LORD. And now for him that builds with wood, straw and
(...). He that is married, caretb for the things of the world, how he may
please his wife. Every man's work shall be made manifest, for the day of the
LORD shall Cor. 3
declare it, that is the day of tribulation, for, it shall be revealed by the
fire.

This tribulation he calls fire, as we read also in another place. The
fur^ (...). ^7
proves the potters vessel, and so does the temptation. [of tribulation] try
man's thoughts. So then, the fire shall try every man's work: and if any work
(...) (as his will, that cares for the things of the LORD, and how to ^ase
him) he shall receive wages, that is, he shall receive him, of whom (...)
thought, and for whom he cared. But if any (...) work burn he shall (...)
because he shall not have his delights that he loved; yet shall he be (...)
in that he held his foundation, maugre all tribulation: but as it were by
(...) for that which he possessed in alluring love, he shall forge with (...)
sorrow. This (think I) is the fire, that shall enritch the one and ^ge the
other, trying both, yet condemning neither. If we say the (...) (...) of here
is that whereof CHRIST spoke to those on his left (...) (...) from me ye
cursed into everlasting fire; and that all such (...) builded (...), straw,
and stubble upon their foundation, are part of the said cursed, who
notwithstanding after a time of torment, are to be dedeliuered by the merit of
their foundation; then can we not think that those on the right hand, to
whom he shall say, Come you blessed, etc. Are any other saving those that
built gold, silver and precious stones upon the said foundation. But this fire
of which the Apostle speaks, shall be as a trial both to the good and the
bad: both shall pass through it, for the word says, Every man's work shall 1
Cor. 3. 13.
be made manifest, for the day of the Lord shall declare it, because it shall
be revealed by the fire, and the fire shall try every man's work of what sort
it is. If the fire try both, and he that has an abiding work, be rewarded,
and he whose work shall burn, shall be indamaged, then cannot this be that
everlasting fire. For into that shall none enter but the cursed, on the left
hand, in the last judgment, whereas the blessed shall pass through this,
wherein some of them shall be so tried, that their building shall abide
unconsumed, and other-some shall have their work burned, and yet shall be
saved themselves, in that their love unto Christ exceeded al their carnal
imperfections. And if they be saved, then shall they stand on Christ's right
hand, and shall be part of those to whom it shall be said, Come you blessed
of my father inherit the kingdom, etc. and not on the left hand amongst the
cursed, to whom it shall be said, Depart from me, etc. For none of these
shall be saved by fire, but all of them shall be bound for ever in that place
where the worm never dies, there shall they burn world without end. But as
for the time between the bodily death, and the last judgment, if any one say
that the spirits of the dead are all that while tried in such fire as never
moves those that have not built wood; straw, or stubble, afflicting only such
as have wrought such works, either here, or there, or both; or that man's
worldly affects (being venial) shall ^e the purging fire of tribulation only
in this world, and not in the other; if any hold thus, I contradict him not,
perhaps he may hold the truth. To this tribu^ also may belong the death of
body, drawn from our first parents sin, and inflicted upon each man sooner,
or later according to his building. So may also the Churches persecutions,
wherein the Martyrs were crowned, and all the rest afflicted: For these
calamities (like fire) tried both sorts of the buildings, consuming both works
and work men, where they found not Christ for the foundation; and consuming
the works only (and saving the worke-men by this loss) where they did find
him, and stubble, etc. built upon him: but where they found works remaining
to eternal life, there they consumed nothing at all. Now in the last days, in
the time of Antichriste shall be such a persecution as never was before* And
many buildings both of gold and stubble, being all founded upon Christ, shall
then be tried by this fire, which will return joy to some, and loss to
others, and yet destroy none of them by reason of their firm foundation. But
whosoever he be, that loves (I do not say his wife, with carnal affection,
but even) such shows of pyety as are utter alliens from this sensuality, with
such a blind desire that he prefers them before Christ, this man has not
Christ for his foundation, and therefore shall neither be saved by (...), no^
otherwise, because he cannot be conjoined with Christ, who faith plainly of
such men, He that loves father or mother more then me, is unworthy of Mat. 1^
me. And he that loves son or daughter more then me, is not worthy of me.
But he that loves them carnaliy, and yet prefers Christ for his
foundation, and had rather loose them all, then Christ, if he were driven to
the loss of one, such a man shall be saved, but as it were by fire, that is
his grief in the loosing of them must needs be as great as his delight was
in enjoying them, But he that loves father, mother, etc. according to Christ,
to bring them unto his Kingdom, or be delighted in the because they are the
members of Christ, this love shall never burn away li^ ^ood, straw, stubble,
but shall stand as a building of gold, silver, and pre^ (...)* for how can a
man love that, more then Christ, which he loves (...) (...) sake only.

L. VIVES.
(...) day of (a) the Lord] Whereunto all secrets are referred, to be
revealed, and therefore they are worthy of reprehension that dare presume to
censure acts that are doubtful (...) ^rable only by conjectures, seem they
never so bad.

(...) th^se that think those sins shall not be laid to their (...),
wherewith they mixed some works of mercy. CHAP. 27.
NOw a word with those that hold none damned but such as neglect to do works
of mercy worthy of their sins; because S. James says, There shall be (...)
mercylesse to him that shows no mercy: he therefore that does show mer^* (...)
(...). (...).
say they) be his life never so burdened with sin and corruption, shall not
withstanding have a mercyful judgment, which will either acquit him from al
pains, (...) (...) deli^ (...) after a time of sufferance. And this made
Christ distinguish (...) (...) ^om (...) ^obate only by their performance, and
not performance of (...) (...) (...), the one whereof is rewarded with
everlasting joy, and the other (...) (...) (...) (...) as for their daily sins,
that they may b^ pardoned through (...) (...) of (...), the Lords prayer (say
they) does sufficiently prove: for as (...) (...) (...) (...) christian ^aith
not this prayer, so likewise is there no daily (...), (...) (...) when we say,
And forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them (...) (...) (...) (...), (...)
we perform this later clause accordingly: for Christ (say they) (...) (...)
(...) (...) (...) forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly father will
forgive (...) (...) (...) (...) (...), but he said generally, he will forgive
you yours. Be they (...) (...) so (...)* never so ordinary, never so
continual, yet works of mercy (...) (...) them al away* well, they do well in
giving their advice, to perform works (...) (...) worthy of their ^ns: for if
they should have said that any works of merc^ (...) (...) (...) (...) for the
greatest and most customary sins, they should be (...) (...) (...)* for so
^ight the richest man for his (a) ten ^ence a day, (...) (...) (...) (...) for all his fornications, homicides, and other sins whatso^* (...) (...) (...) (...)
(...) beyond comparison to affirm this, then questionles (...) (...) (...)
(...) (...) works are that are worthy of pardon for sin, and (...)
(...) (...) (...) (...) spoke, saying, Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of
amendme^t (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) that such as (...) their
own souls by continual sin, (...) (...) (...) (...) meant of in this place:
first because they do take vio^ (...) (...) (...) (...) th^n they bestow
charitably on the poor, and yet in (...) (...) (...), (...) (...) (...) ^eed
Christ (b) and (...) liber^y of sinning (...) (...) (...) (...) upon their
damnation, (...) if they should give (...) (...) (...) (...) unto the poor
members of Christ to redeem one only (...), yet (...) (...) (...) (...) evil
did (...) ^straine them from any more such (...), they (...) ^by (...) good at
all: he therefore that will clear his sins by his works, must begin first at
him-self: for it is unfit to do that to our neighbor which we will not do to
our self, Christ himself saying, thou shall love Mat. 22. Eccl. 30.
neighbor as thy self: and again, Love thine own soul (if thou will please
God) he therefore that does not this work of mercy (that is the pleasing of
God) to Eccl. 14*
his own soul, how can he be said to do works of mercy sufficient to
redeem his sins? for it is written, He that is wicked to himself to whom
will he Eccl. 21.
be good? for almesdeedes do lift up the prayers of men to God. What says the
Scriptures? My son, have thou sinned? do so no more, but pray for thy sins
past, that they may be forgiven thee, for this cause therefore must we do
almesdeeds, that when we pray, our prayer may be heard, that we may leave our
former vices, and obtain refreshment for our selves by those works of mercy.
Now Christ says that he will impute the doing and omission of almesdeeds unto
those of the judgment, to show how powerful they are to expiate offenses
past, not to protect the continuers in sin, for those that will not abjure
the courses of impiety, cannot be said to perform any works of mercy. And
these Mat. 25. 45
words of Christ, In as much as you did it not unto one of these, you did it
not unto me, imply that they did no such works as they imagined; for if they
gave bread unto the hungered Christian, as if it were unto Christ himself: for
GOD cares not to whom you give, but with what intent you give. He therefore
that loves Christ in his members, gives alms with intent to join himself
to Christ, not that he may have leave to leave him without being punished, for
the more one loves what Christ reproves, the farther of does he depart from
Christ, for what profits Baptism unless justification Ioh. 3
follow it? does not he that said, Unless a man be borne again of water and
of the spirit, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of GOD; say also, unless
your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye
shall not enter into the Kingdom of heaven? why do men run to Baptism for
fear of the first, and do not draw near to righteousness for fear of the
later? Therefore as he that checketh his brothers sin, in charity, by
telling him he is a fool, notwithstanding all this, is not guilty of Hell
fire: so, on the other side, he that loves not Christ in his members, gives
no alms to a Christian (as unto a Christian) though he stretch forth his hand
unto one of Christ's poor members: and he that refu^eth to be justified in
Christ, does not love Christ in any respect.

But if one call his brother fool, in reproachful contempt, rather then with
intent to reform his imperfection, all the almesdeeds this man can do, will
never benefit him, unless he be reconciled to him whom he has injured,
Mat. 5.
for it follows in the same place. If then thou bring thy gift unto the
altar, and t^re remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave
there thine offering, and go thy way: first be reconcyled to thy brother and
then come and offer thy gift. So that it is nothing worth to do works of
mercy to expiate any sin, and yet to continue in the sin still. As for the
Lords prayer, it does indeed blot out our daily sins, it being daily said,
And forgive us our trespasses, if withal the following clause be not only
said, but performed also. As we forgive them that ^respasse against us. But
indeed, we say this prayer because we do sin, not that we might (...), for
Our (...) shows us in this, that live we never so careful of shunning
corruption, yet do we every day fall into some sins for the remission of
which we ought both to pray, and to pardon such a^ have offended us, that we
may be pardoned our selves. Wherefore Christ says not this, If ye forgive men
their trespasses, your heavenly father will also forgive you yours, to give hope
to any man to persevere in daily crimes (whether we be borne out by authority,
or commit them by sleight and suttlety:) but to instruct us, that we are not
without sin, though we may be without crime, as God advised the priests in
the Old Testament first to offer for their own sins, and then for the
peoples. Let us mark these words of our great Lord and master with attention
and diligence. He does not say, your heavenly father will forgive you any sin
whatsoever, but, he will forgive you yours, for in this place he taught his
disciples (being already justified) their daily prayer, what means he then by
this same (yours) but such sins as the righteous themselves cannot be
without? wherefore whereas they that would hereby take occasion to continue in
sin, affirm that Christ meant the greatest sins, because he said not, your
smaller sins, but your in general: we on the contrary side considering unto
whom he spoke, do understand his words to concern small sins only, in that
they to whom they were spoken were now cleared of their greater.

Nor are those great sins indeed (which every one ought to reform himself,
and avoyde) ever forgiven, unless the guilty do fulfill the foresaid clause,
As we forgive them that trespass against us, for if the least sins
(whereunto the righteous themselves are prone) cannot be remitted but upon
that condition, then muchlesse shall the great and Criminous ones have this
pardon, though they that used them, do cease there further practice, if they
continue inexorable in forgiving such as have offended them, for the Lord
says, If ye do not Mat. 6.
forgive men their trespasses, no more will your Heavenly father forgive you
your trespasses. And Saint James his words are to the same purpose: there
shall be judgment merciless to him that shows no mercy. Remember but the
servant whom his master pardoned of a debt of 10000. talents, and yet made
him to lie for it afterward, because he would not forgive his fellow a debt
but of an hundred pence. Wherefore in the vessels of mercy, and the sons of
promise the same Apostles words are truly effected, mercy rejoices against
(or above) judgment, for those that lived so holily that they received others
into the everlasting habitations, who had made them their friends with the
riches of iniquity; they themselves were diliuered by his mercy who justifies
the sinner by rewarding him according to grace, not according to merit. He that
professed this, I was received to mercy (that I might be one of the faithful)
was one of this justified number. Indeed such as are received by this number
into the everlasting habitations, are not of that merit that they could be
saved without the intercession of the Church triumphant, and therefore in them
does mercy more evidently eleuate it self above judgment. Yet may we not
think that every wicked man (being without reformation) can be admitted
thither, though he have been beneficial to the Saints and afforded them
helps from his riches, which whether he had gotten by sinister means, or
otherwise, yet are no true riches (but only in the thoughts of iniquity) unto
him, because he knows not the true riches wherewith they abound that help
such as he is into those eternal mansions. Wherefore there must be a certain
mean in the lives of such mercy that it be neither so bad, that the alms
deeds done unto those who being made friends to the doers, may help them to
Heaven be altogether fruitless, nor yet so good, that their own sanctity
without the mercies and suffrages of those whom they have made there friends,
can possess them of so hie a beatitude. Now I have often wondered that Virgill
should have up this sentence of Christ, Make you friends of the riches of
iniquity, that they may receive you into the everlasting habitations. Where
unto this is much like. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a Prophet,
shall have a Lu^. ^6. 9. Mat. 10. 41.
Prophets reward, etc. for this Poet, in describing of the (c) Elysian fields,
which they held the blessed souls to inhabit, does not only place those
there whose proper merits have deserved it, but also adds this: Qui^ sui
memores alios fecere merendo, that is, such as respecting their own future
estate, deserved to be Aeneid. 6.
remembered by those others. Just as if he had said, as every humble Christian
says commonly in commending himself to some holy man or other. Remember me,
and endeavors to procure this remembrance by desert. But what the mean is
here, and what those sins are which hinder a man from heaven, and yet are
remitted by the intercession of his holy friends, it is both difficult to
find, and dangerous to determine. I have sought thus long my self, and yet
could never find them out. Perhaps they are concealed to stir us the rather
to avoid all sin. For if we knew for what sins we might expect the
intercession of Saints, our natural idleness would draw us on securely in
them, and make us rely so wholly upon the help of others, that we should
never seek to avoid them by reforming our selves, but trust only to those
our friends whom we had procured by the unrighteous Mammon: whereas now,
although our venial sin continue with us, and in what measure we know not,
yet our study to profit by prayer, is both more fervent, and our desire to win
us friends of the Saints, better performed. But both these deliueries, both by
our selves and others, tend wholly to keep us out of the fire eternal, not to
free us after we once be in it. For such as interpret that place of scripture.
Some fell in good ground, and brought forth fruit, Mat. 13.
some thirty-fold, some sixty, some an hundred; by the Saints, according to the
diversity of their merit, that some should deliver thirty men, some sixty,
some a hundred, neuer-the-lesse do suppose that this delivery shall be at the
judgment, and not after it. By which opinion one observing what occasion
diverse took to live in all looseness and exorbitance, supposing that by this
means all men might be saved, is said to give this witty answer: We ought for
this cause rather to live uprightly to increase the number of the intercessors,
least otherwise there should be so few, that every one might save his thirty,
his sixty, or his hundred, and yet an infinite company might remain vnsaued:
of which, why might not he be one that nousled himself in his rash hope of
help from another? And thus much against those who not contemning the
authority of our Scriptures, do not-with-standing wrest them to evil
meanings, following their own fantasies, and not the holy ghosts true
intention. But since we have given them their answer, we must now, (as we
promised) give an end to this present volume.

L. VIVES.
HIs (a) ten pence] Behold here Saint Augustine reckneth ten pence a day for a
small alms: but how many have we now that give so much? how many potentates
see you give four pence a day to the poor: nay they think much with a penny
or two pence. But after the Dice, let Ducates go by thousands, their fools
and iesters shall have showers of their beneficence powered upon them, it is a
great man's part, an embleame of Noblesse: but ask them a penny for Christ's
sake, and they are either as mute as stones, or grieve at the sight of the
gift they part from. Respect of virtue now is low laid. (b) They purchase] So
you shall have diverse, take up freely they care not where, nor of whom, nor in
what fashion; and then break, turn counterfeite banquerupts, and satisfy
their creditours with ten at the hundred, and think they have made a good hand
of it, and shall redeem all with a little alms. O fools that think that God
is taken with pence! no, it is the mind that he respects, such as is
resident only in honest breasts.

Thieves and villains have now and then money good store, and disperse it
bountifully. But let no man trust in his wealth, or to purchase heaven with a
piece of silver. (c) The Elysi^ fields] Seruius deriues the name from (...), a
dissolution of the soul from the body. Where these fields are it is
uncertain. Plato places them in the firmament, full of all delights that can
be imagined. Others place them in the hollow sphere of the Moon (Seru.)
where the air is pure, and undisturbed. Of this opinion Lucane seems to be.
Phars. 9. Pythagoras also, and Plato were of opinion that this part of the air
was inhabited with Daemones, Demigods and Heroes. Hear what Lucane says of
the spirit of Pompey: -- Sequitur conuexa tonantis,
Qua niger astriferis connectitur axibus aer,
Quodque patet terras as inter, lunaeque meatus,
Semidei manes habitant, quos ignea virtus
Innocuos vita patientes aetheris imi
Fecit, and aternos animam collegit in ignes.
-- Up to that round ithyes,
Where the dark air does kiss the spangled skies.
For in that region 'twixt the Moon and us,
The Demigods, and spirits generous
Of those whom virtuous ardor guided well
(On earth) in euer-lasting glory dwell.


Homer says, that the Elysian fields are in the farthest parts of Spain,
whence the Fauonian winds blow. Witness Strabo, who says also that the
River Limaea, (now called Liuia) was whilom called Lethe. So does Silius and
Mela call it: when Decimus Brutus lead the Roman soldiers that way, they
were afraid to pass it, least they should have forgotten their country,
wives, friends, themselves and all. The translation of Strabo calls it Ess^,
but it is an error. Silius says it runs amongst the Grauii. Mela, amongst
the Celtici. Indeed the Insulae fortunata (a second Elysium) are not far
from this part of Spain.

Finis lib. 21.
THE CONTENTS OF THE TWO and twentieth book of the City of God.
1. Of the estate of Angels and of Men. 2. Of the eternal and unchangeable
will of God. 3. The promise of the Saints eternal bliss, and the wickeds
perpetual torment. 4. Against the wisemen of the world that hold it
impossible for man's body to be transported up to the dwellings of joy in
heaven. 5. Of the resurrection of the body, believed by the whole world,
excepting some few. 6* That love made the Romans deifie their founder
Romulus, and faith made the Church to love her Lord and master Christ Jesus.
7. That the belief of Christ's deity was wrought by Gods power, not man's
persuasion. 8. Of the miracles which have been, and are as yet wrought, to
procure and confirm the worlds belief in Christ. 9. That all the miracles
done by the Martyrs in the name of Christ, were only confirmations of that
faith, whereby the Mariyrs believed in Christ. 10. How much honor the Martyrs
deserve in obtaining miracles for the worship of the true God, in respect of
the Devils, whose works tend all to make men think that they are Gods. 11.
Against the Platonists, that oppose the elevation of the body up to Heaven by
arguments of elementary ponderosity. 12. Against the Infidels calumnies, cast
out in scorn of the Christians belief of the resurrection. 13. Whether
Abortiues belong not to the resurrection, if they belong to the dead. 14.
Whether Infants shall rise again in the stature that they dyed in. 15. Whether
all of the resurrection shall be of the stature of Christ. 16. What is meant
by the confirmation of the Saints unto the Image of the Son of God. 17.
Whether that women shall retain their proper sex in the resurrection. 18. Of
Christ the perfect man, and the Church, his body and fullness. 19. That our
bodies in the resurrection shall have no imperfection at all, what-so-euer they
have had during this life, but shall ^e perfect both in quantity and quality.
20. That every man's body, how ever dispersed here, shall be restored him
perfect at the resurrection. 21. What new and spiritual bodies shall be given
unto the Saints. 22. Of man's miseries drawn upon him by his first parents, and
taken away from him, only by Christ's merits and gracious goodness. 23. Of
accidents, severed from the common estate of man, and peculiar only to the
just and righteous. 24. Of the goods that God has bestowed upon this miserable
life of ours. 25. Of the obstinacy of some few in denying the resurrection,
which the whole world believes, as it was foretold. 26. That Porphiries
opinion that the blessed souls should have no bodies, is confuted by Plato
himself, who says that the Creator promised the inferior Deities, that they
should never loose their bodies. 27. Contrarieties between Plato and Porphery,
wherein if either should yield unto other, both should find out the truth. 28.
What either Plato, Labeo or Varro might have auailed to the true faith of the
resurrection, if they had had an harmony in their opinions. 29. Of the quality
of the vision, with which the Saints shall see GOD in the world to come. 30. Of
the eternal felicity of the City of GOD, and the perpetual Sabbath.
FINIS.
THE TWO AND TVVENTITH BOOK OF THE CITY OF GOD*Written by Saint Augustine
Bishop of Hippo, unto Marcellinus.
Of the estate of Angels and of men. CHAP. 1.
THIS present volume, being the last of this whole work, shall contain a
discourse of the eternal beatitude of the City of God. Which City is not
called eternal, as if it should continue for the space of so many, or so many
thousand ages, and then have an end, but as it is written in the Gospel, Of
his kingdom there shall be none end. Nor shall this perpetuity preserve the
form by succession, as Luc. 1
a Baye tree seems to keep a continual verdure, though one leaf fall of,
and another spring up: but every Citizen therein shall be immortal, and man
shall attain to that which the Angels have never forgone. This God the
founder of this City, will effect: for so he has promised, who cannot lie,
and who to confirm the rest has effected part of his promises already.

He it is that made the world, with all things sensible and intelligible
therein, whose chief work the spirits were, to whom he gave an
understanding, making them capable of his contemplation, and combining them in
one holy and united society, which we call the City of God, holy and
heavenly, wherein God is their life, their nutriment, and their beatitude. He
gave a free election also unto those intellectual natures, that if they would
for sake him, who was their bliss, they should presently be enthralled in
misery. And fore-knowing that certain of the Angels, proudly presuming that
themselves were sufficient beatitude to themselves, would forsake him, and
all good with him, he did not abridge them of his power, knowing it a more
powerful thing to make good use of such as were evil, then to exclude evil
for altogether. Nor had there been any evil at all, but that those spirits
(though good, yet mutable) which were formed by the omnipotent and unchangeable
Deity, procured such evil unto themselves by sin: which very sin,
proved that their natures were good in themselves. For if they had not been
so (although inferior to the maker) their apostacy had not fallen so heavy
upon them. For as blindness being a defect, proves plainly that the eye
was made to see, the excellency of the eye being hereby made more apparent
(for other-wise blindness were no deffect) so those natures enjoying GOD,
proved themselves to be created good, in their very fall, and that eternal
misery that fell upon them for forsaking GOD, who has given assurance of
eternal perseverance unto those that stood firm in him, as a fit reward for
their constancy. He also made man, upright of a free election, earthly, yet
worthy of Heaven, if he stuck fast to his Creator, otherwise, to partake of
such misery as sorted with a nature of that kind: and fore-knowing likewise,
that he would break the law that he bound him to, and forsake his Maker, yet
did he not take away his freedom of election, foreseeing the good use that
he would make of this evil, by restoring man to his grace by means of a man,
borne of the condemned seed of mankind, and by gathering so many unto this
grace as should supply the places of the fallen Angels, and so preserve (and
perhaps augment) the number of the heavenly Inhabitants. For evil men do much
against the will of God, but yet his wisdom fore-sees that all such actions
as seem to oppose his will, do tend to such ends as he fore-knew to be good
and just. And therefore, whereas God is said To change his will, that is to
turn his meekness into anger, against some persons, the change in this c^se
is in the persons, and not in him: and they find him changed in their
sufferances, as a sore eye finds the sun sharp, and being cured, finds it
comfortable, whereas this change was in the eye and not in the sun, which keeps
his office as he did at first. For Gods operation in the hearts of the
obedient, is said to be his will, where-vppon the Apostle faith, It is God that
works in you both will and deed. For even as that righteousness Phil, 2.
wherein both God himself is righteous, and whereby also a man that is
justified of God is such, is termed the righteousness of God; So also is that
law which he gives unto man, called his law, whereas it is rather pertinent
unto man then unto him. For those were men unto whom Christ said, It is written
also in your law; though we read elsewhere, The law of his God is in his
heart: and according Io. 8. Psalm, 37.
unto his will, which God works in man, himself is said to will it, because
he works it in others who do will it, as he is said to know that which he
makes the ignorant to know. For whereas S. Peter says, We now knowing God,
yea rather being known of God we may not hereby gather that God came but as
then to the knowledge of those who he had predestinate before the foundations
of the world, but God as then is said to know that which he made known to
others. Of this phraze of speech I have spoken (I remember) heretofore. And
according unto this Will, whereby we say that God wills that which he makes
others to will, who know not what is to come, he wills many things, and yet
effects them not.

The promise of the Saints eternal bliss, and the wickeds perpetual torment.
CHAP. 2.
FOr the Saints do will many things that are inspired with his holy will, and
yet are not done by him, as when they pray for any one, it is not he that
causes this their prayer, though he do produce this will of prayer in them, by
his holy spirit. And therefore when the Saints do will, and pray according to
God, we may well say that God wills it and yet works it not, as we say he
wills that him-self, which he makes others to will. But according to his
eternal will, joined with his foreknowledge, thereby did he create all that he
pleased, in heaven and in earth, and has wrought al things already, as well
future as past or present. But when as the time of manifestation of any thing
which God fore-knoweth to come, is not yet come, we say, It shall be when God
will: and if both the time be uncertain, and the thing it self, then we say,
It shall be if God will: not that God shall have any other will as than, then
he had before, but because that shall be then effected, which his eternal,
unchanging will, had from al eternity ordained.

The promise of the Saints eternal bliss, and the wickeds perpetual torment.
CHAP. 3.
Wherefore (to omit many words) As we see his promise to Abraham. In thy seed
shall all nations be blessed, fulfilled in Christ, so shall that be fulfilled
hereafter which was promised to the said seed by the Prophet, The dead shall
live, Gen, 12. Isay, 26. Isay, 65
even with their bodies shall they rise. And whereas he says, I will create
new heavens and a new earth, and the former shall not be remembered, nor come
into mind, But be you glad, and rejoice in the things I shall create; For
behold I will create Jerusalem as a rejoicing, and her people as a joy, etc.
And by another Prophet, At that time shall thy people be delivered, every one
that shall be found written in the book of life, and many that sleep in the
dust of the earth, shall awake, some to ever lasting life, and some Dan. 12.
to shame and perpetual contempt: And again, they shall take the kingdom of
the Saints of the most High, and possess it for ever, even for ever and ever.
And by and by after, His Kingdom is an everlasting kingdom. etc. Together
with all such places as I either put into the twentieth book, or left
untouched; All these things shall come to pass, and those have already which
the infidels would never believe. For the same GOD promised them both, even he
whom the pagan gods do tremble before, as Porphyry a worthy Philosopher of
theirs confesses.

Against the wise men of the world that hold it impossible for man's body to be
transported up to the dwellings of joy i^ heaven. CHAP. 4.
But the learned of the world think that they oppose this all-conuerting power
very strongly, as touching the resurrection, when they use that place of Cicero
in his third book de repub. Who having affirmed that Romulus and Hercules were
both deified, yet were (a) not their bodies (says he) translated into heaven,
for nature will allow an earthly body no place but in the earth. This is the
wise man's argument, which GOD knows how vain it is: for admit that we were
all mere spirits, without bodies, dwelling in heaven* and being ignorant of
all earthly creatures, and it should be told us, that one day we should be
bound in corporal bodies, might we not then use this objection to more power,
and refuse to believe that nature would ever suffer an ^ncorporeall substance
to be bound or circumscribed by a corporeal one? Yet is the earth full of
vegetable souls, strangely combined with earthly bodies. Why then cannot God
that made this creature, transport an earthly body into heaven, as well as he
can bring a soul (a purer essence then any celestial body) down from heaven,
and enclose it in a form of earth. Can this little piece of earth include so
excellent a nature in it, and live by it, and cannot heaven entertain it* nor
keep it in it, seeing that it lives by an essence more excellent then heaven
it self is? Indeed this shall not come to pass as yet, because it is not his
pleasure who made this that we daily see and so respect not, in a far more
admirable manner then that shall be which those wise men believe not: for why
is it not more strange that a most pure and incorporeall soul should be
chained to an earthly body, then that an earthly body should be lifted up
to heaven, which is but a body it self? Only because the first we see daily
in our selves, and the second we have yet never seen. But reason will tell one
that it is a more divine work to join bodies and souls, then to join bodies
to bodies though never so different in natures, as if ye one be heavenly and
the other of earth.

L VIVES.
YEt were not (a) their bodies] But Romulus his body was not to be found, and
therefore the vulgar believed that it was gone up to heaven. And the Greeks
say that Aesculapius restored Hercules his body to the former soundness, and
so it was taken up into the skies.

Of the resurrection of the body, believed by the whole world excepting some
few. CHAP. 5.
THis was once incredible. But now we see the whole world believes that
Christ's body is taken up to heaven. The resurrection of the body, and the
ascension unto bliss is believed now by all the earth, learned and unlearned
embrace it, only some few reject it: If it be credible, what fools are they
not to believe it: if it be not, how incredible a thing is it, that it should
be so generally believed! These two incredible things, to wit the resurrection,
and the worlds belief thereof, Our Lord Jesus Christ (a) promised should come
to pass, before Mat. 27.
that he had effected either of them. Now one of them (the worlds belief of
the resurrection) we see is come to pass already; why then should we despair
of the other, that this incredible thing which the world believes, should come
to pass as well as that other? Especially seeing that they are both promised
in those scriptures, whereby the world believed. The manner of which belief is
more incredible then the rest; That men ignorant in all arts, without
Rhetorike, Logike or Grammar, plain Fishers should be sent by Christ into the
sea of this world, only with the nets of faith, and draw such an inumerable
multitude of fishes of al sorts, so much the stranger, in that they took many
rare Philosophers. So that this may well be accounted the third incredible
thing, and yet all three are come to pass. It is incredible that Christ should
rise again in the flesh, and carry it up to heaven with him. It is incredible
that the world should believe this: and it is incredible that this belief
should be effected by a small sort of poor, simple, unlearned men. The first
of these our adversaries believe not: the second they behold, and cannot tell
how it is wrought, if it be not done by the third. Christ's resurrection and
ascension is taught and believed all the world over* if it be incredible, why
does all the world believe it? If many noble, learned and mighty persons, or
men of great sway had said they had seen it, and should have divulged it
abroad, it had bin no marvel if the world had believed them, and unbelievers
should have bin thought hardly off. But seeing that the world believes it from
the mouths of a few, mean, obscure and ignorant men, why do not our obstinat
adversaries believe the whole world which believed those simple, mean, and
unlearned witnesses, because that the deity it self in these poor shapes did
work the more effectually, and far more admirably: for their proofs and
persuasions lay not in words, but wonders: and such as had not seen Christ
risen again, and ascending, believed their affirmations thereof, because they
confirmed them with miracles: for whereas they spoke but one language, or (at
the most) but two, before, now of a sudden, they spoke all the tongues of all
nations. They cured a man that had bin forty yerres lame, ever from his mothers
breasts, only by the very name of Jesus Christ. Their handkerchiefs helped
diseases; the sick persons got themselves laid in the way where they should
pass, that they might have help from their very shadows, and amongst all
these miracles done by the name of Christ, they raized some from the dead. If
these things be true as they are written, then may al these be added to the
three former incredibles: thus do we bring a multitude of incredible effects to
persuade our adversaries but unto the belief of one, namely the resurrection,
and yet their horrible obstinacy will not let them see the light: If they
believe not that the Apostles wrought any such things for confirmation of the
resurrection of Christ, suffices then that the whole world believed them
without miracles, which is a miracle as great as any of the rest,

L. VIVES.
CHrist (a) promised] In the house of Simon the leaper, and when he sent out
his Apostles to preach. Mat. 27. and promised that his Gospel should pass
throughout the world, and that he would rise again the third day.

That Love made the Romans deify their founder Romulus, and Faith made the
Church to love her Lord and master Christ Jesus. CHAP. 6.
Let us hear what Tully says of the fabulous deity of Romulus it is more
admirable in Romulus (says he) that the rest of the deified men lived in the
times of ignorance, where there was more scope for fiction, and where the rude
vulgar were far more credulous. But Romulus we see lived, within (a) this 600.
years, since which time (and before also) learning has bin (b) more common,
and the ignorance of elder times utterly abolished. Thus says Tully: and by
and by after, Hereby it is evident, that Homer was long before Romulus, so y^
in the later times, men grew learned, and fictions were well near wholly
excluded, whereas antiquity has given credence to some very unlikely fables:
but our modern ages being more polished, deride and reject al things that
seem impossible. Thus says the most learned and eloquent man, that Romulus
his divinity was the more admirable, because his times were witty, and kept no
place for fabulous assertions. But who believed this deity, but Rome, as then a
little thing (god knows) and a young? posterity indeed must needs preserve the
traditions of antiquity, every one sucked superstition from his nurse, whilst,
the city grew to such power, that s^ming in soueraingty to stand above the
nations under it, she powered the belief of this deity of his* throughout her
conquered Provinces, that they should affirm Romulus to be a god (how-soeuer
they thought) least they should scandalize the founder of their Lady and
mistress, in saying other wise of him then error of love (not love of error)
had induced her to believe. Now Christ likewise though he founded the
Celestial City, yet does not she think him a God for founding of her, but
she is rather founded for thinking him to be a God. Rome being already built
and finished, adored her founder in a temple: but the Heavenly Jerusalem
places Christ her founder in the foundation of her faith, that hereby she may
be built and perfited. Love made Rome believe that Romulus was a god: and the
belief that CHRIST is GOD, made his City to love him. So that even as Rome
had an object for her love, which she was ready to honor with a false
belief: So the City of GOD has an object for her says which she is ever
ready to honor with a true and rightly grounded love. For as touching Christ,
besides those many miracles, the holy Prophets also did teach him to be God,
long before his coming: which as the fathers believed should come to pass, so
that we do now see that they are come to pass. But as touching Romulus, we
read that he built Rome, and reigned in it, not that this was prophesied
before: but as for his deifying, their books affirm that it was believed, but
they show not how it was effected, for there were no miracles to prove it. The
she Wolf that fed the two brethren with her milk, which is held so
miraculous, what does this prove as concerning his deity? If this she Wolf
were not a strumpet, but a brute beast, yet the accident concerning both the
brethren alike, why was not (d) Remus deified for company? And who is there
that if he be forbidden upon pain of death, to say that Hercules, Romulus,
or such, are deities, had rather loofe his life, then leave to affirm it? What
nation would worship Romulus as a God, if it were not for fear of Rome? But on
the other side, who is he that can number those that have suffered death
willingly in what form of cruelty soever, rather then deny the deity of
Christ? A light and little fear of the Roman power, compelled diverse
inferior cities to honor Romulus as a god: but neither fear of power,
torment, nor death could hinder an infinite multitude of Martyrs, all the world
through, both to believe and profess that Christ was God. Nor did his City,
though she were as then a pilgrim upon earth, and had huge multitudes within
her, ever go about to (e) defend her temporal estate against her persecutors,
by force, but neglected that, to gain her place in eternity. Her people were
bound, imprisoned, beaten, rackt, burnt, torn, butchered, and yet multiplied.
Their fight for life, was the contempt of life for their Savior. Tully in his
3* De rep. (Or I am deceived) argues that a just City never should take
arms, but either for her safety or faith. What he means by safety, be shows
elsewhere. From those pains (says he) which the fondest may feel, as
poverty, banishment, stripes, imprisonment or so, do private men escape, by the
ready dispatch of death. But this death which seems to free private men from
pains, is pain it self unto a city For the aim of a cities continuance,
should be eternity. Death therefore is not so natural to a common wealth as to
a private man, he may often times be driven to wish for it: but when a city
is destroyed, the whole world seems (in a manner) to perish with it. Thus
says Tully holding the worlds eternity with the Platonists. So then he would
have a city to take arms for her safety, that is, for her continuance for
ever here upon earth, although her members perish, and renew successively, as
the leaves of the Olive and laurel trees, and such like as they are: for death
(says he) may free private men from misery, but it is misery it self unto a
commonwealth. And therefore it is a question whether the Saguntines did well,
in choosing the destruction of their city, before the breach of faith with the
commonwealth of Rome; an act which all the world commends. But I cannot see
how they could possibly keep this rule, that a City should not take arms but
either for her faith or safety. For when these two are jointly endangered, that
one cannot be saved without the others loss, one cannot determine which
should be chosen. If the Saguntines had chosen to preserve their safety, they
had broken their faith: If their faith, then should they lose their safety, as
indeed they did. But the safety of the City of GOD is such, that it is
preserved (or rather purchased) by faith, and faith being once lost, the
safety cannot possibly but perish also. This cogitation with a firm and
patient resolution, crowned so many Martyrs for Christ, when as Romulus never
had so much as one man that would die in defense of his deity.

L VIVES.
Within this (a) 600. yeares] Tully speaks not this of his own times, but
in the person of Scipio Africanus the younger, and Laelius, which Scipio lived
about 602. years after the building of Rome, which was not 600. years after
the death of Romulus. (b) More common] For in those times lived Orpheus,
Musaeus, Linus, Philamnon, Thamyris, Orius, (...), Aristheas, Proconnesius,
Pronetidas of Athens, Euculus of Cyprus, Phenius of Ithaca, Ho^r, etc. (c)
Otherwise] That is in saying, he was but a man, whereas the Romans held him for
a God. James Passauant plays the fool rarely in this place, but it is not
worth relating (d) Why was (...) Remus] He had a little Temple upon Auenti^e,
but it was an obscure one, and rather like an Heroes temple then a gods. (e) To
defend] She might have repulsed injuries by force and awed her adversaries by
power, but she deemed it fitter for such as professed the Gospel of Christ,
to suffer, then to offer, to die then to kill, to loose their body rather then
the soul.

That the belief of Christ's Deity was wrought by Gods power, not man's
persuasion. CHAP. 7.
But it is absurd to make any mention of the false Deity of Romulus, when we
speak of Christ. But if the age of Romulus, almost 600. years before Scipio,
were so stored with men of understanding, that no impossibility could enter
their belief: how much more wise were they 600. years after, in Tulliestime,
in Tiberius his, and in the days of CHRIST'S coming? So that his resurrection
and ascension would have been rejected as fictions and impossibilities, if
either the power of God or the multitude of miracles had not persuaded the
contrary, teaching that it was now shown in Christ, and hereafter to be shown
in all men besides, and auerring it strongly against all horrid persecutions
throughout the whole world, through which the blood of the Martyrs made it
spread and flourish. They read the Prophets, observed a concordance, and a
concurrence of all those miracles, the truth confirmed the novelty, being not
contrary to reason, so that at the last, the World embraced and professed that
which before it had hated and persecuted.

Of the miracles which has been and are as yet wrought to procure and
confirm the worlds belief in Christ-CHAP. 8.
But how comes it (say they) that you have no such miracles now adays, as
you say were done of yore? I might answer, that they were necessary, before the
world believed, to induce it to believe: and he that seeks to be confirmed
by wonders now, is to be wondered at most of al himself: in refusing to
belee^ what all the world believes besides him. But this they object, implies
that they believe not that there were any miracles done at al? No? why then is
Christ's ascension in the flesh so generally auowed? why does the world in such
learned and circumspect times, believe such incredible things, without seeing
them confirmed by miracles? were they credible, and therefore believed? why
then do not they themselves believe them? Our conclusion is brief* either
this incredible thing which was not seen, was confirmed by other incrediles
which were seen, or else this being so credible that it need no miracle to
prove it, condemns their own gross incredulity, that will not believe it.
This I say to silence fools: for we cannot deny but that the miraculous
Ascension of Christ in the flesh was ratified unto us by the power of many
other miracles. The Scriptures do both relate them, and the end whereunto
they tended. They were written to work faith in men, and the faith they wrought
has made them far more famous. They are read to induce the people to believe,
and yet should not be read but that they are believed: and for miracles, there
are some wrought as yet, partly by the Sacraments, partly by the memories and
prayers of the Saints, but they are not so famous, nor so glorious as the
other; for the Scriptures which were to be divulged in all places, has given
luster to the first, in the knowledges of all nations, whereas the later are
known but unto the cities where they are done, or some parts about them. And
generally, there are few that know them there, and many that do not, if the
City be great; and when they relate them to others, they are not believed so
fully, and so absolutely as the other, although they be declared by one
christian to another. The miracle that was done at Millayne when I was there,
might well become famous, both because the City was of great largeness, and
likewise for the great concourse of people that came to the Shrine of Protasius
(a) and of Geruase, where the blind man obtained his sight. The bodies of A
blind man recouers sight, Innocentius,
these two Martyrs lay long unknown, until (b) Ambrose the Bishop had notice of
them, by a relation in a dream. But that at Carthage, whence Innocentius, one
that had bin an advocate of the neighbor state, received his health, was
unknown unto the most, whereas notwithstanding I was present, and saw it with
mine eyes, for he was the man that gave intertainment unto me and my brother
Alipius, not being Clergymen as yet, but onley lay christians, and we dwelt
as then in his house: he lay sick of a many fistulaes bred in his fundament,
and those secret parts of the body: the Chyurgions had lanced him, and put him
to extreme and bitter pains, whereas notwithstanding they had left one part
untouched which they must perforce make incision into ^re they could possibly
cure him: but they cured all the rest, only that, being omitted troubled them
exceedingly, and made all their applications tend to no purpose. Innocentius
marking their protractions, and fearing another incision (which a Physician
that dwelt in his house had told him they would be driven to make, whom they
would not suffer to see how they cut him, wher-vpon Innocentius had angerly
barred him his house, and could scarcely be brought to receive him again) at
last he burst forth, saying, will you cut me again? will it come to his sayings,
whom you will not have to see your tricks? But they mocked at the ignorance of
the Physician and bad Innocentius be of good cheer, there was no such matter.
Well the time passed on, but no help of the malady could be seen: the
Chyurgions did still promise fair, that they would cure him by salve and not
by incision. Now they had got an old man and a cunning Chyurgion called (c)
Ammonius to ioin with them, and he viewing the sore, affirmed as much as they;
which assurance of his did satisfy Innocentius that he himself did now begin
to gibe and jest at his other Physician that said he must be cut again.
Well to be brief, when they had spent some weeks more, they all left him,
showing (to their shame) that he could not possible be cured but by incision.
This, and the excessive fear thereof struck him immediately beyond his
senses, but recollecting of himself he bad them begone, and never more come at
him, being enforced now by necessity, to send for a cunning Surgeon of
Alexandria, one that was held a rare Artist to perform that which his anger
wuold not let the others do. The man coming to him, and (like a worke-man
observing the work of the others by the scarrs they had left) like a honest
man, advised him to let them finish the cure who had taken that great pains
with it, as he had with wonder observed, for true it was, that incision was
the only means to cure him, but that it was far from him to deprive those
of the honor of their industry whose pains in the cure he saw had been so
exceeding great. So the former Surgeons were sent for to perform it, and this
Alexandrian must stand by, and see them open the part which was other-wise held
to be incurable. The business was put off until the next day. But the
Surgeons being all departed, the house was so filled with sorrow for the grief
of their master, that it showed more like a preparation for a funeral then
any thing else, and was very hardly suppressed. Now he was daily visited by
diverse holy men, and namely by Saturninus (of blessed memory) the Bishop of
vzali, and Gelosus Priest, and Deacon of the Church of Carthage, as also by
Bishop Aurelius, who only is yet living of all these three: a man of worthy
respect, and one with whom I now and then had conferred about the wonderful
works of God, I have often taken occasion to speak of this, and sound that he
remembered it exceeding well. These men visiting him toward the evening, he
prayed them all to come again the next day to be spectators of his death,
rather then his pains, for his former sufferings had so terrified him, that he
made no question but that he should immediately perish under the Surgions
hands. They on the other side bad him be comforted, trust in God, and bear
his will with patience. Then went we to prayers, and kneeling of us down, he
threw himself forcibly on his face, as if one had thrust him on, and so began
to pray, with such passion of mind, such floods of tears, such groans and
sobbes (even almost to the stopping of his breath) that it is utterly
inexplicable. Whether the rest prayed, or marked him I know not; for my self,
could not pray a jot, only I said in my heart, Lord whose prayers will thou
hear, if thou hear not his? for me thought his prayer could not but procure
his suit: well we rose, and being blessed by the Bishop, we departed the room,
he in the mean time entreating them to come to him in the morning, and they
strengthening his spirit with as good consolations as they could give him. The
feared morning was now come, the holy men came, according to their promises: so
did the Surgeons, the terrible Irons were made ready, and all things fit for
such a work, whilst all the company sat silent in a deep amazement. The
chief and such as had more authority then the rest, comforted him as well as
they could, his body was laid fit for the hand of him that was to cut him, the
clothes untied, the place bared, the Surgeon veweth it with his knife in his
hand ready to lance it, feeling with his fingers where the vlcerous matter
shouldlye: at length, having made an absolute trial of all the part that was
before affected, he found the orifice firmly closed, and every place thereof
as sound and as solid as it was first created. Then joy and praises unto God
(with tears of comfort) were yielded on al sides beyond the power my pen has
to describe them. In the same town, one Innocentia, a devout woman, and one of
the chief in the city had a canker on her breast, a kind of sore, which the
Surgeons told her is utterly (d) incurable: wherefore they ^se either to cut
the infected part away, or for the prolonging of the life (as Hippocrates they
say does advise) to omit all attempt of ^uring it. This a skillfull Physician
(her familiar friend) told her, so that she now sought help of none but the
Lord, who told her in a dream, that at (e) Easter next (which then drew near)
she should mark, on the woman's side by the fount, what woman she was that
(being then Baptized) should first meet her, and that she should in treat her
to sign the sore with the sign of the cross. She did it, and was cured. The
former Physician that had wished her to abstain from all attempt of cure,
seeing her afterward whole and sound whom he knew certainly to have had
that incurable ulcer before, earnestly desired to know how she was cured,
longing to find the medicine that had frustrated Hippocrates his Aphorism.

She told him: He presently with a voice (as if he had contemned it, in so
much that she feared exceedingly that he would have spoken blasphemy) replied:
Why I thought you would have told me some strange thing, she standing al
amazed, John. 21.
Why is it so strange, (quoth he) for CHRIST to heal a Canker, that could
raise one to life that had been four days dead? When I first heard of this,
it grieved me that so great a miracle wrought upon so great a personage should
be so suppressed, whereupon I thought it good to give her a checking
admonition thereof, and meeting her and questioning the matter, she told me
she had not concealed it, so that I went and enquired of her fellow matrons,
who told me, they never heard of it. Behold (said I to her, before them) have
you not concealed it, when as your nearest familiars do not know of it?
Whereupon she ^ell to relate the whole order of it, unto their great
admiration, and the glorification of GOD. There was also a Physician, in the
same town, much troubled with the Gout, who having given up his name to A
Physician sick of the Gout Baptized.
be Baptized, the night before he should receive this sacrament, in his
sleep was forbidden it by a crew of curled headed Negro boys, which he knew
to be Devils, but he refusing to obey them, they stamped on his feet, so
that they put him to most extreme pain, yet he keeping his firm resolve,
and being Baptized the next day, was freed both from his pain and the cause
thereof, so that he never had the Gout in all his days after. But who knew
this man? we did, and a few of our neighbor brethren, other-wise it had been
utterly unknown.

One of (f) Curubis was by Baptism freed both from the Palsy, and the
excessive tumor of the Genitories, so that he went from the font as found a man
as ever was borne. Where was this known but in Curubis, and unto a few
besides? But when I heard of it, I got Bishop Aurelius to send him to Carthage,
notwithstanding that it was first told me by men of sufficient credit.
Hesperius, one that has been a Captain, and lives at this day by Hespe^,
us, has a litte Farm, called Zubedi, in the liberties of fussali which he
having observed (by the harm done to his servants and cattle) to be haunted
with evil spirits he entreated one of our Priests, (in mine absence) to go
thither and expel them by prayer. One went, prayed, and ministered the
Communion, and by GODS mercy the Devil was quit from the place ever after. Now
he had a little of the earth wherein the Sepulcher of CHRIST stands,
bestowed upon him by a friend, which he had hung up in his Chamber for the
better a voydance of those wicked illusions from his own person.

Now they being expelled, he knew not what to do with this earth being not
willing, for the reverence he bore it, to keep it any longer in his lodging.
So I, and my fellow Maximus Bishop of Synica, being at the next town, he
prayed us to come to his house, we did, he told us all the matter, and
requested that this Earth might be buried some-where, and made a place for
prayer, and for the Christians to celebrate Gods service in, and it was done
accordingly.

Now there was a country youth that was troubled with the Palsy, who hearing
of this, desired his Parents to bring him thither: They did so, where he
prayed, and was presently cured. Victoriana is a town some thirty miles from
Hippo regium. There is a memorial of the two Martyrs of Millayne. Geruase and
Protasius, and thither they carried a young man who bathing himself in
Geruase and Protasius
summer, at noone day was possessed with a Devil. Being brought hither, he lay
as one dead, or very near death: mean while the Lady of the village, (as
custom is) entered the place unto evening prayers, with her maids and certain
votaresses, and began to sing Psalms, which sound, made the man start up as in
an afright, and with a terible rauing he catched fast hold upon the Altar,
whence he durst not once move, but held it as if he had been bound to it.
Then the Deuili within him began mournefully to cry for mercy, relating how and
when he entered the man, and lastly saying that he would leave him: he named
what parts of him he would spoil at his departure, and saying these words,
departed. But one of the man's eyes fell down upon his cheek, and hung only
by a little string, all the puple of it (with is naturally black) becoming
white, which the people (whom his cries had called: seeing, they fell to help
him with their prayers: and though they rejoiced at the recovery of his wits,
yet sorrowed they for the loss of his eye, and advised him to get a Surgeon
for it. But his sisters husband, who brought him thither, replied, saying, the
GOD that delivered him from the Devil, has power to restore him his eye;
which said he put it into the place as well as he could, and bound it up with
his napkin: wishing him not to loose it until seven days were past, which
doing, he found it as sound as ever it was. At this place were many others
helped, whom it were to long to rehearse particularly.

I knew a Virgin in Hippon, who was freed from the Devil, only by anointing
with oil mixed with the tears of the Priest that prayed for her. I know a
Bishop who by prayer dispossessed the Devil being in a youth that he never
saw. There was one Florentius here of Hippo, a poor and Godly Oldman, who
getting his living by mending of shoes, lost his upper garment, and being not
able to buy another, he came to the shrine of the twenty Marti^res and prayed
aloud unto them, to help him to rayments. A sort of scoffing youths
ouer-heard him, and at his departure, followed him with mockes, asking him if
he had begged fifty (g) halfpence of the martirs to buy him a coat withal.
But he, going quietly on, spied a great fish, a new cast up by the sea, and yet
panting, which fish, by their permission that were by, he took, and carried it
to one Carchosus a cook a good Christian, and fold it to him for 300. half
pence, intending to bestow this money upon woll for his wife to spinne, and
make into a garment for him. The Cook cutting up the fish, found a ring of
gold in his belly, which amazing him, his conscience made him send for the
poor man, and give him the ring, saying to him: behold how the twenty Martyrs
have apparelled you. When Bishop Proiectus brought Saint Steuens relics to
the Town called Aquae Tibilitanae, there were a many people flocked together
to honor them. Amongst whom there was a blind woman, who prayed them to lead
her to the Bishop that bare the holy relics. So the bishop gave her
certain flowers which he had in his hand, she took them, put them to
her eyes, and presently had her sight restored, in so much that she passed
speedily on, before all the rest, as now not needing any more to be guided. So
Bishop Lucillus bearing the relics of the said Martyr, inshrined in the
castle of (b) Synice, near to Hippo, was thereby absolutely cured of a fistula
wherewith he had been long vexed, and was come to that pass that he every
day expected when the Chyurgion should lance it: but he was never troubled
with it after that day. Eucherius a Spanish Priest, that dwelt at Calame, was
cured of the stone by the same relics, which Bishop Posidius brought
thither, and being afterward laid out for dead of another disease, by the
help of the said Martyr (unto whose shrine they brought him) was restored unto
his former life and soundness.

There was one Martialis a great man, of good years, but a great foe to
CHRIST, who dwelt in this place. This man's daughter was a Christian, and
married unto a Christian. The father being very sick was entreated by them
both with prayers and tears, to become a Christian, but he utterly and
angerly refused. So the husband thought it good to go to Saint Steuens shrine,
and there to pray the LORD to send his father in law into a better mind, and
to embrace CHRIST JESUS without further delay. For this he prayed with great
zeal and affect, with showers of tears, and storms of religious sighs, and
then departing, he took some of the flowers from off the Altar, and in the
night laid them at his fathers head, who slept well that night, and in the
morning, called in all haste for the Bishop, who was then at Hippo with me.
They told him therefore so: he forthwith sendes for the Priests, and when
they came told them presently that he believed, and so was immediately
baptized, to the amazement of them all. This man all the time he lived after,
had this saying continually in his mouth. LORD Acts, 7. 59.
JESUS receive my spirit: These were his last words, though he knew them not
to be Saint Steuens, for he lived not long after. At this place also were two
healed of the Gowte, a citizen and a stranger: The citizen knew by example
what to do to be rid of his pain, but the stranger had it revealed unto
him.

There is a place called Andurus, where S. Steven has a part of his body
remaining also. A child being in the Street, certain Oxen that drew a cart,
growing unruly, left the way, and ouer-run the child with the wheel, so that it
lay all crushed, and past al hope of life. The mother snatched it up and ran
to the shrine with it, where laying it down, it recovered both life and full
strength again in an instant, being absolutely cured of all hurt what-soeuer.
Near this place, at Caspalia, dwelt a Votaresse, who being sick and past
recovery, sent her garment to the shrine, but ere it came back, she was dead,
yet her parents covered her with it, which done, she presently revived and was
as sound as ever. The like happened to one Bassus, a Syrian that dwelt at
Hippo. Praying for his sick daughter at Saint Steuens, and having her garment
with him, word came by a boy that she was dead. But as he was at prayer, his
friends met the boy, (before he had been with him) and bad him not to
tell him there, least he went mourning through the streets. So he coming
home, and finding all in tears, he laid her garment upon her, and she
presently revived. So like-wise Ireneus his son, a Collector, being dead, and
ready to go out for burial, one advised to anoint him with some of Saint
Stephens oil. They did so, and he revived. Elusinus likewise a Captain,
seeing his son dead, took him and laid him upon the shrine that is in his
farm in our Suburbs, where after he had prayed a while, he found him
revived? What shall I do, my promises binds me to be brief, whereas
doubtless many that shall read these things, will grieve that I have omitted
so many that are known both to them and me.

But I entreat their pardon that they would consider how tedious a task it is,
so that my promised respect of breuity will not allow it. For if I should but
believe all the miracles done by the memorials of Saint Steven, only at Cala^a
and Hippo, It should be a work of many volumes, and yet not be perfect
neither; I could not relate all, but only such as are recorded for the
knowledge of the people, for that we desire, when we see our times produce
wonders like to those of yore, that they should not be utterly in vain, by
being lost in forgetfulness, and oblivion.

It is not yet two years since the shrine was built at Hippo, and although we
our s^lues do know many miracles done there since, that are recorded, yet are
there almost seauenty volumes written of those that have been recorded since
that time to this. But at Calama, the shrine is more ancient, the miracles more
often, and the books far more in number. At Vzali also, near Vtica have
many miracles been wrought by the power of the said Martyr, where Bishop
E^dius erected his memorial, long before this of ours. But there they did
not use to record them, though it may be they have begun such a custom of
late. For when we were there, we advised Petronia (a Noble woman who was
cured of an old disease which all the Physicians had given over) to have the
order of her miraculous cure drawn in a book (as the Bishop of that place
liked) and that it might be read unto the people: And she did accordingly.
Wherein was one strange passage, which I cannot omit, though my time will hardly
allow me to relate it.

A certain Jew had advised her to take a ring, with a stone set in it that
is found (i) in the reins of an Ox, and sow it in a girdle of hair which
she must wear upon her skin, under all her other rayments. This girdle
she had on, when she set forth to come to the Martyrs shrine, but having
left Carthage before, and dwelling at a house of her own by the River (k)
Bagrada, as she rose to go on the rest of her journey, she spied the ring lie
at her feet: Whereat wondering, she felt for her girdle, and finding it tied,
as she had bound it, she imagined that the ring was broken, and so worn
out: But finding it whole, then she took this as a good presage of her future
recovery, and loofing her girdle, cast both it and the ring into the River. Now
they that will not believe that JESUS CHRIST was borne without interruption of
the virginal parts, nor passed into his Apostles when the doors were shut,
neither will they believe this. But when they examine it, and find it true,
then let them believe the other. The woman is of noble birth, nobly married,
and dwells at Carthage* so great a City, so great a person in the City
cannot lie unknown to any that are inquisitiue. And the Martyr by whose prayer
she was cured believed in him that was borne of an eternal virgin, and entered
to his Disciples when the doors were shut: And lastly (whereunto all has
reference) who ascended into heaven in the flesh, wherein he rose again from
death: for which faith this Martyr lost his life.

So that we see there are miracles at this day, wrought by GOD, with what
means he likes best who wrought them of yore: but they are not so famous,
nor fastened in the memory by often reading, that they might not be forgotten.
For although we have gotten a good custom of late, to read the relations of
such as these miracles are wrought upon, unto the people, yet perhaps they are
read but once, which they that are present do hear, but no one else: nor do
they that hear them, keep them long in remembrance, nor will any of them take
the pains to relate them to those that have not heard them. We had one
miracle wrought amongst us, so famous, and so worthy, that I think not one of
Hippon but saw it, or knows it, and not one that knows it that can ever
forget it.

There were seven brethren, and three sisters (borne all of one couple in (l)
Caesarea, a city of Cappadocia) their parents were noble; Their father being
newly dead, and they giving their mother some cause of anger, she laid an
heavy (m) curse upon them all, which was so seconded by GODS judgment, that
they were all taken with an horrible trembling of all their whole bodies: which
ougly sight they themselves loathing that their countrymen should behold,
became vagrant through most parts of the Roman Empire. Two of them, Paul and
Palladia came to us, being notified by their miseries in many other places.
They came some sifteene days before Easter, and every day they visited Saint
Steuens shrine, humbly beseeching GOO at length to have mercy upon them, and to
restore them their former health. Where-so-euer they went, they drew the eyes
of all men upon them, and some that knew how they came so plagued, told it unto
others, that all might know it. Now was Easter day come, and many were come to
Church in the morning, amongst whom this Paul was one, and had gotten him to
the bars that enclosed Saint Steuens relics, and there was praying, having
hold of the bars: Presently he fell flat down, and lay as if he had
slept, but trembled not as he had used to do before, ever in his sleep.

The people were all amazed, some feared, some pitied him, some would have
raised him, and other some say nay, rather expect the event: presently he
started up, and rose as sound a man as ever he was borne. With that, all the
Church resounded again, with loud acclamations and praises to GOD. And then
they came flocking to me, who was about to come forth to them, every one
telling me this strange and miraculous event. I rejoiced, and thanked GOD
within my self: Presently enters the young man, and falls down at my knees,
I took him up, and kissed him, so forth we went unto the people, who filled
the Church, and did nothing but cry, GOD be thanked, GOD be praised. Every
mouth uttered this: I saluted them, and then the cry redoubled. At length,
silence being made, the Scriptures were read, and when it was Sermon time, I
made only a brief exhortation to them, according to the time, and that
present joy. For in so great a work of GOD, I did leave them to think of it
themselves, rather then to give ear to others. The young man dined with us,
and related the whole story of his mother and brethrens misery. The next day,
after my Sermon, I told the people that to morrow they should hear the whole
order of this miracle read unto them: which I doing, made the young man and
his sister stand both upon the steps that go up into the chancell, (wherein I
had a place aloft, to speak from thence to the people) that the congregation
might see them both. So they all viewed them, the brother standing sound and
firm, and the sister trembling every joint of her. And they that saw not him,
might know Gods mercy shown to him by seeing his sister, and discern both
what to give thanks for in him, and what to pray for in her. The relation
being read, I willed them to depart out of the peoples sight, and began to
dispute of the cause of this, when as suddenly there arose another acclamation
from about the shrine. They that hearkened unto me, left me, and drew thither,
for the maid when she departed from the steps, went thither to pray, and
as soon as she touched the grate, she was so wrapped as he was, and so restored
to the perfect use of all her limbs. So while I was asking the reason of this
noise, the people brings her unto the Quire to me, being now fully as sound
as her brother. And then arose such an exultation, that one would have thought
it should never have end. And the maid was brought thither where she had
stood before. Then the people rejoiced that she was like her brother now, as
had lamented that she was unlike him before, seeing that the will of the
Almighty had prevented their intents to pray for her. This their joy was so
lowdlie expressed, that it was able to strike the strongest ear with stupor.
And what was in there hearts that rejoiced thus, but the faith of CHRIST, for
which Saint Steven shed his blood.

L. VIVES.
PRotasius (a) and Geruase] Sons to Vitalis, a Gentleman of Rome, and a
Martyr, and Valeria his wife. Frederick the first translated their bodies from
Millaine to Brisach in Germany. (b) Ambrose] That famous Father of the Church,
and Bishop of Millaine. (c) Ammonius] Not that famous Platonist, Origens
master. (d) Uncurable] Yet Galen and Auicen* teach the cure: marry it must not
then be at the fullness of the maleuolence, for then it cannot be rooted out.
Celsus reckons three kinds of Canckers. First Cacoethes, with a ^all rooted
ulcer, swelling the parts adjoining: the second, with no ulcer at all: the
third is called Thymius, arising from melancholy burnt by choler. (e) At
Easter next] It was a custom as then, between Easter and Whitsontide to
Baptize persons of discretion, and such as required it. There are many
additions in this Chapter (I make no question) foysted in by such as make a
practice of deprauing authors of authority: ^ome I will cut off, and other
some I will but touch at. (f) Curubis] A free town in Africa, near to Mercury
his promontory, beyond Carthage. Plin. lib. 4. Ptolom. (g) Halfe-pence] The
Latin word is Phollis, which is either a weight, containing three hundred and
twelve pound, and six ounces, or it is a kind of tribute, or (when it is used
in the masculine gender, as it is here) it is the same that Obolus is with us,
an halfpenny. Alciat. Hesich de temp. diuis. l. 6. Suidas, etc. (h) Since] It
may be put for Thirissa, a place which Ptolomy places nere Hippo Diarrhytus,
the same y^ Pliny corruptly calls Ticisa, and Tirisa. lib. 5. Or perhaps it
is Sitisa, for there were such a people in Mauritania Caesariensis. (i) Found
in the reines] Of this I never read. Pliny (lib. 30.) says there is a little
one in the head of an Ox, which he casieth out when he fears death, and
that (if one can get it) it is wonderful good to further the growth of the
teeth, being worn about ones neck. But I see no reason why a stone should not
grow in an Oxes kidney sooner then in a man's. His heat is more, his blood and
humors far groser. (k) Bagrada] It rises out of Mapsar, a mountain of
Lybia the farther, and passing through Afric, falls into our sea at Vtica.
Strabo. (l) Caesarea, a City of Cappadocia] Cappadocia is a part of Asia
minor, bounded on the weast with Galatia and Paphlagonia, on the east with
Armenia the less, and on the north with the Euxine sea, it has the name from
the river that passes between it and Galatia. For it was before called Leuco
Syria, white Syria, in respect of that Syria by mount Taurus, whose people are
of swarty and sunne-burnt complexions, Strabo. They were called Syrians of
Syrus, son to Apollo, and Sinope, who gave the name also to Sinope where
Diogenes the Cynike was borne. Herodot. Plutarch.

Now amongst the other cities of Cappadocia, there was Diocaesarea,
Neocaesarea, upon the river Lycus, and Caesarea by mount Aegeus: as witnesses
Pliny, Solinus, Ptolomy, and Ammianus. This town (says Sextus Rufus) was
called Caesarea, in honor of Augustus Caesar. But Eusebius says that Tiberius,
having expelled Archelaus, gave it this name, whereas it was called Mazaca
before, as the forenamed authors do affirm. Perhaps he did so in memory of his
father Augustus. This Mazaca was called the mother of the Cappadocian cities.
Solinus, Martianus Capella. Strabo says it was called Eusebia, and makes it
the Metropolitan city of Cappadocia. There were excellent horses bred in this
liberty, as Claudian says. And Basil, that great father, was borne in this
town.

(m) An heavy curse] Children ought ever to avoid their parents curses, as
ominous, and confirmed by many horrible examples. (n) Chancell] The text
calls it Exedra, which signifies a place full of seats, such as the ancient
Philosophers disputed in. Vitru. lib. 5. But I wonder much that Uitruuius says
there were none in Italy, when as Tully says that Crassus the Orator, and
Cotta the Arch-flamine had such, belonging to their houses. But those in
Churches, we do usually call the Quier, or Chancell, as Augustine uses the
word here: and such the Monks, and Chanons have in their Cloisters. Budaeus in
Pandectas.

That all the miracles done by the Martyrs in the name of CHRIST, were only
confirmations of that faith, whereby the Martyrs believed in CHRIST. CHAP. 9.
AND what does all this multitude of miracles, but confirm that faith which
holds that CHRIST rose again in the flesh, and so ascended into heaven? For
the Martyrs were all but Martyrs, that is, witnesses of this; and for this,
they suffered the malice of the cruel world, which they never resisted, but
subdued by sufferance. For this faith they dyed, obtaining this of him for whom
they dyed. For this, their patience made the way for the power of these so
powerful miracles to follow. For if this resurrection had not been past, in
CHRIST, or had not been to come, as CHRIST promised, as well as those Prophets
that promised CHRIST; how comes it that the martyrs that dyed for this
belief should have the power to work such wonders? For whether GOD himself,
(who being eternal can effect things temporal by such wondrous means) has
wrought these things of himself, or by his ministers, or by the souls of the
martyrs, as if he wrought by living men, or by his Angels over whom he has
an invisible, unchangeable, and merely intellectual command, (so that those
things which the Martyrs are said to do, be only wrought by their prayers,
and not by their powers): be they effected by this means, or by that; they
do neuer-the-lesse in every particular, tend only to confirm that faith
which professes the resurrection of the flesh unto all eternity.

How much honor the Martyrs deserve in obtaining miracles for the worship of
the true God; in respect of the Devils, whose works tend all to make men
think that they are Gods. CHAP. 10.
But it may be, here they will say, that they Gods have also wrought wonders:
very well, they must come now to compare their deities with our dead men. Will
they say (think you) that they have gods that have been men, such as Romulus,
Hercules, etc. Well, but we make no Gods of our Martyrs, the Martyrs and we
have both but one God, and no more. But the miracles that the Pagans ascribe
unto their Idolds, are no way comparable to the wonders wrought by our Martyrs.
But as Moses ouer-threw the enchanters of Pharao, so do our martyrs ^xod. 8
ouer-throw their devils, who wrought those wonders out of their own pride,
only to gain the reputation of Gods. But our Martyrs (or rather GOD himself
through their prayers) wrought unto another end, only to confirm that faith
which excludes multitude of Gods, and believes but in one. The Pagans built
Temples to those Devils, ordeining Priests and sacrifices for them, as for
Gods. But we build our martyrs no temples, but only erect them monuments, as
in memory of men departed, whose spirits are at rest in God. We erect no
altars to sacrifice to them, we offer only to him who is both their God and
ours, at which offering those conquerors of the world as men of God, have each
one his peculiar commemoration, but no invocation at all. For the sacrifice is
offered unto Cod, though it be in memory of them, and he that offreth it, is a
Priest of the Lord, and not of theirs, and the offering is the body of the Lord,
which is not offered unto them, because they are that body themselves. Whose
miracles shall we then believe? Theirs that would be accounted for Gods by
those to whom they show them; or theirs which tend all to confirm our belief
in one GOD, which is CHRIST? Those that would have their filthiest acts held
sacred, or those that will not have their very virtues held sacred in respect
of their own glories, but referred unto his glory, who has imparted such
goodness unto them? Let us believe them that do both work miracles, and
teach the truth: for this latter gave them power to perform the former. A
chief point of which truth is this. CHRIST rose again in the flesh, and
showed the immortality of the resurrection in his own body, which he promised
unto us in the end of this world, or in the beginning of the next.

Against the Platonists that oppose the elevation of the body up to heaven, by
arguments of elementary ponderosity. CHAP. 11.
AGainst this promise do many (whose thoughts God knows to be vain) make
oppositio^ Psalm* 93.
out of the nature of elements: Plato (their Mr.) teaching them that the two
most contrary bodies of the world are combined by other two means: that is, by
air, and water. Therefore (say they) earth being lowest, water next, then
air, and then the heaven, earth cannot possibly be contained in heaven* every
element having his peculiar poise, and tending naturally to his proper place.
See with what vain, weak, and weightlesse arguments man's infirmity opposes
Gods omnipotency! Why then are there so many earthly bodies in the air* air
being the third element from earth? Cannot he that gave birds (that are earthly
bodies) feathers, of power to sustain them in the air, give the like power to
glorified and immortal bodies, to possess the heaven? Again, if this reason
of theirs were true, all that cannot fly, should live under the earth, as
fishes do in the water. Why then do not the earthly creatures live in the
water, which is the next element unto earth, but in the air, which is the
third? And seeing they belong to the earth, why does the next element above the
earth presently choke them, and drown them, and the third feed and nourish
them? Are the elements out of order here now, or are their arguments out of
reason? I will not stand here to make a rehearsal of what I spoke in the
thirteen book, of many terrene substances of great weight, as Lead, Iron,
etc. which not-with-standing may have such a form given it, that it will
swim, and support it self upon the water. And cannot God almighty give the
body of man such a form like-wise that it may ascend, and support it self in
heaven? Let them stick to their method of elements (which is all their trust)
yet can they not tell what to say to my former assertion. For earth is the
lowest element, and then water and air successively, and heaven the fourth and
highest, but the soul is a fifth essence above them all. Aristotle calls it
a fifth (a) body, and Plato says it is utterly incorporeall. If it were the
fifth in order, then were it above the rest: but being incorporeall, it is much
more above all substances corporeal. What does it then in a lump of earth, it
being the most subtle, and this the most gross essence? It being the most
active, and this the most vnweeldy! Cannot the excellency of it have power to
lift up this? Has the nature of the body power to draw down a soul from
heaven, and shall not the soul have power to carry the body thither whence it
came it self? And now if we should examine the miracles which they parallel
with those of our martyrs, we should find proofs against themselves out of
their own relations.

One of their greatest ones is that which Varro reports of a vestall votaresse,
who being suspected of whoredom, filled a Sieve with the water of Tiber and
carried it unto her Judges, without spilling a drop. Who was it that kept the
water in the sieve, so that not one drop passed through those thousand holes?
Some God, or some Devil, they must needs say. Well, if he were a God, is he
greater then he that made the world? if then an inferior God, Angel, or
Devil had this power to dispose thus of an heavy element, that the very
nature of it seemed altered; cannot then the Almighty maker of the whole world,
take away the ponderosity of earth, and give the quickened body an hability to
dwell in the same place that the quickening spirit shall elect? And where-as
they place the air between the fire above, and the water beneath, how comes
it that we oftentimes find it between water and water, or between water
and earth; for what will they make of those watery clouds, between which and
the sea, the air has an ordinary passage? What order of the elements does
appoint, that those floods of rain that fall upon the earth below the air,
should first hang in the clouds above the air? And why is air in the midst
between the heaven, and the earth, if it were (as they say) to have the place
between the heavens and the waters, as water is between it and the earth? And
lastly, if the elements be so disposed as that the two means, air and water,
do combine the two extremes, fire and earth, heaven being in the highest
place, and earth in the lowest, as the worlds foundation, and therefore (say
they) impossible to be in heaven; what do we then with fire here upon earth?
for if this order of theirs be kept inuiolate, then, as earth cannot have any
place in fire, no more should fire have any in earth: as that which is lowest
cannot have residence aloft, no more should that which is aloft have residence
below. But we see this order renuersed: We have fire both on the earth, and in
the earth: the mountain tops give it up in abundance, nay more, we see that
fire is produced out of earth^, namely of wood, and stones, and what are these
but earthly bodies? yea but the elementary fire (say they) is pure, hurtlesse,
quiet, and eternal: and this of ours, turbulent, smoakie, corrupting, and
corruptible. Yet does it not corrupt nor hurt the hills where-in it burns
perpetually, nor the hollowes within ground, where it works most powerfully.
It is not like the other indeed, but adapted unto the convenient use of man.
But why then may we not believe that the nature of a corruptible body may be
made incorruptible, and fit for heaven, as well as we see the elementary fire
made corruptible, and fit for us? So that these arguments drawn from the
sight and qualities of the elements, can no way diminish the power that
Almighty God has, to make man's body of a quality fit and able to inhabit
the heavens.

L. VIVES.
A Fifth (a) body] But Aristotle frees the soul from all corporeal being, as
you may read De anima, lib. 1. disputing against Democritus, Empedocles,
Alcm^on, Plato and Xenocrates. But indeed, Plato teaching that the soul was
composed of celestial fire taken from the stars, and with-all, that the
stars were composed of the elementary bodies, made Aristotle think
(elsewhere) that it was of an elementary nature as well as the stars whence
it was taken. But in this he mistook himself and miss-vnderstood his
master. But indeed Saint Augustine in this place takes the opinion of
Aristotle from Tully (for Aristotle's books were rare, and untranslated as
then) who says that he held their soul to be quintam naturam, which Saint
Augustine calls quintum corpus, a fifth body, several from the elementary
compounds. But indeed it is a question whether Aristotle hold the soul to be
corporeal or no, he is obscure on both sides, though his followers ^old that
it is absolutely incorporeall, as we hold generally at this day. And Tullyes
words were cause both of Saint Augustines miss-prision, and like-wise set
almost all the Grecians both of this age and the last, against himself, for
calling the soul (...), whereas they say Aristotle calls it (...), that is,
habitio perfecta, and not motio pere^nis, as Tullyes word implies. But alas,
why should Tully be so baited for so small an error? O let us be ashamed to
vpbraide the father of Latin eloquence with any misprision, for his errors are
generally more learned then our labors!

Against the Infidels calumnies, cast out in scorn of the Christians belief
of the resurrection. CHAP. 12.
But in their scrupulous inquiries, touching this point, they come against us
with such scoffs as these: Whether shall the Ab-ortiue births have any part in
the resurrection? And seeing the LORD says, there shall no^ one hair of your
headperish, whether shall all men be of one stature and bigness or no? If
they be, how shall the Ab-ortiues (if they rise again) have that at the
resurrection which they wanted at the first? Or if they do not rise again
because they were never borne, but cast out, we may make the same doubt of
infants, where shall they have that bigness of body which they wanted when
they died? for they you know are capable of regeneration, and therefore must
have their part in the resurrection. And then these Pagans ask us, of what
height and quantity shall men's bodies be then? If they be as tall as ever was
any man then both little and many great ones shall want that which they wanted
here on earth, and whence shall they have it? But if it be true that Saint
Paul says, that we shall meet unto the measure of the age of the fullness of
CHRIST, and again if that Ephesians. (...)
place, He predestined [them] to be made like to the Image of his Son,
imply Romans 8
that all the members of Christ's Kingdom shall be like him in shape and stature,
then must many men (say they) forgo part of the stature which they had upon
earth. And then where is that great protection of every hair, if there be
such a diminution made of the stature and body. Besides, we make a question
(say they) whether man shall arise withal the hair that ever the Barber cut
from his head. If he do, who will not loath such an ougly sight? for so
likewise must it follow that he have on all the parings of his nails. And
where is then that comeliness, which ought in that immortality to be so far
exceeding that of this world, while man is in corruption? But if he do not
rise with all his hair, then it is lost, and where is your scriptures then?
Thus they proceed unto fatness and leanness. If all be a like (say they)
then one shall be fat and another lean. So that some must loose flesh, and
some must gain: some must have what they wanted and some must leave what they
had. Besides, as touching the putrefaction, and dissolution of men's bodies,
part going into dust, part into air, part into fire, part into the guts of
beasts and birds; part are drowned and dissolved into water, these accidents
trouble them much, and make them think that such bodies, can never gather to
flesh again. Then pass they to deformities, as monstrous births, misse-shapen
members, scarres and such like; inquiring with scoffs what forms these shall
have in the resurrection. For if we say they shall be all taken away, then
they come upon us with our doctrine that CHRIST arose with his wounds upon him
still. But their most difficult question of all, is, whose flesh shall that
man's be in the resurrection, which is eaten by another man through compulsion
of hunger? for it is turned into his flesh that eats it, and fills the
parts that famine had made hollow, and lean.

Whether therefore, shall he have it again that ought it at first, or he
that eat it and so ought it afterward? These doubts are put unto our
resolutions by the scorners of our faith in the resurrection, and they
themselves do either estate men's souls for ever in a state never certain,
but now wretched, and now blessed (as Plato does) or else with Porphyry they
affirm that these reuolutions do toss the soul along time, but
notwithstanding have a final end at last, leaving the spirit at rest, but
being utterly separated from the body for ever.

Whether Ab-ortiues, belong not to the resurrection, if they belong to the
dead. CHAP. 13.
TO all which objections of theirs, I mean by GODS help to answer, and
first, as touching Ab-ortiues, which die after they are quick in the mothers
womb, that such shall rise again, I dare neither affirm nor deny. Yet, if
they be reckned amongst the dead, I see no reason to exclude them from the
resurrection. For either all the dead shall not rise again, and the souls
that had no bodies, saving in the mothers womb, shall continue bodilesse for
ever: or else all souls shall have their bodies again, and consequently they
whose bodies perished before the time of perfection. Which soever of these two,
be received for truth, that which we will now (by and by) affirm concerning
Infants is to be understood of Ab-ortiues also, if they have any part in the
resurrection.

Whether Infants shall rise again in the stature that they died in. CHAP. 14.
NOw as touching infants, I say they shall not rise again with that
littleness of body in which they died: the sudden and strange power of GOD
shall give them a stature of full growth. For Our Saviors words, There shall
not one heir of our heads perish, do only promise them all that they had
before, not excluding an addition of what they had not before. The infant
wanted the perfection of his bodies quantity (as every (a) perfect infant
wants) that is, it was not come to the full height and bigness, which all
are borne to have, and have at their birth, potentially (not actually) as all
the members of man are potentially in the generatiue sperme, though the child
may want some of them (as namely the teeth) when it is borne. In which hability
of substance, that which is not apparent until afterward, lies (as one would
say) wound up before, from the first original of the said substance. And in
this hability, or possibility, the infant may be said to be tall, or low
already, because he shall prove such hereafter. Which may secure us from all
loss of body or part of body in the resurrection: for if we should be made
all a like, never so tall, or giantlike, yet such as were reduced from a taller
stature unto that, should loose no part of their body: for Christ has said
they should not loose an hair. And as for the means of addition, how can that
wondrous worke-man of the world want fit substance to ad where he thinks good?

L. VIVES.
Every (a) perfect infant] Every thing has a set quantity which it cannot
exceed, and has a power to attain to it, from the generatiue causes whereof
the thing it self is produced: by which power, if it be not hindered, it
dilateth it self gradually in time* till it come to the fullness, where it
either rests, or declineth again as it grew up. This manner of
augmentation proceeds from the qualities that nature has infused into every
thing, and neither from matter nor form.

Whether all of the resurrection shall be of the stature of Christ. CHAP. 15.
But Christ himself arose in the same stature wherein he died: nor may we
say that at the resurrection he shall put on any other height or quantity,
then that wherein he appeared unto his disciples after he was risen again, or
become as tall as any man ever was. Now if we say that all shall be made
equal unto his stature, then must many that were taller, loose part of their
bodies against the express words of CHRIST. Every one therefore shall arise
in that stature which he either had at his full man's state, or should have
had, if he had not died before. As for Saint Paul's words of the measure of the
fullness of CHRIST, they either imply that all his members as then being
joined with him their head, should make up the times consummation, or if they
tend to the resurrection, the meaning is that all should arise neither younger,
nor elder, but just of that age whereat CHRIST himself suffered and rose
again. For the learned authors of this world say that about thirty years, man
is in his full state, and from that time, he declineth to an age of more
gravity and decay: wherefore the Apostle says not, unto the measure of the
body, nor unto the measure of the stature, but, unto the measure of the age of
the fullness of CHRIST.

[What is meant by the conformation of the Saints unto the Image of the Son
of GOD. CHAP. 16.
ANd whereas he says that the predestinate shall be made like to the Image of
Romans 8
the Son of GOD, this may be understood of the inward man; for he says
elsewhere, fashion not your selves like unto this world, but be ye changed
by the renewing Romans 1^
of your mind. So then, when we are changed from being like the world, we
are made like unto the Image of the Son of God. Besides, we may take it
thus, that as he was made like us in mortality, so we should be made like
him in immortality, and thus it is pertinent to the resurrection. But if that
it concern the form of our rising again, then it speaks (as the other
place does) only of the age of our bodies, not of their quantities. Wherefore
all men shall arise in the stature that they either were of, or should have
been of in their fullness of man's state: although indeed it is no matter what
bodies they have, of old men or of infants, the soul and body being both
absolute and without all infirmity. So that if any one say that every man shall
rise again in the same stature wherein he died, it is not an opinion that
requires much opposition.

Whether that women shall retain their proper sex in the resurrection CHAP.
17.
THere are some, who out of these words of Saint Paul, Till we all meet
together in the unity of faith and knowledge of the Son of GOD, unto a
perfect man Ephesians. 4
and unto the measure of the age of the fullness of JESUS CHRIST, would prove
that no woman shall retain her sex in the resurrection, but all shall become
men: for GOD (say they) made man only of earth, and woman of man. But I am
rather of their mind that hold a resurrection in both sexes. For there shall
be none of that lust, which caused man's confusion. For our first parents before
their fall, were both naked, and were not ashamed. So at the later day, the
sin shall be taken away, and yet nature still preserved. The sex in woman is
no corruption, it is natural, and as then shall be free both from childbirth,
nor shall the female parts be any more powerful to stir up the lusts of the
beholders (for all lust shall then be extinguished) but praise and glory shall be
be given to GOD for creating what was not, and for freeing that from
corruption which he had created. For, In the beginning when a rib was taken
from Adam being a sleep, to make E^e, this was a plain prophecy (a) of Christ
and the Church. Adams sleep was CHRIST'S death, from whose side being opened
with a spear as he hung upon the cross, came blood and water, the two
Sacraments whereby the church is built up. For the word of the text is not
formauit, nor finxit, but Aedific^it eam in mulierem he built her up into a
woman. So the Apostle calls ^ph. 4
the church, the aedification of the body of CHRIST. The ^man therefore was
GODS creature as well as man: but made of man, (b) for unity sake. And in the
manner thereof was a plain figure of Christ and his Church. He therefore that
made both sexes will raise them both to life. And JESUS himself, being
questioned by the Sadduces, that deny the resurrection, which of the seven
brethren should have her to wife at the resurrection whom they had all had
before, answered them saying, Ye are deceived, not knowing the Scriptures nor
Mat. 22
the power of GOD. And whereas he might have said (if it had been so) she
whom you inquire of shall be a man at that day, and not a woman, he said no such
matter, but only this, In the resurrection they neither marry wives nor wives,
are bestowed in marriage, but are as the Angels of GOD in Heaven. That is,
they are like them in felicity, not in flesh: nor in their resurrection, which
the Angels need not, because they cannot die. So that CHRIST does not deny
that there shall be women at the resurrection, but only marriage: whereas if
there should have been none of the female sex, he might have answered the
Sadduces more easily by saving so: but he affirmed that there should be both
sexes, in these words; They neither marry wives, that is, men do not, nor
wives are bestowed in marriage, that is, women are not. So that there shall be
there both such as use to marry, and such as use to be married here in this
world.

L. VIVES.
PRophecy (a) of Christ] Ephesians. 5. (b) For unity sake] That their concord might
be the more, the one knowing that he brought forth the other, and the other
that she came of him. So should man and wife think themselves but one thing,
nothing should divide them, and this is the preservation of peace in their
family.

Of CHRIST, the perfect man, and the Church, his body, and fullness. CHAP. 18.
NOw touching Saint Paul's words, Till we all meet together etc. unto a
perfect man, were to observe the circumstances of the whole speech, which is
this. He that descended* is even the same that ascended, far above all
heavens that he might fill all things. He therefore gave some to be
Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Ephesians. 4
Evangelists, and some Pastors and teachers, for the gathering together of the
Saints, and for the work of their ministry and for the edification of the
body of CHRIST, till we all meet together in the unity of faith and knowledge
of the Son of GOD, unto a perfect man and unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of CHRIST: that we may henceforth be no more childeren, wavering and
carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the deceit of men, and with
craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

But let us follow the truth in love, and in althings grow up into him,
which is the head, that is, CHRIST, by whom all the body being coupled and
knit together by every joint, for the furniture thereof according to the
effectual power which is in the measure of every part, receives increase of
the body unto the edifying of it self in love. Behold here the perfect man,
head and body, consisting of all members; which shall be complete in due time.
But as yet the body increases daily in members, as the church enlarges, to
which it is said, ye are the body of CHRIST, and members for your part: and
again; for his bodies sake, which is 1 Cor (...) (...). 1 Ephesians. 4
the Church: and in another place: For we being many, are one bread, and one
body. Of the edification whereof you hear what Saint Paul says here: for the
gathering together of the Saints, and for the work of the ministry, and for
the edification of the body of CHRIST. And then he adds that which all this
concerns: Till we all meet together etc. unto the measure of the age of the
fullness of Christ. Which measure, unto what body it pertains, he shows,
saying, Let us in all things grow up into him which is the head, that is
CHRIST, by whom all the body etc.

So that both the measure of the whole body, and of each part therein, is this
measure of fullness whereof the Apostle speaks here, and also elsewhere,
saying of Christ, He has given him to be the head over all the Church which
is his body, his fullness, who fills all in all. But if this belong to the
form of the resurrection, why may we not imagine woman to be included by man,
as in that place, Blessed is the man that fears the LORD, giueh the same
blessing also to such women as fear him.

That our bodies in the resurrection shall have no imperfection at all,
whatsoever they have had during this life, but shall be perfect both in
quantity and quality. CHAP. 19.
NOw what shall I say concerning man's hair, and nails? understand but that
then no part of body shall perish, yet so as no deformity shall abide, and it
includes, that such parts as do procure those deformities shall be resident
only in the whole lump, not upon any part where they may offend the eye. As
for example, make a pot of clay; mar it, and make it again: it is not
necessary that the clay which was in the handle before should be in the handle
now again, and so of the bottom and the parts: suffices that it is the same
clay it was before.

Wherefore the cut hair, and nails, shall not return to deforme their
places, yet shall they not perrish (if they return) but have their congruent
places in the same flesh from whence they had their being. Although that our
Saviors words may rather be understood of the number of our hairs, then the
length, whereupon he says elsewhere, All the hairs of your head are
numbered. Luc. 12
I say not this to imply that any essential part of the body shall perish, but
that which arises out of deformity, and shows the wretched estate of
mortality, shall so return that the substance shall be there, and the
deformity gone. For if a statuary having for some purpose made a deformed
statue, can mold, or cast it new and comely, with the same substance of matter,
and yet without all the former miss-shapednesse; neither cutting away any of
the exorbitant parts that deformed the whole, no^ using any other means but
only the new casting of his metal, or molding of his matter; what shall we
think of the Almighty Molder of the whole world? Cannot he then take away
men's deformities of body, common or extraordinary (being only notes of our
present misery, and far excluded from our future bliss) as well as a common
statuary can reform a misshapen statue of stone, wood, clay or metal?
Wherefore the fat, or the lean need never fear to be such hereafter, as
if they could choose, they would not be now.

For all bodily beauty, (a) is a good congruence in the members, joined with a
pleasing color. And where that is not, there is euer-more dislike, either by
reason of superfluity, or defect. Wherefore there shall be no cause of dislike
through incongruence of parts, where the deformed ones are reformed, the
defects supplied, and the excesses fitly proportioned. And for color, how
glorious will it be! The just shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of
their Father. And this luster was rather hidden from the Apostles eyes at
CHRIST'S resurrection, then wanting in his body. For man's weak eyes could not
have endured it, and CHRIST was rather to make them to know him then to show
them his glory, as he manifested by letting them touch his wounds, by eating,
and drinking with them, which he did not for any need of meat or sustenance,
but because he had power to do it. And when a things is present thus, and not
seen, with other things that are present and seen (as this glory was,
unseen, being with his person, which was seen) this in greek, is called
(...), the Latins translate it in Genesis, caecitas, blindness. The Sodomites
were smitten with it, when they sought Lots door, and Genesis 19
could not find it. But if it had been direct blindness, they would rather
have sought for guides to lead them home, then for this door which they could
not find.

L. VIVES.
BEauty (a) is] So says Tully Tuse. quest. 3. who makes beauty of two sorts:
one, wherein dignity excels, another wherein comeliness. Aristotle gives
every part of man's life a several beauty. (...). 1.

That every man's body, how ever dispersed here, shall be restored him,
perfect, at the Resurrection. CHAP. 20.
Our love unto the Martyrs is of that nature that we desire to behold the
scarres of their wounds (borne for the name of Christ) even in their
glorification, and perhaps so we shall. For they will not deforme, but grace
them as then, and give out a luster of their virtue, not bodily, albeit in the
body. But if any of them lost any member for his Savior, surely he shall not
want that in the resurrection, for unto such was it said, not an hair of your
heads shall Luck. 21
perish.

But if CHRIST'S pleasure be to make their scarres apparent in the world to
come, then shall those members also that were cut off have visible marks in
the place whence they were cut, and where they are reioyned, for although all
their miserable hurts shall not be their visible, yet their shall be some, which
nevertheless shall be no more called hurts, but honors. And far be it from
us to think (a) GODS power insufficient to recollect and unite every atome of
the body, were it burnt, or torn by beasts, or fallen to dust, or dissolved
into moisture, or exhaled into air. GOD forbid that any corner of nature
(though it may be unknown to us) should lie hid from the eye and power of the
almighty. (b) Tully (their great author) going about to define GOD, as well as
he could; affirmed him to be. Men's soluta and libera, secreta ab omni
concretione mortali, omnia sentiens and mouens ispaque motu predita sempiterno.
A free and unbounded intellect, separate from all mortal composition, moving
and knowing althings and moving eternally in himself. This he found in the
great Philosophers. Now then to come up to them, what can lie hid from him that
knows all? what can avoid his power that moves all? And now may we
answer the doubt that seems most difficult: that is, whose flesh shall that
man's be at the resurrection, which another man eats? ^c) Ancient stories,
and late experience have lamentably informed us, that this has often come to
pass that one man has eaten another: in which case none will say that all the
flesh went quite through the body, and none was turned into nutriment: the
meager places becoming by this only meat, more full and fleshy do prove
the contarry. Now then my premises shall serve to resolve this Ambiguity.

The flesh of the famished man that hunger consumed, is exhaled into air, and
thence (as we said before) the Creator can fetch it again. This flesh
therefore of the man that was eaten, shall return to the first owner, of whom
the famished man does but as it were borrow it, and so must repay it again.
And that of his own which famine dried up into air, shall be recollected, and
restored into some convenient place of his body, which were it so consumed that
no part thereof remained in nature, yet GOD could fetch it again at an
instant, and when he would himself. But seeing that the very heirs of our
head are secured us, it were absurd to imagine that famine should have the power
to deprive us of so much of our flesh.

These things being duly considered, this is the sum of all, that in the
Resurrection every man shall arise with the same body that he had, or should
have had in his fullest growth, in all comeliness, and without deformity of
any the least member. To preserve with comeliness, if some what be taken from
any vnshapely part, and decently disposed of amongst the rest (that it be not
lost, and withal, that the congruence be observed) we may without absurdity
believe that there may be some addition unto the stature of the body; the
inconvenience that was visible in one part, being inuisibly distributed (and
so annihilated) amongst the rest. If any one avow precisely that every man
shall arise in the proper stature of his growth which he had when he died,
we do not oppose it, so that he grant unto an utter abolishing of all
deformity, dullness and corruptibility of the said form and stature, as things
that bee^it not that Kingdom, wherein the sons of promise shall be ^uall to
the Angels of GOD, if not in their bodies, nor ages, yet in absolut^
perfection and beatitude.

L. VIVES.
TO think (a) Gods power] The Governor of a family (if he be wise and
diligent) knows at an instant where to fetch any think in his house, be his
rooms never so large, and many; and shall we think that GOD cannot do the
like in the world, unto whose wisdom it is but a very casket? (b) Tully] Tusc.
quaest. lib. 1. (c) Ancient stories] Many Cities in strait sieges have been
driven to this. There is also a people, called Anthropophagi, or Caniballs,
that live upon man's flesh.

What new and spiritual bodies shall be given unto the Saints. CHAP. 21.
EVery part therefore of the bodies, peryshing either in death, or after it, in
the grave, or wheresoever, shall be restored, renewed, and of a natural, and
corruptible body, it shall become immortal, spiritual and incorruptible. Be
it all made into powder, and dust, by chance, or cruelty, or dissolved into
air, or water, so that no part remain vndispersed, yet shall it not, yet can
it not, be kept hidden from the omnipotency of the Creator, who will not have
one hair of the head to perish. Thus shall the spiritual flesh become subject
to the spirit, yet shall it be flesh still, as the carnal spirit before was
subject to the flesh, and yet a spirit still.

A proof of which, we have in the deformity of our penal estate. For they
were carnal in respect of the spirit indeed, (not merely of the flesh) to
whom Saint Paul said, I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual men, but
as unto carnal. So man in this life is called spiritual, though he Cor. 3
be carnal still, and have a law in his members, rebelling against the law
of his mind. But he shall be spiritual in body, when he rises again, ^o
that it is so^ a ^urall body, but raised a spiritual body, as the said
Apostle says. But of the measure of this spiritual grace, what and how great
Cor. 15
it shall be in the body, I fear to determine: for it were rashness to go a^
it.

But seeing we may not conceal the joy of our hope for the glorifying of GOD,
and seeing that it was said from the very bowels of divine rapture, Oh LORD, I
have loved the habitation of thine house! we may by GODS help, Psalm 26, 8
make a conjecture from the goods imparted to us in this transitory life, how
great the glories shall be that we shall receive in the other, which as yet we
neither have tried, nor can any way truly describe. I omit man's estate before
his fall; our first parents happiness in the fertyle Paradise, which was so
short, that their progeny had no taste of it. Who is he that can express the
boundless mercies of GOD shown unto mankind, even in this life that we all
try, and wherein we suffer temptations, or rather a continual temptation (be
we never so vigilant) all the time that we enjoy it?

Of man's miseries, drawn upon him by his first parents, and taken away from
him only by CHRIST'S merits, and gracious goodness. CHAP. 22.
COncerning man's first original, our present life (if such a miserable estate
be to be called a life) does sufficiently prove that all his progeny was
condemned in him. What else does that horred gulf of ignorance confirm,
whence all error has birth, and wherein all the sons of Adam are so deeply
drenshed, that none can be freed without toil, fear and sorrow? what else
does our love of vanities affirm, whence there arises such a tempest of
cares, sorrows, repinings, fears, mad exultations, discords, altercations,
wars, treasons, furies, hates, deceipts, flatteries, thefts, rapines,
periuries, pride, ambition, envy, murder, parricide, cruelty, villainy, luxury,
impudence, unchasteness, fornications, adulteries, incests, several sorts of
sins against nature, (beastly even to be named) sacrilege, heresy,
blasphemy, oppression, calumnies, circumuentions, cousnages, false witnesses,
false judgments, violence, robberies, and such like, out of my rememberance to
reckon, but not excluded from the life of man? All these evils are belonging
to man, and arise out of the root of that error and perverse affection which
every Son of Adam brings into the world with him. For who knows not in what
a mist of ignorance (as we see in infantes) and with what a crew of vain
desires (as we see in boys) all mankind enters this world? so that (a)
might he be left unto his own election, he would fall into most of the
fore-sayd mischiues.

But the hand of GOD bearing a rain upon our condemned souls, and pouring our
his mercies upon us (not shutting them up in displeasure) law, and
instruction were revealed unto the capacity of man, to awake us out of those
lethargies of ignorance, and to withstand those former incursions, which
notwithstanding is not done without great toil and trouble. For what imply
those fears whereby we keep little children in order? what do teachers,
rods, fer^laes, thongs, and such like, but confirm this? And that discipline
of the scriptures that says that our sons must be beaten on the sides
whilst they are childeren, least they wax stubborn, and either past, or very
near past reformation? What is the end of all these, but to abolish ignorance,
and to bridle corruption both which we come wrapped into the world withal?
what is our labor to remember things, our labor to learn, and our ignorance
without this labor; our agility got by toil, and our dullness if we neglect
it? does not all declare the promptness of our nature (in it self) unto all
viciousness, and the care that must be had in reclayming it? Sloth,
dullness, and negligence, are all vices that avoid labor, and yet labor it
self is but a profitable pain.

But to omit the pains that enforce childeren tolearne the (scarcely useful)
books that please their parents* how huge a band of pains attend the firmer
state of man, and be not peculiarly inflicted on the wicked, but generally
impendent over us all, through our common estate in misery? who can recount
them, who can conceive them? What fears, what calamities ^doth the loss of
childeren, of goods, or of credit, the false dealing of others, false suspect,
open violence, and all other mischieues inflicted by others, heap upon the
heart of man? being generally accompanied with poverty, inprisonment, bands,
banishments, tortures, loss of limbs or senses, prostitution to beastly lust,
and other such horred events? So are we afflicted on the other side with
chances ab externo, with cold, heat, storms, shoures, deluges, lightning,
thunder, earthquakes, falls of houses, fury of beasts, poisons of airs,
waters, plants, and beasts of a thousand forts, stinging of serpents, biting of
mad dogs, a strange accident, wherein a beast most sociable and familiar
with man, shall sometimes become more to be feared then a Lion or a Dragon,
infecting him whom he biteth, with such a furious madness, that he is to be
feared of his family worse then any wild beast? what misery do Nauigators now
and then endure? or travelers by land? what man can walk any where free from
sudden accidents? (b) One coming home from the court, (being sound enough of
his feet) fell down, broke his leg, and died of* (...), who would have
thought this that had seen him sitting in the court? Heli the Priest, fell
from his chair where he ^ate and brake his neck. What fears are husbandmen,
yea all men subject unto, that the fruits should be hurt by the heavens, or
earth, or caterpillars, or locusts or such other pernicious things? yet when
they have gathered them and laid them up, they are secured: notwithstanding I
have known granaries full of (...) borne quite away with an inundation.

Who can be secured by his own innocence against the innumerable incursions
of the devils, when as we see that they do sometimes afflict little
baptized infants (who are as innocent as can be) and (by the permission of
GOD) even upon their harmless bodies, do show the miseries of this life, and
excite us all to labor for the bliss of the other? Besides, man's body we see
how subject it is to (c) diseases, more then physic can either cure or
comprehend. And in most of these, we see how offensive the very medicines are
that cure them, nay even our very meat we eat, during the time of the
maladies domination. Has not extremity of heat made man to drink his own
urine, and others too? Has not hunger enforced man to eat man, and to kill
one another to make meat of; yea even the mother to massacre and deuowre her
own child? Nay is not our very (d) sleep (which we term rest) sometimes
so fraught with disquiet, that it disturbes the soul, and all her powers at
once, by obiecting such horred terrors to the fantasy, and with such an
expression, that she cannot discern them from true terrors? This is ordinary
in some diseases: besides that the deceiptfull fiends sometimes will* so
delude the eye of a sound man with such apparitions, that although they make no
f^rther impression into him, yet they persuade the sense that they are truly
so as they seem, and the devils desire is ever to deceive. From all these
miserable engagements, (representing a kind of direct hell) we are not freed
but by the grace of JESUS CHRIST, For this is his name; JESUS IS A SAVIOVR, and
he it is that will save us from a worse life, or rather a perpetual death,
after this life: for although we have many and great comforts by the Saints in
this life, yet the benefits hereof are not given at every ones request, least
we should apply our faith unto those transitory respects, whereas it rather
concerns the purchase of a life which shall be absolutely free from all
inconvenience. And the more faithful that one is in this life, the greater
confirmation has he from grace, to endure those miseries without faynting,
whereunto the Paynin authors refer their true Philosophy; which their Gods,
(e) as Tully says, revealed unto some few of them (f) There was never (says
he) nor could there be a greater gift given unto man, then this. Thus our
adversaries are feign to confess that true Philosophy is a divine gift: which
being (as they confess) the only help against our humane miseries, and
coming from above, hence then it appears that all mankind was condemned to
suffer miseries. But as they confess that this help was the greatest gift
that GOD ever gave, so do we avow and believe, that it was given by no other
God but he to whom even the worshippers of many gods, give the pre-eminence.

L. VIVES.
MIght (a) he be left] There was never wild beast more unruly then man would
be, if education and discipline did not repress him: he would make all his
reason serve to compass his apperites, and become as brutish and fond as the
very brutest beast of all (b) One comming] Of such accidents as this read Pliny
lib. 7. cap. 4. and Valor. Max. lib. 9. (c) Diseases] As the pox, (call them
French, Neapolitane, Spanish, or what you will, they are indeed, Indian, and
came from thence hither. Childeren are borne with them, in the Spanish Indies.)
or the pestilent sweat that kills so quickly: the ancient writers never
mention these. Such another strange disease a Nobleman lay sick of at Bruges,
when I was there, the Emperor Charles being as then in the town. John Martin
Poblatio told me that he had never read of the like, and yet I will avouch
his theory in physic so exact, that either the ancient physicians never wrote
of it, or if they did, their books are lost and perished. (d) Sleepe] So Dido
complayneth to her sister of her frightfull dreams. Uirg. Aeneid. (e) As Tully
saith] But where, I cannot find, unless it be in his 5. de finibus. (f)
There was neuer] The words of Plato in his Timaeus translated by Tully toward
the end of the dialogue. Tully ^ath it also in his fifth de Legib.

Of accidents, severed from the common estate of man, and peculiar only to the
just and righteous. CHAP. 23.
BEsides those calamities that lie generally upon all, the righteous have a
peculiar labor, to resist vice, and be continually in combat with dangerous
temptations. The flesh is sometimes furious, sometimes remiss, but always
rebellious against the spirit, and the spirit has the same sorts of conflict
against the flesh: so that we cannot do as we would, or expel all
concupiscence, but we strive (by the help of GOD) to suppress it by not
consenting, and to curb it as well as we can, by a continual vigilance: least
we should be deceived by likelyhoods, or suttleties, or involued in errors,
least we should take good for evil and evil for good, least fear should
hold us from what we should do, and desire entice to us do what we should
not: least the sun should set upon our anger: least enmity should make us
return mischief for mischief; least ingratitude should make us forget our
benefactors; least evil reports should molest our good conscience; least our
rash suspect of others should deceive us, or others false suspect of us, deiect
us* least sin should bring our bodies to obey it: least our members should
be given up as weapons to sin: least our eye should follow our appetite:
least desire of revenge should draw us to inconvenience: least our sight or
our thought should stay too long upon a sinful delight: least we should give
willing ear to evil and indecent talk* least our lust should become our law:
and least that we our selves in this dangerous conflict should either hope to
win the victory by our own strength, or having gotten it, should give the
glory to our selves, and not to his grace of whom Saint Paul says: Thanks be
unto GOD, who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ: and
elsewhere: In all these things we are more then conqueror through him that 1.
Cor. 15 Romans 8. 37
loved us.

But yet we are to know this, that stand we never so strong against sin, or
subdue it never so much: yet as long as we are mortal, we have cause every
day to say, Forgive us our trespasses. But when we ascend into that Kingdom
where immortality dwells, we shall neither have wars wherein to fight, nor
trespasses to pray for, nor had not had any here below, if our natures had
kept the gifts of their first creation. And therefore these conflicts, wherein
we are endangered, and whence we desire (by a final victory) freedom, are
part of those miseries wherewith the life of man is continually molested.

Of the goods that GOD has bestowed upon this miserable life of ours. CHAP. 24.
NOw let us see what goods the Great Creator has bestowed in his mercy upon
this life of ours made miserable by his justice. The first was that blessing
before our Parents fall, Increase and multiply, fill the earth, etc. And this
he revoked not, for all that they sinned, but left the gift of fruitfulness
to their condemned offspring: nor could their crime abolish that power of the
(seede-producing) seed inherent, and as it were wouen up in the bodies of man
and woman: unto which nevertheless death was annexed, so that in one and the
same current (as it were) of mankind, ran both the evil merited by the
parent, and the good, bestowed by the creator. In which original evil, lies
sin, and punishment: and in which original good, lies propagation, and
conformation or information. But of those evils, the one whereof (sin) came
from our own audaciousnesse, and the other, (punishment) from the judgment of
GOD, we have said sufficient already.

This place is for the goods which GOD has given, and does still give to the
condemned state of man. In which condemnation of his GOD took not all from him
that he had given him, (for so he should have ceased to have had any being)
nor did he resign his power over him, when he gave him thrall to the Devil,
for the Devil himself is his thrall, he is cause of his subsistence, he that
is only and absolutely essential, and gives all things essence under him,
gave the Devil his being also.

Of these two goods therefore which we said that his Almighty goodness had
allowed our nature (how ever depraved, and cursed) he gave the first
(propagation) as a blessing in the beginning of his works from which he
rested the seventh day. The second, (conformation) he gives as yet, unto
every work which he as yet effects. For if he should but withold his
efficient power from the creatures of the earth, they could neither increase to
any further perfection, nor continue in the state wherein he should leave
them. So then GOD creating man, gave him a power to propagate others, and to
allow them a power of propagation also, yet no necessity, for that GOD can
deprive them of it, whom he pleases: but it was his gift unto the first
parents of mankind, and he having once given, has not taken it any more
away from all mankind.

But although sin did not abolish this propagation, yet it made it far
less then it had been if sin had not been. For man being in honor,
understood not, and so was compared unto beasts, begetting such like as
himself: yet has he Psalm. 49.
a little spark left him of that reason whereby he was like the image of GOD.
Now if this propagation wanted conformation, nature could keep no form nor
similitude in her several productions. For if man and woman had not had
copulation, and that GOD neuer-the-lesse would have filled the earth with men,
as he made Adam without generation of man or woman, so could he have made
all the rest. But man and woman coupling, cannot beget unless he create. For
as Saint Paul says in a spiritual sense, touching man's conformation in
righteousness: Neither is he that planteth, any thing, nor he that waters,
but GOD that gives the increase: so may we say here; Neither is 1. Cor. 3.
he that sows any thing, nor she that conceiueth, but GOD that gives the
form.

It is his daily work that the seed vnsoldeth it self out of a secret clew as
it were, and brings the potentiall forms into such actual decorum. It is he
that makes that strange combination of a nature incorporeall (the ruler) and a
nature corporeal (the subject) by which the whole becomes a living creature.
A work so admirable, that it is able to amaze the mind, and force praise to
the Creator from it, being observed not only in man, whose reason gives him
excellence above all other creatures, but even in the least fly that is, one
may behold this wondrous and stupendous combination. It is he that given man's
spirit an apprehension (which seems, together with reason, to lie dead in an
infant, until years bring it to use) where-by he has a power to conceive
knowledge, discipline, and all habites of truth and good quality, and by which
he may extract the understanding of all the virtues, of prudence, justice
fortitude, and temperance, to be thereby the better armed against viciousness
and incited to subdue them by the contemplation of that high and unchangeable
goodness: which height, although it do not attain unto, yet who can
sufficiently declare how great a good it is, and how wonderful a work of the
Highest, being considered in other respects? for besides the disciplines of
good behavior, and the ways to eternal happiness (which are called virtues)
and besides the grace of GOD which is in JESUS CHRIST, imparted only to the
sons of the promise, man's invention has brought forth so many and such rare
sciences, and arts (partly (a) necessary, and partly voluntary) that the
excellency of his capacity makes the rare goodness of his creation apparent,
even then when he goes about things that are either superfluous or
pernicious, and shows from what an excellent gift, he has those his
inventions and practices. What varieties has man found out in Buildings,
Attyres, Husbandry, Navigations, Sculpture, and Imagery? what perfection has
he shown in the shows of Theaters, in taming, killing, and catching wild
beasts? What millions of inventions has he against others, and for himself
in poisons, arms, engines, stratagems, and such like? What thousands of
medecines, for the health, of meats for the weasand, of means and figures to
persuade, of eloquent phrases to delight, of verses to disport, of musical
inventions and instruments? How excellent an invention is Geography,
Arithmetique, Astrology, and the rest? How large is the capacity of man, if
we should stand upon perticulars? Lastly, how cunningly, and with what
exquisite wit, have the Philosophers, and the Heretics defended their very
errors: it is strange to imagine? for here we speak of the nature of man's
soul in general, as man is mortal, without any reference to the tract of
truth, whereby he comes to the life eternal.

Now therefore seeing that the true and only GOD, that rules all in his
almighty power and justice, was the creator of this excellent essence
himself; doubtless man had never fallen into such misery, (which many shall
never be freed from, and some shall) if the sin of those that first incurred
it, had not been extremely malicious. Come now to the body: though it be
mortal as the beasts are, and more weaker then many of theirs are, yet mark
what great goodness, and providence is shown herein by GOD Almighty. Are not
all the sinews and members disposed in such fit places, and the whole body so
composed, as if one would say, Such an habitation is fittest for a spirit of
reason? You see the other creatures have a groueling posture, and look toward
earth, whereas man's upright form bids him continually respect the things in
heaven. The nimblenesse of his tongue and hand, in speaking, and writing, and
working in trades, what does it but declare for whose use they were made so?
Yet (excluding respect of work,) the very congruence, and parilitie of the
parts do so concur, that one cannot discern whether man's body were made
more for use, or for comeliness. For there is no part of use in man, that has
not the proper decorum, as we should better discern, if we knew the numbers
of the proportions wherein each part is combined to the other, which we may
perhaps come to learn by those that are apparent. As for the rest that are not
seen, as the courses of the veins, sinews, and arteries, and the secrets of
the spiritualls, we cannot come to know their numbers: for though some
butcherly Surgeons (b) (Anotamists they call them) have often cut up dead men,
(and live men sometimes) to learn the posture of man's inward parts, and which
way to make incisions, and to effect their cures; yet those members whereof I
speak, and whereof the (c) harmony and proportion of man's whole body does
consist, no man could ever find, or durst ever undertake to enquire, which if
they could be known, we should find more reason, and pleasing contemplation
in the forming of the interior parts, then we can observe or collect from
those that lie open to the eye. There are some parts of the body that concern
decorum only, and are of no use: such are the pappes on the breasts of men, and
the beard, which is no strengthening, but an ornament to the face, as the naked
chins of women (which being weaker, were other-wise to have this strengthening
also) do plainly declare. Now if there be no exterior part of man that is
useful, which is not also comely, and if there be also parts in man that are
comely and not useful, then GOD in the framing of man's body, had a greater
respect of dignity then of necessity. For necessity shall cease, the time shall
come when we shall do nothing but enjoy our (lustlesse) beauties, for which
we must especially glorify him, to whom the Psalm says; Thou have put on
praise, and comeliness. And then for the beauty and use of other creatures,
which God has set before the eyes of man (though as yet miserable, and amongst
miseries) what man is able to recount them? the universal gracefulness of the
heavens, the earth, and the sea, the brightness of the light in the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, the shades of the woods, the colors and smells of flowers,
the numbers of birds, and their varied hewes and songs, the many forms of
beasts and fishes, whereof the least are the rarest (for the fabrike of the Be
or Pismier is more admired then the Whales) and the strange alterations in the
color of the sea, (as being in several garments) now one green, then
another; now blew, and then purple? How pleasing a sight sometimes it is to see
it rough, and how more pleasing when it is calm? And O what a hand is that,
that gives so many meats to assuage hunger? so many tastes to those meats
(without help of Cook) and so many medecinall powers to those tastes? How
delightful is the days reciprocation with the night? the temperatenesse of
the air, and the works of nature in the barks of trees, and skins of
beasts? O who can draw the perticulars? How tedious should I be in every
peculiar of these few, that I have here as it were heaped together, if I
should stand upon them one by one? Yet are all these but solaces of man's
miseries, no way pertinent to his glories.

What are they then that his bliss shall give him, if that his misery have
such blessings as these? What will GOD give them whom he has predestined
unto life, having given such great things even to them whom he has
predestined unto death? What will he give them in his kingdom, for whom
he sent his only son to suffer all injuries, even to death, upon earth?
Whereupon Saint Paul says unto them; He who spared not his own son, but
gave him Romans 8.
for us all unto death, how shall he not with Him give us all things also?
When this promise is fulfilled, O what shall we be then? How glorious shall
the soul of man be, without all stain and sin, that can either subdue or
oppose it, or against which it need to contend; perfect in all virtue, and
enthroned in all perfection of peace?

How great, how delightful, how true, shall our knowledge of all things be
there, without all error, without all labor, where we shall drink at the
spring head of GODS sapience, without all difficulty, and in all felicity? How
perfect shall our bodies be, being wholly subject unto their spirits, and
there-by sufficiently quickened, and nourished without any other sustenance?
for they shall now be no more natural, but spiritual, they shall have the
substance of ^sh, quite exempt from all fleshly corruption.

L. VIVES.
PArtly (a) necessary] Such as husbandry, the Art of Spinning, weauing, and
such as man cannot live without. (b) Anatomists] that is, cutters up; of (...),
a section, incision, or cutting. (c) Harmony] The congruence, connection, and
concurrence of any thing may be called so: it comes of (...), to adapt, or
compose a thing proportionably.

Of the obstinacy of some few in denying the resurrection, which the whole
world believes, as it was foretold. CHAP. 25.
BUT as touching the goods of the mind, which the blessed shall enjoy after
this life, the Philosophers and we are both of one mind. Our difference is
concerning the resurrection which they deny with all the power they have: but
the increase of the believers has left us but a few opposers; CHRIST, (that
disprooued the obstinate even in his proper body) gathering all unto his faith,
learned and unlearned, wise and simple. The world believed GODS promise in
this; who promised also that it should believe this. It was (a) not Peter's
magic that wrought it, but it was that GOD, of whom (as I have said often,
and as Porphyry confesses from their own Oracles) all their Gods do stand in
awe and dread. Porphyry calls him GOD the Father, and King of GODS: But GOD
forbid that we should believe his promises as they do, that will not believe
what he had promised, that the world should believe. For why should we not
rather believe as the world does, and as it was prophesied it should, and leave
them to their own idle talk that will not believe this that the world was
promised to believe? for if they say we must take it in another sense; because
they will not do that GOD whom they have commended, so much injury, as to say
his Scriptures are idle things; Yet surely they iniure him as much, or more, in
saying they must be understood other-wise then the world understands them,
which is, as GOD both promised and performed. Why cannot GOD raise the flesh
unto eternal life? Is it a work unworthy of God? Touching his omnipotency,
whereby he works so many wonders, I have said enough already. If they would
show me a thing which he cannot do: I will tell them he cannot lie. Let us
therefore believe only what he can do, and not believe what he cannot. If
they do not then believe that he can lie, let them believe that he will do
what he promises. And let them believe as the world believes, which (he
promised) should believe, and whose belief he both produced, and praised. And
how prove they the work of the resurrection any way unworthy of GOD? There
shall be no corruption there-in, and that is all the evil that can be-fall the
body. Of the elementary orders, we have spoken already: as also of the
possibility of the swift motion of the incorruptible body. Of man's bodily
health in this world, and the weakness of it in respect of immortality, I
think our thirteenth book contains what will satisfy. Let such as have not
read this book, or will not rehearse what they have read, read the passages of
this present volume already recorded.

L. VIVES.
NOt (a) Peter's Magick] He touches at Porphyryes slandering of Saint Peter
with sorcery and Magical enchantments: as you may read in the end of the
eighteenth book.

That Porphyryes opinion that the blessed souls should have no bodiss, is
confuted by Plato himself, who says that the Creator promised the inferior
deities, that they should never loose there bodies. CHAP. 26.
YEa but (says Porphyry) a blessed soul must have no body: so that the bodies
incorruptibility is nothing worth, if the soul cannot be blessed unless it
want a body. But hereof we have sufficiently argued in the thirteenth book:
only I will rehearse but one only thing. If this were true, then Plato their
great Master must go reform his books, and say that the GODS must go and
leave their bodies (for he says they all have celestial bodies) that is,
they must dye, ere they can be blessed: how-so-euer that he has made them,
promised them immortality, and an eternal dwelling in their bodies, to assure
them of their bliss: and this should come from his power-full will, not from
their natures. The same Plato in the same place, ouer-throwes their reason that
say there shall be no resurrection, because it is impossible for GOD the
uncreated maker of the other Gods, promising them eternity, says plainly that
he will do a thing which is impossible: for thus (quoth Plato) he said unto
them. Because you are created, you cannot but he mortal and dissoluble: yet
shall you never dye, nor be dissolved; fate shall not control my will, which
is a greater bond for your perpetuity, then all those where-by you are
composed. No man that hears this, (be he never so doltish, so he be not
deaf) will make any question that this was an impossibility which Platoes
Creator promised the deities which he had made. For saying, You cannot be
eternal, yet by my will you shall be eternal, what is it but to say, my will
shall make you a thing impossible? He therefore that (as Plato says) did
promise to effect this impossibility, will also raise the flesh in an
incorruptible, spiritual and immortal quality. Why do they now cry out that
that is impossible which GOD has promised, which the world has believed, and
which it was promised it should believe, seeing that Plato himself is of our
mind, and says that GOD can work impossibilities? Therefore it must not be
the want of a body, but the possession of one utterly incorruptible, that the
soul shall be blessed in. And what such body shall be so fit for their joy,
as that wherein (whilst it was corruptible) they endured such woe? They shall
not then be plagued with that desire that Virgil relates out of Plato, saying:
Rursus and incipiunt in corpora velle reuerti.
Now began they wish to live on earth again.
I mean, when they have their bodies that they desired, they shall no more
desire any bodies: but shall possess those for ever, without being ever
severed from them so much as one moment.

Contrarieties between Plato and Porphyry, wherein if either should yield unto
other, both should find out the truth. CHAP. 27.
PLato and Porphyry held diverse opinions, which if they could have come to
reconcile, they might perhaps have proved Christians. Plato said, That the
soul could not be always without a body: but that the souls of the wisest,
at length should return into bodies again. Porphyry said, That when the
purged soul ascends to the father, it returns no more to the infection of
this world. Now if Plato had yielded unto Porphyry, that the souls return
should be only into an human body: and Porphyry unto Plato, that the soul
should never return unto the miseries of a corruptible body, if both of them
jointly had held both these positions, I think it would have followed, both
that the souls should return into bodies, and also into such bodies as were
befitting them for eternal felicity. For Plato says, The holy souls shall
return to human bodies: and Porphyry says; The holy souls shall not
return to the evils of this world. Let Porphyry therefore say with Plato,
They shall return unto bodies: and Plato with Porphyry, they shall not return
unto evils: And then they shall-both say; They shall return unto such bodies
as shall not molest them with any evils, namely those wherein GOD has
promised that the blessed souls should have their eternal dwellings. For this
I think they would both grant us; that if they confessed a return of the
souls of the just into immortal bodies, it should be into those wherein they
suffered the miseries of this world, and wherein they served GOD so faithfully,
that they obtained an everlasting delivery from all future calamities.

What either Plato, Labeo, or Varro might have auailed to the true faith of the
resurrection, if there had been an Harmony in their opinions. CHAP. 28.
SOme of us liking and loving Plato (a) for a certain eloquent and excellent
kind of speaking: and because his opinion has been true in some things, say,
that he thought some thing like unto that which we do, concerning the
Resurrection of the (b) dead. Which thing Tully so touches in lib. de rep.
that he affirms that he rather spoke in sport, than that he had any intent
to relate it, as a matter of truth. For (c) he declares a man revived and
related some things agreeable to Platoes disputations. (d) Labeo also says,
that there were two which dyed both in one day, and that they met together in a
crosse-way, and that atferward they were commanded to return again to their
bodies, and then that they decreed to live in perpetual love together, and
that it was so until they dyed afterward. But these authors have declared,
that they had such a resurrection of body, as they have had, whom truly we
have known to have risen again, and to have been restored to this life: but
they do not declare it in that manner, that they should not dye again. Yet
Marcus Varro records a more strange, admirable, and wonderful matter, in his
books which he wrote of a Nation of the people of Rome. I have thought good
to set down his own words. Certain Genethliaci (wisards) Have written,
(says he) that there is a regeneration, Genethliaci.
or second birth in men to be borne again, which the Greeks call (f) (...)
They have written, that it is brought to pass, and effected in the space of
four hundred and forty years: so that the same body and soul which had been
foretime knit together, should return again into the same conjunction and
union they had before. Truly this Varro, or those Genethliaci (I know not who
they are For he has related their opinion concealing their names) have said
something, which although it be false, because the souls returning into the
bodies, which they have before managed, will never after forsake them:
not-withstanding it serves to stop the mouth of those babblers, and to
overthrow the strong hold of many arguments of that impossibility. For they do
not think it an impossible thing which have thought these things, that dead
bodies resolved into air, dust, ashes, humors, bodies of devouring beasts, or
of men them selves, should return again to that they have been. Wherefore
let Plato, and Porphyry, or such rather, as do affect them and are now living,
if they accord with us, that holy souls shall return to their bodies, as
Plato says, but not to return to any eiuls as Porphyrie says, that that
sequel may follow, which our Christian faith does declare, to wit, that they
shall receive such bodies, as they shall live happily in them eternally without
any evil: Let them (I say) assume and take this also from Varro, that they
return to the same bodies in which they had been before time, and then there
shall be a sweet harmony between them, concerning the resurrection of the
flesh eternally.

L. VIVES.
FOr (a) certain.] Three things moved not only Greece, but the whole world to
applaud Plato, to wit, integrity of life, sanctity of precepts, and eloquence.
The (b) dead Eusebius lib. 11. thinks that Plato learned the alteration of the
world, the resurrection and the judgment of the damned, out of the books of
Moses (...) Plato relates that all earthly things shall perish, a cercaine
space of time being expired, and that the frame of the world shall be moved
and shaken with wonderful and strange ^otions, not without a great
destruction, and overthrow of all living creatures: and then that a little time
after, it shall rest and be at quiet by the assistance of the highest God, who
shall receive the government of it, that it may not fall and perish, endowing
it with an everlasting flourishing estate, and with immortality. (c) For he
declareth] Herus Pamphilius, who dyed in battle (Plato in fine in lib. de rep)
writes yt he was restored to life the tenth day after his death. Cicero says,
macrob. lib. 1.) may Herus Pamphilius.
be grieved that this fable was scoffed at, although of the unlearned, knowing
it well enough himself, nevertheless avoiding the scandal of a foolish
reprehension, he had rather tell it that he was raized, than that he revived.
(d) Labeo] Plin, lib. 7. sets down some examples of them which being
carried forth to their grave revived again, and Plutarch in (...). de anima
relates that one Enarchus returned to life again after he died, who said
that his soul did Enarchus.
depart indeed out of his body, but by the commandment of Pluto it was
restored to his body again, those hellish spirits being grievously punished
by their Prince, who commanded to bring one Nicandas a tanner, and a wrastler,
forgetting their errant and foulie mistaking the man went to Enarchus in stead
of Nicandas who dyed within a little while after. (e) Genethliaci] They are
mathematical petty soothsayers, or fortune tellers, which by the day of
Nicandas.
Nativity presage what shall happen in the whole course of man's life. Gellius
has the Chaldaeans and the Genethliaci both in one place lib. 14. Against them
(says he) who name themselves Caldaeans, or Genethliaci, and profess to
prognosticate future things by the motion and posture of the stars. (f) (...)]
Regeneration or a second birth, Lactant. also lib. 7. rehearses these words
of Chrysippus the stoicke out of his book de prouidentia, by which he
confirms a return after death. (...), etc. And we (says he) certain
reuolutions of time being complet and finished, after our death, shall be
restored to the same figure and shape which we have now.

Of the quality of the vision, with which the Saints shall see GOD in the
world to come. CHAP. 29.
NOw let us see what the Saints shall do in their immortal and spiritual
bodies, their flesh living now no more carnally but spiritually: so far forth
as the Lord shall vouchsafe to enable us. And truly what manner of action or (a)
rather rest and quietness it shall be, if I say the truth, I know not. For I
have never seen it by the senses of the body. But if I shall say I have seen
it by the mind, that is by the understanding, (alas) how great, or what is
our understanding in comparison of that exceeding excellency? For there is,
the peace of God which Phillip, 4.
passes all understanding, as the Apostle says, what understanding, but ours,
or peradventure of all the holy Angels? For it does not pass the understanding
of God. If therefore the Saints shall live in the peace of GOD, without doubt
they shall live in that peace, Which passes all understanding. Now there is no
doubt, but that it passes our understanding. But if it also pass the
understanding of Angels, for he seems not to except them when he says, All
understanding; then according to this saying we ought to understand that we
are not able, nor any Angels to know that peace wherewith GOD himself is
pacified, in such sort as GOD knows it. But we being made partakers of his
peace, according to the measure of our capacity, shall obtain a most excellent
peace in us, and amongst us, and with him, according to the quantity of our
excellency: In this manner the holy Angels according to their measure do know
the same: but men now do know it in a far lower degree, although they excel
in acuity of understanding.

We must consider what a great man did say, We know in part, and we prophecy
in part, until that come which is perfect. And we see now in a glass in a
dark 1 Cor, 13.
speaking: but then we shall see him face to face. So do the holy Angels now
see which are called also our Angels, because we being delivered from the
power of darkness, and translated to the kingdom of God, having received the
pledge of the Spirit, have already begun to pertain to them, with whom we
shall enjoy that most holy and pleasant City of God, of which we have
already written so many books. So therefore the Angels are ours, which are the
Angels of God, even as the Christ of God, is our Christ. They are the Angels
of GOD, because they have not forsaken God: they are ours, because they have
begun to account Math, 22.
us their Citizens. For the Lord Jesus has said, Take heed you do not
despise one Math, 18. 10.
of these little ones: For I say unto you, that their Angels do always
behold the face of my father, which is in heaven. As therefore they do see,
so also we shall see, but as yet we do not see so. Wherefore the Apostle
says that which I have spoken a little before. We see now in a glass in a
dark speaking: but then we shall see him face to face. Therefore that vision is
kept for us being the reward of faith, of which also the Apostle John speaking
says; When he shall appear, we shall be like unto him, because we shall
see him as he is. 1. John. 3.


But we must understand by the face of GOD, his manifestation, and not to be
any such member, as we have in the body, and do call it by that name.
Wherefore when it is demanded of us, what the Saints shall do in that
spiritual body, I do not say, that I see now, but I say, that I believe:
according to that which I read in the Psalm. I believed, and therefore I
spoke. I say Psalm. 115
therefore, that they shall see GOD in the body, but whether by the same
manner, as we now see by the body, the Sun, Moon, Stars, Sea and Earth,
it is no small question.

It is a hard thing to say, that then the Saints shall have such bodies, that
they cannot shut and open their eyes, when they will. But it is more hard to
say, that who-so-euer shall shut their eyes there, shall not see GOD. For if
the Prophet Heliseus absent in body, saw his servant Giezi receiving the gifts
which Naaman gave unto him, whom the aforesaid Prophet had 4, King. 5.
cleansed from the deformitye of his leprosy, which the wicked servant thought
he had done secretly, his master not seeing him: how much more shall the
Saints in that spiritual body see all things, not only if they shut their
eyes, but also from whence they are absent in body? For then shall that be
perfect of which the Apostle speaking, says, We know in part, and Prophecy
in part: but when that shall come which is perfect, that which is in part,
shall be done away.

Afterward that he might declare by some similitude, how much this life does
differ from that which shall be, not of all sorts of men, but also of them
which are endewed here with an especial holiness, he says. When I was a
child, I understood as a child, I did speak as a child, I thought as a
child, 1. Cor. 13.
but when I became a man, I put away childish things. We see now in a Glass
in a darke-speaking, but then we shall see face to see. Now I know in part,
but then shall I know, even as I am known. If therefore in this life, where
the prophecy of admirable men is to be compared to that life, as children to
a young man: Not-with-standing Heliseus saw his servant receiving gifts where
he himself was not: shall therefore the Saints stand in need of corporal
eyes to see those things which are to be seen, which Heliseus being absent
needed not to see his servant? For when that which is perfect is come, neither
now the corruptible body shall any more aggrauate the soul: and no
incorruptible thing shall hinder it?

For according to the LXX. interpreters, these are the words of the Prophet to
Giezi: Did not my heart go with thee, and I knew that the man turned back
from his chariot to meet thee, and thou have received money, etc. But as
Hierome has interpreted it out of the Hebrew: Was not my heart, (says he) in
presence, when the man returned from his Chariot to meet thee? Therefore the
Prophet said, That he saw this thing with his heart, wonderfully aided by the
divine power, as no man doubts. But how much more shall all abound with that
gift, when GOD shall be all things in all? Neuer-thelesse those corporal
eyes also shall have their office, and shall be in their place, and the spirit
shall use them by the spiritual body. For the Prophet did use them to see
things present, though he needed not them to see his absent servant, which
present things he was able to see by the spirit, though he did shut his eyes,
even as he saw things absent, where he was not with them. GOD forbid
therefore, that we should say that the Saints shall not see GOD in that life,
their eyes being shut, whom they shall all always see by the spirit. But
whether they shall also see by the eyes of the body, when they shall have them
open, from hence there arises a question. For if they shall be able to do no
more, in the spiritual body by that means, as they are spiritual eyes, than
those are able which we have now, without all doubt they shall not be able
to see GOD: Therefore they shall be of a far other power, if that
incorporate nature shall be seen by them, which is contained in no place, but
is whole every where. For we do not say, because we say that GOD is both in
heaven and also in earth. (For he says by the Prophet, I fill heaven and
earth.) Hier. 25.
that he has one part in heaven, and another in earth, but he is whole in
heaven, and whole in earth, not at several times, but he is both together,
which no corporal nature can be. Therefore there shall be a more excellent
and potent force of those eyes, not that they may see more sharply then some
serpents and Eagles are reported to see: for those living creatures by their
greatest sharpness of seeing can see nothing but bodies, but that they may
also see incorporat things. And it may be, that great power of seeing was
granted for a time to the eyes of holy Job, yea in that mortal body, when he
says to GOD. By the Job. 7.
hearing of the ear I did he are thee before, but now my eye does see thee,
therefore I despised my self, consumed, and esteemed my self to be earth and
ashes. Although there is nothing to the contrary, but that the eye of the heart
may be understood, concerning Ephesians. 1.
which eyes the Apostle says: To have the eyes of your heart enlightened. But
no Christian man doubts, that GOD shall be seen with them, when he shall be
seen which faithfully receives that which GOD the master says: Blessed are
the pure in heart, because they shall see GOD. But it now is in question,
whether Math. 5.
he may be seen there also with corporal eyes. For that which is written;
And all flesh shall see the salvation of God, without any knotte, or scruple
Luke. 3.
of difficulty may so be understood, as if it had been said. And every man
shall see the CHRIST of GOD, who as he has been seen in body shall
likewise be seen in body, when he shall judge the quick, and the dead. But
that he is the Salvation of GOD, there are also many other testimonies of the
Scriptures.

But the words of that worthy and reverent old man Simeon declare it more
evidently: who, after he had received the Infant CHRIST into Luc. 2.
his hands, Now (says he) let thou thy servant, O LORD, depart in peace,
according to thy word: because mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Also, that,
which the above recited Job says, as it is found in many coppies taken from
the Hebrew: And I shall see GOD in my flesh. Verelie he prophesied the Job. 19.
Resurrection of the flesh without all doubt, yet he said not, By my flesh.
For if he had said so, GOD CHRIST might have been understood, who shall be
seen in the flesh by the flesh: now indeed it may also be taken, In my flesh,
(b) I shall see GOD: as if he had said. I shall be in my flesh, when I shall see
GOD. And that which the Apostle says, Face to face: does not compel us that
1. Cor. 13.
we believe that we shall see GOD by this corporal face, where there are
corporal eyes, whom we shall see by the spirit without intermission. For
unless there were a face also of the inward man, the same Apostle 2. Cor. 3.
would not say. But we beholding the glory of the LORD with the face vnuayled
are transformed into the same Image from glory into glory, as it were to the
spirit of the LORD. Neither do we otherwise understand that which is sung in
the Psalm. Come unto him and be enlightened, and your faces shall not Psalm.
33. 34
be ashamed. For by faith we come unto GOD, which as it is evident, belongs
to the heart and not to the body (universally). But because we know not now
how near the spiritual body shall approach, for we speak of a thing of
which we have no experience, where some things are, which can-not otherwise
be understood, the authority of the divine Scriptures does not resist, but
succor us: It must needs be that that happen in us which is read in the book
of Wisdom: The thoughts of men are fearful, and our fore-sights are
uncertain. For if that manner Wisdom. (...)
of arguing of the Philosophers, by which they dispute that intelligible things
are so to be seen by the aspect of the understanding; and sensible, that is
to say, corporal things, so to be seen by the sense of the body, that
neither the understanding can be able to behold intelligible things by the
body, nor corporal things by themselves, can be most certain unto us, truly
it should likewise be certain, that God could not be seen by the eyes of a
spiritual body. But both true reason, and prophetical authority will deride
this manner of disputing. For who is such an obstinate and opposite enemy to
the truth, that he dare say, that God knows not these corporal things? Has
he therefore a body by the eyes of which he may learn those things?
Further-more does not that, which we spoke a little before of the Prophet
Heliseus, declare sufficiently also, that corporal things may be seen by the
spirit, not by the body? For when his servant received rewards, though it was
corporally done, yet the Prophet saw it, not by Kings. 4. 5.
the body but by the spirit. As therefore it is manifest, that bodies are seen
by the spirit: what if there shall be such a great power of the spiritual
body, that the spirit may also be seen by the body? For God is a spirit.
More-ouer, every man knows his own life, by which he lives now in the
body, and which does make these earthly members grow and increase, and makes
them living, by the inward sense, and not by the eyes of the body. But he
sees the lives of other men by the body, when as they are invisible. For from
whence do we discern living bodies from vn-liuing, unless we see the
bodies and lives together. But we do not see with corporal eyes the lives
without bodies.

Wherefore it may be, and it is very credible, that then we shall so see the
worldly bodies of the new heaven, and new earth, as we see GOD present every
where, and also governing all corporal things, by the bodies we shall carry,
and which we shall see, where-so-euer we shall turn our eyes, most evidently
all clouds of obscurity being removed; not in such sorts as the invisible
things of GOD are seen now, being understood by those things which are made,
in a glass, darkly and in part, where faith prevails more in us, by which
we believe, than the object of things which we see by corporal eyes. But
even as, so soon as we behold men amongst whom we live, being alive, and
performing vital motions: we do not believe that they live, but we see them
to live, when we cannot see their life without bodies: which
not-with-standing we clearly behold by the bodies, all ambiguity being
removed: so where-so-euer we shall turn about these spiritual eyes of our
bodies, we shall like-wise see incorporate GOD governing all things by our
bodies.

GOD therefore shall either so be seen by those eyes, because they have
something in that excellency, like unto the understanding whereby the
incorporall nature may be seen, which is either hard or impossible to declare
by any examples or testimonies of divine Scriptures: or that which is more
easily to be understood, God shall be so known, and conspicuous unto us, that
he may be seen by the spirit of every one of us, in every one of us, may be
seen of another in another, may be seen in himself, may be seen in the new
heaven and in the new earth, and in every creature, which shall be then: may be
seen also by the bodies in every body, where-so-euer the eyes of the
spiritual body shall be directed by the sight coming thither. Also our
thoughts shall be open, and discovered to one another. For then shall that be
fulfilled which the Apostle intimates when he said. Judge not any thing
before the time, until the Lord come, who willl lighten things that are hid in
darkness, and make the counsels of the heart manifest, and then 1. Cor. 4.
shall every man have praise of GOD.

L. VIVES.
OR (a) rather rest] For there shall be a rest from all labors, and I know not
by what means, the name of rest is more delightful and sweet than of action:
therefore Aristotle nominateth that contemplation, which he makes the chiefest
beatitude, by the name of Rest. Besides the Sabbath is that, to wit, a ceassing
from labor and a sempeternall rest. (b) I shall see God] It is read in some
ancient copies of Augustine. I shall see God my savior. But we do neither
read it in Hieromes translation, neither does it seem ^o be added of Augustine
by those words which follow. For he speaks of God without the manhood.
Further if he had added Savior, he should have seemed to have spoken of
Christ.

Of the eternal felicity of the City of God, and the perpetual Sabbath.
CHAP. 30.
HOw great (a) shall that felicity be, where there shall be no evil thing,
where no good thing shall lie hidden, there we shall have leisure to utter
forth the praises of God, which shall be all things in all? For what other
thing is done, where we shall not rest with any slothfulness, nor labor for
any want I know not. I am admonished also by the holy song, where I read, or
hear. Blessed are they Psalm. 83.
oh Lord, which dwell in thy house, they shall praise thee for ever and ever.
All the members and bowels of the incorruptible body which we now see
distributed to diverse uses of necessity, because then there shall not be that
necessity, but a full, sure, secure, euer-lasting felicity, shall be advanced
and go forward in the praises of God. For then all the numbers (of which I have
already spoken) of the corporal Harmony shall not lie hid, which now lie hid:
being disposed inwardly and out-wardly through all the members of the body, and
with other things which shall be seen there, being great and wonderful; shall
kindle the reasonable souls with delight of such a reasonable beauty to sound
forth the praises of such a great and excellent workman. What the motions of
those bodies shall be there, I dare not rashly define, when I am not able to
diue into the depth of that mystery. Nevertheless both the motion and state, as
the form of them, shall be comely and decent, whatsoever it shall be, where
there shall be nothing which shall not be comely. Truly where the spirit will,
there forthwith shall the body be: neither will the spirit will any thing,
which may not beseem the body, nor the spirit. There shall be true glory,
where no man shall be praised for error or flattery. True honor, which shall be
denied unto none which is worthy, shall be given unto none unworthy. But
neither shall any unworthy person covet after it, where none is permitted to
be, but he which is worthy. There is true peace, where no man suffers any
thing which may molest him, either of himself, or of any other. He himself
shall be the reward of virtue, which has given virtue, and has promised
himself unto him, then whom nothing can be better and greater. For what other
thing is that, which he has said by the Prophet: I will be their GOD, and they
shall be Leu^. 26
my people: but I will be whereby they shall be satisfied: I will be what-soeuer is
lawfully desired of men, life, health, food, abundance, glory, honor, peace,
and all good things? For so also is that rightly understood, which the Apostle
says. 1. Cor. 15
That GOD may be all in all. He shall be the end of our desires, who shall be
seen without end, who shall be loved without any saciety, and praised without
any tediousness. This function, this affection, this action verily shall be unto
all as the eternal life shall be common to all. But who is sufficient to think,
much more to utter what degrees there shall also be of the rewards for
merits, of the honors, Degrees of rewards.
and glories? But we must not doubt, but that there shall be degrees. And also
that Blessed City shall see that in it self, that no inferior shall envy his
superior: even as now the other Angels do not envy the Arch-angells: as
every one would not be which he has not received, although he be combined
with a most peaceable bond of concord to him which has received, by which the
finger will not be the eye in the body, when as a peaceable conjunction, and
knitting together of the whole flesh does contain both members. Therefore one
shall so have a gift less then another has, that he also has this gift,
that he will have no more. Neither therefore shall they not have free will,
because sins shall not delight them. For it shall be more free being freed
from the delight of sinning to an vndeclinable and sted-fast delight of not
sinning. For the first free will, which was given to man, when he was created
righteous, had power not to sin, but it had also power to sin: but this
last free will shall be more powerful then that, because it shall not be able to
sin. But this also by the gift of GOD, not by the possibily of his own
nature. For it is one thing to be GOD, another thing to be partaker of GOD.
GOD cannot sin by nature, but he which is partaker of GOD, receives from
him, that he cannot sin. But there were degrees to be observed of the divine
gift, that the first free will might be given, whereby man might be able not to
sin: the last whereby he might not be able to sin: and the first did
pertain to obtain a merit, the later to receive a reward. But because that
nature sinned, when it might sin, it is freed by a more bountiful grace,
that it may be brought to that liberty, in which it cannot sin. For as the
first immortallity, which Adam lost by sinning, was to be able not to die. For
so the will of piety and equity shall be free from being lost as the will of
felicity is free from being lost. For as by sinning we neither kept piety nor
felicity: neither truly have we lost the will of felicity, felicity, being
lost.

Truly is GOD himself therefore to be denied to ^aue free will, because he
cannot sin? Therefore the free will of that City shall both be one in all,
and also inseparable in every one, freed from all evil, and filled with all
good, enjoying an everlasting pleasure of eternal joys, forgetful of faults,
forgetful of punishments, neither therefore so forgetful of her deliverance,
that she be ungrateful to her deliverer. For so much as concerns
reasonable knowledge she is mindful also of her evils, which are past: but
so much as concerns the experience of the senses, altogether unmindful.

For a most skillful Physician also knows almost all diseases of the body,
as they are known by art: but as they are felt in the body, he knows not
many, which he has not suffered. As therefore there are two knowledges of Two
knowleges of evils.
evils: one, by which they are not hidden from the power of the understanding,
the other, by which they are infixed to the senses of him, that feels them
(for all vices are otherwise known by the doctrine of wisdom, and otherwise
by the most wicked life of a foolish man) so there are two forgetfulnesses of
evils. For a skillful and learned man does forget them one way, and he that
has had experience and suffered them, forgets them another way. The former,
if he neglect his skill, the later, if he want misery. According to this
forgetfulness, which I have set down in the later place, the Saints shall not
be mindful of evils past. For they shall want all evils, so that they shall
be abolished utterly from their senses. Nevertheless that power of knowledge,
which shall be great in them, shall not only know their own evils past, but
also the everlasting misery of the damned. Otherwise if they shall not know
that they have been miserable, how, as the psalm says, Shall they sing the
mercies of the LORD for ever? Psalm. 88
Then which song nothing verily shall be more delightful to that City, to the
glory of the love of CHRIST, by whose blood we are delivered. There shall be
perfected, Be at rest and see, because I am GOD. Because there shall be the most
Psalm. 45
great Sabbath having no evening. Which the LORD commended unto us in the first
works of the world, where it is read. And GOD rested the seventh day from all
his works he made, and sanctified it, because in it he rested from all his
works, Genesis 2
which GOD began to make. For we our selves also be the seventh day, when we
shall be replenished, and repaired with his benediction and sanctification.
There being freed from toil we shall see, because he is GOD, which we our
selves would have been when we fell from him, hearing from the Seducer: Ye
shall be as goods: and departing from the true GOD, by whose means we should be
gods Gene. 3
by participation of him, not by forsaking him. For what have we done without
him, but that we have failed from him and gone back in his anger? Of whom we
being restored and perfected with a greater grace shall rest for ever, seeing
that he is GOD, with whom we shall be replenished, when he shall be all in all:
for our good works also, although they are rather understood to be his then
ours, are then imputed unto us to obtain this Sabbath: because if we shall
atrribute them unto our selves, they shall be servile, when it is said of the
Sabbath. Ye shall De^t. 5
not do any servile work in it. For which cause it is said also by the
Prophet Ezechiel. And I have given my Sabbaths unto them for a sign between
me, and them, Ezech, 20
that they might know, that I am the LORD, which sanctify them? Then shall we
know this thing perfectly, and we shall perfectly rest and shall perfectly
see, that he is GOD. If therefore that number of ages, as of days be
accounted according to the distinctions of times, which seem to be expressed
in the sacred Scriptures, that Sabbath day shall appear more evidently,
because it is found to be the seventh, that the first age, as it were the
first day, be from Adam unto the flood, then the second from thence unto
Abraham, not by equality of times, Three ages before the coming of Christ.
but by number of generations. For they are found to have a tenth number. From
hence now, as Matthew the Evangelist does conclude, three ages do follow even
unto the coming of CHRIST, every one of which is expressed by fourteen
Generations. From Abraham unto David is one, from thence even until the
Transmigration into Babylon, is another, the third from thence unto the
incarnat Nativity of CHRIST. So all of them are made five. Now this age is the
sixth, to be measured by no number, because of that which is spoken. It is not
for you to know the seasons, which the father has placed in his own power.
Act. 1
After this age GOD shall rest as in the seventh day, when GOD shall make that
same seventh day to rest in himself, which we shall be. Furthermore it would
take up a long time to discourse now exactly of every one of those several
ages. But this seventh shall be our Sabbath, whose end shall not be the evening,
but the LORDS day, as the eight eternal day, which is sanctified and made holy
by the resurrection of CHRIST, not only prefiguring the eternal rest of the
spirit, but also of the body. There we shall rest, and see, we shall see, and
love, we shall love, and we shall praise: Behold what shall be in the end
without end! For what other thing is our end, but to come to that Kingdom of
which there is no end. (b) I think I have discharged the debt of this great
work by the help of GOD. Let them which think I have done too little, and
they which think I have done too much, grant me a favorable pardon: But let
them, which think I have performed enough, accepting it with a kind
congratulation, give no thanks unto me, but unto the LORD with me. Amen.

L. VIVES.
HOw (a) great shall that felicity be] Innumerable things might be said, but
Augustine is to be imitated in this, and we must neither speak, nor write
any thing rashly of so sacred and holy a matter; neither is it lawful for us
to search out that by Philosophy and disputations of men, which the LORD has
commanded to be most secret, neither has vnuailed to the eyes, nor uttered to
the ears, nor has infused into the thoughts and understandings of mortal
men. It is his will, that we should believe them to be great, and admirable,
and only to hope after them, then at last to understand them, when we being
made partakers of our desire, shall behold openly all things being present, and
with our eyes, and so conjoined and affixed unto our selves, that we may so
know, as we are now known: neither ought we to enquire, whether that
blessedness be an action of the understanding, or rather of the will: whether
our understanding shall behold al things in GOD, or whether it shall be restrained
from some things: least if we enquire these things over contentiously there be
neither blessedness of our understanding, nor of our will, nor we see any
thing in GOD. Althings shall be full of joys, and beatitudes, not only the will
and understanding, but the eyes, ears, hands, the whole body, the whole mind,
the whole soul. We shall see al things in GOD, which we will, and every one
shall be content with the degree of his own felicity: nor will envy another,
whom he shall behold to be nearer unto GOD, because every man shall be so
blessed, as he shall desire. I think (a) I have discharged the debt of this
great work.] And I likewise think that I have finished, no less work and
disburdened my self of no less labor then Augustine thinks he has done.
For the burden of these mean and light Commentaries has been as heavy to our
imbecility and vnskilfullnesse; as the admirable burden of those volumes was
to the vigor and strength of his wit, learning, and sanctity. If I have said
any thing which may please, let the Reader give thanks unto GOD for me; if
any thing which may displease let him pardon me for GODS sake, and let things
well spoken, obtain favor for things il-spoken. But if he shall kindly amend
and take away the errors, he shall deserve a good turn of me and the Readers,
which peradventure relying upon me might be deceived.

FINIS.
An alphabeticall Index pointing out memorable matters contained in these
books of the City of God.
A
ARion, who he was. fol. 24 Ttilius Regulus. fol. 26 Abraham no murderer.
fol. 37 Agamemnon who he was. fol. 34 Atis, who he was. fol. 56 Alcibiades,
his law. fol. 64 Aeschines, who he was. fol. 69 Aristodemus, who he was. ibid.
Attelan Comedies. fol. 73 Athens laws imitated in Rome. fol. 78 Agrarian
laws. fol. 84 Apollo and Neptune build Troy. fol. 108 Anubis, who he was. fol.
76 Aedile, his office. fol. 103 Athenian ambassadors. fol. 90 Ages of men. fol.
117 Aesculapius who he was. fol. 120 Aetnas burning. fol. 157 Assyrian
monarchy. fol. 161 Anaximander, who he was. fol. 299 Anaximines, who he was.
fol. 300 Anaxogoras, who he was. ibid. Archelaus who he was. ibid. Aristippus,
who he was. fol. 302 Antisthenes, who he was. ibid. Atlas, who he was. fol. 313
Aristole who he was. fol. 318 Academia, what it was. ibid. Alcibiades, who he
was. fol. 507 Arc compared to man's body. fol. 566 Antipodes, who they are.
fol. 584 Aratus, who he was. fol. 598 Actisanes his law against thieves. fol.
600 Anna, her prophecy of Christ. fol. 624 Arons priesthood a shadow of the
future priesthood. fol. 631 Anointing of Kings a type of Christ. fol. 636
Abraham's birth. fol. 656 Apis who he was. fol. 662 Apis the Ox. fol. 663 Argus
King of Argos. ibid. Attica, what country it is. fol. 669 Athens, why so
called. fol. 670 Apollos, plates. fol. 676 Antaeus, who he was. fol. 677
Aconitum, how it grew. fol. 682 Amphion, who he was. fol. 684 Admetus, who he
was. fol. 686 Andromeda, who she was. fol. 687 Agamemnon, who he was. fol. 690
Apuleius Lucian, who he was. fol. 695 Aeneas, who he was. fol. 696 Aeneas
deified. fol. 698 Archon, what kind of magistrate. fol. 700 Auentine, a
mountain why so called. fol. 701 Amos the prophet. fol. 703 Abdi, who he was.
fol. 718 Abacuc, who he was. ibid. Anaxagoras his opinion of heaven. fol. 731
Alexander the great his death. ibid. Alexanders coming to Jerusalem. 736
B
BErecinthia mother of the gods. fol. 56 Budaeus, his praises. fol. 80
Brethren killing one another. fol. 100 Belus who he was. fol. 577 Babilons
confusion. fol. 577 Bersheba, what it is. fol. 613 Beggar differing from the
word poor. fol. 627 Babylon what it is. fol. 657 Busyris who he was. fol. 677
Bellerephon, who he was. fol. 684 Bona Dea who she was. fol. 691 Bias, who
he was. fol. 711 Baruch who he was. fol. 722 Book of life. fol. 809
C
COnquerors custom. fol. 9 Claudian family. fol. 10 City what it is. fol. 25
Cleombrotus. fol. 34. 35 Catoes, who they were. fol. 36 Catoes their integrity.
ibid. Cato, his son. fol. 37 Cauea, what it was in the Theater. fol. 47
Circensian plays. fol. 48 Consus, who he was. ibid. Cibeles, invention. fol.
56 Cleon, who he was. fol 67 Censor, who he was. ibid. Cleophon who he was.
ibid. Caecilius who he was. fol. 68 Curia what it was. fol. 71 Censors view of
the city. fol. 73 Cynocephalus, who he was. fol. 75 Camillus exiled from his
country. fol. 79 Consus a god. fol. 81 Consulls first elected. ibid. Camillus
who he was. ibid. Christ the founder of a new City. fol. 83 Commonwealth, what
it is. fol. 88 Cinnas wars against his country. fol. 93 Carbo, who he was.
ibid. Capitol preserved by geese. ibid. Cateline his conditions. fol. 96
Christians name hateful at Rome. fol 55 Charthaginian wars begun. fol. 46
Caesar's family. fol. 111 Caius Fimbria, who he was. fol. 114 Cyri who they
were. fol. 125 Concords temple. fol. 143 Catulus his death. fol. 146 Cateline
his death. fol. 149 Christ's birth time. fol. 150 Ciceroes death. ibid. Caesar's
death. fol. 151 Cyrus Persian Monarch. fol. 162 Curtius who he was. fol. 179
Causes threefold. fol. 210 Camillus his kindness to his country. fol. 222
Curtius his voluntary death. fol. 222 Constanstine the first christian Emperor.
fol. 23 Claudian who he was. fol. 233 Ceres sacrifices. fol. 280 Crocodile,
what it is. fol. 335 Cyprian, who he was. fol. 336 Cynikes who they were. fol.
523 Circumcision a tipe of regeneration. fol. 602 Cyniphes, what they are. fol.
618 Canticles, what they are. fol. 648 Cecrops who he was. fol. 667 Centaures,
why so named. fol. 681 Cerberus band-dog of hell. ibid. Chymaera the monster.
fol. 684 Castor and Pollux, who they were. fol. 689 Circe, who she was. fol.
693. Codrus, who he was. fol. 698. Creusa, who she was. fol. 698. Caesar's
whence so named. fol. 700. Captivity of Judah. fol. 710. Chilo, who he was.
ibid. Cleobulus, who he was. fol. 711. Cyrus, who he was. ibid. Christ's birth.
fol, 738. Churches ten persecutors. fol. 743. 744. Calculators cashered. fol.
747. Christians vpbraided with killing of children. fol. 747. Christians
believe not in Peter-but in Christ. fol, 748. Cacus, who he was. fol. 768.
Cerinthus, his heresy. fol. 800. Cappadocia, what it is. fol. 891. Comeliensse
of man's body. fol. 908.
D
DAnae, who she was. fol. 63. Decimus Laberius, who he was. fol. 72. Discord a
goddess. fol. 143 Decius his valor. fol. 180. Dictatorship, what it was.
fol. 224. Diogenes Laertius, who he was. fol. 300. Death of the soul. fol.
470. Death remains after Baptism. fol. 470. Difference of the earthly and
heavenly City. 532. David a type of Christ. fol. 635. Deucalion, who he was.
fol. 670. Danaus, who he was. fol. 673. Dionysius, how many so called. fol.
675. Daedalus, who he was. fol. 685. Danae, who she was. fol. 686. Delborah who
she was. fol. 690. Diomedes, who he was. fol. 692. Diomedes, fellows become
birds. ibidem. Devil, what he may do. fol. 694. David's and Solomon's praises.
fol. 700. Daniell, who he was. fol. 722. Diogenes treading down Platos pride.
857. Diogenes taxed of vain glory ibidem.
E
EVpolis, a Poet. fol. 64. Ennius, who he was fol. 91. Eternal City. fol.
220. Eternal ^fe, what it is. fol. 256. Epictetus, who he was. fol. 342.
Envy, not ambition moved Caine to murder Abel. fol. 536. Eudoxus, who he was.
fol. 598. Ephod, what it is. fol. 630. Eben Ezer, what it signifies. fol.
633. Eusebius a Historiographer. fol. 669. Europa, who she was. fol. 677.
Erichthonius, who he was. fol. 677. Esaias the Prophet. fol. 709. Esaias his
prophecy. fol. 715. Esaias, his death. fol. 716. Ephrata, what it is. fol.
717. Epicurus, opinion of the gods. fol. 731. Epiphanes, who he was. fol.
736.
F
FAbius, a Roman conqueror. fol. 11. Famous men. fol. 48. Fugalia, what they
were. fol. 60. Fugia, a goddess. fol. 60. Floralia, what feasts they were.
fol. 65. Febris, a goddess. fol. 76. Friendship and faction. fol. 91 Flora,
what she was. fol. 10^ Fabricius, who he was. fol. 105. Fate, what it is.
fol. 98. Fortunes casualties what they are, fol. 198. Fate of no force. fol.
208. Fabricius a scorner of riches. fol. 224. Faunus, who he was. fol. 691.
Felicity not perfect in this life. fol. 757. Father of a family why so called.
fol. 774. Fire eternal how to be understood. fol. 822.
G
GRacchi, who they were. fol. 93. Getulia, what it is. fol. 128. Gracchus Caius
his death. fol. 142. Gratidianus his death. 148. Gold, when first coined. fol.
181. GODS prescience no cause of events. fol. 212. Gratians death. fol. 231.
Ganimede who he was. fol. 287. Greek Sages seven. fol. 299. Gellius, who he
was. fol. 342. GODS creatures are all good. fol. 560. Gorgons what they v^re.
fol. 683. Gog, and Magog, h^v to be understood. fol 806. GOD can do all
things saving to make a lie. fol. 910.
H
HYperbolus, who he was. fol. 67. Harmony of a commonwealth. fol. 88.
Hadrianus, who he was. fol. 191. Hydromancy, what it is. fol. 294. Hebrews,
why so called. fol. 577. Holy spirit, why called the finger of God. fol. 617.
Ie^alem why so called. fol. 640. Ha^ocrates, who he was. fol. 66^. Hercules,
six of that name. fol. 667. Holy street in Rome. fol. 675. Hercules manner of
death. fol. 677. Hieremy his prophecy. fol. 709. Hose his prophecy. fol. 714.
Herod the King. fol 737. Heretics profit the Church. fol. 742.
I
IAnus, who he was. fol. 116. Iulianus, who he was. fol. 191. Iouianus, who he
was. fol. 191. Iouinians death. fol. 231. John the Anchorite. fol. 233. Israel
what it signifies. fol. 614. Judah his blessing explained. fol. 615. Infants
why so called. fol. 618. Justice to be performed in his life only. fol.
626. Inquisition made by the Lord, how it is taken. fol. 631. India what is
is. fol. 656. Inachus, who he was. fol. 659. Io, who she was. fol. 660. Isis
who she was. ibid. Ixion who he was. fol. 680. Iphigenia, who she was.
fol. 696. Jonas the prophet. fol. 713. Ioell the prophet. fol. 714. Israel,
who are so called. fol. 714. Joel his prophecy. fol. 716. Idumaea where it
is. fol. 718. Job, whence he descended. fol. 739. Julian the Apostata. fol.
745. Judgment day when it shall be. fol. 793. John Bapt. life like unto the
life of Elias. fol. 831. Incredible things. fol. 879. Innocentius, his
miraculous c^re. fol. 883.
L
LAbeos, who they were. fol. 70 Laws of the twelve Tables. fol. 78 Lycurgus,
his laws. ibid. Law, what it is. fol. 80 L. Furius Pylus a cunning latinist.
fol. 90 Lycurgus, who he was. fol. 379 Lawful hate. fol. 503 Lyberi, how it is
used by the latins. fol. 615 Lupercalls, what they are. fol. 674 Liber, why so
called. fol. 675 Labirinth what it was. fol. 680 Linus who he was. fol. 688
Laurentum, why so called. fol. 690 Latinus who he was. fol. 692 Labdon, who he
was. fol. 698
M
Manlius Torquatus. fol. 37 Marius, who he was. fol. 93 Marius his happiness.
fol. 94 Marius, his cruelty. fol. 95 Metellus his felicity. fol 96 Marius, his
flight. ibid. Marica, a goddess. ibid. Mithridates, who he was. fol. 98
Megalesian plays. fol. 58 Mettellus who he was. fol. 135 Man, how he sins.
fol. 212 Mercury, who he was. fol. 272 Moon drunk up by an Ass. fol. 384
Man formed. fol. 492 Maspha, what it signifies. fol. 633 Moses his birth.
fol. 665 Minerua who she was. fol. 668 Marathus who he was. fol. 673 Minos
who he was. fol. 677 Minotaure what it was. fol. 679. Medusa who she was.
fol. 683 Musaeus who he was. fol. 988. Mycenae why so called. fol. 690.
Mnestheus, who he was. fol. 697. Melanthus, who he was. fol. 699. Micheas
the prophet. fol. 713. Micheas his prophecy. fol. 776. Man desires four
things by nature. fol. 751. Man what he is. fol. 755. Miracles related by
Augustine. fol. 883.
N
NAsica prohibiteth sitting at plays. fol. 47. Neptunes prophecy. fol. 108.
Numitor and his children. fol. 112. Nigidius Figulus who he was. fol. 201. Nero
Caesar, who he was. fol. 225. Niniuy the City. fol. 576. Number of seven
signifies the churches perfection. fol. 625. Nabuchadonosors wars. fol. 709.
Naum, when he lived. fol. 718. Niniuy a figure of the church. fol. 734.
Natures primitive gifts. fol. 755.
O
OPtimates, who they were. fol. 91. Olympus what Mount it is. fol. 569.
Osyris, who he was. fol. 662. Ogyges, who he was. fol. 668. Oedipus, who he
was. fol. 686. Orpheus who he was. fol. 688. Ozias the prophet. fol. 713.
Origens opinion of the restoration of the devils to their former state. fol.
657.
P
PAlladium image. fol. 4. Phaenix, who he was. fol. 9. (...) bishop of Nola.
fol. 17. People, how they are styled. fol. 35. Priests, called Galli. fol. 57.
Pericles, who he was. fol. 67. Plato accounted a Demigod. fol. 73. Priapus a
god. fol. 75. Pomona a goddess. fol. 77. Patriots and the people divided. fol.
83. Porsenna, his wars. fol. 84. Portian and Sempronian laws. ibid.
Posthumus, who he was. fol. 98. Prodigious sounds of battles. fol. 100. Plato
expells some poets. fol. 74. Pyrrhus, who he was. fol. 133. P^s war. fol.
145. Piety what it is. fol. 183. Pompey his death. fol. 231. Plato his ridle.
fol. 286. Pluto, why so called. fol. 289. Plato who he was. fol. 303. Porphyry
who he was. fol. 319. Plotine who he was. ibid. Proteus who he was. fol.
374. Pygmees, what they be. fol. 582. Prophecy spoken to Heli fulfilled in
Christ. fol. 628. Psalms, who made them. fol. 640. Psaltery what it is. fol.
641. Philo who he was. fol. 649. Pelasgus, who he was. fol. 659.
Phoroneus, why called a judge. fol. 660. Prometheus who he was. fol. 665.
Pandora, who she was. fol. 666. Phorbus who he was. fol. 667. (...) and
Hell who they were. fol. (...)^. (...) the vvinged-horse. fol. 684. Perseus
who he was. fol. 687. Portumnus, what he is. fol. 689. Picus, who he was.
fol. 690. Pitacus who he was. fol. 710. Periander, who he was. fol. 711.
Ptolomy, who he was. fol. 731. Philadelpus why so called. fol. 732. Pompey
his wars in Africa. fol. 736. Proselite, what he is. fol. 740. Peter
accused of sorcery. fol. 746. Purgatory not to be found before the day of
judgment. fol. 857. Paul's words of the measure of fullness, expounded. fol.
897. Propagation not abolished, though diminished by sin. fol. 907.
R
Romans judgment in a case of life and death. fol. 31. Romans greedy of
praise. fol. 32. Roman orders. fol. 73. Roman priests, called Flamines. fol.
76. Romulus a god. fol. 77. Rome taken by the Galls. fol. 93. Roman Theater
first erected. fol. fol. 47. Romes salutations. fol. 86. Rome punishing
offenders. fol. 84. Roman government threefold. fol. 91. Remus his death.
fol. 113. Romulus his death. fol. 127. Regulus his fidelity. 223. Radagasius
King of the Goths. fol. 229. Roinocorura what it is. fol. 600. Repentance of
God, what it is. fol. 632. Rabbi Salomons opinion of the authors of the
psalms. fol. 641. Rhadamanthus, who he was. fol. 700. Roboams folly. ibid.
Rome second Babylon. fol. 702. Rome imperious Babylon. fol. 763.
S
Syracusa, a City. fol, 11. Sacking of a City. fol. 12. Scipio Nasica, who he
was. fol. 45. Sanctuaries what they were. fol. 49. Scipio's, who they were.
fol. 66. Scipio's, which were brethren. fol. 68. Seditions between great men
and people. fol. 79. Sabine virgins forced. fol. 80. Sardanapalus, last King of
the Assyrians. fol. 86. Sardanapalus, his Epitaph. ibid. Sylla, who he was.
fol. 93. Sylla, and Marius his war ibid. Sylla, his cruelty. fol. 98.
Sempronian law. fol. 109. Saguntum, what it was. fol. 138. Salues war.
fol. 145. Sertorius his death. fol. 149. Scaeuola his fortitude. fol. 179.
Silver, when first coined. fol. 181. Socrates, who he was. fol. 300. Schools
of Athens. fol. 319. Scripture speaks of God according to our vveake
understanding. fol. 565. Saul's reiections a figure of Christ's kingdom. fol.
632. Solomon, a figure of Christ. fol. 634. Syon what it signifies. fol. 643.
Sotadicall verses what they are. fol. 642. Sycionians first King. fol. 657.
Semiramis, who she was. ibid. Sarpedon, who he was. fol. 677. Sphynx, her
riddle. fol. 686. Stercutius, who he was. fol. 691. Swinging games. fol. 698.
Sangus, who he was. ibid. Sybils, who they were. fol. 703. Sages or wise
men of Greece. fol. 710. Solon, who he was. ibidem. Septuagints, who they
were. fol. 732. Sanctum sanctorum. fol. 736. Society subject to crosses. fol.
761. Servant not read in Scripture before Noah cursed his son. fol. 773.
Sin, mother of servitude. ibid. Saints, where they shall be at the burning of
the world. fol. 8^3. Sodomites blindness, of what kind it was. fol. 300.
T
THomas Moore his praises. fol. 62. Tarquin Collatine exild from Rome. fol. 79.
Tarquin the proud his death. fol. 83. Tribunes first elected. fol. 84.
Tiberius Gracchus a lawgiver. fol. 90. Tyrannus, what and whence. fol. 91.
Tarpeia, who she was. fol. 122. Tables of proscription. fol. 148. Torquatus
putting his son to death. fol. 222. Theodosius, who he was. fol. 231.
Theodosius, his humility. fol. 234. Thales Miletus, who he was. fol. 299.
Trismegistus, who he was. fol. 335. Thurimachus, who he was. fol. 659.
Triton the Lake. fol. 668. Triple penalty i^osed on the Athenian women. fol.
670. Triptolemus, who he was. fol. 679. Taurus, who he was. fol. 680.
Tautanes, who he was. fol. 697. Thales, who he was. fol. 710. Theman,
where it is. fol. 720. Time of Christ's death. fol. 749. Tully his sorrow for
his daughters death. fol. 706. Thieves have a kind of peace. fol. 767. Temples
why erected to Martyrs. fol. 898.
V
VV^an, who he was. fol. 168. ^tary poverty. fol. 223. V^, who he was. fol.
234. Valentinian the elder. fol. 745. Valens law. fol. 746. Viues complaint for
dec^ed charity. fol. 873.
W
Wars of Africa. fol. 84. Wine, how found out. fol. 675. whores ^ed she
(...). fol. 701. Worm of the wicked how to be understood. fol. 822. Will of
God how it is changed. fol. 887.
X
XEnocrates, who he was. fol. 318. Xerxes, who he was. fol. 659. Xanthus, who
he was. fol. 676.
Z
ZEphanie the Prophet. fol. 722. Zeal, how to be taken. fol. 807. Zoroastres,
who he was. fol. 855.
ERRATA.
Folio, 24. l, 22. r, example for example. f, 25. l, 33. r, forgo for forge f,
32. l, 26. r, thirst after glory for this of glory. f. (...)* l, 2^. r, seeing
for being f, 40. l, 31. r, her for his. f, 43. l, 18. r, it for if. f, 53 l,
17. r, hands for heads. f, 62. l, 25. r. (...) ^or worships. f, 69. l, 27. r,
this for is. f, 88. line 24. read prouiso for provision. f, 108. line I. read
per, (...) (...) (...). l, 26, r, the for their. f, 109. l, 18, r, leuing for
living. 118. l, 6. fifth for first f, 128. l, 23. r, field ^or filed. (...)
(...) to be. f, 230. l, 9. cryings for cringes. l, 15. r, call for all. f, 259.
l, ult. r, and Diana for Diana and. f, 240. l, (...)* (...) ^ers (...) o^ f,
321. l, 41 r, forbid for forbad f, 334* l, 16. r, wife for wife: f, 339, l. 29.
r, not for not. f, (...). l, 35. (...), then was he also for then we also. f,
396. l, 22. r, then for the. f, ^30. l, 28. r, nul^ (...) (...). f, (...). l,
(...) r, worlds for words. f, 464. l, 3. r, them for then. f, 503 l, 8. r,
which for with. f, 558. l, 3. r, (...) (...) (...) l, 1^. read swim for some:
f, 608. line 34 r, desired for edisred f, 632. l, 32. read event for even.
(...) (...) (...) reparing for repaying f, 760, line 7. r, man for many: f,
767, line 9. r, cruelty for cruelly, f, 798, (...), (...) many* f, (...), l,
(...) r, dead for death. f, 810, l, 4. r, gave for wave. f, 811, l, 4* r, we
for were f, 815. l, 36. (...)* l, 34. r, of the for the of* f, 852, l, 5, r,
then for them f, 898, l, 33. r, saying for saving. f, 906, l, 6^ (...) to for
to us.


