SAINT AVSTINS CARE OR THE DEAD, OR HIS BOVKE INTIT'LED De cura pro mortuis,
translated for the use of those who either have not his volumes, or have not
knowlige in the Latin tungue.

Printed and published, M.DC. XXXVI.

THE TRANSLATORS INTENT.
THe motive of my translation is partly to delight the Rieder with the
Curiosity of the discourse, and partly to acquainte him wi' the notorius
difference which in it appieres betwixt the doctrine, spirit, and style o'those
Primitive ages (in part of which Saint Austin flourished) and the doctrine,
spirit, and style of the pretensiue Reformers of our present times, concerning
some points of Religion in controversy betwixt them, and us Roman Catholics,
which the tenor of the Tractate will particularly declare, and specify;
especially touching Purgatory, and prayer to Saints; which place of
Purgatory, Saint Austines doctrines (professedly asserting in several parts
of this his brief elucubration, prayer for Souls departed in state of
salvation) so necessarily supposes, that I must occasionally exhort the
erroneous perusers for their own souls safety touching this particular, to
adhere to antiquity, and renounce novelty, seriously yet farther reflecting
on that which the same S. Austin (applying a certain passage of the Apostle to
this same purpose) in another place delivers concerning the pains of
Purgatory: 1 Cor. 3. 15. in Psalm. 37.
sufficient to cause al its contemners to tremble. Because (quoth S. Austin) it
is said, he shall be saved as it were by fire, that fire is contemned: ey
plainly althou' they be saved by fire, yet that fire, is more grievous than all that one can suffer in this life. For which cause the same renowned Father
immediately before in the same place, and occasion, most ingeniously, and
iudiciously terms the pains of Purgatory an emendatorie fire, ernestly
desiring God to purge him in this life, and render him such a one that now he
stands not niede of it. In so much that by thiese passages, and by this present
Treatise it will finally appiere that they who refuse to pray for Souls in
Purgatory, John. Calu. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 14, ^i^e,
ar no such Christians as ancient S. Austin, and others o'former ages: this
Father being (even as Calvin himself confesses) the best and most fidelious
witness of all the aneient writers.

But let this suffice briefly to infinuate both the scope of this matter, and
the translators purpose; in which if perchance the viewer finds not the
claritie which he desires, let him please not to attribute it to the
Interpreters defect, but to the difficulty of the Authors style; who
(supposing the translator in realitie has used no small industry in
elucidating the sense) partly by reason of his own most in genious
profunditie, and partly by the Printers neglect, not only in this but in the
rest of his wourkes, has diverse very obscure and intricate passages. Nether
let any one maruelle at any novelty appiering either in the translators
orthographie, or phrase, supposing he most commonly both writes his wourds
according to their sound in pronuntiation: and som'at latinyzes and
frenchifyes his style in this and other his translations, purposely to mitigate
the asperitie, or ruffnesse of our vulgar tungue, and the more to facilitate it
for those strangers who defire to learn it, and peruse our wrytings; and yet
rather chuseing to streine the property of his own native language than in
any sort to diminishe the energie either of the Authors style, or sense: but
let him totally apply his mind to the scope and matter, of this most famous
Father: for in this doutlesse we will have both pleasure, and profit,

Finally the Translator in most humble manner presents his labor as a
perpetuated DEDICATORIE of his religious affection and respect to the excellent
Princess, and gracious great Lady, the Lady Duches of Richmond, expecting no
other reward for his service, than that her excellency will at her convenient
leisure and retired times, graciously voutsafe to peruse this brief treatise
of the ancient and renowned Father Saint Austin; and seriously reflecte how
much she is traduced by her Preichers, and Directors concerning the doctrine of
prayer for souls departed, Mass, merit, and Mediation of Saints; for thence
doutlesse her Grace by divine grace, and assistance will yet further conceue,
and conclude that, in sembleable sort she is seduced from the true dictamen of
Antiquity in other points of her faith, and Religion under a false pretext of
Scripture, and the written Wourd of God: as by divine assistance I intend
professedly to demonstrate in an other occasion.

AURELIUS AVGVSTIN TO BISHOP PAVLIN, TOUCHING CARE for the ded.
MY venerable fellow B. Paulin, I have bin long a detter to your letters since
you writ unto me by the servants of our most religious sister Flora, propunding
me a question, whether it profits any one after his decease to have his body
buried at the monument of a Saint, for this, the same mentioned widow had
inquired of you concerning her Son in those parts departed, to whom you had
rescrybed comforting her by your letters; also signifying that to be
accomplished which with maternal and, pious affection she desired, viz. to have
the corpse of the faithful youth Cynegius defunct, put in the Church of the most
blessed Confess^r Felix: by occasion of which it was effected that you writ to
me even by the same carriers of your letters, propounding the same question;
both requesting me to deliver my responsiue opinion, and yet not being silent
your self in delivering your own dictamen: for you say the motions of those
religious, and faithful minds which procure these matters, sieme to you not to
be vain: and you add that it cannot be void of cause that the universal
Church accustomes to pray for the deceased, in so much that hence it may also
be coniectured that it profits one after his death, if for the interment of his
body such a place is provided by the faith of his friends in which even this
manner of procured assistance of Saints may appiere. But althou' this be thus,
yet you signify you know not sufficiently how that sentence of the Apostle is
not contrary to this opinion. We shall all stand at Christ's Tribunal that
every one may receive according to that which he performed in his body, be it
goud, or evil. For surely this Apostolical sentence admonishes us, that must
be performed before death, which may profit us after our decease: not the^ when
every one is to receue according to that which he did before his death.

But this question is thus resolved viz. that it is acquired by a certain
manner of life during the time we remain in this body, that these things may
som'at help the deceased, and that by this means, they are succor'd according
to those matters which they performed by their bodies, by those things which
are religiously performed for them after their bodies decease. Mark merit
ackowliged in this: and other places by Saint Austin: yet rejected, and
renounced by pretensiue reformers.
For this cause it is that these matters avail not those who either have so ill
merited that they deserve not to be succor'd by them, or else who have merited
so well that they niede not such succors. Whence it is concluded that it is the
manner of life which one has exercised by his body, which is the cause why
these matters profit, or profit not him for whom they are performed after
he has left his body. For if no merit is acquired in this life by which these
matters may profit one, it is in vain to procure it after this life. Thus it
is effected that nether the Church nor the care of ones own friends exhibites
in vain what Religious acts they are able to perform for the deceased, and yet
is it true that every one shall receue according to that he performed by his
body, be it goud or be it evil, our Lord rendering to every one according to
his operations. For it is acquired in this life which he led in his body,
that, that which is exhibited may profit him after the death of his body. Now
this my brief responsion might sufficiently fatisfie your demand, yet in
regard I have other motives which I judge necessary to ansere, afforde me
some longer attention.

We riede in the bouks of Machabies, The Machabies ancient Scriptures.
that sacrifice was offered for the ded; yet if in no place of the ancient
Scriptures it were red at all, Reflecte on the universal Churches custom in S
Austins time, to pray for the ded in Mass.
nevertheless the authority of the universal Church which clearly appieres
in this Custom, is not small, where, in the Priests prayers which are vtterd
to our Lord God at his Altar, also the recomendation of the ded has its place.

But we must further more laboriously inquire whether the place in which one is
buried, any thing profits the soul of the deceased. And inprimis it is to be
examined not according to a vulgarly known opinion, but rather according to
the sacred Scriptures of our Religion, whether in any respect it conduces
either to the inflicting, or increasing the misery of peoples souls after this
life, if their bodies be not buried. Nether is it to be bilieued, as it is red
in Virgil, that the unburied ar debarred from passing the Infernal River, as if
they were not permitted to be transported by those horrid coasts and AEn^d. 6.
hoarce gulphes before their bones were set at rest. who can move a Christian
heart wi' these poetical and fabulous figments, since that our Lord Jesus, to
the intent that Christians might securely suffer death by their hands who were
to have Math. 10.
their bodies in their power, assures us that, not even any one heir of their
head shall perish, Luc. 12.
exorting them not to fear those who when they shall have killed the body,
have no more to do.

Whence it was that in my first bouke of the City of God, I spoke that which,
as I suppose, is sufficient to stop their mouths, who imputing to Christian
times that barbarous ruin especially which Rome suffered, obiecte that unto
the^, that Christ did not their succore his own people: who, when it is anserd
them that, the souls of those his fidelious people were receued by him
according to the merits of their Faith, then they insulte about their
insepulcherd bodies. For this cause I explicated this whole place of Scripture
in such terms as thiese. For nether indiede could they possible be buried in
such a great ruin of Carcasses, nether does a pious man embracing the
predicted sentence of our Savior, much fear this; nor that beasts devouring
them shall hurt those bodies which are to be resuscitated, an of which one
heir of theirs shall not perish. For verity would in no sort have said,
fear not those who kille the body, but cannot kille the soul, if any of
that which an enemy would do to the bodies of the Saints, did any way
prejudice the future life. Except peradventure some one is so absurd as to
contend that we must not fear before our death those who kille the body least
they kille it: and yet that we must fear after death least they should suffer
it to be buried when it is a' ready killed. Ergo, that would be false which
Christ says. Who kille the body, and afterward have no more to do, if they
have so much to do about bodies: God defend that should be false, which
verity pronounced. It is said that they do som' at when they kille the body,
in regard there is sense in a body which is to be killed, but that afterward
they have no more to do, cause there is no sense in a body killed. wherefore
many bodies of Christians have not bin couerd with earth, but none ever
separated any of them from both Heaven and earth, which he replenishes totally
with his presence who knows whence he is to resuscitate that he created. It is
indiede said in the 78. Psalm, They exposed the bodies o'thy servants for
meite to the birds of the air, the flesh of thy Saints to the beasts of the
earth: they effused their blud like water round about Jerusalem, and there was
none who would bury them. Yet this was vtterd to amplify the cruelty o'those
who did thiese things, and not to declare any infelicitie in those who sufferd
them. For althou' thiese matters sieme cruel, and horrible in the view of men,
Psalm. 115.
yet precious is the death of his Saints in the view of our Lord.

For this cause all thiese particulars, that is the provision of a funeral, the
quality of the sepulture, the pomp of Exequies, ar rather comforts for the
living, than helps for the ded. If a precious sepulture profits the impious,
a pour one, or none will prejudice the pious. An argument founded in a
contrary absurdity.
Agreat company of servants made a sumptuous funeral for the purpled rich one
in the view of men, but the Ministry of Angels made the vlcerous pour one
much more sumptuous exequies in the view of our Lord, who did not exalte him
to a marble tumbe, but carried him into Abraham's bosom: They against whom I
interprised the defense of the City of God, laffe at these matters:
nevertheless even their Philosophers contemned the care o'Sepulture: and often
times in tire armies when they died for their temporal Countries, nether cared
where afterward their bodies were to lie, or by what beasts they were
devoured, and the Poets had license to say plausiblely touching this matter.
Heaven couers him who has no coffin. Lacan.
How much less ought they to insulte over Christians touching their
insepulchred bodies to whom the reformation o'their flesh and all their
members in respect o'that which their decayed carcases had lost, is promised to
be restored and redintegrated, not only out of the earth, but also out of the most
secret bosom of other elements. Nevertheless the bodies of the deceased, are not therefore to be abiected, and contemned, especially those of just, and
faithful people, which the Holy Ghost has used as instruments and vessels for
all goud works. For if the Fathers garment, or ring, or the like, is so much
the more dear to his posterity by how much ones affection was greater toward
his parents, in no sort ar the bodies themselves to be contemned, which surely
we carry about us much more familiarly, and intrisically than any apparel,
whateuer. For our bodies perteyne, not to any extrinsical ornament or help,
but to humane nature it self.

Whence it is that the funerals of the ancient just people, wiere performed with
officious piety, their exequies celebrated, and their sepulchers provided: ey
and they in their life time commanded their children to bury, Genes. 23.
yea and to transfer their bodies. Tob. 2. and 12.
And Tobias according to the testimony of an Angel, is commended to have
merited Gods favor in burying the ded. Also our Lord himself being to
resuscitate the third day, publishes the religious woman's goud work, and
recommends it to be published, Math. 26.
for that she effused a precious ointment on several members of his body, and
did this for his burial, and those are laudably commemorated in the Euangel
who having taken his body from the Cross, procur^ed it to be honorably
covered and buried. Yet thiese Authorities admonish us not that there is any
sense or fieling in Carcasses, but they signify that even the bodies of the
ded perteine to Gods providence (whom such offices of pity pleases) for
confirmation of the faith of the Resurrection. Whence it is also profitablely
learned how great a reward thiere may before the almesses which we exhibit to
those who live and ar sensible, if nether this office, and diligence perishes
with God, which is performed for the examinated members of people.

Thiere are indeed also other particulars which vtterd by prophetical Spirit,
the holy Patrlarches would have understood touching either the burying, or
tra^sferring their bodies: but this is no place to treat of them, since that
which we have delivered suffices. But if those things which are necessary to
the sustenance of the living, as ar victuals and apparel, althou' they be
wanting with great difficulty, yet they violate not virtue in goud people, nor
extirpate piety out of the mind, but revive it, and make it more abundant, how
much less do those matters which use to be exhibited for performance of the
funerals, and burials of the bodies of the deceased, when they are wanting,
make those misera-ble who are a'redie quietly placed in the secret seats
of the pious.

And according to this when thiese matters wiere wanting to Christian Corpse in
the vastatio^ either o'that great City, or else of other Towns, it is nether
the fault of the living which could not exhibit them, nor any pain to the
ded which could not be sensible o'them. This is my opinion touching de cause
and reason of Sepulture, which I thierefore transferd into this bouke out of an
other of my own, in regard it was more easy for me to repeat this, than to
deliver it in an other manner.

Which if it be true, surely also the provision of place for the burial of
bodies at the monuments of Saints, is apart of goud humane affection toward
the funerals of ones own friends. For if it is some sort of religion to bury
them, it cannot be noe religion to have a care whiere they be buried. Yet when
such comforts of the living are required by which the pious affection o'their
friends toward, them may appiere, I perceive not what helps they be for the
ded, save only that while they remember where the bodies o'those they affect,
Note praver to Saints for the souls of the deceased.
are placed, they may recommend them by prayer, to the same Saints as to
Patrones, whom they have receued to assiste with our Lords which in diede they
may perform althou' they could not interre them in such places. But nether be
those places which being adorned ar made the Sepulchers of the ded, called
Memories, or monuments for any other reason than because they by way of
admonition renew the memory, and cogitatio^ o'those who are subtracted by
death from the eyes of the living, least they be subtracted also from the hearts
of people by oblivion. For eue^ the name of Memory, most plainly declares the
same, and is called a Monument for that it moves the mind, that is in regard
it admonishes us. For which cause the Grecians also call it Mnymeion, which wie
call a memory, or a monument, cause the memory it self by which we
remember, in their language is called mnymy. When therefore the mind remembers
whiere the body of ones dear friend is buried, and the place occurres which is
venerable for the name of the Martyr, the affection of the rememberer, Observe
praver to Saints for the deceased.
and prayer recomends the soul it loved, to the same Martyr: which affection
when it is exhibited by their faithful and most dear friends to diceased
people, they themselves merited that it should profitte them. But if any
neces*sitie gives noe leave, or permits not, bodies either to be interred at
all, or not be interred in such places, as those, Note the public prayer
of the Church for the ded, befides the devotions of particular persons.
yet those prayers for the souls of the ded are not to be pretermitted, which
the Church has engaged her self to perform under a general commemoration for
all that are ded in Christian and Catholic Communion, even without particular
mention o'their names, to the end that those prayers may be exhibited to those,
by one pious common mother; who ar neglected touching thiese matters, by their
parents, Children, Couzens, or friends. Yet if these supplications were wanting
which are performed in a right faith, and piety, for the ded* then I am of
opinion, that it would not in any sort avail their souls in how holle place
soever their exammated bodies were put.

Wherefore when, the faithful mother desired to have the body of her faithful
child put in the Church of a Martyr, for her to have had this faith, was a
kind of prayer, since that indeed she bilieued that his soul was (...) by the
Martyrs merits; Saints mediate for souls departed.
and this was that which profited, if profitable it was. And that the mother
remembers the same Sepulcher, and ^ecommends her son in her prayers more and
more, not the place of the ded body, but the mothers lively affect procieding
from the memory of the place, succores the soul of the deceased. For it does
not improfitably concern the religious mind of the prayer to consider at once,
both who recommonded, and to whom he is recommended. For the pra^ers dispose
the members o'their, bodies as is convenient for Supplicants to dispose them,
when they bend their knies, when they extend their hands, when they prostrate
their bodies on the ground: and what ever other visible actions they use in
that nature, although their invisible will, and hearts intention is known to God
who niedes not thiese external fignes for the expression of a humane mind unto
him, yet one moves himself more by thiese particulars to pray, and lamente
more humblely, and Fervently.

And I know not how it is that (since thiese motions of the body cannot be
performed but by a precedent motion of the mind) by thiese external actions
visibly used, that other invisible motion which causes them, is mutually
increased; and how by this means that affection of the mind which preceded
thiese same actions as their causes, increases by cause they are effected. Yet
if any one be in such sort held, or else ^yed that he cannot dispose his
corporal members, the internal man ceases not therefore to pray, nor to
prostrate his mind before the eyes of God in hi^ most secret closet in which he
is compuncted.

In sembleabel sort since it much importes whiere he places the ded body of
him for whose soul he (...) God, in regard that both the precedent affect did
choose a holy place, and having put the body in it, the remembrance of the
same renewes, and increases that affect which preceded: yet althou' he cannot
effect this, nevertheless when a religious friend has once determined to
interre him whom he loves, he must not in any case cease from his necessary
prayers in recommendation of him: for whiere ever the body of the deceased
lies, or lies not, the rest of his soul is to be proeured: which when it
departed thence carried its sense with it, by which it may appiere in what case
every one is whether in good or evil state. Nether expects the Spirit its
life should be succored by the flesh to which it afforded that life which
departing it carried away, and is to render as its return, cause the flesh
acquires not the merit of resurrection to the Spirit, but the Spirit to the
flesh, whether it reuyues to pain, or to glory.

We riede in the Ecclesiastical History which Eusebius writ in Gre^ke and
Ruffinus turned into Latin, Martyrs bodies to have bin cast to the dogs, and
that the bones of the ded remaining, were utterly consumed with fye^, and the
ashes dispersed in the river Rhodan least aine part of them should remain for
a memory; which is not to be imagined to have bin for any other cause
permitted by divine providence, but for that Christians in confessing Christ,
might learn that while they contemn this life, they much more contemn
burial. For this which was perpetrated with great cruelty on Martirs bodies,
if it had any thing hurt them, whereby their most inulncible spirits should
not rest in blessedness, surely it would not have bin permitied. It is
thierefore really declared that out Lord said not, fear not those who kille
the body, and baue no more to do, for that he was not to suffer them to
perpetrate any thing on the bodies of his de^eased servants, but for that what
oner they were permitted to effect, yet nothing should be effected by which the
felicity of deceased Christians might be diminished, nothing which might
thence redounde to the sense o'those who live after their death: or at the
least, that nothing should perteine to the detriment o'their bodies, by reason
of which they should rise less entire.

And yet if by reason o'that affection of a humane mind according to which
none ever hated his own flesh, people after their death perceue any thing to
be wanting to their deceased bodies, which the solemnity of sepulture
according to the custom of every ones several Country affordes, they are
contristated like men, and fear that, touching their bodies before their death,
which after their death appertenes to them: in so much that we find in the
Boukes of Kings, 3. Reg. 13.
that God by one certain Prophet menaces an other who had transgressed his
Command, that his Carcass, should not be carried into the sepulcher of his
Ancetours: the reno^r of which Scripture is this. Our Lord says thus, in
regard thou have bin disobedient to the Mouth of our Lord, and have not
observed the Commandment the Lord thy God gave the, and for that thou have
rerurned and eren bred, and drunk water in that place in which our Lord
commanded the not to eite bred, nor drink water, thy carcass shall not be
put in the sepulcher of thy Ancetors.

If we recogitate how much this punishment is to be accounted according to the
Euangell in which we have learned not to fear least our exanimated members
should suffer after the body is killed, it deserves not to be named a pain:
yet if we consider humane affection toward its own flesh, one might be
contristated alive for that he was sorry that this was to pass with his body
althou? it should not be sensible of it when it should be effected. Hence it
was that our Lord would chastise his servant who had not contemned to
accomplish his Precept, but only being deceued by an others fallace, imagined
he had obeyed it when he did not* Nether is it to be conceued he was so killed
by the beast biting him, that* his soul was thence violently carried to the
infernal pains, since that the same Lion which killed him guarded his body,
the Ass on which he rid remaining unhurt, and also the cruel beast assisting
with an vndaumed presence at his Masters funeral. By which admirable sign it
appieres that the man of God was rather temporally corrected to death, than
punished after death. Touching which matter the Apostle having for the offenses
of some commemorated, the infirmities and defects of maine. 1 Cor. 1^
For (quoth he) if we would judge our selves we should not be judged by our
Lord: but when we are judged, we are reprehended by our Lord least we be
condemned with this world. Truly he who had deceued him, buried him with
sufficient honor in his own proper monument, and procured himself to be
buried at his Corpse hoping that by this means his own bones would be spared
when the time should come in which according to the Prophecy of that man of
God, losias King of Judah caused the bones of many ded people to be
disinterred; and contaminated the sacrilegious Altars whcih were erected to
soulptils, with the same bones. For indeed he, spared the monument in which the
Prophet was buried who had predicted these matters above three centenaries of
years a fore, and for his respect, his Sepulcher who had seduced him, was not
violated. For by reason o'that affection according to which none ever hated his
own flesh, he provided for his own carcass who by a lie had slain his own
Soul. For this cause therefore for which every one naturally loves his own
flesh, to him it was. a punishment to know that he was not to be put in the
Sepulcher of his Ancetors, and to this, a care to use such providence, that his
bones would be spared, if he la^e ^^re to him whose Sepulcher none would
violate.

The Martyrs of Christ combating for the truth vanquished this affection.
Nether is it any merueile that those contemned that which tehy wiere not to
fiele after their death, who could not he vanquished wi'those torments which
they felt alyne. For surely God who sufferd not the Lion to touch the
Prophets body which he had slain, a^^e more, and of a killer made him a
kieper, he could, I say, have debarred the dogs to which the murdered bodies of
his servants wiere cast, from them, and he could innumerable ways have
terrified the cruelty of the people so that they should not have dared either
to destroy their bodies by fire, or disperse their ashes. But nether was this
trial to be awanting to the various multiplicite o'their temptations, least
their fortitude in Christ's Confession whcih was not to yield to the barbarous
rigor of the persecution, for the safety of their bodies, should tremble for
the honor of a sepulcher, and finally least faith of the Resurrection should
fear the destruction of humane bodies. Thiese matters theirefore wiere also to
be permitted to the intent that after thiese so great examples of honor,
fervent Martyrs in Christ's Confession, might also be witnesses of that verity
according to which they learned that, those who killed their bodies, had
afterward no more to do with them, in regard that what ever they should do
to their defunct bodies, doubtless they should effect nothing, since that in
insensible flesh nether hie who thence departed, could fiele, nor hie who
created it could loase any thing. But althou' among thiese matters which
passed touching the bodies o'those who wiere killed, the Martyrs not fearing
them sufferd with great fortitude, nevertheless their Christian brothers wiere
much grieved for that they had no means either to perform their duties,
touching the funeral of the Saints, nor yet did the strait vigilancie of the
cruel kiepers permit them to subtracte any part of them, secretly, as the
same History testifies. So that when no misery did touch those who were
killed, either in the tearing a pieces the members of their bodies, in the
combustion o'their bones, or in the dispersion of their ashes, yet thiese who
could not bury any part of them, were miserably afflicted, since that they in
a certain manner felt that of which the Martyrs wiere in noe sort sensible,
and whereas no suffering was in thiese, yet in the other there was a most
miserable compassion.

According to this which I called a miserable compassion they are commended,
and praised by K. David, who exhibited the mercy of Sepulture to the dry
bones of Saul and Ionathas; 2. Reg. 22
yet what mercy is afforded to those who are not sensible? Is this peradventure
to be reduced to that opinion, that insepulcherd people cannot pass the
infernal river? Let this be far from Christian faith, otherwise such a great
multitude of Martyrs whose bodies could not be buried, were in a miserable
case; and verity fallaciously pronunced. Fear not those who kille the body,
and have no more to do, if they could so much prejudice them as to impedite
their passage to their desired places. But because this without all doubt, is
most false, nether does sepulture denied, to their bodies indomage faithful
people, nor profitte Infidells if they have it? Why therefore are those who
buried Saul and his Son commended for this by the pious King, save only for
that the hearts of the commiserators, ar well affected when they grieve at that
which happens to the ded bodies of others, which according to that affect by
which none ever hated his own flesh, they will not have done after their death
to their own bodies: and precure while they remain sensible, to have that
exhibited to others who be not sensible, which they will have exhibited to them
selves when they are not to be sensible.

Certain visions ar recounted which sieme to cause no irregardeable question
in this disputation. For some ded people ar related to have appiered to the
living either in their sliepe, or in some other manner, and showing the places
in which their bodies lay unburied, to those who were ignorant of it, and to
have admonished them to exhibit the Sepulture to them which they wanted.

If we replye that these things ar false, we shall sieme impudently to
contradicte both the writings of some Christians, and also the dictamen of
those who affirm they happened unto them: but it is to be responded or anserd
that, we must not imagine the ded ar sensible of these matters for that they
sieme to themselves either to signifye, or demand them in their sliepe. For
even the living appiere often times to the living being a sliepe, when they
know them selves that they appear, and they hear them relate these
particulers which they dreamed, and affirming that they had them, in their
sliepe doing, or speaking som'at. If therefore one can sie me in his sliepe
declaring som'at which is either aredie effected, or else prenuntiating some
future matter while I am totally ignorant of it, nor yet care not a jot, not
only what he dreams but nether whether he be awake while I sliepe, or sliepe
while I wake, or whether we sliepe both, or wake, at one and the same time, in
which he has a vision in which he sies me. What meruelle is it if ded people
nether knowing, nor fieling these things, yet ar viewed by the living in their
dreams, and utter something which those who ar awake known to be true.
Wherefore I should think it to be effected by Angelical operations, whether it
be permitted, or commanded from above that these should sieme to utter som'at
in their sliepe touching the burial o'their bodies, althou' they ble quite
ignorant whose bodies they be. And this is sometimes profitably effected,
whether it be to give some sort of comfort to the living to whom those ded
people apperteyne whose representations appiere to the dreamers; or to the
intent that by these admonitions the humanity of Sepulture may be recommended
to humane generation which althou' it helps not the deceased, yet is it
culpable irreligiosit^e to neglect it.

Yet sometimes people are carried to great errors by fallatious visions, who
justly deferue to suffer such illusions; as for example if one should view
that which Aeneas by poetical falsitie is related to have siene in the
infernal regions, and that the figure of some unsepulcherd person should
appear unto him, and utter such particulars as Palinurus is recounted to have
vtterd to Aeneas, and that when he awakes he should find his body in the same
place in which he heard it to be, while he dreamed, and was admonished and
requested to bury it when he had found it, that in regard he perceived it to
be true, he should for that cause bilieue that, the ded are therefore buried
that their souls may pass to those places. Does not he who bilienes these
matters very much exorbitate from the way o'trueth? For such is humane
infirmity, that when any one sies one ded in his sliepe, he imagins, he sies
his soul, but when he. Sembleably dreams of any one alive, he doutes not but
that nether his body, nor his soul, but the similitude of a man appiered to
him, as if not the souls, but the similitudes of people souls being in the
same sort ignorant, could not appiere to those who dream.

When I was at Milan, I heard for certain that when a debt was demanded of
one by producing the bond of his father deceased (which det had bin paid
unknown to his son) he began to be very much co^tristated, and to admire that
his Father dying had not declared his dets unto him, supposing he made a will.
Then his Father appeared to him being very much perplexed, in his sliepe, and
signified where it was recorded that the bond was cancelled: which being found,
and produced, the young man not only repelled the calumniation of the false
debt, but also receued the acquittance which his Father had not receued when
he paid the money. In this case therefore it is conceued that the soul of the
Father had care of his Son, and to have come to him being a sliepe, to the
intent that teiching him that which he ignored, he might deliver him from a
great molestation. Yea and amost at the very same time, at which we heard
this, that is, I being at Milan, Eulogius the Rhetoritian of Carthage, who was
my Scholar in the same Art, as himself after my return into Africa related
to me, when he expounded to his Scholars Cicero's books of Rhetorique,
perusing the lesson which he was to deliver to them the day ensuing, he found
a certain obscure place which not understanding he could scarce sliepe for
care, to whom being in a dream that might, I expounded that to him which he
did not understand, yea not I, but my figure, I ignoring it, and either employed
in far different matters beyond the seas, or not caring a jot for his cares.
How these things are effected I know not, but in what ever manner they are
effected, why bilieue we not they are effected in the same manner that one
viewes one in his sliepe ded, in the same manner as it is effected that he
viewes one alive, certainly nether o'them either knowing or caring, where, when
or who dreams o'their figures, or shapes.

Sembleable to dreams are also some visions of the living who have their
senses troubled, as are those of frantique people, or in any sort furious, for
these also speike to them selves as if they spoke to those who are really
present, as well with the absent as the present whose figures they view
whether a live or ded. But even as those who live know not that they are viewed
by them, or that they speak wi'the^, for that inrealitie they are nether
present, nor discourse wi'them, but only being people troubled in their senses,
they suffer such imaginary visions: in the same fashion those who have
departed this life, to people thus affected seem to be present when they are
absent, not knowing at all whether any body, imaginarily viewes them.

Of this same nature is also that other matter, vizt; when people ar
subtracted from their corporal senses, and possessed with such visions more
profundly than if they sliepe. An to these also appiere the resemblances both
of the living, and the ded, but when they return to their senses who ever they
affirm they have siene ded, they are truly credited to have bin with them:
nether consider they who hear these matters that sembleably the resemblances
also o'some living ar viewed, they remaining absent and ignorant of the same.

A certain ordinary person Curina by name, in the Incorporation of Tullie
which is very near to the City Hippon, a pour officer, and scarce in the
rank of a Diumuir in that place, and an absolute rustique being sick and
deprived of his senses he lay some certain days amost ded, yet a very small
breath remaining in his nose which by putting tou ones hand was scarce
perceived, served for a slender sign of his life, which as one astonished
sufferd him not to be buried. He moved not one member, he recelued no
sustenance, he perceived nothing with his eyes, nor felt any pain he was put
tou in any other of his corporal senses: nevertheless he sae many things in
his sliepe which at length after many days awaking he related. And in primis
as soune as he opened his eyes: let some body go (quoth he) to Curina the
smith's house, and know what is done there: when the messiuger came thither, he
was found to have died at the same moment in which this man was restored to
his senses, and had revived a most from death. Then he signified to those who
were present with attention, that Curina the smith was commanded to appiere at
the time of his own dismission: and that he heard in the place whence he
returned that, not Curina the Curial, but Curina the Smith was commanded to be
adduced to those places of the ded. Therefore in those visions as in his
dreams, it was aduertissed that among those deceased people which he sae, some
were treated according to the diversity o'their merits. Also some he observed
whom he had known alive. But I perhaps, should have bilieued them to be ded,
if he in those his, as it were dreams, had not siene some who are yet alive at
this present, vizt; some priests of his country; by whose priest there, he was
instructed to that purpose that he might be me baptized at Hippon, which he
said was performed, wherefore he sae in that vision a priest, clerks, and my
self not yet ded, in which same vision he also sae such as were ded. Why
should he not be supposed to have siene them as well as us, both of us, being
absent, and ignorant of this, and accordingly not to have siene the persons
themselves, but their resemblances, or figures, as also the resemblances of the
places? for he both sae the field in which that priest was, with the clerks,
and the City Hippone where he was as it were baptized. In which places
certainly he was not when there he siemed to be. For he knew not what was
done there at that time: which doutlesse he would have known if verily he had
bin there. Therefore these matters were siene which are not presented in the
things as they are in their nature, but as they are adumbrated, or shadowed in
certain images of things.

Finally, after many things which he viewed, he related that he was introduced
in to Paradyse, and that it was said to him at the time of his dismission ready
to return to his friends: go be baptized if thou will be in that place of the
blessed. Further more being admonished to be baptized, he anserd it was a'redie
done. To whom he with whom he spoke replied go, quoth he, and be truly
baptized, for thou saest that in a vision. After this he recover, and went to
Hippon: Easter now approached, he deliuerd his name among other Competents with
very many others in like manner unknown to us. Nether had he care to notifye
his vision to mie, or to any of mine. He was baptized; and the holy days
being past, he returned home. After a year or two transacted, or more, I knew
all these particulars first by a friend of his and mine at my table when we
discoursed about some such matters. Then I urged, and caused him to relate
these things in presense to me, his honest citticens testifying both his
strange infirmity, how he had layne almost ded, for the space of many days,
and o'that other Curina the Smith which I above mentioned, and when he related
me all these matter, they also then rememberd, and auerred that they had heard
them of him. Wherefore as he sae his own baptism, and mie; and the City
Hippone, the Church, and the font, not in the things them selves but in
certain similitudes, so also did he view some other certain live persons they
not knowing it.

Why therefore might he not view those ded persons they not knowing it? why
bilieue we not these operations to be Angelical by the dispensation of Gods
providence who uses well both goud and ill things according to the inscrutable
profunditie of his judgments, whether mortal men's minds be hence instructed,
or deceived, whether they be comforted, or terrified: as to every one either
mercy is to be exhibited, or revenge to be irrogated by him to whom the
Church sings mercy and judgment not in vain. Let every one take as he
please that which I will say.

If the souls of the ded were present to the living, and did converse with us
when we see them in our sleep (to be silent of others) my own pious mother
should noe night relinquishe me, who followed me by s^ae, and by land that she
might live with me. For God defend that she by a more happy life should be
made so cruel that when any thing afflictes my heart, she should not comfort
her contristated son, whom she ever vnically loved, whom she would never
sie sorry. But surely that which the Sacred Psalm perfecty soundes, is true,
because my Father and my Mother relinquished me, Psalm. 26.
yet our Lord receued me. If therefore our Fathers have relinquished us, how are
they present to our cares and businesses. An if our parents are not present,
who are those other ded persons which know what we do or what we suffer?
Isaias the Prophet says, Cap. 65.
for thou art our Father, hicause Abrabam was ignorant of us, and Israel knew
us not. If such great Patriarchs were ignorant of what was done touching the
people o'their own procreation, to whom for their Faith in God the people of
their progeny was promised, how meddle the ded wi'the living in knowing, and
assisting them in their actions and affeires? How say we that these consulted
with them: who dyed before their evils happened which followed their dethes? if
also after death they be sensible of all those matters which happen in the
calamities of this mortal life. Or peradventure say we this by error, and
o^tieme those for quiet whom the inquyet life of the living sollicits? what is
therefore that which God promised for a great benefit to the most pyous King
Josias, that he should dye before, least he should sie those mischiefs which he
menaced futurely to happen to that place, and people? which words of God are
these. Thus says the Lord God of Israel: my words which thou did hear, and
feared before my face while thou hear dest them, which I spoke of this place, and
those who inhabit in it, that it be left desolate and in malediction: and thou
did tiere thy garments and cried in my conspect, and hearing, and the Lord
of Sabath said: not so, lo I will put the with thy Fathers, and thou shall be
placed with peace; and thy eyes shall not view all those miseries which I will
induce into this place, and to the people which inhabit in it. This King being
terrifyed with Gods comminations, had cried; and tore his garments, and was
secured from all future evils by the accelerations of a hasty death, that he
should so rest in peace as he should not sie them. Therefore the spirits of the
deceased existe there where they shall not view those things which are done, or
chance to people in this life. How then sie they their own sepulchers, or
their own bodies, or whether they lie unburied, and abiected? How are they
present at the miseries of the living, since that either they suffer their own
evils if such merits they have contracted, or rest in peace (as was promised to
this Josias) where they ^^steine no evils nether by suffering them selves, nor
by compassionating others, freed from all those evils which they sufferd while
here they lived.

Perhaps some one will say, if the ded have no care of the living, how did that
rich one who was tormented in Hell pray Father Abraham to send Lazarus, to
his five brothers yet alive, and to deal with them, least they also should
come to the same place of torments? But did the rich one because he said this,
therefore know what his brothers did after or suffer at that time? Prayet for
the ded is to be used althou we know not distinctlye the actions which they
exercise in the other life.
such was his care of the living althou he knew not at all what they did, as
we have care of the ded, althou? we are quite ignorant what they do. For if we
cared not for the ded, surely we would not pray to God for them. Finally,
nether did Abraham send Lazarus, but anferd that they had Moses, and the
Prophets hiere, whom they ought to hear to the end they might not come to
those punishments. Where it recurres to be observed, how Father Abraham knew
not what hiere was done where he knew Moses, and the Prophets to be, that is
their boukes by obeying to whom, people might avoid theinfernal torments:
where in conclusion, he knew that rich one to have lived in deliciousnes, but
pour Lazarus in labor, and pains For this also he says unto him. Remember
son that thou haest received houd things in this life, but Lazarns evil.
Therefore he knew thiese things which verily were done about the living, not
about the ded: yet not when they were done about the living, but they being ded
he might know them by Lazarus means least it should be false which the
Prophet affirms. Abraham knew us not.

Furthermore it is to be confessed that indied the ded knows not what is done
here, but this is while it is done hiere for afterward they hear of those who
dying depart hence, and pass to them: not indeed al things, but those which
they are permitted to disclose, who also are permitted to remember them, and
such as those must hear to whom they notifye them.

The ded also may by the Angels which are present at those things which here ar
done, hear some thing which he to whom all things are subject, judges
necessary for them to hear? For unless there were Angels which could be
present both in the places of the living, and the ded, our Lord Jesus would not
have said, it chanced that pour man dyed, and was carried by Angels into the
bosom of Abraham. Therefore they could be now here, and now there, who carried
away him whom God would have them. Also the souls of the ded may know some
things done here which Gods Spirit reueling them are necessary for them to
know, and which it is not necessary for the^ not to know, not only past, or
present, but also future matters. As not all sorts of people but the Prophets
knew while they lived here: nether knew they all things, but those which the
divine providence judged necessary to be reveled unto them. An divine
Scripture also testifyes that some of the ded are sent to the living, as
contrarily that Paul was rapt from the living into Pararadyse. For the Prophet
Samuel being deceased, predicted future things also to King Saul alive:
althou'some are of opinion it was not he who could be euocated by art magique,
but some ill spirit agreeable to such an ill action; which represented his
person, since that the bouke of Ecclesiasticus which Jesus the Son of Sirach
is delivered to have writ, and is affirmed to be^ Salomons, for some
similitude in the style, conteines in the commendation of the Fathers, that
Samuel even being ded, prophicyed. But if contradiction be made unto The Jews
reject the Ecclesiastique, but S. Austin places it in the Christian canon. lib.
2. de doctrine. Christ. cap. 8.
this bouke by the canon of the Jews (for it is not extant in it) what shall we
say of Moses who certainly is red both in the Deuteronomie to have binded,
and in the Euangel to have appiered to the living with Elias who is not ded.

Hence also that other question is solued, vizt, in what manner the Martyrs
signifye by the benefits which are conferred to those who pray, that they are
present at humane businesses, if the ded know not what the living do. For we
have heard not by incertaine rumors, but by sure witnesses, that Felix the
Confessor appiered to the inhabitants of Nola, which he piously loved when it
was oppugned by the Barbarians, not only by the effects of his benefits, but
also to the view of the people. But thiese things ar exhibited by divine
operation far different from the usual course, which is attributed to every
sort o'creature. For we must not therefore not discern the difference which
is betwixt the virtue of water in its proper order of elements, and the
raritie, or rather singularity of this divine operation, cause our Lord where
he pleased suddenly turned water into wine. Nether because ded Lazarus rize
again, therefore every one ded, rises when he will, nor is he in the same
manner reuyued by one living, when he is astonished, in which he is awaked when
he is a sliepe by one who is awake. Wherefore one thing is the limits of humane
matters, and an other the signs of divine power, those things which are
naturally effected, ar one, and those which miraculously, an other: althou' God
both assists nature that it may have existence, and also nature is not awanting
to miracles. It is not thierefore to be imagined that every disceased person
can be present at the affairs of the living, cause Martyrs ar present either to
cure, or succore some particular people: but rather it is to be known that
Martyrs are therefore present at the affairs of the living by divine power
cause the deceased cannot by their own proper nature be present at the affairs
of the living. How be it this question exciedes the powers of my intendiment,
how it is that the Martyrs help thiese who are certainly helped by them:
whether they by themselves are present at the same time in so diverse, and so
far distant places, either where their memories ar, or in other places beside
their monuments where soever they are known to be present, or else whether,
they existing in a place agreeable to their merits, remote from all conversation
of mortal men, and yet generally praying for the necessities o'their
Supplicants, Mark. It is expedient to the edification of Christian faith for
God to use the mediation of his Saints for the cure, and conforte of his people
in their necessities.
as we pray for the ded to whom never the less we are not present, nor know
where they bie or what they do; God omnipotent who is present in every place,
and nether commixed with us, nor remote from us, hearing the prayers of his
Martyrs, by Angelical Ministry every way diffused, exhibites to people these
solaces, which he judges necessary to be exhibited, who by ineffable power,
and bonitie comends the merits of his Martyrs where he will, when he will, and
as he will, and chiefly by their memories, in regard he knows this is
expedient to the edification of the faith of Christ for whose confession they
sufferd. This matter is hyer than I can atteine to, and more abstruse than I am
able to search out and therefore which o'these twoe, or else whether perhaps
both is so, vizt; that some times by the very presence of the Martyrs, and
sometimes by Angels personating the Martyrs, I dare not determine, I would
rather inquyre these matters o'those who know them; nether is there none who
know these matters, nor none who fieme to them selves to known them, and yet
know them not: for these ar Gods donations, who liberally conferres some to
one, and some to others according to the Apostle who affirms that the
manifestation of the spirit is given to every one for their profitte. To one,
quoth he, is given by the spirit the word of Sapience, to an other is given,
by the spirit the word of knowlige, to an other the word of science according
to the same spirit, but to an other faith in the same spirit, to an other the
guifte of cures in one spirit, to an other operations of power, to an other
Prophecy, to an other discernement of spirits, to an other diuerfitie of
languages, to an other inter-pretation o'wordes: but one, and the same spirit
operates all these, diuyding to every one that which is proper to them, as he
pleases. To whom ever is conferred the discernement of spirits, he knows
these things as they are to be known.

Such a one it is to be bilieued John the Monk to have bin, whom Theodosius
the greater consulted touching the event of the ciuille war, because he had
also the gift o'prophecie. For nether doubt I but that not only every one in
particular may have every one o'these Dones, but also that one may have many;
wherefore this John said to a certain woman very Religious, impatiently
desyring to fie him, and vehemently instanceing by her husbands means to
obtain her desire, when he refused in regard he never permitted this to
women, go, quoth he, tell thy wife she shall fie me the next night, but in her
sliepe: and it was performed. He admonished her touching all that which a
fidelious wife ought to be admonished. Who when she awaked, she fignifyed to
her husband she had siene the man of God in such a form as she had known him.
He who had knowlige of this from them, related it to mie, a grave and noble
personage, and who very much deserved to be credited. But if I my self had
siene that saintlie Monk, in regard, as it is reported, he most patiently
sufferd himself to be interrogated; and anserd most discrietly, I would have
inquyred of him that which perteines to this question: whether he, that is, his
spirit in the figure of his body, came to that woman in her sliepe, as we
dream of our selves in the shape of our bodies: or else he being otherwise
occupied, or if he slept, otherwise dreaming, whether by an Angel, or in any
other manner, such a vision was made, and that he knew before by prophetical
spirit reueling, it was afterward to come to pass that he should promise it.
For if he was present to the dreamer, certainly he had power to do it by
admirable grace, not by nature, and by Gods donation, not by his own proper
forces. But if he either being in other matters employed, or else in a dream,
and busied with other visions, the woman sae him in her sliepe, verily some
such matter was effected, as that which we riede in the Acts of the Apostles
where our Lord Jesus speikes to Ananias touching Sanl, and signifies to him
that Saul sae Ananias coming to him when Ananias himself did not know it.
Whether ever o'theise that man of God should have anserd me, I would also
prociede to inquyre of him touching the Martyrs, whether they are present in
sliepe, or to those who sie them in any other facion, in what form they
please, and chiefly when the Devils confess they are tormented by them in
peoples bodies, and pray them to spare them: or whether these matters are
performed at Gods command by Angelical powers in honor and comendation of the
Saints for the profit of men, they remaining in sovereign rest, and attending
to an other much better vision; separated from us, and praying for us.

For at Milan at S. Geruasius and Protasius Martyrs (as they mentioned in the
same sort other people deceased by expression o'their names) the Devils
confessed S. Ambrose Bishop yet alive, and obsecrated him that he would spare
them, while he was about other matters, and quite ignorant of this when it
passed. Now whether some times these matters be performed by the presence
of the Martyrs, and some time by the presence of Angels, and whether, and by
what signs they can be discerned: none can be able to know and determine this
but he only who has that guifte by Gods Spirit, dividing to every one as he
pleases. I conceive the prenominated John would resolve me all these points
according to my desire, to the end that either I might learn them by his
instruction, and know these things to be true which I should hear: or else
bilieue those things which I should not know, he teiching me, who knows them.
And if perchance he should ansere me out of holy scripture, and should say,
Eccles. 3.
inquire not hyer matters than thy self, Proverb. 15.
and search not stronger matters than thy self, but ever cogitate those
matters which God has commanded thie, I would also receive it graciously. For
it is no small comoditie, at the least to know for certain and clear, that
such matters are not to be exquyred as are obscure, and incertaine, and which
we are not able to comprehend: and that which any one desires to know
imagining it is profitable for him to know it, let him learn it preiudices him
not if he ignores it.

Now since these matters stand thus, let us not imagine that any thing
arriues to the ded of whom we have care save that we solemnily supplicate for
them either by sacrifices of the Altar or prayers, Both the oblation c^the Mass,
and other prayers, and alms diedes profitte souls departed.
or of almeses: how be it, they profitte not all those for whom they are
performed, but those only to whom during their life, it is acquired that they
should be profitable: yet in regard we know not in particular who they be, we
must perform all these things for all the regenerated, to the end that none
o'them be pretermitted, to whom thiese benefits may, and ought to acrue. For
it will be better they should superabound in respect o'them whom they nether
profitte nor disprofitte, than that they should be defective to those whom
they profitte: nevertheless every one performs thiese matters more
diligently for his own intrinsicall friends in regard the like is performed
by them for him. But what ever is expended in the inhumation of the body, it is
no succor for salvation, but an office of humanity conformable to the affect
according to which none ever hates his own flesh. Whence it is that as much as
is in his Power, one must have all the care he can for the body of his neybor
when he who ruled it shall thence depart. An if they who bilieue not the
Resurrection of the flesh perform thiese things, how much more ought those who
bilieue it, to perform them, to the intent that an office thus performed may
be to the body ded, but yet to ryze again, and to remain in eternity; in
some sort a testimony of the same faith. But that some are buried niere the
monuments of Martyrs, Prayer to Saints in particular.
this only siemes to mie to profitte the deceased person, that the affection
of his prayer who commendes him to the patronage of the Martyr, may be increased.

You have now such a responsiue resolution of mine to those points which you
estiemed convenient to inquyre of me, as I could aford you. Which if it is
larger than may suffice, perdone me, for it was in regard, of the desire I had
to discourse longer wi' you wherefore I pray let me know by your rescriptiue
letters how your venerable Dilection accepted this bouke, which doutelesse the
Messinger will render more gracious unto you, vizt. Our brother compresbyter
Candidianus whom as known by your letters, I receued most affectionately, and
dismissed inuoluntarily. For he comforted us much with his prsence, in Christ's
charity, and I must confess I obeyed unto you at his solicitation. For my
mind is with so many matters distracted, that unless he by his continual
admonition had not sufferd me not to forget, surely my responsal had bin
wanting to your question.

FINIS.
Errates.
THe chief errors committed in the printe be these. page 24. line 8. menlate
for lamente. page 30. line 17. and to have this providence for, and a care to
this, to have this providence. page 35. line 7. They know them selves for they
know not them selves. line 11. they had them for they sae them. page 46. line
19. consulted wi'them for were provided for. page 48. line 3. unburied, and
abiected for buried, or abiected.

Other lesser faltes I remitte to the perusers discretion for him to correct
mentally in his own discourse, ever caring in his mind that by reason we
Catholics be not permitted to print in our own Country, but are forced to
use strangers, it is impossible to have matters exactely performed.

THE SOVLES SVPPLICATION AT THE HOVRE OF DEATH: Applied by the Church, to Souls
departed as represented in that most terrible trance: or in relation to the
general Judgment.
THat day, that day of doume and ire,
This corporal sphere will by fire,
Convert to ashes senze delay,
Witness David with Sybilla.
What fear, and terror will be thiere
When the just Judge shall once appiere
Attended on (...) Angels, thus
All with great strictness to discuss*
A trumpet cansting a strange sound
On the Graves in every ground,
With like constreinte by one and one,
Will summone all before his Throne.
Both Death, and nature in a maze
Will stand; when in those horrid days*
Al humane creatures shall arize
Their Judge to anser in this guyze.
A written bouke shall be produced
To which all matters ar reduced
In order; according to which
All shall be judged both pour and rich:
Wherefore when the Judge shall sit thiere,
All secret acts shall then appiere:
Not one offense shall want its pain,
Nor irreuenged shall remain.
What pour creature shall I then say*
Or to what Patron shall I pray?
When in that most distressed case
Even scarce a just one will be safe.
O Prince o'formidable driede
Of whose great Majesty we riede:
Thou who saues the saved gratis,
Save me, founteine Pietatis.
Remember Jesus thie I pray,
That I am cause of this thy way:
Thou haest rediem'd me from the pray,
Let me not perish in that day.
Thou haest exquir'd me to thy loss,
Thou haest rediem'd me by thy Cross:
Let this labor not be frustrate,
But wi' glory me illustrate,
O thou great Judge of just revenge
Since I Am not able thy challenge
To endure: grante me remission
Before I Am to render reason.
I sigh, and sob as one guilty,
My face blushes at my filthy
Fault: For thy pity most intense
Voutsafe to perdone my offense.
Thou who did from sin absolve
That vicious Marie; and dissolve
By thy perdon the thiefs offense,
Haest also gin me confidence.
My prayers I know are not worthy
For to obtain thy great mercy:
Yet pious Lord I thie desire
I be not burnte with endless fyere.
O divine sheperd thou me kiepe,
And place me once a mong thy shiepe:
Diuyde me from the goats: and stand
Let me, o Lord, at thy right hand.
When thou shall once confounded have
The male dicted; and from Grave
Haest sent them to eternal flame,
Place me wi' those of blessed name.
To thie, o Lord, I supplicate
With contryte mind I now prostrate
My self before thy face; and bend
To have assistance at my end.
O lamentable is the day
In which all people must obey
The Angels voice; and ryze a gain
To judged be to Bliss, or pain.
Spare us therefore both great and small,
And free us from eternal thral,
O pious Christ; whose name be blessed
Give us, and them eternal rest.
Amen.

