A copy of a letter with articles, sent from the Queens Majesty unto the
Bishop of London, and by him and his officers at her graces commandment
to be put in spedye execution with effect in the whole diocese, as well in
places exempt, as not exempte, whatsoever, according to the tenor and form
of the same.

Sent by the Queens Majesty's commandment, in the Month of March, Anno
Domini. 1. 5. 5. 3.

I.C.

By the Queen.
Right reverend father in God, right trusty and well-beloved, we great you
well. And whereas heretofore in the time of the late reygne of our most
deareste brother king Edward the sixte, (whose soul God pardone) diverse
notable crimes, excesses, and faults, with sondrie kinds of heresies, simome
aduoutrye and other enormities have been committed within this our realm, and
other our dominions the same continuing yet hitherto in like disorder, since
the beginning of our reygne, without any correction or reformation at all,
and the people both of the layte, and also of the clergy, and chieflye of the
clergy have been given to mucheinsolencie and ungodly rule, greatly to the
displeasure of almightye God, and very much to our regrette and evil
contentation, and to no little slander of other Christen realms, and in manet
to the subversion, and clean defacing of this our realm, and remembering our
duty to almighty god to be to forsee as much as in us may be, that all
virtue and godly living would be embraced, flourishe, and increase. And there
with also, that all vice, and ungodly behavior should be utterly bannished,
and put away, or at the least ways (so nighe as might be) so bridled and kept
under, that godliness and honesty might have the ouerhande, understanding by
very credible report, and public fame to our no small heaviness and discomfort,
that within your diocese, as well in not exempted as exempted places, the like
disorder, and evil behavior has been done and used, like also to continue
and increase, unless due provision be had and made to reform the same,
(which earnestlye in very deed we do mind and intend) to thuttermooste all
the ways we can possible, trusting of Gods furtheraunce and help in that
behalf. For these causes and other most just considerations us moving, we
send unto you certain articles of such special matter, as among other
things be most necessary to be now put in execution by you, and your
officers, extendinge to the end by us desired, and the reformation aforesaid,
wherein ye shall be charged with our special commandment by these our
letters, to the intent you and your officers may the more earnestly and boldly
proceed thereunto, without fear of any presumption to be noted on your part,
or danger to be incurred of any such our laws, as by your doings, of that is
in the said articles contenyned, might any wise grieve you, whatsoever be
threatened in any such case. And therefore we strayghtlye charge and command
you and your said officers to proceed to the execution of the said articles
without all tracte and delay, as ye will answer to the contrary. Given under
our Signet at our Palace of Westminster, the fourth day of March, the first
year of our raygne.

Articles sent from the Queens Majesty unto the ordinary, and by him and his
officers by her graces commandment to be put in spe^ie execution with
effect in the whole Diocese, as well in places exempte as not exempte,
whatsoever.
1 FIrst that every Bisshoppe and his officers, with all other, having
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, shall with all speed and diligence, and al manner a
ways to the^ possible put in execution all such Canons and Ecclesiastical
laws, heretofore in the time of King Henrye the eight, used within this realm
of England, and the dominions of the same, not being direct and expressly,
contrary to the laws and statutes of this realm.

2 ITem that no bisshoppe or any his officer, or other person aforesaid
hereafter in any of their Ecclesiastical writings in process, or other
extraiudiciall acts do use to put in this clause or sentence, Regia
auctoritate fulcitus.

3 ITem that no Bishop or any his officers, or other person aforesaid do
hereafter exact or demand in thadmission of any person, to any
Ecclesiastical promotion, orders, or office, any oath touching the primacie or
succession, as of late in few years passed, has been accustomed and used.

4 ITem that every Bisshoppe and his officers with all other persons aforesaid
have a vigilant eye, and use special diligence and foresight, that no person
be admitted or received to any Ecclesiastical function, benefice, or office,
being a Sacramentarye, infected or defamed with any notable kind of heresye,
or other great crime. And that the said Bishop do stay, and cause to be
stayed as much as lies in him, that benefices and Ecclesiastical promotions
do not notably decay, or take hinderaunce by passing or confirmynge of
unreasonable leases.

5 ITem that every Bishop and all other persons aforesaid do diligently
travail for the repressyng of heresies and notable crimes, especially in the
clergy duly correcting and punishing the same.

6 ITem that every Bishop, and all the other persons aforesaid, do likewise
travail for the condemning and repressing of corrupt and naughtye opinions,
unlawful books, ballades, and other pernicious and hurtful devises,
engendring hatred among the people, and discord among the same. And that
Scholemaysters, Preachers, and teachers do exercise and use their offices and
duties without teaching, preaching, or setting forth any evil corrupt
doctrine. And that doing the contrary, they may be by the Bishop and his said
officers punished and removed.

7 ITem that every Bisshoppe and all the other persons aforesaid, proceeding
summarely, and with all celeritye, and speed, may, and shall deprive or declare
deprived, and amoue according to their learning and discretion all such
persons from their benefices and ecclesiastical promotions, who contrary to
the state of their order, and the laudable custom of the church have married
and used weomen as their wives or otherwise notably and slanderously
disordered or abused them selfs sequestryng also during the said process,
the fructes and profits of the said benefices and Ecclesiastical promotions.

8 ITem that the said Bishop and all other persons aforesaid do use more
lenity and clemency with such as have married, whose wives be dead, then
with other, whose weomen do yet remain in life. And likewise such priests,
as with the consentes of their wives, or weomen openly in the presence of the
Bishop do profess to abstain, to be used the more fauourablye, in which case
after penance effectuallye done, the Bishop according to his discretion and
wisdom may upon just consideration receive, and admit them again to their
former administration, so it be not in the same place, appoyncting them such a
portion to live upon, to be paid out of their benefice, whereof they be
deprived by discretion of ye said Bishop or his officer shall think may be
spared of the said benefice.

9 ITem that every Bishop and all other persons aforesaid do forsee, that
they suffer not any religious man, having solemnly professed Chastity, to
continue with his woman or wife, but that al such persons after deprivation of
their benefice or Ecclesiastical promotion be also deuorsed every one from his
said woman and due punishment, otherwise taken for the offense therein.

10 ITem that every Bishop, and all other persons aforesaid do take order and
direction with the parishioners of every benefice, where Priests do want to
repair to the next parish for divine service, or to appoint for a convenient
time, till other better provision may be made one curate to serve. Alternis
uicibus in diverse parisshes, and to allotte to the said curate for his labor
some portion of the benefice, that he so serves.

11 ITem that al and almaner of processions of the church be used, frequented,
and continued after the old order of the church in the Laten tongue.

12 ITem that al such holy days and fasting days be observed and kept, as was
observed and kept in the latter time of King Henry theyght.

13 ITem yt the laudable and honest ceremonies which were wont to be used,
frequented, and observed in the church, be also hereafter frequented, used, and
observed.

14 ITem that children be christened by the Priest, and confirmed by the
Bishop, as heretofore has been accustomed and used.

15 ITem touching such persons, as were heretofore promoted to any orders
after the new sort and fashion of order, consideringe they were not ordered in
very deed, the Bishop of the diocese findinge otherwise sufficiency and
ability in those men, may supply that thing, which wanted in them before.
And then according to his discretion admit them to ministre.

16 ITem that by the Bisshoppe of the Diocese a uniform doctrine be set forth
by Homilyes, or otherwise for the good instruction and teaching of all people.
And that the said Bysshopppe and other persons aforesaid do compel the
parishioners to come to their several churches, and there devoutly to hear
divine service, as of reason they ought.

17 ITem that they examine all Scholemaysters and teachers of children, and
finding them suspecte, in any wise to remove them, and place catholic men in
their comes, with a special commandment to instruct their children so, as
they may be able to answer the priest at the mass, and so help the priest
to mass, as has been accustomed.

18 ITem that the said Bishop and all other the persons aforesaid have such
regard respect, and consideration, of, and for the settinge forth of the
premises with all kind of virtue, godly living, and good example, with
repressing also, and keeping under of vice and unthriftiness, as they, and
eueryche of them may besene to favor the restitution of true religion, and
also to make an honest account and reckening of their office and cure, to the
honor of God, our good contentation, and the profit of this our realm, and
dominions of the same.

Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi, Typographi Reginae Mariae. Anno.
1553. Mense Martio.


