A DECLARATION, CONTEYNYNG THE JUST CAUSES and consyderations, of this present
war with the Scottis, wherein alsoo appears the true and right title, that
the kings most royal majesty has to the souerayntie of Scotland.

historiated page border

BEING NOW ENforced to the war, which we have always hitherto so much
abhorred and fled, by our neighbor and Nephieu the king of Scottis, one, who,
above all other, for our manyfold benefits towardis him, has most just cause
to love us, to honor us, and to reioise in our quiet: We have thought good to
notify unto the world his doings and behauour in the provocation of this
war, and likewise the means and ways by us used to exchue and aduoyde it,
and the just and true occasions, whereby we be now provoked to prosecute the
same, and by utterance and diuulging of that matier, to disburden some part of
our inward displeasure and grief, and the circumstaunces known, to lament
openly with the world, the infelicitie of this time, in which things of such
enormitie do breast out and appear.

THE KING of Scotts our Nephieu and neighbor, whom we in his youth and tender
age preserved and maynteined from the great danger of other, and by our
authority and power conduced him sauely to the real possession of his estate,
He now compels and forces us for preservation of our honor and right, to
use our puissaunce and power against him. The like unkindness has been
heretofore showed by other in semblable caces against goddis law, man's law,
and al humanity: but the oftener it chances, the more it is to be abhorred,
and yet in the persons of princis for the raritie of them can so happen but
seldom, as it has now come to pass.

IT HAS been very rarely and seldom seen before, that a king of Scottis has
had in marriage a daughter of England: We can not, ne will not reprehend the
king our fathers act therein, but lament and be sorry it took no better
effect. The king our father in that matier minded love, amity, and
perpetual frendshyp between the posterity of both, which how soon it
failed, the death of the king of Scottis, as a due punishment of god for his
unjust invasion into this our realm, is and shall be a perpetual testimonye
to their reproach for ever, and yet in that present time could not the
unkindness of the father extinguishe in us the natural love to our Nephieu
his son, being than in the miserable age of tender youth: but we than
forgettyng the dyspleasure that should have worthily provoked us to invade that
realm, nurrished and brought up our Nephieu to achieue his fathers possession
and government, where in he now so unkindly uses and behaueth him toward
us, as he compels us to take armor and war against him.

IT IS specially to be noted, upon what grounds, and by what means we be
compelled to this war, wherein among other is our chief grief and
displeasure, that under a color of fair spech and flattering words, we be
in deeds so injured contempned and despised, as we ought not with sufferaunce
to pretermitte and pass over. Words writings letters messages, ambassiatis,
excuses, allegations, could not more pleasantly, more gently, ne more
reverently be devised and sent, then has been made on the king of Scottis
behalf unto us, and ever we trusted, the tree would bring forth good fruit,
that was on the one party of so good a stock, and contynually in appearance put
forth so fair buddes: and therefore would hardely believe or give ear to other,
that ever alleged the deeds to the contrary, being nevertheless the same
deeds so manifest, as we must needs have regarded them, had we not have been so
loathe to think evil of our Nephieu, whom we had so many ways bound to be of
the best sort toward us. And therefore having a message sent unto us the
year paste from our said Nephieu, and a promise made for the repayryng of the
said king of Scottis unto us to York, and after great preparation on our part
made therefore, the same metyng was not only disappoynted, but also at our
being at York, in the lieu thereof, an invasion made by our said Nephieu his
subjects into our realm, declaryng an evident contempt and dispite of us: We
were yet glad to impute the defaute of the metynge to thaduyse of his
counsaylle, and the invasion to the lewdnes of his subjects: and according
thereunto gave as benign and gentyl audience to such Ambassadors, as repaired
hither at the Christmas afterward, as if no such causes of displeasure had
occurred, specially considering the good words, sweet words, pleasant
woordis, eftsoon proponed by the said Ambassadors, not only to excuse that
was past, but also to persuade kindness and perfect amity to ensue. And albeit
the king of Scottis having contrary to tharticle of the leage of amity,
received and entreteigned such rebels, as were of the chief and principle,
in sterringe the insurrection in the North against us, with refusal before
time, upon request made to restore the same: yet nevertheless upon offer made
by the said ambassadors, to send commission to the bordures, to determine
the debates of the confinies in the same, with so great a pretense of amity
and so fair words, as could be in speech desired: we were content for the
time to forbear to press them over extremely in the matier of rebels, Albeit
we never remitted the same, but desirous to make trial of our said Nephieu in
some correspondence of deeds, condescended to the sendyng of commissioners to
the borders, which to our great charge we did, and the king of Scotts our
said Nephieu the semblable. Where after great travail made by our
Commissioners, this fruit ensued, that being for our part challenged a piece of
our ground, plainly usurped by the Scottis, and of no great value, being also
for the same showed such evidence, as more substanciall, more autentique, more
plain and euydent, can not be brought fourth for any part of ground within
our realm. The same was nevertheless by them denied, refused, and the
evidence only for this cause rejected, that it was made (as they alleged) by
Englishemen. And yet it was so ancient, as it could not be counterfaite
now, and the value of the ground so little, and of so small wait, as no man
would have attempted to falsify for such a matier. And yet this denial being
in this wise made unto our Commissioners, they never the less by our
commandment departed as friends, from the Commissioners of Scotland, taking
order as has been accustomed for good rule upon the borders in the mean time.

AFTER which their recesse, the lord Maxwell, warden of the west marches of
Scotland, made proclamation for good rule, but yet added therewith, that the
bourderers of Scotland should withdraw their goods from the bourders of
England: And incontinentely after the Scottisshe men bourdurers, the fourth of
July, entered into our realm suddenly, and spoiled our subjects, contrary to
our leages, even after such extremity, as it had been in time of open war.
Whereat we much meruayled, and were compelled therefore to furnishe our bourdour
with a garrison for defense of the same. Whereupon the king of Scottis sent
unto us James Leyrmouth, master of his howseholde, with letters devised in the
most pleasant manner, offering redress and reformation of al attemptates. And
yet nevertheless at the enter of the said Leyrmouth into England, a great
number of the Scottis, than not looked for, made a forrey into our bourders, to
the great annoyance of our subjects, and to their extreme detriment, wherewith
and with that unseemly dissimulation, we were not a little moved, as reason
would we should. And yet did ^e not finally so extremely persecute and
continue our said displeasure, but that we gave benign audience to the said
Leyrmouth, and suffered our self to be somewhat altered by his words and fair
promyses, tendyng to the persuasion that we ever desired, to find the king of
Scottis such a Nephieu unto us, as our proximitie of blood, with our
gratuitie unto him, did require.

IN THE mean time of these fair words, the deeds of the borders were as
extreme as might be, and our subjects spoiled: and in a rode made by sir
Robert Bows for a revenge thereof, the same sir Robert Bows with many other
taken prisoners, and yet deteyned in Scotland, without putting them to fine
and ransom, as has been ever accustomed. And being at the same time a
surceaunce made on both sides at the suite of the said Leyrmouth for a
season: the Scottis ceased not to make sundry invasions into our realm in
such wise, as we were compelled to forgette fair words, and only to
consider the king of Scotts deeds, which appeared unto us of that sort, as
they ought not for our duty in defense of our subjects, ne could not in
respect of our honor, he passed over unreformed: and therefore put in a
redynesse our army, as a due mean whereby we might atteigne such a peace, as
for the safeguard of our subjects we be bound to procure.

AFTER which preparation made, and knowledge had thereof, the king of Scottis
cessed not to use his accustomed mean of fair words, which in our natural
inclination wrought eftsoon their accustomed effect, evermore desirous to find
in the king of Scottis such a regard and respect to be declared in deeds, as
the correspo^dence of natural love in the Nephieu to such an Uncle, as we
have showed our self toward him, does require. Wherefore upon new request
and suite made unto us, we determined to stay our army at York, appoynting the
Duke of Norff. our lieutenaunt, the lord privy seal, the bishop of Dureham,
and the master of our horses, there to common treat and conclude with the
Ambassadors of Scotland, for an amity and peax upon such conditions, as by
reason and equity were indyfferent, whereby the war might be exchued, being
by sundry invasion of the Scottis than open and manifest.

IN THIS communication between our and their commissioners, after diverse
degrees of commission, showed by the Scottis, and finally one, that was by our
commissioners allowed, matiers were proponed for conclusion of amity, nothing
difficile or hard on our part, but so agreeable to reason, as the commissioners
of Scotland said, they doubted not, but if it might ones be brought to pass,
that the king of Scottis our Nephieu might have a meting with us, all matiers
should easyly be componed and determined. Whereupon they left speaking of any
articles of amity, and the ambassadors of Scotland made much outward joy in
communication of a metinge, they showed them self in wordis facion and behauor
much to delight in it, to rejoice in it, and therewith thought it easy and
facile to be concluded and accomplysshed, and for their part they took it then
for a thing passed, a thing concluded, and most certain to take effect, and
only desired.vi. days to obteigne answer from their master, and our army for
that time to stay and go no further. Whereunto our commissioners then agreed.

AFTER THESE six days was sent a commission out of Scotland, with power to
conclude a metynge precisely at such a place, as they knew well we would not,
ne could not in winter observe and keep, wherewith when our commisioners were
myscontent, the ambassadors of Scotland to relieve that displesure, and to
tempre the matier, whereby to win more time, showed forth their instructions,
wherein liberty was given to the ambassadors to excede their commission in the
appointment of the place, and to consent to any other by our commissioners
thought convenient, which manner of procedyng, when our commissioners refused,
alleging that they would not conclude a metynge with men, having no commission
thereunto, the ambassadors of Scotland upon pretense to send for a more ample
and large commission, agreeable to their instructions for appointment of the
place, obtained a delay of other.vi. days, to send for the said ample
commission without restraynt of place. And after those.vi. days they brought
forth a new commission, made in a good form, and without exception. But
therewith they showed also new instructions, containing such a restraynte as
the former commission did conteyne, so as the liberty given to the
Commissioners in the commission was now at the last removed and taken away by
the instructions, with addition of a special charge to the ambassadors not to
excede the same.

AND thus first the ambassadors of Scotland seemed to have will and desire to
conclude of a place semely and convenient, which for want of commission they
might not do, and at the last might have concluded a metynge by virtue of
their commission, and then for fear of the commandment in their second
instructions they durst not. And so they showed their first instructions partly
to excuse their king, who should seem secretly to will more, than in the
commission he did openly profess.

AND THAN with an ample commission from the king, they showed their secret
instructions for defense of them self, why they proceeded not according to their
commission, not carynge how much they charged therein their king, whose fault
they disclosed to dyscharge them self, trusting that by benefit of the winter
approchyng, and the time lost in their communication their master should be
defended against our power for this year, without doing for their part that
by honor, right, law, and leages they be obliged and bound to do. And in
this mean time our subjects taken prisoners in Scotland could not be
delivered upon any ransom, contrary to al custom and usage of the border in
the time of peax and war. and in this mean time stayed a great part of our
army already prested, and in our wages to go forward. In this time ambassadors
(as ye have herd) assembled to talk of an amity and conclude it not. The
treatyng of amity was put over by communication of a metynge.

THE communication of metyng was so handled by alteration of commyssion and
instructions on their behalf, as it appears a plain devise only excogitate
for a delay, which has given us light, where upon more certainly to judge the
king of Scottis inward affection toward us, whose deeds and words well
wayed and considered, does us plainly to understand, how he has
contynually labored to abuse us with sweet and pleasant words, and to satisfy
the appetites of other at home and abroad with his unkind and displeasant
deeds. In his words he professes an indissoluble amity, he alleges kindred,
he knowlegeth benefits, only the fault is that he speaks an other langage
to all the world in deeds, and thereby so touches us in honor and denegation
of justice, as we be enforced and compelled to use the sword, which god has
put in our hand as an extreme remedy, whereby to obteigne both quiet for our
subjects, and also that is due unto us by right, pactes, and leages.

WE HAVE patiently suffered many delusions, and notably the last year, when we
made preparation at York for his repair to us: But should we suffer our people
and subjects to be so often spoiled without remedy? This is done by the Scottis
what so ever their words be. Should we suffer our rebels to be deteyned
contrary to the leages without remedy? This is also done by them what so ever
their words be. Should we suffer our land to be usurped contrary to our most
plain evidence, only upon a will, pride, and arrogancye of the other party?
This is done by them what so ever their words be. And all these be over
presumptuously done against us, and give such signification of their
arrogance, as it is necessary for us to oppress it in the beginning, lest
they should gather further courage to the greater displeasure of us and our
posterity hereafter. And yet in the entreatyng of this matier, if we had not
evidently perceived the lack of such affection as proximitie of bloudde
should require, we would much rather have remitted these injuries in respect
of proximitie of blood to our Nephieu, than we did heretofore the invasion of
his father. But consyderyng we be so surely ascertayned of the lack thereof,
and that our blood is there frorne with the cold air of Scotland, there was
never prince more vyolently compelled to war then we be, by the unkind
dealyng, unjust behauour, unprincely demeanor of him that yet in nature is our
Nephieu, and in his acts and deeds declares him self not to be moved
therewith, ne to have such ernest regard to the observation of his pactes and
leages, ne such respect to thintreteynment of the administration of Justice, as
natural equity byndeth, and conservation of amity does require: which we
much lament and be sorry for, and use now our force and puissaunce against
him, not for reuengeance of our private displeasure (being so often deluded as
we have been) but for recouerye of our right, the preservation of our subjects
from injuries, and the observation of such leages as have passed between us,
firmly trusting, that almighty god, under whom we reign, woll assist and aid
our just procedinges herein to the furtherance and advancement of the right,
which we doubt not shall ever prevail against wrong falseheade deceipte and
dissimulation.

HITHERTO it appears how this present war has not proceeded of any demand
of our right of superiority, which the kings of Scotts have alwais knowleged
by homage and fealty to our progenytours even from the beginning: But this
war has been provoked and occasioned upon present matier of displeasure,
present injury, present wrong mynistred by the Nephieu to the Uncle most
unnaturally, and supported contrary to the deserts of our benefits most
unkindly. If we had minded the possession of Scotland, and by the motion of
war to atteyne the same, there was never king of this realm had more
opportunity in the minority of our Nephieu Ne in any other realm a prince that
has more just title, more evident title, more certain title, to any realm
that he can claim, than we have to Scotland, not divised by pretense of
marriage, not imagined by covenant, or contrived by invention of argument, but
lineally descended from the beginning of that astate established by our
progenitors, and recognized successively of the kings of Scotland by deeds
words acts and writings continually almost without interruption, or at the
leest intermission, til the reign of our progenitour Henry the, VI, in whose
time the Scottis abused the Civil war of this realm, to their license and
boldness, in omitting of their duty: which for the proximitie of bloudde
bitwene us, we have been slack to require of them, being also of our self
inclined to peace, as we have ever been always glad, rather without prejudice
to omyt to demand our right, if it might conserve peace, than by demandyng
thereof to be seen to move war, specially against our neighbor, against our
Nephieu, against him, whom we have preserved from daungier, and in such a time
as it were expedient for all Christendom to be unite in peace, whereby to be
the more able to resist the common ennemy the Turk.

BUT for what so ever considerations we have omitted to speak hitherto of the
matier, it is never the less true, that the kings of Scotts have always
knowleged the kings of England superior lords of the realm of Scotland,
and have done homage and fealty for the same.

THIS appears first by history, written by such as for confirmation of the
truth in memory, have truly noted and signified the same. SECONDLY it appears
by instruments of homage made by the kings of Scottis, and diverse notable
personages of Scotland, at diverse and sundry times sealed with their seals,
and remaining in our Treasorye.

THIRDLY it appears by regesters and records iudicially and autentiquely
made, yet preserved for confyrmation of the same. So as the matier of title
being most plain, is furnished also with all manner of evidences for
declaration thereof.

FIRST AS concerning histories, which be called witnesses of times, the
light of truth, and the life of memory, and finally the convenient way and
mean, whereby things of antiquity may be brought to men's knowledge, they show
as plainly this mattier as could be wyshed or required, with such a consent of
writers, as could not so agree upon an untruth, conteynyng declaration of
such matier as has most evident probability and appearance. For as it is
probable and lykely, that for the better administration of justice among rude
people, two or mo of one astate might be rulers in one country unite as this
Isle is: so is it probable and lykely, that in the beginning it was so ordered
for auoydinge discention, that there should be one superior in right, of whom
the said astates should depend. According whereunto we read how Brutus, of whom
the realm than called Brytayn took first that name (being before that time
inhabited with gyauntes, people without order or civility) had three sons,
Locrine, Albanact, and Camber, and determinyng to have the whole Isle within
the Occean sea to be after governed by them three, appointed Albanact to rule
that now is called Scotland, Camber the parties of Wales, and Locrine that
now is called England: unto whom as being the elder son, the other two
brothers should do homage recognisyng and knowleagynge him as their superior.
Now consider if Brutus conquered all this Island, as the hystorye says he
did, and then in his own time made this order of superiority as before: How
can there be a title divised of a more plain beginning, a more just
beginning, a more convenient beginning for the order of this Island, at that
time specially when the people were rude, which can not without continual
strife and variaunce conteyne two or the rulers in all points equal without
any manner of superiority, the inward conscience and remorse of which
superiority should in some part dull and diminishe the perverse courage of
resistance and rebellion. The first division of this Isle we find it written
after this sort without cause of suspection why they should write amysse. And
according hereunto we find also in hystory set forth by diverse, how for
transgression against this superiority, our predecessors have chastised the
kings of Scottis, and some deposed, and put other in their places.

WE will here omyt to speak of the rudenes of the antiquity in
particularitie, which they cared not distinctly to commit to writing, but some
authors, as Anthonius Sabellicus among other diligentely enserchynge, what he
might truly write of al Europe, Ened 10. Lib. 5.
and the Islands adioynynge, over and besides that which he writes of the
nature manners and condytions of the Scottis, which who so list to read, shall
find to have been the very same in times paste, that we find them now at
this present, he calls Scotland part of England, which is agreeable to the
division aforesaid, being in deed as in the land contynuall without
separation of the sea, so also by homage and fealty unite unto the same, as by
particular declarations shall most manifestly appear by the testimony of such
as have left writing for prove and confirmation thereof. In which matier
passing over the death of king Humbre, the acts of Dunwald king of this
realm, the division of Belin and Brene, the victories of king Arthure, we shall
begin at the year of our lord, DCCCC, which is, DCXLII, years by past, a time
of sufficient auncientie, from which we shall make special declaration and
evidence of the execution of our right and title of superiority evermore
continued and preserved hitherto.

EDWARD the first before the conquest, son to Alured king of England had
under his dominion and obedience the king of Scottis. And here is to be noted,
that this matier was so notorious and manifest, as Maryon a Scot writing that
storye in those days, grants confesses and testifies the same, and this
dominion continued in that state, XXIII, year: At which time Athelstaine
succeeded in the crown of England, and having by battle conquered
Scotland, he made one Constantine king of that party, to rule and govern
the countray of Scotland under him, adding this princely word, That it was
more honor to him to make a king, than to be a king.

XXIIII, years after that, which was the year of our lord, DCCCCXLVII, Eldred
king our progenitour, Athelstains brother, took homage of Irise then king of
Scottis.

XXX, years after that, which was the year of our lord, DCCCCLXXVII, king
Edgar our predecessor took homage of Kynalde king of Scottis. Here was a
little trouble in England by the death of sayncte Edward king and martyr,
distroyed by the deceit of his mother in law: but yet within memory.

XL, years after the homage done by Kynald to king Edgare, that is to say, in
the year of our lord, MXVII, Malcolme the king of Scotts did homage to
Knute our predecessor. After this homage done the Scottis uttered some piece
of their natural disposition, whervppon by war made by our progenitour
saint Edward the confessor, XXXIX, year after that homage done, that is to
say, the year of our lord, MLVI, Malcolme king of Scottis was vanquisshed, and
the realm of Scotland given to Malcolme his son by our said progenitour
saint Edward: unto whom the said Malcolme made homage and fealty.

WITHIN, XI, years after that Wylliam Conqueror entered this realm, whereof he
accounted no perfect conquest, until he had likewise subdued the Scottis, and
therefore in the said year, which was in the year of our lord, MLXVIII, the
said Malcolme king of Scottis did homage to the said William Conqueror, as
his superior by conquest king of England.

XXV, years after that, which was the year of our Lord, MXCIII, the said
Malcolme did homage and fealty to William Rufus, son to the said William
Conqueror: and yet after that was for his offenses and demerites deposed, and
his son substitute in his place, who likewise failed in his duty, and
therefore was ordained in that astate by the said William Rufus, Edgare brother
to the last Malcolme, and son to the first, who did his homage and fealty
accordingely.

VII, years after that, which was in the year of our lord, MC, the said Edgar
king of Scottis, did homage to Henry the first, our progenitour.

XXXVII, year after that, David king of Scottis did homage to Matilde the
Emperatrice, as daughter and heir to Henry the first. Wherefore being after
required by Steven, then obteynynge possession of the realm, to make his
homage, he refused so to do, because he had before made it to the said
Matilde, and thereupon forbear. After which David's death, which ensued
shortly after, the son of the said David made homage to the said king Steven.

XIIII, years after that, which was in the year of our lord, MCL, William
king of Scottis, and David his brother, with all the nobles of Scotland made
homage to HENRY the secondes son, with a reservation of their duty to Henry
the second his father.

XXV, years after that, which was in the year of our lord, MCLXXV, Wylliam
king of Scotland, after much rebellion and resistance, according to their
natural inclination, king HENRY the second, than being in Normandy, William
then king of Scottis knowledged finally his error, and made his peace and
composition, confirmed with his great seal, and the seals of the Nobility of
Scotland, making therewith his homage and fealty.

WITHIN, XV, years after that, which was the year of our lord, MCLXXXX, the
said Wylliam king of Scotts, came to our city of Canturbury, and there did
homage to our noble progenitour king RICHARD the first.

XIIII, years after that, the said William did homage to our progenitour king
JOHN, upon a hill besides Lincoln^, making his oath upon the cross of Hubert
than archbishop of Canturbury, being there present a meruaylous multitude
assembled for that purpose.

XXVI, years after that, which was in the year of our lord, MCCXVI, Alexander
king of Scottis married Margaret, the daughter of our progenitoure HENRY the
third, at our city of York, in the feast of Christmas: at which time the
said Alexander did his homage to our said progenitour: who reigned in this
realm, LVI, years. And therefore between the homage made by the said Alexander
king of Scotts, and the homage done by Alexander, son to the said king of
Scottis, to Edward the first at his coronation at Westmester, there was about
fyfty years, at which time the said Alexander king of Scottis repaired to
the said feast of coronation, there did his duty as is before said.

WITHIN, XXVIII, years after that, which was the year of our lord, MCCLXXXII,
John^ Baliol king of Scottis, made homage and fealty to the said king
Edward the first, our progenitour.

AFTER THIS began Robert Bruise to usurp the crown of Scotland, and to move
sedition therefore, against them of the house of Ballioll, which made for a
season some interruption in the said homage: but yet no intermission without
the terms of memory. For within, XLIIII, year after, which was the year of
our lord, MCCCXXVI, Edward Baliol, after a great victory in Scotland against
the other faction, and enioyenge the crown of Scotland, made homage to our
progenitour Edward the third.

AND, XX, years after that, which was in the year of our lord, MCCCXLVI, David
Bruise, who was ever in the contrary faction, did nevertheless in the title of
the crown of Scotland, whereof he was then in possession, make homage to our
said progenitour Edward the third.

WITHIN, IX, years after, this Edward the third, to chastise the infidelity
of the Scottis, made war against them: where after great victories, Edward
Balliol having the just and right title to the realm of Scotland, surrendered
clearly the same to our said progenitour at the town of Rokysbrough in
Scotland: where our said progenitour accepted the same, and than caused him
self to be crowned king of Scotland, and for a time enterteigned it, and
enjoyed it, as very proprietarye and owner of the realm, as on the one party by
confiscation acquyred, and on the other part by free will surrendered unto him.

AND then after the death of our said progenitour EDWARD the third, began
seditions and insurrections in this our realm, in the time of our progenitour
RICHARD the second, which was augmented by the alteration of the state of the
said Richard, and the deuolution of the same, to Henry the IIII, so as the
Scottis had some leisure to play their vagues, and follow their accustomed
manier. And yet Henry the, V, for recovery of his right in France, commanded
the king of Scottis to attend upon him in that journey. And in this time the
realm of Scotland being descended to the house of the Stewardes, of which our
Nephieu directly comes, James Steward king of Scottis, in the year of our
lord, MCCCCXXIII, made homage to Henry the, VI, at Wyndesour. Which homage
was distaunt from the time of the other homage made by David Bruise LX, years
and more, but far within the fresshe memory of man.

ALL which homages and fealties as they appear by story to have been made and
done at times and season as before: so do there remain instruments made
thereupon and sealed with the seals of the kings of Scotland testifyenge the
same. And yet does it appear by story, how the Scottis practiced to steal out
of our treasaury diverse of these instruments, which nevertheless were after
recovered again. And to the intent ye may know of what form and tenor the
said instruments be, here is inserted the effect in word and sentence as
they be made, which we do, to mete with the cauellation and contrived evasion
of the Scotts, alleaginge the homage to have benne made for the Erldome of
Huntyngton, which is as true as the allegation of him that is burnte in the
hand, to say he was cut with a sikell. And therefore the tenor of the homage
is this.

I John N. king of Scotts shall be true and feythfull unto you lord Edward
by the grace of god king of England, the noble and superior lord of the
kingdom of Scotland, and unto you I make my fydelitie of the same kingdom of
Scotland, the which I hold, and claim to hold of you: and I shall bear to
you my feythe and fidelity of life and lymme and worldely honor against all
men, and feythfully I shall knowleage, and shall do to you service due unto you
of the kingdom of Scotland aforesaid, as god so help me and these holy
euangelies.

NOW FOR the third part touching records and regestres, we have them so
formal, so autentiquall, so seriously handeled, and with such circumstaunces
declarynge the matiers, as they be and ought to be a great corroboration of
that has been in stories written and reported in this matier. For among other
things we have the solemn act, and judicial process of our progenitour
EDWARD the first, in discussion of the title of Scotland, when the same was
challenged by twelve competitiours: That is to say, Florentius comes Holandie.
Patricius de Dunbar comes de Merchia. Willielmus de Vesty. Villielmus de Ros.
Robertus de Pinbeny. Nicholaus de Souls. Patricius Galightly. Rogerus de
Mundeville. Ioannes Common. D. Ioannes de Hastinges. Ioannes de Balliolo.
Robertus de Bruise. Ercius rex Norvvegie.


AND finally after a great consultation and mature deliberation, with
discussion of the allegatio^s proponed on all parties, sentence was given for
the title of Ballioll, according whereunto he enjoyed the realm. But for
confirmation of the duty of homage before that time observed by the kings of
Scottis, it appears in those records, how when those competitours of the
realm of Scotland repaired to our said progenitour, as to the chief lord for
discussion of the same, in as much as the authority of the judgment to be
given depended thereupon: It was than ordered, that the hole parliament of
Scotland spiritual temporal and of all degrees assembled for that purpose,
and considering upon what ground and foundation the kings of Scotland had in
times paste made the said homages and recognition of superyoritie, the said
parlyament fynding the same substantial good and true, should if they so demed
it, yield and give place, and by express consent recognize the same. At which
parlyamente was alleged unto them, as appears in the same records, not
only these acts of the princes before those days, and before rehearsed: but
also besides the testimonye of stories, the wrytinges and letters of foreyn
princis, at that time recitynge and rehersynge the same. Whervppon the said
parlyament did there agree to this our superiority, and ensuynge their
determination did particularly and severally make homage and feaultie with
proclamation: That who so ever withdrue him self from doing his duty
therein, should be taken and reputed for a rebel. And so all made homage and
fealty to our progenitour Edward the first. The realm was in the time of the
discussion of the title ruled by gardians deputed by him: all castles and
holds were surrendered to him as to the superior lord in the time of vacation,
benefices, offices, fees, promotions passid in that time from the mere gift of
our said progenitour, as in the right of this crown of England, Sheriffs
named and appointed, writtis and precepts made obeyed and executed: And finally
all that we do now in the Duchy of Lancaster, the same did our progenitour for
the time of contention for that title in the realm of Scotland, by the
consent and agreement of all astates of the realm assembled and consulted with
for that purpose. At which time the bishops of saint Andrews and Glascoo
were not as they now be archebyshoppes, but recognized the province of our
archbishop of York, which extended over all that country.

NOW if the Scottis will take exception to the homages of their pryncis, as
made in war and by force which is not true: what will they say or can they
for shame allege against their own parlyament, not of some, but of all
confirmed and testified by their writynge and seals? whereunto nothing enforced
them, but right and reason, being passed in peace and quiet without armor or
compulsion. If they say they did it not, they speak like them selves: If they
say they did it, then do they now like them selfs, to withdraw their
duty, not so much to be blamed, as to be amended.

THVS APPEARS unto you the beginning of the right of superiority, with a
perpetual contynuaunce, without intermission within memory, certain omission
and forbearynge upon the grounds and occasions before specified we deny not.
Whereby they have many times sought and taken their oportunities, to withdraw
the doing of their duty in knowledge of our superiority over them, which
to avoid, they have not cared what they said or alleged, though it were never
so untrue: lyeng always in awayte when they might annoy this realm, not
without their own great dangier peril and extreme detriment. But as they
detrected the doing of their duty, so god ever granted unto this realm
force to compel them thereunto within memory, not withstandyng any their
interruption by resistance, which unto the time of our progenitour Henry the,
VI, never endured so long as it made intermission within time of mind, whereby
the possession might seem to be enpaired, from the time of Henry the, VI, unto
the seventh year of our reign, how our realm has been for a season lacerate
and torn by diversity of titles, till our time and sins by war outwardly
vexed and troubled, The story is so lamentable for some part thereof, as were
tediouse to rehearse.

SINCE THE death of our progenitour Henry the, VI, our grandfather Edward
the, IIII, reigned, who after great travails to atteyne quietness in his
realm, finally in the time of preparation of war against Scotland, dyed.

RICHARD the, III, than usurped for a small time in years, whom the king
our father by the strength of goddis hand ouerthrewe in battle, and most
justly attained the possession of this realm, who nevertheless after the great
tempestious storms finding all matiers not yet brought to a perfect quiet
and rest, ceased and forbear to require of the Scottis to do their duty,
thinkyng it policy rather for that time to assay to tame their nature by the
pleasant conjunction and conversation of affinity, then to charge them with
their fault, and require duty of them, when opportunity served not, by force
and fear to constrayne and compel them.

AND thus passed over the reygne of our father, without demand of this
homage. And being our reygne now, XXXIIII, years, we were, XXI, year let by
our Nephieu his minority, being then more careful how to bring him out of
daungier, to the place of a king, then to receive of him homage when he had
full possession in the same. Wherefore being now passed since the last
homage made by the kings of Scottis to our progenitour Henry the, VI, CXXII,
year, at which time the homage was done at Wyndesor by James Stuard, then king
of Scottis, as before. LVI of these years the crown of this realm was in
contention, the trouble whereof engendered also some business in the time of the
king our father, which was, XXIIII, year: And in our time XXI, year has
passed in the minority of our Nephieu So as finally the Scottis resorting to
their only defense of discontinuance of possession, can only allege justly
but, XIII, year of silence in the time of our reign, being all the other times
sythens the homage done by James Steward, such as the silence in them had they
ben never so long, could not have ingendrid prejudice to the loss of any
right, that may yet be declared and proved due. For what can be imputed to king
Edward for not demanding homage, being in strife for that estate, whereunto the
homage was due? What should Richard the, III. search for homage in Scotland,
that had neither right ne leisure to have homage done unto him in England? Who
can blame our father, knowing the Scottis nature, never to do their duty but
for fear, if he demanded not that of them, which they would exchue if they
might, being his realm not clearly than purged from ill seed of sedition,
sparkeled and scattered in the cruel civil wars before.

LAW AND reason serves, that the passing over of time not commodious for the
purpose, is not allegable in prescription for the loss of any right. And the
minority of the king of Scottis has endured XXI, years of our reign, which
being an impediment on their part, the hole prescription of the Scottis, if the
matier were prescriptible, is thus deduced euidentely to, XIII, year, which,
XIII, year without excuse we have ceased and forborne to demand our duty,
like as the Scottis have likewise cessed to offer and tend the same. For
which cause nevertheless we do not enter this war, ne minded to demand
any such matier: Now being rather desirous to rejoice and take comfort in
the frendshyppe of our Nephieu, as our neighbor, than to move matier unto him
of displeasure, whereby to alienate such natural inclination of love, as he
should have toward us. But such be the works of god, superior over all, to
suffer occasions to be minystred, whereby due superiority may be known
demanded and required, to the intent that according thereunto all things
governed in due order here, we may to his pleasure pass over this life, to his
honor and glory, which he grant us to do in such rest peace and
tranquillity, as shall be mete and convenient for us.



LONDINI in officina Thomae Bertheleti typis impress.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M.D.XLII.


