The Loves OF CLITOPHON AND LEVCIPPE. A most elegant History, written in Greek
by ACHILLES TATIUS: And now Englished.

Senec: praefat: ad contr: Nunquam imitator par fit autori.

OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM TURNER for JOHN ALLAM. 1638.

On the Frontispiece.
SEE for the scene a troubled Sea, whereon
Float fair Leucippe and her Clitophon:
But churlish Neptune (who for Venus sake
Me thinks on Lovers should some pity take)
Quels not the raging Ocean, while each wave
Presents the ship, and passengers, a grave.
No Castor here, or Pollux to be seen,
But the celestial influence of Loves Queen,
Which seeing her Darlings to such straits were come,
As to take boat to go to Elysium,
Sets Cupid at the stern; who well may free
These pair of Turtles from the tyranny
Of angry Neptune, since from his first birth
Has been the Lawgiver to Sea and Earth.
THE LOVES OF Clitophon and Leucippe A most Elegant History written in Greek
by Achilles Tatius and now Englished.

Nunquam imitator par fit autori Sen praefat: cont* Oxford Imprinted for John
Allam. W. (...) 1638.

The Translator to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, how this recreation of my idle hours (whose hard fortune it
is now to come under thy censure) shall please thee, it matters not much; since
I beg not thy approbation, or fear thy dislike; either because thy fancy
may be mother to the one, thy prejudice to the other; or because I my self
cannot -- digito monstrari and dicier hic est: wherefore thou may condemn the
Translator, not me. If thou cry me down for a d^^inquent, I may perhaps be
sorry for taking so much pains to offend, yet never fear coming to execution.
But lest I should so far betray my own cause, anticipate thee in thy
censure, or pass too hard a censure upon so petty a crime (as abusing a
Readers patience is now adays accounted) hear what I can say in my own
defense. First, how difficult a thing it is to maintain the elegancy of a
Greek author in our language, I appeal to thee, if thou have read either
Aristaenetus, Eustathius, Longus the Sophist, or Parthenius; from whose pens,
as sometime from the tongue of Ulysses, -- (...):
A voice more sweet than honey did distill;
yet were they Englisht, they would be as little esteemed of, as the Latin
translation of Plato, or that of my Author done by Hanniball Cruceius; which I
may in Photius language truly call (...): The second thing which may excuse me,
is, that by the exection of the two testicles of an unchaste dispute, and one
immodest expression, I have so refined the author, that the modestest matron
may look in his face and not blush. Besides, I present him not here clad in
the ra^^es of mine own phancie, nor yet in language rackt and disjoynted out
of its proper idiom; but I have observed a medium betwixt both: I could with
some unnecessary pains have given it a flourish, but I preferred the fidelity
of the Translation before the Ornament. That little which I have spared to
English, prostituted my author not only to the censure of the Patriarch of
Constantinople, but also of some of these times, and would have appeared as a
mole in his face; whose worth, were it not so great, I might have good color
to piece out my unseasonable advertisements with; but sparing thee, and not
willing to injure him, I bid thee farewell.

Amico suo in elegantem Achillis Tatii Translationem.
PRioris aevi si quis indigenas sales,
Autocthonasque voculas Latii colit,
Graecosque latices, Attici fontes soli,
Hic obstupescat: Tatius leporum satur
Graecorum Achilles, qui invidens cineres sacros
Orbi prophano, latuit ignotus domi,
Nec ad triumphos ire litterarios,
Agamemnonemve visere in bello Ducem
Dignatus ante, prodit; and dignum creans
Pretium nitoris (blattulis spolium licet,
Tineisque fuerat,) novit antiquum decus,
Amatoriaeque flammulas Briseidos,
Vel Clitophontis, redditus Britonum stylo,
Et characteris Anglici idiomati
Cantare; vel quid Charicles and Clinias,
Cynops scelestus, Matris astutum quibus
Leucippa ludit Panthiae ingenium dolis.
Ostendit etiam mill quas nectunt vafrae
Arts Puellae, quanta sors iniquior
Possit, profundi purpura insano tegens
Rostrata amictu transtra lethi murice:
Quid praedo Terrae coluber infestus suae,
Sicariaeque sanguine aspersae manus,
Dirumque fulmen. Cuncta nec fari datum est.
At cuncta vestris (Antoni) calamis tamen
Debentur: ista nulla cum superet dies,
Et nulla taceat, perge laetus, aemulo
Vincas Achillen igne, dum reddis Tuum.
Sic optat Fr. James A. M. e Coll. Novo.

In the Translators praise.
TO make the dumb to speak, or raise the dead,
The chief'st of miracles it is reckoned:
A wonder then thy powerful pen has shown,
Amongst many wonders worthy to be known;
That this dumb Author, who has tongue-tied bin
For many years, should now at last begin
To speak our language: and that he likewise,
Who had so long layne dead, should now arise.
O let him live then, and with him thy praise,
Who for thy worth and work deserve the bays*
JOS: FORDE.

To the Ladies.
Fair ones, breathe: a while lay by
Blessed Sidney's Arcady:
Here Is a Story that will make
You not repent Him to forsake;
And with your dissolving look
Untie the Contents of this Book;
To which naught (except your sight)
Can give a worthy Epithet.
It Is an abstract of all Volumes,
A Pillaster of all Columns
Fancy e're reared to wit, to be
Little Love's Epitome,
And compactedly express
All Lovers Happy Wretchedness.
Brave Pamela's majesty,
And her sweet Sisters modesty
Are fixed in each of you, you are
Alone, what these together were:
Divinest, that are really
What Cariclea's feigned to be;
That are every One, the Nine;
And on Earth Astraea's shine;
Be our Leucippe, and remain
In Her, all these over again.
Wonder! Noble Clitophon
Me thinks looks somewhat colder on
His beauteous Mistress, and she too
Smiles not as she used to do.
See! the Individual Pair
Are at odds, and parted are;
Quarrel, emulate, and stand
At strife, who first shall kiss your hand.
A new war e'rewhile arose
'Twixt the Greeks and Latins, whose
Temples should be bound with Glory
In best languaging this Story:
You that with one lovely smile,
A Ten-yeares War can reconcile;
Peaceful Hellens, awful, see
The jarring languages agree;
And here all Arms laid by, they do
Meet in English to court you.
Rich: Lovelace, Ma: Ar: A: Glou: Eq: Aur: Fill: Not: Max.

To his Friend A. H. on his Translation of Achilles Tatius, on the Loves of
Leucippe and Clitophon. Incipit F. J.
FRiend, I thy book compare with swilk of yore,
With mighty deeds of worthy Heliodore,
Proud Antioch's Prelate: when he wrote his werk
And was forthy deposed: Thilk Asian Clerk
Hight Bishop too, yet lives, whose buxom pen
Maugre all envy made him man of men.
As whilom for the lore of Engelond
Gaufrid an orpyd Knight took upon hond
To written thilk throw; for all ages after
Of Troyl hight Pryam's son and Cressida.
Calchas daughter;
"The double sorrows of those wights to tellen,
"Froe woe to well how their aventures fellen.
Clepend on Muse, to help for to endite
His balefull verse that weepen as he write.
Forthy a Sir Francis Kynaston.
Muses son in great nobles,
That can of Knighthode chivalrie and prowes
The lore; whose goodship algates did deserve
The studdie of thilk Goddess Minervae Musaeum.
hight Minerve,
Chaucer*
Pain Roet's Nephew so did understond,
As shope him to the lenguage of Rome's land:
So I full lewd and (though I not the quill
Of doughtie Knight, ne eke of Sir Philip Sydney.
Astrophill)
In tiny connyng which me underfongeth,
Do thee all preyse as it of right belongs,
And sikerlie endevor to avance
Thy goodship, and the Muses chevisance:
If in some oder lenguage clerks that conne
Will put in verse Leucip and Clitophon.
Explicit Fr: James A. M. of New Coll.

On Clitophon and Leucippes Loves translated.
THus thrive the Printers: the wise Gnomists pain
Might well be spared now; each humerous brain
Knows, that his knowing profits not, unless
Others know it too: this agitates the Press:
This stops the Passenger, when he shall spy
Some pamphlets glorious front courting his eye.
Some love-toy, such as this, whose furious zeal
Will not permit Antiquity conceal
Her follies past: as if our age could throw
Them in her teeth without a blushing brow.
Are Clitophons so scarce? does not each street
Afford us Melites? every cloak you meet
May wrap Thersanders rising forehead: though
Exc'lent Leucippes peer we scarce can show.
Thus may some sager Critic, who would have
Us straight from Cradle think upon the Grave,
Condemn our youths delight: we must expect
The worst of censures for the least defect.
Love is a Passion, and who e're will touch
Ought that is his, must look to find him such.
Nor shall the wounded only bleed, but He
That dares describe Cupids Artillery.
And yet he shall not suffer, let me call
Lovers, the better part of the world, who all
Will vindicate our Author. Here may youth
Loves Copy draw, to act their own in truth:
Here may the Non-plust wooer fetch a wile
To break all Remora's, plots to beguile
All Fortune's crosses: and if language fail,
Here may he learn to court, triumph, bewail*
In The eloquentest strains. Nay here the man
Of a severer brow may deigne to scan
Maxims of moral goodness: it is the End
Of both our Authors, by delight to bend
Our Souls to Good, which in its own course dress
Would move her faculties, would please them less.
This thank We Will owe their labors, and let them
Commend their own, that others pains condemn.
H. Allen e C.C.C.

To his Friend.
Dear Friend, I will not say what is due to thee
Either from Court or University;
Both are upon thy score; For some there be.
In each place, that may tender thee a fee
For what they learn by thy Translation,
We are not all borne Greeks; nor is it a fashion
To speak all Tongues: many there be amongst All
Who might have read the first Original,
But in the end, professed, we cannot tell
What the man means, but yet the Greek sounds well.
But here the Critic spatters like a Cat,
And with a Pish damnes all, and cries it is flat
And dull what thou have done. But we say no;
Till he shall better it, or equal show.
Tatius has had no wrong, if through thy pen
He seems to be one of our Countrymen:
Or if thou, Words and Sense, do by thy light
Make that, which seemed to some mere black and white.
Do we take from an Author, if we look
With Spectacles on a small-printed book?
Or is it a wrong, if, to set off a bright
Taper, we put a Crystal before the light?
A Pearle's a Pearl, though in the shell it is coucht;
Yet it is more glorious, when taken forth and oucht
In glittering gold. Then gemmes more briskly shine,
Not when they are in the Sea, but when they are mine.
Thy Lovers had without thy second Form
Been more obscured in the Greek, than in the storm.
And though they escaped by Sea, yet had we found
Thy Amorous Pair still in the Language drowned.
Well (Friend) thou do excel thy Authors fate;
He made the Sound, thou do Articulate.
W: Wallwyn: S: Io: Bap: Col:

To the ingenious Translator, on his ACHILLES TATIVS.
SEE here your convert Sir, I must confess,
I dully thought, that Englands barrenness
Could not produce by her best Artists toil
An Olive rich as grew on Graecia's soil.
The gallant Muse which freely revell'd there,
Translated once, became a prisoner
Fettered in English chains; and seemed to me
Like the wrong side of rich Embroiderie.
But when I look on you, and see each line
Of Tatius wrought in more pure thread and fine
Than ever filled his loome, overcome I cry
It Is not Translation this, but Alchimy,
Or turning dross to gold. This Muse before
Went homely clad, like to some Country Boore,
Now it is turned Court-like; and, O blessed hap,
May rest it self on each fair Lady's lap.
So have I seen great Titans powerful ray
With active streams of heat exhale from clay
And miry bogges a fume, which climbing high
Shines like a Star in Heavens bright Canopy.
Go on brave friend, and from the shore of Greece
By your new pains bring home the Golden fleece;
Enrich our language so, that if again
Apollo spoke from his dark hallowed den,
The mind of Fate he would rather choose to tell
In a pure English, than Greek Oracle.
Mean time as due receive this grain of praise,
Which neither guilds, nor blasts thy glorious bays.
Leucippe's face thou here have drawn so well,
That which the pattern was no eye can tell.
And Clitophon does now his love express
As well as ever in the Grecian dress.
I. Metford Art. Bac. Aul. Edm.

To the well deserving Translator of the Book.
HOw shall we (Friend) thee gratify,
That have inricht our treasury?
A piece of coin of old Greek print
Thou Have changed to new and English mint.
Leucippe thou made common have,
And yet (what is strange) have made more chaste.
Why should Clitophon complain
In Atticke only, not our strain?
Several tongues we praise in men,
Why not several in books then?
Cannot a Queen, because in one
Apparel she has glorious shown,
In another dress be fair?
Does a Jewel cease to bear
The name of Jewel, when the earth
It leaves, and place of proper birth
To see a foreign land, and there
Be fixed in a golden sphere?
The copy which thou wroughtest by
Thou answered have so evenly,
(As if the Greek words summed had bin
And as many of ours put in)
That men in times to come may miss,
And take Achilles to write this.
So then I need not happiness
Wish, and pray books Fate to bless
This thine; for none can blast with hate
These which all Love insinuate:
But yet for custom, not for need,
I here make vow, and drop a bead,
That this amorous pair, expressed
In answerable language, dressed
In fin'st attire, in waves so tossed,
(And happy we that not quite lost)
May now not flote again; but rest
Where they deserve, in Ladies breast.
O may they still find in the Readers look
Such smoothness as the Reader in this book.
Tho: Snelling A.B. Ioann.

To the Translator my Friend.
ME thinks I hear our age complain,
That every sick and crazy brain
Which has a tympany within't,
Does cure it self by being in print;
And that she fears, bands being so small,
The price of paper will mar all:
I cannot blame her, since we fill
Our Presses (which never yet stood still)
With such stuff, as it were a sin
To wrap Tobacco, or Macrell in.
But for thy book (judicious Friend)
Upon it I Will this censure spend;
That to perpetuate our tongue,
This issue from thy fancy sprung:
For should an English word e're dye,
Hence might we fetch a new supply.
Greece shall not us Barbarians call,
Thy Atticke style has freed us all.
T. C.

To the Translator.
PArdon (sweet Six) if on your Work I spend
My little judgment, and (unknown) befriend
With needless verse, what claims no other grace
Than its own natural dress, nor begs a face
That Is not her own; no, she is still best seen
In her own colors, Spring-like clothed in Green.
'Twas then officious zeal, Sir, to your worth
Prompt'd me to language; I had never set forth
My self in verse, but that by' th interview
Of your well-polisht lines, my sick Muse grew
Big till delivered, your most graceful strains
Were the first widwife to my pregnant brains:
The charming sweetness of your flowing quill,
Makes me hold Transmigration, and that still
Sydney's soul lives in you, else I am sure,
None could with such a pleasing grace allure*
Since then you are so happy in your charms,
Go on, let Ladies laps shield safe from harms
Your innocent Book, let it their fondling be,
And 'tice their tempers into ecstasy.
So let them freely in their rosy bowres,
Crop the early fruit of your not serious hours.
A. H.

To the Translator.
AS richer Grapes blood often rackt, at last
Loses the former, pleasant, rasie taste;
Nor Rhodian art can to the life express
At second draught the Archetype: No less
Presume we in Translation, where we seek
With English pencill to pourtraict the Greek;
Whose every pondrous word in balance set,
Draws six of ours: Which striving t'interpret
We torture language, making the intent
Of Authors such as what they never meant.
Mistake me not; I blame not this in thee,
That rendrest all in pure integrity,
And faithfulnesse^ Nor gives thy 'Edition place
To that in Latin, or the Tuscan phrase.
Though some may lash these labors, and repine
They were not spent on subject more divine;
Whom naught but Pulpit-travels please: We say
Who made time to be serious, made to play*
Did not sweet Heliodore and Eustath lend
Stolen hours to Fancies, and made condescend
The Venerable Mitre, for to prove
To handle pen drawn from the wings of Love,
The sacred Crozier laid aside, whereby
Lives Chariclea to eternity,
And fair Ismene? Sage, and grave, and wise,
Who pitched their contemplations on the skies,
And lived among the Stars; whose nimble brains
Ran over the Pole, such as thine Authors, deignes
To deck our thoughts in amorous slavery,
Offering no force or rape to modesty:
Longus his Shepherds stories, and, not known
Yet, Aristaenetus, with clear Alciphron,
May safely still be handled; and above
All learned Worthies of the school of Love
The godlike Sydneys works. It does not skill
Though Cato Florals see, he is Cato still.
May not I, honest too, great love behold
Slide into Danaes lap in drops of gold?
May we not from the windows of our hearts
View Cupid aiming with sweet-bitter darts,
And still be shot-free? or discern the fire
His flaming torches yield, and escape his ire?
Books are like bogs; heed with what foot we tread,
We may not sink; so with what mind we read.
Judge others what they please: what you have done,
Certes it is good: show it the glaring Sun.
Fr: Roui.

The Loves of CLITOPHON AND LEVCIPPE. THE FIRST BOOK.
The Argument.
Clitophon tells his parentage. Leucippe with her mother Panthia, by reason
of the wars which were at Byzantium, where they then lived, were sent by
Sostratus to Hippias Clitophons father, there to live till the wars ceased.
Clitophon falls in love with Leucippe; Clinias his friend instructs him how to
court her.

SIdon the chief City of Phoenicia, and which gave the first original to the
Thebans, is situated on the shore of the Assyrian Sea; having to it two very
fair havens, but a narrow entrance into them: for where the right side of the
Bay twines and winds, there lies open another passage through which the water
runs again: So that the two havens being joined together, in one of them the
Ships may harbor safely in the winter; in the other in the summer: Whither by
the violence of the tempest being cast, I sacrificed to the Goddess Venus,
whom the Sydonians call Astarte (which solemnity is usually performed by those
who have escaped the danger of the Seas) then viewing other parts of the City,
and seeing the donaries which hung up in the Temples of their gods, I chanced
to cast mine eye on a picture, wherein was most curiously represented the Sea
and the Land, the fable also of Europa: the sea I descried to be the
Phoenicians, the land the Sidonians: part of the landscape was a meadow well
replenished with beautiful Virgins: in the sea a Bull swamme, bearing on his
back a maid, and bending his course toward Crete: the meadow seemed to smile,
being adorned with such variety of flowers and trees, whose boughs and leaves
with their mutual embracements were so well knit and united, that they served
for an arbor. The painter also had made a shade under the trees, but with such
art that in some places the Sun shone in, yet through no bigger a space than
he pleased to leave. The whole meadow he had environed in with sedge, under
the trees were planted beds of Roses, Daffadillies, and Myrtles: Out of the
earth sprang a fountain, which dividing it self into many streams, watered
the whole meadow, flowers, and plants; nor was there one wanting who with a
spade dug a passage, through which the water might the more easily diffuse
it self. In that part of the meadow which touches upon the Sea, he had
painted the virgins, seeming by their looks to be both merry and sad: they
had garlands on their heads, their hair hung about their ears, their sandals
were off, and their legs bare; their countenance pale, their cheeks thin,
their eyes were fixed toward the sea, their lips standing apart, they seemed to
mutter somewhat for fear; their hands pointed toward the Bull, and so near
they went toward the sea, that some part of their feet touched the water: to be
brief, the whole posture of their body was such, that feign they would have
followed the Bull, yet loath they were to expose their tender bodies to the
merciless fury of the waves.

The Sea was of two colors, for that part which was nearest the Land was of a
mixed red, the farthest and deepest of an azure color; in it were rocks, which
were made white by the some of the waves, swelling and beating against them.
The Bull, Neptune (out of an awful reverence as it were) gave such kind
entertainment to, that the sea went back, and where he trod, the water which
but now was as smooth as glass, grew to a mountain. Thus rode he on the
water, and on his back the virgin, not astride, but both her legs decently
hanging down on one side, holding in her left hand the horn, as a charioter
his reins; for the Bull obeyed her check, and seemed willing to bend his
course which way she pleased to steer it. The virgins upper parts were
covered with a white vesture, the rest with a purple robe, yet so, as one might
discern each part through her garments, which being girt about her, were truly
no other than the looking-glass of her whole body. One hand she had on his
horn, the other on his tail; and the wind, never till now painted, getting
into her veil, made it swel like the sails of a ship. About the Bull were
many Dolphins skipping and playing, whose wanton gestures you would swear to
be no others than were there painted. Little Cupid stretching out his wings,
with one hand led the Bull, in his other hand were bow and arrows, and
torches, who looking back on Jupiter seemed to mock him, that for his sake
he should so transform himself. All other parts of the picture I much
commending, but more especially this, and therefore looking more earnestly on
it, burst out into this admiration; See how a little infant has the command of
sea, of earth, and of heaven it self* Which speech of mine a young man that
was there present, hearing, said he found what I spoke to be true by his own
experience, seeing that Love had been the cause of all the sad disasters which
had ever happened unto him: Tell me Sir, said I, what in this kind you have
suffered, for by your looks you seem to be a lover: You call me back, said
he, to the remembrance of a promiscuous and confused heap of miseries, the
greatness whereof would make them seem fabulous; I desired him for Venus sake
that the relation of that should not be troublesome to him, which though it
were not true, yet would much delight me. So having taken him by the hand I led
him to a grove adjoining to the place in which was a fine shade of plane trees,
and a brook of water, so clear and cool, as if it had been snow newly
dissolved; there when I had placed him in a little valley, and I my self had
taken my seat close by him, I told him that it was now a fit time to begin,
seeing the very opportunity of the place, which full of delight, and therefore
most fit for love-tales, seemed to invite him, so he began.

I am by birth, says he, a Phoenician, my Country is Tire, my name Clitophon,
my Father Hippias, my uncle Sostratus, my mother I remember not that ever I
saw, for she died while I was young, therefore my father married another wife,
by whom he had a daughter named Caligo, her he intended to have espoused unto
me, but the Fates, whose power is able easily to over master the decrees of
men, reserved another for me. And indeed many times the gods are wont to
foretell things that shall come to pass to mortals in a dream, not that we
being forewarned of the evil might shun it (for no man can withstand his
destiny) but that we may the more patiently endure it when it shall happen, for
that which suddenly and unexpectedly assaults the heart, strikes it with a deep
terror; but things foreseen, and so consequently taken heed of, whilst by
degrees they entice the mind to think on them, do less afflict it.

When I was nineteen years of age, and my father not long after was about to
marry me, Fortune began to play her prankes with me; for on a time sleeping
I dreamt that I was in love with a virgin, and so intimately knit unto her by
the bond of affection, that we seemed both of us to have but one soul; with
her as I was sporting, me thoughts there appeared unto us a woman of a most
horrid aspect, an immense stature, a rusticke countenance, bloody eyes, rough
cheeks, snaky hair, holding in her left hand a torch, in her right hand a
sickle, with which she gave such a stroke that she parted us as we were
embracing; at which dream much affrighted I awak't, not revealing it to any
man, but keeping it locked up close in my breast: In the mean time letters were
sent from Byzantium by him whom I even now told you was my fathers brother.

Sostratus to his brother Hippias, etc.
I send unto thee my daughter Leucippe, and my wife Panthia, for at this time
the Thracians wage war with the Byzantians, keep therefore these my dear
pledges till the war be ended. Farewell.


My father so soon as he had read the contents of the Letter, arose, and went
down to the sea to meet them, and not long after returned, a great number of
servants and maidens, whom Sostratus had sent to attend on his wife and
daughter, accompanying him. Leucippe above all the rest was costly attired, on
whom I had no sooner cast mine eyes, but I straightway thought on Europa. She
had an angry eye, yet it was qualified with a merry aspect: her eyebrowes were
black as jet, her cheeks white as snow, only that in the midst they were
dyed with Lidian purple, her mouth was like the rose beginning to bud, so that
when I had fully viewed her I was almost dead: For beauty strikes deeper than
the sharpest arrow, whilst piercing through the eyes it opens a passage to the
heart, and wounds it too. In the same moment I was forced to praise her
stature, to be amazed at her beauty, to tremble at my heart, and warily to eye
her, still fearing lest I should be observed; and endeavoring to draw mine eyes
from her, but they would not, for being still enticed by the sweetness of her
countenance, they obeyed not my command, but reflecting on her got the victory
over me.

When the women were brought in, and had one part of the house allotted them,
my father commanded supper to be set on the board, and that we should all sit
at several tables, he having so contrived it that he and I should be in the
middle, the matrons on the left hand, the virgins on the right: which when I
had observed, I had much ado to forbear kissing of my father, that he had
placed the maid so luckily that I might still look upon her; but for any
supper, God knows I ate no more than he which dreams he eats; for still
leaning my elbow on the table, I viewed her, and that was meat and drink to
me. After supper was ended, a boy came with a Lute, and tuning the strings, it
gave a gentle low sound, but afterward taking his quill, and striking up
louder, he added his voice, which made the music more sweet. He sung how
Apollo complained of Daphne for flying from him, how near he had like to have
caught her, how she was turned into a Bay tree, with the leaves whereof he
made him a garland, which song added more violence to my inflamed love. For an
amorous story is a great enticement to lasciviousness, and though a man may be
of himself continent, yet he is drawn by a strong example, and the more
easily, by how much the more that vice is patronized by some great one: for
shame which at the first did revoke him from offending, being posted forth by
the dignity of some one which is better than himself, yet guilty of the same
crime, turns into licentiousness. Wherefore thus I resolved with my self, was
not Apollo in love? did not he cast away all shame, and openly pursue his
Daphne? whilst thou like a fool benumbed with sloth, and overcome with
modesty containst thy self. Art thou, or would thou seem better than a god?
The evening drawing on, the women went to bed first, and not long after we.
Some having bestowed the pleasure of the supper on their bellies, I on mine
eyes, so that I was glutted, and as it were drunk with love; wherefore I betook
my self to my chamber where I used to lie, but slept not one wink. For nature
has so ordained, that all diseases and wounds of the body are most troublesome
in the night, especially when we cannot sleep; nor is a wounded heart in a
better state, for when the body moves not, it being hurt is far more
troubled, because when the eyes and ears are busied about diverse objects, it
feels not the goads of care, but distracts the mind, so that there is no
leisure left to grieve; but while the members are at ease, the mind
recollecting it self, is sensible of its calamity, for such things which
before lay as it were asleep, are then rouzed up, and are at hand, to wit, to
those that mourn, sorrow; to those that are sollicitous about any civil
affairs, distraction of thoughts; to those that are in danger, fears; to
those that are in love, fire.

At length the morning approaching, sleep took pity on me, and afforded me some
rest; nor then was she out of my mind, but all my dreams were of Leucippe,
with her I played, with her I talked, with her I supt, then enjoying more delight
than when I was awake, for me thoughts I kissed her, and that truly. Whilst I was
in the midst of this delightsome fancy, one of the servants called me, whom I
cursed that he had wakened me out of so sweet a dream; then rising out of my
bed, I went on purpose to walk in a place that the maid might see me, where
holding down my head I read in a book which I brought along with me, that as
often as I turned back to her door, I might cast mine eyes on her. Thus
having done, I departed with a mind most miserably perplexed, and so I spent
three days.

Now I had a kinsman two years elder than my self, whose father and mother
were both dead, his name was Clinias, which had formerly been in love, against
whom I had much exclaimed that he should have nothing else to do, but he
laughing at me, and shaking his head, replied, that the time would come when I
my self should be caught in the same snare; him I went to, and having saluted,
thus I began: Ah Clinias, now am I justly punished for all those scandalous and
opprobrious obloquies which I cast on thee, seeing I my self am now caught. At
which clapping his hands, and most excessively laughing, he saluted me, and
said, Truly I perceive by thy very looks that thou art in love. He had scarce
said this, but immediately came in his friend Caricles, on whom he had formerly
bestowed a most gallant horse, who coming, said, Clinias, I cannot be at rest
till I have revealed my mind unto thee. Clinias, as if his soul had been
joined with his, and not only compassionate, but really sensible of what
harms might befall Caricles, with a stammering tongue replied, Thou kill'st me
with thy silence, tell me thy grievance, what is it troubles thee, or with whom
art thou to fight? My father, said Caricles, is providing me a wife, and such a
blouze that I shall be tormented with her above measure; if a handsome woman
be an evil intolerable, what is an ill favored one? but my father he gapes
after her wealth, and there is no hopes of me poor wretch, but that I must
be betrayed to a little money. Which when Clinias heard, he waxed pale, and
inveighing against the whole sex, dissuaded the young man from marriage in this
wise. Does thy Father provide thee a wife? how have thou so ill deserved at his
hands, that he should cast thee into bonds and fetters? does not Jupiter say
in the Poet? The fire that bold Prometheus stole from me,
With plagues called women shall revenged be,
On whose alluring and enticing face
Poor mortals doting, shall their deaths embrace.
And such truly is all pleasure we take in any thing that is bad, not much
unlike the Sirens, who deluding poor Mariners with the melodiousnesse of their
voice, slay them.

Me thinks the very pomp and provision (if there were no other evil in
marriage) were enough to deter a man from it, the noise of musicians, the
crackling of doors, dancing, singing, revelling, and the like, were able of
themselves to make a man miserable; for in my mind one were better be in a
skirmish. Were you not a Scholar you might perhaps be ignorant what history
and antiquity have related concerning the wickedness of women: but seeing you
are so good a proficient in your studies, that you are able to relate to others
of how many tragedies women's cruelties have been the argument, how can you
seem to forget Euriphyles bracelet, Philomela's banquet, Sthenobaeas calumny,
Aeropes incest, Prognes salvage murdering of her child?

Agamemnon was ensnared with the beauty of Chryseis, Achylles of Briseis, who
proved the ruin of both their armies. Candaules married a beautiful wife, and
was murdered by her: Helena's nuptial torches set all Troy on fire: Nay more,
the chastity of Penelope proved the death of many suitors: Phaedra slew
Hippolytus whom she loved: Clytemnestra Agamemnon whom she hated. O women ready
to attempt any mischief, who are as pernicious in their love, as in their
hatred! little reason was there that Agamemnon should be slain, a man of so
exquisite a composure for his beauty, To be compared with the immortal gods.
Yet though he was endowed with such excellent perfection, a woman was the
death of him. And all this may be said of those that are beautiful, in whose
embracements there is an indifferency of infelicitie, for beauty does a little
qualify the calamity, it being the only good amongst so much evil: But if
as you say she be ill-favored, the misery is far greater, and no man able
to endure it, especially a proper man, and in the spring of his youth, as you
are. By all the gods, Caricles, make not a slave of thy self, nor suffer the
flower of thy age to be cropped before its time; do not, as thou love me,
spoil thy self, by letting so fresh a rose be plucked by the hand of so rude
a husbandman. Then Caricles answered, This has been as much my care as the
gods, who (I thank them) have given me respite to bethink my self, so at my
leisure I will consider better on it; but now I must to the horse-race, for as
yet I have not tried the horse which thou gave me, this bodily exercise may
perhaps somewhat assuage the grief of my mind; so he departed and run his
first and his last race.

Now I proceed to tell thee Clinias how my affairs stand with me, how I fell
in love, the satiety I had in seeing Leucippe, the hearty meal I made on her
beauty, and now me thinks I speak I know not what, my grief having distracted
me; for love has poured all his fury on me, not allotting me so much time as
to sleep, Leucippe is still in my mind, still in my sight, nor is there any
hope of release, since the cause of my grief lives at home with me. Sure,
says Clinias, these are the words of a madman, could you desire a fairer
opportunity for your love, seeing you need not stir out of doors, nor use a
spokesman for you to your mistress? Fortune has not only bestowed her on
thee, but has put her in the same house with thee; other lovers count it a
great happiness but to see her whom they affect, and getting but an hours
conference, they think they have attained the full height of that happiness,
but thou see her, talkest with her, art ever in her company, dinest and
suppest with her, yet complainest, wherein thou arguest thy self guilty of
the greatest offense that can be committed against Love, to wit, ingratitude;
for do thou not know that beauty is far more pleasant to the eye, than the
hand; to the sight, than the touch? For while the eyes look mutually each on
other, they receive the images of our bodies like looking-glasses, whence those
sparks of beauty being sent, and conveyed into our souls through our eyes,
they are united, though our bodies be separate: which conjunction is far more
sweet than that of the body. The event as I guess will be very successful,
for the eyes being as it were loves factors, your living with her will be of
much consequence, company and society being so prevalent, that the very bruit
beasts being among men a while wax tame, and shall not a woman? Again you have
another advantage, in as much as you are both of one age. But you must commend
her above measure, for every maid would feign be accounted fair, and is never
gladder than when she is wooed, and will still be praising her sweet heart, as
the witness of her beauty; and if there be any with whom no man was ever in
love, she scarce believes that she is handsome, though perhaps she be.
Therefore I counsel you to make it your chiefest care to possess her so far
forth with your mind, that she may perceive you love her, and you shall see
that not long after she will follow your example, and love you again. But by
what means may I effect that which you tell me? you have given me a remedy,
but I would desire you that you would prescribe me how I shall apply it, for
you have been a scholar in Loves school longer than my self. What shall I
do, or what shall I say? You need not, says Clinias, learn of others, for in
this case every man is his own master, children are not taught to suck, for
by natural instinct they know there is milk provided for them in the dugge;
so young men being first pregnant with love, need not the help of a midwife to
bring them to bed. Though thy torment grow greater by delay, yet fear not,
thou shall have a happy deliverie, only take some general notions of such
things as are common, and need not the opportunity of time to further them,
which are in brief these.

First, be sure you talk not obscenely to her, but dispatch your loves with
silence, for women though they be most lascivious and wanton, yet in this they
are modest, detesting to hear that spoken, which they make no bones of doing,
accounting the words more filthy than the deed. Those that have made shipwreck
of their virginity will suffer you to talk more freely, and perhaps will in
plain terms reveal their mind; but maidens have other preludiums to their
loves, a nod or a beck. Therefore if you talk wantonly to her she will blush,
and be much offended, esteeming it a great injury to her honor, and though
she may entirely love you, yet shame not suffering her to give consent, you may
quite take off the edge of her affection.

Next if you have tried any other means, and thereby have displeased her, so
that she chide you, make no reply, but by little and little draw near and get
a kiss from her, For a kiss to a willing mind is a silent petition, to an
unwilling a prayer.

Again, if you see her resisting, yet do not you give off, for in this matter
much circumspection is requisite; yet be sure if you see her obstinate, use no
violence, being that she is never past all persuasions, how backward ere she
may seem.

Lastly, if nothing will prevail, dissemble with her, and I doubt not but thou
may bring to pass thy intended purpose.

Then I replied, thou have furthered me much O Clinias, in my love, but I fear
this happiness will turn to my mischief, and more inflame me, which if it
do, what course shall I take, I cannot marry her, for my father has betrothed
me to another, and she none of the unhandsomest, but I at this time can no
more judge of her beauty than a blind man, nor can I see ought any where but
Leucippe, by reason whereof I am distracted betwixt love to Leucippe and
obedience to my father: how shall I decide this controversy, seeing necessity
fights against nature? I would give sentence on my fathers side, but I have so
potent an adversary I cannot, he threatens to torment me, pleading his cause
with arrows, and torches in his hand: I will obey him, father, for I am
encompassed with flames of fire; thus did I reason about the god Love, when
suddenly one of Caricles familiar friends came in, in whose countenance you
might read some ill message, whom as soon as Clinias saw, he said certainly
some ill is befalne my friend Caricles, which words he had scarce uttered, but
the messenger replied, Caricles is dead.

At which words Clinias was so astonished, that he neither spoke nor moved, but
stood like one that were thunder-strucken. The boy going on with his message,
said, O Clinias, Caricles mounted on thy horse, at the first put him gently
forwards, till he had finished two or three races, and then let him rest, but
the reins being slackned, and he sitting on him, wiping off the sweat,
wherewith the saddle was wet, some noise was made behind him, at which the
horse affrighted ran up and down like mad, biting the bridle, and wreathing
his neck to and fro, and mounting with his two fore feet, whilst the two
hindmost hasted to follow them, he was hurried like a ship in a tempest, and at
last fell backwards: poor Caricles shaken with his prauncing, was one while
thrown back on his tail, another while forward on his maine, and with this
waving up and down was most miserably vexed; at length when he could no longer
hold the bridle in his hand, he committed himself wholly to the blast of
Fortune, but then the horse being most vehemently enraged, turned out of the
path way, and flung into a wood adjoining, where he dashed the poor young man
against a tree, who tumbling out of his saddle, and thereby freed by a less
torment from a greater, had his face wounded in as many places as there were
prickles on the tree, but his body tangled in the bridle, and not only
affrighting the horse by its fall, but hindering him in his flight, he trampled
on, and has so defaced him, that now you can scarce know him. Clinias at this
held his peace for a while, at length as though he had begged leave of his
grief, he burst forth into a most bitter cry, and ran straightway to the
carcass; whom I followed, administering him what comfort I could: mean time
Caricles was brought forth, a most lamentable spectacle, so torn and mangled
that none of the standers by could refrain weeping at the sight of him.
Moreover, his father being at that time present, and a sad beholder of his dead
son, with many a sigh and beating of the breast burst out into this
lamentation:

What a one was thou when thou wentest from home, and what a one art thou
returned? O the accursed art of riding! thou truly dyd'st no common death, for
other men though dead have something left that may speak them men, but thou
have not: In other carcasses, whether the lineaments or the beauty of the face
perish, yet there is some effigies left, which deluding the spectators with
hope that they are asleep, abates their grief. Death truly robbes a man of
his soul, but usually leaves his body untoucht, yet this also has thy
injurious face violated, wherefore thou art twice dead, first in thy soul,
next in thy body, out of which thy breath is fled, yet I find thee not there
neither. When will thou marry now my son, when shall I provide for thy wedding
O thou unskilful and unhappie rider? Thou art now espoused to death: wherefore
I must for thy chamber give thee thy sepulcher, for thy marriage song a
funeral elegy: I hoped to have kindled other lights for thee, but envious
fortune, together with thy life has put them out, and in stead of them has
kindled funeral torches.

In this manner did the father bewail the son, but Clinias on the contrary
(for the father and the friend strived to outvie one another in their griefs)
said thus: I truly have been the sole cause of what evil has befallen
Caricles, for why should I give him that fatal gift? have I not a golden
goblet in which I sacrifice? would not that have been a present far more
acceptable to him? but I unhappy wretch must bestow this horse on him, tricking
him up with silver trappings, golden bridle, and other ornaments for his breast
and forehead, all this did I do for him which slew thee. O salvage and
unthankful beast, abhorring from all acknowledgment of thy masters love! he
commended thy pace, wiped off thy sweat, and promised thee that thou should
run in a fat pasture, yet for all his promise, for all his commendation, thou
slewest him: me thinks thou should have been glad of so fair a burden, and
not have cast it on the ground.

After we had dispatched his funeral rites, I ran straightway to Leucippe,
who was then in our garden. There was a grove of a most pleasant aspect,
environed with a row of trees thinly set, and all of one height; whose four
sides, for there were so many in all, were covered with a shelter, which stood
on four pillars, the inner part was planted with all sorts of trees, whose
boughs flourisht, and mutually embraced each other, growing so thick, that
their leaves and fruit were promiscuously mingled; upon the bigger trees grew
ivy, some of it on the soft plane trees, other some sticking to the pitch tree
made it tenderer by its embracements; so by this means the tree served to
bear up the ivy, and the ivy was a crown to the tree: on both sides many
fruitful Vines bound with reeds spread forth their branches, which displaying
their seasonable blossoms through the bands, seemed like the curled locks of
some young lover. The walks which the trees hanging over shaded, were here and
there enlightened, whilst the leaves driven this way and that way with the
wind, made room for the sun to shine through. Moreover, diverse flowers
strived as it were to show their beauty; the daffadilly and the rose, whose
beauties were equal, made the earth of a purple color, the upper part of the
rose leaves was of the color of blood and violets, the lower part white as
milk; the daffadilly differed not at all from the lower part of the rose; the
violets were of the color of the sea when it is calm; in the midst of the
flowers sprang up a fountain, which was first received in a fouresquare basin,
and running from thence it fed a little rivulet made with hand: in the grove
were birds, some used to the house, and to be fed by the hands of men, others
more free sported on the tops of trees, some of them being eminent for their
singing, as the grasshopper and the swallow, some of them again for their
painted wings, as the peacocke, the swanne, and the parrot. The grasshopper sung
of Aurora's bed, the swallow of Tereus table; the swan was feeding near the
head of the fountain; the parrot hung on the bough of a tree in a cage: the
peacocke stretching forth his golden plumes, seemed to contend in beauty not
only with the rest of the birds, but even with the flowers themselvers, for to
say truth, his feathers were flowers: wherefore willing to g^^e her a hint of
my intended love, I fell in talk with Satyrus my fathers man (who was at that
time in the garden) taking the argument of my speech from the peacocke, which
by some chance spread her wings just over against him: This peacocke (said I)
does not all this for nothing, for being in love, and desiring to allure that
female to him which he most affects, thus he deckes himself. Look (and then I
pointed with my finger) do you not see that peahenne under the plane tree, to
her he shows all his bravery, that meadow and garden of his wings which
flourishes more than this, for in his tail which is distinguished with a row
of eyes, that part which resembles gold, is on every side clothed with purple.
Then Satyrus well perceiving the drift of my speech, and to what it tended,
replied: The power of Love is so great, that it extends not only to birds,
but serpents, foure-footed beasts, and (as it seems to me) even stones; for
the lodestone loves the iron, which if it but see or touch, it draws to it,
as if it were some amorous flame: for what is it in the stone but a kissing of
the iron? Concerning trees, now that they are in love one with another it is
the common received opinion of Philosophers, which I should think fabulous,
did not the experience of all husbandmen sub^^ribe unto it, that the palm
trees are distinguished by sexes, and that the male is much in love with the
female, for if she be planted far from him, he waxes dry and withers:
wherefore the husbandman gets to the top of some hill, and marks which way the
male inclines, (for he bows toward the female) and finding his disease, he
administers a remedy by taking a cions of the female, and ingrafting it into
the male, with which he is much recreated, and moving his body seems to be
rouzed, revived, and delighted with the embracements of his beloved; and these
are the marriages of trees. There is another wedding between the river
Alphaeus and the fountain Arethusa, this river passes through the sea with no
more alteration than through the earth, for it relishes not at all of the salt
water, so that by this means he arrives safely at the fountain Arethusa;
every five years or at the celebration of the Olympicke games, many will fling
diverse toys into the river, which he presently conveyes as love tokens to his
mistress Arethusa. Among serpents there is another kind of love, for the
viper is in love with the lamprell; now this lamprell is like a serpent, yet as
usually eaten as any fish: when they would come together, the viper standing on
the shore and hissing toward the sea, gives notice to the lamprell, she having
perceived it, comes out of the water, yet hastens not straight way to her
bridegroom, whom she knows to have poisonous and deadly teeth, but getting
upon some rock, stays there till he has cast his venom, then they stand and
view one another, but as soon as the lover has freed his mistress from all
fear, by casting his poison on the ground, she slides off the rock and
embraces him.

While these love-stories were a telling, I narrowly observed how Leucippe was
affected with them, who seemed to me to hear them gladly; but let them say
what they will, Leucippes countenance far surpassed the rare and exquisite
splendor of the peacocke, nay the whole garden, for in her forehead were
daffadillies, in her cheeks roses, in her eyes violets, her locks were more
curled than the twining Ivy, and every part held such correspondence with the
garden, that I may truly say the best flowers were in her face. Not long after
she departed, being called away to her Lute; but to me she was still present,
imprinting her image in mine eyes at her departure. Then began Satyrus and I
to applaud each other, I him that he had told such fine stories, and he me,
that I had given him the hint: immediately it was supper time, and we sat
down in the same order as before.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK.
The Argument.
Clitophon meeting Leucippe courteth her, they break their minds each to
other, and after many kisses and embraces part. Clitophons father, who had
intended to espouse him to another, provideth for his marriage, for the better
success whereof he does sacrifice: now a dissolute young man, named
Callisthenes, who had desired to have Leucippe to wife, and was denied,
resolved to take this opportunity to steal her away; but mistaking Calligo
Clitophons sister for Leucippe, he carries her away by violence, with which
tumult the sacrifice and marriage are both deferred, and Clitophon solliciteth
Leucippe again; afterward being admitted to her bedchamber by Clio, is
almost caught by Panthia, who hearing a noise in the chamber, strictly
examineth Leucippe, but she pleads ignorance; afterward fearing lest the
matter should be known, he, Leucippe, Satyrus, Clinias, and two servants,
resolve to fly; and finding a ship bound for Alexandria, they enter into it,
where they fall acquainted with an Egyptian called Menelaus.

WHilst we were thus commending our selves, we came to Leucippe's chamber to
hear her sing to her Lute, whose voice was so pleasant, and music so sweet,
that I could not withdraw mine ear from it: for first she sung the combat
betwixt the Bore and the Lion, described by Homer; next a more pleasing song in
commendation of the Rose; and if I shall wrong it so much as to say it, and not
sing it, thus it was: Should Kings over flowers appointed be,
The Rose should bear the sovereignty,
That maiden blush of modest earth,
Appearing ere she has brought forth
Her summer fruits, that flower so fair
Perfuming, where it grows, the air;
Giving our sense the sweetest kiss,
It patronized by Venus is.


This was her song, though me thoughts the rose was all this while on her
cheeks; which she had scarce ended, but immediately it was supper time. Now
about this time were the festivals of Protrygaeus Dionysius celebrated, whom
the Tyrians make their tutelar god, the original of which solemnities sprang
from hence. In former time there was no wine in the world, for the black wine
which they call Anthosmia, was not yet found out, nor Bibline, Maronian, Chian
or Icarian, but all these came from the Tyrians, and the first inventer of them
was borne amongst Them: for they say that Dionysius upon a time happened into
the house of a certain shepherd, who was much famed for his hospitality, and
when this shepherd had set before him all which the earth would afford, or his
team could labor for, he had no other drink for him but that which his
cattle drank: So Dionysius highly commending his liberality, in recompense
thereof invited him to a cup of wine; which when he drank, he demanded of
the god whence he had that purple water, or in what country she found such
sweet blood, for it was not such he thought as ran in the veins of the earth,
because that goes not down half so pleasantly; but you may feel this in your
nose as soon as you put it to your mouth, and though to the touch it seem
cold, yet it heates the stomach. Then Dionysius answered, This is the water of
the grape, and the blood of the vine; so straightway bringing him to a tree,
and pressing a cluster or two of the fruit, said, This is the water, this is
the fountain, by which means (say the Tyrians) wine was found out; wherefore
this day was solemnly kept in honor of that great god, which my father willing
most magnificently to celebrate, provided a costly supper, drinking out of a
goblet of wrought glass, in the which was the picture of Dionysius crowned
with a vine, the grapes whereof hanging down on the inside of the cup,
seemed green while it was empty, but red and ripe when it was filled with wine.

By that time that two or three of these boules had gone round, I began to eye
the maid most shamefully: For Bacchus and Venus two powerful deities, invading
a man, do so inflame him, that they make him exceed the limits of all modesty,
the one setting him on fire, the other adding fuel to that fire: for what is
wine but the nourisher of lust? nor was the maid much afraid to look on me
then: so we spent ten days, receiving nothing from each other, save a look,
not daring to do any more. At length I made my mind more fully known to
Satyrus, and desired his help in the business. All this I knew before (says
he) but seemed to be ignorant of it, for a secret lover, if any reveal his
intents, hates that man worse than a backbiter or slanderer. But my good
fortune, I thank her, took care for you, for Clio who has the charge of
Leucippes bed, is grown in favor with me, and yesterday she told me that
you need not trouble your self, for she would help you to fair
opportunities, and the like. But in the mean time this is but a weak trial
which you make of the maids good will toward you by her eye only, I would
council you to speak to her, which perhaps may be more prevalent. So Pallas
help me (said I) you council me well, but I am afraid, for in these kinds of
wars I am but a fresh water soldier. Satyrus replied, Cupid hates a coward,
for he marches armed like a warrior, his arrows, quiver, darts, fire, you
see are weapons showing his audacity. Can thou entertain the least cowardly
thought* being inspired with such a deity? Take heed I find you not a
dissembler all this while, and that at length you prove not to be in love. What
I have promised I will perform. I will make Clio privy to your design, and
will see that you have an opportune time to converse with Leucippe, where no
body shall interrupt you. When he had said this he went his way. So I being
alone, and somewhat heartned with Satyrus words, strived so to compose my
looks, that when I came in her sight I might not be dashed out of countenance,
saying thus with my self: How long thou effeminate fool will thou fear? why
art thou so obstupified, being the soldier of so powerful a god? what do
thou look that she should woo thee? Then a little while after my mind
changed, But why do thou not rather repent thee that thou should so
immoderately affect her, seeing thy father has provided another for thee, and
she none of the deformed'st, love her I say, and think on her whom thou may
marry without danger, so I seemed to persuade my self to this: but on the
contrary straightway love speaking as it were from the bottom of my heart,
gave me this answer, Durst thou take so much upon thee as to resist my power? I
have wings to fly after thee, arrows to wound thee, torches to burn thee,
how can thou think to escape me? Thou may perhaps shun the stroke of
the dart, but the fire of the torches will burn thee, and though thou hold up
the shield of continence against that too, I shall catch thee by my flight.
While I was reasoning thus with my self, I straightway met Leucippe, whom as
soon as I saw I waxed pale, and presently again blushed, (she was then all
alone, for Clio had left her) and though greatly astonished, and partly with
fear, partly with shame much dejected, yet I cried God save you mistress; at
which she sweetly smiling, and by her smile signifying that she knew to what
end that salutation tended, replied, Am I your mistress Sir? you do not well
to say so. Sure I do, for I am sold to your service, as Hercules was to
Omphale's. As Mercury, said you? for Jupiter gave the selling of her to him,
and then she laughed. What Mercury mean you, sweet? what tricks are these,
seeing you know well enough what I mean? while thus we wove our speeches one
within another, a certain accident stood me in much stead, for by chance the
day before, about noone, Leucippe was playing on her Lute (where I was also
present) and Clio sat by her, at that time a Be flying unexpectedly into the
room, stang Clio on the hand, with that she cried out, and Leucippe throwing
her Lute aside, looked on the wound, and bid her be of good cheer, promising
her with two words to ease her of her pain, for she had learned of a gypsy
how to cure those which were stung either with Be or Wasp; so straightway she
repeated some certain spells, after which Clio confessed her self to be much
eased: now at this very time as I was talking with her, a waspe flew about me,
so catching hold of this occasion, I clapped my hand to my face, feigning my
self to be stung, and in great pain: she presently running unto me snatched
away my hand, and asked me what part was hurt? I answered, my lips, my dearest
Leucippe, why do thou not conjure? then she put her mouth to mine as if she
would have charmed, and touching my lips she mumbled I know not what; in the
mean time I stole many kisses from her, whilst she in speaking, sometimes
opening, sometimes shutting her lips, made her enchantments kisses, wherefore I
grew bolder, and kissed her again, offering also to embrace her, but she
straightway started back, saying, What will you do? will you conjure too? Yes
said I, but I will kiss out my conjuration, for by that means you cured me
even now. Which when she had understood, and smiled on me, I began to take
courage, and spoke to her on this wise: Ah my dearest Leucippe, I am pricked
worse than I was before, for the sting has pierced even to my heart, and
requires thy help to cure it, thou truly carriest the Be in thy mouth, for
therein thou have honey, and in thy kisses a sting, wherefore prithee once more
charm again, but dispatch not so soon lest the wound bleed afresh. So I
embraced her, which she seemed to resist, yet nevertheless suffered me to
do: mean while her maid coming a far off, we parted each a several way, I
very unwillingly, but she with what mind I know not. Ever after that, my hopes
were augmented, and the kisses she gave me, me thoughts I plainly felt still on
my lips, the sweetness whereof I was as wary in keeping, as of a magazen of
treasure, for this is the first and greatest pleasure which lovers take,
coming from the most comeliest and beautiful part of the body. For the mouth
is the instrument of the voice, and the voice is nothing but the shadow of the
mind; now the touch of the lips working delight in the heart, draws our
minds to kiss each other. Nor truly do I remember that ever my senses had a
more pleasing object, for I never tasted any thing half so sweet as those
kisses she gave me.

As soon as supper was ready we sat down again, and Satyrus which filled
our wine would change Leucippes cup for mine promiscuously, so I observing
which part of the cup she put her lips to put that to my mouth, feigning it to
be a kiss sent unto me, which she observing did the like to me; this pleased
me the more, because we did not do it once, or twice, but all the day long.
When supper was done, Satyrus met me and told me, now is the time for you to
show your self a man, for the maids mother is gone to bed you know, and
Leucippe will walk with Clio, and her I will draw away with some talk or
other; so every thing went as we wished; for Clio was led away, and Leucippe was
walking by her self, wherefore taking the advantage of the evening, and
imboldened with the success of my former onset, I came upon her like a
soldier that had already conquered, not fearing the danger of the battle,
for I had many weapons to trust to, to wit, wine, hope, love, and
solitariness; so I saluted her, and when we should have conferred farther for
our marriage, we heard a great noise behind us, at which affrighted, we
parted, Leucippe to her chamber, and I to another part of the house, much
grieved that I had lost so fair an opportunity, and cursing those that made
the noise; whilst suddenly Satyrus meets me with a merry countenance, who
seemed to be an eyewitness of what we did, while he sat under a tree to
watch whether any one came, so spying some body, he knew not who, coming
toward us, he made the noise.

Some few days after, sooner than he had intended, my father began to
provide for my wedding, by reason of many strange dreams that troubled him,
for he dreamed that so soon as he had kindled our nuptial torches, they were
immediately put out, and which troubled him most of all, the bride and
bridegroom were stolen away; so the day of our marriage was appointed, and all
things necessary for the bride; an ornament for her neck set with diverse
precious stones, her garment all of purple, only that part which in other
garments is purple, was in hers woven with gold. The precious stones seemed to
contend with each other in brightness, the Iacinth was the color of the rose,
the Amethist inclined somewhat toward the color of gold; in the middle were
three stones so placed, that one received the color from the other, for they
were all joined in one, the lower part was black, the upper part which was
sharp as the top of a spear, was red; the bottom being white cast his rays
on the red and black: the stone it self set in gold looked like a golden eye:
nor were her garments of the common purple, but such as the Tyrians say was
found out by the Shepherds dog, and such as Venus veil is dyed in. There was
a time when the use of purple was not known to men, for it was hid in a little
shell, some few whereof a certain fisherman took, supposing them to be fish, but
seeing the shell so rough, he cast them away, which by chance a shepherds
dog lighting on, brake with his teeth, the blood whereof dyed his jaws; so
the shepherd seeing his dogs mouth bloody, and supposing him to be wounded,
went to the sea side to wash it, but the color was the brighter for washing:
hence the shepherd knew the nature of the shell, that it had in it some
excellent tincture, and that he might the better search out the whole matter,
he let some of it drop into a piece of wool, by this means unlocking the
rare mystery of purple, and adding a new treasure to the fullers trade.

My father now as the custom was, did sacrifice before the marriage, which
when I perceived I judged my self quite lost, and was thinking on some means
to defer all till some other time, when suddenly as I was thus thinking, a
great shout was made, the reason whereof was this: when my father had slain
the sacrifice, and laid it on the Altar, an Eagle snatched it away maugre all
the standers by.

This being taken as an ill omen, there was no wedding kept that day, but my
father sent for Augurs, and related to them what had happened, so they
councelled him to go to the sea side, and to sacrifice to Jupiter Hospitalis,
for that way the Eagle flew: but this matter was quickly hushed, for the Eagle
was never seen after; at which happy event I was much delighted, commending
the Eagle above measure, and saying that for this one act she well deserved to
be styled the Queen of birds. But that which was portended by this omen not
long after came to pass; for Callisthenes a young man of Byzantium, who having
a fair estate left him by his parents (which not long before dyed) was rich,
yet withal very luxurious. This Calisthenes hearing that Sostratus had a very
beautiful daughter, though he had never seen her, desired to have her to his
wife: For so inordinate are the desires of an intemperat man, that a rumor
will set him on fire, and his ear can challenge as much part in his love as
his eye. Therefore before the war began, he desired of Sostratus that he
might have the maid to wife, but he, misliking it seems his debauched life,
denied him: at that Callisthenes supposing himself to be undervalued, and
condemned by Sostratus, was much enraged, yet dissembled his anger, and
bethought himself how he might have his will on the maid, and be revenged on
Sostratus. Now there was a law amongst the Byzantians, that if any one had
stole away a Virgin, and had offered violence unto her, he should have no other
punishment inflicted on him than to marry her. Callisthenes calling this to
mind, thought on a fit opportunity to steal her away, and though the war
was hot, and he knew she was at my Fathers house, yet he desisted not to lay
wait, in which business this matter was a great help to him. There was this
Oracle given to the Byzantians. A little Island you shall see,
Which took its first name from a tree,
Seeming by a small streake of land,
To take the continent by the hand:
You may be sure to find the place
Where Vulcan Pallas does embrace,
There see that to Amphytrions son,
A solemn sacrifice be done.
Whilst they were doubting what Island the Oracle meant, Sostratus for he as I
told you was a chief commander in the wars, said, that it was time that they
should to Tire to do sacrifice to Hercules, for by all likelihood that should
be the place the Oracle intended, since the answer was this, the Island took its
name from a tree, and Phoenix in the Tyrian tongue signifies the branch of a
Palm tree. Now Tire is an Island of the Phoenicians for which the sea and the
earth contend, this drawing it to her self, the other striving to wash it away
being it lies on the sea, and yet is not parted from the earth, but by the help
of a narrow path, is joined to the continent, which path is as it were the neck
of the Island, not lying on the bottom but floating upon the top of the water,
affording a strange spectacle, a City in the Sea, and an Island on the land. Now
what was meant by Vulcan and Pallas we may construe to be oil and fire, both
which are there joined together; for in a certain holy place an Olive tree
grows, incompast in with flames, which consume not the tree but make the
Olives the better, as if betwixt them there were a mu^^^ll league* and here
Minerva refuses not the society of V^^can.

Then Chaerephon Sostratus colleague in the war, and of more authority than
him, because he was of Tire, extolling him above measure said, thou have well
interpreted the answer of the Oracle: but do thou think that the nature of
fire only is to be admired, water has its miracles too, some whereof I my
self have seen. There is a fountain in Sicilia containing water mingled with
fire, wherein you may see the flames leaping up from the bottom, yet if you
but touch the water, it is as cold as snow; nor yet does the water extinguish
the fire, or the fire heat the water, but betwixt them there is a truce. There
is also in Spain a river, which you would think at the first sight differed
not at all from other rivers, but if you listen more attentively, you shall
hear it make a great noise; for when a little wind has raised the waves
thereof, they are like so many strings of an Harp, which the wind being the
quill plays on. There is also a Lake in Lybia, the sand whereof differs not
much from that in the Indian rivers, which Lake the Virgins in that Country
know to be rich for its wealth, which lies hid under water, mingled with the
mud; a fountain of gold flowing there: now they let ^^wn a long staff
besmeared with pitch* and even as the hook is to the fish, so is this stick to
the gold; for it catches it, and the pitch serves in stead of the bait, to
which as much gold as it touches sticks, and by this means they take it out
of the the Lybian Sea.

Chaerephon having spoken this he sent those to Tire which should do sacrifice,
the City allowing of it, wherefore Callisthenes feigning himself to be one of
the overseers of the sacrifice, made what haste he could to Tire, and having
learned where my father dwelt, laid snares for the women who came to view the
pomp of our sacrifice, which was most sumptuously set forth, with great store
of incense, and all varieties of flowers; the chiefest of the incense was
Cassia, Franckincense, and Saffron; of the flowers, the Rose, Daffadilly, and
Myrtle. All of them smelled so sweet that they seemed as it were to contend
which should delight much. The beasts to be sacrificed were many, the chief
whereof were Egyptian Bulls, which are not only admirable for their color but
their height: a huge stature they are, of having a fat neck, broad shoulders, a
great belly, and horns not like those of Sicilia bending downward, or deformed
as those of Cyprus, but such as sprouting out to a great length, are by little
and little so bowed, till their top come to be distant each from other no
further than the roots; representing in a manner the form of a full moon;
the color they are of is that which Homer commends in the Thracian horses:
this beast marches with his head stately erected, as if he were King of the
rest, into this kind of Bull sure did Jupiter turn himself, if the story lie
not, when he stole Europa. Now at that time it happened that my mother in law
was not well, Leucippe also feigning her self to be sick, (for we agreed it
should be so till all were gone forth) stayed at home, so that no body but my
sister Caligo went forth with Panthia, Leucippe's mother. So Callisthenes which
had never seen Leucippe, took Caligo to be her, for he knew Panthia very
well, and consulting with no body whether it were her or no (for I think now
he was quite blind) made no more ado but showed her to one of his servants, in
whom he put trust, and commanded him to provide thieves to steal her away;
prescribing withal the manner how it should be done, telling him that the
solemnity was at hand, wherein all the virgins were to go down to the sea
side; which when he had spoken, taking no care for the sacrifice, he departed.
Now he had a private ship, which he had furnished before he came forth to the
furtherance of the business which he intended; the rest of his company, which
seemed to be of those who had the overseeing of the sacrifice, launcht into the
middle of the sea, but Callisthenes went not far from the shore, that he
might not only see what company came, but also lest his ship being near Tire,
after the fact was done, he should presently be pursued and taken. As soon as
he came to Saraptas, a street of the Tyrians situate in the sea, there he
provided those which should lie in ambush, and committed them to Zeno, that was
the servants name who had the charge of stealing her away. He was a man of a
strong body, and had been a pirate, who came to Tire by chance, and meeting
there with some fishermen which were pirates, fell into their company. There is
a little Island near Tire called Orodopes tomb, where the Tyrian ships
harbor, there he set his pinnace. We made our selves ready in the night to
do sacrifice the next day, which was not unknown to Zeno, wherefore when we
set forth, he followed us. Now it was our chance to go out in a very opportune
time, for Zeno lift up a certain ensign, whereupon the pinnace made to shore:
There were in it ten men, and there were eight more lying in wait on the
shore, dressed in women's apparel, and their beards shaven; all these had
swords hidden under their garments, and to avoid all suspicion, attended on the
sacrifice; insomuch that none could discern them from women. After fire was
ready to be put to the sacrifice, they put out their torches, and set upon us;
whilst we astonished, ran, one this way, another that way: so with their
swords drawn they carried away my sister Caligo, and going a ship board with
her, flew away as fast as an Eagle with her prey; some of us ran away,
neither hearing nor sceing this, others saw it and cried out, The pirates have
borne away Caligo; by this time the pinnace had sailed half way over the sea,
and drew near to Sarapta, where Callisthenes, knowing the sign, met them, and
taking the maid of them, fled. Our marriage being so fortunately and beyond all
expectation broke off, I began to take courage, though it grieved me much
that this mishap should befall my sister, and a few days after thus I began to
say to Leucippe. Dunces in love, how long shall we
Be poring on our A. B. C?
For such are kisses, which torment
Rather than give my soul content:
Letters from which you scarce will prove,
The wisest scholar can spell love.
What though the lilly of your hand,
Or coral lip I may command?
It is but like him up to the chin,
Whose mouth can touch, but take none in.
Having often sung her this song, I prevailed so far as to be admitted to her
bed, being assisted by Clio, who had the charge thereof.

There was a fair room in our house, having in it two places for beds, one on
the right hand, and two on the left; betwixt them was a narrow passage, through
which you might come at them; at the entrance into this narrow passage, were
two folding doors; on one side of the room lay Leucippe and her mother, in
the third bed lay Clio. And in the place where the fourth bed should be set,
their provision. Now Leucippe's mother accompanied her still to bed, and did
not only shut the doors on the one side, but gave out the keys to one of her
servants, through a crevise, to have them locked on the other side; and took
the keys in again. Then the next morning calling the same servant, and giving
him the keys, she commanded him to unlocke the doors again. So Satyrus made
some other keys like them, and having tried them, and found them fit for his
turn, he charged Clio not to hinder him in any thing that he did. But there
was a servant in the house, a busy prating meddling fellow, whose name was
Conops, a name very fit for him, he would still have an eye over us, but more
especially at night times, for he would sit watching at the chamber door, so
that it was impossible to escape him, wherefore Satyrus endeavoring to fall in
league with him, would many times jest with him, and play upon his name, which
is in English a gnat* he perceiving Satyrus cunning, made as if he would jest
too, yet bore a base malicious mind to us all the while. Go to now, says
he, because you jeere me so of my name, hear what a pretty tale I will tell
you of the gnat.

The Lion was wont to complain much to Prometheus, seeing he had made him
such a comely great creature, and armed his mouth with teeth, his feet with
claws, and made him stronger than all other beasts, yet that he should stand
in fear of a cock; to whom Prometheus replied, Why do thou rashly accuse
me? it is not my fault, but thine own cowardlinesse* at which the Lion wept,
and accusing himself had resolved to pine away for grief, and dye; while he
was in these dumps, he met with an elephant, whom after he had saluted, he fell
in talk with, as they were discoursing, the Elephant would still shake his
ears, for there was a gnat hovering about him; what is the matter, says the
Lion, you let not your ears be at rest? The Elephant replied, This little
beast which you see flying about me, should he but get into mine ears would
kill me: when the Lion heard this, What a fool was I, said he, to resolve to
die, seeing I am as much better than an Elephant, as a Cock is better than a
Gnat? You may see, says Conops, how little strength there is in a gnat and yet
how greatly the Elephant fears him. Satyrus perceiving his tail to be a
crafty one* and full of deceit, smiled a little, and said, I thank you for your
story of the elephant and the gnat. Now hear mine of the Lion and the Gnat, as
it was told me by a Philosopher.

Once upon a time the Gnat bespoke the Lion thus, Surely thou art much
deceived, O Lion, if thou think thou art King of me as well as of other
beasts, seeing thou art neither fairer, stronger, nor better than me, though
in some kind of strength thou exceed me, thou tearest with thy talons, and
bitest with thy teeth, what scolding woman cannot do the like? what beauty,
what greatness have thou? nothing but a huge breast, and a broad pair of
shoulders, and thy hinder partswhich thou can not see are far uglier than
these; my greatness is the whole air, so much I mean as I can incompasse
with my wings: my beauty the flowrishing colors of the meadows, which when I
please I put on: nor laugh at me if I style my self strong and valiant also,
for I am nothing but an entire engine of war, never entering combat without the
sound of a trumpet, my mouth striking up the alarm and giving the blow both at
once. I am also an arrow shooting my self through the air, and when I am shot
I wound, which wound he that receives cries out suddenly, looking about him to
see who hurt him, whilst I stand by him and straightway leap away, and am here
and there in a trice, skipping and laughing to see him ^tampe and fret; but why
do we parley so long, let us enter the lists, so immediately he fell on the
Lion, stinging him by the eyes, and all other parts where there grew no hair,
the Lion was enraged, and turning himself up and down, beat the air: the
Gnat taking more pleasure to see him angry, flew at his lips: the Lion turning
himself to come at the place which smarted, fell down; the Gnat like a nimble
wrastler bending his body, crept through his teeth, and again sliding through
his mouth, which was shut, got away: wherefore his teeth failing of their prey,
knocked one against another: at length the Lion wearied out with his bootlesse
striving, and as it were, yielding himself conquered, lay still: the Gnat
flying about him, singing a triumphant song; at last puffed up with* the
greatness of his victory, and fetching a greater compass than before, fell
unawares into a cobweb, and was straight caught by the Spider; wherefore seeing
no way to escape, and detesting his own folly he said, Fool that I was to
provoke a Lion, and am not able to shift from a Spider; which when Satyrus had
said, he bad Conops that he should take heed of a Spiders cobweb. So a few
days after, when he saw this Conops very hungry, he provided a sleepy potion
and invited him to supper, he suspecting something to be in the wind, denied
him; but being overcome with the persuasions of his belly, (the best orator)
at length came, and in his grace cup had this potion administered to him; which
as soon as he had taken up, he could scarce hold his eyes open* till he
went into his chamber: presently Satyrus meeting with me, told me that Conops
was laid fast, and bid me like Ulysses be of good cheer; at which words we
went both to Leucippes chamber, he stood at the door, I entered by the help of
Clio, who conveyed me in by stealth; at my entrance I trembled partly for
joy, partly for fear, for my mind was perplexed with the suspicion of some
ensuing danger, and yet overjoyed, as it were, with the hope of success, which
hope qualified the greatness of my fear: but to see the mischief, ere I
entered the chamber, her mother Panthia did dream a terrible dream, for she
thought she saw a thief enter the chamber, with his sword drawn, which took
her daughter out of the bed, and throwing her along ripped up her bowels;
wherefore affrighted with this dream, she leapt of her bed, and ran to
Leucippes (which was close adjoining), before I was half in bed; so I hearing
the noise, made what haste I could forth, knowing what a case I was like to be
in if I were caught: Satyrus was at the door ready to receive me, trembling
and half dead with fear; then both of us stealing away through the dark,
went each of us to his own Chamber: her mother good woman fell straightway
into a swoone; afterward being recovered fell a beating of Clio, and tearing
her own hair, and with many a sigh and groan uttered these words to Leucippe,
Thou have fond wench frustrate all our hopes. Thou good man, Sostratus, wagest
war at Byzantium for others marriages, whilst here at home some body I know
not whom has seized on thy daughter, and defiled her. I little thought to have
seen thee thus married, O Leucippe, I would thou had stayed at Byzantium,
and that the fortune of the war had cast this contumely on thee, or that some
Thracian conqueror had deflowred thee, that so thou might have yet been
chaste, for the violence which had there been offered thee, would have taken
away the disgrace of the fact, but now thou art thy self the cause of it,
and therefore must justly endure the infamy. My dream was too true, better
thou had bin ripped up alive, then that this bloody massacre should have been
committed upon thine honor: but that which most troubles me is, that I know
not the author of this injury, nor my grief: If it were some slave tell me.
But Leucippe being confident that I was gone far enough out of sight,
replied, Mother, you vvrong mine honor much, thus to attach it of that which
it is not guilty, for what I have done deserves not this harsh language from
you; the party which came so rudely into the chamber, whether he were a
hero or a thief I know not, for I lay astonished and affrighted, not able to
cry out, being tongue-bound with fear, only this I know, that no violence
was offered my virginity, in the mean time Panthia sighed, and fell down
with grief; but we were all the while plodding what we were best to
do: and this we found at last to be our safest course, that before day (least
Clio should be rackt to a confession) we should fly our Country. Having
resolved upon this course, we got the Porter to let us out, who supposed that
we went forth to meet with a svveet-heart of ours: So we went straight
to Clinias; it was then the dead of the night betwixt twelve and one, so
that we could not get in at his door; but by good fortune Clinias lying in
the forepart of the house, heard our tongues, and suddenly met us, straightvvay
in comes Clio, for she had intended to fly for it too: (Now Clio knevv all
our counsel and we hers, and Clinias both) for the poor vvench knevv that
she must to the rack for all, if she stayed but till morning; wherefore she
said she would rather choose to die, than stand to the hazard of it. Then
Clinias taking me by the hand drew me aside out of Clios hearing, and told me
that he had thought on a very good course to shift off Clio, and then to fly
by our selves: for the old woman knew not whom she caught, nor can she know
unless it be revealed to her by Clio; now perhaps you may entice her to fly
by her self, and upon these conditions he promised to accompany us in our
journey. To this we all agreed, concluding that Clio should be committed to
one of the servants, who shipping her should hoist sails and away with her,
which we persuaded her to, telling her that we intended to stay there and
bear the brunt of the matter, come what would of it, so we stayed there some
time to see this business dispatched; the rest of the night we spent in sleep;
betimes in the morning we returned home, not seeming to Panthia to know any
thing that had past. Panthia commanded Clio to be called, that she might be
questioned about it; she being not to be found, the old woman fell upon
Leucippe, asking why she would not tell her the truth of the matter, urging
her also to be privy to Clio's going away; then Leucippe being the more
emboldened with that, answered, What would you have me to do, mother? or what
shall I say more? what arguments shall I use to persuade you? if you suspect
the loss of my virginity, pray make trial of it. That's a good one, quoth the
old woman, we will have all the world to be witnesses of your shame, and with
that she flung out of the room. Leucippe left all alone, and much perplexed
with her mothers words, was almost distracted, she blushed that she was caught,
grieved she was that her mother had railed on her, and angry that she could
not be believed. Now shame, grief, and anger are to the mind like three waves
ready to overwhelme it, for shame getting into the eye, deprives it of its
liberty; grief flowing into the heart abates its courage; anger snarling and
breaking in the breast, drownes reason in the flaming sea of madness: The
tongue may be the cause of all these, for it is an arrow with three heads,
namely slander, a divulgation of the slander, and an exprobration of it; and
the number of the wounds must needs be proportionable, to wit, anger, grief
and shame: each of these wounds, though not bloudily, yet deeply, which cannot
be cured but by retorting them on him that smote with them, making your reply
as sharp as his onset; wherefore it is commonly seen how deep an impression
the words of a great man, or one in authority do make, because those that are
provoked by them, dare not answer again: For the greatest griefs unless
they have a vent, prove the greatest burdens to themselves. This being
Leucippes case, she was half dead with sorrow: in the mean time I sent
Satyrus to know of her whether she would go along with us, who preventing him
in his message, said, I beseech you by all the gods carry me whither you will
out of my mothers sight* for if you leave me behind you, there is no way for
me but to lay violent hands on my self: which when Satyrus told me, I
received no small comfort at the relation of it; so staying two days (my
father being from home) we provided all things necessary for our journey, and
the rest of the potion which Conops had left, we got Satyrus to give Panthia as
he waited on her at the table, which she had no sooner drunk but she hasted
to her chamber, and there fell asleep. The chamber maid (for there was a new
one chosen in Clio's room) and the Porter, he laid fast with some of the same
potion. While this was doing a coach was made ready, and Satyrus stayed at the
door for us; so when they were all in a dead sleep we stole away making no
noise. Now Satyrus led Leucippe by the hand, for by great chance Conops who was
wont to watch us, was gone forth about some business for his mistress, who
opening the door, we took coach; six of us, namely, my self, Leucippe,
Satyrus, Clinias, and two of Clinias servants poasting toward Sidon, whither
before the night was half spent we came, but making no stay there, we hasted
to Byritum, expecting to find some ship ready to set forth, nor did our hopes
fail us, for we found one into which we conveyed all our goods before we
knew whither it was bound; and a little before day we went aboard our selves,
then we understood it was bound for Alexandria, one of the famousest Cities of
Egypt: As soon as I saw the sea, I was not a little glad while I was yet in
the haven, afterward I rejoiced more that the wind served us so well: there
was such running up and down in the ship with the mariners, some drawing up
the ropes, others the saile-yards, others spreading the sail; so presently
taking in one another, we launched forth into the deep, the earth seemed to
sail as fast as our ship, for to our thinking it went backwards: great
shoutings there were and prayers to the gods that we might have a prosperous
voyage; so immediately we had a fine gale of wind which made our sails swell
and drove the ship apace.

Now by chance there was a passenger in the ship, who because it was supper
time and being by himself, desired us very courteously to take part of such as
he had; whose courtesy I kindly entertained, and caused Satyrus to bring forth
what he had provided for our suppers, so putting them together we supped all
at one table, passing away the time in discourse; at length I demanded of the
stranger what Countreyman he was, he replied an Egyptian, his name Menelaus;
which question also he asked me, and I answered him, my name is Clitophon,
this Clinias, both of us Phaenicians; tell us the cause of your journey, and
you shall know the cause of ours: then Menelaus began in this manner; I had a
friend whom I tendered dear as my soul, he was but a very young man much
addicted to hunting, from which neither I nor any could diswade him: on a
certain time I my self accompanied him to his sport, and being all mounted,
while as we pursued the lesser beasts, we prosper'd well enough in our game,
but suddenly a wild Boar coming out of the wood, this desperate youth was so
far from being affrighted, that he voluntarily run upon him, though I had
reclaimed him, the Boar ran fiercely at him, and he at the Boar, which
when I savv I was affrighted, and fearing lest the Boar slaying his horse,
should likewise tear him in pieces, cast a dart, little dreaming it should
light where it did, and it chanced while my friend stepped aside he received the
wound; in what a miserable perplexity I was then, who can judge? but that
which grieved me most of all, was, that whilst the breath was yet in his
body he embraced me, and was so far from detesting me his murderer, that til
the last minute he held me by that hand which vvounded him. For this his
parents endited me, to which I willingly agreed, and was so far from pleading
not guilty, that I proclaimed my self worthy of death, but the Judges moved
with pity, spared my life; and banished me for three years, so my time being
expired I am now returning to my country. When Menelaus had told this story,
Clinias could not forbear weeping to think on Caricles: whereat Minelaus asked
him whether for his sake he shed those tears, or whether the like unhappy
accient had befell him: then Clinias with many a groan and sigh told him the
story of Caricles and his horse, after which they had my story too; but seeing
Menelaus weeping for his friend, and Clinias making moan for his Caricles, to
put them out of their dumps, I began to tell love stories, and merry tales, at
length to talk much in commendation of women, but Menelaus who had always
been their enemy spoke as much against them, so at last we fell in a large
discourse concerning the dignity of their sex, which I list not here to set
down.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK.
The Argument.
Clitophon having been two days on the sea, at last arises a tempest, wherein
the ship was broken, and many of the passengers drowned; but he and Leucippe
swimming in a broken piece thereof, arrive safe at Pelusium, from whence once
more they set forward for Alexandria, when suddenly they are taken by Pirates;
Leucippe is carried before to their Captain; Clitophon and the rest of the
passengers being led after, another company of Pirates set upon these, (their
Captains name was Charmides) now all the prisoners seeing those who took them
captives, busy in fight, fled to the other company, whereof Charmides was
Captain; who seeing them bound, and therefore taking them to be prisoners,
saved their lives; but Clitophon after he had told him his misfortunes, was
received into great favor, and for his chivalry is made use of in the wars.
Mean time Leucippe was led to be sacrificed, but by a sleight of Satyrus and
Menelaus, (who arriving there by chance, and acquainted with the Captain of
those thieves, obtained the chief care of the sacrifice) she is saved, and
restored again to Clitophon.

THe third day the weather having been very fair all the time before, it grew
dark on a sudden, and the wind arose, beating the waves against the ship
side, whereat the Pilot commanded the saile-yard to be turned, which the
mariners assaying to do were hindered by the violence of the tempest, and
forced to leave it in its own place: immediately one part of the ship was
driven downwards, the other upwards, that we could scarce stand in our places,
the wind growing stronger we came all to the upper deck, partly to lighten
the lower part which was full of water already, and partly to balance her,
equally distributing her burden to every side, but this was to no purpose, for
while we strived to make her sail eaven, the wind would turn on a sudden,
and beat on the other side of the ship, insomuch that we were all in great fear
of drowning: at which there was a great shout in the ship, and we were all
forced to run back to the place from whence we came: and this we did six or
seven times, carrying our luggage backward and forwards from place to place,
expecting death every hour, which I think was not far off, for in the
afternoon the sun was quite taken from us, that we could see one another no
better than by moone-light: the lightning shone, the thunder ratled, and the
air was wholly distempered. The waves rising from the bottom of the sea, and
beating one against another, made a hideous noise: betwixt the heaven and the
sea was heard a horrid and confused murmour, like the rattling sound of a
trumpet: our ropes worn in two, and violently rent from our sails, fell
down, and this we feared, lest the plankes being broken, and the nails
loosened, our ship should fall in pieces: all the deckes by this time were
covered with water, so we lay in the bottom as if it had been in a den or
cave, committing our selves wholly to that sentence which it should please
fortune to pass upon us, all hope of escaping being quite cast away; for the
waves coming thick against the fore part and hinder part of the ship, seemed
to run a tilt one at the other, some of them were like mountains, other like
whirlepooles, but they troubled us most which came obliquely against the ship
for they overwhelmed it with water. Moreover, these kind of waves being
mounted almost as high as the clouds, did nevertheless seem to be of a
prodigious greatness; but falling down again, that you might the more plainly
discern them, you would think one sufficient to drown a thousand such ships:
As the billows fought one with another, so the wind fought with them; in the
mean time we were so tossed up and down, that we could stand still in no
place, though some of us held by the tackling, others by the side of the ship.
A great confusion of outcries there was, the water that grumbled, the wind
that kept a roaring, the women they shreekt, the men they cried out, the
Mariners they shouted to cheer up one another at their work; but all in
vain, for there was no place free from sorrow and weeping. Then the Master of
the ship commanded she should be eased of her burden, which was straightway
done; gold and silver being thrown out as well as the baser commodities, the
Merchants also themselves lent a hand to help to fling out their own goods; so
that by that time there was almost nothing left in the ship, yet the tempest
ceast not, insomuch that our Pilote forsook his compass, and would stir our
course no longer, but committed us all to the mercy of the sea, and made ready
the cockboate, into which he himself first entered, and the rest of the
Mariners after him.

Now here arose a greater mischief than the other, for we fell all together
by the ears who should get first into the boat, for the Mariners had cut the
rope by which she was tied to the ship; the passengers seeing this did what
they could to get in, but the sailers would not let them, holding up swords and
hatchets at them, threatening to strike them if they came in, which made the
passengers snatch up what came next to hand to defend themselves, some a broken
oar, others pieces of old plancks: violence was all the law they observed in
this strange and unheard of sea fight. For they which were in the boat
(fearing least if there came too many in they should be all cast away) laid on
them with swords and hatchets, so that some were slain, others stepping short
fell into the sea, and they which were got in were fighting with the Mariners:
for there was not the least shame or scruple of friendship left amongst them,
every man providing for his own safety, and not caring for another: This can
the greatness of danger do: straightway one of the passengers, a lusty stout
fellow, caught hold of the rope, and drew the cockboat to him, whereat every
man provided himself to leap in, as soon as it came within reach, which but
few of them obtained, so cutting the rope with their hatchets, they let the
boat go where it would. Our ship all this while turned round, and at last
dashing against a rock, broke all to pieces: our maine mast being broken in
one place and bowed in another. Those that were cast away at the breaking of
our ship, I count were in better case then we that stayed, (For death prolonged
in a tempest kills a man ere he feel it, whilst his eyes being filld with the
greatness of the danger, make his fear as great) Some seeking to swim away
were dashed against the rock, some getting upon old boards, looked like so many
sea monsters, some half dead floating on the waters: But by good chance a
pretty big piece of the forepart of the ship fell to Leucippes share and
mine, in which we sat. Menelaus and Satyrus and others, having lighted on the
maine mast, held fast by that; Clinias we saw not far from us, bestriding the
sail yard, who bid us have a care that we let not go our hold, which while
he was speaking, there came a great wave and overwhelmed him, threatening us
also; but as the fates would have it, it only raised the wood whereon we sat;
so being lifted on high we espied Clinias again: wherefore not without tears I
burst forth at length and cried, Take pity on us god Neptune, and spare those
relics of our shipwreck, we have died a thousand deaths, being in a
continual fear of death, but if thou will that we perish, divide us not, but
let one wave swallow us both; or if it be thy pleasure to make us food for thy
flock, let one fish devour us, so by that means we shall both lie in one
sepulcher.

After I had thus prayed, the wind ceast, and the waves were still, whereon you
might see many hundred carcases. Menelaus was cast on the shore of Egypt,
into a place inhabited by thieves and pirates, and about the evening it was
our fortune to arrive at Pelusium; and having set footing on the long wished
for earth, we gave many thanks to the gods for our safe delivery; afterward
we bemoaned Clinias and Satyrus whom we supposed to be dead.

At Pelusium is the statue of Jupiter Cassius, pictured so young, that you
would rather take him for Apollo than Jupiter; in his right hand he held a
pomegranate, the reason whereof was very mysterious: we entered the Temple to
ask of this statue what was become of Clinias and Satyrus (for it gave answers
to such as asked any questions of it) and in the inner part we saw two rare
pieces of Evanthus the painters drawing, (whose picture also hung there) in the
one whereof was Prometheus bound, in the other Andromeda, which was the reason I
think the painter had joined them together, though in other parts and
circumstances there was much analogy betwixt them; both of them had a rock for
their prison, both were manacled, each had his executioner at hand, and each
had a Grecian champion to deliver them, the one Perseus, and the other
Hercules; the one whereof shot at the Eagle Jupiters bird on the ground, the
other at the whale Neptunes fish in the air; the rock was hollowed no more
than to contain the virgin, and so curiously done, that it seemed not to be
artificial but natural, for the painter had made it cragged and uneaven, as
the earth uses to produce it; in it sat the virgin of so comely an aspect,
that would you only look on her beauty, the very picture were worthy your
admiration, but if on the chains wherewith she was bound, and the whale ready to
devour her, you would count it an object scarce worth your sight, as
representing you a rude and disorderly sepulcher. She was fair and yet pale
withal, her beauty being placed chiefly in her eye, her palenesse in her
cheek which was not yet quite destitute of the red tincture wherewith before
it had been dyed; nor did her eyes so sparkle, but that you might discover in
them (as in violets lately gathered) a kind of languishing and drooping, to
express in her a modest fear of what she was to suffer, her hands which
being bound to the rock were stretched out, the prominent veins whereof
making them to incline to a purple blew color, seemed to hang on her arms
like grapes on a vine; thus was the face of her expressed, which every minute
expected death, she was attired like a bride (as being about to be married to
Pluto) in a garment down to her heels, white as snow, and for the subtilty of
the weaving like the spiders cobweb, not made of the sheep fleece, but such
feathers as the Indian women kembe off the trees. Over against her appeared the
whale, with his head only above water, yet the shadow of his shoulders, the
ranks of his scales, the bending of his back, and the wreathing of his tail
might be discerned through the water: his nose was wrinkled like a snarling
dogs, and his mouth being wide open reached to his shoulders; betwixt the
virgin and this ugly beast came Perseus flying down from heaven naked, only a
scarf over his shoulders, on his feet he had winged shoes, and a hat on his
head like a helmet, in his left hand he held the Gorgons head, which served him
for a buckler; it looked most grimly, with a ghastly countenance, shaking its
hair, and wreathing the serpents up and down, so that the very picture were
enough to have affrighted you; in his right hand he had a certain kind of
weapon which was made in the manner of a sword and a sickle; from the hilt to
the middle it was like a sword, then it was divided, and one part was crooked
toward the point, the other straight, so that at the same blow he would wound
and draw to him; thus was the story of Andromeda set forth.

Prometheus was tied to a rock with iron chains, by him stood Hercules with his
bow and arrows in his hand, the Eagle preyed on Prometheus breast, still
opening it wider and wider, digging in further with his beak to find out more
of his liver, a great part whereof the painter had made appear through the
wound; upon one thigh stood the Eagle, whilst he shrinking up his side, and
lifting it up, gave her talons the more hold; his other thigh was stretched out,
wherein you might discern each sinew and vein; nor were these all the
postures that might express the greatness of his torture, for he frowned, bit
his lips, and gnasht with his teeth, all which were so lively done, that the
very picture would have moved you to compassion.

While he was in this distress, Hercules was ready with his bow and arrow, who
with all his might drew the string to his right dugge, and shot at the Eagle,
which he did so speedily, that at the same instant he drew his arrow to the
head, and discharged it at the mark. Prometheus himself full of fear and
hope, cast his eyes one while on his wound, and another while on Hercules, on
whom they would still have dwelt, had not his torment violently snatched them
away to the contemplation of it also.

Now when we had stayed here a pretty while, and had refresht our selves after
the misery we had suffered by shipwreck, we hired an Egyptian pinnace (for
we had some money left) and sailing on the river Nilus, steering our course
toward Alexandria, intending there to live, hoping also to find some of our
friends, whom happily we supposed the violence of the tempest might have cast
on those shores; but when we came to a certain town, we heard a great noise,
at which the mariners crying out, The shepherds are upon us, and making as if
they would go back, the banks were filled presently with a company of rude
and salvage fellows, very tall, not quite so black as the Indians, nor tawny
as the Egyptians, but betwixt both, they were bareheaded, their feet were
very little, their bodies great, and their language barbarous: where our Pilot
affirming that we were all dead men, stayed our ship, for it had been to no
purpose to have gone forward, the river being so narrow. So immediately there
came four of them aboard our ship, who carried away all the goods and moneys
that were in it, and went their ways, leaving us bound in the custody of some
other of their companions, that the next day we might be brought before their
King (for so they style the master of the thieves): Now he dwelt two days
journey from that place, as we understood by some others who were taken
captives with us; in the mean time the night drew on, and our keepers were
asleep, by reason whereof I had a good opportunity to bewail Leucippe's
calamity, wherefore considering my self to be the chief cause, I sighed
deeply, and not daring to utter my griefs aloud, spoke softly thus.

You gods (if there be any in this place) is our offense so great, that in so
short a time you should afflict us thus? you have given us over into the hands
of Egyptian robbers, whose hearts are so obdurate that we may utterly
despair of finding any mercy from them: how many be there who have pacified
the merciless fury of their enraged enemy with their prayers? (For the tongue
pleading for the grief of the mind is a strong motive to divert the fury of
the adversary) but alas what prayers shall we pour forth, what vows shall
we make, though our speeches were sweeter than the Sirens, or the music of
our tongues more harmonious than that of the spheres, it were so far from
prevailing, that it would not be understood by these parricides. I must beg
for mercy by a nod, or some other gesture of my body; oh misery beyond compare!
but for mine own misfortunes (though they be greater than can be imagined) I
grieve not so much as for thine, my dear Leucippe; with what mouth shall I
complain? with what eyes shall I vveep? seeing thou have proved so constant
and so kind to me thy most unhappy lover. See what stately preparation here is
for thy marriage, to wit, a dungeon for thy bride-chamber, the earth for
coastly bedding; for thy chains and bracelets ropes and cords; in stead of a
bride-boy see thy jailour lies by thee. We were much to blame to thank thee,
O sea, seeing they whom thou swallowed'st up, are in better case than we,
which thou sparedst, thus to save us, what is it but more cruelly to slay us,
envying as it were that we should fall by the hand of any but these thieves.
This I uttered veru softly, but for tears (the fountain whereof in greater
griefs is dried up) I shed none. For in lesser evils they flow apace, whiles
begging favor, though they prevail not, yet do lessen the grief, as an
ulcer, when it is broken brings ease to the patient; but in greater ils they
fly back and forsake the eyes, being stifled with sorrow, and compelled to
return with it, to the inmost and retiredst corners of the heart.

Afterward turning my self to Leucippe, who all this while spoke not a word, I
said, Why art thou so silent my Leucippe? She answered, that it fared with her
as it uses to do with those that are sick unto death, who immediately before
their departure, usually are speechless. While we talked the day drew on,
when suddenly there came in a strange fellow with long black locks, riding
upon an horse, with shagg'd hair, without either bridle or saddle, for so your
thieves ride, he, as it seems, was sent from their King, who told us if
there were ever a Virgin taken captive, she should be brought to him to be
made an expiatory sacrifice for their whole army; then the keepers cast their
eyes on Leucippe, but she taking me about the middle, and holding fast by me
fell a weeping and crying out, whllst some of them drew her away, others beat
me; so by violence they carried her thence, and some two hours afterward they
led us away: but by that time we had gone half a mile or there about on our
way, we heard a great shouting, also the noise of trumpets; and immediately we
descryed an army of Soldiers coming toward us, which as soon as the thieves
saw they put us in the midst of their company, least we should run away, and
provided to fight with them.

Not long after there stepped me out fifty men armed cap a pe, some with
targets which covered their whole bodies, others with shorter* the thieves,
which were more then the soldiers fell a flinging clods of earth at them,
which in Egypt are so hardened with the sun, that they are as good as any
weapon, for the unevener parts thereof being prominent, make not only a wound
but cause a swelling about it: but the soldiers warding off their blows with
their targets, cared not for them, but as soon as they saw them weary with
flinging, opened their army, so those which were but slightly armed rusht out
and threvv darts at them, afterward they joined battle, and to fighting they
went, blows and vvounds there were given and taken on each sides, but the
soldiers were too hard for the thieves, who though they were not so many in
number, yet were better experienced in the vvarres. Mean time we that were
captives perceiving the thieves to be put to the vvorst, gathered our selves
together in a troop, and broke their rancks, and ran over to the enemies side;
who not knovving what we were would have killed us, but seeing we were
bound, and thereby guessing how the case stood with us, admitted us into their
army, and placed us in the reere, that so we might be free from all danger.
In the mean time the horsemen came upon the thieves, and slew the greatest
part of them, some of them lay dead upon the ground, others half dead fought
as well as they could, the rest were taken prisoners.

Toward evening the Captain of these soldiers, whose name was Charmides,
examined every particular man what he was, and how he fell into the hands of
these thieves, to whom every one laid open his case, and I mine: when he had
thoroughly sifted us, he commanded us to follow him, promising also that we
should have weapons given us, for he had determined as soon as his munition
and more men came (whom he expected every hour) to set upon the greatest
receptacle of these thieves, wherein (as it was reported) was above ten
thousand men. Now I having formerly had some skill in riding, desired a horse
might be given me, which as soon as I had, I praunced about the ranks of
soldiers, and showed Charmides my horsemanship, which he highly commended,
injoyning me for that night to be his guest. While we were at supper he
desired me more particularly to relate what had happned to me, which when he
heard he much commiserated my case. For so it happens often time, that he which
hears of another misery, does almost suffer with him; now this compassion
begets a good will toward him whom he pitties, which good will is many times
vented in a real expression of some extraordinary favor. Thus it fared with
me, for I wrought so much upon Charmides with my story, that he did not only
weep at the relation, but gave me an Egyptian servant to wait upon me.

The day after he provided to go forth to battle, and assayed to stop up
the trench which was between us and the enemy, for on the other side he had
discovered a great number of thieves up in arms, these thieves had built an
altar of clay, and dug a sepulcher, two of them led a virgin bound toward
the altar, whom because they were in armor I knew not, but the virgin I
discerned to be Leucippe; they poured oil on her head, and omitted not any
ceremony; while an Egyptian Priest sung an hymn, for so I ghest by his making
of faces and wry mouths: immediately a watchword was given, and each man
stood a pretty distance from the altar, then one of those which led her made
her fast to a stake (like Marsyas whom the potters frame in clay bound to a
tree) who stabbing her in the breast ripped her downwards till he came to the
paunch, so that her entrails started out, which they snatching up, speedily
threw upon the altar, and when they had boiled them, cut them in pieces, and
eat them up, dividing to each man a share.

When the soldiers and Captain saw this, they could not choose but cry out at
the horridness of the fact, but I was amazed and astonished at it, for the
unusual greatness of the wickedness had quite bereft me of sense, which made
me give more credit to that tale of Niobe, who conceiving some extraordinary
grief for the death of her children, gave occasion to the fable. After this
part of the tragedy was acted (as it seemed to me to be) having laid her in the
sepulcher, and covered her with earth, they pulled down the altar, and
departed, never looking back again on the place.

About the evening the trench betwixt them and us was filled up, so our
soldiers went over and pight their tents on the other side, this being done we
went to supper. Charmides perceiving me much grieved in mind, sought by all
means possible to comfort me, but prevailed not, for about the first watch of
the night, finding them all asleep, I took my sword and went to the sepulcher,
intending to slay my self thereon, which when I had drawn out, thus I spoke: O
wretched Leucippe, and the unhappiest of all women, I grieve not so much that
thou diedst so far from thine own country a violent death, or that those
salvage villains made such a May Game of thy murder; but this it is augments
my misery, that thou should be made an expiation for such polluted slaves*
that they should rippe thee up alive, that their unhallowed hands should
violate thy chaste womb, that they should erect thee an altar, and dig thee
a grave, wherein it is true, thy carcass lies, but where are thy bowels? had
they been consumed with fire, the calamity had been the less, but when in
stead of a sepulcher, they shall lie buried in those paunches of these lewd
miscreants, what patience is equal for so great a burden of sorrow! a strange
and unheard of banquet was it, could the gods see it and not blush? But to
pacify thy ghost, O Leucippe, I will offer my self a sacrifice to the
infernal gods: Having said thus, I set the sword to my breast, when suddenly I
espied two poasting toward me in all haste, (for the moon shone) wherefore
thinking them to be thieves, and therefore the more willing to be slain by
them, I held my hand, when they came near they shouted to me; now who do you
think these two men were but Satyrus and Menelaus? whom with all the rest of
my friends I had given over for dead, yet though they came so unexpectedly, I
was so far from embracing them, that I took no comfort me thought at the sight
of them, the bitterness of my grief had so dejected me. They went to take my
sword out of my hand; but I replied, by all the gods you shall not: envy me not
the glory of so rare a death, nor detain from me that which is the only
medicine of all my sorrows; though you should compel me to live, I cannot,
Leucippe being dead; what though you take my sword from me by violence, yet
there is a sting of grief within me which will torment me, would you have me
still wounded and never die? If this be all the cause why you would lay
violent hands on your self (quoth Menelaus) I swear by Hercules you may
forbear; for Leucippe is still alive, and shall straightway appear unto you:
at that fixing mine eyes very wishfully upon him, Is it not enough said I that
I am in this distress, but must I also be derided and mocked? this is against
the laws of all Hospitality: Then Menelaus beating on the sepulcher with his
foot, bad Leucippe testify whether she were alive or not, when he had smote
the urne two or three times, I heard a very still voice, whereat looking
steadfastly on Menelaus, I supposed him to be some Magician, but he uncovered
the urne and straightway came Leucippe forth, a most ghastly creature, for she
was unbowelled from top to bottom, she casting her self upon me embraced
me, and I her also, at which sudden meeting we both swoun'd.

I was scarce come to my self, but straightway I turned to Menelaus, and asked
him why he would detain the truth of this matter from me? is not she which I
hold by the hand, and hear speak, mine own Leucippe? What did I then see
yesterday, either this or that was a dream, and yet me thinks again this is
a true and lively kiss, such a one as I use to have of my Leucippe: what say
you, quoth Menelaus, if I find her bowels again, and heal this great wound
without leaving any scar behind? cover your face, for I must invoke the aid
of Proserpina to the effecting of it, (whereat believing that he was able to
perform what he promised) I did so, and while he uttered some strange bombast
words, he took away that device which they had put before her breast to
delude the thieves, and Leucippe was as whole as ever she was; then he bid
me look back, which I would scarce do, fearing that Proserpina was there
indeed, at length I turned about and uncovered my face, and saw Leucippe sound:
At which wondering more and more, I told Menelaus if he were some god he should
tell us, then Leucippe entreated him that he should hold me no longer in
suspense, but relate unto me the whole carriage of the matter; so he began.

If you be remembered Clitophon at our first acquaintance in the ship, I told
you I was an Egyptian; now the greatest part of my possessions and lands lie
near to this City; the chief governors whereof are my friends: What time we
then suffered shipwreck, I was cast on the Aegyptain shore, where Satyrus and
I were taken by the Pirates of this City, but some of them which knew me, led
me to their governor, by whom I was freed from my bonds, kindly entreated,
and desired to be an assistant to them in such enterprises as they should
undertake; finding so much favor at their hands I begged Satyrus freedom
also, but they replied unto me ere they granted me that, I was to perform
some noble exploite, wherein I might give sufficient testimony of my valor. At
that time they had a strict command from the Oracle to offer up a Virgin, as an
expiation for the City which they inhabited, and that they should eat part of
the liver of the sacrifice, then bury the body, afterward depart; and all this
was to keep the enemy back from assaulting them, what followed I pray will
you tell Satyrus. So thus he continued the story. When first I came to the
Camp (Master) understanding what was like to befall Leucippe, I wept, and
desired Menelaus to think on some means to free her; in which business I
know not what god was propitious to us, for the very day before the
sacrifice was to be don, we were both by the sea side, very pensive,
thinking upon some way to deliver her: while we were in these dumps, the
thieves espying a ship, which not knowing those coasts, had lost its way, set
upon it; they who were in it seeing they were assaulted by Pirates,
indevour'd to fly, which course failing the^, they fought it out: In that ship
was one who used to recite Homers Poems in the theater, attired in the same
manner as he used to be at recitation; he with the rest of his company gave
the^ a shrewd onset, but the thieves having a fresh supply of galleys, and
other long boats, quickly slew all the men, and brake the ship; a piece whereof
did swim toward us, and in it a little cabinet, which had escaped the hands of
those which ransackt the ship: this Menelaus took up, and going aside opened
it, wherein I thought there had been no small treasure, but in it we found
nothing but a short cloak and a knife, the handle whereof was four handfulls
long, but the blade not above three fingers; while Menelaus handled this knife,
he pulled unawares a great part of the blade out of the handle, wherein as in
a sheath it was hid, so we straightway supposing that this was the weapon which
that juggling fellow made people believe he stabd himself withal; wherefore
turning me to Menelaus, I said, Now beat thy brains a little, and we doubt
not by the gods assistance but we shall free the virgin, and the thieves never
discover our device: we will sow a very thin sheepskinne in the form of a
wallet, about the bigness of a man's belly, and filling it with the blood and
entrails of some beast, put it before her, so when she has her long garment
on, and is adorned with garlands and flowers, our device cannot be discovered,
in which matter we are much furthered by the Oracle, which gave strict charge
that she being clothed in a long robe, should be led to the altar, there to
be cut up; besides, this knife is made so, that the beholders will think it
runs into her body when it runs into the handle; so there is but just enough
to cut the counterfeit belly, which nevertheless when it is drawn out, you
would think had been sheathed in her body; if we do this, the thieves can
never detect us, for the skin shall be covered, and the entrails at the first
stroke shall start forth, which we presently snatching up will fling on the
altar* nor shall the standers by be suffered to come near the body, which we
will prevent, by burying it. The means how we shall come to have the chief
care of the sacrifice is this: The King, if you be remembered, not long since
enjoined you some exploit, ere you could obtain my enfranchisement, wherefore
go straight to him, and tell him you are ready for this enterprise.

Having thus said, I conjured him by Iuppiter the hospitable, and by our
familiarity, and the shipwreck we suffered together. Mean while this good man
Menelaus well weighing the matter, replied, that it was a thing very difficult
to bring to pass, yet he would not stick to dye for a friend. But said I, for
ought you know Clitophon is yet alive, for I asked Leucippe of him, and she told
me she left him bound among the captives, and that it was reported to their
captain, that while they were in fight all the prisoners flew over to the
enemies side, so that by this means you shall not only deliver Leucippe, but
by this courtesy further engage Clitophon unto you; and this persuaded him:
nor ever after was fortune adverse to us, but the care of providing such things
as were to use about it, was committed to my charge.

Afterward Menelaus meeting the King, and intending to motion the matter to
him, was by him prevented in this manner: The laws of my land (says he) have
provided that he which shall be appointed overseer of any sacrifice,
especially when any man or woman is to be sacrificed, shall slay them;
wherefore see that you and your servant be ready to morrow to perform it: to
which Menelaus replied, that he would willingly undertake it, and carefully
perform it: which was as we would have desired: So while we were attiring of
Leucippe, we put her in good comfort, and preacquainting her with the whole
carriage of the business, after this to the altar she was brought, the rest
you saw your self.

With this speech of Satyrus my mind was so distracted, that I knew not how to
think on a requital sufficient for Menelaus, only as the common custom is,
I embraced him, and to speak truth did almost adore him as a deity. But
afterward seeing that all went well with Leucippe, I demanded what became of
Clinias? Menelaus told me that when he saw him last, he was bestriding the
saile-yard: whereat (though in the midst of all my joy) I could not choose but
lament, (for it was the gods pleasure that such excess of gladness should
have some intermixture of sorrow) that for my sake he should be lost, whom I
tendered dearest next to Leucippe, and that the sea should exercise a cruelty
on him above all the rest, whereby he was not only deprived of life, but also
of a grave. O faithless Sea, thou enviedst that we should enjoy the fruits of
thy bounty entire. After this parting we went to the camp together, where this
was straightway divulged, and spent the rest of that night in my tent; as soon
as it was day I brought Menelaus to Charmides, to whom I related the whole
story, wherewith he was so much delighted, that he took Menelaus into favor,
which when he had done, he asked him concerning the number of the thieves;
Menelaus told him that in the next village there were near about ten
thousand of them: though they be, said Charmides, yet five thousand of my
soldiers shall be too hard for them, but I daily expect two thousand more, who
lie in garrison at the Isle of Delta.

While Charmides was yet speaking, in came a boy who brought news that there
was a messenger at the door from the Isle of Delta, the tenure of his message
was this, That the thieves made no onset on the Island, yet the coming of his
army was deferred five days longer; for as they were setting forth there met
them a bird which brought with her the sepulcher of her mother, whose coming
was the cause of their delay: but I desirous to know the meaning of what he
said, asked what bird, or what sepulcher it was they owed so much reverence to?
The name of the bird, replied the messenger, is reported to be Phaenix, and is
bred among the Aethiopians, about the bigness and almost of the same color as
a Peacocke, but scarce so beautiful; her feathers are partly of a golden and
partly of a purple color; she boasts her self to be the bird of the Sun,
which her head may seem to testify, for on it is a curiously composed crown,
which in figure resembles the picture of the Sun; her body is azure, her face
the color of the rose, her aspect pleasant, and her feathers shooting out like
Sun beams; the Aethiopians enjoy her living, and the Egyptians dead, for when
she dies, which is not till after a great while, her young one carries her to
the river Nilus, and makes her this kind of sepulcher: It takes a good
quantity of the sweetest smelling myrrh, as much as will contain the carcass,
and hollowes it with its beak, into which it puts the body, then flies toward
the river Nilus, carrying the sepulcher along, an innumerable company of birds
attending on her, like so many noble men guarding their prince when he goes
into a far Country; nor does it betake it self to any place but the city of
the Sun, and there getting upon the top of some high tower, expects the
coming of the priest, who straightway comes out of an holy place with a book
in his hand, and comparing the bird with the description which is given of her,
he judges whether it be a true Phaenix or no; and so curious he is (lest he
should be mistaken himself) that he makes anatomy of her as it were, and
shows each part to the standers by; after full trial, adding some short
speech in commendation of her, he buries her; thus when she lives the
Aethiopians have her, when she is dead, the Egyptians.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOURTH BOOK.
The Argument.
Charmides falls in love with Leucippe, and sollicits Menelaus to win her to
his will, but he as a trusty friend relates all to Cltiophon and her; who
laying their heads together, shift off Charmides from enjoying her; but mean
while one Gorgias an Egyptian soldier, makes a phyltre, and hires Clitophons
slave to give it Leucippe, wherewith she runs mad, the ingredients he made
choice of being too strong. Charmides at first thinks this a trick to delude
him, but afterward perceiving her to be truly distracted, sends her his own
Physician, who can do no good on her; thus she continues the whole time,
during the battle betwixt Charmides and the thieves, this battle ended
wherein Charmides and this Gorgias were slain: his servant who was privy to
it, told one Chaereas, who more out of love to Leucippe then to Clitophon (as
in the issue it appeared) relates unto him what Gorgias his servant had told
him, and that this servant had a medicine which would disanull the force of the
Philtre; it is applied, wherewith Leucippe recovers; Gorgias his servant is
well rewarded for his pains, and Chaereas for his love admitted into
familiarity with Clitophon and Menelaus, and accompanies them in their journey
toward Alexandria.

AFter Charmides had been informed of the enemies strength, and the delay of
his armies coming, he decreed to return to the village from whence we came,
and there to stay while his forces came, where was a better lodging provided
for me and Leucippe than for Charmides himself. As soon as I entered the
Chamber, I began to embrace her, and would have done the office of a husband,
but she refusing, I said, how long my dearest Leucippe shall we live
unmarried? see thou not how many miseries unexpectedly befall us? we have
suffered shipwreck, fell into the hands of Pirates, and thou had been almost
sacrificed: wherefore let us while we are in safety take hold of such fair
opportunity, least by misfortune we be again separated: But Leucippe
answered, This cannot yet be done, for not long since as I was wailing my
miseries, Diana appeared unto me in a dream, and spoke to me on this wise:
Weep not Leucippe for thou shall not die, I my self will free thee, only
keep thy self chaste, till I shall commend a husband to thee, who doubtless
shall be no other then thy Clitophon. For this ensuing joy I was not a little
glad, though this delay cut me to the heart: and hearing her make mention of her
dream, I thought on that which but the night before I had, me thoughts I saw
the temple of Venus with an image in it, hither when I went to offer up my
devotion, the doors were shut against me, whereat being much troubled, a
woman appeared unto me, not much unlike the statue, which said, It was not yet
lawful for me to come into the temple, but if I would stay a little, the time
should come when I should not only be permitted to enter but be made a priest
to the goddess. These two dreams I still thought on, and would never after
force her.

Afterward Charmides having opportunity to see Leucippe, eyed her most
immodestly, the opportunity was this: Leucippe and my self being present, some
fellows had got a sea monster, not unworthy the sight, which the Egyptians call
the horse of Nilus; and as they report of him he is very like a horse both in
his belly and in his feet, only that his hoofes are cloven: for bigness he
is equal to the fairest Ox, his tail is short, being smooth and without
hair, as the rest of his body; his head great and round, his cheekbones almost
like a horses, his nostrils very broad, breathing out a smoke mixed with
sparkles of fire: his chin is broad as his jaws, the compass of his mouth so
great, that it reaches to his temples; his teeth which you call doggeteeth, are
crooked in form, and are placed not much unlike horses, though they be thrice
as big: Charmides invited us to see this monster, but he himself looked more
upon Leucippe than on it; for he was in love with her, and willing to feed his
eyes the longer with her beauty, framed a great many frivolous delays to
detain her; first relating the nature of this monster, that it was a great
devourer, and would eat up a whole field of standing corn; next the manner of
taking him, that he could not be caught but by sleight, and that the hunters
thereof observing the places which he most haunts, dig there a pit, putting a
chest therein, whose lid is open that it comes as high as the side of the pit,
this they cover with turves of earth and sedge, then they go to some secret
place adjoining, where they stay and watch this horse, who as soon as he
treads upon the turves, falls into the chest; the huntsmen observing this, make
what haste they can to shut the chest, and so they take him; if they did not
use this slight he would never be taken by violence, for as he is most
strongly joynted, so is his skin impenetrable, insomuch that iron can scarce
pierce it; so that we may not unfitly call him the Egyptian Elephant, for
next to that Elephant of India, he is the strongest creature in the world.
Then Menelaus replied, Have you ever (Sir) seen an Elephant? Yes, said
Charmides, and and have heard of his strange birth by some who have narrowly
searched into the nature of it: But I replied that we had never seen any more
then the picture among us; then Charmides promising that so rare a mystery in
nature should no longer be hid from us, began on this wise;

The old one is ten years conceiving, and that time expired brings forth nor
her young but old one: and this is the reason that they are all of so vast a
body, undaunted strength, and so long lived that they outlive Hesiods crow; the
jaw bone of him is as big as an ox head, if you saw his mouth you would think
that he had two great horns growing out of it, but they be not horns, but
teeth bending upwards, in the middle whereof grows his proboscis or snout,
which they call his hand, in form and bigness like a trumpet, very useful to
him, for in that he receives his meat; and if it be such as is his usual food,
he conveyes it to his mouth; if not, he gives it to his master, an Ethiopian,
who sits on his back. To this Ethiopian he is very obedient, for he
understands his language, he fawnes on him, and yet stands in awe of him, and
if he offend, is by him in stead of a whip beaten with an iron bar. One
strange thing I will tell you, whereof I my self was an eyewitness.

I remember I saw a Grecian once (I have forgot his name) lie down and lay his
head to the Elephants head, who opening his mouth breathed on him; in which
thing I much admired the boldness of the man, and the clemency of the beast;
but the Grecian afterward told me that he was feign to fee the Elephant, so
having received his reward, he blew on him a breah more sweet than all the
Indian spices, which cured him of a pain in his head; and that the Elephant
knowing this (like a cunning lawyer) would not open his mouth gratis, or like a
proud Physician, would be greaz'd in the fist ere he would meddle with his
patient: then said I, how comes it to pass that so ugly a beast should have so
svveet a breath? His meat is the cause of it, says Charmides, which is a
certain kind of leaf which grows in a City of India (a place where the
Sun is first seen, and displayes most heat) which among them (concealing
its svveet savor) is of no account, either because it vvil not boast of its
vvorth in its own country, or that it envies that those inhabitants should
enjoy it; this leaf removed from thence and planted on some mountain,
discloses its hidden savor, and of a leaf becomes a flovver; this is that
which among the Indians they call a black Rose, on which the Elephants feed
among them as Oxen do on grass among us, to which kind of food they being
continually used, their breath smells like the flower.

After Charmides had done his tales, he let not much time slip, (for they which
are wounded with love, are tossed to and fro, scarce able to undergo the burden
of their grief) but calling Menelaus aside, took him by the hand, and said, I
see Menelaus by what thou have done for Clitophon, thou art a trusty friend,
thou shall find that my fidelity shall be answerable to thine, only do one
courtesy for me, which is easy for thee to perform, and to me a matter of
such moment, that thereby thou will preserve my life. Leucippe has almost
slain me, do thou save me, she has not yet paid thee for that life she owes
thee, let her in loving me make thee requital; thou shall have for thy pains
fifty pieces of gold, and Leucippe as many as she will ask. Then Menelaus
answered, Your money, Sir, keep to your self, or at leastwise profer it to
such as use to sell courtesies: for my part, seeing I am so deeply engaged in
your favor, I shall endeavor to make it appear to you, that you have not
fastened your affection on one void of all desert.

Not long after he met with me, and told me what had past between him and
Charmides; which when I heard, I thought it was time to bestirre my self for
avoiding this danger, at last we pitched upon this resolution, to cousen
Charmides: for then it was not safe to give a flat denial, when he might by
violence effect what he had intended; and fly we could not, by reason every
place was fraught with thieves; besides, he had many soldiers attending him
continually who might have pursued us. Therefore Menelaus went confidently to
Charmides, and told him that his business was dispatched, and that the maid
did at the first very obstinately deny his suit, but afterward upon much
entreaty mention also being made of the reward proposed, she yielded; yet
conditionally he would grant her one favor before he enjoyed her, to stay
till he came to Alexandria, for the place where they then were was but a small
village, and all would be known quickly to the inhabitants. This good turn
(quoth Charmides) will be long a coming, and in war who can have patience to
defer his desire? no man goes into the field who can assure himself of the
conquest, seeing there be so many passages open to his death: do thou beg of
Fortune that I may return safe out of the battle, and I will tarry. I go
now to fight with the shepherds, but have a greater fight within me; the
soldier armed with bow and arrows, fights against me, and has so far
prevailed over me, that I am nothing but wounds; fetch me hither a Physician,
some one, for my wounds rankle. I go to fling fire against the enemy, while
Cupid flings torches about in my heart: do thou Menelaus first put out these
torches; for it were a good omen me thinks first to fight Venus battle, ere
I enter into Mars his field. True, said Menelaus, but you see how hard a thing
it is for her to conceal it from her husband, who is still conversant with
her, and besides which loves her so dearly. I but, said Charmides, it is an
easy matter to send him out of the way. Whereat Menelaus seeing him so eager
upon the matter, and fearing much lest I should have some mischief done me,
fained this excuse; would you needs know the truth of the matter Charmides, I
will tell you, she is sick. I will stay then, said he, three or four days,
mean while let her come to me, and talk with me; I long to hear her voice,
to take her by the hand, and to embrace her, this would be some remedy for my
love-sicke soul, sure she may safely give me a kiss.

When Menelaus was come back, and told me this, I could not choose but at his
last words cry out, that no man but my self should enjoy a kiss (than which
nothing is more sweet) from Leucippes mouth. For in the congresse questionless
there is some measure and satiety, but kisses are endless, and always fresh.
The three best things which the mouth can boast of, are, the breath, the voice,
and a kiss; yet think I not that there is any delight in the mutual touch of
the lips, but the fountain of all pleasure is the heart. Trust me Menelaus, for
in my distress I will not be ashamed to reveal any thing, I have hitherto
obtained nothing my self at Leucippes hands but a kiss, she is yet a virgin,
and made a woman by nothing else; this shall no man adulterate, and he that
shall seek to rob me of this treasure, will brand me with an infamy which I
will by no means bear. Wherefore I think it best yet longer to milk his
hopes; For a lover, so long as he has any hopes of obtaining his desire, will
brook any delays, but if he lose his possibility, any obstacle which hinders
him he will remove; especially if he have power to do it without control;
but if he see himself neglected, he is the more enraged.

While we were thus consulting, in came a messenger, who brought news that
Leucippe as she was walking fell down, and struck out one of her eyes; with
this we ran straightway to the place, and found her lying on the ground, but
coming nearer, and asking her what had befell, she looked upon me, rolling her
bloody eye, and smote her self on the cheek; and when Menelaus went to take
her up, she beat him away with her foot; perceiving then that she was
distracted, we strove to hold her by maine force, but prevailed not. Charmides
also (by reason of the tumult which was there made) hearing of this ran
thither speedily, who knowing what had past, thought she had dissembled, and
casting his eye aside, looked wishfully on Menelaus, suspecting that this had
been done to put a gull on him; but finding out the truth, he himself was
much grieved at this accident.

Mean while ropes are brought, and Leucippe is bound; which when I saw,
turning my self to Menelaus (for all the rest were gone out) I said, Loose I
pray you those bands for they will injure her tender skin, let her and I
alone, my twining imbracements shall serve in stead of chains, let her vent
all her fury on me, for my life is loathsome to me, since I am in company
with my Leucippe, and she acknowledges me not: I see her bound and dare not
be so merciful as to loose her. Did fortune therefore deliver thee out of the
hands of thieves, to make thee a laughing stock? miserable wretches! we
shunned what we feared at home, that we might suffer the violence of the sea,
we escaped shipwreck, and the hands of the robbers, because we were doomed
to madness; which though thou escape, yet it is much to be feared, that
fortune has one more mischief to cast thee into; and what mischief indeed
can parallel this of ours, which makes us fearful even of good events? But let
fortune do her worst, so thou recover thy lost senses.

While I spoke this Menelaus put me in good comfort, affirming that those
diseases were not of any long continuance, but such as youth was often incident
to, for that the young blood boiling in the veins, by evaporating up into the
brain distempers it, and consequently bereaves the party of sense; upon this
we concluded that Physicians were to be sent for, and Physic speedily
prescribed.

So Menelaus hasted to Charmides, desiring him that the Physician of his army
might be sent for, which he easily condiscended to, as being glad of any
opportunity to express his good will toward Leucippe. The Physician coming
in, told us that first he must cast her into a sleep, thereby to assuage the
greatness of her pain; that being the only remedy of all ils, then that he
would proceed to the rest of the cure; so he left us a certain medicine about
the bigness of a pease, which being dissolved in oil, he commanded us to
anoint her temples with, promising to send her a purge presently after: we did
as he prescribed us, and presently after the anointing, she fell asleep, and
slept till the next morning, all this while I sat by her, not taking one wink
of sleep, but casting mine eyes on her bands, thus bemoned her, My dear
Leucippe thou art bound sleeping, and can not enjoy thy natural rest freely,
I wonder what kind of dreams thou have, what Chimera's thy distempered fancy
represents unto thee.

After she awaked, she uttered some abrupt and imperfect speeches, when
suddenly the Physician came and administered more physic.

While Leucippe lay thus distracted, letters were brought to Charmides, from
the governor of Egypt, which it seems willed him to muster up his forces as
soon as he could; for upon the the receipt of these letters, he presently
charged them to be in arms, ready to go forth against the shepherds, so all
his soldiers with what celerity they could, after the watchword was given,
were ready with their javelings in their hands: the next day very early
Charmides brought his army in sight of the enemy.

The village is thus situated; the river Nilus descends from those places which
are beyond the Egyptian Thebes, and falls down as far as Memphis, sending
out a little horn, or winding, and where the greatest stream ends is this
village called Syrus; there the earth is parted again, and of one River are
made three, two whereof run freely without any let, but the third divides the
region which is called Delia; nor is there any of these streams which run into
the sea, but one into one City, and another into another, the least whereof is
bigger than any River in Greece: Nor does Nilus by being thus divided, loose a
jot of its virtue, being they may sail on it, drink of it, and where the
water of it sometime ran, drive a plough; being to them both a river, a sea, a
marsh, and arable land: which is worth admiration, that in the same place a
ship should sail, and a spade should dig, an oar row, and a plough go; that
where the mariner has his cabbine, the husband man should have his cottage,
where the Oxes their stalls, the fishes their receptacles also; yet so it is
that where the ship even now went, they sow corn, and not long after where the
corn grew the ship sails; the river being navigable for many miles. The
Egyptians know what time it will overflow the banks, nor does the river deceive
their expectation, for it is never tardy, but keeps constantly the set time,
and flows just so many days.

Then may you see a contention betwixt the water and the earth, this striving
to drink up so much water, that to overflow so much land: and to say truly the
victory is equal; but in that regio^ where the shepherds inhabit, there is
still much water; for the annual inundation of Nilus being past, many standing
pooles are left full of water, which soon after is choked up with mudde;
through which place some pass on foot, others in little boats no bigger than to
carry one single man, for should they be greater having not water sufficient
to bear them up, they would stick fast in the mudde, but being small and
light, that little water suffices them, and if they chance to come to a place
while they are rowing, where they have not water enough, then they take their
boats on their shoulders, and pass over on foot till they find some.

In those marshes there be many Islands lie scattered; those which are not
inhabited, are overgrowne with paper reeds, which grow so thick, that betwixt
every stem there is but just room enough to entertain one man, and the
leaves at the top touch one another; hither the shepherds betake themselves,
consult together, and lie in ambush, while the paper reeds serve them for City
walls; some of these Islands are compassed about with bogges, and fenns, having
in them some small cottages which lying scattered here one and there one, look
like some City built in haste; one of these Islands being nearest to us, and
more conspicuous by reason of the great number of cottages, was called as I
remember Nichocis: to this City as to a most invincible fort they repaired,
relying much, partly on the number of their soldiers, partly on the situation
of the place, for it had but one passage into it, and that over a narrow
causeway, an hundred and twenty paces in length, and twelve in breadth.

When they saw Charmides approaching, they devised this stratageme: having got
all their old men, and attiring them like suppliants, putting branches of
palme-trees in their hands, they commanded the valiantest of their youth, that
they should follow them close at the heels, every one armed with his buckler
and spear; that by this means the old men going before with these emblemes of
peace, might shrewd the armed men behind them, who partly hid by these boughs,
and partly by dragging their weapo^^ on the ground, could not be discovered;
intending that if Charmides would grant the old men their requests, the young
men should not fight at all, but if he would not, that they should lead
Charmides into their City, under pretense of submitting themselves to what
death he should please to inflict upon them, and when they had brought him to
the Causeway, the old men upon a watchword given, should fling away their
boughs and save themselves by flight, and they which were armed should rush
upon them.

Thus having ordered themselves, they met Charmides, beseeehing him that he
would have compassion on their old age, and that for their sakes, the whole
City might fare the better; which peaceful conditions if he would yield to,
they promised to give him an hundred talents of silver, and as many men whom he
might send as pledges to the Governor of Egypt; all which they seemed to have
been willing faithfully to have performed, had he accepted of these
conditions: but giving little ear to what they said, he seemed not willing to
entertain their profer, which the old men perceiving broke forth into this
sad ^ermocination, O death, if our fate have so decreed we shall patiently
bear thee! Only do thou, O Charmides, deigne us this favor, not to slay us
without the City, or far from it, but bring us into our fathers ancient
seats, and let that place where we were borne, be also our Sepulchree: we
will lead on to our deaths.

Charmides hearing this, dismissed the greatest part of those forces which he
had intended for the battle, bidding them without spoil or tumult, quietly
repair to the army, all that had past was espied by some scouts whom the
thieves had set to watch, and charged, that as soon as they saw the enemy
approach, they should cut a passage through the bank of the river, and let the
water in upon them, which they usually damme up, but when they would water the
plains let it out: Behind this village was a great trench dug, the damme
whereof immediately upon their reproach they broke down; the old men at that
very instant fled, some one way, some another: the young men who had all this
while drawed their weapons on the ground, after them, set fiercely on Charmides
and his company, the water by this time (coming so fast upon them) had
overflowed all the marshes and the causeway, so that every place looked like a
sea.

The Egyptians slew first of all Charmides, and then those few men that were
with him, who were so affrighted with this sudden and unexpected event, that
in their countenances there was such variety of changes, as it were impossible
to tell how they looked when they were a dying, for some having not time either
to defend the blow, or to resist the enemy, perished, not knowing what was the
matter, ere they felt the stroke; some were slain ere they could know any
thing at all; others struck with a sudden fear stood still, expecting
death; others there were who had their heels tript up with the violence of the
water; many striving to fly were drowned; for the water by this time was up to
their navels which stood on the causeway, by which means the use of their
bucklers was taken away, and their sides exposed to the danger of being
wounded; but those which were in the Marish were up to the necks, who still
supposing themselves to be on firm ground, went on till they were drowned:
this the others seeing, fearing lest they should step aside, made but slow
haste to fly, and were presently slain by the enemy.

Questionless this was a strange kind of shipwreck, no ship being near
them, and which may exceed belief, there was shipwreck on the earth, and a
land battle fought in the water.

The shepherds proud of their success, boasted much of the victory, thinking
they had obtained it by their valor, not fraud; for the nature of the
Egyptian is this, that while he is in danger he is timorous, but when secure,
courageous; for either he yeeldes most slavishly, or domineeres most proudly.

By this time Leucippe had been sick eleven days, nor was there any hope of
recoverie left, had I not heard her in her sleep utter these words, Thou O
Gorgias art the cause of my madness; which in the morning I told to Menelaus,
asking him whether he knew one Gorgias which lived in that village: afterward
going out of our tent we met a young fellow in the street, who saluted me with
this complement: You are fairly met Sir by one that shall preserve both you and
your wife: at which I being astonished, as supposing him to be a man sent from
the gods, asked him whether his name were Gorgias, he answered no, but my name
is Chaereas, for Gorgias has been the cause of all this mischief: but more
amazed at this, I asked him what mischief, or what Gorgias he meant? for the
gods that night revealed something to me concerning him in my dream, which I
desired him to expound. Then said he, this Gorgias was an Egyptian soldier,
who was slain in the battle, he was in love with thy wife, and being
skillful in the power of herbs, mingled a love potion, undermining your
Egyptian slave who attends on you to administer it; but while he unwisely
made choice of too strong ingredients, the phyltre (turning to little better
than poison) made her mad: all this Gorgias his servant told me yesterday, whom
it seems fortune preserved alive in the midst of the battle to do you good;
for he constantly affirms to me that he has a medicine which shall utterly
disanull the force of the phyltre: for the cure he demands four pieces of
gold. For your love, Sir, said I, I am not unthankful, and would you bring
this man to me, I should acknowledge my self farther engaged: so parting from
him I went home, where meeting with my Egyptian slave, I soundly bepummelled
him on the face with my fist, and with threatening language compelled him to
confess all that Charmides had told me, which when I had extorted, I cast
him into jail.

By this time was Chaereas returned with Gorgias his servant, to whom I
willingly disbursed the money, as a revvard due to them for their good tidings;
but said I, hear my opinion concerning this your medicine, a potion you know
was the cause of her sickness, wherefore, in my judgment, it were not fit
that her body should be weakened by any more physic, but go to, mingle your
ingredients here that we may see what they are, which if you do you shall
have half your pay beforehand. You do well, quoth the servant, to fear the
worst, yet such things as I shall give her I would have you know are common* and
such as we usually eat, for the same quantity which I shall give her, I will
first take my self: so immediately he named every ingredient, and sent for
them by a messenger, which when they were brought he pounded, and mingled
before us, and dividing them into two parts, the one he said he would first
take himself, the other he would give the maid; which as soon as she had
taken, she should rest well all that night, and in the morning not only be
freed from sleep, but also from her disease; which he straightway did, and
went to sleep, having first had half his money, which I promised him he
should have, before the cure, and the other half after, and left prescription
how Leucippe should take the rest.

The evening drawing on, for that was the time prescribed, when Leucippe should
drink her potion, taking the cup in my hand thus I said; O medicine, which
sprangest from the goddess Tellus, and wast bestowed on mankind by
Aesculapius, may thy virtue be greater than the large promises of this
Physician; be propitious, and expel from her stomach this salvage and
barbarous poison, that I may again enjoy my Leucippe. Having with these words
compacted as it were with the physic for her recovery, and kissing the cup
again and again, I administered it, which she had no sooner received, but (as
the Physician had before told us) she fell asleep, then taking my place by
her, I asked her these questions, as if she had been awake, Will thou again
recover thy lost senses? will thou any more acknowledge me? shall I hear the
melodious harmony of thy voice? tell me, prophecy in thy dream, for so thou
did yesterday, when thou exclaimd'st against Gorgias, tell me I say, for now
thou can best, seeing thy dreams savor of wisdom, thy words and actions
of folly and madness.

While I thus spoke, the long-lookt for day appeared, and Leucippe awakened,
and called me by name; whereat I starting from my seat, ran nearer to her,
and asked her how she did; but she not knowing it seems what had past, stood a
great while wondering how she came bound; by this perceiving her to be fully
recovered, I speedily loosed her bonds, and related to her the whole story of
her madness, which when she heard she blushed, thinking her self still to be
mad; but I cheering her up, bid her be of good comfort, and discharged the
expense of her sickness, for those moneys which we had took with us to fray
the charges of our journey, Satyrus had kept safe in the midst of our
shipwreck; nor did Menelaus or I after that take any thing from the thieves.

The shepherds whom you heard even now had got the victory, were not long
after by fresh supply of soldiers sent from the chief City, utterly
overthrown, and their Cities ransackt, whereby we being freed from the fear
of robbing set forward once more for Alexandria, taking Chereas along with us,
whom for his extraordinary love we kindly entreated, and admitted into our
familiarity; he was by profession a fisherman, of the Island Phares, who in the
sea fight against the shepherds, for his skill in Navigation served as a
soldier, and that ended was dismissed.

So as before I told you the coasts being clear, and the fear of robbing
(which for a long time had staved us off from our intended voyage) being past,
we stroke sail.

Then the noise of the Mariners, the singing of the passengers, the
pleasantness of the river, whose streams more smooth than the Marble, seeming
as it were keep holyday, gave us no small delight: at that time desiring to
know the sweetness of the river Nilus, I drank some of the water, not mixing
any wine with it, least it should be an hindrance to me in descrying the
nature, or discerning the taste: so I filled a Crystal glass with the water,
which seemed to me more clear than the glass; to the taste it was cold, yet
sweet and pleasant withal, so that the Egyptians having store of this water,
feel no want of wine; nor do they drink it in cups as we do, but in the
hollow of their hands, for the mariners lying along fill their hands with it,
and cast it into their mouth, which they were so expert at, that they spild not
a drop.

One thing I saw about the river worth the taking notice of, a creature far
fiercer than the horse of Nilus, the name of it is a Crocodile, in shape it
resembles both a fish and a foure-footed beast; he is of a great length, but
his breadth is no way proportionable to it; his skin is rough with scales,
his back of a dark color, like a rock; his breast white, his four legs
bend outward as the legs of a land Tortoise; his tail is thick and long,
not much unlike the rest of his body, which being part of his back bone as it
were, is hard, set with a row of teeth on the top like a saw; this in taking
his prey he uses as a whip or scourge, striking such beasts as he would
devour, and at one blow making many wounds, his neck is immediately joined to
his shoulders, that you can perceive no space betwixt them, Nature having
concealed it; the rest of his body is of a horrible shape, especially when he
opens his jaws, for you would think him then all mouth; and when he gapes
not, he looks as if he were all head; when he feeds, he moves only the upper
jaw, which is observable in no other creature: his teeth are many, set like the
teeth of a comb, which they that have numbered have found to be so many as there
be days in the year: how vast and strong he is, if you saw him on the land
(for he is of those kind of beasts which we call Amphibia) you would think
almost incredible.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
The Argument.
Chereas being admitted to the familiarity of Clitophon, sets Pirates to steal
away Leucippe whom he had privately before loved. Clitophon bewailes her
loss, afterward meets his old friend Clinias, who heard by one Diophantes of
Tire, of Clitophon's being in Alexandria: he comforts him for the loss of his
Leucippe, whom all men thought the Pirates had slain, but better fortune
reserved her alive; for Melite a rich widow, whose husband was reported to have
dyed at sea, falling in love with Clitophon, and bringing him home to her
house, Leucippe (whom the Pirates had sold to Melites steward for a slave, under
the name of Lacoena) makes her self known to Clitophon by a letter: mean
time Thersander husband to Melite, supposed to be dead, coming home, and
seeing Clitophon somewhat familiar with his wife, beats him, and fetters him;
but Melite conditionally that he would consent to her love, promises to set
him free, which after long entreaty he agrees to.

AFter three days we arived at Alexandria, entering at the gate which they
call the gate of the Sun, at my entrance my eyes were not a little delighted
to look on the beauty of the City, for from the gate of the Sun to the gate
of the Move, (so called for that they are the tuletar gods of them) stood a
long row of pillars on either side: in the middle was a fair street, out of
which you might go into diverse lanes, insomuch that they which walked there
might go a long journey in their own City. Departing from thence we came to
that place which took its name from Alexander, and there I saw another City
which was thus beautified:

At the end you might discern another row of pillars go athwart them, so
that mine eyes gazing on them could not be satisfied with seeing, or fully
comprehend all parts which were represented unto them: some I saw, others I was
to see, some I wished to see, other things which were not in themselves worthy
the sight my curiosity would not let slip; and although that which I saw seemed
at the present to satisfy my longing eye, yet would it still wonder to
recreate it self with a new object yet unseen* but at length endeavoring by
all means to take a full view of the City, I failed in my purpose, and was
forced to confess my self glutted, ere satisfied; but one thing above all the
rest seemed strange, and almost incredible to me, that the City was as big, as
beautiful, and the number of the inhabitants answerable to both, so that it
were hard to determine whether the spaciousness or beautifulness of the
buildings, whether the greatness of the City, or multitude of the people had
the preheminency; for he which had seen so many inhabitants, would have much
doubted whither the place would have contained them or no.

At the time of my arivall at this place, were the festivals of that great god
celebrated, whom the Grecians call Dis, the Egyptians SERAPIS, the Latins
Jupiter, to whom the people sacrificing, the fires shone in every part of the
City; where I observed one thing worthy admiration, that when the evening was
come, and the sun was set, no night ensued, but another sun arose
straightway divided into a great many little parts, then did I perceive the
City to contend with the heavens almost in beauty. I saw also the statue of
Jupiter Milichius, and that divine temple of his, to whom having performed a
most obsequious worship, and prayed that at last he would put a period to our
misfortunes, we entered into a house which Menelaus had hired: but as by the
event it appeared, the god granted not our request, seeing fortune had one more
danger wherein she meant to try us, for Chereas loved Leucippe long before,
and what he did for her recovery when she was sick, was but a pretense of
kindness, that by that means he might insinuate himself into our
familiarity, and therey make a freer passage for his love to Leucippe, but
seeing how hard it was to effect covertly, and underhand what he had intended,
he thought upon another way, to lay wait for Leucippe: so having called some
Pirates together, fellows which were well skilled in Navigation, as he himself
was, he gave them their charge.

Not long after he invited us to the Pharus, or watch tower in Egypt, telling
us that it was his birthday, which he intended there to celebrate, but as we
went forth of doors there happened an evil omen to us, for a hawke pursuing a
swallow smote Leucippe on the face with her wing, at which I was much troubled,
and looking up to heaven said; Shield me Jupiter, what should this thing
portend! if this bird were of thy sending, give me some other omen, whereby I
may more clearly construe the meaning of this; not observing all this while the
picture, for behind me was a painters shop, wherein was expressed the misery
of Progne, the violence of Tereus, the cutting out of Philomela's tongue, and
the whole fable; in it was the sampler, wherein was wrought what Philomela had
suffered, the sampler a servant unfolded, while Philomela pointed toward it
with her finger, to show her sister Progne what she had undergone, Progne
seemed to understand the meaning of it, whereat she contracted her brow; which
the painter had done so lively that her very picture seemed to be angry, to see
the obscene postures of lascivious Tereus forcing the chaste Philomela; who
having her hair pulled about her ears, her girdle loosed, her garment rent,
discovered a great part of her naked breast; her right hand she held before her
eyes, seeming much offended at what Tereus did; her left hand gathered a part
of her torn vesture, wherewith she strived to cover her breast: But Tereus
all this while most inmodestly for'cd her* this part of the story was painted
as if it had been wrought on a sampler with a needle, in the other part of the
picture some women did very orderly serve unto Tereus, the head and hands of
his own child in a dish; the women themselves smiled, and yet trembled at the
sight; but Tereus rising from his seat, drew his sword at them, and thrust away
the table which seemed to fall, but yet fell not.

Menelaus having full viewed this picture, told us, that would we take his
counsel, he would persuade us to defer our journey to Pharus till some other
time, for (says he) have not two ominous things befell us in the way; first
the flight of the hawke, next the threats of the picture; and believe it, those
which interpret such things, bid us not slight them as mere fables, but that
we should compare these prodigies which happen to us while we are in action,
and observe whether they hold any analogy with the business in hand; now see
you not this picture fraught with all the mischiefs which can befall a woman?
obscene and incestuous love, most shameless adultery, and indeed what not? But
use you your pleasure, for mine own part I would choose rather to stay at home.
Which words of Menelaus wrought so much upon me, that I took my leave of
Chereas for that time, who grieved much at it, and conjured me to go the next
day with him: He being parted from us, Leucippe (as women desirous of fables)
bid me tell her the meaning of the birds, and women, and what they should do
in the company of that impudent fellow, so I began;

Those birds thou see were sometime men and women, the women were Progne and
Philomela, two sisters, borne at Athens, the one of them was turned into a
Swallow, the other into a Nightingale. The man whose name was Tereus, was by
birth a Thracian, husband to Progne, and as they say turned into a Lapwing; who
(as the custom of such barbarous people is) could not be content with one
woman, especially when a fair opportunity of satisfying their irregular
affections is offered them: The opportunity he had was from the piety of Progne
toward her sister, by which he took occasion to second his incontinence, for
she sent him to see her sister, who departed Prognes husband, but returned
Philomelas ravisher; thereby making her a second Progne; which thing he
endeavoring to conceal, in liew of her lost virginity, cut out the maids
tongue: but it was to no purpose, for Philomela (though dumb) devised a means
to reveal what she had suffered; working with her needle on a sampler the
whole story; so by that means what she could not make her sister hear, she
made her see.

Progne understanding thereby that violence had been offered to her sister,
devised a revenge greater than can be imagined; nor could less be expected,
for the anger of the one, and the malice of the other conspiring together, made
a banquet far more detestable than the injury offered unto Philomela; for
they set before him the limbs of a child, whom before she was enraged, Progne
would not stick to acknowledge her son, but afterward she quite forgot the
pangs she underwent in bringing it forth, so great was her fury, that she
preferred the pleasure she took in revenge, before the pains of her travail;
and though what they did, grieved them, yet seeing that thereby they did fully
wreeke their malice on him, who had so incestuously violated the laws of the
nuptial bed, the sweetness of the revenge recompensed the bitterness of
their grief.

After Tereus had fed sufficiently on this hellish banquet, the two sisters
laughing and trembling brought in the relics of the child, which when he
saw, knowing then he had devoured his own son, at first he wept, a little
after enraged, he pursued them with his naked sword, but they straightway
turned into birds, flew up into the air, with whom Tereus himself was also
metamorphos'd, the memory of which fact seems to survive in all birds of that
kind, for to this very day the lapwing pursues the nightingale; where the
hatred still remains, though in other bodies.

By this means we escaped the treachery of Chaereas, which did but little
advantage us, seeing our misery was thereby but rejourned a day the longer: for
the very next day Chaereas came and invited us again, who was so importunate
with us, that we could not for shame deny him; so taking ship we went all to
Pharus, except Menelaus, who because he was sick stayed at home. So Chaereas
first brought us into the tower, and showed us the foundation, which was
strangely and almost incredibly built, for there was a mountain in the midst
of the sea which touched the clouds almost, on the top of this was a tower,
wherein was fire continually to light mariners which sailed that way; having
seen this we were brought to a house, which was in a part of the Island,
bordering upon the sea; here Chaereas feigning some excuse to go out, left us,
when suddenly there was a great tumult at the door, and an innumerable
company of lusty fellows, with their swords drawn, set upon Leucippe, and
carried her away: but I seeing this, and taking it hainously, cast my self
into the midst of their weapons, and received a grievous wound on my thigh, so
that my leg doubled under me, and I fell down; mean while the pirates put
the maid a shipboard, receiving no affront from any man; but afterward there
being a great noise and tumult raised, as at the arrival of any pirates there
uses to be, the governor of the Island came speedily thither; he was not
unknown to me, for I had sometime served under him in the wars, wherefore I
showed him the wound which I had received, and beseecht him that he would with
all speed pursue the rogues; so immediately he took a ship out of the
harbor, and furnishing it with those few soldiers he had then in readiness,
he followed after the thieves: I my self also caused my wound to be bound up,
and got one to carry me aboard; the pirates so soon as they saw us to draw
near to them, and that we were providing to fight, tied the maid with her
hands behind her, to the fore part of the ship, whilst one of them crying with
a loud voice, SEE THE PRIZE YOU SEEK AFTER, cut off her head, which fell into
the ship, but her carcass they tumbled into the sea: Seeing this I spared
neither tears nor sighs; nay the greatness of my grief was such, that had
not some in the ship hindered me, I had cast my self headlong into the sea; but
afterward I desired the Governor that he would send some forth in the
Cockboat, which should fetch the body in, that I might bury it; to which he
condescended, and the body was brought into the ship. Mean while the Pirates
betook themselves to flight as fast as they could, whom we no sooner had
overtaken, but they presently spied another ship, and knowing who they were
(for they were gatherers of purple, and Pirates as well as they) implored their
aid; our Governor seeing that they had joined forces, and were ready to set
upon us, commanded the Pilot to turn back from pursuing them.

After we were come on shore, I embraced the dead body of my Leucippe, and
thus began to bemoan her; Thou have died ah alas a double death, one by land,
and another by sea, and though these relics of thy body remain with me, yet I
have lost thee, for I reckon not that part which I shall commit to the earth,
able to countervaile that which the sea retains, seeing I have the greater
part of the body, less of thee, but the sea more of thee, and less of thy
body.

Now though fortune envied me the happiness of imprinting my last farewell on
thy lips, yet maugre all her malice, I will kiss thy neck: After these words
uttered I buried her, then returned to Alexandria; where having my wound cured,
yet sore against my will god knows, I lived in great torment: some nine
months afterward, my pain was pretty well assuaged; for time is the only
curer of all wounds, as well the mind as the body, suffering them, though
never so great but for a small while to molest the patient.

Going on a time into the market place, there came one behind me, who taking
me fast by the hand, turned me about and saluted me, at first I knew not who
it was* but afterward seeing that his salutations tended toward me, I eyed
him a little more narrowly, and immediately shouting out for joy embraced him,
for it was my old friend Cinias: After much complementing betwixt us, home I
bring him, where he relates to me what befell him, and I to him what had
happened to Leucippe: he began thus;

Thship being split I got to the sail-yard, which be being full of men I could
not handsomely bestride, and was forced therefore to hang by one end of it:
while we were thus tossed up and down there came a wave and dashed the saile-yard
against a rock, which rebounding again cast me off like a stone out of a
sling, so that I was forced to spend the rest of that day in swimming, having
made shipwreck then of my hope also: at length weary and committing my self
wholly into the hands of Fortune, I espied a ship coming toward me, and
stretching forth my hands to them which were in it, humbly implored their aid,
the Saylours whether they were truly compassionate on me, or whether the
violence of the wind drove them that way, made to me, and one of them cast
out a rope to me as the ship past along, which when I had taken hold of, they
drew me out of the jaws of death.

This ship was bound for Sidon, wherein were some that knew me, and took care
of me: Two days expired, we arived at Sidon; but I desired some Sidonians
which were in the ship, to wit, Xenedamas the Merchant and his father in law
Theophilus, that if they met any of Tire, they should not tell that they had
saved me from d^owning, least happily they might conjecture that I fled with
you, endeavoring by this means to conceal my flight, which I did easily,
seeing I had been but five days absent, and had left word with my servants
that they should tell any man which enquired for me, that I was gone into the
country, and intended not to return till after ten days; but to see the
mischief, two days after we were gone, your father returned home from
Palestina, and found letters which were sent the day before from Leucippe's
father, wherein he betrothed his daughter unto you; which when he had read,
and heard that you were gone, he was exceedingly enraged, partly that you
should loose so rich a profer, and partly that in so small a time things should
be brought to such a pass; none of which had happened had the letter come but
a day sooner; yet he desired Leucippes mother to conceal it, hoping that he
might hear tidings of you, not thinking it fit to acquaint Sostratus with this
mischance, and persuading himself that whithersoever you went it was to make up
the match, which when you heard you should have free leave to do, you would
return home not ashamed to tell the cause of your flight; wherefore his sole
care was to enquire diligently whither you fled, and to come and seek you out.

Not long after, Diophantes of Tire, who was newly returned out of Egypt, told
him that he saw you here; wthich coming to my ears I made no delay, but came
straightway to tell thee of it, and have now been eight days in enquiring thee
out: think therefore again and again what course you will take, for your
father will be certainly here very shortly.

Hearing these words, I bewailed much that Fortune should make such a May Game
of me. I am in a fine case sure, Sostratus has betrothed me his daughter now
she is dead, he reckoned the days fairly, when his promise could not prevent
our flight. O unseasonable happiness! or rather, O till this day happy
Clitophon! I must be wedded to a coarse forsooth, and while I am mourning for
her death, sing her marriage song! a fine bride sure, a carcass without a
head. Clinias hearing this, told me that it was not a time to lament, but that
I should settle upon some course or other, whether to return home, or expect
my father here: neither of them pleases me, said I, for how shall I look him
in the face, out of whose house I fled so basely, and made him to falsify his
oath to his brother, treacherously robbing him of that which was committed to
his custody? I think no way safer therefore, than to be gone ere he come.

While Clinias and I were in talk, in came Menelaus and Satyrus, both of them
having embraced Clinias, and fully understood my mind, Satyrus turned to me,
and said thus: There is an opportunity not to be contemned, offered to thee
Clitophon, nor shall Clinias be exempted from hearing it, whereby thou may
not only repair thy fortunes, but also cure thy inflamed desire; it is a
happiness which Venus her self prostitutes to thee, slight not then her
profer. There is a woman in Ephesus named Melite, which is deeply in love with
thee, she is very rich, and so fair, that when thou see her thou will take
her to be some goddess; she has lately lost her husband at sea, and now
desires thee not for a husband, but for a paramour, laying her self and all
her fortunes at the feet of thy acceptance; for thy sake she has stayed here
two months, wooing of thee to go home with her; nor can I see any reason why
thou should be backward in granting her suit, unless thou lookst that
Leucippe should revive again. Then said Clinias, Satyrus in my mind counsels
you well, for there needs no demurring, when beauty, riches, and love, offer
themselves so freely, whereby thou may not only enjoy thy pleasure, but
purchase credit, and furnish thy self with all necessaries: besides you must
know that the gods may punish you for your pride; no sin being more detestable
to them than that: contradict not therefore their will, and if I may counsel
you, follow Satyrus advice.

At this I sighed, saying, lead me whither you will, since Clinias approves of
it, so this woman be not so troublesome or hasty as to exact my love ere I
come to Ephesus, for I have solemnly vowed not to marry any other in that place
where I have lost my Leucippe. Satyrus hearing this, carried the news to
Melite, and not long after returned, telling us that at the relation of it the
good woman was ready to swoun for joy, and that she had invited me to supper
that night. So I went to her. She had no sooner seen me, but she met me,
entertaining me with a thousand kisses, and embraces, nor was she any of the
unhandsomest, for she was of a most beautiful aspect, such as might befit
Venus her self: what comeliness she had was genuine, for the color in her
face was not sophisticated with Ceru^e or Fucus, but looked like a mixture of
blood and milk; her hair was thick and shined like gold; which rare
perfection of hers made me delight much to look on her.

Mean while a most sumptuous banquet was prepared, and down we sat, but
Melite though she would carve of diverse dishes, eat nothing, but looked upon me
all the while. For no food is so pleasing to lovers palats, as the creature's
eye they dote on; the soul being glutted with this makes the body pine, the
pleasure of seeing being by a secret conveiance carried through the eyes into
the heart, drawing along with it the thing seen, imprints and ingraves it
there where it is as conspicuous as the face in a looking glass.

Observing this I asked her what was the reason she had provided so much
victuals, and eat so little, sitting as if not only the meat had been
painted, but she her self had been a statue. She answered me that my very
company was meat and drink to her, averring also that there was more
sweetness in my countenance than in all her banquet: after which words she
kissed me, nor was I coy of such a favor then, as before I had been:
afterward she told me I was her joy and delight: this past between us at the
banquet, and night approaching she would have detained me, but telling her what
I had vowed to Satyrus, at the length, though very unwillingly, she let me go,
but with this promise, that the next day I should meet her in the Temple of
Isis, that there in the presence of the goddess the conditions of our love
might be determined of, established, and confirmed. Which the next day I
faithfully performed, vowing in the presence of Isis, Clinias, and Menelaus, to
love her as my wife, and she me as her husband, freely surrendering into my
hands not only her self but her whole estate* this was confirmed betwixt us,
yet so as there should be no marriage till we came to Ephesus, for there, as I
had diverse times before promised, Leucippe should give place to Melite. The
contract ended, we sat down to supper, the table standing thronged as it
were with the most exquisite rarities which were to be had: yet was it no
marriage supper, seeing we had deferred that: and this Melite seemed to think
on, when sitting at the table she made me laugh with this jest, the company
called her mistress bride, and wished her much joy: to whom she replied, it
fares with me, friends, as with the bodies of some great men, which their
friends finding not, commit an empty coffine to the earth, giving that the same
solemnity which the body should have had, could it have been found; so may I no
more be said to be married, then they to be buried, thus cunningly she
jested.

The day after the wind serving, and seeming as it were to invite us, we
loosed from Alexandria, and Menelaus accompanied me to the sea side, where
saluting each other he wished me a prosperous journey, and so departed.

He was a young man, of so honest and sweet a nature that he wept when he
took his leave of me, which drew some tears from mine eyes also; but Clinias
counting it an indignity to leave me, resolved to accompany me to Ephesus,
there to stay till I were fully settled.

As we were sailing, and night drew on ere our chamber could be made ready to
entertain us, Melite was so eager on the matter, that she would have me
confirm what I had promised in the temple of Isis, saying; Now sure we are
out of Leucippes bounds, this is the appointed time, what need we then stay
till we come to Ephesus? Know you not how uncertain we are of our lives at
sea, and how dangerous traveling it is on the land? I am on fire believe me
Clitophon, I am on fire, and I would my modesty could permit me to discover
openly to thee how to great the flames are which consume me: I would there were
the same power in me which is in fire, then might I have hopes to win thee
with my embraces; but the fire in my breast is of a clean contrary nature,
warming none but my self, a fire too modest and temperate, as not one inch to
transgress its own limits; but while I speak we loose time my Clitophon,
why defer we our sacrifice to Venus?

Then I replied, Suffer me not I pray thee to disturb the dead, for as yet we
are not past the place where that poor wretch Leucippe was slain, till we
come on shore. Have thou not heard that she dyed at sea? This water on which
we sail is her sepulcher, and for ought we know her ghost wanders about this
ship; for the common opinion is, that the souls of such as be drowned, Charon
Ferries not over to hell, till their bodies be found and buried, till which
time they walk about the waters; which may make us justly fear, while we are
embracing, she may appear in some terrible shape and affright us. But letting
this pass, can thou imagine the sea to be a fit place to make a marriage
in, where our bed is tumbled and tossed up and down? may we not fear that
this may be ominous, and that it may portend instability in thy love, and
inconstancy in mine?

Then said Melite; Thou have, believe me, disputed very subtly, yet say what
thou will, I think a married couple need not be scrupulous in choice of their
bed, for one is as good as another, and that where true love is, no place can
challenge any privilege above another; yet if there be any to be claimed,
the sea sure must have it, either that it is privy to many such love
mysteries, or because Venus was borne here: Wherefore I make no doubt but it
will be a deed most acceptable to her, if we shall seem to reverence her
mother so much, as here to consummate our marriage: there is nothing here but
may seem to animate us to it, the very seat the mariners sit on, the ropes
which are tied about the saileyard, represent our twining embracements* see
also Neptune (who is married to Amphitri^e) and the whole company of Mereides,
shall dance at our wedding, while the gentle winds softly murmuring about the
tackling of our ship, shall sing us a marriage song: See thou not that teeming
sail, which me thinks seems to foretell, that straightway I shall be a
mother, thou a father?

Seeing her so eager in pursuit of my love, I said, Let us dispute the matter a
little till we come on shore, for I swear to thee by the sea, and by the
event of this our journey, that I love none but thee, yet grant thee thy
request I cannot, since it is against the laws of Neptune; for I have often
heard Mariners say that the passengers must keep themselves chaste, and that
any unclean fact may hazard the Ship: either because it is a thing
consecrated, or because it is offensive to the gods, that any one should
lasciviously dally in the midst of so many dangers. Let us not therefore defile
so chaste a place, or while we are in the jaws of death, dream of marriage.
When I had said this I made her content to part with a kiss, and the rest of
the night we slept.

The fifth day after our departure we arived at Ephesus, where I saw Melite's
house, which for the elegant structure, multitude of servants, and all variety
of choice household stuff, was the biggest and fairest in the whole city:
Here she commanded a sumptuous banquet should be provided for me, and
desired me to ride along in her coach wi^^ her, to a country farm of hers
not above five hundred paces from her house, to pass away the time till the
banquet was ready. There she led me into a most pleasant walk, where the
trees were set by five and five. As we were walking, there met us a woman
laden as it were with chains, having her head shorn, her body looking
sluttishly and nastily, her clothes old and torn, and a spade in her hand,
she kneeling down to Melite, begged on this manner* Take pity on me
mistress, for I am a woman, and may safely say sometimes I was a free woman,
but now Fortune has been pleased to make a slave of me: And here she held
her peace. Then Melite said, Arise good woman, and tell me first thy name,
next thy Country, then who has cast these chains on thee, for me thinks
though thy adverse fate has so debased thee, I read something more than
ordinary in thy looks. Then she answered, Your Steward, mistress, has done
all this, because I would not prostitute my self to his impure lust. I am by
birth a Thessalian, my name is Lacoena. This my wretched estate I live in, I
commend to your consideration, desiring that you would set me free, and bear
with me but a little longer, and I will repay to you, mistress, within a short
space, the two thousand sesterces which Sosthenes your Steward paid for me to
the Pirates; but if you will not grant me my request, I will serve you still;
yet did you but know how basely, and inhumanely he has dealt with me, your
heart would relent; then she showed the impression of his scourge on her
shoulders. Melite and I, seeing and hearing this, were both astonished, but I
especially, for me thought she favored Leucippe somewhat. But Melite bid her
be of good cheer, promising not only to set her free, but also to remit her
ra^some. By and by (after she had caused her fetters to be taken off) she sent
for Sosthenes (whose breech made buttons) and called him salvage villain,
asking him when ever he knew one of the basest of her slaves served so?
afterward bid him without dissimulation tell her what she was? He replied,
he knew nothing concerning her more then this, that he bought her of one
Callisthenes a Merchant, and that she was free borne, and her name was Lacoena.
But Melite turned Sostratus out of his office, and committed Lacoena to the
care of some maids who should wash her and put clean linen on her, and bring
her to her house in the City. Then taking order for some business concerning
the affairs of her Country farm, she and I returned home in her coach to
supper. While I was at supper Satyrus looked somewhat seriously on me,
intimating as much as if he had something to say to me in private; whereupon
feigning some excuse, I rose; when I was gone aside, Satyrus without speaking a
word to me, gave me a letter, which when I had opened, before I read a
syllable I was amazed, for I perceived it to be Leucippes hand: The copy of
the letter was this: Leucippe to her master Clitophon.
FOr what other title can I have for him who has married my Mistress? though
thou can not be ignorant what for thy sake I have suffered; yet at this time
I thought good to put thee in mind of it. For thee it was I forsook my mother
and undertook this long pilgrimage: For thy sake first I suffered shipwreck,
next fell into the hands of Pirates: To expiate thy faults was I made a
sacrifice, for thy sake was I sold, was I bound with chains, did I carry a
spade, dig the earth, and was beaten, to the intent, sure, that thou
should be another woman's husband, I another man's wife* but the gods forbid
this. This cruel progress have I made in my love, but thou remainest still
untoucht, embracing in thy arms thy new married wife. All that I desire at
this time (if for all this which I have suffered, I have deserved any favor at
thy hands) is, that you would get your wife to set me free, or pass your word
for the money which Sosthenes bought me for: and being we are not far from
Byzantium, I will pay you again; but if you will not pay it on these
conditions, then think that I shall think all the miseries which for thy sake
I have suffered in the payment of this money to be fully recompenc't: Fare
thee well; and may thou have much joy in thy new married wife. This I write
to thee being yet a Virgin.




When I read this, my mind was variously distracted, for one while I was
enflamed with love, another while I waxed pale with fear; now I wondered, anon I
would not believe that this could possibly be Leucippes hand: Such a conflict
was there within me betwixt fear and hope, then turning my self about hastily
to Satyrus, I said, did thou bring this letter from the Elisian fields, what
means this which I here see and read? is Leucippe alive again? Yes says
Satyrus, and the woman you saw yesterday was she, but by reason her hair was
cut, she was so disfigured, that neither of us knew her. Why do thou ravish
my ears so with this news (said I) and let not mine eyes share in the joy?
fetch her that I may see her. Peace master, quoth Satyrus, seem not to know so
much as you do, least thereby you should undo us all; stay therefore till we
have consulted further, what we were best to do, for you see how this woman
loves you, and is almost mad for you, and should she take the least spleen
against us, we are in the midst of her snares, destitute of all hope.

How is it possible to contain my self (said I) since I am so excessively
overjoyed? see but how she reasons the case with me? Then opening the letter
again, I read it, and answered distinctly to every objection, as if she had
been present her self to have heard me. Thy complaints are most just, my best
Leucippe? thou have truly for my sake undergone all this, I have been the sole
author of whatsoever mischance has betaken thee: But when I came to that part
of the letter which spoke of the blows inflicted on her by Sosthenes, I wept
as really as if I had bin present when they were given. For the eye reflecting
on any object, apprehends it not half so sensibly as the mind does a thing
which one reads. And when she did twit me in the teeth with my marriage, I
blushed as much as if I had been caught in adultery. Then turning me to
Satyrus, I said, Alas Satyrus what apology shall I make? or which way shall I
excuse my self? Leucippe knows us, and I fear me her love is turned to
hatred. But now I would feign know how she escaped, and whose carcass that was
which I buried: No doubt, says Satyrus, but Leucippe at her leisure will tell
thee all.

What now is most requisite, is, that you send her an answer of her letter to
satisfy her; which I have in part done already, telling her that thou
marriedst Melite sore against thy will: Did thou tell her that I was married?
then thou have quite undone me, for there is none in the whole City will say
so much; I swear to thee here by Hercules, and my present Fortunes, there is
no such matter. Then Satyrus replied, Good Sir, you would feign make me believe
that; does not all the world know that you have been both in bed together?
True, but yet (which may exceed belief) I never enjoyed her. But tell me,
leaving this, what shall I write? for this strange event has so much disturbed
my fancy, that I cannot invent any thing: You know better than I, says
Satyrus, what to write; do but begin and love will dictate the rest. Then I
writ a letter on this manner: Clitophon to Leucippe.
ALL health to my Leucippe. The same thing has made me both happy and
unhappy, for I account it a great felicity, that I can see thee in a letter,
yet most unhappy am I that I cannot enjoy thy presence. But setting these
things aside, if thou would hear the truth; then know that I have followed
thy example, and (if our Sex may boast of any virginity) I am still a maid. But
if thou have censured me, and condemned me already, ere I could speak for my
self, my humble suite is that thou revoke thy sentence: for I call all the gods
to witness, that I have not offended in the least manner, which shortly shall
appear. Farewell, and let me hear that my request is granted.




When I had wrote this, and sealed it, I delivered it to Satyrus, charging him
to commend me highly to Leucippe. Then full of pleasure, and yet grieved
withal, I returned home to supper, for it came into my head that Melite would
not let me go that night, seeing our marriage was not perfected; and having
found Leucippe, I would not so much as look upon any other woman; wherefore I
strived to alter my countenance, so that Melite might believe there was an
alteration in my mind; but this way I could not dissemble handsomely,
therefore as soon as I came in, I began to shiver, telling Melite that a
chilling numnesse was got into all my bones; though Melite knew this to be but
an excuse, yet durst she not publicly condemn me for not performing my
promise; though to cloak the matter better I went to bed that night
supperlesse, but she followed me close at the heels into my chamber; where I
feigned that my disease was much augmented, she still wooed me: How long will thou serve me so? will thou put no period to thy contempt of my love? we are
not now at sea, but arived at Ephesus, the place which was appointed: Shall we
stay longer yet? or shall I pass my widownight like some devoted virgin which
attends on the altar of some god? Thou have made my bed like Tantalus his
table, showing me a great deal of water, yet suffer me not to drink a drop?
Shall I sit so long by the river side and not quench my thirst? Which when she
had spoke, she laid her head in my bosom, and wept most lamentably, so that I
was much moved at it; nor did I know how in any conscience to delude her any
longer, seeing her complaint was so just. Yet this answer I gave her; I swear
by the gods my dearest Melite, that I am as willing to grant thy request, as
thou art willing to desire it, but somewhat ails me on a sudden, and I fear
my health is much in danger, and thou know how great an enemy sickness is
to the marriage bed; while I was speaking this, I wiped the tears from her
eyes, swearing most deeply to make her mistress of her wish. By this means I
easily allayed the flaming desire of my widow.

The day after, Melite having sent for her maids, to whose care she had
committed Leucippe, she first asked whether they had used her kindly,
according to her injunction? And when they had answered her that she wanted for
nothing which was fitting, she commanded she should be brought to her: When
she was come, she began to her on this manner, How courteously I have used
thee, seeing thou know already, and I doubt not but thou will acknowledge,
were needless now to repeat; for requital of all my favors I request but one
thing at thy hands, which is in thy power to grant me, I have heard that your
women of Thessaly are great enchantresses, and that they are able, by spells,
and philtres, not only to bind whom they love, from setting their affection
on any other women, but also to inflame them with love toward them,
themselves: in this Art if thou have any skill, I desire thine aid. That lusty
young gallant which thou saw walking with me the other day, your husband do
you mean? said Leucippe, craftily pretending that she had heard say so. What
husband said Melite? I have no more to do with him, then with a stone, but
there is one Leucippe, for so they call her name, which has been this long
time dead, she is preferred before me, whom he still thinks on, eating,
drinking, or sleeping: yet never cared this much for what I ever did for him; I
waited at Alexandria four months for him, begging, beseeching, promising him,
and omitting no enticement which might allure him: But he like a block, a
piece of iron, or some such senseles thing, neglects my prayers and entreaties,
nay is so coy of his company to me, that he will scarce vouchsafe me time to
look on him, I call Venus to witness that I have lain this five nights by him,
and rise again as if I had went to bed with some Eunuch. So that I began to
mistrust, my folly is so great that I am in love with some statue, seeing I
can enjoy him only with mine eyes.

Wherefore as thou pleadedst yesterday, that one woman should pity another, so
plead I now to thee, and that thy help may bring down this haughty spirit of
his, and recall that portion of my soul, which for grief is fled out of my
body.

Leucippe knowing this, was not a little glad that Melite had mist her aim of
me, and promising her that she would go and seek out some herbs, she went
to the Country farm house: for had she denied her, she might justly have
feared that Melite would have suspected her fidelity, which was the reason I
think she promised her.

Melite having such fair hopes of obtaining her desire, was a little pacified
for the time. For not only the fuition of any thing, which we desire, but also
the expectation is most delightful.

I being ignorant of all this, was much perplexed, how I should shift Melite
that night, and meet Leucippe, for I fully persuaded my self, that her chief
aim in going into the country, was, that I hearing of it might follow her;
but while a coach was making ready for her departure, and we were scarce set
down to supper, we heard a great tumult, and concurse of people, about that
part of the house where the men lay; when suddenly comes me in a messenger,
who had run himself almost out of breath, and brings news that Thersander,
husband to Melite, and reported to have been dead long before by some of his
own servants, who suffered shipwreck with him, was yet alive, and ready to
enter the house, the servant had scarce uttered his message, but Thersander
came in after him, and entered the room where we were at supper, for he made
the more haste to catch me, because at his first arivall it had been told him,
how familiar I was with his wife* Melite to have dissembled the matter would
feign have embraced her husband, but he thrust her from him with great
violence, cast his eye on me, and asked, Is this the adulterer? and being in a
great fury ran upon me violently, beating me on the face, then taking me by
the hair of the head he dragged me about the house, and wounded me in
diverse places.

But all the while, as if I had been in the temple at the offering of some
sacrifice, where the Priest commands silence, I was as mute as a fish; not
daring to ask him who he was, or wherefore he beat me? and still considering
how the case stood with me, durst not resist him though I might have got the
masterie over him: At last when he was weary with beating me, and I with
reasoning the matter with my self, I began to ask him what he was, and
wherefore he had so shamefully misused me? but he the more enraged that I
should dare to mutter a syllable against him, laid hands on me again, and
called for a pair of fetters to put on my legs, and willed some of his
servants to bind me with coards, and cast me into a chamber in the house,
where I was close prisoner* While I was busling with him, Leucippes letter,
which I had hid in my skirt, fell out, and I never perceived it, which Melite
privately snatched up, fearing that it was one of the letters which had past
betwixt her self and me; but not long after opening it and finding Leucippes
name, she discovered all, yet could scarce believe that Lacoena should be
she, because she had heard it out of twenty men's mouths, that Leucippe was
dead: yet afterward viewing the contents of the letter more narrowly, she was
fully certified of all which had past betwixt us, wherewith she was strangely
distracted, partly with shame, partly with anger, partly with love, afraid she
was of her husband, angry she was at the contents of the letter, yet did her
love to me qualify both.

Wherefore when it was evening, and Thersander having beaten me was gone to see
a friend of his: Melite taking that servant aside to whose custody I was
committed, apart from his fellows, commanded him secrecy and came into the
chamber to me, there finding me on the ground she came near; at her first
approach I did read the discovery of my love to Leucippe in her very
countenance. At last she burst out into this exclamation; Unhappy me! I would
I had never seen thy face, to whom I have been so long a suitor, yet have not
got my request granted: mad woman that I am, how long shall I languish for the
love of one which contemnes me so? I am grieved, yet pity him which is the
author of my grief; nor can I choose but love him which hates me, O
treacherous pair of creatures! the one here makes a laughing stock of me, the
other is gone to gather herbs for me; I have sought for help from my
inveterate enemies.

Melite having spoken these words, threw Leucippes letter to me, whereat I was
so afrighted and dejected, that I held down my head as if I had been guilty of
some notorious and heinous crime: but she went on in this manner; How many
miseries am I encompast with? for thy sake I have lost my husband, yet can I
not enjoy thee, nay shortly I shall not so much as see thee, which is all the
favor I have yet had from thee; but this were somewhat tolerable, did not my
husband hate me, and call me adulteress, by which means I undergo the
infamy of that vice, yet never enjoyed the pleasure; other women blush not for
their faults, till they have committed them, but I must bear the ignominy of
that whereof I am guiltless. O unfaithful, barbarous, and more cruel then
any Pirate Clitophon! can thou suffer a poor woman thus miserably
tormented, thus impotentlie doting on thee, to perish almost for thy love,
seeing thou art also in love thy self? cannot the anger of a deity, Cupid I
mean, affright thee? do not fear his torches? cannot the tears which have
most prodigally flowed from the fountain of my eyes, and which would have made
the heart of the most salvage thief to have relented, move thee? nay my
prayers have so little prevailed with thee, that neither opportunity of time or
place, could force from thee more then a kiss, or embrace, nay so coy thou
art, that thou partest from me as modestly as a woman would do: what is this
but a mere mock marriage? thou layest not with a barren, but with a young,
nay and though I say it my self an handsome woman: Out thou Eunuch, thou no
man, thou contemner of beauty. I pray the immortal gods that all things may
happen contrary to thy wish, that thereby thou may have trial of that in
thy self, which thou make experiment of on me. Melite having spoke this
with weeping eyes, was for a little while silent; but afterward seeing I gave
her no answer, and that I still fixed my eyes on the ground, her mind was
altered on a sudden, and she began to me again on this manner;

What I have hitherto spoken (O sweet young man) grief and anger suggested to
me; but now I speak in love; yet can thou not blame me that I was angry,
since I was all on fire within. Alas, at length let me have my wish, I ask
not marriage of thee now, wherewith thou have so long deluded me, let these
arms but once embrace thee; it is a small request, and a medicine scarce
proportionable to my disease; yet I desire no more. Go to now, cast but one
drop of water to the quenching of so great a flame, and if I have spoken any
thing whereat thou wast offended, I pray thee pardon me, they were the words
of a mad woman? For those which have ill success in their loves, are commonly
distracted. I know I am advocate in a bad cause, yet withal that it is no
shame to speak what love dictates, and that I open my disease to one which
very well knows the state of my body, for who can better judge of another
wound, then he which is wounded himself.

There is yet this one day left to perform thy promise. Think on what thou
swarest in Isis Temple. Fool that thou art, would thou be true to me, thou
should not fear what a thousand Thersanders could do to thee, but since
this cannot be, Leucippe being yet alive, marry her with all my heart, for I
utterly despair of any favor from thy hands, since all things are so adverse
to me, that the very dead are raised to cross me in my designs. O
treacherous sea, that have by saving one destroyed another! Clitophon thou
sett'st free, that he might be my ruin, and as if in him thou had not
sufficiently tormented me, thou have freed Leucippe also: But fond woman as I
am, why should I exclaim against her? may she ever live to the joy and
comfort of her Clitophon; but that which grieves me most of all is, that the
wicked Thersander should return, that he should smite those tender cheeks of
thine, nay that I should look on, and yet could not rescue thee: see how that
amiable face of thine is disfigured with the blows of that impious Thersander,
sure he was blind when he did it.

But to be brief, my master Cliophon (for so I must call thee, since my very
soul is at thy service) let me croppe the first and last fruits of thy love;
this one day shall be as sweet to me as if I had enjoyed thee many years, so
shall thou enjoy both Leucippe and my self: if no argument can persuade thee,
yet consider that besides many things wherein my love has been beneficial to
thee, in this one thing it has been chiefly; that through my means thou have
found Leucippe; for had not I brought thee hither, thou had still thought thy
Leucippe to have been dead; thou should for this make Fortune some
requital: I have heard of one who finding a treasure, honored the place much,
building there an Altar, offering sacrifice, and crowning the earth with
Garlands; but thou, having found here such a magazen of love, art so far from
being thankful, that thou contemnest her which brought thee to it. Think not
that it is I which utter these words, but Cupid which is in me.

Grant me Clitophon, which am thy captain, and under whose banner thou
fightest, that Melite ere she depart may have her will, it is I which have
inflamed her heart with thy love; be obedient therefore to me thy tutelar god,
as thou expectest ever to prosper in thy love to Leucippe.

I will loose thee from thy bands, let Thersander chafe his heart out, and thou
shall lie in mine own brothers Chamber, where thou shall have what attendance
thou will desire, and to morrow morning very early expect Leucippe there: for
she promised me to stay in the Country all night, that she might gather
her herbs, while the Moon was up; thus was I made a fool of, imploring her
help as if she had been some Thessalian woman skilled in witchcraft: For
what other refuge had I when I could not by lawful means purchase my wishes?

Now thou needst not fear Thersander, he is gone out so opportunely, as if
the gods would have had it so, to visit a friend; by which means thou may
safely accomplish my desire.

This eloquent Oration (for Cupid had taught her) Melite having uttered, she
loosed my bonds, and taking my hands in hers, kissed them, and then put them on
her breast, saying, Feel thou not now my heart which full of fear and hope
(I would I could say pleasure also) pants out sighs to move thee to pity.

Being set at liberty, and well weighing with my self, that I was not to
marry her, but be her Physician as it were. I was afraid that CUPID should
be offended with me, and therefore consented.

The end of the fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
The Argument.
Melite to requite Clitophons love, sets him free, seeing the servant to whose
custody he was committed: and that he might the better steal away, she
attyres him in her own apparel: But Sosthenes, whom Melite had turned out of
his stewardship, hearing his master was come home, thinks to currie favor with
him this way; first he betrays Clitophon, whom he had met in Melites apparel
to Thersander, next he turns bawd to procure Leucippe for him, who falls in
love with her. Mean while Clitophon is more closely prisoned then before, and
Melite strives to salve up the matter to Thersander, but cannot. After this
Sosthenes and Thersander seek by all means both fair and foul to win
Leucippes love, but prevail not.

HAving cured Melite who had been so long love sick, I asked her how she would
provide for my freedom, and make good what she promised me concerning
Leucippe? Then she answered, Fear not that I will be worse then my word, for
Leucippe thou may make thy self as sure of her as if thou had her in thine
arms; and for thine own security put on my apparel, and cover thy face with
my veil; Melantho shall accompany thee to the door where your way lies, there
shall a servant meet you whom I appointed to bring you to Satyrus, and Clinias;
Leucippe shall follow you a while after. Then she attyred me as she used to
attire her self, and kissing me again and again said, Thou art far more
beautiful in my garments than in thy own; and while I look on thee, me
thinks I see the picture of Achilles disguised. But my soul Clitophon have a
special care of thy self that thou be not discovered: here take my gown, and
leave thy cloak in exchange, which as often as I put on I shall think I
embrace thee; then she gave me an hundred pieces of gold, and called Melantho
to her, that was the trustiest of all her maids, to whose care she committed
the keeping of the doors; and giving her charge how to dispose of me, that
being finished she willed her to return.

Being thus accoutred, Melantho attending on me as on her mistress, the
porter who took me for Melite, let me forth; when I was gone forth she led me
to a by door in the house, where this young man, as Melite had appointed, met
me; he was very courteous to me, for in my journey to Ephesus he
accompanied me in the ship; after Melantho was returned and found the keeper
shutting the chamber door whence I was gone, she commanded him to open it
again, and told her mistress that I was fled; Melite sent for the keeper who
struck with fear and admiration at the strangeness of his departure, as being
a thing unknown to him, and after it was told him, incredible, was not able to
speak one syllable: wherefore Melite began to him thus; I had resolved that
Clitophon should be set free, but I invented this plot to excuse thee to
Thersander, for how can he justly tax thee of being privy to his flight, since
thou knewst not of it? stay but here a while and Clitophon shall send thee ten
pieces of gold, though I think thy safest course is to fly for it: Opasion
(for that was the servants name) answered that he thought no course so fit to
resolve on as what his mistress did approve of; at length it was her pleasure
that he should speedily betake himself to some retired place, whence he should
not return till her husbands anger were over, and all these troubles and
turmoiles were appeased.

But in the mean time, Fortune dealing as treacherously with me as before,
laid a snare to entrap me in a new danger, for Thersander coming from a
friends house, where he had been at supper, (and where very likely having told
what reaks his wife had played in his absence, he had been counseled not to
be long from her) met me as he was coming home. Ir was about that time when
the feasts of Diana were celebrated, when half the City almost was drunk, and
went reeling about the market place; which was a great hindrance to me in the
cleanly conveiance of the matter: But I had past undiscovered, had not
Sosthenes been my enemy, for he (as you heard before) being turned out of his
stewardship for abusing Leucippe, hearing that his master was come home, ceased
not to vex Leucippe further, but also to revenge himself on Melite; wherefore
first he betrayed me to Thersander, and next told him a great many lies of
Leucippe, for being frustrate of all hopes of enjoying her himself, he began
to be a pandar to procure her for his master, telling him this story.

In your absence, Sir, I bought a most beautiful virgin, fairer than you can
imagine, the rareness of whose perfection is such, that it far exceeds my
expression, her I reserved against your coming home, for I heard you were yet
alive, with which news though I was most excessively delighted, yet would I not
devulge it to any, to the end that coming home suddenly, and unexpected, you
might be an eye witness of my mistresses baseness; and that this impudent
stranger, who has adulterated your marriage bed, might be deprehended in the
height of his villainy. This maid, Sir, Melite has took out of my custody,
intending to set her free; but Fortune I doubt not, Sir, has reserved so rich
a treasure of beauty for you, she is now at your Country farm house; but the
reason why she was thither sent I cannot well guess: Now if you please, Sir,
she shall, ere she return to Melite who sent her, be locked up close in some
room where you shall have access to her. Thersander approving of this course
very well, and giving strict charge that it should be performed: Sosthenes
went to the farm house, coming to that cottage where she was to lie that
night, he set a couple of husband men to call away those maids which were with
her, under pretense that they had some business with them whereof they were to
confer in private: The maids being thus circumvented, Leucippe was left
alone, and Sosthenes with two more ran violently in, and stopping her mouth
that she should not screeke out, took her about the middle, and locked her
fast up in a close room; saying thus to her, I bring thee this day, O Lacoena,
as much good as any virgin could ever expect* but withal I must request thee
that my prayers when thou shall come to the fruition of it, may not pass
unrewarded: fear not that the violence I used in bringing thee hither was that
thou should unwillingly part with the flower of thy virginity, it was to
initiat thee into the familiarity of my master Thersander.

But Leucippe who was amazed at this sudden and unexpected calamity, gave him
no answer. Sosthenes meeting Thersander told him what he had done, and withal
commended Leucippe to the skies, insomuch that Thersander fancying her to be
none other than such a one as Sosthenes had described her to him, ere the
sports were ended the country farm being not above four score paces from his
house, commanded Sosthenes to lead the way, and he would down immediately to
see the wench. As they were going I like a fool met them full butte, clothed
in Melites attire, whereat Sosthenes who straightway knew me, cried out, See,
see, master the reeling leacher in thy wives apparel: The youth which manned
me along having no time to counsel me which way I should betake my self,
showed me a fair pair of heels, and shifted for himself, and poor
peelegarlicke I was presently caught, and laid hands on. Thersander while he
was apprehending me, exclaimed so hideously that in an instant I had a whole
jury of Constables, and watchmen flockt about me; while he laid the law
against me, accusing me of such heinous crimes as the whole City had scarce
ever been guilty of* at length calling me thief, and adulterer, of both which
crimes I was accused in public Court, and cast into prison.

But yet was not I a jot dismayed at all this, neither did the infamy of my
accusation, or the ignominy of my imprisonment dishearten me, for I was most
confident that I should clear my self by most invincible arguments, from the
crime whereof I was accused; seeing we were both publicly married: but this
was it, which did most of all deject me, namely that I had not yet come to
enterchange discourse with Leucippe. Moreover, the mind does commonly presage
bad things, but not good. Even so it fared with me, at that instant I thought
not of Leucippe, she was quite out of my mind, which was wholly taken up with
fear, suspicion, and grief.

Thersander having put me in prison, returned with a merry heart to Leucippe,
Sosthenes accompanying him: when he entered the house, he saw her lying all
along on the ground, and heard her recounting the words which Sosthenes had
spoke to her, when he last had been with her; while with a look wherein you
might have read the whole story of her grief, she betrayed her fearfulness;
which makes me think the proverb true, That the heart is as clearly
represented in the face, as the face is in a looking glass; for if grief has
once seized on the inner parts, the very countenance will seem to droope, and
if the heart through joy be dilated, the aspect must needs be pleasant.

Leucippe after they had opened the door (now there was a candle in the room)
would scarce look on them, but cast her eyes on the ground. Thersander seeing
that those sparks of beauty which glistred in her eyes, were as piercing as
the flashes of lightning which result from the conflict of two clouds, was
straightway on fire, and wounded with one glance, stayed still expecting when
she would bless him with another; but observing her still to look steadfastly
on the ground, How long, says he, will thou debar me the fruition of thy
sweet looks? how long shall the sordid earth rob me of so much pleasure?
rather bestow them on me, than suffer them so vainly to perish. At which
Leucippe shed many tears, which were so far from being a blemish to her
face, that they were an ornament: for tears make the eyes to swell, which
tumor to a hard-favoured face is a deformity, but to a handsome one a grace:
but if they be black eyes and have a coronet of white about them, the
moisture which they receive from tears, makes them far more resplendent,
which trickling down to the breast, some of them resemble the Violet, others
the Narcissus; but being contained within the eyelids, you may as well guess
them to be the effects of joy as grief: such were the tears of Leucippe,
which if she had let drop out of the cabinet of her eyes, they would
straightway have been gathered up for Amber.

Thersander looking at the same time on her beauty, and her grief, the one
struck him with admiration, the other with a kind of angry sorrow* in so much
that the tears trickled down his eyes, for it is usually seen that there is
no stronger motive to compassion, than the mourning of a woman, especially if
she have newly blasted the roses of her cheeks with brmish tears. But if her
lover be in presence, and a witness of it, his eyes will never be at rest,
till he have almost exhausted those fountains. For sure there is in beauty
(whose chiefest seat is the eye) a certain kind of fascinating power, whereby
from the mistress to the paramour are conveyed some certain rays, which by
way of sympathy enforce him to be affected as she is, whether well or ill, it
is equally delightful to him, seeing many times a lover will strive to
replenish his eyes with tears, which he will there nourish and keep in,
fearing lest he should unawares let them flow, and his mistress not see them:
which he the more carefully observes, as knowing that tears are the blood
which trickle from a heart wounded with love.

Thus stood the case with Thersander, he wept that he might curry favor with
Leucippe, hopeing that she would guess the cause of his grief to be no other
then her own. Then he turned about to Sosthenes and said, Thou see how this
woman is dejected, do what lies in thy power to comfort her, perhaps my
presence may be troublesome to her, therefore I will be gone though sore
against my will: So he departed, but ere he went he called Sosthenes aside,
and bid him speak as much as he could in his behalf, and that he should
have a care after he had dispatched the business to be with him by break of
day.

Mean while Melite as soon as she had parted from me, sent one to her
country farm to ca^l back Leucippe, telling her that there was now no need of
her charms; the messenger coming thither, saw the maids very busy in the
search of Leucippe, who were much disturbed that she could not be found:
this news he straightway returned with it to his mistress, but she
understanding not only of Leucippes being lost, but also my imprisonment, was
grievously perplexed; and though she knew the certainty of the matter, yet
she much suspected Sosthenes to be the author of all this mischief;
wherefore she commanded that public search should be made for Leucippe; and
to excuse her self to Thersander, she cunningly invented this intricate tale,
wherein it is true she told him all the truth, yet so aenigmatically involved in
tropes, and circumlocutions, that he should never fish it out; for when he
came home, and with open mouth railed on her on this wise; Thou have taken this
whoremaster out of my house, thou have loosed his fetters from off his legs,
thou have set him free, why do not thou get thee out of my doors after him?
what do thou stay here for get? thee gone I say, and let thy adulterous arms
embrace him, which I make no doubt but will be as painful chains to him as
the former: Then Melite replied, What whoremaster? what adulterer is that which
you twit me in the teeth with? sure you are not in your right senses, would you
but put your self out of this fretfull humor, and let me have the use of
your ears but a while, I should quickly unfold the whole truth to you; only
before I speak, I say, let me but desire that all choler and malice being
laid aside, that your passion may give place to reason, you judge impartially
of what I shall say; This young man whom you have so often abused with the name
of adulterer, or at least suspect to be my husband, is neither; but by birth a
Phaenician, and as well descended, and for virtue, for ought I know qualified,
as any citizen of Tire: sailing by chance this way it was his fortune to be
shipwrackt, and loose the greatest part of his wares upon these shores: which
when I heard of, I much commiserated his case, (as not knowing whether the case
might stand so with you) and kindly entertained him, thinking thus with my
self, that some good woman or other might at the same time take pity on thee
in the like manner, if thou were yet alive; but if dead, that it was a most
charitable office in me for thy sake to let no man which had escaped
shipwreck pass unpitied, many hundreds of them did I refresh, many of their
dead bodies if I but saw them floating on the water, did I most sumptuously
interre; and could I but recover a piece of a broken planke, how did I weep
over it, saying thus with my self, perhaps this is a part of that ship wherein
my Thersander sailed: Now of all that have escaped the danger of the sea, and
whom I have succored, this only man remains with me, if I have showed him
more than ordinary respect, what was it but to express my officiousness to
thee? he went to sea, so did thou, his calamity (wherein for ought I knew
was thine represented) did I pity my dearest husband: Hitherto have I told you
how he came hither. Now when he was come he bemoaned much the loss of a wife
of his, which fame had falsely reported to have been dead, but a little while
after some one or other told him she was alive, and was with one of my
stewards they named Sosthenes; which proved to be true, for going to my country
farm there we found the woman; this was the reason he followed me; Sosthenes
is now with you, the woman in the country, enquire if all be not as I have
told you, and if you catch me tripping in the least syllable, call me
adulteress, and what you will, spare me not.

This Melite spoke, dissembling all this while that she knew how Leucippe was
stole away, and intending if Thersander were inquisitive to know the truth, to
bring the maids who went along with Leucippe, and were to return with her the
next morning, to testify that Leucippe could no where be found, and this was
the plot why she would have Leucippe sought for, that Thersander might give
more credit to what she said; which though it was most appositely spoken, yet
she went on again in this manner, Think not dear husband that what I tell
you is false, for remember but how chastely I lived with you before you went to
sea, and you will say your self that thus to suspect me in your absence, you
do much wrong me; especially seeing that lying rumors of people, who knew not
the reason of my familiarity, or why I should so much honor the young man,
have been the sole ground of your suspicion; alas fame is but a very weak
intelligencer, should we believe all it says, we should believe that thou also
were shipwrackt^ For fame and calumny are near of kindred, this being the
daughter of that, the one being more sharp than a sword, hotter than fire, and
to persuade more prevalent than the voice of Sirens; the other being more fluid
than the water, swifter than the wind, and quicker of flight than any winged
foul: wherefore the words of a detractor once let fly, pass swifter through
the air than an arrow, not only wounding the party injured, but deluding the
parties present with a show of truth, incense them against him which is absent:
the fame which issues from this wound is manifold, and is straightway spread
abroad, driven by the wind of speech, and bore up on the wings of the tongue,
is hurried this way and that way, buzzing in every man's ear it meets. These
two plagues have conspired against me, and are the sole obstacle why I am so
hardly believed.

Melite having spoken this, made profer to take Thersander by the hand to have
kissed it, which he refused, yet was a little appeased with the likelihood of
her tale, and grew a little less suspicious, seeing that in her story of
Leucippe she differed not much from Sosthenes; yet he would not believe all
that she spoke, for when once a man is incensed with a rumor, he is not so
soon pacified.

But Thersander all this while hearing that the maid he was so in love with,
was my wife, began to be much troubled; and took from this occasion to hate
me worse then he had done before; yet with a resolution, further to enquire
whether it were so or no, he went to bed alone that night.

Poor Melite all this while she grieved most excessively, that she could not
be as good as her word, to perform what she had promised; and Sosthenes he
on the other side promised Thersander great matters of Leucippe, and went to
her again, and looking very merrily said thus to her, al things go as well as
we could wish, my Lacoena, Thersander is almost mad for thy love; nay which is
more, perhaps he will make thee his wife, yet thou must know that all this is
done through my means, I have by extolling thy beauty above measure, so rooted
and engrafted thee into his favor, that nothing shall ever separate you: cease
to weep therefore and be of good comfort, go offer sacrifice to Venus as a
thankful acknowledgement of so great a favor as thou art made mistress of.
Then Leucippe answered, The gods requite thee with as great a favor as this,
and grant that thou never have more felicity in any thing then I have in the
news thou bringst me: Sosthenes not thinking she had abused him, but that
she spoke seriously, went on in this manner; Hear me further Lacoena I will
tell thee the state and condition of this Thersander, which shall not a little
rejoice thee: first know then that he is husband to that rich woman Melite,
and come of the chiefest family in Ionia, but his riches exceed his parentage,
and his virtues outballance his wealth; I need not here tell thee that he is
young withal, and beautiful (thy own eyes having been witness of it) both
which things women much desire. Here Leucippe could no longer endure this knave
Sosthenes, but railed on him, How long thou beast will thou go on to pollute
my chaste ears with thy obscene talk? what have I to do with Thersander? if
he be beautiful, it is for Melites sake; if rich, for his country sake; if
gentle, mild, or valiant, let him be so to those which stand in need of his
help; for let him be as rich as Croesus, or as poor as Codrus, it is nothing
to me: why do thou commend him to me so highly? when he shall cease to
solicit other men's wives, and be content with his own, then praise him to me,
and I will gladly hear thee. What you jest sweet? says Sosthenes. No indeed
said Leucippe this is neither time nor place to jest in: let me alone, let my
Fortune have her full swing, and the thread of my destiny be spun out as far
as it will, for I see that I am in the hands of Pirates. Sosthenes replied, Sure
thou art mad beyond all cure: to have a rich husband, honor, beauty, pleasure,
and all the delights that may be, prostitute themselves unto thee, is this to
fall into the hands of Pirates? nay to have such a husband whom the gods have
after so peculiar a manner indulged, as to recall from the very jaws of death:
And here he took occasion to tell her the story of his shipwreck, making her
believe that the gods took special notice of this man at sea, above all the
rest, sending a Dolphin to rescue him, (as the Poets feign of Arion) and that
by special providence he was reserved in the midst of his shipwreck.
Leucippe gave him no answer to this, so he went on; Consider but how much it
may be in thy way if thou consent, and have a care that thou answer not
Thersander as thou have answered me, for by this means thou may turn his
patience into fury, for as he is most mild while he is pleased, so is he most
impatient when he is crossed. The meekest men if they light on a mild
disposition are most affable, but if on an obstinate one, they are most
implacable; nature having so provided, that he which is ready meekly to second
a good action, is as forward bitterly to revenge a bad.

Thus much of Leucippe.

Clinias and Satyrus understanding that I was in prison (for Melite had told
them) came to me by night, intending there to live to bear me company, but
the Iailour forced them away quickly, not permitting them to stay. I desired of
them before they went, that as soon as they heard that Leucippe was returned
they should come to me again; all this while remembering Melites promise, I was
betwixt fear and hope, hope being annexed to my fear, and fear to my hope.

Afterward when it was day Sosthenes returned to Thersander, and Satyrus to
me. Thersander asked of Sosthenes how the case stood with Leucippe, whether
she would yield to him: but Sosthenes cunningly concealing the truth, invented
this lie: She denies you Sir, yet so faintly, as I am persuaded it is not from
her heart, and for ought I can gather by her, she is willing enough, but
fearful of the disgrace, and that when you have enjoyed her you will cast her
off. For this matter, says Thersander, let her not be afraid, for to confess
ingenuously, I am linked to her with such strong bands of affection, that
nothing can separate me from her. Yet one thing I feign would know, whether she
be wife to that young man, as Melite told me.

Thus while they were talking one with another, they came to the place where
Leucippe was, and hearing her before they came near the door, bemoaning her
miseries in a loud and lamentable tone, they stood a while and listened.

Woe is me, O Clitophon, (that name was often in her mouth) thou know not
where I am, nor can I tell where fortune has bestowed thee, but both of us
live ignorant one of the others miseries! has Thersander caught thee in his
house? has he exposed thee to public shame? I have been many times about to
ask Sosthenes, but I could not safely do it* for should I ask him concerning
thee as my husband, I fear much lest it may work thee some mischief, by
incensing Thersander against thee; but if as a guest, or stranger, there is
room here also for suspicion, for none will imagine that a woman should be so
sollicitous and inquisitive after one to whom she has no relation. But why do
I say so? for I have often assayed to speak yet could never bring my tongue
handsomely in frame, but have been forced to conceal my grief, and talk thus
to my self: O Clitophon, the husband only of Leucippe, the faithful and
constant husband, whom the flattering inticements of a woman could not allure;
nay more, whom the very thought of Leucippe (which till now I did scarce
believe) deterred from enjoying her whom he lay with; how did I dwell on thy
lips when we met at the farm? how often did I kiss thee? but suppose
Thersander should come in and ask me some more questions, what answer shall I
give him? shall I take off the vizard which all this while I have wore, and
discover unto him the naked truth? think not me a base bond-slave, Thersander,
know that I am the daughter of the chief Captain of the Byzantians army, and
wife to a young man of Tire of no small repute, I am no woman of Thessaly, nor
am I called Lacoena, this was the pirates covetousness to rob me of my name
also: Clitophon is my husband, my country Byzantium, my father Sostratus, my
mother Panthia: should I give thee this answer, I suppose thou would scarce
believe me, or if thou should believe me, yet do I fear that my husbands
importunity for my liberty may be his ruin; I will once more put on my
vizard, and be Lacoena again.

Thersander hearing this, turned about to Sosthenes, and said, Did thou hear
what an incredible story she told, yet full of love? how many things did she
rip up? how mournfully did she complain? why should she accuse her self? but
what do I trouble my self to ask these questions? that adulterer is
preferred before me, that thief has stole away her affection from me, I
think the villain is some witch or conjurer, Melite is mad for him, and
Leucippe she dotes on him: before Jove I could wish that I were Clitophon. To
this Sosthenes replied, I think it not fit master that we should desist now
we have gone so far; go to her once more, let not the love she bears to
that adulterous slave deter thee, for she makes use of him but for mere
necessity, because perhaps she can get no body else, I make no question but
when once you shall succeed him (for you are many degrees handsomer) she will
quite forget him, and settle her affection only on you. For a new flame
extinguishes the former, and the nature of that sex is, that he which is then
in place winnes their hearts: they will be enamoured on one for the present,
but he being out of their sight, is as soon out of their mind. These words
did somewhat cheer up Thersanders drooping spirits* For nothing is more apt to
gain credit than a fair soothing promise, wherein there is but the least
shadow of probability, to which belief we are not only drawn with the hope
of obtaining what is promised, but compelled by the concupiscible part of our
mind, earnestly to prosecute what we so eagerly coveted.

After Thersander had overheard what Leucippe had spoke to her self, he staid
a while lest she should have suspected him, and endeavoring to frame his
countenance, as if he had hopes she would now be more tractable, went in to
her, whom as soon as he had beheld, he was all on fire, for she seemed now
far more beautiful than before, the flame which with her last looks was
kindled in his breast, being nourished by his long absence from her, and now
kindled afresh by this second visit, insomuch that he could scarce forbear
adoring of her, but he refrained a little, and sitting down by her began to
talk idly, for his words did not hang well together, which is the custom of
all lovers when they come in company with their mistresses, something they will
be prating, yet heed they not what they speak; for fixing their minds only
upon her whom they talk with, their tongues destitute of the guidance of
reason, run at random; and as he talked he put his arm about her neck as if
he would have embraced her, Leucippe perceiving this gave him not so much as a
look, but hid her face in her bosom; but he still persisted, and was very
earnest to have had a kiss from her, she all the while denied him, and
covered her face more, so both of them having strived sufficiently, whether he
obtained what he desired, or whether he was weary with struggling, the strife
was ended at last; and Thersander desirous to have her angry, and to chide with
him a little, put his left hand under her chinne, and with his right hand took
hold of the hair of her head, forcing her to look up; but Leucippe replied to
him upon this: Thou have neither shown thy self freeborn, nor a gentleman;
in this thou imitatest thy servant Sosthenes, who in my mind is a very fit man
for such a master; wherefore desist I say, and let me alone, for thou have no
hopes of obtaining any thing from me, unless thou could out of Thersander
be metamorphosed into Clitophon.

He hearing this was scarce his own man, he was so distracted with anger and
love; which two passions are like torches to sear the mind, both of them
having heat, yet contrary one to the other, though in their power they are
equal; the one stirring us up to hatred, the other to good will: nor do they
dwell far apart; this having the liver for its abode, that the heart; both of
them having seized on a man, his mind which is as it were the balance,
weighes them, whilst the one strives to outpoise the other, but for the most
part love gets the upper hand, having obtained what it desired; but if it sees
that it is neglected, it straightway invokes the assistance of anger, who being
neighbor to it is ready at hand to lend her help; both which like two flames
joining in one, conspiring, incense the mind: and if anger have once took
possession of loves habitation, it straightway turns him out of doors, and is
so far from helping him to obtain his wishes, that she fetters him like a
slave, not suffering him to work any reconcilement, though he much desire it;
by which means it comes to pass that love is violently oppressed, and
striving to regaine his lost power is repelled, being forced to hate those whom
he intended to have loved. But when this anger has raged enough, and is as it
were glutted with revenge, having taken its full swing, at last abates somewhat
of its fury; then by degrees love gathers strength, and mustering up affection,
desire, and good will, deposes anger from her throne: and recounting with
himself how injuriously he has raged against those whom he had formerly
loved, grieves much, labors to clear himself, and makes suite to come in
favor again, affirming that where he once took distaste he now takes great
delight. By which it appears that as long as love can have what he desires,
he is mild and gentle, but if he loose this, anger gets the upper hand, who
though she seemed to sleep is upon little warning awaked, and is ready to
revenge the least affront, or contempt which has been offered to love.

Wherefore Thersander as long as he had possibility of having his will on
Leucippe, folly devoted himself to her service; but seeing his hopes to be
now quite frustrate, forgetting the former delight which he had taken in her
beauty, smote her on the face, uttering these words; Thou base libidinous
bond-slave, I now find that report has not belyed thee to me, mine eyes are
witnesses of more wickedness by thee than ever mine ears were; do thou
disdain my company, scorn to talk with me, and refuse a kiss from thy
master? But I rather think that all this is but thy dissimulation, feigning
that thou detestest that which thou most of all desire: For those looks of
thine which would feign make me believe that thou art in despair, are but
personated, and such as thou have upon occasion been used to put on, ever
since thou have first used the profession of a whore, and followed this
adulterer Clitophon. Well, seeing thou will not entertain me as a friend,
thou shall know ere long that thou shall awe me as a master. Leucippe
answered, You mean sure to play the tyrant with me, but do your worst, so I
may keep my self chaste: And turning about to Sosthenes, she said, I call
even thee to witness how patiently I suffer all these reproaches, though I
endured far worse at thy hands. At which Sosthenes (who being palpably guilty
of what she accused him, could not choose but blush) said, It were very fit,
master, that this idle baggage were well whipped with thongs to day, that to
morrow she might learn not to contemn her master. Do as your servant bids
you Thersander, (for he counsels you very well) command that all the tortures
you can invent be brought hither, you shall wreck all your malice on me,
whether you be minded to break my limbs on the wheel, scourge me with whips,
sear my flesh with hot irons, or run me through with swords: you shall see
a fine combat; for even I a poor silly woman will fight against all these,
and get the victory. Thou call Clitophon an adulterer when thou art one thy
self: But hear me, do not fear that the anger of that deity, whom in
going to defile me, thou so highly offendest, should strike thee dead, Diana I
mean, who is the tutelar goddess of this City? why do thy arrows sleep in
thy quiver, O divinest goddess! why let thou not one fly at this impudent
villain, who dares offer in thy presence, and in thy own City to deflowre a
Virgin? Thou a Virgin, says Thersander, which have lain all night with Pirates?
thou shameless strumpet, what, is a thieves chamber turned into a philosophy
school? or was there never a one amongst them who had his eyes in his head?
Ask of Sosthenes who first forced me, and used me worse than any Pirate would
have done, whether I am a maid or no, the Pirates were far more modest and
civil than you have been, they never offered that to me which you have done;
I may better call your city a receptacle of thieves, seeing here I have found
those who would have done that which they never attempted. But thou know not
how far thy baseness will promote my honor; for should thou at this
instant kill me, the world would say thus of me; Leucippe after she had
lived so long among Pirates, after she had been stole away by Chereas, and
escaped from the violence which Sosthenes would have offered her, yet at length
was found to be a maid* but this is but a small commendation for me* this
were far greater; Leucippe after the violence of Thersander who was worse
then all the pirates, into whose hands she fell before, chose rather to loose
her life then her virginity: go to therefore, bring hither quickly the wheel,
the fire, the sword, the whips, let your partner Sosthenes instruct you: I a
naked unarmed woman will hold up the buckler of my freedom against them all;
this can neither scourging hurt, the sword cut, or the fire burn, this I will
never loose, and though you should straightway cast me into a furnace, the
heat of it shall have no power over this.

The end of the Sixth Book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
The Argument.
Thersander to be revenged on Leucippe intends to poison Clitophon, but
fearing the rigor of the law, he takes this course: he casts one into the
prison where Clitophon was, who should tell him that he chanced to be in
company with one who was apprehended for murdering Leucippe, by the
instigation of Melite, and that the party himself which did the deed was fled,
and he was cast in prison upon suspicion that he was his confederate.
Clitophon believes this, and in public court (to revenge himself on Melite
for the supposed killing of Leucippe) confesses not only that he lay with
Melite, but also that he conspired with her for the making away of Leucippe,
both which crimes his friend Clinias, who was then in place, endeavored to
clear him from, but both he and Clitophon miss of their aims, for sentence
is given by the Judges, that according to the laws of the Land, Clitophon for
accusing himself should suffer death, and Melite should have some lesser
punishment inflicted on her: but as good fortune would have it, by reason of
some solemnity whereof Sostratus Leucippes father was the chief author,
Clitophons execution is deffered; Sostratus as he had been told the night
before by Diana in a dream, finds Clitophon, at whom he is much offended for
the stealing away of his daughter Leucippe; but afterward it is told him that
Leucippe was in the Temple of Diana (whither she had fled as to an asylum,
having taken opportunity to steal away when Sosthenes was absent) by which
means he is not only appeased, but Clitophon is also freed from his own
accusation for the present: afterward he walks under bale of the chief
Priest, till he come to his second appearance, to be fully set at liberty.

THersander therefore seeing Leucippe so obstinate, was much distracted, for he
grieved that his hopes were frustrate, and was angry that his fair profer
should be so neglected and contemned; which made him like one wounded with
love, study what he were best in this plight to do; he spoke not a word to
Leucippe, but in a rage run speedily out of the room: after that talking
with Sosthenes that he might put a period to his distracted thoughrs, he went
to him which was keeper of the prison, and would have had him poisoned me,
which course upon better consideration he disliking (for that the people were
very severe against such delinquents, and had not long before that time caused
one to be put to death for the same crime) obtained thus much of the keeper,
that he might cast a man into the prison who was no malefactor, but privy to
his designs: who should undermine me, and catch me tripping, if he could, in
my discourse* this fellow had Thersander cunningly instructed to make mention
of Leucippe by some means or other, and to say that she was slain by the
consent of Melite; which plot he invented, that though I had quitted my self
of the crime which I was accused of, yet I would never make further search
after her who was dead: And the reason why he would have him say that Melite
slew her, was lest Leucippe being slain I should marry Melite, whom he meant
to put away, (and this he might justly suspect, seeing it was plain that I
loved her) which if I had done he could not so safely have enjoyed Leucippe;
wherefore thus he thought with himself, that when I should hear that Melite
had done me this injury, I should hate and detest her for it, and (as having
little heart to stay with such an enemy) in a rage leave the City.

The fellow coming into the prison to me began his tale, but first gave a
great sigh, saying; What hope of life is there, or how shall a man be secure,
seeing danger attends on him for weldoing, and that to live justly is a
sufficient accusation? Alas how was it possible I should guess what he that
travailed with me had committed? to this purpose would he many times talk to
himself in my hearing, to the end that I should ask him the meaning of what
he spoke, but, alas, I was otherwise employed, my griefs had so taken me up,
that I had not leisure to enquire after another: But one which was bound with
us seeing him to weep so excessively (for those which are in any distress are
desirous to know another misfortune as well as their own, for that the
communicating of their griefs each to other, is a kind of easing their
afflicted minds) said, What has befallen thee, for it should seem thou art
attached for that whereof thou wast never guilty, which I gather from what has
happened to me. Then he began to tell me the cause of his imprisonment,
which I did not much listen to; afterward he demanded of the other his story,
to which he began on this manner;

Yesterday departing from this city, and journeying toward Smyrna, one met me,
and demanded of me whither I was traveling; when he had understood that I was
going to Smyrna, he told me that it was the very place he was bound for too;
together we went, and as the custom of travelers is, we eased the length of
our journey with a great deal of good talk; but turning into an Inn to bait,
four men followed us, and making as if they came in to dine there, sat down
by us, and looked very hard upon us, nodding their heads one to the other,
which made me suspect that they talked of us, though I knew not the reason:
The fellow that was with me began straightway to wax pale, stammer in his
speech, and tremble; which they perceiving, laid hold of us both, bound us with
ropes, and smote my fellow traveller on the face; who as if he had been
already upon the rack, cried out though no man examined him, I slew Leucippe,
having of Melite, Thersanders wife, a hundred pieces of gold for my pains, for
it was she that hired me to do this villainy; the money here I give you to a
farthing, spare my life I beseech you, and defraud not your selves of so much
treasure.

I hearing Thersander and Melite named, began to prick up my ears, and to
listen more attentively to what he said; then turning me about to him, I asked
of him, What is this Melite? He answered, one of the chiefest women in this
City, who is in love with a young man here, (they say he is of Tire) who
having by some chance lost his sweet heart, and found her again at home in
Melites house, she out of a jealousy that the maid should draw his affection
from her, committed her into the hands of him whom it was my hard fortune to
accompany in my journey, to be slain; and he did the deed, but I poor wretch
who was neither witting nor willing to it, or privy to the least word or deed
which past about it, am apprehended for it; but which is worst of all, after
these four men had gone a little from the Inn, they took the money of the
fellow, and let him go, but me they brought before the Judge.

Having heard this turbulent story, I could neither speak nor weep, for my
tongue was tied, and my tears dried up, every joint trembled, my heart
fainted, and my soul was well nigh fled out of my body; but after I had
recovered my self out of this drunkenness of grief, I asked of him, how did
this fellow which was hired kill her? where did he bestow her body? but he
having once pricked me in this vein, and knowing that he had what he desired,
was ever after so mute, that I could not extort a word more from him; for when
I asked him any more questions, he told me churlishly that sure I suspected
him to have a hand in it, whereof he was utterly guiltless.

So that concerning the murderer, after my much inquiry, I could learn nothing
of him, only this, that the maid was slain, but where, or how, he would not
tell me, which made the tears trickle down my cheeks, and discover that
portion of grief which had lay hid all this while in my breast. For as in a
body beaten with rods, the impression they leave is not straightway seen; or
as in one who has been newly bitten with a Bore, the wound appears not
suddenly, being deep, but a while after there arises a white streake, from
whence straightway the blood flowing shows where the wound is: so in a mind
wounded with some bad news, the print it makes is not seen, not do any
tears fall (which are the blood issuing from such a wound) till grief has
fully satisfied her hungry appetite; then does the wound gape, and the tears
forcing a passage through the eyes, stream down like the water of some
fruitful spring: all this I found to be true in me, for being first struck
with the news of Leucippes death, as with a dart, I could neither speak nor
weep, till my grief having took time to breathe it self as it were, with
many a tear and sigh I burst forth into these words.

What devil was it which first tempted me with this momentany joy? who did me
the mischief first to show me Leucippe, on whom my eyes could scarce yet ever
have their pleasure? for if I did chance to see her, yet could I never be
satisfied with seeing, but all the pleasure which I have yet had has been like
a dream: alas my poor Leucippe, how often will thou renew my grief by thy
often dying? I think for ever: seeing every day one death comes on the neck of
another: but as yet fortune has but mocked, and dallied with me, making me
believe that thou were dead; now therefore thou art dead in good earnest, and I
fear thou art quite taken from me: before from that personated death of thine
I had some comfort, first by interring thy whole body, next thy carcass without
a head; what profited it thee alas that thou twice escapedst the hands of
thieves, and should be slain by Melite? that vile woman I whom though thy
murderesse, I more vile have so often kissed and embraced, nay imparted more
to, than ever I did to thee.

While I thus reasoned with my self, Clinias came to see me, whom I told that
I had decreed to dye; but he bid me be of good comfort, telling me that I knew
not whether she might once more be alive again, or no; has she not been
diverse times dead already, yet revived? if you have a mind therefore to kill
your self, be advised, and stay till you are sure the news you hear is true.
Thou triflest, (said I) what further evidence would thou have, or what better
intelligence would thou desire? I am resolved therefore to die, and I have
thought upon such a course, as that eyes sore of the gods Melite shall fall
with me: I had intended thou know to have cleared my self of the adultery
whereof Thersander accused me, but now I have decreed the contrary; I will
acknowledge the fault; and further confess, that Melite and I being in love,
conspired to the making away of Leucippe; by which means I shall be freed from
this wretched life of mine, and the wicked Melite shall have her just reward.
The gods forbid, will you by making your self guilty of so foul a fact as the
death of your Leucippe, forfeit your life? I answered him, that no fact was
foul whereby a man might revenge himself on his enemy, and so the case stood
with me.

Within a short while after my fellow prisoner, who had told me of Leucippes
death, was sent for (as I was told) to answer to the accusations which were
laid against him before the Judge: The very day that this was done Clinias and
Satyrus who still continued comforting me, hired a house and thither went,
that they might not be discovered to be in company with me, who was suspected
to be Melites bedfellow.

The day after to the Court I was brought, where Thersander was ready with no
small preparation, having entertained no less then ten advocates against me,
and as sollicitous was Melite in her own defense as he; after they had made a
long invective to the Judge against me, I being permitted to speak for my
self, began thus*

What either Melite or Thersanders advocats have hitherto said, are but toys
wherewith they have gulled the Court, will you but lend me your ears a while,
I shall as faithfully and carefully as I can, relate the whole matter. had
sometime a sweetheart, she was by birth a Byzantian, her name was Leucippe,
whom I supposing to be dead, (for the pirates had stole her away in Egypt)
fell by chance in league with Melite, whom I accompanied to this city* where I
found Leucippe made a slave to Sosthenes her steward; but how he durst make a
bond woman of a free, or what commerce there was betwixt him and the pirates, I
leave you to decide.

Melite understanding that I had found my old sweetheart, fearing lest she
should share most of my love, took counsel to slay her; which counsel I my
self did very well approve of, (for why should I deny what is truth?) and upon
condition that she should make me lord of all she had, I hired a fellow to
kill Leucippe, who having dispatched his business, and for his pains had of
me an hundred pieces of gold, fled his country, and was never since seen: but
love did presently revenge himself on me, for ever after that I was so pricked
in conscience, that I could not forbear weeping, nay and at this very instant,
though she be dead I love her, nor have I accused my self for any other end
then that I might be sent to my sweetheart, whose murderer I have been, and
yet whose love I now am.

When I had said thus, all that were present, but especially Melite, were
astonished at the sudden and unexpected issue of the business; while
Thersander and his advocates shouted most plausibly: which made Melites
advocates ask of her the meaning of what I spoke, but she much troubled, denied
somethings flatly, others she confessed, yet so obscurely that they could not
well know whether she were guilty or no; nevertheless all I spoke about
Leucippe, only her death excepted, she told them was true: wherefore seeing
the greatest part of my confession was true, they began thereupon much to
suspect Melite, and were in a great straight how they should study a defense
for her.

But Clinias when there was a great hurly burly in the Court steps me forth,
and says. Give me leave I pray to speak a little in my friends behalf,
seeing it is a matter concerns his life, which when he had obtained, he
began with weeping eyes thus;

You men of Ephesus, condemn not rashly this young man, who is so willing to
die, seeing he rather desires death as a remedy of his misery, than the due
punishment of any crime he is guilty of: he has accused himself of another
fault, that he might be rid of his life, which his unhappy fortune has made so
loathsome to him; what his misery is I shall briefly show you.

That he had sometimes a sweetheart is most true, and that she was stolen from
him by Pirates and sold to Sosthenes, I deny not, for every tittle of what he
said ere he came to tell how he was consenting to Leucippes death, I can safely
justify; also that it is reported she is dead, but how, or by what means,
whether she be slain, or again stole away by pirates, or whether she be yet
alive, it is uncertain: but that Sosthenes was in love with her, and not
obtaining his will on her, did most severely use her, will appear by witness:
now Clitophon supposing he has lost her utterly, is willing to dye, and
therefore feignes himself her murderer, for by his own confession the sole
cause which has moved him to accuse himself, is the grief he conceives for
her departure. Consider with your selves again and again, I beseech you,
whether it be probable, in any likelihood or reason, that a man should desire
to dye with one which he has killed; or that any one should be so lovingly
malicious as to take pity on the party he has slain; such hatred is not so
soon appeased. By all the gods believe not what he says, and adjudge not one
to execution, who should rather be an object of your pity, than your justice:
if it be so that he hired one to do the murder, let him produce the party, or
show the dead body; but if he can do neither, why should you judge this to be
murder? I loved Melite, says he, and therefore I slew Leucippe; but then I
would feign know why he should call her name in question whom he so much
loved? why he should dye for Leucippes sake, whom he caused to be slain? what
do you think any man so senseless, that he would love whom he hates, and hate
whom he loves? should one not rather think that a loving man would deny the
fault, though he were convicted, that he might save her life whom he loves,
lest the grief for her death might cost him his life? it were worth the
examination also why he should accuse Melite* if she be not guilty. But I
beseech you again and again that you construe not my speech, as tending to
the disgracing of this woman, but rather to the opening of the cause: Melite
was in love with this young man, and before her husband, who had been long at
sea, returned, there was talk that they should have been married; but this
young man was so far from consenting to her unchaste love, that he would by
no means be enticed to marry her: besides, having found his sweetheart with
Sosthenes, whom he supposed to have been dead, he began more and more to
slight Melite; who seeing the maid, but not knowing her to be Clitophons sweet
heart, took pity on her, loosed the chains wherewith Sosthenes had bound
her, and because she saw her looks to be ingenuous, and speak her freeborn,
courteously entertained her, and afterward sent her to her Country house, to
oversee some gardens she had there: since which time she was never seen. That
what I now speak is truth, not only Melite, but the two maids which were sent
along to accompany her can testify: and that which makes the poor young man
so desperate, is, he suspects that Melite has caused Leucippe to be slain,
which suspicion of his has been much augmented, and has incensed him not
only against Melite, but himself, by this occasion: There was a
fellow-prisoner of his yesterday, who bemoning himself and his fortunes, told
him that as he travailed on the way, he chanced to fall in company with a
cutter, who had been hired to kill a maid, she that hired him was Melite,
she that he slew was Leucippe; which story how true it is, is not yet known;
it were good you would search it out: it is a matter of no great difficulty to
find out, especially having this prisoner in your jail, who says he was in
company with this murderer; whom in my judgment it were very fit you examine;
Sosthenes also may be summoned to appear, and those maids may be brought into
the Court: of him you may enquire how he came by Leucippe, of these how she
came to be made away: before all these witnesses are thoroughly examined, it is
neither just nor right that you put him to death upon no other grounds than his
mad speeches; for grief has quite distracted the man, and bereft him of his
senses. So Melite caused the maids to be brought, and desired that Thersander
might produce Sosthenes, whom Melite thought the likelier of the two to kill
Leucippe, for those who pleaded Melite's cause put in that condition.

But Thersander fearing least all should come to light, sent one of his
servants privately to Sosthenes, that he should with what speed he could get
him out of the way, before those who were sent out to apprehend him should come
thither. The servant rides to him, tells him the danger, and withal, that he
was likely to be strictly examined, if he suffered himself to be taken:
Sosthenes was then by chance with Leucippe, seeking by his smooth and
flattering speeches to ease her afflicted mind: Wherefore after much knocking
and calling, out he came at last, where understanding how the business went,
full of fear, and supposing the apparitors to be at his heels already, he
took horse, and went straightway to Smyrna; the messenger returned to
Thersander. But ere I go further let me tell you that the proverb is true,
FEAR is the mother of forgetfulness: For when Sosthenes was in this fright*
he forgot his business in hand, and did not so much as think upon shutting
the door where Leucippe was kept: for your slavish natures when they are in
the least dangers are most timorous.

After this Thersander omitting the first condition, mentioned by Melites
advocates, began to plead on this manner; This young fellow whosoever he be,
has played the lawyer wisely: But I wonder much at your stupidity, who seeing
the murderer manifestly deprehended in the fact, though his own confession be
a far greater evidence against him, keep him in ward so long, and send him
not to execution, but sit listening to this dissembling, juggling fellow, who
has as good a faculty in lying as in weeping: whom I begin to suspect to have
had a hand in the murder himself: but I am unwise to make so many words,
seeing the case is so clear: what I fear is this, I shrowdly suspect that he
has done another murder since this, for that Sosthenes whom they so call for,
has not been seen in my house this three days, it is not unlikely that they
have plotted to make him away too, because at my first coming home he told me
of my wifes loose behavior* therefore my adversaries knowing I cannot produce
him, have cunningly put in this condition; well, I would Sosthenes were alive,
that I might bring him as a witness: but go to, let us now suppose Sosthenes
to be here, all that you can ask him is this, whether he bought the maid,
and whether Melite took her out of his hands? all this I will confess; it is
granted that he bought her, Melite released her; is there any thing else you
would ask him? surely no; why then Sosthenes is dismissed.

But now let me turn my speech to Melite and Clitophon. What have you done
with my servant you stole from me, for she was mine, and no man's else (this
Thersander craftily put in by the way, that if Leucippe were yet alive she
should still continue in his service) he added this moreover: Clitophon says
he killed the maid, Melite denies it; but her the maids testimonies confute, for
if it appear, as it does already, that Melite gave them the charge of her, and
they never restored her, what must be become of her? why she was sent out: sent
out, to whom? that they tell you not: is it not therefore palpably manifest,
that she was delivered into some man's hand to be slain? which it is likely was
concealed from the maids, lest many being privy to it there would incur a
greater danger of having it divulged: for they left her among a company of
thieves, where it is very probable they durst not stay to see what would become
of her. Again he tells you a flim flam tale of a fellow prisoner of his, who
should make mention of this murder, but who should this be which should tell
him all, and the Judges never a word? had he not denied that he knew him, he
might perhaps have been bidden to produce him, and have been caught in a lie.
How long will your grave and judicious ears suffer themselves to be abused
with such trifles and gewgawes, as these are? can you think that a man should
accuse himself, were he not guilty, and did not the gods by special
providence compel him to it?

Here when Thersander had made an end of speaking, and had taken his oath that
he knew not what was become of Sosthenes, it seemed good therefore to the
chief of the Judges (he was of the blood royal, and sat still in capital
causes concerning life and death, though he had some other of the elders of
the City which did assist him in the administration of justice, and with whom
he frequently consulted) it seemed good to him I say, after he had imparted the
matter to his colleagues, that I should suffer death, according to the law,
which had provided, that in case a man did accuse himself of murder, without
any other evidences, he should straightway be put to death: some other
punishment they intended for Melite, after they had examined her; and for
Thersander, they enjoined that the oath he had taken concerning Sosthenes
should be registered; but for me it was decreed, that I should be wrackt to
confess whether Melite were guilty of the murder or no; so my clothes being
taken off, I was mounted upon an engine, where I hung, while some brought
whips, some fire, another a wheel; Clinias all this while stood by weeping;
when suddenly the Priest of Diana was seen to come into the market place,
crowned with a laurel, which is a sign always that there are some strangers
come from foreign parts to do sacrifice to the goddess Diana: this accident
if it happen while any malefactor is about to be punished, causes his execution
to be deferred till the sacrifice is ended; therefore at that time I escaped.

Now who do you think was chief author of these solemnities, but Sostratus
Leucippes father? for when the Byzantians by the help of Diana had got the
victory over the Thracians, with whom they waged war, they thought fit by way
of gratitude to the goddess for her assistance, to offer her some great
sacrifice: besides, Diana her self had privately appeared to Sostratus in a
dream, foretelling him that he should at Ephesus find his daughter and his
nephew.

At the same time Leucippe perceiving the doors open where she was, and
fearing lest Sosthenes whom she saw go forth, should stand before the door,
she was fearful to steal away; at last seeing he came not in again, she
took heart of grace; for recounting with her self how many times before, and
how unexpectedly she had been freed out of greater dangers, and when she was
almost past all hope, she decreed to take hold of this fair opportunity
fortune offered her; for the temple of Diana being not far distant from the
place where she then was, out she went, and thither betook her self.

This Temple heretofore durst no woman who was free borne enter, but to men and
maidens it was always open, yet was it lawful for such women servants as were
accused by their masters for any crime, to fly thither as to an Asylum or
place of refuge: then did the Judges give sentence between the servant and her
manner; for if it did appear that the master had not wronged her, he was
enjoined by them to receive her again into his service, and solemnly to swear
that he would never any more so much as think of her running away; but if
the maids complaint were just, then she should continue there ever after, and
attend the altar of the goddess. While Sostratus was leading the Priest (who
had commanded the Court should break up toward the temple,) Leucippe entered
in and mist but a little of meeting her father.

When the assembly was broke up, and that I was set free, a great multitude
thronged about me, some of them pitied my case, others prayed for me, others
asked me questions: amongst whom Sostratus standing, as soon as he saw me knew
me, for as I told you at the beginning of my story, he was sometime at Tire
when the festivals of Hercules were celebrated, and there stayed a great while
before our flight; by reason whereof he might easily know me; especially
being told in a vision that he should find us both here. So coming nearer to
me he said, Here truly is Clitophon, but where is my Leucippe? Then I knowing
him, cast my eyes on the ground; while those that stood about me told him all
that I had accused my self of, which he hearing, sighed deeply, and smiting
himself on the head, flew in my face, and almost dug my eyes out; mean time
I was so far from resisting him, that I held my face to him while he struck
me. But Clinias stepping forth held his hand, and asked him what he meant, so
violently to fall upon one who loved Leucippe far dearer then he did himself,
and proffered to dye because she was supposed to be dead? Many other arguments
he added also to appease his fury. But he calling often on Diana, began thus
to complain; Did thou, O goddess, bid me come hither for this end? were
these thy predictions? I did believe thy dreams till now to be true, and was
confident that I should have found my daughter here, and see in stead of her I
find her murderer.

Clinias hearing him make mention of a dream, was not a little glad, and wished
Sostratus to be of good cheer, telling him that the goddess would not
falsify her word, and if he would bethe prophetique spirit which was in him,
he durst promise him that Leucippe without all question was yet alive, seeing
Diana to make good her promise, had delivered Clitophon out of the the
executioners hands. While they were yet talking, one of the keepers of the
temple run speedily thither, and brought news to the Priest, that a Virgin
which was a stranger was come to Diana for protection, and was at that time in
the Temple. When I heard this, I began to look more cheerfully, and was almost
revived again. Clinias turning to Sostratus said, My prophecies are true, you
see. They asked afterward of the Sexton whether she were fair or no: He told
them that, Diana excepted, he never saw one fairer in his life. Then I leaping
for joy asked whether her name were Leucippe; answer was made it was; and that
she said her Country was Byzantium, her father Sostratus: Clinias at this
gave a shout for joy, but Sostratus good man swooned. I cut a caper as high
almost as the clouds, and flew as if I had been driven by some executioner to
the temple, my keepers supposing I had been fled from them, run after me,
and cried out stop the thief; but had you seen how fast I run, you would
have said I had had Mercuries shoes on my feet: But as fast as I went some
caught me, and fell a beating of me, I began to take courage and strike them
again, but they went to hail me to prison: while we were bustling the priest
and Clinias were at hand; and Clinias asked them whither they would lead me,
seeing I was acquitted of that whereof I had accused my self. But Sostratus
more punctually clearing me, affirming that he himself was father to her whom
it was supposed I had slain, appealed them then, the standers by were so far
from hayling me to prison, that they were all most devoutly thankful to Diana,
that I had acquitted my self: The keepers not daring to let me go being a
condemned man, and they having no commission to do it, the Priest at Sostratus
entreaty was bale for me, that when ever I was summoned again, I should make
my appearance. On these conditions my fetters were taken off, and Sostratus and
I ran joyfully to the Temple of Diana. But the old proverb I found true, That
fame is swifter of foot than the speediest messenger, for though we made such
exrraordinary haste, yet was the news there before us. Leucippe had
intelligence of all, and specially of her fathers coming, which made her come
out of the temple to meet him, whom though she embraced, yet was her eyes all
the while on me: modesty and bashfulnesse made me refrain embracing her at
that time, yet did I look earnestly on her, and this was all the salutation
which passed between us at our meeting.

The end of the seventh Book.
THE EIGHTH BOOK.
The Argument.
Thersander and Clitophon fall out in the Temple, which begins a new suit
between them; to the Court they are both summoned, where not only theirs, but
Leucippe and Melites cases are both stoutly pleaded by their advocates: at last
it is decreed by the Judges, that trial should be made of Leucippes
virginity, by making her go down into Pans cave, where by the sound of a pipe
which hung there, they should know whether she were a maid or no. Clitophon
was to take his oath whether he had ever to do with Melite, but she her self
was to enter the fountain Styx, which would almost drown any perjured woman:
in all these trials they come clear off: and Thersander flies away with much
disgrace, fearing he should be stoned by the people. Leucippe after this tells
how it came to be thought that the pirates cut off her head; this one thing
only was wanting to the perfecting of the story: which afterward is shut up
with the joyful marriage of Clitophon and Leucippe.

BUT Thersander, while we were about to sit down and talk of what had past,
came running speedily into the Temple, bringing some witnesses with him, and
turning him about to the Priest, with a loud voice said, I give thee to
understand before al these which are present, that thou have offended against
the laws of our City, in releasing one who was condemned to dye, and in
sheltring here that lascivious queen my maid, that insatiate whore, whom I
would feign know upon what grounds thou should detain from me, she being my
servant.

I hearing Leucippes chastity to be questioned, and that he called her servant,
answered, Thou art the slave, the mad man, the adulterer, Leucippe is free
borne, and worthy the goddesses entertainment. Which when he heard, he said,
Dare you sirrah which are a condemned man, and bound* talk so saucily? and
with that fell upon me in a most violent manner, and struck me on the face,
that whole streams of blood issued out of my nosthrills; but while he was
beating me on the mouth, he chanced unwisely to dash his fingers against my
teeth; whereat fetching a deep sigh he started back, so my teeth, by wounding
his right hand, revenged the injury my nose received, after he saw his fingers
bleed, like an effeminate white-livered knave, he fell a howling, and left off
beating me, and I on the other side making as if I had not seen his hurt,
made all the Temple ring with my outcries and exclamations: Where shall we be
safe from the outrageous violence of such swashbucklers? What gods will take
care of us, seeing Diana has left us? we are beaten in the very Temple it
self, and have many a sore stroke inflicted on us even before the altars of
the gods, such outrageous facts as these are usually done in desert places,
where there may be no witness: but thou snatchest the sword of justice out of
the gods hands; and whereas this roof is wont to be a refuge for the most
notorious malefactors, I who am most innocent (poor wretch) while the goddess
looked on, have received a wound; who can deny but that the blow was as well
intended unto her as me? but his drunken fury could not be satisfied with
this, he must also wound me, and by shedding humane blood as they do in the
wars, defile this blessed pavement: did ever any one in Ephesus offer such a
sacrifice to Diana? On the altars of the Scythians, and of the inhabitants of
Taurica, for incense they burn man's flesh to their gods, and offer up the
blood on the altar of Diana: wherefore thou have of Ephesus made Scythia. Why
did thou not draw a sword at me? alas that needed not, seeing that bloody
hand of thine which has often been inured to murder, has done as much as if
it had been armed.

While I thus bemoaning my self, some which were in the Temple came flocking
about me, the most part whereof exclaimed against him as much as I did. The
Priest himself said, Now I see thy impudence, who durst commit this outrage in
the Temple: which made me boldly to say, You men of Ephesus, upon no other
grounds than I was now beaten, was I of a freeman and a citizen of no mean
place, made a slave, and brought in so great danger of my life, that had not
the goddess her self by detecting this man's false accusations freed me, I had
utterly perished. But now it is fit I go out of the Temple to wash my face,
for it were a great impiety in me if I should pollute these sacred waters with
blood, so unjustly shed.

Mean while Thersander, while some thrust him out of the Temple, as he
departed muttered these words: For your part sirrah, you are condemned already,
and I will take order your execution shall not any longer be deferred; but for
that punke which counterfeits her self a maid, the Pipe shall make trial of
her.

When he was gone I washed my face, and when supper time was come we were
kindly entertained by the Priest; but while we sat at meat I was so
conscious of the injury I had done Sostratus, that I durst not look him in the
face, which he perceiving was ashamed to look on me; so that we had but a
melancholy banquet of it: yet after two or three cups had gone round, and
Bacchus who is the sole author of all liberty of speech, had made us leave
blushing, the Priest first turning himself to Sostratus said, I pray guest
will you tell me the full story of this business, for it seems to me to
contain in it many delightful passages, besides such talk as this does very
well suite with a banquet of wine. Sostratus taking hold of this opportunity,
told him that what he could say was only this, His name was Sostratus, his
Country Byzantium, that he was uncle to me, and father to Leucippe: the rest
he bid me not be afraid to tell, saying whatsoever crosses I have had, I
ascribe not unto thee, but make my adverse fortune author of them: besides, the
remembrance of such dangers as we have escaped, are so far from grieving us,
that they much delight us.

Then I began to relate all that happened to me since I left Tire, every
thing in order: first my sailing and my shipwreck, next my voyage into Egypt,
and how the shepherds dealt with us; after that, how Leucippe was stolen away,
Menelaus plot to save her from being sacrificed, Charmides love, Chaereas
potion, the Pirates stealing away Leucippe, and the wound on my thigh, the
scarre whereof I showed them: But when I came to what past betwixt Melite and
me, I made the best of it I could, first relating her extraordinary love, then
my continence; how long she was a suitor to me, and how long I milked her
hopes; all that she said, and all that past betwixt us, except one thing, and
that was how when we sailed from Alexandria to Ephesus we both lay in one bed.
Last of all, the respect and attendance I had at her house, the costly banquets
she made me, my false accusation, and every thing which happened till the very
instant that Sostratus came to Ephesus, excepting only what I did in the ship:
and this I told them was all I could say of my self: what Leucippe had
undergone was far more: for she was made a slave, did dig and delve, was
deprived of the ornament of her head, her hair; every thing which she had
suffered, I set out with such excellent language, that when I came to talk of
Sosthenes and Thersander, I spoke more highly in her commendation than my own,
chiefly aiming by so extolling her, to make her father the more in love with
her, telling him that all the mischief and crosses that were possible to be
inflicted upon any poor wench she suffered, one only excepted, for she was
to this very minute as pure and undefiled a virgin, as she was at her departure
from Byzantium; which I would not have you thank me for, who though I fled,
never did that which was the end why I fled, but her, who kept her self chaste
amongst pirates, and withstood the violence of that impudent and immodest slave
Thersander, whose assaults were worse then any she received from them.

We agreed both of us to fly, yet was it love compelled us to it, so that our
fault is the more excuseable; nay more, we have in our whole journey behaved
our selves as brother and sister each to other; and my virginity (if a man may
be properly said to be a maid) I have kept untouched, as well as Leucippe, who
has lately betaken her self to the temple of Diana.

But, O Lady Venus, think not thy self neglected, that we have not yet
sacrificed unto thee, he which should have made up the match was absent, but
now is come, wherefore be propitious to thy servants* while I was speaking
this the Priest was amazed, but Sostratus all the while I related his daughters
miseries wept. When I had done I told them that they had both our stories; now
I would request the priest to tell me one thing, what were the meaning of
Thersanders last words when he went angry out of the temple, and threatened
Leucippe with a pipe? You do well to ask, says he, and it were discourtesie in
us who know it, if we should not tell you. Do you not see you grove behind the
temple? in it is a cave, into which none but maids can enter, a little within
the door there hangs a pipe: which kind of instrument if it be in use
amongst you at Byzantium, you well understand my meaning, but if any of you be
so unskilful in music, as to be ignorant of it, I will relate the whole
story of Pan, as much I mean as belongs to the explaining of this.

A Pipe consists of many reeds compacted into one, which being joined one to
the side of another, give but one sound, it is on both sides alike, but one
reed is longer then another, yet are they proportioned so that there is no
inequality in their sounds, for the uppermost being biggest, gives the deeper
sound, the lowermost a more shrill, wherefore most necessary it is that there
should be one in the midst of an indifferent size, which qualifying the other
two sounds might make the consent true.

This Pipe when you first put it to your mouth, is not much unlike Pallas fife,
only that your mouth is the maine thing you use to that, and to this your
fingers: he that plays on this stops all the holes except one, out of which
is breath goes: but he that plays on the fife, puts his mouth to that hole
which he would have sound, and so goes from one to another as he has
occasion: Time was when this pipe was a most beautiful virgin: who flying from
Pan which was in love with her, betook her self into a thick wood, Pan
following her laid hands on her, and held her fast by the hair, supposing that
she was sure his own, but immediately he found that his hand grasped nothing
but a few flagges and reeds, which they say sprang up in the place where she
vanished; these in a fury he presently cut up, as supposing that they had
bereaved him of his love; but not finding the maid in the reeds where he
thought she was hid, he sighed greatly, as if he had been guilty of her
death* then gathering the broken flagges together which he supposed to be her
members, he bganne to kiss them and embrace them: at length what with his
kissing, and sighing, his breath got into them, and they began to make a most
melodious noise, by which means the Pipe got that sound. This Pipe the god Pan
himself hung up in yonder cave, and as it is commonly reported he comes ever
and anon to play a lesson on it: In succeeding times the inhabitants of this
place thinking to curry favor with Diana, consecrated this Pipe to her, but
upon condition, that none but maids should enter the pl^ce where it hung:
Wherefore when any maids chastity is suspected, the people accompany her to the
door. Now the manner of trial is this; she is attired in a long white robe,
enters the cave, and has the doors made fast upon her: if she be chaste those
which stand without hear a most sweet and divine harmony of music, whether
the Echo the place gives be the cause of it, or whether Pan himself play the
musician, I cannot tell. Immediately after the doors rush open of their own
accord, and the Virgin comes out crowned with a garland of pine leaves. But if
she which goes in be unchaste, you shall hear nothing but a lamentable
howling; at which, the people forsake the place, and the woman in the den: but
three days after, a Virgin who has the overseeing of it, enters in, finds the
Pipe thrown on the ground, but she which went in three days before is never
more seen.

This trial must you be put to, think with your selves how sad the event is:
if Leucippe be chaste, (which from my heart I wish) go joyfully to work, stand
to the trial of it, and may the Pipe be ever propitious to you: but if she
be not (for you eannot tell how many things she has suffered against her
will, having fallen so often into the hands of thieves and robbers).

Here Leucippe took off the Priest ere he had done speaking, and said, Be not
so sollicitous for me, Sir, let me alone, I will gladly enter the cave, where
this pipe is. It very well pleases me, says the priest, for I wish thee all
chastity and felicity.

When evening drew near, every one of us went to our lodging where the Priest
appointed us: Clinias supt not with us that night, but at his Inn where he
supt the day before, because we would not be burdensome to our Host. Sostratus
hearing the story of the Pipe, began to suspect us both much, lest Leucippe
should be no maid, yet for bashfulnesse we should be ashamed to confess it to
him; which made me becken to her that she should resolve her father of that
doubt; she presently understood the reason why I made signs to her, for she
well perceived that her father was loath to condescend that she should enter
the cave, which made her presently invent some pretty arguments to persuade
him; and taking her leave of him as she was going to bed* she desired him to
believe all was told him, for so Diana help her she told him nothing but truth.

The day after all things necessary being in a readiness, the Priest and
Sostratus did sacrifice, where was present a great assembly, who with great
shouts and acclamations gave thanks to the goddess Diana. Thersander (for he
was present too) having found out the judge, went to him and said, Sir, I
desire our day of appearance may be deferred till to morrow, for him whom you
yesterday condemned, has some body or other set free, nor can Sosthenes any
where be found. So his suit was granted, and we had more time to provide our
selves against we were to appear. Which time when it was come, Thersander
made this long Oration.

What shall I say, or where shall I begin my speech? whom shall I first accuse,
and whom last? alas I know not: for I am to speak of so many crimes, and so
many men who have been interessed in them, which crimes are so great, and the
evidences I have for what I speak greater, that I fear the little model of
this short accusation of mine will scarce contain them. What my mind
conceives, I fear my tongue will never be able to utter, for ere I have spoken
one thing, twenty new things are dictated to my fancy. If adulterers shall kill
other men's servants, cutters defile other men's wives, pandars release men
condemned to die, harlots profane the most holy temples of the gods, servants
be suffered to accuse their masters, who will think that either adultery,
sacrilege, murder, outrage, nay any villainy is unlawful? One thing I pray
you; you condemn some one to dye, give charge that he be kept close prisoner;
this man in stead of suffering death is richly attired, comes into the Court,
sits cheek by jole with the best freeman of us all, nay dares revile not
only me, but your grave fatherhoods, contemn your laws, and slight your
decrees.

READ WHAT the court has decreed. You hear what sentence passed upon him whom
I lately accused. Clitophons doom which he had from you is death, why does not
then the hangman draw him up to the wrack? why does he not poison him, the day
appointed for his execution is past, and in law he is a dead man already. And
what forsooth can you say to this good master Priest? you that are so religious
and pious a man, where do you find it lawful I pray, to set one free, who by
the decree of the chiefest Magistrates of our City, nay by the consent of so
frequent an assembly was adjudged to death? but perhaps you have more
authority than either President or Magistrate; if it be so, I pray good master
President will you be pleased to descend from your seat, let the whole
government of the City, and disposing of all laws be committed to this
gentleman, seeing you have not so much authority left you as to command a
villain to be executed; this man quits whom he pleases: nay faith Sir, stand
not any longer among us as a private man, I pray mount into master Presidents
chair, and do us right, or if you will let law and justice go hang, that you
may be said in a more tyrannical manner to reign over us. I would not have
you think your self a man any longer, but share honor with Diana, whose
authority thou have most arrogantly usurped; for it appertains to her only
to shelter those whose causes the judges know not, and though she her self
never loosed any one out of prison, or violently snatched an offender out of the
hands of the executioner (for the altars of the gods use to be a refuge for
miserable, not wicked men) yet you forsooth, above all the rest, have freed the
guilty from their bonds, and set condemned men at liberty; which in my mind is
little better than to go to outvie Diana. But further, thou have turned a
Temple into a jail, by making that murderer and that adulteress Diana's
guests. O horrid crime! the Temple of our chaste goddess is polluted with an
adulteress! for I was an eyewitness of the banquet and entertainment thou
made her there. But this I fear me is not all, I pray heaven send you turned
it not into a stews, by lying with her, and that the actions of pandars and
prostitutes in some venereous cell were not far honester than yours in the
Temple. And this I had to speak in the first place of these two, the one
whereof I make no doubt but shall suffer severely for his rash impudence; the
other I beseech you that you command presently to be put to death.

Now it is requisite that I speak of Melite, who is here accused of adultery,
of whom I need not speak much, seeing it was determined lately by the Court
that her two maids should be examined; wherefore my desire is they be brought
in, if they shall stiffely swear, as formerly they did when they were wrackt
to confession, that during my absence, this condemned person had nothing to do
with my wife, neither as an husband, nor as an adulterer, I see no reason but
that I should acquit her: but if they shall recant what they have formerly
spoken, my wife is to loose her portion, and he by the law is to suffer death;
who whether he die for adultery, or for murder, it is no great matter, for he
is guilty of both: nor can death be a sufficient punishment for him, seeing
when he has suffered for one, he is liable to suffer for the other.

It remains now that I speak somewhat of this wench my servant, and this
reverend graybeard which counterfeits himself her father, but ere I proceed I
expect your censures on these.

After this steps me forth the priest, an excellent orator, and one very well
verst in Aristophanes; who most comically and wittily inveighed against the
dissolute youth of Thersander, in this manner; That Thersander should so
scurrilously rail upon honest men, not only in the presence of this judicious
assembly, but Diana her self, is an argument that he is a man of a very foul
mouth; which were more tolerable, had this been the first time of his offending
in this kind, but he has been trained up to it from his infancy, for when
he was but a boy he kept most lewd company, by which means he wanted no
tutors; he pretended love of learning in his minority, but what he then did
and suffered, I blush to speak; for leaving his fathers house, he hired him a
small cottage, where partly by singing in the market place, and partly by other
dishonest and indirect means he lived, yet was not publicly detected to the
world: This and worse have we been eye witnesses of. Thus lived he while he
was young, when he grew older whatsoever he had formerly done in private,
then he did openly, for growing bigger, and his former means of living
failing, he had nothing to maintain himself but that foul mouth of his,
which he so abused, that out of it he would vomit nothing but slanderous
accusations, and scurrilous contumelies, on every one he met, spitting out the
venom with his tongue that he had before nourisht in his heart: that what I
now speak is truth, I refer my self to this assembly, who have heard how
reproachfully he has reviled one, whom the city have made choice of for
their priest. Had I lived any where but in this City where you your selves
have been eye witnesses of my conversation, I know it were most expedient that
I should take more pains in clearing my self, but you your selves being not
ignorant how unlikely the greatest part of his accusation is to be true, I
shall quit my self only of some part of it.

Thou have set one at liberty (says he) who was condemned, and here he takes
occasion to be very angry with me, calling me tyrant, and giving me many
other most sarcasticall terms, as if to save the innocent and uncondemned were
tyranny, but to be a detractour were no vice.

But first Thersander let us know by what law thou did cast this man into
prison? which of the Judges censured him? or did the president give charge he
should be bound? but let him be guilty of all which thou laist to his charge,
yet is it the duty of the law, which has authority both over thee and me, to
command a man to be fettered; one man can have no further power over another
then that shall please to afford him. But if you will arrogate this to your
self, then pray you shut up the door of the market place, pull down the
court, turn the magistrates out of their places. What thou objectedst to me
even now, I may very well retort upon thee. Pray Master President will you come
down from your seat, for you do but bear the name, he bears the office. He
does not only what you ought, but also more then you can do: you do nothing
without the general consent of your counsel, you imprison no man in your
house, or give sentence in huggermugger, but upon your seat here in public.
But this gentleman forsooth is President, counsel, judge, people, and all
himself; he makes his house a Bridewell, where he passes sentence on men,
commands them to be bound; and has no fitter time to choose for the doing of
it then the evening: a fine judge in faith, and a wise man to cry out that I
released one condemned to dye: Well, let us examine the cause a little further,
tell me first why he was condemned? you say because he was guilty: guilty of
what? why of murder: then sure he killed some body? but sure you cannot tell
who it was; for she which he is accused for murdering, stands before thee,
yet art not thou ashamed to persist in so notorious a lie. Look on her well,
she is no phantasme, nor has Pluto sent a ghost hither to delude us: thou art
rather worthy of a double death, who have often times assayed to kill this
young man, and have killed the maid already almost, by thy railing on her; nay
thou would have killed her indeed, for we heard what prankes you played in
the Country with her, where she had utterly been lost, had not Diana been so
propitious as to deliver her out of the hands of thee and Sosthenes, whom thou
have now shifted out of the way. Art thou not ashamed, not only barely to
accuse, but publicly to demonstrate against these poor strangers? thus much
I had to say for my self, the defense of these strangers causes I leave to
these men.

When a famous advocate was about to plead for me and Melite, another of
Thersanders advocates whose name was Sopater, told my advocate, whom they
called Nicostratus, that it was his turn next to plead against those
adulterers, for the whole scope of Thersanders speech was against the Priest,
and did but glance at other matters: telling my advocate further, that as soon
as he had finished his accusation, he should have time to put in his defense:
so with a most impudent look, and a tongue inured to lying, he began.

You have heard the scurrilous and false tales which this babbling priest has
invented of Thersander, by retorting upon him what was more applicable to
himself: all that Thersander laid to his charge was most true, for it is most
evident that he set Clitophon free, that he entertained a strumpet and an
adulterer in the Temple: but he thinking to make Thersander odious in the eyes
of this assembly, rippes up a rhapsodie of vices whereof Thersander was never
guilty, which me thinks is a thing very ill beseeming a man of his coat, for
of all things a priest should carry a good tongue in his mouth, (that I may
whip him with his own rod.) But to come to the point: and passing over the
former part of his speech, which would have better be fitted a Theater, than
the Court, let us come I say to that part wherein he so much complains of us
for committing one to prison whom we had manifestly deprehended in the very act
of adultery: wherein I wonder much that he being a priest should take so much
pains in the patronizing of this exolete couple; sure it is to be suspected
that their looks have bewitched him, and that the beauty of the wench has
ensnared him; In Faith say which of them do thou love best, a man may without
offense ask you the question, for you eat together, drink together, and lie
together, and what you then do no body knows; I fear you turn the Temple
of Diana into the Temple of Venus. I hope we shall call your priesthood in
question anon, and examine whether these premises rightly considered, you are a
fit man for the place: for as touching Thersanders conversation, how modestly,
how incorruptly he has lived from his childhood, all the world knows: when he
was of years he was legitimately married, though I must confess he was much
deceived in the choice of his wife; for relying too much on her nobility and
wealth, he found she proved another gates woman than he took her for: for it
is very probable that she had to do with a great many men, which the good man
her husband never knew of, but at length she grew to such a height of
impudence, that she played the whore publicly: and while her husband had
occasion but to step a little out of the way, she taking this to be a very
opportune time to satisfy her lust, entertained this lascivious youth, whom
she could not be content to play the whore with in Alexandria, but must
cross the sea with him, and bring him hither to Ephesus; where she not only
lay with him, but even while the very Sailors stood and looked on most wantonly
embraced him: O insatiate miscreants, who have defiled both sea and land,
Egypt and Ionia! I have heard of many who have unawares slipped into this vice,
yet would never again run voluntarily into it, as abhorring the bestiality
of it; or if they did, yet have they concealed it: but this woman blows a
trumpet, and sets a crier to proclaim it; all Ephesus must take notice of this
smooth-faced youth, whom she without any shame brought from a far country,
and showed about the City, being as proud of such a prize, as a Merchant is of
some costly wares which he has transported. But then she answers that she
thought her husband had been dead: that^s well answered, for were it so, then
she were quite free, seeing her husband being dead, the name of adultery dies
with him.

Here Thersander interrupted Sopater in his speech, and said, What I formerly
proposed needs no further examination: as touching Melite, and her which is
reported to be daughter to him who is chief author of this sacrifice (though
she be truly my servant) I have these conditions drawn. REPEAT them.

Thersander concerning Melite and Leucippe (for so they say this prostitute is
called) proposes these conditions: First for Melite, that since she constantly
affirms that she never had to do either with this stranger, or any man else in
his absence, that first she swear it, next for further trial go down into
the fountain of Styx; where if it shall appear that she is not forsworn, I
will willingly yield that she shall be dismissed. Next for Leucippe, if it
appear she be a woman, she shall serve out her time to me, but if she say she
be a maid, she shall be locked into the Cave where Pans pipe hangs.

To these conditions we gladly agreed, as being confident of Leucippes
virginity: and on the other side Melite was sure that during the time
Thersander was from home, nothing had past between her and me but discourse,
which made her say thus to her husband: The conditions I will gladly embrace,
nay more, will swear that when thou wast from home neither citizen nor
stranger had to do with me: but if it shall appear that thou have wrongfully
accused me, what punishment will thou be content to suffer? Thersander
answered, whatsoever the judges shall please to inflict on me. After this the
assembly was dismissed, and it was concluded on, that the next day trial should
be made of each particular contained in the conditions.

The story of the fountain of Styx was this. There was sometime a very
beautiful virgin called Rhodope, who delighted much in hunting, for swiftness
of foot, and skill in casting a dart most exquisite; her attire used to be a
robe reaching down to her knees, and girt about with a girdle, her hair
short, with a coronet on her head. Diana on a time seeing her, took a liking
to her, and led her a hunting, where what they took was equally divided
between them; Rhodope for the favor she received at Dianas hands, made a vow
to keep her virginity, and never to come in the company of man: which when
Venus perceived, she was enraged, and determined with her self to revenge the
arrogance of this maid, who seemed thus to slight her: for it fortuned that
there was a youth of Ephesus, as handsome a man as she was a woman, whose name
was Euthynicus, delighted as much with hunting as Rhodope was, and as much
detesting the company of women, as she of men; as they went forth one day both
a hunting, Venus cunningly stole into the wood, and brought the two wild
beasts, which they hunted in several parts of the wood, together: by and by
Diana being gone, she meets with her son, to whom she says thus: See thou
not (strippling) our two enemies yonder, nay the wench has been so malapert
that she has taken a solemn oath against us; thou see them following their
prey, do thou play the huntsman too, and first work thy revenge on that
saucie wench; she is about to shoot the Dear, do thou shoot her; I make no
doubt but thou will come nearer the mark than she; so both of them shot
together, the maid at the Dear, and wounded her on the shoulder; Cupid at the
maid, and wounded her on the heart, the force whereof was so great, that she
was straightway in love with Euthynicus, and not long after Cupid let fly an
arrow at him, and he was as much in love with her; after which they began to
look one upon the other: but in a short time in stead of their wounds, which
they made a shift to cure, they had nothing left but scarres; for love
conducted them into the cave in which this fountain is where they both broke
their oaths. Diana knowing what had past, and seeing Venus smile, turned the
maid into a fountain, which sprang up in the same place where she lost her
virginity. Whence it comes to pass that when any one is accused of
unchastitie, she is made go down into that fountain, the water whereof reaches
but up to the anckles. The trial of her chastity is thus: She which is
accused wrongfully, takes her oath that her accusation is false, and having her
oath written in a little scrowle, it is tied about her neck, with which she
descends into the fountain; if she have sworn truly, the water remains
unmoved; but if falsely, it swells on a sudden up as high as her neck, and
covers the scrowle.

While we were yet in talk evening grew on, and each of us parted to our
lodging: the day after all the whole city was assembled, amongst whom
Thersander was the chiefest, and a busy spectator. So Leucippe being attired
in a holy robe, woven of the finest silk, and girt about her, also having her
head bound up with purple ribbonds, and bare footed, entered the cave most
maiden like. Which when I saw I began to say to my self, without all question
Leucippe thou art a virgin; yet when I think with my self what a perilous
thing this love is, I am compeld to be afraid lest thou also should be turned
into a pipe. She did fly from Pan, and had room enough, but should Pan have a
mind to follow thee, he may easily catch thee: but O god Pan be propitious
unto us, nor violate the laws of this place, which we so religiously have
observed; restore Leucippe as safe and sound as she went in, for that was the
compact betwixt thee and Diana.

Presently after this was a most delicate soft sound heard, so sweet, that none
of the standers by had ever heard the like: not long after the doors of the
cave opened of their own accord, and Leucippe came forth, at which the whole
multitude applauded her much, and railed on Thersander: but how glad I was no
tongue can express. Having got this first and greatest victory, on we went to
the fountain of Styx, to make trial of the other part of the condition; the
people were there to look on, and all things were in a readiness, so Melite
tied the scrowle about her neck, and went very courageously into the
fountain; the water moved not a jot, nor rose any higher than her anckles;
wherefore the time appointed for her to stay in being expired, the President
led the woman out by the hand.

Thersander seeing he had been foiled in two combats, having little hopes of
conquering in the third, and fearing lest he should be stoned by the people,
ran home with what speed he could, and the next night fled out of the City;
for hearing how Melite had sent out two of her servants to seek Sosthenes, and
that Sosthenes was found, he thought it not safe to come any more to
examination, lest Sosthenes confessing all, his knaverie should out. Mean
while Sosthenes was committed to prison. We after all these perplexities were
with great commendations set free.

The day after Sosthenes being led by the Sergeants before the Judge, when he
saw he was like to be wrackt, of his own accord confessed all that he had
suggested to Thersander, and all which Thersander attempted to do; nay every
word which had past between them concerning Leucippe, after which he was sent
back to jail. Thersander though absent was perpetually banished. We were
entertained as before we had been by the Priest, where we went on with those
stories we had before omitted, but especially Leucippe, not standng in fear of
her father, seeing she was proved to be a maid, told all which had happened to
her, with a great deal of delight; when she was come to the story of Pharus
and the pirates, I bid her she should untie the riddle of cutting off her head,
and tell us what slight the pirates used to delude us; for there was this
only knot to be loosed. Then she told us, These pirates having got a whore
into the Ship, by promising her that she should be married to one of the
mariners, she poor wretch little dreaming to what end she was brought
thither, willingly accepted their profer; after they had stole me away, they
spyed another Ship making haste after them; with that they attired her in my
apparel, and set her in the fore part of the Ship, that those who pursued
them might see her the better, at length they cut off the poor wenches head as
you saw and tumbled her body into the sea; her head they kept a while in the
Ship, but when they saw no body pursued after them, they cast that after the
body: whether this were the reason, or whether they thought to make more money
of me than of her, I cannot tell: this I am sure of, that she poor wretch was
killed in stead of me, to delude those which pursued after them; but Chereas
who was the chief man to entice her in, and then to slay her, was justly
punished; for when the rest of the pirates were unwilling that he should have
me, because a little before he had one which he had made a great deal of
money of, and denied them to have share with him, the like he would have done
by me, to which end he pleaded the matter stoutly with them, affirming that I
was meat for him only, and that he hired them to steal me away, that I might
be only his; these things while he confidently urged, and none of them would
consent unto, one which was by cut off his head, which me thinks was a
punishment very justly inflicted on him for the wrong which he had done to me.
Two days after, the pirates being cast on a strange shore, sold me to one
Sosthenes a merchant.

Leucippe having ended her story, Sostratus said, Go to now, seeing you have
told all your fortunes, give me leave to tell you what has passed between
C^lligo and Callisthenes. I hearing my sister named, told him I would very
gladly listen, if she were yet alive. Then he began to tell of the Oracle, the
sacrifice, the pinnace, and all which I before told you; adding this also, that
when Callisthenes afterward perceived his mistake, and that Calligo was my
sister, though he were thus frustrated of his expectation, yet did he most
entirely love her, and kneeling down to her, said, Think me not, mistress, a
thief or pirate any longer, for I am a gentleman borne, and my country is
Byzantium, I confess I laid wait for thee, yet was it love compelled me to it,
in recompense whereof I here wholly devote my self to thee, and will for ever
be thy bondsman; nor shall only my self, but also my fortunes, which are far
greater than ever thy father could give thee, be at thy service; but which is
more, thou shall keep thy virginity unspotted as long as thou please: with
these fair speeches (for he was a man not only strong to persuade, but withal
very comely, and above measure eloquent) he obtained his desire. After he came
to Byzantium he gave her a great deal of money, and attired her most richly
with gold and precious stones, and as he found her a maid, so he restored
her. He was quite changed from what he had formerly been, for he began to
be most elegant, temperate, modest in all his actions, nay he had learned to
give respect to his betters, to salute every one he met; and as he had formerly
been most profuse in his expenses, he turned his prodigality into
liberality, releeving those which were in want, that all the world wondered how
on a sudden he became so good a husband; but me above all the rest he
respected: nor was my love to him wanting, and I began to see that that which
in him I had formerly thought to be luxury, was but a kind of free spirit;
which made me think on that which was reported of Themistocles, how in his
youth he was most dissolute, but when he came to riper years, for prudence
and valor he outstript all the Athenians. This made me sorry that I had
formerly denied him my daughter; for he did not a little respect me, calling me
nothing but father. Nor was he meanly skilled in chivalry, for at the jousts
and tournaments he behaved himself most courageously, having been always
used to riding, though formerly for pleasure, yet now for valor he did it: he
likewise augmented the public treasury much by many large donations of his
own, in recompense whereof he was made Captain of the host with me, in which
place he showed himself not only respective, but observant to me. After we
had got the victory he was sent to Tire to sacrifice to Hercules, and I hither
to Diana; but ere we parted, he took me by the hand, and said, what I did
formerly intend against Calligo, I desire father you would not remember, seeing
it was nothing in me but rashness of youth; but think on what upon more
mature judgment I have done: how I have preserved her virginity, nay and in
time of war, when many men's lips would have watered at so fair a prize; how
I have further decreed to carry her to Tire to her father, where according to
the custom of our land, my desire is to marry her; which if he deny me, let
him keep his daughter, for I have left her as I found her; though perhaps she
may have many a worse match than I am, and I will read you the letters which I
wrote in Callisthenes behalf to my brother, wherein I did set forth his
generositie, his skill in military affairs, and his whole worth to the full.
If it be so that the Counsel shall judge the cause on our side, we will first
sail to Byzantium, next to Tire.

Here when he had made an end of speaking, we parted each of us to the same
lodging we lay in the day before. The day after Clinias came and told us that
Thersander was shifted out of the way, that he might shift off the day of his
trial; we having expected him three days, for the day of appearance was
rejourned no longer; meeting the President, who cleared us by law, took
shipping, and having a gentle gale of wind, arrived at Byzantium, after this to
Tire we went, where we consummated our long desired marriage: here having
stayed two days, we met Callisthenes, and found our father sacrificing for
his daughters marriage, in which we assisted him, and prayed the gods that
they would prosper all our joyful marriages, intending that having vvintered
there, we would afterward return to Byzantium.

The end of the Loves of Clitophon and Leucippe.

