By the King.
RIyht Trusty, Etc. We greet you well.
As that Sovereignty which under God we hold over you, tyeth us to take care
for your safeties and welfare, so the love of subjects and bond of duty ties
you to aid and assist us in those actions which have no other end, but the
common preservation both of us and your selves; In which affairs, such has
been our care, and so exceeding great our charge, as that the sale of a great
part of our Jewels, Plate, and lands (besides the aids and loanes already had
of our people) have not sufficed the necessities of these public services.
Wherefore as our Ancestors, Kings and Queens of this Realm, have ever used
upon urgent necessities, for the common defense (occasions nor time not
permitting the calling of their people in general) to resort unto the private
helps of those whom they pleased to choose; So we not doubting of your obedience
in this behalf, and fidelity you bear toward the surety of our person,
defense of your Country, maintenance of Religion and our Allies: (The safeguard
of all which, all good subjects ought so much to tender, as we look you should
not fail to strain both your credit and your self heartily to maintain and
defend) do for these causes require of you, by virtue of these presents, the
sum of (...) which we do promise in the name of us, our heirs and
successors, to repay to you or your assigns within one year after the payment
thereof to the Collector. The person that we have appointed to collect (...) to
whose hands we do require you to send it, within ten days after you have
received this Privy Seal, which together with the Collectors acquittance,
shall be sufficient warrant unto the Officers of our Receipt for the repayment
thereof at the time limited. And because we make our full account of the
receipt of so much money at your hands, we require you in no wise to fail
hereof.

Given under our Privy Seal at our Palace of Westminster, the (...) day of
(...) in the (...) year of our Reign of England, Scotland, ffrance and
Ireland.

