Take up and read* Take up and read. ST. AUGUSTINES Confessions translatedand
With some marginall notes illustrated.

By WIlliam Watts. Rector of St. Albanes, Woodstreete.



Saint Augustines Confessions translated: AND With some marginall notes
illustrated.

WHEREIN, Diverse Antiquities are explayned; And the marginall notes of a former
Popish Translation, answered.

BY William Watts, Rector of St. Albanes, Woodstreete.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN NORTON, for JOHN PARTRIDGE: and are to be sold at the
sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard, 1631.



TO THE NOble and Religious Lady, the Lady Elizabeth Hare, Wife to the
Honorable Sir John Hare of Srow in Norff. and daughter to the Right Honorable
Thomas Lord Couentry, Lord Keeper of the great Seal, etc.
Madam,
HOW great advantage a native disposition to goodness is, we confess all; all
know how much the goodness of the Stock, conferres toward the sweetness of
the Fruit. And yet have our Gardeners observed another advancement of Nature:
namely, how wonderfully the goodness of the Stock, is improued by the virtue
of the Cyon: and that it is the Graft, and not the Plant alone, which renders the
fruit more pleasant. Besides that natural preeminence therefore which your
Ladyship has, to be honorably descended; you are (as the world acknowledges)
virtuously descended also (your Stock is good) and you are (which the world
knows not) high borne too (your Cyon is better) borne from above; not only
once, but again; and I fully persuade my self, that I have long since seen
many vnsayned assurances of it. I must not tempt your Ladyship with your own
praises (your neighbors can speak forth them) and did I not know you to be
most discreetly humble, I might not have said so much. Let me now be bold (good
Madame) to add one Counsel after many Commendations, (it shall be but such a
one as I know you most apt to take) give me leave to put you in mind, that all this, though the chief, yet is it not the only Engagement your Ladyship
stands obliged to Almighty God in; but that you owe him, above most women, a
daily thankfulness both for his domesticke and worldly blessings. God has
endowed your Ladyship with a most plentiful fortune: And above that, with a
wellchosen and a towardly Gentleman, one of the early hopes and praises of his
Country; a yoake-fellow equal to your Self in blood, in youth, in personage:
And to increase all these blessings, has God increast you both, with a sweet
and numerous Issue, even so numerous, that your Olive branches are already
round about your table: So that (blessed be God) neither of you both are likely
to want Heirs, nor they, Inheritances. Thus has God blessed you, as he did
Joseph, with blessings of the Heaven Genesis 49. 25
above, and blessings of the Deep beneath, blessings of the breasts and of the
womb. And what could God have done more to his Vine? And what remains for your
Ladyship to do, but to cultiuate, to p^une, and to water both Stock and Cyon,
with a religious industry? I know your Ladyship to be addicted as well to the
Closet, as to the Church; to private Reading, as to public Hearing: and I have
heretofare served your Ladyship in both. In thankfulness therefore for your
salt which I have eaten, ^here make present of a most fit instrument for your
Spiritual culture, St. Austens own Pruning knife, by which He cut off his
sins by Repentance: an exercise for your Closet devotion; the devout st piece
of all St. Austen, and the vsefullest: by which, Confession is made unto
Salvation. I Romans 10. 10
direct not this to your Name by any chance, but upon deliborate choice: for I
presume to be so privy to the way of your Religion, as to know that even this
Subject of Private Confessions will much please you. It will, I hope, do your
soul good; Let it therefore, I beseech you Madam, partake again of your
Goodness: Countenance it, I entreat your Ladyship, with your Nime, and defend
it with the privilege of a Ladies Honor, which no man (I hope) will be so
unmannerly as to vivlate. God bless your Honored Husband, and Self, and
Children, and Kindred, and Family, with Grace in this Life, and with Glory in
the next. Thus prays he affectionately, who still remains,

Madame, Your good Ladyships obliged to honor and serve you, William VVatts.

To the devout Reader,
FOr such a one, I hope this book will make thee. I am forced for want of
paper, to turn an Epistle into an excuse. If thou here missest the Preface;
know, that the swelling of the volum shut it out. This Translation I began for
the exercise of my Let^ten Devotions; but I quickly found it to exercise more
then my Devotion: it exercised my skill, (all I had:) it exercised my Patience,
it exercised my Friends too (for it is incomparably the hardest task that ever I
yet undertook) the Press wrought, as fast as I wrote, and I could not recall
what was past. Some things therefore may be ouerslipt; but neither many, I hope
nor material to Religion, nor so many by many, as those of the former
Translation, which misled me as much as helped me, especially the two first books,
when I too much trusted him. Who was the Author of it, I assuredly know not:
some name Parsons; others, name a knight. That I sometimes touch him too tartly,
was my a^ale against him; not only for being so Arrantly, Partially Popish;
but for being so spiteful to the Holy Scriptures; which he never honors with
quoting in his margent; every where debases, by advancing the Romish Church
above them. If finding himself aggrieued, he shall in Print discover himself
against me; I hope this of mine will one day come to a second Impression. Now
in the mean time I humbly desire the Devout Reader, to be a Courteous
Censurer: and I promise to send any man as many Thanks, as he shall fairly
send me word of Faults, escaped in my book. God bless the Readers; and send
them all to make confession unto Salvation.

So prays your Chaplayne the Translater, W. W.

St. Augustines own testimony of this Book, taken out of his Retractations.
THe thirteen books of my Confessions, both of my sins, and good deeds, do
praise God, who is both just and good; and do excite, both the affection, and
understanding of man toward him. In the mean time, for as much as concerns
me, they wrought this effect, when I wrote them and so they yet do, when now I
read them. What others find thereby, let themselves observe; but this I know,
That they have much pleased and do much please many of my brethren. From the
first, th^^ ^^ the whole tenth Book, they are written of my self; in the
three Books following, of the holy Scripture; from that place where it is said,
In the beginning God made heaven and earth, till he speaks of the Rest of the
Sabbath. In the fourth book, when I confessed the misery of my mind; upon
occasion of my friends (...), says, I hat my soul was, as it were made one,
of both our souls, and that therefore it was perhaps, that I feared to dye,
lest so he might wholly dye, whom I extremely loved, this seems rather alight
kind of Declamation, then a serious Confession. Though yet howsoever, that
impertinency besomewhat moderated, by the addition of this word, perhaps, which
then I used. And that also, which I said in the thirteenth book, The fir^^ament
was made, between those superior spiritual waters, and these inferior
corporeal waters, was not consider attuely enough expressed. But the truth
hereof, is extremely hard to be discovered. This work begins thus: Great
art thou, O Lord, and highly worthy to be praised.

SAINT AUGUSTINES Confessions. THE FIRST BOOK.
CHAP. 1. (...) admires Gods Majesty, and is inflamed with a deep desire of
praising him.
GREAT art Psalm. 147. 5.
Thou, (O Lord) and greatly to be praised: great is thy power, ^^ and thy
wisdom is infinite. And man, who being a part of what thou have created, is
desirous to praise thee; this man bearing about his own mortality with him,
carrying about him a testimony of his own sin (even this testimony, That God
James 4. 6.
resists the proud;) yet this Man, this part of what thou has^ created, is
desirous to praise thee thou so sweetly provokest him that he even delights
to prai^ thee: For thou have created u^ for thy self, and our heart can not be
quieted till it may find repose in thee. Grant me (Lord to know and understand
what ought first to do, whether ca^ upon thee, or praise thee? an^ which ought
to be first, to know thee, or to call upon thee?

2. But who can rightly call up thee, that is yet ignorant of thee for such an
one may, in stead ^ thee call upon another. Or a^ thou rather (first) called
upon that thou may so come to b^ known? but how then shall Romans 10. 14.
they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe
without a Preacher? And again, They Mat. 7. 7.
shall praise the Lord that seek after him: For, They that ^eeke, shall find;
and finding, ^hey shall praise him. Thee will seek, O Lord, calling upon ^ee;
and I will call upon thee, ^eleeving in thee: for thou have ^eene declared unto
us. My faith O Lord) calls upon thee, which ^ou have given me, which thou ^st
inspired into me; even by the ^^^anity of thy Son, and by ^e ministry of thy
Preacher. He mea^e either the Holy Ghost, or S. Ambrose, who converted him.


CHAP. 2. Man has his being from God; ^and that God is in Man, and Man in God.
ANd how shall I call upon my God, my Lord, and God? because that when invoke
him, I call him into m^ self: and what place is there ^^ me, fit for my God to
come in to me by, whither God man come into me; even that Go^ which made
Heaven and Earth Is it so, my Lord God? is the any thing in me capable of the^
Nay, can both Heaven and ea^ which thou have made, and which thou have made me,
any wise contain thee?

2. Or else because whatsoe^^^ Is, could not subsist witha^^ thee, must it
follow thereup that what soever has being endued with a capability of the
since therefore I also am son^ what, how do I entreat the^ come into me, who
could not unless thou were (first) in ^^ For I am not now in Hell; ^ yet thou
art there: For if I ^ Psalm. 132. 8.
down into Hell, thou art t^ also. I should therefore not O God, yea I should
have being at all, unless thou were in ^e: or rather, I could not one, unless
I had my being in (...); ^f whom, and through whom, Romans 11. 36.
and to whom are all things. Even so it is, Lord, even so. Wherefore (then) do.
I invoke thee, ^eeing I am already in thee? or whence can thou come into ^e?
For whither shall I go? ^eyond heaven and earth, that (...) thence my God may
come ^^ to me, who has said, The heaven and earth do I fill. Ier. 23. 24.


CHAP. 3. ^od is wholly every where, and is (...) by parts contained by the
Creature.
Do therefore the Heaven and earth contain thee, ^eing thou fillest them? or
do ^ou fill them, and there yet re^aines an overplus of thee, because they
are not able to comprehend thee? If so, into what do thou power whatsoever
remains of thee after heaven and earth are filled? Have thou need to be
contained by something thou who containest all things seeing that what thou
fillest, by containing them thou fillest for those vessels which are full o^
thee, As vessels do to water, which they preserve from spilling.
add no stability to thee for were they broken, thou a^ not shed out: and when
thou a^ shed out upon us, thou art no spilt, but thou raisest us up; no art
thou scattered, but thou gatherest up us: but thou who fil^ lest all, with thy
whole sell do thou fill them all.

2. Or because all things cannot contain all of thee, do the receive a part
of thee; and do a^ at once receive the same part o^ thee? or, several
capacities, several parts; and greater things greater parts; and less,
lesser. Is therefore one part of thee greater, or another lesser? or art tho^
All every where, and nothing contains thee wholly?

CHAP. 4. An admirable description of Gods Attributes.
1. WHat art thou therefore, O my GOD? What, but the Lord God? For Psalm. 18. 31.
who is God but the Lord? or who has any strength besides our God? Oh thou
supreme, most excellent, most mighty, most omnipotent, most merciful and most
just; most secret and most present; most beautiful and most strong; constant
and incomprehensible; immutable, yet changing all things; never new, and never
old; renewing all things, and insensibly bringing proud men into decay; ever
active, and ever quiet; gathering together, yet never wanting; upholding,
filling, and protecting; creating, nourishing and perfecting all things; still
seeking, although thou stand in need ^ nothing.

2. Thoulovest, yet art no transported; art jealous, but without fear; thou
do repent, but not grieve; art angry but cool still. Thy works tho^
changest, but not thy counsel take what thou find, never losest ought.
Thou art never needy, yet glad of gain; never covetous, yet exactest advantage
Thou have Supererogatur tibi: which the Romish Catholic translates thus; By
our supererogation thou becommest our debtor: And notes in the margin, God
makes us able to do works of Supererogation: Nosuch matter: for the words
are, Supererogatur tibi, and debes, (not, ut de bea^, as they read it.)
Besides, the Text has a comm^ (...), and cannot therefore be all put into one
sentenc^ Lastly, the Father here speaks of Gods Attributes, which
Supererogation is none, I tr^w See the Preface.
superabundance o^ all things, yet art still owing; and who has any thing
which is no^ thine? Thou payest debts, ye^ owe nothing; forgivest debts yet
losest nothing. And wha^ shall we say, my God, my life my holy delight: or what
ca^ any man say when he speaks of ^^e? And woe to them that take nothing in
thy praise, seeing those that speak most, are ^^ dumb in it.

CHAP. 5. He prays for forgiveness of sins, and the love of God.
Who shall so mediate for me, that I may repose in thee? Who shall ^^cure
thee to enter into my ^^rt; and so to inebriate it, that ^^ay forget my own
evils, and ^^brace thee, my only good? that art thou to me? let me ^de grace
to speak to thee. What am I to Thee, that ^ou should command me ^oue
thee, and be angry with ^^, yea and threaten me with (...) mischiefs, unless
I do love ^e Is it to be thought a small ^sery in it self, not to love thee Woe
is me! answer me for thy mercies sake, O Lord my God, what thou art unto me;
Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. Psalm. 35. 3.
Speak it out, that I may hear thee. Behold, the ears of my heart are before
thee, O Lord; open them, and say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. I will
run after that voice, and take hold of thee. Hide not thy face from me, that
whether I dye, or not dye, I may see it.

2. My Souls house is too straight for thee to come into: let it be enlarged
by thee: it is ruinous, but do thou repair it. There be many things in it (I
both confess and know) which may offend thine eyes, but who can cleanse it? or
to whom but thee shall I cry? Cleanse me, O Psalm. 19. 12
Lord, from my secret sins, and from strange sins deliver thy servant; I
believed, and therefore Psalm. 116. 10.
I will speak. Thou know, O Lord, that I have confessed my sins against
mine own self, O my God; and thou forgavest the iniquity of my heart. I will
not plead with thee, who Ier. 2. 29.
art Truth: and I will not deceive my self, lest mine iniquity be a fall
witness to it self. I will not therefore plead with thee: For if thou (Lord)
should be Psalm. 130. 3.
extreme to mark what is done amiss, O Lord, who may abide it?

CHAP. 6. That he has received all blessings from God: and how he has been
preserved by him.
YEt suffer me to plead before Genesis 18. 27. From hence to the end of this
first Book thee most divine meditations upon Gods providence.
thy Mercy seat, even me, who am but dust and ashes: once again let me
speak, seeing it is thy Mercy to which I address my speech, and not man who
is a mocker. Yet even thou perhaps do smile at me; but turning, thou will
pity me. What is it that I would say, O Lord my God, but even this; that I
know not whence I came hither; into this, a dying life (shall I call it) or a
living death rather? And then did the comforts of thy mercies take me up, as I
have heard it of the parents of my flesh, out of whom, and in whom thou
sometimes did form me, for I my self cannot remember it. The comfort
therefore of a woman's milk did then entertain me: yet did neither my mother
nor nurses fill their own breasts; but thou, O Lord, did by them afford a
nourishment fit for my infancy, even according to thine own institution, and
those riches of thine, reaching to the root of all things. Thou also
ingraftedst in me a desire to suck no more than thou supplyedst them withal;
and in my Nurses, to afford me what thou gave them: for they were willing to
dispense unto me with proportion, what thou supplyedst them with in abundance.
For it was a He alludes to that in 1. Tim. 2. 15. She shall be saved in
childbearing.
blessing to them, that I received this blessing from them; which yet was
rather by them, than from them. For all good things proceed from thee, O GOD,
and from my GOD comes all my Salus universa.
healthfulnesse. And so much I observed afterward, when thou did cry unto me
by those instincts of nature which thou induedst, me withal, both inwardly
and outwardly. For then first knew I how to suck; and to he contented with
what did please me, and to cry at nothing so much as what offended my flesh.
After wards I began a little to laugh; first sleeping, and then waking: for
thus much was told me of my self and I easily believed it, for that we see
other Infants do so too. For these things of my self I remember not.

2. And behold, by little and little I came on to perceive where I was; and I
had the will to signify what I would have, to those that should help me to
it: but I could not yet clearly enough express my desires to them; for these
were within me, and they without me; nor could the guess of their senses dive
into my meaning. Thereupon would I flutter with my limbs, and sputter out some
words, making some other few signs; as well as I could; but could not get my
self to be understood by them: and when people obeyed me not, either for that
they understood me not; or lest what I desired should hurt me; then how would I
wrangle at those elder servants that were to tend thee, and the children that
did not aptly humor me, and I thought to revenge my self upon them all, with
crying. And this is, as I have learned, the fashion of all Children, (that I
could hear of:) and such an one was I, as those who brought me up told me:
although they may be said not to know so much, rather tha^ to know it. And now
behold, my infancy is dead long ago, yet I live still. But thou, O Lord, who
both live forever, and in whom nothing dies, (because that before the
foundations of the World, and before every thing else, that can be said to be
Before; thou art both God and Lord of all which thy self has created; and in
whose presence are the certain causes of all uncertain things, and the
immutable patterns of all things mutable, with whom do live the eternal
reasons of all these contingent chance med leyes, for which we can give no
reason) tell (I pray thee, O God) unto me thy suppliant: Thou who art
merciful, tell me who am miserable; did my infancy succeed to any other age
of mine that was dead before; even to that which perhaps I past in my mothers
belly* for something have I heard of that too, and my self have seen women
with great bellies.

3. What also passed before that age, O God my delight? Was I any where, or any
body? for I have none to tell me thus much: neither could my Father and Mother,
nor the experience of others, nor yet mine own memory. Do thou laugh at me
for enquiring these things, who command me to praise and to confess to thee
for what I knew? I confess unto thee, O Lord of heaven and earth, and I sing
praises unto thee for my first being and infancy, which I have no memory of:
and thou have given leave to Man, by others to conjecture of himself, and upon
the credit of women to believe many things that concern himself. For even
then had I life and being, and toward the end of mine infancy, I sought for
some significations to express my meaning by unto others. Whence could such a
living creature come, but from thee, O Lord? or has any man the skill to frame
himself? or is any vein of ours, by which being and life runs into us,
derived from any original but thy workmanship, O Lord, to whom Being and
Living are not several things, because both to Be and to Live in the highest
degree, is of thy very essence: For Thou are the highest, and thou art not
changed; neither is this present day spent in thee, although it be brought to
an end in thee; because even all these have a fixed Being in thee; nor could
have their ways of passing on, unless thou upheldest them. And because thy
years Psalm. 102. 27.
fail not, thy years are but this very day. And how many soever, ours or our
Fathers days have been, they have all passed by this one day of thine: and
from that day have they received their measures and manners of being; and those
to come shall so also pass away, and so also receive their measures and
varieties of beings. But thou art the same still; and all To Morrowes and so
forward, and all Yesterdaies and so backward, thou shall make present in this
day of thine; yea and have made present. What concerns it me? If any
understand not this, let him rejoice notwithstanding; saying, What is this
mystery? Let him so also rejoice, and rather love to find in not finding it
out, than by finding it, not to find thee with it.

CHAP. 7. That even his Infancy was subject to sin.
1. HEarken to me, O God! Woe to the sins of men: Yet when man says thus,
thou have mercy upon him: because him thou have created, but sin in him thou
have not made. Who shall bring to my remembrance the sin of my infancy? for
in thy sight can no man be Job 25. 3.
clean from his sin; no not an Infant of a day old. Who will put me in
mind of this? any such a little one, in whom I now observe, what of my self I
remembered not? Wherein did I then sin? in that I cried too fiercely after the
pap? For if I should do so at these years, crying, (though not to suck
again, but after such food as is convenient for my growth) I should most
justly be laughed at and reprehended for it. Even then therefore did I
something worthy to be blamed: but for that I could not understand such as
reprehended me, therefore would neither custom nor reason suffer me to be
corrected. For as we grow toward discretion, we root up and cast out such
childishness: nor have I seen any man (knowing what he does) who purging out
bad things, casts the good away also. But whether may this pass for good,
(considering the time) by crying to desire, what would have hurt me being
given; and by being so sullenly froward at people that did not humor me; even
at young and old, and mine own parents too; yea and fighting (as fiercely as I
could) at diverse other discreeter persons, that did not Cockney me in every
thing; and because they obeyed not my commands, which had been hurtful to me
to have been obeyed. So that it is not the mind of Infants that is
harmless, but the weakness of their childish members. I my self have seen
and observed a little Baby to be already jealous; and before it could speak,
what How early malicious envy comes to express it self.
an angry and a bitter look it would cast at another child that sucked away
it is milk from it.

2. Who knows not this? That Mothers and Nurses profess, indeed to expiate
these things, by I know not what remedies. But may this pass for innocence;
that a Baby full fed, should not endure a poor Foster-childe to share with him
in a fountain of milk plentifully and freshly flowing, though destitute of
succor, and having but that only nourishment to sustain it is poor life
withal. But these childishnesses are with pleasure borne withal: not because
they be in themselves either none or small faults; but for that they will
vanish with age: Which though they may in this age be allowed of; yet are they
with no patience to be endured in an elder body. Thou therefore, O Lord my
God, who have given both life and body to the Infant; which as we see thou have
furnished with senses, compacted with limbs, beautified with shape, and for
his general good and safety, have armed all the endeavors of the whole
Creature: even thou command me to praise thee for these things, and to
confess and sing unto thy Psalm. 102. 1.
Name, O thou most high! Because thou art a God omnipotent and good, although
thou had done no more but these things which none else can do, but thou
alone, from whom all proportion flows; O thou most beautiful, which
fashionest all, and after thine own method disposest all.

3. This Age therefore of my life, O Lord, of which I remember not any
passages; concerning which I must give credit to others relation, which
(notwithstanding) that I have passed, as I conjecture by other Infants
(although these tokens may very strongly assure my conjecture) it irkes me to
reckon unto the rest of that life which I lead in this world; seeing that in
regard of the darkness of my forgetfulness of it, it is like that part which
I passed in my Mothers womb. Now, if I were shapen in iniquity, and in sin
conceived Psalm. 51. 5.
by my Mother; where, I beseech thee, O my God, in what place, Lord, was I (thy
servant) where or when was I innocent? But behold I now pass by that age, (for
what have I to do with it?) whereof I can call nothing at all to memory.

CHAP. 8. A description of his Childhood.
1. GRowing on from the state of Infancy, came I not into my Childehood; or
rather came not that into me, and succeeded unto my Infancy? nor yet did my
Infancy depart: for whither went it? though now it were no more: for an Infant
I was no longer, that could not speak; seeing now I began to prove a pretty
prating Boy. And this I well remember, and I afterward observed how I first
learned to speak. For my elders did not teach me this ability, by giving of
me words in any certain order of teaching, (as they did letters afterward)
but by that mind which Thou my God gave me, I my self with gruntings,
varieties of voices, and various motions of my body, strove to express the
conceits of mine own heart, that my desire might be obeyed; but could not
bring it out, either what I would have, or to whom I desired. Then, I settled
in my memory when they named any thing; and when at that name they moved their
bodies toward that thing, I observed it, and gathered thereby, that that word
which they then pronounced, was the very name of the thing which they showed me.

3. And that they meant this (or that) thing, was discovered to me by the
motion of their bodies, even by that natural language (as it were) of all
nations; which expressed by the countenance and cast of the eye, by the action
of other parts, and the sound of the voice; discovers the affections of the
mind, either to desire, enjoy, refuse, or to do any thing. And thus words in
diverse sentences, set in their due places, and heard often over, I by little
and little collected, of what things they were the signs; and having broken my
mouth to the pronunciation of them, I by them expressed mine own purposes.
Thus (with those whom I conversed withal) did I communicate the expressions of
mine own desires; and ventured thereby upon the troublesome society of humane
businesses, depending all this while upon the authority of my parents, and
being at the beck of my Elders.

CHAP. 9. The hatred that children bear to Learning, and their love to playing.
1. O God, my God! what miseries and what mockeries did I find in that age;
when as being yet a Boy, obedience to my Teachers was propounded unto me, as
the means to live by another day; that in this world I might grow famous, and
prove excellent in Tongue-sciences, which should get me reputation amongst men,
and deceitful riches? Thereupon was I set to school, to get Learning; whereby
little knew I (wretch that I was) what profit might be obtained; and yet if I
proved trewantly at my Book, I was presently beaten. For this discipline was
commended by our Ancestors; and diverse passing the same course before our
times, had chalked these troublesome ways out unto us, by which we were
constrained to follow them; multiplying by this means both labor and sorrow
to the sons of Adam.

2. We (little ones) observed, O Lord, how certain men would pray unto thee;
and we learnd of them; thinking thee (as far as we could apprehend) to be
some great thing; who were able, (and yet not appear to our senses) both to
hear and help us. For being yet a Boy, I began to pray unto thee, (my aid
and refuge) and I even brake the strings of my tongue in praying to thee; and
being but yet a little one, I prayed to thee with no small devotion, that I
might not be beaten at school. And when thou heardest not (which yet was not
to be accounted folly in me) my corrections (which I then esteemed my greatest
and most grievous affliction) were made sport at by my elders, yea and by mine
own parents, who wished no hurt at all unto me. Is there any man, O Lord, of so
great a spirit, cleaving to thee with so strong an affection; is there any man,
I say, (for even a stupidity may other-whiles do as much) who by devoutly
applying himself unto thee, is so resolutely affected, that he can think so
slightly of those rackes and strappadoes, and such variety of torments, (for
the avoiding whereof men pray unto thee with so much fear all the world over)
that he can make sport at those who most bitterly fear them; as our parents
laugh at those torments, which we schoole-boyes suffer from our Masters? For
we were no less afraid of the Rod, nor did we less earnestly pray to thee
for the scaping of it, than others did of their tortures. And yet for all our
fears, we too often played the Trewants; either in writing, or reading, or
thinking upon our lessons, less than was required of us.

3. For we wanted not (O Lord) either memory or capacity, (of which,
considering our age, thou pleasedst to bestow enough upon us) but our mind was
all upon playing; for which we were beaten, even by those Masters, who had done
as much themselves. But elder folks Idlenesses, must (forsooth) be called
Business, and when children do the like, the same men must punish them; and
yet no man pitties, either childrens punishments, or men's follies, or either.
But perhaps some indifferent Judge might account me to be justly beaten, for
playing at Ball, being yet a Boy, because by that sport I was hindered in my
Learning, by which, when I came to be a man, I was to play the fool more
unbeseemingly: as my Master, who now beat me, often did; who if in any trifling
Question he were foiled by another Schoolmaster, he was presently more rackt
with choler and envy at him, than I was, when at a Match at Tennis-ball, I lost
the Game to my play-fellow.

CHAP. 10. How for his play he neglected his parents commandments.
1. ANd yet I offended, O Lord God! thou disposer and Creator of all natural
things, only of sins not the ordainer. I sinned, O Lord my God! in doing
contrary to the commandments of my parents, and of those Masters: for I might
afterward have made good use of my learning, which they were desirous I should
obtain, whatsoever purpose they had in it. For I disobeyed them not out of
desire of choosing better courses; but all out of a desire to play: aspiring to
be Captain at all sports, and to have mine ears tickled with fained Fables,
to make them itch the more glowingly: the like desperate curiosity also
sparkling through mine eyes, after the shows and plays frequented by my
elders: the Authors whereof are esteemed to gain so much honor by it, that
almost all the Spectators wish the like to their own children; whom for all
that they suffer to be beaten, if by such Stage Plays they be hindered from
their studies, by which they desire them to arrive one day to the ability of
making the like. Look down upon these things mercifully, O Lord, and deliver
us that now call upon thee: deliver also those that do not yet call upon thee;
that they may call upon thee, and thou may deliver them.

CHAP. 11. How he fell sick, and how recovering, his Baptism was deferred.
1. I Had heard (being yet a Boy) of eternal life promised unto us through the
humility of thy Son our Lord God, descending even to our pride: And I was
then signed with the sign of his Cross This was the practice of the Primitive
times: by which religious parents devoted their children unto Christ, long
before their Baptism; which in those days was deferred till they were able to
answer for themselves.
, and was seasoned with his salt, so soon as I came out of my Mothers womb,
who greatly trusted in thee. Thou saw, O Lord, when being yet a Boy, and was
one day taken with a pain in the stomach, I suddenly fell into a Fit, very
like to dye. Thou saw, O my God, (for thou were my keeper) with what
earnestness of mind, and with what faith, I importuned the piety both of mine
own Mother, and of thy Church the Mother of us all; for the Baptism of thy
Christ, my Lord God. Whereupon the Mother of my flesh being much porplexed,
(for that in a chaste heart, and faith in thee, she most lovingly Gal. 4. 19.
even travailed in birth of my eternal salvation,) did hasten with great care
to procure me to be initiated and washed with thy wholesome Sacraments, (I
first confessing thee, O Lord Jesus This confession was done by repeating of
the Creed, as we do before Baptism at this day.
, for the remission of sins) but that I presently recovered upon it. Upon my
recovery was my cleansing deferred: as if it were necessary that I should yet
be more defiled, if I lived longer: because (forsooth) This was the reason why
Baptism was deferred, which Saint Augustine here finds fault withal. God
would not suffer our Father to be baptized in his sickness: for then bad the
Church lost a most glorious Minister; for by the Canons of the Church, no man
could be a Bishop, who had been baptized in his bed: because such an one
seemed to be baptized rather out of necessity, than says, which would be
scandalous to a Bishop.
the guilt contracted by the filth of sin, were both greater and more
dangerous after Baptism, than before.

2. Thus did I then believe, as also my Mother and the whole House, except my
Father only; who did not for all this overthrow the power of my Mothers piety
in me, to the hindrance of my believing in Christ, although himself had not
ye^ believed in him. For she by all means endeavored, that thou my God
should be my Father, rather than he. And herein did thou assist her to
overcome her Husband, to whom (though the better of the two) she continued her
service; wherein she principally served thee, who command her to do so. I
beseech thee, O my God, (for I would gladly know, if thou were pleased to tell
me) to what purpose was my Baptism then deferred; whether it were more for my
good that the reins of sin were (as it were) then enlarged, or that they
should not have bin enlarged at all? whence therefore comes it, that my ears
are on all sides so beaten with this noise; The Ancients deferred Baptism,
either til age, when the heates of sin were well over; or till marriage, till
they had got a remedy against it; and then did they wash away all their former
sins together. And till then they thought they might take liberty; seeing
those sins were to be washed away; and so not to be imputed. Saint Augustine
misliketh this.
Let him alone, let him do what he will; for he is not yet baptized: whereas
upon any doubt of bodily health, we do not say, let him be more dangerously
wounded, for he is not yet cured? How much better had it been for me to have
been speedily cured, that by my friends diligence and my own, so much might
have bin wrought in me, that my soul having received health, might have been
safe under thy protection, who had given it? This verily had been the better
course. But how many, and what violent waves of temptation did seem to
threaten me after my childhood, those my Mother full well knew; and desired to
commit, both those temptations by which I was afterward to be new molded; as
me also, the work it self, unto thy disposing.

CHAP. 12. He is forced to his Book: which God turned to good purpose.
1. But in this my childhood (wherein there was less fear of me than in my
youth) I loved not my Book, and I hated to be forced to it: yet was I held to
it notwithstanding; wherein they did very well for me; but I did not well for
my self: for I would never have taken my learning, had I not been constrained
to it. For no man does well against his will: though that which he does be
good. Nor did they that forced me to it, very well; but it was thou, my God,
that did the good to me. For they that held-mee to my learning, did not
understand to what I would apply it, unless to satiate the insatiable desires
of a rich beggary, and a dishonorable glory.

2. But thou before whom the ^at. 10. 30
very hairs of our heads are numbered, did convert the common error of them
all who pressed me to learning, to mine own benefit; and my error, who would
not learn, did thou make use of for my punishment; of which I being then so
little a Boy, and so great a sinner, was not unworthy. Thus by their means who
did not well by me, did thou well for me: and upon me who was a sinner, thou
inflictedst a deserved punishment. For thou have appointed it, and so it
proves, Every man's inordinate affection shall be his own affliction.

CHAP. 13. With what studies he was chiefly delighted.
1. But what was the reason why of a Child I should so naturally hate the
Greek Tongue when it was taught me, I cannot yet understand. Latin I loved
very well: not that part which our first Masters enter us in, but that which
the Grammarians teach us. For those first rudiments, to read, to write and
Cipher, I accounted no less painful and troublesome, than the Greek. But
whence should this proceed, but from the sinfulness and vanity of this life?
For I was but flesh, a wind that Psalm. 78. 39
passes away and comes not again. For those first rudiments were better,
because more certain, (seeing by them, that skill was and is wrought in me,
that I am able to read what I find written, and of my self to write what I
will) than these latter; by which I was enforced to commit to memory the
wanderings, of I know not what Aeneas, while I forgate mine own: and to bewail
dead Dido, because she killed her self for love; when in the mean time
(wretch that I was) I with dry eyes endured my self then dying toward thee, O
God my life! For what can be more miserable than a wretch that pitties not
himself; one bemoaning Didoes death, caused by loving of Aeneas, and yet not
lamenting his own death, caused by not loving of thee?

2. O God, thou light of my heart, thou bread of the internal mouth of my
soul, and thou firmest knot, marrying my soul and the bosom of my thoughts
together, I did not love thee, and I committed fornication against thee, while
in the mean time every one applauded me with Well done, well done. But the
love of this world is fornication Iam. 4. 4.
against God: which so applauds and encourages a spiritual fornicator, that it
is even a shame for a man to be otherwise. But I bemoaned not all this; but
dead Dido I bewailed, that killed her self by falling upon the Sword: I my
self following these lower creatures of thine, forsaking thee; and my self
being earth; hastening to the earth. But if I were forbidden to read these
toys, how sorry would I be, for that I might not read that which would make
me sorry. Such madnesses, were esteemed to be more commendable and fluent
learning, than the learning to write and read.

3. But let my God now cry unto my soul, and let thy truth say unto me, It is
not so, it is not so; that first kind of learning was far better: for behold
I am readier to forget the wanderings of Aeneas, and all such toys, than I am
to write and read. True it is, that there are Curtains at the entrance of
Grammer-schooles; but they signify not so much the Cloth of State to privacie,
as serve for a blind to the follies committed behind them. Let not these
Masters now cry out upon me, whom now I am out of fear of; whilst I confess
to thee my God, what my soul delights in; and rest contented with the
reprehension of mine own evil ways, that I may love thy good ones. Let not
those buyers or sellers of Grammar exclaim upon me, for that if I ask them,
whether that of the Poet be true, that Aeneaes ever came to Carthage; the
unlearned will answer, They know not; and the learned will deny it to be true.

4. But if I ask them with what letters Aeneas name is written, every one that
has but learned so sarre, will pitch upon one truth, according to the
agreement and will, whereby men at first made Rules for those Characters. If I
should ask again, which of the two would be most incommodious to the life of
man to forget; to write and read, or, these Poetical fictions? who sees not
what any man would answer, that had not quite forgotten himself? I offended
therefore being but a Boy, when in my affection I preferred those vain studies
to these more profitable; or rather indeed, I utterly hated these, and was in
love with those. But then, One and one makes two, and two and two makes four,
was a harsh Song to me; but The wooden Horse full of armed men, and the
burning of Troy, and the Ghost of Creusa, was a most delightful spectacle of
vanity.

CHAP. 14. Of the Greek and Latin tongues.
1. But why then did I hate the Greek Grammarians that chant of such things?
For Homer himself was skillful in contriving such fictions, and is most
delightfully wanton; but yet very harsh to me being a school boy. I believe
that Virgill is no less to Grecian children when they be compelled to learn
him, as I was to learn Homer; for to say troth, the difficulty of learning a
strange language, did sprinkle as it were with gall, all the pleasures of those
fabulous narrations. For I understood not a word of it, yet they vehemently
pressed me and with most cruel threatenings and punishments, to make me
understand it. The time was also (when I was an infant) that I knew not a word
of Latin; yet by marking I gate that without any fear or tormenting, even by
my nurses pratlings to me, and the pretty tales of those that laughed upon me,
and the sports of those that played with me.

2. So much verily I learnt without any painful burden to me of those that
urged me, for that mine own heart put me to it to bring out mine own
conceptions. Which I could never have done, had I not learnd diverse words, not
of those that taught me, but of them that talked familiarly to me; in whose
hearing I also brought forth whatsoever I had conceived. Hereby it clearly
appears that a free curiosity has more force in childrens learning of
languages, than a frightfull enforcement can have. But the unsetlednesse of
that freedom, this inforcement restraines; Thy Laws O God, yea Thy Laws,
even from the schoolemasters Ferula, to the martyrs Trials, being able to
temper wholesome and bitter together; calling us back by that means unto thy
self, even from that infectious sweetness, which at first allured us to fall
away from Thee.

CHAP. 15. His Prayer to God.
1. Hear my prayer O Lord, let not my soul faint under thy correction: nor
let me faint in confessing unto thee thine own mercies, by which thou have
drawn me out of all mine own most wicked courses: that thy self might
from hence forward grow sweet unto me, beyond all those allurements which
heretofore I followed; and that I might most entirely love thee, and lay hold
upon thy hand with all the powers of my heart, that thou might finally draw
me out of all danger of temptation.

2. For behold O Lord my King: whatsoever good I have learned, being a boy,
unto thy service let it be all directed, yea, whatsoever I speak, or write, or
read, or number, let all serve thee. For when I learned vain things, thou
did discipline me: and in those vanities, thou forgavest the sinfulness of
my delight in them. In those studies I learnt many useful words, but those
might have been also learned in studies not so vain: which is (I confess)
the safest way for children to be trained up in.

CHAP. 16. Against lascivious fables.
1. But woe unto thee, O thou Torrent of humane custom, who shall stop the
course of thee? when will thou be dry? how long will thou continue tumbling
the sons of Eve into that hugie and hidcous Ocean, which they very hardly
pass, who are well shipped? Do I not read in thee of Jupiter sometimes
thundering, and sometime adulterating? but verily both these could not one
person do: but this is feyned, that he might have authority to imitate
true-acted Adultery; false thunder the mean while playing the bawd to him.
Yet which of our Penulatorum Magistro^um: cloakt Masters or gowned sirs. For
Penula or Toga, the gown or long cloak (which were both one) was the habit of
Philosophers and graver teachers. The Father here quipps at their affected
gravity: as the Philosophers on the other side deryded the habit of the
Christians, which they called Pallium; a loose habit buttoned under the chinne.
Upon which Tertullian wrote his incomparable book De Pallio; which so tortures
our Crittikes to understand.
grave Masters can with any patience hear a man that should in his School cry
out saying, Homer feigned these, and ascribed men's faults unto the gods; but I
had rather he had derived divine excellencies upon us. But more truly is it
said, that Homer feyned these things indeed: and that by his attributing divine
excellencies to most wicked mortals, crimes might not be accounted crimes; so
that whosoever shall commit the like, seems not therein to imitate desperate
people, but some heavenly Deities.

2. This notwithstanding O thou hellish torrent, are the sons of men cast
into thee with rewards propounded to allure children to learn these fables;
and a great solemnity is made of it, when it is pleaded for openly in the
assembles, and in the sight of the laws, which allow stipends to the Teachers
over and above the reward unto the scholars: yet (O Torrent) thou art still
beating upon thy rocks, roaring out and crying, Here are fine words to be
learned, here Eloquence is attained; eloquence so necessary to persuade to
business, and with advantage to express sentences. But for all this should
we never so patheticall have understood these words The golden shower, The
lap The deceit, The temple of heaven, and such others written ^ the same
place; had not Ter^n^ withal brought a lewd your man upon the stage,
propounding Jupiter to himself for a example of his adultery; wh^^ he beholds
a certain picture ^^ the wall, wherein was set out t^ the life, the story of
Jupiter r^yning a golden shower into D^^aes lap, deceiving the simp^^ maiden
by that means. Show that young man provoke himself to lust, as if he had he a
celestial authority for it.

3. But what God do I imitate; says he? even that God who with a mighty
thunder shakes the very Arches of heaven: may not I then frail flesh and blood
do as much? But I for my part did as much unprovoked, yea and gladly too.
Plainly; by this filthy matter, are not these words so much the more
commodiously learned, as by these words, is this filthy business learned to
be the more confidently committed. I blame nor the words, which of themselves
are like vessels choice and precious; but that wine of error which is in them,
drunk to us by our intoxicated teachers. If we refused to pledge them, we
were beaten: nor had we liberty to appeal unto any sober Judges. All this
notwithstanding, O my God, I, (in whose presence I now with securityremember
this) did willingly learn these things; and unhappy I, was for this accounted
a youth of much towardliness.

CHAP. 17. The way of exercising youth in repeating and varying of verses.
1. GIve me leave O my God, to tell thee something; and that of mine own wit,
which was thy gift, and what dotages I spent it upon-My Master put a task upon
me, (troublesome enough to my soul) and that upon terms of reward of
commendations, or fear of shame and whipping: namely, That I should declame
upon those words of Juno expressing both her anger and sorrow, that she could
not keep off the Trojane King from going into Italy: which words I had heard
that Juno never uttered; yet were we enforced to imitate the passages of these
poetical fictions; and to vary that into Prose which the Poet had expressed
in verse. And he decliamed with most applause, in whose action (according to
the dignity of the person represented) there appeared an affection nearest to
anger or grief, set out with words most agreeable to the matter.

2. But to what end was this, O my true life, my God? why was my declamation
more applauded than so many others of mine own age and form? Was not all this
mere smoke and wind? and could no other subject be found to exercise my wit
and tongue in? Thy praises O Lord, thy praises, might have stayed the tender
sprig of my heart upon the prop of thy Scriptures, that it might not have been
cropped off by these empty vanities, to be caught up as a prey by those flying
spirits. For by more ways than one is there sacrrifice offered to the
collapsed Angels.

CHAP. 18. That men care more to observe the Rules of Grammar, than the Laws
of God.
1. But what wonder was it, if I were thus carried toward vanity, and
estranged from thee, O my God; wheneas such men were propounded to me to
imitate, who should they deliver any of their own Acts (though not evil) with
any Barbarism or Soloecisme, they were utterly dashed out of countenance: but
should they make a copious and neat Oration of their own lusts, in a round and
well followed style; would take a pride to be applauded for it. These things
thou see, O Lord, long suffering, and of much mercy and truth, and thou
keep silence; but will thou be silent for ever? and forbear to draw out of
this horrible pit, that soul that seeks after thee, and that thirsts after thy
pleasures? whose heart says Psalm. 27. 9.
unto thee, I have sought thy face, and thy face Lord will I seek. For I had
straggled far away from thy countenance in the mistynesse of my affections.

2. For we neither go nor return, from, or to thee, upon our feet, or by
distance of spaces: or did that younger brother seek Posthorses, or Wagons,
or Ships, fly away with visible wings, or take his journey by the motion of
his hammes, that living in a far Country, he might prodigally waste that
Luke 15.
portion, which thou had given him at his departure? A sweet Father, because
thou gave him his portion: yet far sweeter to the poor wretch returning:
for that he went from thee out of a voluptuous affection; that is to say, a
darkened one; and such that is, which is far from thy countenance. Behold, O
Lord God, and patiently behold, as thou still do, how diligently the sons
of men observe the Rules of letters and syllables received from former
speakers; and yet regard not the eternal covenants of everlasting salvation,
received from thy self. Insomuch, that he who either holds or teaches the
ancient Rules of pronunciation, if contrary to Grammar he shall pronounce
ominem, (that is a man) without H in the first syllable; he shall displease men
more, than if against thy Rules he should hate a man. As if any man should
think his enemy to be more pernicious to him, than that hatred of his own is,
whereby he is set on against him; or imagine that he does worse skath to
another man by persecuting him, than he does to his own heart, by contriving
enmity against him.

3. And certainly there is no other inward knowledge of Letters, but this (Law
of Nature) written in the conscience, Not to do to another, what himself Mat.
7. 11.
would not suffer. How secret art thou, O thou only great God! which dwell
in the highest, and in silence, with an untyred destiny dispersing blindnesses
for punishments upon unlawful desires. When a man affects the credit of
Eloquence, standing before a mortal Judge, a multitude of mortals standing
about him, inveighing against his Adversary with his fiercest hatred; he takes
heed most watchfully, that his tongue trips not before men: but takes no heed
at all, lest through the fury of his spirit he should destroy a man out of the
society of men.

CHAP. 19. How he was more careful to avoid barbarism of speech, than
corruption of manners.
1. IN the Road-way of these Customs lay I, wretched Boy, and upon that Stage
I played my Prizes; where I more feared to commit a barbarism in speaking,
than I took care when I committed any, not to envy those that committed none.
All this I declare and confess to thee, my God, namely in what things I was by
them applauded: to please whom, I then accounted equal to living honestly. For
I then discerned not that whirle-poole of filthiness whereinto I was cast from
thine eyes. For in thine eyes, what was more filthy than I where also I
displeased such as my self; with innumerable lies deceiving both my Tutor, and
Masters, and Parents: all for love of play, out of a desire to see toys, and
of imitating them with a ridiculous unrestfulnesse.

2. Theevery also I committed out of my Fathers Buttery and Table; either
gluttony often commanding me; or that I might have something to give my
play-fellowes, selling-mee their Babies, with which they were as much delighted
as my self. In these play-games I being often over-matcht, did with a vain
desire to be counted excellent, aspire to win, though by foul play. And what
was I so unwilling to endure, and what if I found out the deceit, would I so
fiercely wrangle at, as even those very tricks which I would put upon others;
and being my self taken with the manner, I would rather fall flat out, than
yield to it.

3. Is this that childish innocence? It is not, LORD, it is not, LORD: I cry
thy mercy, O my GOD: for wranglings about Nuts, and Balls, and Birds, are as
much to boys (yet under their Tutors and Masters) as the ill getting of Gold
and Manor Houses, and Slaves, is to Kings and to Governors. But this
Boyes-play passes over as more years come on, just as greater punishments
follow after the Ferula. Thou therefore, O our King, have allowed of the
Character of humility in the stature of Childehood, when once thou saydest; To
such belongs the Kingdom of God.

CHAP. 20. He thanketh God for his Benefits.
1. But yet, O Lord, thanks had been due to thee, our God and most excellent
Creator, Governor of this Universe; although thou had not been pleased to
have brought me any further than that age of Childhood. For even then a Being I
had, yea Life and Senses; even then had I a care of mine own wel-being, which
is an Vestigium secretissimae unitatis. Hence did the Schoolmen borrow their
vestigium.
impression of that most secret unity of thine, whence I had my Being; in my
Interiore sensu: The Philosophers make three interior senses: 1. The conmon
sense (or Judgment.) 2. The Fancy. 3. The Memory. To these he alludes: for
these serve to receive and preserve the Species or Forms of things, offered
unto them by the five outward senses of the body.
inward sense preserved I the entireness of my outward senses; and in these
slender faculties, was I delighted with the truth of mean conceits. I would
not willingly be decerved; a fresh memory I had; in forms of speaking I was
well tutored; by friendly usage I was made tractable. I avoided all sadness,
dejectedness, and ignorance; in such a little Creature, what was there not
admirable, not commendable?

But all these are the gifts of my God: for I bestowed them not upon my self.
Good endowments they were; and all these was I. Good therefore is He that made
me; yea he is my God, and to him I rejoice for all my good gifts, which of a
Child I had. But here was my oversight, that I sought not my self, and other
pleasures, honors, and trueths in Him, but in his Creatures; and therefore
rusht I my self upon sorrows, disorders and errors. Thanks to thee my
sweetness, my honor, my trust, and my God. Thanks to thee for all thy gifts:
but be pleased to preserve them still unto me, and thus shall my self be
preserved and thy Gifts shall be both increased and perfected; yea and I shall
be with thee; for my being is of thy giving. *

SAINT AUGUSTINES Confessions. THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. 1. He enters upon the years and sins of his Youth.
1. I Will now call to mind my overpassed impurities, and the fleshly
corruptions of my Soul: not because I love them, but that I may love thee, O
my GOD. For love of thy love I do it; in the very bitterness of my
remembrance repeating over my most wicked courses, that thou may only grow
sweet unto me; (thou sweetness never beguiling, thou happy and secure
sweetness!) and recollecting my self out of that broken condition of mine,
wherein I am piece-meale shattered asunder; while being turned away from thee
alone, I squandred away my self upon many vanities.

2. For I even burnt in my youth heretofore to be satiated in these lower
pleasures; and I dared even to grow wild again, with these various and
shaddowie loves: my beauty withered away, and I even stanke in thine eyes;
pleasing my self all this while, and desirous to content the eyes of mortals.

CHAP. 2. He accuses his Youth spent in the heat of lustfulnesse.
1. ANd what was it that I delighted in, but to love, and to be beloved? but
love kept not that moderation of one minds loving another mind, as the
lightsome bounder of true friendship; but out of that puddly concupiscence of
my flesh, certain mists and bubblings of youth fumed up, which be clouded and
so overcast my heart, that I could not discern the beauty of a chaste
affection, from a fogge of impure lustfulnesse. Both did confusedly boil in
me, and ravished away my unstayed Youth over the downefals of unchaste desires,
and drencht me over head and ears in the very whirle-poole of most heinous
impurities. Thy wrath all this while grew upon me, and I perceived it not. I
was now grown deaf by the continual crashing of that Chain of my frailety,
(thy punishment upon the pride of my soul) and I straggled further from thee,
and thou let'st me aloue, and I was tumbled up and down, and I was even spilt
and powered out, yea and I boiled over in my fornications, and tho^ heldest thy
peace yet. O my Joy, how slow art thou! Thou then heldest thy peace, and then
wandered I further and further from thee, into more and more fruitless
seedplots of sorrows, with a proud dejectedness; and an untyred weariness.

2. Oh for somebody that would then have Modularetur.
sweetened my misery, and have converted to good use the fading beauties of
these newest vanities! that would then have prefixed some bounds to their
tempting sweetes, that so the high-tides of my youth might have spent their
force at last upon the shore of the marriage bed; if so be the calmnesse those
Tides might be brought unto, would not have been contented with the delight of
having children, as thy Law prescribes, O Lord: even thou, who this way formest
the offspring of our mortality, being able also with a gentle hand to blunt the
prickles of those thorns, which were not suffered to grow; He alludes to 1
Cor. 7. to the earths bringing forth thorns after Adams driving out of
Paradise. His whole meaning is, that though usually married people have thorns
or troubles in the flesh, yet God could make a marriage so happy to him, as he
had done to Adam in Paradise, where no thorn (or discontent) ever grew, which
sprung not up till Adam was ex^elled Paradise. He alludes to Heb. 12. 1. which
witnesses are the Texts here quoted. 1 Cor. 7. 28. 1 Cor. 7. 1. 1 Cor. 7. 33.
in thy Paradise? For thy omnipotency is not very farfrom us, even when we be
farfrom thee. But when I had once most heedfully hearkened to the voice of these
clouds (of witnesses) of thine; Notwithstanding such shall have trouble in the
flesh, but I spare you. And again: It is good for a man not to touch a woman.
And, He that is married cares for the things of this world, how he may please
his wife.

3. Had I thereupon more attentively listened to those words, and made my self
an Augustine was yet a youth and no Priest therefore this place makes for
Continency in the Laity (which was indeed frequent in those days) and not of
the Clergy only.
Eunuch Mat. 9. 12.
for the kingdom of God, I might more happily have expected thy embracements.
But I was too hot upon it (wretch that I was) pursuing still the violent course
of mine own stream, having left thee utterly: yea, and exceeded all thy
prescriptions, nor did I escape thy scourges. For what mortal can avoid them?
For thou were with me at every turn most mildly rigorous and ever and anon
besawcing all my unlawful pastimes with most bitter discontentments: all to
draw me on to seek for such pleasures as were without such discontent. But
where I might light upon such but thee. O Lord, I could not find: But thee,
who make (as it were) some hardship in thy Commandment; and smitest us, that
thou may break us, yea slayest us that we should not dye to thee-ward. Where
was I, and how far was I banished from those delights of thy house in that
sixteenth year of the age of my flesh; at what time the madness of raging
luff, (in which humane shamelessness takes too much liberty, not withstanding
by thy Laws it be forbidden) exercised it is supreme dominion in me, I giving
over all my force unto it? my Parents took no care all this while by marriage
to save me from ruin; but their care was to have me learn to make a
powerful Oration, and to prove a most persuasive Speaker.

CHAP. 3. Of his travayle for his studyes sake, and his Parents purpose in it.
1. NOw for that year were my Studies intermitted: whenas upon my return from
Madauris (a neighbor City wherein I had begun to learn the principles of
Grammar and Rethoricke) the expenses for a further journey to Carthage, were
provided for me: and that rather out of a brave mind my Father bare, then any
ability in him, for he was but a poor Freeman of Thagaste. To whom tell I all
this? for to thee I tell it not; but before thee relate it to mine own kind,
even to so much of mankind as may light upon these writings of mine. And, to
what purpose do I this? even that both my self, and whosoever reads this,
may bethink ourselves out of what depths we are to cry unto thee. For what is
Psalm. 130. 1.
nearer to thine ears than the confessing heart, and the life directed by
faith? Who did not then highly commend my Father, for that even above the
ability of his means he had furnished out his son with all necessaries for
the taking of a far journey for his studies sake? For many abler Citizens did
no such thing for their children. But yet this Father of mine never troubled
himself with any thought of How I might improve my self toward thee, or how
chaste I were; so that I proved eloquent, though I were withal left undrest by
thy tillage, O God, which art the only, true, and good Landlord of the field
of my heart.

2. But whilst in that sixteenth year of my age I left going to school, and
upon some household necessities lived idly at home with my parents, the
briars of unclean desires grew rank over my head, and there was no hand put
to root them out. Moreover, when my Father seeing me in the Bath, how the
signs of Manhood began to bud in me, and plumed already with a stirring
youthfulness: (as if in this sight he had first rejoiced in hope of having
grandchildren by me) he gladly told it to my Mother; rejoicing (I say) at it in
his wine, in which the world too often forgets thee it is Creator, and in the
baseness of it is own will, frowardly and weakly setting it is love upon thy
Creature in stead of thy self, who art divine and invisible. But thou had
already begun thy Temple in my Mothers breast, and laid the foundation of thine
own holy Habitation: whereas my Father was but a Catechumenus Catechumenus:
such a one as in the Primitive Church was s^t to learn his Catechism, and the
grounds of Religion: in which be was to answer for himself when he after came
to be baptized.
as yet, one newly converted. She therefore was even startled with an holy
fear and trembling. And though I were not as yet Nondu^ fideli: The Primitive
Church called none fideles but the baptized, although they were never so learned
or devout believers: but upon their (...) Ar^ic^es of Faith, in ^^e time of
Baptism, they were catled fideles, faithful. ^ symbolo fidei, fideles
nominantur.
baptized; yet feared she those crooked ways, in which they walk, who set
thee behind their backs, and not before their faces.

3. Woe is me! and dare I say that thou heldest thy peace, O my God, whilst I
wandered further from thee? Is it so? Did thou indeed hold thy peace to me?
And whose but thine were those words, which by my Mother, thy faithful one,
thou sangest in my ears? Nothing of which would at that time so for sink into
my heart, as to do it. For she commanded me, and (as I well remember)
between her and me, with very much earnestness forewarned me, that I should
not commit simple fornication; but especially that I should never defile
another man's wife. These seemed to me no better than Women's advices, which
would be a shame for me to follow. But they were thine (indeed) and I (...)
not: I thought thou ^i^st held thy peace, and that she only had spoken: She,
by whom thou were not silent unto ^^, and in her thy self wast (...) by the;
even by me (...) son, the son of thy (...) and thy servant. But all this
whole I knew it not; and I (...) head long with such blindness, that I was a
shamed amongst my equals to be guilty of less impudency than they were, whom
I heard b^ag mightily of their naughtiness: yea and so much the more boasting;
by how much those they had been ^eastly: and I took pleasure be do it, not
for the pleasure of the act only, but for the praise of it also.

4. What now is worthy of dispraise, if (...) be not? But I made my self worse
than indeed I was, that I might not be dispraised; and when I wanted
opportunity to commit a naughtiness should make me as bad as the best, I would
feyne my self to have done what I never did, that I might not seem so much
the more dastardly, as I was the more innocent; and that I might not be
counted so much the more faint-hearted, as I was the more chaste. Behold with
what companions I walked the streets of Babylon, and I wallowed my self in the
my^e of it, as if I had reposed in a bed of Spices, and most precious
Ointments. And to make me cleave the faster to the very Center of sin, my
invisible Enemy troad me down, and seduced me, for that I was easy to be
seduced. Yea and the Mother of my flesh, although her self were already fled
out of Babylon, yet went she with the Ier. 51. 6.
slowest, about providing of due remedies for me: for, as she had once advised
me to keep my chastity, so she carried some respect withal, to what she had
heard her husband say of me. And thereupon bethought her self to restrain
what was both deadly and dangerous in me, within the bonds of a matrimonial
affection, if that infection in me could not otherwise be pared away by the
quick. But long she continued not in that care, because she feared withal,
lest my hopes might be hindered by a she-clogge. Not those hopes of the next
world, which my Mother reposed in thee: but the hope of Learning, which both my
parents were desirous I should attain unto. He, because he had little or no
thought almost of thee, and but vain conceits of me neither. She, because she
made reckoning that those usual courses of learning, would not only be no
hindrance, but a great furtherance toward my attaining of thee. For thus I
conjecture (to my best remembrance) were the disposition of both my parents at
that time. The r^y^es (in the mean time) of liberty to play were slackned
toward me, beyond all temper of due severity, yea even to disso^^^enesse in
whatsoever I affected. And in all (...) there was amyst, depriving my sight; O
my God, of the brightness of thy truth; and mine iniquity came from me, as if
swelling from a fitness. Psalm. 73. 7.


CHAP. 4. How he robbed a Peare-tree.
1. SV^^y thy Law (O Lord) punishes (...); yea, and this Law is so written in
our hearts, that iniquity it self cannot blot it out. For what thief does
willingly abide another man to steal from him? ^o not a rich thief, him that
is driven to steal upon necessity. Yet had ^^ desire to commit theevery, and
did it, compelled neither by ^^^ger nor poverty; but even through a cloyednesse
of weldoing, and a pamperednesse of iniquity. For I stale that, of which I had
enough of mine own, and much better. Nor when I had done, cared I to enjoy the
thing which I had stolen, but joyed in the theft and sin itself. A
Peare-tree there was in the Orchyard next our Vineyard, well laden with fruit,
not much tempting either for color or taste. To the shaking and robbing of
this, a company of lewd young fellows of us went, late one night, (having,
according to our idle custom in the Game-places, continued our sportseven till
that season) thence carried we huge loadings, not for our lickerishnesse, but
even to fling to the Hogs, having bitten off one piece. And all this we did,
not because we might do it, but because we would do it.

2. Behold my heart, O Lord, behold my heart, which thou had pity upon in
the very bottom of the bottomless pit. Now (behold) let my heart tell thee,
what it sought for there, that I should be thus evil for nothing, having no
other provocation to ill, but soul ill it self. Yet I loved it, I loved to
undo my self, I loved mine own fault, not so much that, for which I committed
the fault, but even the very fault it self, of my beastly soul; shrinking
back thus from my hold-fast upon thee, even to utter destruction; not
affecting any thing that had shame in it, but they very shame it self.

CHAP. 5. No man sins, but provoked by some cause.
THere is a comelines now in all beautiful bodies, both in Gold and Silver,
and all things; and in the touch of flesh, sympathy pleases (...). Each other
sense has his proper object answerably tempered. Worldly honor has also it is
grace, in commanding and overcomming by it is own power: whence springs the
thi^st of revenge. But yet, might a man obtain all these, he were not to
depart from thee, O Lord, not to decline from thy Law. The life also which here
we live, has its proper inticement, and that by reason of a certain
proportion of comeliness of it is own, and a correspondency with all these
inferior beauties. That friendship also which is amongst Societies, we see
endeared with a sweet tie, even by reason of the union of many hearts.

2. Upon occasion of all these and the like, is sin committed, while through
an immoderate inclination toward these, which are Goods but of the lowest
alloy, better and higher are left out; even thou out Lord God, thy Truth and
thy Law. For these low things have their delights, but not hinglike my Lord
God, who has made these All: for in him is the righteous man delighted; and
he is the deliciousness of the up ^Word in heart. When ^^quirie is made after
wickedness, upon what cause it was committed, no other reason uses to be
believed but this, When then there has appeared to be a possibility of the
Appetites obteyning some one of those good things which we called of a
loweralloy, or else a fear of losing it. For even these are beautiful and
comely; although compared with those higher goods, and happy making riches,
they be but abject and contemptible.

3. A man has murdered another; why so? Either he loved his wife or his
estate; or he would rob another, to get maintenance for himself; or he stood
in fear to lose some such thing by him; or being wronged, he was all on fire
to be revenged of him. Would any man commit a murder upon no provocation, but
only upon a delight he takes in murdering? Who will believe it? For as for
that man said to be so stupidly and savagely Catiline.
cruel, that he was evil and cruel merely for cruelties sake; yet is there
a cause assigned: Lest (says himself) my hand or heart should grow unactive
with idleness. And why that? Why? Even because when he had once made himself
master of the City, through frequent execution of mischievousnesse, he might
mount up unto honors, commands, and riches; and set himself above the fear
of Law, and the difficulty he found in getting means for the maintenance of
his Family, and the consciousnesse of his own villainies. Therefore even
Catiline himself loved not his own villainies, but 'twas something else he
loved, for whose sake he fell to commit them.

CHAP. 6. All those things which under the show of good, invite us unto sin,
are in God alone to be found true and perfect.
1. WHat then was it that wretched I so loved in thee, O thou Theft of mine,
thou deed of darkness, which I committed in that 16. year of my age? Lovely
thou were not, because thou were Theft. But art thou any thing, that I may
reason the case with thee? Those Pears that we stole were fair to see to, for
they were thy creature, O thou most beautiful of all, thou Creator of all,
thou good God; God, thou Sovereign good, and my true good: those Pears were
fair indeed, but it was not those that my wretched soul desired; for I had
store of better of mine own, and I beat down those only that I might steal.
For having gathered them up, I flung them away, eating little of them but my
own sin only, which I was extremely pleased with the enjoying. For if any bit
of those Pears came within my mouth, the sweetest sauce it had was the sin of
the eater.

2. And now, O LORD my GOD, I inquire what was it in that Theevery of mine,
should so much delight me; and behold there appears no loveliness in it. I
do not mean such loveliness as there is seen in Justice and Wisdom; no nor
such as is in the mind and memory; or in the, senses and vegetable soul of
man; nor yet such as the Stars are glorious and beautiful withal in their
Orbs; or the Earth or Sea replenished with their natural off springs, which
by daily growing, supply the rooms of the decayed. Nay, my Theft had not so
much as that false color or shadow of good, that usually appears in
deceiving vices. For Pride imitates high spiritednesse; whereas thou alone art
the highest over all. Ambition, what seeks it but honors and reputation?
whereas thou art to be honored above all things, and glorious for ever-more.
The cruelty of Great ones desires to be feared; but who is to be feared but God
alone? out of whose power what can be wrested? or when, or where, or which way,
or by whom? The inticements of amourous inveiglers, desire to be loved; but yet
is nothing more pleasurable than thy Charity, not in any thing loved more
wholsomely than that Truth of thine, more bright and beautiful than any thing.
Curiosity makes semblance to affect a desire of knowledge; whereas it is thou
only that supereminently know all things. Yet ignorance and foolishness it
self would yet be masked under the name of simplicity and innocence; even
because nothing can be found more simple than thy self: and what is more
innocent, seeing all thy works are so averse from evil: Yea, Sloth pretends a
desire of quietness: but what stable rest is there besides the Lord?
Expensivenesse affects to be called plenty and abundance; yet art thou the
fullness and neverfaining plenty of most incorruptible sweetness. Prodigality
pretends a show of liberality: but thou art the most flowing bestower of all
good things. Covetousness desires to possess much: and thou possessest all.
Emulation contends for excellency: but what so excellent as thou? Anger seeks
revenge: but who revenges more justly than thou? Fear startles an unusual and
sudden chances, which skare away the thing loved, while it is wary for it is
own security: but what can happen unusual or sudden unto thee? or who can
deprive thee of what thou love? Or where but with thee is there any settled
security? Grief pines away its self at it is losses, which desire took
delight to enjoy; even because it would no more be deprived, like as nothing
can be lost to thee.

3. Just thus does the soul commit a spiritual fornication, when she turns
from thee, secking those things without thee, which she can no where find pure
and untainted, till she returns again unto thee. Thus all awkwardly imitate
thee, even they that get themselves far from thee, and who pride themselves
against thee: and yet by thus imitating thee, do they declare thee to be the
Creator of the whole frame of nature, and consequently, that there is no place
whither they can at all retire from thee. What therefore did I love in that
theft of mine? and wherein did I thus awkwardly and corruptly imitate thee? Was
it, because I was disposed to do contrary to thy Law, if but in show, because
by strong hand I could not: that being a prisoner, I might make show of a
counterfeit liberty, by doing that unpunished, which I had not power to do
under the assumed covert of thy Omnipotency?

CHAP. 7. He returns thanks to God for remitting these sins, and for
keeping him from many other.
1. BEhold, here is thy servant, fleeing from his Lord, and He aliudes to Jonas
flight and Gourd.
gotten under a shadow. O rottenness, O monster of life, O depth of death!
could any thing please thee, that thou might not do lawfully; and do it too
upon no other reason, but because it was not lawful? What reward shall I
render unto the Lord, for that he so gently brings these things to my
remembrance, that my soul is not affrighted at it? I will love thee (O Lord)
and thank thee, and I will confess unto thy Name; because thou have forgiven
me this crime, and these heinous deeds of mine: unto thy grace and mercy do
I ascribe, that thou have dissolved my sins as it were Ice: yea unto thy
grace do I ascribe whatsoever evils I have not done. For what evil was not I
apt enough to commit, who loved the sin for the sins sake? Yea all I
confess to be forgiven me; both what evils I committed wilfully, and what by
thy guidance I have not committed.

2. What man is he, who upon consideration of his own infirmity, dares so
far to ascribe his chastity and innocence to his own virtue, as that he
thereupon should love thee the less; as if thy mercy, (by which thou forgivest
those that turn unto thee) had been less necessary for him? Whosoever now
being effectually called by thee, has obeyed thy voice, and declined those
transgressions which he here reads me remembering and confessing of my self;
let him not laugh at me, who am now cured by that same Physician, who ministered
unto him such preservatives, that he might not be sick at all, or but a little
distempered rather: but let him take occasion thereupon to love thee so much,
yea, so much the more; since by that Physician he has observed me to have
been recovered out of such deep consumptions of sinfulness, by the same hand
he perceives himself not to have been encumbered by the like.

CHAP. 8. What he loved in that his theft.
1. What fruit had I (wretched man) heretofore in these things, of the
remembrance whereof I am now Romans 6, 21.
ashamed? In that piece of theeverie especially, wherein I loved nothing but
the very Theft it self: whereas that was nothing of it self, but I much the
more miserable by it? Yet by my self alone I would not have committed it: so
well I now remember what my disposition then was, that alone I would never have
done it. Belike therefore it was the company that I loved, who were with me at
it. And even therefore I loved nothing but the theft it self; yea verily
nothing else, because that circumstance of the company, was indeed a very
nothing.

2. What is this, verily? who is it that teaches me, but even he that
inlightneth my heart, and discovers the darkness of it? What is that which
came into my head to enquire into, and to discuss and consider better of? For
had I then loved those Pears which I stole, I might have done it by my self,
had it been enough barely to commit the The every, by which I might attain my
pleasure; nor needed I have provoked that itch of mine own desires, by the
rubbing of those guilty consciences. But because the pleasure I took consisted
not in those Pears, it must needs therefore be in the very pranke, it self,
which the company of us offenders jointly committed together.

CHAP. 9. Bad company is infectious.
1. What kind of disposition was that then? For it was too bad plainly: and
woe to me that I had it. But yet what was it? Oh, wh^ can Psalm. 19. 12
understand his errors? We laughed heartily, till we tickled again, that we
could beguile the owners, who little thought what we were a doing, and would
never have endured it. Yet (again) why took I delight even in this, that I
did it not alone? Is it for that no man does so readily laugh alone? ordinarily
indeed no body does; but yet a fit of laughter sometimes comes upon men by
themselves and singly, when no body else is with them, if any thing worthy to
be laughed at, comes either in their eye or fancies. Yet I for my part would not
have done this alone; I should never have done it alone verily.

2. See here, my God, the lively emembrance of my soul set beforethee. Alone,
I would never have committed that Theft, wherein what I stole did not so much
content me, as because I stole it; which would never have pleased me so well to
have done alone, nor would I ever have done it. O friendship too unfriendly!
thou inveigler of the soul, thou reasonlesse greediness to do mischief, all
out of a mirth and wantonness, thou thirst to do wrong to others, though upon
no pleasure of gain, or revenge unto our selves: but even because when one
cries, Let Us go, let us do this or that, it is ashame not to be shameless.

CHAP. 10. Whatsoever is good, is in God.
1. Who can pick out that crooked and intricate knottinesse? It Is filthy, I
will never give my mind to it, I will not so much as look toward it. But thee
I desire, O Righteousness and Innocence, most beautiful and comely to all
chaste eyes; yea, with an insatiable satiety I desire to behold thee. With thee
is Rest assured, and a life never to be disturbed. He that enters into thee,
enters into his masters joy: and he shall Mat. 25. 21.
have no cause of fear, and shall be well in him, who is the best. (...) a way
from thee, and I went astray O my God, yea, too much astray from thee my stay,
in these days of my youth, and I became to my self (as it were) that He
alludes to the Prodigal child, Luke 15. 13.
far Country of misery.

SAINT AUGUSTINES Confessions. THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. 1. He is caught with love, which he hunted after.
TO Carthage I came, where a whole Drying Pan full of abominable Loves crakled
round about me, and on every side. I was not in love as yet, yet I loved to be
in love, and with a more secret kind of want, I hated my self having little
want. I sought about for something to love; loving still to be beloved: safety
I hated, and that way too that had no snares in it: and all because I had a
famine within me, even of that inward food, (thy self, my God) though that
famine made me not hungry: For I continued without all appetite toward
incorruptible nourishments, not because I was already full, but the more empty,
the more queasie stomackt. For this cause my soul was not very well, but
miserably breaking out into botches, had an extreme itch to be scratcht by the
touch of these sensible things, who yet if they had not a life, could not
deserve to be beloved. It was very pleasurable to me, both to love, and to be
beloved; but much more, when I obtained to enjoy the person whom I loved.

2. I defiled therefore the Spring of friendship with the filth of
uncleanness, and I be fullied the purity of it with the hell of lustfulnesse:
But thus filthy and dishonest as I was, with a superlative kind of vanity I
took a pride to pass for a spruce and a gentile companion. I forced my self
also into love, with which I affected to be insuared. My God, my Mercy, with
how much sowrenesse did thou out of thy goodness to me, besawce that
sweetness? For obtaining once to be beloved again, and secretly arriving to
the bond of enjoying; I was with much joy bound with sorrow-bringing
embracements, even that I might be scourged with the Iron burning rods of
Jealousy, and suspicions, and fears, and angers, and brawles. Stage Plays
also at that time drew me away; sights full of the images of mine own
miseries, and the fuel to mine own fire.

CHAP. 2. Of Stage Plays.
What Is the reason now, that a spectator desires to be made sad, when he
beholds doleful and tragical passages, which himself could not endure to
suffer? yet for all that he desires to feel a kind of passionatenesse, yea,
and his passion becomes his pleasure too. What Is all this but a miserable
madness? for every man is more affected with these actions, the less free he
is from such affections: Howsoever, when a man suffers ought in his own
person, it uses to be styled misery: but when he has a fellow feeling of
another, then it is mercy. But what compassion is to be shown at those feined
and scenicall passions? For the Auditors here are not provoked to help the
sufferer, but invited only to be sorry for him: and they so much the more love
the actor of these fictions, by how much the more he can move passion in them:
and if the calamities of the persons represented (either fallen out long since
or merely fained) be so lamely set out, that no passion be moved in the
spectator, he goes away surfetted and reporting scurvily of it: But if he be
moved to passion, He sits it out very attentively, and even weeps for joy
again. Are tears therefore loved, and passions? Verily each man desires joy
fullness. Or, whereas no man is willing to be miserable, is he notwithstanding
pleased to be merciful? which because it cannot be without passion, for this
reason alone come passions to be loved. All this springs from that Vein of
friendship.

2. But whither goes that Vein? which way flows it? wherefore runs it into
that torrent He alludes to the Sea of Sodom, which is said to bubble out a
pitchy slime, into which other rivers running, are there lost in it. And like
the lake it self rename unmovable: wherefore it is called the dead Sea.
of boiling pitch, those vast ^^^ flowings of the lands of lustfulnesse, into
the nature of which it is of 'its own inclination changed, being quite altered
from 'its heavenly cleerenesse, and corrupted? Shall compassion therefore be
banished? by no means. Let us frame our selves rather to love passion
sometimes. But take heed of uncleanness, O my soul, under the eye of God my
protector, (that God of our fathers, who is to be praised, and to be exalted
above all, for ever and ever) beware of uncleanness. Nor am I now past all
compassion; but when in those days I in the Theaters sympathized together with
the lovers, when they wickedly enjoyed one another, although their Parts were
merely feined in the action of the comedy: and when they lost one another, I
was sad with them, as if really pitying them: being in both successes equally
delighted notwithstanding. But I much more pity him now that still rejoices
in his own wickedness, than I do him that is as it were hardly pinched with
the forgoing of some pemitious pleasure, and the loss of some miserable
felicity.

3. This certainly is the truer mercy, but the heart takes not so much delight
in it. For though he that condoles with the miserable be commended for his
office of charity; yet had he, that is most brotherly compassionate, much
rather there were no occasion given him to condole at. For if good will be
ill-wild, (which can never be) then may he as well who is truly and sincerely
compassionate, wish there might still be some men miserable, that he might
still be compassionate. Some kind of sorrow may therefore be allowed, but no
kind loved. And thus do thou, O Lord God, who love our souls much more
purely than our selves can do, and art more incorruptibly merciful, because
thou can be wounded with no sorrowfulness. And who is fit for these things?
But wretched I, loved at that time to be made sorry, and sought out matter to
be sorry at, when as in another man's misery, though feined and merely
personated, that Action of the Player best pleased me, yea, and drew me the
more vehemently, which extracted tears out of mine eyes. What mervayle was it
now, when being an unhappy sheep, straying from thy flock, and not contented
with thy keeping, I became infected with that filthy scab? And hence came my
loving of those sorrows; not such (though) as should gall me too deep: (for I
was not so far gone, as to love to suffer, what I loved to look on:) but
such yet as upon hearing their fictions should lightly scratch me; upon which
(as after venomed nails) followed an inslained swelling, an Impostumation, and
a putrified matter. Such a life I then led; but was that a life, O my God?

CHAP. 3. His conversation with young Lawyers.
1. ANd thy faithful mercy hoverd over me afar off: Upon what gross
iniquities consumed I my self, pursuing a sacrilegious curiosity, that having
once forsaken thee, it might bring me as low as the very bottom of infidelity,
to that beguiling service of Devils, unto whom I sacrificed mine own
vileactions; for all which thou did chastise me? I was so bold one day (as
thy solemnities were a celebrating) even within the walls of thy Church, to
desire and to execute a business, enough ^^ purchase me the very fruits of
death: for which thou (...) me with very grievous punishments, though nothing
in respect of my fault, O thou my infinite mercy I my God, my refuge against
those terrible dangers, in which I wandered with a stiff (...), to withdraw my
self the further off from thee, loving mine own ways, and not thine:
affecting a freedom though that of a Runaway.

2. Those Studies of mine also which were accounted commendable, were intended
toward the Law, with an ambition to prove excellent at them; so much the
(...), as I proved the craftier. Such is men's blindness, that they even brag
of their owle-eydnes. I (...) this time to be a prime fell^o^ in the Rhetorrke
schools, ^^ch joyed in it very pertly, and I sweld again with arrogance
though more temperate I was (Lord thou know.) Yea, and far enough off from
those humors of the OVERTVRNERS EVER^ORES, OVERTVRNERS or VNDOERS. These for
their boldness were like our Ro^ers, and for their itering, like the worser
sort of those that would be called The wits.
(for this cruel and diabolical name, was given out to be the very badge of
gallantry) whom notwithstanding I kept company withal, even with an impudent
bashfulnesse, because I had not so rightly gotten the garb of it as they. With
these I conversed, and was often times delighted with their acquaintance, whose
doings I ever did abhor, that is, their humors of OVERTVRNING, in which their
custom was malapertly enough, to come over the demure and bashfuller behavior
of those they never saw before, whom they thoroughly vexed with abusing and
jeering at, upon no occasion, and all to maintain their own humor of bitter
jesting, nothing in the world can be liker the very actions of the Devil
himself, than this behavior of theirs: what name then may they more truly be
called by, than OVERTVRNERS? being themselves overturned and altogether
perverted first, and that by those seducing and deceiving spirits, secretly
deriding them, even for this, that themselves take so much delight to jeere at,
and to put tricks upon others.

CHAP. 4. How Tullies Hortensuis provokt him to study Philosophy.
1. AMongst these mad companions in that tender age of mine, learnd I the
Books of Eloquence, wherein my ambition was to be eminent, all out of a
damnable and vainglorious end, puse up with a delight of humane glory. By the
ordinary course of study I fell upon a certain book of one Cicer^, whose
tongue almost every man admires, though not his heart. This book of his
contaynes an exhortation to Philosophy, and it is called Hort ensius. This very
Book quite altered my affection, turned my prayers to thy self, O Lord, and
made me have clean other purposes and desires. All my vain hopes I
thenceforth slighted; and with an incredible heat of spirit I thirsted after
the immortality of wisdom, and began now to rowse up my self, that I might
turn again to thee* ward. For I made not use of that book to file my tongue
with, (which I seemed to buy with that ^^^^bition my another allowed me, in
that mine tenth year of my age, my father being dead two years before) I made
not use therefore of that book (I say) to sharpen my tongue withal, nor had it
persuaded me to affect the find language in it, but the matter of in.

2. How did I burn then, my God, how was I inflamed to fly from earthly
delights toward thee, and yet I knew not what thou meanedst to do with me?
For with thee is wisdom. That love of wisdom is in Greek called
Philosophy, with which that book inflamed me. Some there be that seduce
others through Philosophy, under a great, a fair promising, and an honest
name, coloring over and palliating their own errors: and almost all those who
in the same and former ages had been of that stamp, are in that book censured
and set forth: there also is that most wholesome advice of thy Spirit, given by
thy good and devout servant, made plain; Beware left any man spoil you
through Philosophy and vain Col. 2. 8.
deceit after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not
after Christ. For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

3. For my part (thou light of my heart know) that the Apostolical
Scriptures were scarce known to me at that time: but this was it that so
delighted me in that He means Ciceroes Hortensius.
exhortation, that it did not engage me to this or that sect, but left me free
to love, and seek, and obtain, and hold, and embrace wisdom it self what
ever it were. Perchance 'twas that book I was stirred up, and inkindled and
inflamed by: This thing only in such a heat of zeal took me off, that the
name of Christ was not in it. For this Name, according to thy mercy, O Lord,
this Name of my Savior thy Son, had my tender heart even together with my
mothers milk devoutly drunken in, and charily treasured up; so that what book
soever was without that Name, though never so learned, politely and truly
penned, did not altogether take my approbation.

CHAP. 5. He sets lightly by the Holy Scriptures because of the simplicity of
the style.
1. I Resolved thereupon to bend my studies toward the holy Scriptures, that I
might see what they were: But behold, I epsy something in them not revealed to
the proud, not discovered unto children, humble in style, sublime in operation,
and wholly veyled over in mysteries; and I was not so fitted at that time, as
to pierce into the sense, or stoop my high neck to track the style of it. For
when I attentively read these Scriptures, I thought not then so highly of them,
as I now speak; but they seemed to me far unworthy to be compared to the
stateliness of the Ciceronian eloquence: For my swelling pride soared above
the temper of their style, nor was my sharp wit able to pierce into their
sense. And yet such are thy Scriptures as grew up together with thy little
Ones. But I much disdained to be held a little One; and big-swoln with pride, I
took my self to be some great man.

CHAP. 6. How he was ensnared by the Manichees.
1. ANd even therefore I fell upon a sect of men proudly doting, too carnal
and prating, in whose mouths were the very snares of the devil, and a very
Birdlime compounded by the mixture of the syllables These were frequent with
the Manichees.
of thy Name, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost the
Comforter. All these names came not out of their mouth, but so far forth as
the sound only and the noise of the tongue, for their heart was void of true
meaning. Yet they cried out Truth, and Truth, and diverse sounded the word to
me, yet was the Truth it self no where to be found amongst them: But they
spoke falsehood, not of thee only (who truly art the Truth it self:) but
also of the elements of this world, thy creatures. Concerning which it had
been my duty, (O my supreme good Father, thou beauty of all things that are
beautiful) to have outstripped all the Philosophers though they spoke most
truly. O Truth, Truth, how inwardly did the very marrow of my soul pant after
thee, when as they often and diverse ways, though but barely, pronounced thy
name to me, with their voice only, and in many books and hugie volumes? And
these were the dishes wherein to hungerstarven me, they, instead of thee,
served in He alludes to the Manichees Philosophical Theology.
the Sun and Moon: Beautiful works indeed of thine, but thy creatures
notwithstanding, not thy self, no nor thy first creatures neither. For thy
spiritual works are before these corporeal works, celestial though they be
and shining.

2. But I hungered and thirsted not after those first works of thine but after
thee, even thee, the Truth, with whom there is no variableness, neither shadow
Iam. 1. 17.
of turning: yet they still set before me in those dishes glorious fantasies,
than which much better it were to love this Sun, (which is true to our sights
at least) than those fantasies which by our eyes serve to deceive our mind.
Yet because I thought Them to be Thee, I fell to and fed; not greedily though,
for thou were not savoury in my mouth, nor like thy self; for thou wast not
those empty fictions, nor was I soundly nourisht by them, but drawn dry
rather. That food we dream of, shows very like the food which we eat awake;
yet are not those asleep nourisht by it, for they are asleep. But neither were
those fantasies any way like to thee, as thou have since spoken to me; for
that those were corporeal fantasies only, false bodies, than which these true
bodies both celestial and terrestrial which with our fleshly sight we behold,
are far more certain: Here the Popish Translator patches two sentenses into
one, losing half the force of the Fathers Argument.
These things the very beasts and birds discern as well as we, and they are
much more certain than any we can fancy of our selves. And again, we do with
more certainty conceive the images of these, than by them entertain the least
suspicion of any vaster or infinite bodies which have at all no being: such
empty husks as these, was I then fed with, yet not a whit nourished.

3. But thou my Love, after whom I pine, that I may gather the more strength,
art not these bodies which we see, though from heaven appearing: nor art thou
any of those which we see not there; for all those have thou created, nor yet
Nee in summis ruis conditionibus abes. Here be has missed the whole sense,
turning it: And when thou will, thou can make nobler than they: meaning than
the Angels, as his margin intimates. Judge Reader. Saint Augustine alludes to
Act. 17. 27. as may he seen by his following it.
in these chiefest pieces of thy workmanship art thou far absent. How far
then art thou from those fond fantasies of mine, the fantasies of those bodies
which have at all no being? than which the Images of those bodies, which have
real existence, are far more certain, and yet the bodies themselves more
certain than their own Images; yet these bodies thou art not. No, nor yet art
thou the Soul, which is the life of those bodies; though better and more
certain be the life of those bodies, than the bodies themselves are. But thou
art the life of souls, the life of lives, yea the very living life itself;
nor art thou altered, O life of my soul. Where therefore, how near were thou
then unto me, and how far from me? Very far verily had I stragled, from thee,
being even barred from the husks of those swine, whom with husks I Another
cobble of the old Translator, which he turns, Though with husks I was
entertaining my brutish appetite.
was set to feed. How much better then are those fables of the Poets and
Grammarians, than these fooletraps? For their Verses, and Poems, and Medea
flying, are more profitable surely, than these The Manichees fooleries he
alludes unto.
men's Five elements, odly devised to answer the Five Dens of darkness, which
have at all no being, and which slay the believer. For verses and Poems I
verily can refer to the Another mistake: Advera elementa transfero: I can
apply to a true sense, says he. So can not I his translation.
true Elements. But Medea flying, although I charted sometimes, yet I maintaind
not the truth of, and though I heard it sung, I believed it not: But these
fantasies I thoroughly believed.

4. Alas, alas; by what degrees was I brought into the very bottom of hell?
when as toyling and tunnoyling my self through want of Truth, I sought after
thee my GOD, (to thee I now confess it, who had mercy on me, when I had not
yet confessed) not according to the understanding of the mind, wherein thou
made me excel the beasts; but according to the sense of the flesh. But thou
at the same time were more inward to me, than my most inward part; and
superior then, unto my supremest. I chanced upon that bold woman, who is
simple and Compare Prev. 7. 10. with Prove. 9. 13, 17. ver. and you have the
meaning.
knows nothing, that subtilty in Solomon. sitting at the door of her house,
and saying, Eat ye bread of secrecies willingly, and drink ye stolen waters
which are sweet: This harlot seduced me, because she found my soul without
doors, dwelling in the eye of my flesh, and chewing the cud by my self, upon
such bayts as through her inticement I had devoured.

CHAP. 7. The absurd doctrine of the Manichees.
1. FOr I knew not that there was any other truth, and was, as it were, through
mine own sharp wit persuaded to give my consent to those foolish deceivers
when they put these questions to me, Whence comes evil? and whether God were
made up in a bodily shape, and had hairs and nails? and whether those were to
be esteemed righteous men, who had many wives at once, and did kill men, and
offered sacrifices of living creatures? At which things ignorant I was much
troubled, and while I went quite from the truth I seemed to my self to be
making toward it; because I yet knew not how that evil was nothing else but a
privation of good, having of it self at all no being. Which, how should I come
to see, whose sight pierced no further than to a Body, with mine eyes; and with
my soul no deeper than to a mere fantasy.

2. Nor did I yet know God to be a Spirit who has not any parts extended in
length and breadth, or Cui effe, moles effet.
whose Being was to be a bulk; for that every bulk is lesser in his part,
than in his whole: and if it be infinite, it must needs be less in some part
that is limited in a certain space than that which is not limited: and cannot
so be wholly every where, as a spirit, as God is. And which part in us that
should be by which we were like to God, and how rightly in the Scriptures we
may be said to be made after the Image of God, I was altogether ignorant. Nor
was yet acquainted with that true and inward righteousness, which judges not
according to custom, but out of the most rightful Law of God Almighty, by
which the fashions of several places and times were so desposed, as was
fittest both for those times and places; it self in the mean time being The
same always and every where; not another thing in another place, nor otherwise
upon another occasion. According to which righteousness both Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob, and Moses were Heb. 11.
righteous, yea and all those other commended by the mouth of GOD: but they
were judged unrighteous by unskilful people judging out of humane judgment,
and measuring all mankind in general by the model of their own customs:
just as i^ in an Armory, a man being ignorant what piece were appointed for
what part, should clap a boot upon his head, and draw an headpeice upon his
leg, and then murmur because they would not fit him: or as if upon some ^^ day
when the course of Justice (...) publicly forbidden in the afternoon, a
shopkeeper should stomach at it that he may not have leave Here the old
translator bewrayes ignorance enough. Thus he renders it: Or as when public
justice should command the shops to be shut after noon upon some certain day,
one should chafe for not being suffered to sell his wares, although the next
day he might lawfully do it. Let me help him: In Romans had 3. sorts of
days, 1. Festos or Ferias whole holidays. 2. Professos, whole working days.
(...) Intercis^^ half holidays. In this lost sort the courts: Justice and
shops having been open the forenoone, usu some sudden accident, (suppose the
death or funeral some great personage, etc.) the Bedl^ proclaimed a (...) on
from working and pleading. Upon the same (...) have we in our Universities a
sudden Non Ter^inus and ceasing of all disputations, namely upon the death
some Master of Arts or Doctor.
to sell his wares, which it was lawful for him to do it the forenoone: or
when in some house he observes some servant to pass that kind of busines^
through his hands, which the Butcher is not suffered to meddle withal; or some
thing done behind the stable, which is forbidden in the dyning-roome: or as if
he should be angry, that where there is one dwelling house, and one family,
the same equality of distribution is not observed every where, and to all alike
in it.

3. Of the same humor be those who are fretted to hear something to have
been lawful for righteous men in the former age, which is not so for just men
now adays: And because GOD commanded them one thingthen, and these an other
thing now for certain temporal respects; and yet those of both ages to be
servants to the same righteousness: whereas they may observe that in one man,
and in one day, and in one house, one thing to be fit enough for one member,
and one thing to be lawful now, which an hour hence is not so; and some
thing to be permitted or commanded in one corner, which is forbidden and
punished in another. Is Justice thereupon various or mutable? No; but the times
rather in which Justice governes are not like one another; for they are times.
But men now, whose life is but short upon the earth, for that in their own
apprehensions they are not able to compare together the causes of those former
ages, and of other nations, which they have had no experience of: with these
which they have had experience of: and that in one and the same body, day or
family, they may easily observe what is fitting for such a member and at what
seasons, what parts and what persons; they take exceptions to those, but to
these they servilely submit their approbations

4. These things I then knew not, nor did I mark them, and they on every side
beat about mine eyes, yet did not I see them. I endited verses, in which I had
not liberty to place every foot where I pleased, but in one meeter in one
place, and in another meeter in another place: and not the self same foot in
all places of the self same verse neither: yea and the very Art of Poetry it
self, by which I endited, had not Rules different in one place from those in
another, but all answerable. Not did I then behold how that Rule of
Righteousness, to which those good and holy men obeyed, did far more
excellently and sublimely contain all those things which God commanded,
answerably one unto another; which though not varyed from it self in any part,
yet in different Ages, did not distribute or command all the same things at one
time, but what was fit and proper for each time. Thus blind I reprehended
those holy Fathers, not only for making use of the present things with that
liberty which God both commanded and inspired them, but even also for
foretelling things to come, which God had revealed to them.

CHAP. 8. Heinous offenses what be, and how punished.
1. CAN it at any time or place be an unjust thing, for a man to love God with
all his heart, with all his soul, and Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 22.
with all his mind; and his neighbor as himself? Therefore are those crimes
which be against nature, to be every where and at all times both detested and
punished, such as those of the men of Sodom were: which should all nations
commit, they should stand all guilty of the same crime, by the Law of God,
which has not so made men that they should any way abuse one another. For even
that society which should be betwixt God and us, is then violated, when the
same Nature of which he is Author, is polluted by the preposterousnesse of
lust. Those Actions also which are offenses against the Customs and public
usage of people, are to be avoided, with respect had to the diversity of those
several Customs and usages; so that a thing publicly agreed upon, and
confirmed, either by the custom or Law of a City or Nation amongst
themselves, may not be violated at the lawless pleasure of any, whether native
or forreiner.

2. But when God commands any thing to be done, either against the Customs or
Constitutions of any people whatsoever, though the like were never done
heretofore, yet is it to be done now; and if ever it has been intermitted
before, it is to be restored now; and if it were never made a Law before, it is
to be made one now. For lawful if it be for a King, in that City which he
reigns over, to command that, which never any Prince had before him, nor he
himself ever heretofore, and that it cannot be held to be against the common
good of the City that he is obeyed; nay, it were against it if he were not
obeyed: (For, a general agreement of all humane Societies it is, That Princes
should be obeyed:) How much more dutiful then ought we to be to God, who is
Lord Paramount over al his creatures, and that without any sticking at all, at
whatsoever he pleases to command us? For as amongst those Powers appointed in
humane Society, the greater Authority is set over the lesser, to command
obedience; so is God set over all. In heinous offenses also, where there arises
a licentious will to hurt another, be it either by offering reproach or
injury; and both of these either upon occasion of revenge, as in one enemy
against another, or for the compassing of some piece of profit, not in his own
power, as in the highway thief to the travailer, or for the esche wing of
some evil, as in him that is afraid of another, or in case of envying, as the
miserable wretch against him in happier condition, or as he that is well
thriven in any thing, fears him that is to grow up to him, or is grieved at
him already in equal case with him; or for the pleasure alone at another man's
mischance, as those that are spectators of the Sword-players, or that deride or
put tricks upon others. These be these chief heads of iniquity, which sprout
forth from that lawless desire See 1 Ioh. 2. 1.
of Bearing rule, of Seeing much, or of Feeling pleasure, or of any one, or two
of these, or of all three together. Thus we live offensively against Three and
Seven that Psaltery Psalm. 33. 2.
of ten strings, thy ten Commandments, O God, most high and mostsweet.

3. But what foul offenses can there be against thee, seeing thou can not by
them be corrupted? or what high-handed transgressions can cross thee who can
not be harmed? But this is it that thou revengest that namely which men commit
against one another, seeing also when they sin against thee, they do wickedly
even against their own souls, and iniquity gives it self the lie, either by
corrupting or perverting it is own nature which thou have created and ordained;
or else by an immoderate use of those creatures appointed for them; or in
burning in lust toward the use of what is not appointed, which is against
nature; or when as they are guilty to themselves for raving with heart and
tongue against thee, kicking thereby against the Acts 9. 5.
prick: or when as breaking open the pale of all human society, audacious
people rejoice themselves in their privy bargains of bawderies or theeveries,
right as any thing either delights or offends them.

4. And these pranks are played, whenever thou art forsaken, O Fountain of
Life, which art the only and the true Creator and Governor of this Universe,
when as out of a singularity of pride, any one false thing is in part loved. By
an humble devoutnesse must we therefore return unto thee; and then thou
purgest away our lewd customs, and provest favorable to their sins that
confess unto thee, and thou hear the groans of those that are enthralled
by them, and thou loosest those fetters which we have made for our own
selves; if so be we do not lift up against thee the horns of a feined
liberty, through a gripplenesse of having more, though with a danger of losing
all; even by more strongly settling our love upon our own private commodity,
than upon thee the common good of All.

CHAP. 9. The difference that is betwixt sins, and betwixt the judgment of God
and men.
1. But amongst those infamous and high-handed offenses, are the sins of
these men to be reckoned, who are good proficients otherwise in virtue; which
by those that judge rightly, and after the Rule of perfection, are
discommended, and yet the persons commended withal, upon hope of better fruit,
as is the greeneblade of the growing Corn. And there are some again, that
look like infamous or impudent crimes, which yet are no sins; even for that
they neither offend thee, O Lord God, nor yet any sociable conversation; when
(namely) provision is made of somethings fitting for the times, and we cannot
judge whether it be out of a lust of having; or when some actions be by
ordinary authority punished, with a desire of correcting, and it is uncertain
whether it were out of a desire of hurting. Many a fact therefore which seems
worthily disallowed by men, is yet well approved of by thy testimony; and many
a one by men praised, are (thou being witness) condemned: and all this,
because the outside of the fact, and the mind of the doer, and the unknown
secret of the present hint of opportunity, are all different from one another.

2. But when thou on the sudden command any unusual and unthought-of thing,
yea, notwithstanding thou have sometime heretofore forbidden this (although
thou keep secret for the time the reason of thy command, and notwithstanding
it be against the private ordinance of some Society of men who doubts but it
is to be obeyed, seeing that Society of men is a just Society, which serves
thee? But happy are they who know it was thou that gave the command. For all
things are done by them that serve thee, either for the providing themselves of
what is needful for the present, or for the foreshewing of something to come
hereafter.

CHAP. 10. He speaks again of the Figtree: and derides the Manichees foolish
conceits about it.
1. I My self being at that time ignorant of these things, derided heartily
those holy servants and Prophets of thine. And what gained I by scoffing at
them, but that my self should in the mean time be scorned at by thee, being
sensibly and by little and little drawn on to those toys, as to believe that
a Fig Tree wept when it were plucked, and the Mother of it to shed milkie
tears? Which Fig notwithstanding (plucked by some other man's boldness) had
some Manichean He alludes in this Chapter to the folly of the Manichees.
Saint eaten, he should digest in his guts, and breath out of that Fig, very
Angels; yea, in his prayer, groan and sigh out certain portions (forsooth) of
the Deity; which portions of the most high and true GOD should remain bound in
that Fig, unless they had been set at liberty by the teeth or belly of some
elect holy one. And I believed (wretch that I was) that more mercy was to be
shown to the fruits of the earth, that unto men for, whose use they were
created. For if any man (though a hungered) should have eaten a bit, who were no
Manichee, that morsel would seem as it were to be condemned to a capital
punishment, should it have been given him.

CHAP. 11. His mothers Dream.
1. ANd thou stretchedst thine hand from on high and drewest my soul out of
that darksome deepenesse, when as my mother thy faithful one wept to thee for
me, more bitterly than mothers use to do for the bodily deaths of their
children. For she evidently fore saw my death, by that faith and spirit which
thou had given her, and thou heardest her, O Lord, thou heardst her and
despisedst not her tears, when flowing down they watered the very earth He
alludes bear to that devout manner of the Eastern Ancients, who used to lie
flat on their faces in prayer.
under her eyes in every place where she prayed, yea thou heardst her. For
whence else was that dream of hers, by which thou comfortedst her; in which
she verily thought me to live with her, Here the old Translator is mistaken,
falsely construing the word Crederet.
and to eat at the same table in house with her, which she already begun to
be unwilling withal, refusing and detesting the blasphemies of my error. For
she saw Her vision.
(in her sleep) her self standing in a certain wooden In quadam Tegula
Lignea, and not in regula Linea, or Lignea, as the printed Coppies read it.
This Tegula signifies an upper room next the tiles: But in those hot Affricane
Countries they used to be much upon the Ro^fes of their houses; which therefore
were commanded to be battlemented lest any should fall from thence, Deuteronomy. 22.
8. so ^e such upper room, gallery or pergula it is likest to have been.
battlement, and a very beautiful young man coming toward her, with a
cheerful countenance and smiling upon her, herself being grieved and far
gone with sorrowfulness. Which young man when he had demanded of her the causes
of her sadness and daily weepings, (that he might teach rather as Angels use
to do, than learn) and she had answered that it was my perdition that she
bewailed; he bad her rest contented, and wished her to observe diligently and
behold, That where she herself was, there was I also. Who when she looked
aside, she saw mestanding by her in the same battlement. How should this
chance now, but that thine ears were bent toward the requests of her heart.

2. O thou Good omnipotent, who have such special care of every one of us, as
if thou had care but of one alone; and so regardest all, as if but single
persons. How came this about also, that when she had told me this Vision, and I
would have interpreted it, That she should not despair of being one day of my
opinion: she presently without any sticking at, replies; No (says she) it was
not told me that thou art where he is, but where thou art, there he is? I
confess to thee, O Lord, that to the best of my remembrance (which I have often
spoken of) I was then the more moved at that answer of my vigilant mother, that
she was not put out of conceit by the likelihood of my forced interpretation,
and that upon the very instant she apprehended as much of it as was truly to be
discerned (which I my self verily had not perceived, before she spoke.) I was
more moved (I say) at that, than with her dream it self; by which the joy of
that holy woman to be fulfilled so long after, was, for the consolation of her
present anguish, so long before foresignified.

3. For nine full years passed after that, in all which I tumbled up down in
the mudde of that deep pit, and the darkness of that false belief, and when
I endeavored to rise, the violentlyer was I slung down again. All which time
that chaste, godly and sober widow (such thou love) more cheered up with
hope, though no whit slackned in weeping and mourning, failed not all hours of
her set prayers to bewail my case unto thee. And her prayers found entrance
then into thy sight, yet notwithstanding thou sufferedst me to be tumbled yet
again, and to be all over involved in that mist of Manichisme.

CHAP. 12. The answer his mother received from a Bishop, concerning his
conversion.
1. ANd thou gave her another answer in the mean time, which I now
remember: and yet I pass over many a one, for that I make have to those things
which more press me to confess unto thee, and many have I also forgotten.
Thou affordedst her another answer, therefore by a certain Priest of thine, a
Bishop brought up in thy Church, and well studied in thy Books. Whom when this
woman had entreated that he would vouchsafe to have some conference with me, as
well to un-teach me what was false, as to instruct me in what was sound; (for
this office she ever and anon did for me, as she found men fit for such an
undertaking) but he refused it, and in truth discreetly too, as I better
afterward perceived. For his answer was, that I was yet unripe for
instruction, for that I was yet puffed up with the new taken-in heresy, and that
I had already troubled diverse unskilful persons with spurring of questions to
them, as she had already told him: but let him alone a while (says he) only
pray to God for him, he will of himself by reading find his own mistake, and
how great his impiety is.

2. The Bishop then up and told her how himself when he was a little one had
been by his seduced mother committed to the Manichees, and how he had not only
read over almost all, but also coppied out their books, and that it appeared to
him (without the help of any man to dispute against, or convince it) how much
that sect was to be avoided; and how of himself therefore he had forsaken it.
Which words when he had spoken, and she would not yet be satisfied: but pressed
more upon him what with entreating, and what with weeping, that he would be
pleased to see me, and discourse with me; he, a little displeased at her
tedious importunity, Go thy ways, (says he) and God bless thee, for it is
not possible that the son of these tears should miscarry. Which answer she
then took (as she often remembered in our familiar discourse afterward) as if
an oracle had resounded from heaven.

SAINT AUGUSTINES Confessions. THE FOVRTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1. How long, and what ways he seduced others.
FOr the space of nine years then (that is from the nineteenth year of mine
ago to the eight and twentieth) we were seduced our selves, and others we
seduced; deceived and deceiving in diverse lusts; and in public we did it by
those Arts which are called liberal, but in private we still peretended the
assumed Just thus do the Puritanes of our days; some champions they have that
are still scribbling, and others bragging in their conventicles how able they are
to confute the Adversary: but in private houses they pretend sanctity and long
Prayers, and stillseeme zealous against the pretended imperfections of the
Church, times, and governors, temporal and spiritual.
name of Religion. Here were we proud, there superstitious, every where vain;
still hunting after the empty noise of popular reputation, even affecting those
The atricall hummings and It was the old fashion to humme, and give low
plauditees with the band, to their Orators and Preachers; as may be seen in
Saint Basile and Saint Chrysostom.
applauses, and those contentious strifes of wit, and to gain the grassy
garlands, and the vanity of showing our selves upon the It was the Roman
custom to rebearse upon the stage or in public their own composures (which
they called Reponere,) before they set forth copies of them, which when they did,
they were said Edere. Thus edere spectaculum, and edere librum Semper ego
auditor tantum: nunquamne reponam? Pers.
stage; and the intemperancy of ambition. But much desiring then to purge our
selves from these our natural corruptions by the help of those who were
called elect and holy, we carried them certain chosen He derides at this
wicked Sacrament of the Manichees in which they thought to imitate the
receiving and benefit of the Lords Supper. Here had they a chosen meat
consecrated by their elect; and they hoped by it to be purged, and as it were
united to God.
meats, out of which in the workehouse of their own paunches, they should
forge certain Angels and Gods, by whom we were to be cleansed. These things
did I then follow, these things did I then practice with my friends, who were
deceived by me and with me.

2. Let such deride me now, who are arrogant, and not yet savingly cast down
nor broken in heart by thee, O my GOD; but I for all this do here confess
mine own shame to thee in thy praise. Suffer me I beseech thee, and give me
grace to run over in my present remembrance the errors of my forepassed time,
and to offer up unto thee the sacrifice of rejoicing. For what am I without
thee, but a guide to mine own downfall? or what am I even at the best, but an
infant sucking thy milk, and feeding upon thee the food incorruptible? But
what kind of thing is any man, seeing at the best he is but a man? Let now the
strong and the mighty laugh at us, but let us weak and needy souls ever
confess unto thee.

CHAP. 2. He teaches Rhetoric, and despises a wizard who promised him the
victory.
1. I Taught in those years the Art of Rhetoric, and my self being overcome
with a desire of gain, made sale of a loqu^city, to overcome others by. Yet I
desired rather (Lord thou know) to have honest scholars (as they are now
adays accounted) and those without all deceit, I taught how to deceive; not
that I would have them plead against the life of any Oh that those Lawyers
would learn this, who think they may undo any man's life, cause, or
reputation, so it be for their Clyent: say or unsay, any thing for their Clyent.
innocent person, though sometimes to save the life of the nocent. And thou, O
God, from afar perceivedst me falling in that slippery course, and in much
smoke sparkling out some small faith, which I then made show of in that
Schoole-mastership of mine to those that loved vanity, and becoming the
companion to those that sought a lie. In those days I kept a Mistress, whom I
knew carnally, not in that lawful way of marriage; but the way found out by
wandering lust, utterly void of understanding: yet had I but that one, toward
whom I truly kept the promise of the Bed* in whom I might by mine own example
learn experience, what difference there would be betwixt the knot I read it
Nodum, and not Modum.
of the marriage-covenant, mutually consented unto for the desire of children,
and the bargain of a lustful love, where though children be against our wills
begotten, yet being borne, they even compel us to love them.

2. I remember once, that when I had a mind to put forth my self for the
prize in a Theatricall Poem, I was demanded by I know not what wizard, what I
would give him, to be assured to win the garland: but I detesting and
abhorring such filthy compacts returned him answer; That though the garland were
immortal and of gold, yet would I not suffer a fly to lose it is life to gain
me the better of it. For he was to kill certain living creatures in those his
sacrifices, and by those honors to invite the Devils to favor me in the
peoples acclamations. But this ill means I refused not, out of any chaste
reservation toward thee, O God of my heart; for then knew I not how to love
thee, who knew not how to think on any thing but certain He alludes to the
Manichees errors, who thought God and the Angels to be but glorious bodies.
Hos. 12. 1.
Corporeal Glories. And did not my soul, panting after such fond fictions,
commit fornication against thee, trust in false hopes, and feed upon the wind?
But I would not (forsooth) that he should do sacrifice to the Devils for me,
and yet did I my self offer unto them, even by that my superstition. For, to
feed upon the wind, what is it else but to feed them; that is, by our own
errors to make our selves the subjects of their pleasure and derision?

CHAP. 3. Giving himself to Astrology, he is reclaimed by an ancient
Physician.
1. THose Star-gazers therefore, whom they style The old Translator is often
mistaken in this Chapter.
Mathematicians, I verily did not forbear to consult with; and that because
they used no sacrifice, not directed their prayers to any Spirit to speed their
Divinations: and yet does Christian and true piety consequently refuse and
condemn that Art. For it is a good thing to confess Psalm. 41. 4.
unto thee, and to say, Have mercy upon me, heal my soul: for I have sinned
against thee: and not to abuse thy kindness for a liberty of sinning, but to
remember our Lords warning, Behold thou art made whole, sin no Job. 5. 14.
more, lest a worse thing come unto thee. All which wholesome advice they
endeavor to overthrow, that say, The cause of thy sin is inevitably
determined in heaven; and that Man, flesh and blood, and proud corruption be
kept without sin, is of Venus doing, forsooth; or Saturn or Mars procured
it; mean while the Creator of Heaven and Stars, bears the blame of it. And
who is he but our God, the very sweetness and wellspring of Righteousness, who
shall render to every man Romans 2. 6.
according to his works: and a broken and contrite heart wilt Psalm. 51. 17.
thou not despise.

2. There was in those days a wise Gentleman, very skillful in Physics; and
famous for his Art, who being at that time This was part of the Proconsuls
Office in the Roman Provinces, to be Judge at these kind of Exercises: and in
these lesser Cities so serve from Rome, a mean man might be Proconsul. The
old Translator turns Proconsul, In place of the Consul, ignorantly.
Proconsul, had with his own hand put the Garland upon my distempered head,
but not as a Physician: for this disease thou only curest, I am. 4. 6.
who resistest the proud, and give grace to the humble. But did thou fail
me by that old Physician, or forbarest to heal my soul? For in regard I grew
more acquainted with him, and that I diligently and firmly depended upon his
advice; for hoe delivered it in neat terms, full of quick sentences, both
pleasant and grave withal. Who, when he had gathered by my discourse, that I
was given to study the books of the Nativity-casters and Figure-flingers, he
courteously and fatherly advised me to cast them all away, and that I should
not hereafter in vain bestow my care or diligence (which was necessary for
more useful things) upon that vain study: affirming withal, that himself had
in his younger years studied that Art, with a purpose to get his living by it;
hoping, if he could once have understood Hypocrates, he might attain to
understand that kind of learning also: and that he had given it over, and
wholly betaken himself to Physic, for no other reason, but that he found it
most deceitful; and he being a grave man, would not get his living by cheating
of people. But thou (says he) have the profession of Rhetoric to maintain
thy self by, whereas thou followest this study voluntarily, not driven to it
by necessity: so much the more then ought thou to give me credit in this
point, who labored to attain to perfection in it, out of a purpose merely to
get my living by it.

3. Of whom when I had demanded, what the reason was then, why so many true
things should be foretold by it? He answered me (as well as he could) That
the force of Chance, diffused round about in the nature of things, brought this
about. For if when a man had by hap-hazard consulted the books of some Poet,
who sang of and intended clean another matter, the Verses did oftentimes fall
out wondrously agreeable to the present business: it were not then to be
wondered at (says he) if out of the soul of man (by some higher instinct)
knowing nothing what is done within it self, some answer should be given,
which more by hap than any good cunning, should have agreement to the business
and actions of the demander. And thus much truly, either from or by him, thou
then wroughtest for me, and then decypheredst in my memory, what of my self I
should seek out afterward. But yet at that time neither he, nor my most dear
Nebridius; (a very good dispositioned young man, and very cautelous, who utterly
derided that whole manner of Divination) could persuade with me to cast away
those studies, even because the authority of the very Authors overswayed more
with me, and that I had not yet light upon any demonstrative argument (such as
I sought for) whereby it might clearly and without all doubtfulnesse appear,
that what had been truly foretold by those Masters of the Science, were
spoken by Fortune or by chance, and not out of the sure Art of the
Starre-gazers.

CHAP. 4. He relates the sickness and baptism of his Friend, whom himself
had infected with heresy: he grievously laments his death.
1. IN those years when I first of all began to teach Rhetoric in the Town
where I was borne, I gained a very dear friend, upon the occasion of the
neerenesse of our studies; one he was about mine own age, now springing up
with me in the flower of youth. He had grown up of a child with me, and both
schoole-fellowes and play-fellowes we had been. But yet was he not so truly
my friend, no nor of later times neither, as true friendship should be indeed;
for true it cannot be, unless thou soderest it betwixt such parties as cleave
together unto thee, by that love which is shed abroad in Romans 5. 5.
our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us. But yet a very sweet
friendship it was, being ripened by the heat of the equality of our studies:
For, from the true faith, (which he being a Youth was not soundly and thoroughly
grounded in) I had wrapped him, even toward those selfsame superstitious and
pernicious Fables, for which my Mother bewailed my condition. With me now erred
the mind of that man, nor could my soul be without him. But behold thou, ever
at the backs of thy Runneawaies, the God of revenge, and Father of mercies,
both at the Psalm. 94. 1.
same time, who turnest us to thy self by most wonderful means, tookest that
man out of this life, when he had scarce continued one whole year in my
friendship, sweet to me above all sweetness of this life.

2. What one man is able to recount all thy praises which he has felt in him
self alone? What was it thou then did, my God, and how unsearchable is the
bottomless depth of thy Judgments? For when as one day, sofe sick of his
Fever, he lay senseless in a deadly sweat, and all despairing of his
recoverie, he was baptized unwitting to himself; my self mean while little
regarding, and presuming that his soul would have retained rather what it had
received of me, and not what was now wrought in the body of him that knew The
wonderful effect of the Sacrament of Baptism.
nothing of it. But it fell out far otherwise: for he became refreshed, and
recovered his health upon it: For when as soon as ever I could come to speak
with him; (and I could, so soon as he was able: for I had never yet gone from
him, and we very nearly depended one upon another) I offered to scoff, as if
he also would have scoffed with me for company, at that Baptism which he,
being most absent both in understanding and feeling, had lately received, but
had now understood that he had received. But he looked with as great
indignation upon me, as I had been his morrall enemy; and with an admirable
and sudden freedom of language, advised me, that if I purposed to continue
his friend, I should forbear such talk to him.

3. But I all astonished and amazed, put off the disclosing of my private
commotions, till he should grow well again, and had recovered so much
strength of health, that he were fit for me to deal with as I would my self.
But he was taken away from my phrenzie, that with thee he might be preserved
for my future comfort; falling in my absence a few days after into a relapse
of his Fever, and was parted away from me. At the grief of this, my heart
was utterly over-clouded; and whatsoever I cast mine eye upon, looked like death
unto me. Mine own Country was a very Prison to me, and my Fathers house a
wonderful unhappiness; and whatsoever I had communicated in with him, wanting
him turned to my most cruel torture. Mine eyes roved about every where for
him, but they met not with him; and I hated all places for that they had not
him; nor could they now tell me, Behold, he will come shortly, as when he was
alive they did whenever he was absent. I became a great examiner of my self,
and I often asked over my soul, why she was so sad, and why she afflicted me
so sorely: but she knew not what to answer me. Then said I to my soul, Put
thy trust in God; but very justly she did not obey me; because that most dear
man whom she had lost, was both truer and better, than that fantastical God
she was bid to trust in. Only tears were sweet to me, Arar^ conceit.
for they had now succeeded in my friends place, in the dearest of my
affections.

CHAP. 5. Of tears in our prayers for, and bewailing of, the thing beloved.
1. ANd now, Lord, are these things well passed over, and time has assuaged
the anguish of my wound. May I learn this from the^ who art Truth, and may I
apply the ear of my heart unto thy mouth, that thou may tell me the reason,
why weeping should be so sweet to people in misery? Have thou (notwithstanding
thou art present every where) cast away our misery far from thee? and thou
remainest constant in thy self, but we are tumbled up and down in diverse
trials: and yet unless we should bewail our selves in thine ears, there
should no hope remain for us. How comes it then to pass, that such sweet
fruit is gathered from the bitter tree of a miserable life, namely to mourn,
and weep, and sigh, and complain? Is it this that sweetens it, that we are in
hope thou hear us. This may be rightly thought of our prayers, because they
have a desire to approach unto thee. But may it be so said too concerning that
grief and mourning for the thing lost, with which I was then wholly
overwhelmed? For I could not hope he should now revive again, nor did I desire
this with all my tears; but bemone him only I did, and weep for him: seeing a
wretch I was, and had utterly lost all my joy. Or is weeping a bitter thing,
and yet out of a full-gorg'dnesse of what we before enjoyed, and in the very
instant while we are a loathing of them, can it be pleasing to us?

CHAP. 6. He tells with what great affection he loved his friend.
1. But what speak I of these things? for it is no time to ask questions, but
to confess unto thee. Wretched I was; and wretched is every soul that is
engaged in the friendship of mortal things; he becomes all to pieces when he
forgoes them, and then first he becomes sensible of his misery, by which he is
already miserable even before he forgoes them. This was my case at that time;
I wept full bitterly, and yet was best at quiet in that bitterness. Thus was I
wretched enough, and that wretched life I accounted more dear than my friend
himself. For though I would gladly have exchanged it, yet as unwilling I was
to forgo that, as I had been to lose him; yea I knew not whether I would have
forgone that, even to have enjoyed him. The old Translator confounds these two
sentences.
Like as the tradition, (if it be not a fiction) goes of Pilades and Orestes,
who would gladly have dyed one for another, or else both together, it being to
them worse than death not to live together. But I know not what kind of
affection prevailed with me which was too much contrary to theirs, for both
grievously tedious to me it was to live, and yet fearful I was to dye. I
suppose that how much the more affectionately I loved him, so much the more did
I both hate and fear (as my cruellest enemy) death which had bereaved me of
him: and I imagined it would speedily make an end of all other men, because it
had the power to do of him. Even thus I well remember, stood I then affected.

2. Behold my heart, O my GOD, yea search it thoroughly; search it because I
remember it well, O my Hope, who cleansest me from the impurity of such
affections, directing mine eyes toward thee, and plucking my feet out of the
snare. For I much admired that other mortals did live, since he whom I so
loved, as if he never should have dyed, was now dead: yea, I more admired that
my self who was to him a second self, should be able to live after him. Well
said he of his friend, Thou half of my soul: for I still thought my soul and
his soul, to have been but one soul in two bodies: This conceit Saint
Augustine Retracted afterward Retract lib. 2. cap. 6.
and therefore was my life a very horror to me, because I would not live by
halves. And even therefore perchance was I afraid to dye, lest he should wholly
die, whom so passionately I had loved.

CHAP. 7. The impatientnesse of grief constraines us to shift our dwellings.
1 O Madness, which know not how to love men, as men should be loved! O
foolish man, which so impatiently endurest the chances mortality is subject
unto! Thus mad and foolish was I at that time. Therefore I stormed, and pu^t,
and cried, and tumbled, being capable neither of Rest nor Counsel. For I was
said to uphold my shattered and blood-blubbered Conscissam and cruentatam,
(not cruentam) animam.
soul which yet had not patience enough to be supported by me, yet a place
where to dispose of it, I could not light upon. Not in the delightful groves,
not where mirth and music was nor in the odoriferous Gardens, nor in curious
Banquettings, nor in the pleasures of the Bed and Chambering; nor (finally) in
reading over either Verse or Prose, took it any contentment. Every thing was
offensive, yea, the very light it self; and whatsoever were not as he was,
was alike painful and hateful to me, except groaning and weeping. For only
in those found I a little refreshment.

2. But so soon as I had retired my soul from them, a huge weight of misery
over-loaded me, which thou only could ease and lighten, O Lord. I knew thus
much, and yet indeed I would not, nor was I able; for thou were not any solid
or substantial thing unto me, when in those days I thought upon thee. For not
thou thy self, but mine own idle fantasy and errou^ were then my God. If I
offered to discharge my burden upon that, to give it some easement, fell as it
were into the empty air, and came tumbling again upon me: whereupon I
remained so unfortunate a place to my self, as there I could neither stay, nor
get away from it. For whither should my heart fly from my heart? Whither was
it possible to fly from mine own self? Whither should I not have followed my
self? And yet after all this, out of my Country fled: for so should mine eyes
less look for him there, where they were not wont to see him. And thus I left
Tagaste, and came to Carthage.

CHAP. 8. Time cures Sorrow,
1. TImes lose no time; not do they idly go and return about these senses of
ours; but they cause strange operations in our minds. Behold, they went a^^
same day by day, and by going and coming to and again, they brought into my
mind other notions, and other remembrances, and by little and little prec'd
me up again with my old kind of delights, unto which my present sorrow gave
some way. And yet to that again there succeeded, though not other griefs, yet
the causes of other griefs. For how came that former grief so easily and so
deeply to make impression in me, but even from hence, that I had spilt my
soul upon the sand, in loving a man that must once dye, as if he never had
been to dye? For the co^fortings of other friends did mostly repair and
refresh me, with whom I did love, what for thy sake I did not love: and this
was a great Fable, and a long lie; by the impare This passage has the old
Translator rendered very mannerly, and I have followed him.
repetition whereof, our soul, which lay itching in our ears, was wholly
corrupted.

2. But that Fable would Not yet dye with me, so often as any or my friends dyed.
But there were some other things which in my friends company did take my mind;
namely, to discourse, and to laugh with them, and to do obsequious offices of
courtesy one to another; to read pretty books together, sometimes to be in
jest, and other whiles seriously honest to one another; sometimes so to dissent
without discontent, as a man would do with his own self, and even with the
seldomnesse of those dissenting, season our more frequent consentings;
sometimes would we teach, and sometimes learn one of another; wish for the
company of the absent with impatience; and welcome (...) the new comers with
joy^^^nesse. With these and the like expressions, proceeding out of the hearts;
of those that loved and repaired one another affections, by the countenance,
by the tongue by the eyes and by a thousand other most pleasing motions, did we
Conflare, and facere: Here the Infinitive Mood is put for the Praeter imperfect
tense plural: He illudes to ^he running or melting of glass or metals
together.
soder or run as it were our souls together, and made but one out of many.

CHAP. 9. The comparing of humane friendship with divine.
1. THis is it now which a man loves in our friends; and so loves it, that he
must in conscience confess himself guilty if he should not love him that
loves him again, or not love that man again that loves him first, expecting
no other thing from him besides the pure demonstration of his love. Hence is
that mourning when ever a friend dies, yea those overcastings of sorrows, that
steeping of the heart in tears, all sweetness utterly turned into
bitterness: hence too upon the loss of the life of the dying, comes the death
of the living. But blessed is the man that loves thee, and his friend in thee,
and his enemy for thee. For he alone loses none that is dear unto him, to whom
all are dear, in him that can never be lost. And who is this but our God, the
God that made heaven and earth, and who fills them, because in filling them
he created them? Thee, no man loses, but he that lets thee go. And he that
lets, thee go, whither goes he, or whither runs he, but from thee well
pleased, back to thee offended? For where shall not such a one find thy Law
fulfilled in his own punishment? And Ioh. 17. 17
thy Law is truth, and Truth is thy self.

CHAP. 10. All beauty is from God, who is to be praised for all.
1. Turn us O God of Hosts, show us the light of thy countenance and we shall
be whole. For which way soever the soul of man turns it self, unless
toward thee, it is even rivetted-into dolours. Yea though it settles it self
upon beautiful objects without thee, and without it self: which beauties were
no beauties at all, unless they were from thee. They rise, and set; and by
rising, they begin to have Being; they grow up, that they may attain
perfection; which having attained, they wax old and wither: for grow old all
must, and all must wither too. Therefore when they spring up and tend toward a
Being, look how much more have they make to Be, so much the more they also
make not to Be. This is the law of them. Thus much have thou bequeathed them,
because they are parcels of things which are not extant all at one time, but
which by decaying and succeeding do altogether play the part of the whole
universe, whereof they are the parcels. And even thus is our speech delivered
by sounds significant: for it will never be O most dainty comparison and
expression!
a perfect sentence, unless one word gives way when it has sounded his part,
that another may succeed it.

2. And by them let my soul praise thee, O God, Creator of things; but yet let
not my soul be fastened in to these things with the glue of love through the
senses of my body. For these things go whither they were purposely to go, that
they might no longer Be, and they cleave the soul in sunder which most
pestilent desires: even * because Quon^a^a^^m^ ipsa esse vult. This he
translates, for the soul desires to be. Short of the sense.
the soul earnestly desires to be one with them, and loves finally to rest, in
these things which she loves. But in those things she finds not settlement,
which are still fleeing, because they stand not ever at the same stay: and who
is he that can follow them with the senses of his flesh; yea, who is able to
overtake them, when they are hard by him?

3. For the sense of our flesh is slow, even because it is the sense of our
flesh: and it is self is it is own measure. Sufficient enough it is for the end
it is made for; but it is not sufficient for this, namely, to hold at a stay
things running of course from their Ab initio debito, usque ad finem debtum.
appointed starting place, to their Races end. For in thy Word by which they
were created, they hear this signal, from hence, and even thus far.

CHAP. 11. All things are created mutable in themselves, and immutable in God.
1. BE not foolish O my soul and make not the care of thine heart deaf, with
the tumult of folly. But hearken now: the Word it self calls to thee to
return: for there is the place of quiet not to be disturbed, where thy love
can never be forsaken, if it self leaves not off to love. Behold, these things
give way that other things may come in their places, that so this lower would
may at last have all his parts. But do I ever depart, says the Word of God?
There set up thy dwelling, trust there whatsoever thou have left, O my soul;
especially since thou art at length tired out with these uncertainties.
Recommend over unto truth, whatsoever thou have left of truth; and thou shall
lose nothing by the bargain; yea, thy decaies shall reflourish again, and all
thy languishments shall be recovered; thy fadings shall be refreshed, shall be
renewed, and shall be made to continue with thee: nor shall they put thee down
to the place whither themselves descend; but they shall stay with thee and
stand fast for ever before that God, who himself stays and stands fast for
ever.

2. Why now my perverse soul will thou be still following thine own flesh?
Let that rather turn and follow thee. What ever by her thou have sense of, is
but in part: and the whole whereof these are parts, thou know not; and yet
this little contents thee. But had the sense of thy flesh been capable of
comprehending the whole, and not for thy punishment been stinted to a part of
the whole; thou would have then desired that whatsoever has existence at
this present should pass away, that so the whole might better have pleased
thee altogether. For what we speak, by the same sense of the flesh thou
hear, and yet would not thou have the same syllables sound ever, but fly
away, that others may come on, and thou may hear up the whole sentence. Thus
are all these things in ever Being, which have still any one part of theirs in
being, and yet all those parts which go to the making up of that whole Being,
are never all together in present Being. All together surely must needs delight
morefully, than parts single, if the pleasure of all could be felt all at once.
But far better than these all, is he that made all: and he is our God: nor
does he depart away, for that he has no successor: If bodies then please thee,
praise God for them, and turn thy love upon him that made them; lest otherwise
in those things which please thee, thou displease him.

CHAP. 12. Love of the creatures is not forbidden, provided that in those which
please us, God be loved.
1. IF then souls please thee, let them be loved in God: for they are mutable,
but in him are they firmly established, or else would they pass, and perish.
In him therefore let them be beloved; and draw unto him along with thee as many
souls as thou can, and say to them, Him let us love, let us love him; he
made all these, nor is he far from them. For he did not once make them, and
then get him gone, But of him, and in him they are. See where he is, even
wherever truth is savoury. He is within the very heart, but yet has the
heart strayed from him. (...) again to your own heart O^^ transgressors, and
cleave fast ^^ Esaias 46. 8.
to him that made you. (...) with him, and you shall (...) surely: Repose your
(...) him, and ye shall rest (...) Whither go you i^ these (...)gy passages?
O whither go you The good that you love, is (...) him; and in respect of him,
(...) both good and pleasant. But it shall justly be turned to bitterness,
because whatsoever is from him is unjustly loved, if he be forsaken for it.

2. Whither now wander (...) further and further over these difficult and
troublesome passages? There is no rest to be found where you seek it. Seek
what you do seek, but yet it is not there where you are seeking for it. You
seek a blessed life in the land of death; it is not there: for how should there
be a happy life, where there is at all no life? But our Life descended down
hither, and took away our death, and killed him, out of the abundance of his
own life: and he thundered, calling unto us to return from hence to him into
that secret place, from whence he came forth to us; coming first into the
Virgins womb, where the Humanity was married unto him, (even our mortal
flesh, though not ever to be mortal) and thence came he like a Bridegroom out
of his chamber, Psalm. 19. 5.
rejoicing as a Giant to run his course. For he foreslow'd not, but he ran,
crying both in words, deeds, death, descent, and ascension; still crying to us
to return unto him. And he withdrew himself from our eyes, that we might
return to our own heart, and there find him.

3. He withdrew himself, and behold he is still here. He would not tarry long
with us, yet has he not utterly left us; for thither is he gone, from whence
he never parted, because the world John 1.
was made by him. And in this world he was, and into this world he came to
save sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15
unto whom my soul now confesses, that he may heal it, for it has sinned
against him. O Psalm. 41. 4.
ye sons of men how long will ye be slow of heart? will ye not now after that
Life is descended down to you, will not you ascend up to it and live? But
whither ascended you when you were high-conceipted, and lifted up your head
into heaven? Descend again, that you may ascend, and ascend to God. For
descended you are, by ascending against him. Tell the souls whom thou love,
thus; that they may weep in this valley of tears; and so carry them up with
thee unto God, because by his Spirit thou speak thus unto them, if speak
thou do burning with the fire of charity.

CHAP. 13. Love whence it comes.
1. THese things I as then knew not, and I fell in love with these inferior
beauties, and I was sinking even to the very bottom, and unto my friends I
said, do we love any thing that is not beautiful? For what is fair? and
what is beauty? what is it that inveigles us thus, and that draws our
affections to the things we love? for unless there were a gracefulness and a
beauty in them, they could by no means draw us unto them. And I marked narrowly
and perceived that in the bodies themselves, there was one thing as it were the
whole feature, which in that respect was beautiful, and another thing that did
therefore become, because it was aptly fitted to some thing, as some part of
the body, in respect of the whole body, or a shoe in respect of the foot, and
the like. And this consideration sprang up in my mind even out of the
innermost of my very heart, and I composed certain books De Of Fair and Fit.
Pulchro and Apto, two or three as I think. Thou know it O Lord, for it is
out of my memory. For I have them not now by me, but lost they are, and I know
not how.

CHAP. 14. Of his book of Fair and Fit.
1. WHat was the cause, O Lord my GOD that moved me to dedicate unto Icherius
an Orator of Rome these books of mine, whom as then I so much as knew not by
face, but upon love to the man merely for the fame of his learning, which was
eminent in him, and some words of his that I had heard, which very well pleased
me? But rather did he please me, for that they pleased others, who highly
extold him, admiting much that a Syrian borne, brought up first in the Greek
Eloquence, should afterward prove so wonderful a master in the Latin also:
being above all this, a most knowing man in all the studies that pertain unto
Wisdom. A man is commended, and loved even when he is absent: Does then this
love enter the heart of the hearer immedidiately from the mouth of the prayser?
Nothing so. But by one lover is another inflamed. Hence comes it that he is
often loved, who is heard commended, when (namely) his worth is believed to be
truly set forth by the unfeined heart of the commender; that is, when he that
loves him, praises him. Thus then loved I men, upon the judgment of men, but
not upon thine, O my God, in which no man is deceived. But yet why not as that
noble Chariotier or Huntsman, so famously spoken of by our vulgar affections?
no, but far otherwise and more seriously; and even so as I would desire to be
my self commended.

2. For I would by no means have my self or commended or loved, in that kind
that Stageplayers are, (though I my self did sometimes both commend and love
them) but I would choose rather to have lived concealed, than to be known that
way; and to be hated, than in that kind to be beloved. Where now are these
overswayings of such various and diverse kinds of loves distributed in one
soul? what is it that I am in love with in another man? And what again is it,
that did I not hate him for, I should not detest and keep him out of my
company, seeing we are men either of us? For the comparison holds not, that as
a good horse is loved by him, who would not yet be that horse, no not though he
might; the same should likewise be affirmed of a Stage Player, who is a fellow
in nature with us. Do I therefore love that in a man, which I hate to be,
seeing I am a man? Man is a great deep, whose very hayres thou numberest, O
Lord, and they fall not Mat. 10. 29. 30.
to the ground without thee, and yet are the hayres of his head easier to be
numbered, than are his affections and the motions of his heart.

3. But that Orator whom I so loved was one of those that I would have wished my
self to have been: and I erred through a swelling pride, and was tossed up
and down with every wind, but I was governed by thee very secretly. And how
now shall I know, and how may I upon a sure ground confess unto thee, that I
loved that man more for the love of them that commended him, than for the good
parts themselves for which he was commended? Because if the self same men
should not have dispraysed him whom they before had praised, and by dispraysing
and despising him had they not told the same things of him, I should never have
been so kindled and provoked to love him.

4. See where the impotent so le lies along, that is not yet staid up by the
solidity of truth. Just as the blasts of tougues blow out of the breasts of
censurers, so is it carried this way and that way, tumbled and tossed up and
down, and the light is so beclowded that it can never discern the truth: And
yet it is right before us. I conceived to purchase some great credit by it, if
my style and meditations might but be known to that famous man: which should
he allow of, then were I more on fire, but if he disapproved, this vain heart
of mine utterly void of thy solidity, had been cut to the quick at it. And yet
that subject of Fair and Fit upon which I wrote to him, my meditations gladly
labored upon, and though I wanted others to commend it, yet did I my self
admire it.

CHAP. 15. How his understanding being overshadowed with corporeal Images, he
could not discern the spiritual.
1. But I could not all this while discover the maine point of the business in
that artfull carriage of thine, O thou Omnipotent who only do great
wonders: and my conceit ranged through corporeal forms; as Fair, that is so,
absolutely of it self; and Fit, which becomes graceful when applied to some
other thing: and I defined and distinguished, and confirmed my argument by
corporeal examples. I set my studies afterward to consider of the nature of
the Soul, but that false opinion which I had already entertained concerning
spiritual, matters would not let me discover the truth, yet the force of truth
did ever and anon flash into mine eyes, but I turned away my panting soul from
all incorporeall substances, setting it upon line aments, and colors, and
swelling quantities. And for that I was not able to see all these in my soul,
I verily believed that I could not see that soul of mine. And whereas in
virtue I loved peace, and in vitiousnesse I abhorred discord: in the first I
observed an Unity, but division ever to be in this. And in that Unity, He
alludes to the Manichees errors, which had infected him.
I conceived the nature both of truth and of our chiefest goodness to consist:
but in this division, silly I imagined, I know not what substance of an
irrational life, and the nature of the greatest evil, which should not only
be a substance, but a very The old Translator jumbles two sentences into one.
true life also: and yet not at all depend on thee, O my God, of whom are all
things. And yet that first I called Unity, as if it had been a Soul with
(...), but the latter I styled a Duality (or a Division,) which should be
Anger, in unmanly cruelties: and lust, in beastly impurities; little knowing
what I talk of He alludes to the Manichees foolish Philosophical Divinity,
which notwithstanding that the so^le and (...) ^^culties were created all at
once, and all good, ((...) by the Fall;) yet they made the Soul only to be
good, from which virtue came, which they called unity; (...) that the soul was
but one: but the powers of the soul, they (having an eye only to the Fall and
not to the Creation) made to be absolutely and originally Evil and ^^ causes
of all Evil. Such were those two power of (...) Sensitive Appetite, the
Concupiscible and the ^^cible: (of which they made their Duality or Division)
whereof nature intended the first, (the Concupiscible or Longing appetite) for
the conservation of the (...) and the pleasant or well being of it: and the
(...) or angry appetite, for the defense of the Concupiscible: by which we are
angry at, and resist whatsoever (...) our wellbeing The use of both together is
to (...) good, and to (...) evil, for soul and body. (...) Appetites be in
the Motive faculty of the (...) Soul: by these ^^e soul moves herself to or
(...) sesued or abhorred object. Here the old (...) much mistakes, for want of
Philosophy.
.

2. For I had not as yet either known or learned, that neither was any
substance evil, or that our own soul was not that chiefest and unchangeable
goodness. For even as those are to be called facinora, that is, bold, heinous,
and desperate deeds, if so be that motion of the soul in which the force of
the Appetite now is, be vicious or corrupted, stirring it self insolently and
unrulily: and those are to be styled Flagitia, Crimes, or naughty actions, when
that affection of the soul, by which carnal pleasures are taken into
resolution, be any way immoderate or disorderly. And thus do Errors and false
opinions defile the conversation, if so be that the reasonable soul it self
be viciously disposed; as it was in me at that time, when I was utterly
ignorant of any other light to illustrate it by, to make it partaker of the
Truth, seeing of it self it is not that Nature of Truth. For thou shall light
my Candle, Psalm. 18. 28
O Lord my God, thou shall enlighten my darkness: and of thy fullness have we
all received; Ioh 1. 16, 9
for thou art the true light that lights every man that Iam. 1. 16.
comes into the world; for that in thee there is no variableness, 1 Pet. 5.
5.
neither shadow of change. But I pressed toward thee, and was as fast thrust
from thee, that I might taste of death: for thou resistest the proud.

3. And what could be prouder, than for me with a wonderful madness to
maintain, my self to be that by nature which thou thy self art? For whereas
my self was mutable, (so much appearing manifestly unto me, in that I became
so ambitious to grow wiser, that of worse I might so prove better;) yet chose I
rather to imagine thee to be mutable, than my self not to be that which thou
were. Therefore gave thou me the repulse, and thou curiedst my unconstant
stiffe-neckednesse, and I fancied to my self certain corporeal forms, and
being flesh, I accused flesh; and being a way faring spirit, I did not turn
toward thee, but went nuddling on and on toward those fancies which have no
being, neither in thee, nor in me, nor in any body. For they were not created
for me by thy Truth, but devised merely by mine own vain conceit, fancying
out a body. And I demanded of thy faithful little ones, my fellow-Citizens,
(from whom unbeknowing to my self I stood exiled) I put the question to them,
I say, (prating and foolish man that I was!) Why therefore does the soul err
which God has created? But I would endure upon no terms, any one should
demand of me, Why therefore does God err? And I stiffly maintained, that thy
unchangeable substance rather did err upon constraint, than be brought to
confess mine own changhable substance to have gone astray voluntarily, or
gone any thing near it.

4. I was at that time perchance six or seven and twenty year old, when I
composed those Volumnes; canvassing up and down with my self these corporeal
fictions, which were still buzzing in the ears of my heart, (which ears I
intended rather, O sweet Truth, to hearken after thy inward melody) plodding
all this time upon my Fair and Fit, and desiring to stay, and to hearken to
thee, and to rejoice exceedingly at the voice of thy Spouse, but could not
bring my self to it; for by the calls of mine own errors, I was drawn out of
my self, and oppressed with the weight of my own proud conceit, I sunk into
the lowest pit. For thou did not make me to hear (...) Psalm. 51. 8.
and gladness, that the (...) which thou had not yet enough broken might
rejoice.

CHAP. 16. The admirable aptness to Learning, and the great understanding S.
Augustine had.
1. ANd what was I the better for it, when scarce twenty years old, that Book
of Aristotle's Praedicaments falling into my hands, (of which my
Rhetoricke-master of Carthage, and others, esteemed very good Scholars, would
be cracking with full mouths:) I earnestly and with much suspense gap't upon
it at first, as upon I know not what deep and divine piece; but read it over
afterward, yea and attained the understanding of it, by my self alone? And
comparing my Notes afterward with theirs, who protested how hardly they gate
to understand the Book from very able Tutors, not dictating to them only, by
word of mouth, but taking pains also to delineate out in the Multa in pulvere
depingentibus. Which the Other Translator turns, writing them in the dust:
noting in his margent, that it was a manner of ^^iting then used. Boldly
affirmed. I dare say there was never such a manner of writing. But thus it was;
The Mathematicians had their pulverem Mathematicum, dust in linen bags,
which scirced or pownc'd upon a board, they drew their Schemes and Diagrams
upon, to make ocular demonstration withal; either for their own use or their
Scholars. This they could easily and the aply put in and out again. Arch
medes was taken in his Study, drawing his Mathematical Lines in such dust.
dust the Schemes and demonstrations of it; they could teach me no more of it,
than I had observed before upon mine own reading. And it seemed plain enough
to my capacity, when they discourst of Substances, such as Man is, and of the
Accidents inhering to these Substances; as for example, the figure of a man,
how qualified he was, and of what shape and stature, how many foot high, and
his relation to his kindred, whose brother he is, or where placed, or when
borne, or whether he stands or sits, or be shod or armed, or does or suffers
any thing: and whatsoever to be learned besides in these nine Praedicaments,
(of which I have given these former examples) or these other innumerable
observations in that chief Praedicament of Substance.

2. What now did all this further me, seeing withal it as much hindered me?
when as I took pains to understand thee, O my God, (whose Essence is most
wonderfully simple and unchangeable) imagining whatsoever had being, to be
comprehended under those ten Praedicaments: as if thy self had been subject
to thine own Greatness or Beauty; and that these two had an inherence in
thee, like Accidents in their Subject, or as in a Body: whereas thy greatness
and beauty is thy Essence; but a body is not great or fair in that regard as
it is a body, seeing that though it were less great or fair, yet should it be
a body notwithstanding. But it was a mere falsehood which of thee I had
conceived, and no truth; a very fiction of mine own foolery, and no solid
ground of thy happiness. For thou had given forth the command, and so it
came to pass in me, that my earth should bring forth briars and thorns in me,
and that in the sweat of my brows I should eat my bread.

3. And what was I the better, that I the vile Slave to wicked affections, read
over by my self, and understood all the books of those Sciences which they
call liberal, as many as I could cast mine eye upon? And that I took great
delight in them, but knew not all this while whence all that came whatsoever
was true or certain in them. For I stood with my back to the light, and with
my face toward these things which received that light: and therefore my face,
with which I discerned these things that were illuminated, was not it self
illuminated. Whatever was written, either of the Art of Rhetoric, or
Logic, whatever of Geometry, Music, and Arithmeticke, I attained the
understanding of by my self, without any great difficulty, or any instructor
at all, as thou know, O Lord my God; even because the quicknes of
conceiving, and the sharpness of disputing is thy gift: and yet did I not
sacrifice any part of it to thy acknowledgement. All this therefore served not
me to any good employment, but to my destruction rather, since I went about to
get so good a part He alludes to the Prodigal, Luke ^5.
of my portion into mine own custody; and I preserved not mine own abilities
entire for thy service, but wandering into a far Country, to spend it there upon
my Harlotries. For what good did it me to have good abilities, and not employ
them to good uses? For I understood not that those Arts were attained with
great difficulty, even by those that were very studious and ingenuous O
wonderful natural wit of S. Augustine!
Scholars, until that my self going about to interpret them in others
hearing, he was held the most excellent at them, who was able to follow me
with least slownesse.

4. But what at last did all this benefit me, thinking all this while, that
thou, O Lord my God of truth, were nothing but a vast and bright Body, and my
self some piece of that Body? O extreme perverseness! but in that case was I
then; nor do I blush, O my God, to confess thy mercies toward me, and to
call upon thee, who blushed not then openly to profess before men mine own
blasphemies, and to bark against thee. What good did then my nimble wit, able
to run over all those Sciences; and all those most knotty Volumes, made easy
to me, without help or light from any Tutor; seeing I erred so The Papists
brag of being in the true Church, but plainly their Chickens seldom prove
more than spoonefeathered, and not hardpenn'd. For they want the food here
spoken of, Sound Faith. Traditions, Legends, seined Miracles, carnal Vows,
and out side Sanctity, may puff up, not edify.
foully, and with so much sacrilegious shamefulnesse in the Doctrine of Piety?
Or what hinderance was a far slower wit to thy little ones, seeing they
straggled not so far from thee, but that in the Nest of thy Church they might
securely plume themselves, and nourish the wings of charity, by the food of a
solid faith.

5. O Lord our God, under the shadow of thy wings let us hope; defend thou, and
hold us up. Thou shall bear us up, both while we are little, and when we are
gray headed: for our weakness, when it is from thee, then is it strength; but
when it is of our selves, then is it weakness indeed. Our good still lives with
thee; from which because we are averse, therefore are we perverse, Let us now
at last, O Lord, return, that we do not overturne: because with thee our
Good lives without any defect, which Good thou art. We shall not need to fear
finding a place to return unto, because we fell headlong from it: for how^ever
we have been long absent from thence, yet that house of ours shall not fall
down; and that is thy Eternity. *

SAINT AUGUSTINES Confessions. THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1. He stirs up his own soul to praise God.
REceive here the Sacrifice of my Confessions from the hand of my Tongue,
which thou have formed and stirred up to confess unto thy Name. Heal thou all
my bones, and let them say, O Lord, who is like unto thee? For neither does a
man teach thee what is done within himself, when he confesses to thee; seeing
a closed heart shuts not out thy eye, nor can man's hard-heartednesse thrust
back thy hand: for thou openest it when thou please, either out of pity or
justice to us, and there is nothing can hide it self from thy heat. But let
my soul praise thee that it may love thee: and let it confess thine own
mercies to thee, that it may praise thee. No creature of thine is slack or
silent in thy praises, nor the spirit of any man by the praises of his mouth
converted to thee; no nor yet any animal or corporeal creature, He means:
that the goodly order and workmanship of the creatures causes those that well
consider them, to open their mouths in praises to God for the^. The Old
Translator is much puzzled here, confounding both the sense and Sentences.
by the mouths of those that well consider of them: that so our soul may
toward thee rowze it self up from wearines, leaning it self on those things
which thou have created, and passing over to thy self, who have made them so
wonderfully; where refreshment and true fortitude is.

CHAP. 2. Gods presence can no man avoid, seeing he is every where.
1. LEt unquiet and naughty people now run and flee from thee as fast as they
will; yet thou see them well enough, and can distinguish of shadows. And
behold, all seems gay to them, mean while themselves be deformed. And what
wrong have they done thee by it, or how have they disparaged thy government,
which from the highest heaven to this lowest earth, is most just and perfect?
But whither are they fled, when they fled from thy presence? Or in what corner
shall not thou find them out? But run away Psalm. 139. 7
that they might not see thee, who well saw them, that being thus
blindfolded, they might stumble upon thee, because thou forsakest nothing that
thou have made; that the unjust I say might stumble upon thee, and be justly
vexed by it; withdrawing themselves from thy lenity, and stumbling at thy
justice, fall foul upon thy severity. Little know they in truth, that thou art
every where, whom no place incompasses, and that thou alone art ever near,
even to those that set themselves furthest from thee.

2. Let them therefore be turned back, and seek thee; because as they have
forsaken thee their Creator, thou have not so given over thy Creature. Let them
be converted, that they may seek thee; and behold, thou art there in their
heart, in the heart of those that confess to thee, and that cast themselves
upon thee, and that power forth their tears in thy bosom, after all their
tedious wanderings. Then shall thou most gently wipe away their tears, that
they may weep the more, yea, and delight in their weeping; even for that thou,
Lord, and not any man of flesh and blood, but thou Lord, who made them, can
refresh and comfort them. But whereabouts was I, when I sought after thee? Thou
were directly before me, but I had gone back from thee; nor did I then find
my self, much less thee.

CHAP. 3. Of Faustus the Manichee: and of Astrology.
1. LEt me lay open before my GOD that nine and twentieth year of mine Age.
There came in those days unto Carthage a certain Bishop of the Manichees,
Faustus by name: a great snare of the Devil he was, and many were entangled by
him in that ginne of his smooth Language: which though my self did much
commend in him, yet was I able to discern betwixt it, and the truth of those
things which I then was earnest to learn: nor had I an eye so much to the
curious Dish of Oratory, as what substance of Science their so famous Faustus
set before me to feed upon. Report had beforehand highly spoken him to me; as,
that he was a most knowing man in all honest points of Learning, and
exquisitely skilled in all the liberal Sciences.

2. And for that I had sometimes read many books of the Philosophers, and had
fresh in memory much of theirs; I presently fell to compare some points of
theirs to those soul fables of the Manichees: and those things verily which
the Philosophers had taught, (who could only prevail so far as to make
judgment of this lower world, though the Lord of it they could by no means
find out) seemed far more probable unto me. For great art thou, O Lord, and
have respect unto the humble, but Psalm. 138. 6
the proud thou beholdest afar off. Nor do thou draw near, but to the
contrite in heart, nor art thou found by those that be proud, no not though
they had the curious skill to number the Stars and the sand, and to quarter
out the houses of the heavenly Constellations, and to find out the courses of
the Planets. For with their Understanding and Wit, which thou bestowedst on
them, do they search out these things: yea they have found out and foretold
many a year, before the Eclipses of the lights of the Sun and Moon, what
day and what hour, and how many Digits they should be so, nor has their
calculation faild them: and just thus came all to pass as they foretold; and
they committed to writing the Rules found out by them, which are read this day,
and out of them do others foretell in what year, and month of the year, and
what day of the month, and what hour of the day, and what part of it is light,
the Moon or Sun is to be Eclipsed, and so it shall come to pass as it is
foreshewed.

3. At these things men wonder and are astonished, that know not this Art, and
they that do know it, triumph and are extolled; and our of a wicked pride
turning back from thee, failing thereby of thy light, they foresee an Eclipse
of the Sun so long beforehand, but perceive not their own which they suffer
in the present. For they enquire not religiously enough from whence they are
enabled with the wit, to seek all this withal: and finding that it is thou
that made them, they resign not themselves up unto thee, that thou may
preserve what thou have made, and that they may kill in sacrifice unto thee,
what they have made themselves to be; and slay their own exalted imaginations,
like as the fowls of the air; and their own curiosities, like as the fishes
of the Sea, in which they wander over the unknown paths of the bottomless pit;
and their own luxuriousness, like as the beasts of the field; that thou Lord,
who art a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 4. 21.
may burn up those dead cares of theirs, and renew themselves immortally.

4. But they knew not that way, (thy Word) by which thou made these things
which themselves can calculate, and the calculators themselves, and the sense
by which they see what they calculate, and the understanding, out of which they
do number it; or that of thy wisdom there is no number. But the only
Begotten is made unto us Wisdom, and Righteousness, and 1 Cor. 1. 30
Sanctification, and was numbered as one of us, and paid tribute unto Caesar.
This way have not these men known, by which they should descend from
themselves down to him, and by it ascend again unto him. They verily knew not
this way, and they conceit themselves to move in an high orb, and to shine
amongst the Stars; whereas behold they grovell upon the ground and their
foolish heart is darkened. They discourse truly Romans 1. 21.
of many things concerning the creature; but the true Architect of the creature
they do not religiously seek after; and therefore do they not find him. Or
if they do find him, acknowledging him to be God, yet they glorify Romans 1.
21.
him not as God, neither were thankful, but became again in their
imaginations. They give out themselves to be wise, attributing thy works unto
their skill; and in this humor with a most perverse blindness study they on
the other side to impute to thee their own follies; entitling thee who art
Truth it self unto their lies; changing Romans 1. 23, 25.
thus the glory of the uncorruptible God into an Image made like corruptible
man, and to birds, and four footed beasts, and creeping things: changing thy
truth into a lie, and served the creature more than the Creator.

5. But yet diverse observations concerning the creature truly delivered by
these Philosophers, did I retain in memory, yea and I conceived the Reason of
them by mine own calculations, the order of times, and the visible testimonies
of the Staries: and all this I compared with the sayings of Manichaeus, who had
written much of these subjects, doting most abundantly; nor did he give me any
reason either of the Solstices, or Aequinoxes, or the Ecclipses of the greater
Lights, nor of any such point as I had learned in the Books of secular
Philosophy. But in his Writings was I commanded to believe all, but no answer
met I withal unto those reasons, which had been found true, both by mine own
calculatings and eyesight; from all which, his was quite contrary.

CHAP. 4. Only the knowledge of GOD makes happy.
1. TEll me, O Lord God of Truth, is whosoever is skillful in these Philosophic
all things thereby acceptable unto thee? Surely most unhappy is the man that
knows all these things, and is ignorant of thee: but happy is he that knows
thee, though ignorant of these. And he that knows both thee and them; is not
the happier for them, but for thee only; upon condition that as he knows thee,
so he glorifies thee as God, and it thankful, and becomes not vain in his
own imaginations. Romans 1. 21.


2. For even as he is in better case that knows how to possess a Tree, and to
return thanks unto thee for the commodities of it, although he knows not how
many cubits high it rises, or how broad it spreads; than he that has the
skill to measure it, and keeps an account of all the boughs of it, and is
neither owner of it, nor knows nor loves him that created it: Even so, a
faithful man; whose right all this world of wealth is, and who having nothing,
yet does as it were possess all things, even by eleaving unto thee, to whom
all things serve, though he knows not so much as the Circles of the North; yet
is it folly to doubt but he is in better estate than he that can quarter out
the heavens and number the stars, and poises the Elements, and yet is
negligent of thy knowledge, who have made all things in number, Wis. 11. 20
weight, and measure.

CHAP. 5. The rashness of Faustus, in teaching what he know not.
1. But yet who requested I know not what Manichaean to write these things,
without the skill of which, true piety might well be learned? For thou have
said unto man, Behold, Job 28. 28.
piety is wisdom: of which that Manichaean might be utterly ignorant, though
perfect at the knowledge of these things: but these things because he knew not,
most impudently daring to (...) them, he was not able plainly to attain the
knowledge of that piety. A great vanity it is verily to profess the knowledge
of these worldly things; but it is a pious thing to confess unto thee.
Wherefore this roving fellow prated indeed much of these things, that so being
confuted by those who had not learned the truth of these things, he might be
evidently discovered what understanding he had in points that were abstruser.
For the man would not have himself meanly thought of, but went about forsooth
to persuade, that the Holy Ghost, Manichaeus his pride and blasphemy. All
Heretics do thus brag of the Spirit.
the Comforter and Enricher of the faithful ones, was with full auhority
personally resident within him.

2. Whereas therefore he was found out to have taught falsely of the Heavens
and Stars, and of the courses of the Sun and Moon, (although these things
pertain little to the Doctrine of Religion) yet that his presumptions were
sacrilegious is apparent enough, seeing that he delivered those things not
only which he knew not, but which himself had falsified, and that with so mad
a vanity of pride, that he went about to attribute them to himself, as to a
divine person. Whenever now I hear a Christian Brother, (either one or other)
that is ignorant enough of these Philosophical Subtilties, and that mistaketh
one thing for another, I can patiently behold such a man delivering his
opinion; nor do I see how it can much hinder him, when as he does not believe
any thing unworthy of thee, O Lord, the Creator of all, if perchance he be
less skilled in the situation or condition of the corporeal creature. But
then it hurts him, if so be he imagines this to pertain to the form of the
doctrine of piety, and will yet stand too stiffely in a thing he is utterly
ignorant of.

3. And yet is such an infirmity in the infancy of a man's faith borne withal
by our Mother Charity, till such time as this new Convert grow up unto a
perfect man, and not to be carried Ephesians. 4. 13, 14.
about with every wind of Doctrine: whereas in that Faustus, who was so
presumptuous as to make himself the Doctor and Author, the Ringleader and
chief man of all those whom he had inveigled to the opinion, that who-ever
became his follower, did not imagine himself to follow a mere man, but thy
holy Spirit; who would not judge but that so high a degree of madness, when
once he had been convicted to have taught such falsities, were not to be
detested, and utterly rejected? But I had not clearly as yet found out,
whether the interchanged alterations of the length and shortness of days and
nights, yea of the day and night it self, with the Eclipses and wainings of
the greater Lights, and other things of the like kind which I had read of in
other Books, might be so expounded as to stand with his determination of them:
but though peradventure it might so be, yet should it remain uncertain to
me, whether it were so or not: however, for the great sanctity supposed to be
in the man, I was forsooth to propound to my self his authority, which ought
to be enough to make me believe him.

CHAP. 6. Faustus was eloquent by nature, rather than by Art.
1. ANd by the space almost of those 9 years, wherein with an unsettled mind I
had been a Disciple of the Manichees, with a desire set upon the
Tenter-hookes, had I expected the coming of this Faitstus. For all the rest of
that Sect, whom by chance I had light upon, and had put to a non plus with my
Questions and objections about these things, still promised me this Faustus,
upon whose coming and conference all these, and greater difficulties, if I had
them, would most easily and clearly be satisfied. So soon therefore as he was
come, I quickly tasted him to be a very pleasing-languag'd man, and one that
could prate a great deal more delightfully of those points that they were wont
to talk of: But how should a spruce Cup Bearer slake the thirst I had after
those precious Cups? Mine ears had been cloyed already with such trash; which
did not now therefore seem better to me, because better said; nor therefore
true, because eloquent; nor seemed the soul wise, because the face had a good
garb, and the language a sweet tone. As for them who had made such promises of
him to me, they plainly were no good Judges of things; and therefore to them
he appeared prudent and wise, for that he could please them in the speaking.

2. Another sort of people I had also met withal, who Just the Purilane humor
of our ti^es; with whom our incomparable Court Sermons are flatteries; and our
neatest Preachers are Ladypreachers: for so they call them.
become presently suspicious of the Truth it self, and refuse to acknowledge
it so, if delivered in a picked and flue it discourse. But thou, O my God,
had taught me by wonderful and secret ways, and therefore I believe, even
because thou have taught me; for that is the very truth, nor is there besides
thee any other teacher of Truth, wheresoever or whenever he may be famous.
Of thy self therefore had I now learned; nor ought any thing seem to be
truly spoken, because eloquently set off; nor false therefore, because
delivered with an untuneable pronuntiation. Again, nor therefore true, because
roughly delivered; nor therefore false, because graced in the speaking: but it
fares with Wisdom and Folly, as it does with wholesome and unwholesome Diet;
and with neat and undrest Phrases, as with Courtly or Country Vessels; either
kind of meats may be served up in either kind of dishes. That greediness
therefore of mine, with which I had so long expected that man, was delighted
verily with the carriage and action of his dispute, fluently expressing
himself, and in such terms as were very apt to set out his sentences to the
best.

2. I was therefore much taken with him; and with others many, yea and more than
those many, did I both praise and extol him; this I took ill from him, that
in the assembly of his Auditors, I might not be suffered to put in now and
then, and This was the old fashion of the East; where (...) Scholars had
liberty to ask questions of their Masters, and to move doubts as the
Professors were reading, or so soon as the Lecture was done. Thus did our
Savior with the Doctors, (...) 2. 46. So (...) still in some European
Universities
communicate those questions that troubled me, by a familiar conferring and
exchange of arguments with him. Which when I gate opportunity to do, I, with
other of my friends, both began to busy his ears, and that at s^^h times too,
as had not been undecent for him to have exchanged an argument with me; and I
opened my self in such things as did sway much with me: but the man I found
utterly unskilful in the liberal Sciences, five of Grammar only, and but
ordinarily in that neither. But because he had read some of Tullies Orations,
some few books of Seneca, diverse of the Poets, and those Volumes of his own
Sect, which had been written in the Latin tongue, and something hansomly; and
for that he was daily practiced in speaking upon a subject; thence became he
furnished with eloquence, which proved the more pleasing and inveigling, being
governed by a good wit, and set off with a kind of gracefulness that was
natural unto him. Is it not thus, as I now remember, O Lord my God, thou Judge
of my conscience? Before thee my heart still is, and my remembrance too; thou
who did at that time direct me by the hidden secret of thy providence, and
did turn those shameful errors of mine before my face, that I might see
and hate-them.

CHAP. 7. He falls off from the Manichees.
1. FOr after that he had sufficiently appeared to me, to be thus ignorant of
those Arts in which I thought he had excelled; I began to despair that he
should ever open and untye these difficulties which so much perplexed me; of
which though a man were ignorant, he might yet hold fast the truth of Piety,
provided he were not a Maniches. For their Books are fraught with farre-fetcht
Fables, of the Heaven, and the Stars, of the Sun, and of the Moon, which I
(having compared with the calculations I had read of other where) did not
hereafter hold him any ways able subtilely to resolve me in (which I much
desired) whether those things should be rather so, as in the Manichees books
they were contained, or that some as sufficient reason might at least be
fetched out of them. Which Quaere's when I had offered to be considered upon and
discussed, he modestly (to say truth) had not the boldness to undergo the
burden, (being guilty of his own ignorance in these Arts) nor was at last
ashamed to confess as much. For none of those prating fellows he was, many of
which I had been troubled withal, that would undertake to instruct me in
these Arts, and at last say nothing to the purpose. But this man bare an
ingenuous mind, though not right toward thee, yet not too rash toward
himself: for he was not altogether ignorant of his own ignorance; nor was
he willing rashly to engage himself in a Dispute, whence he could neither
get off, nor retire fairly. And even for this did I like the better of him:
for fairer appears the modesty of a confessing mind, than those things which
I then desired to be informed of. And at this guard I found him lying, in all
those more difficult and subtiler questions.

2. My edge being thus taken off, which I had keenely intended toward the
Manichees doctrine; and despairing more of the performance of their other
Doctors, seeing in diverse things which had stumbled me, this so famous Faustus
had appeared so shallow; I began with him to take the same course of life,
according to that study which he was very hot upon, in that kind of learning,
in which at that time being a Rhetoricke-Reader in Carthage, I instructed young
Students; and I began to read with him, either what himself desired to hear,
or such stuff as I judged fit for such a wit. But all my endeavor, by which I
purposed to proceed in that Sect, upon knowledge of that man, began utterly to
faint in me; not that I yet brake with them altogether, but as one not finding
any thing better than that course, upon which I had some way or other thrown
my self; I resolved to stay where I was a while, until by some good chance
something else might appear, which I should see more cause to make choice of.

3. And thus that Faustus, who had been the very snare of death unto diverse,
had now, nor willing nor knowing, begun to unbinde the snare in which I was
fettered. For thy hands, O my God, out of the secret of thy providence, did not
now forsake my soul; and out of the blood of my Mothers heart, through her
tears night and day powered out, had thou a Sacrifice offered for me; and
thou proceededst with me by strange and secret ways. This thou did, O my
God: for the steps of a man shall be directed by the Lord, and he shall
dispose his way. For how shall we procure Pro. 21. 29
salvation, but from thy hand, that repaires whatsoever thou have made?

CHAP. 8. He takes a voyage to Rome, against the will of his Mother.
1. THou dealtest with me therefore, that I should be persuaded to go to Rome,
and to teach there, rather than at Carthage. And how I came to be persuaded to
this, I will not neglect to confess unto thee: because hereby thy most
profound secrets, and thy most ready mercy toward us, may be considered upon
and professed. I had no intent for this cause to go toward Rome, that greater
gettings, and higher preferments were warranted me by my friends which
persuaded me to the journey, (though these hopes likewise drew on my mind at
that time) but there was another great reason for it, which was almost the
only reason, that I had heard how young men might follow their studies there
more quietly, and were kept under a stticter course of discipline; that they
might not at their pleasures, and in insolent manner, rush in upon that man's
School, where their own Master professed not, no nor come within the doors
of it, unless he permitted it.

2. But at Carthage, on the other side, reigns a most uncivil and unruly
licentiousness The insolent fashion of the Students in Carthage.
amongst the Scholars: They break in audaciously, and almost with Bedlam
looks, disturb all order which any Master has propounded for the good of his
Scholars. Diverse outrages do they commit, with a wonderful stupidnesse,
deserving soundly to be punished by the Laws, were not Custom the defendresse
of them; this declaring them to be more miserable, as if that were lawful to
do, which by thy eternal Law shall never be so: and they suppose they escape
unpunished all this while, whereas they be enough punished with the blindness
which they do it with, and that they already suffer things incomparably worse
than what they do. These men's manners therefore when I was a Student, I would
never fashion my self unto, though when I set up School I was feign to endure
them from others: and for this cause was I desirous to go to Rome, where, all
those that knew it, assured me, that there were no such insolences committed.
But thou, O my refuge Psalm. 142. 5.
and my portion in the land of the living, to force me to change my dwelling
for the salvation of my soul, did prick me forward with goads at Carthage,
with which I might be driven thence, and made proffer of certain allurements
at Rome, by which I might be drawn thither: even by men who were in love with
a dying life, now playing mad pranckes, then promising vain hopes: and, for
the reforming of my courses, did thou make secret use both of their
perverseness and of mine own too. For both they that disturbed my quiet, were
blinded with a base madness, and those that invited me to another course,
savoured merely of the Earth. And I my self, who here detested true misery,
aspired there to a false felicity.

3. But the cause why I went from thence, and went thither, thou knew, O
God, yet did thou neither discover it to me, nor to my Mother, who heavily
bewailed my journey, and followed me as far as the Sea side. But I deceived
her, though holding me by force, that either I should go back with her, or
she might go along with me: for I feined that I had a friend whom I could not
leave, till I saw him with a fair wind under sail. Thus I made a lie to my
Mother, and to so good a Mother too, and so got away from her. But this have
thou mercifully forgiven me, preserving me from the waters of the Sea, then
full of execrable filthiness, landing me safe at the water of thy Grace; He
means the waters of baptism.
with which so soon as I were purged, those floods of my Mothers eyes should
be dried up, with which for my sake she daily watered the ground under her face,
in prayer unto thee. At last refusing to return without me, I with much ado
persuaded her to stay that night in a place hard by our Ship, where there was
an Oratory erected Memoria beati Cypriani. This the former Translator turns,
The Shrine of Saint Cyprian: and notes in his margent, The place where S.
Cyprians Relics were kept. See our Preface.
in memory of S. Cyprian. That night I privily stole aboard, but she tarryed
behind in weeping and prayer. And what, O Lord, requested she at thy hands,
but that thou would not suffer me to sail away from her. But thou
profoundly providing, and fearing the maine point of her desire, did not at
that time regard her petition, that thou might bring that to pass in me,
which she had always begged of thee.

4. The wind blew fair, and sweld our sails, and the shore withdrew it self
from our sights. The morrow after she fell into an extreme passion of sorrow,
and with complaints and lamentation she even filled thine ears, which did for
that time little seem to regard them: even then, when through the strength of
my own desires, thou did hurry me away, that thou might at once put an
end to al her cares: mean while her carnal affection toward me, was justly
punished by the scourge of sorrows. For she much doated on my company, as
Mothers use to do, yea much more fondly than many Mothers: for little knew she
how great a Joy thou were about to work for her out of my absence. She knew
nothing of it, therefore did she weep and lament; proving herself by those
tortures, to be guilty of what Eve left behind her; with sorrow seeking, what
she had brought forth in sorrow. But having at last made an end of accusing me
of false and hard dealing with her, she betook her self again to entreat
thy favor for me, returned home: and I went on toward Rome.

CHAP. 9. Of a shrewd fever that he fell into.
1. But lo, there was I welcomed with the rod of bodily sickness, and I was
even ready to go to hell, carrying with me all those sins which I had
committed, both against thee, and my self, yea many and grievous offenses
against others, over and above that bond of original Because he was not yet
baptized. Ephesians. 2. 16.
sin, whereby we all dye in Adam. For thou had not yet forgiven me any
thing in Christ, nor had he yet slain that enmity by his Cross which by my
sins I had incurred: and how indeed could he by an imaginary suffering upon it,
which was my Another error of the Manichees who believed not Christ to have
assumed a true body, but a fantastical appearance and shape only.
belief of it. How false therefore the death of his Flesh seemed unto me, so
true was the death of my soul; and how true the death of his body was, so
false was the life of my soul, which did not believe the death of his body. My
fea^es now growing more violent upon me, I was at the point of going and
perishing: for whither should I have gone, had I dyed at that time, but into
fire and torments, such as my misdeeds were worthy of in the truth of thy
decree. Of all this nothing knew my mother, yet continued she to pray for me
though in absence. But thou who art present every where, heardest her where she
was, and had compassion upon me, whereas I was; for I recovered health of
body thereupon, though sorely crazed as yet in my sacrilegious heart. For I had
not in all that danger desired thy baptism, and I was better affected being
but a youth when through my mothers devotion in my sickness I had bin very
earnest to receive it: as I have before recited and confessed.

2. But I had from thenceforth grown worse and worse, to my own shame: and
now stark mad I scoffed at those prescripts of that Physike of thine by
which thou would not suffer me to dye He alludes to his own Manichaean
humor and contempt of Baptism, that Physike of the soul which suffers it not
to dye the second death, though the body through sickness dies the first. Here
the former Translator mistakes and misses: talking of I know not what journey.
two deaths at once: with which wound should my mothers heart have been
goared, it could never have been cured. For I want words to express the
affection she bare toward me; and with how much vehementeranguish she was now
in labor of me in the spirit, than she had been at her childbearing in the
flesh. I cannot possible see therefore, how she should have been cured had so
unchristian a death of mine, once stricken through the bowels of her love. And
what should then have become of those passionate prayers of hers, so frequently
and incessantly in all places made Nusqua^nisi, or nusquam non (as Suetonius
has it) no place omitted, or, in every place. In the Latin, the Interrogative
point should not be after intermissione, but after ad te.
unto thee? But would thou O God of mercies, have despised that contrite and
humbled heart of that chaste and sober widow, so frequent in Almesdeeds, so
obsequious and serviceable to thy See 1 Timothy 5. 10.
Saints, who passed no day without her Oblations were those offerings of bread,
meal or wine for making of the Eucharist, or of Alms besides for the poor,
which the Primitive Christians every time they communicated brought to the
Church, where it was received by the Deacons, who presented them to the Priest
or Bishop. Here note, 1. They communicated daily. 2. They had Service morning
and evening, and two Sermons a (...) many times. 3. Note that Saint Monica
never heard Mass (as the Popish Translater would have it in his margeat:) for
Mass is not sound in Saint Augustine. 4. Observe that here be Sermons too:
which because the Papists have not with their Masses, he cunningly (but
fal^ily) translates Sermonibus, Inspirations.
oblation at thine Altar, never missing twice a day morning and evening to come
to Church, not to listen after idle tales and old wives chat; but that she
might hear thee speaking to her in thy Sermons, and thou her, in her prayers.

3. Could thou despise and reject without thy succor those tears of hers,
with which she begged no gold or silver of thee, nor any mutable or fading
good; but the salvation of her sons soul only? could thou do it, by
whose grace she was inspired to do thus? By no means, Lord. Yea thou were
still at hand, and thou heardest her, and thou did all in the selfsame
order thou had predestined it should be done in. Let it never be thought
thou should deceive her in those Visions and Answers she had of thee; both
those which I have already remembered, and those which I have not remembered; all
which she laid up in her faithful heart, which in her prayers ever and anon
she would press thee withal, as with thine own handwriting. For thou,
(because they mercy endures for ever) vouchsafest unto those whose debts thou
forgivest thoroughly, even to become a kind of debtor by thy promises.

CHAP. 10. His errors before his receiving of the Doctrine of the Gospel.
1. THou recoveredst me therefore of that sickness, and healedst the son of
thy handmayd at that time in his body, that thou might bestow upon him a
health far better and more certain. I consorted my self in Rome at that
time with those deceiving and deceived Holy These glorious titles did the
Manichees assume. So do our own schismatic Pure ones. This spiritual pride
still accompanies Heretics: yea, it is a sare mark of heresy: Mark how Saint
Augustine describes them: We have those now a days that say, God sees no sin
in them: and it is not they that sin, but corruption in them.
ones: not only with their Disciples, (of which mine Host was one, in whose
house I fell sick and recovered:) but also with those whom they called The
Elect. For I was hitherto of the opinion, That it was not we our selves that
sinned, but I know not what other nature in us; and it much delighted my proud
conceit, to be set beyond the power of sin; and when I had committed any
sin, not to confess I had done any, that thou might heal my soul when I
had sinned against thee: but I loved to excuse it, and to accuse I know not
what other corruption that I bare about me, and that it was not I that did it.
But verily it was I my self altogether, and mine own impiety had made the
division in me: and that sin of mine was the more incurable, for that I did
not judge my self to be a sinner; and most execrable iniquity it was, that I
had rather have thee, O GOD Almighty, even thee I say, to be overcome by me to
mine own destruction, than my self to be overcome of thee, to mine own
salvation.

2. Thou had not yet therefore Psalm. 141. 3, 4.
set a watch before my mouth, and kept the door of my lips; that my heart
might not incline to wicked speeches, to the excusing of these excuses of my
sins with the men that work iniquity: and even therefore continued I still
combined with their Elect ones. But yet now as it were dispayring much to
profit my self in that false doctrine, even those opinions of theirs (with
which if I could chance upon no better, I was resolved to rest contented) I
began now to be something more remiss and careless in the holding. For there
rose a conceit in me, That those Philosophers, which they call Academikes,
should be wiser than the rest, even for that they hold, men ought to make a
doubt upon every thing: and for that they determined, how that no truth can be
comprehended by man: for thus to me they seemed clearly to have thought, as it
is commonly received, even by such as understand not the utmost of their
meaning by it.

3. And as free and open I was to dissuade that Host of mine, from that too
much confidence, which I perceived him to settle upon those fabulous opinions,
which the Manichees books are full of. And yet I made more familiar use of
their friendship, than I did of other men's that were not of this heresy. Yet
did I not maintain it with my ancient obstinacy, but yet did my familiarity
with that Sect (of whom Rome shelters too many) make me slower to seek out any
other way: especially seeing I now despayred, O LORD of heaven and earth,
Creator of all visible and invisible things, to find the truth in thy Church,
which they had quite put me out of conceit with. And it then seemed a very
unseemely thing to believe thee to have the shape of our humane flesh, and to
be girt up in the bodily lineaments of our members. And because that when I had
a desire to meditate upon God, I knew not how to think of him, but as of a
Bulk of bodies, (for that seemed to me not to be any thing, which was not
such) this was the greatest, and almost the only cause of my inevitable
misprision.

4. For hence it was that I believed Evil to have been a kind of substance,
and had a bulk of earth belonging to it, either deformed and gross, which
they Other of the Manichees errors.
called Earth: or else thin and subtle, (like the body of the Ayie) which
they imagine to be some ill-natured mind, gliding through that Earth. And for
that I know not what not illminded piety, constrained me to believe that the
good God never created any evil nature; I supposed two Bulkes, contrary to one
another, both infinite, but the Evil to be lesser, and the Good larger: and
out of this pestilent foundation, other sacrilegious conceits followed upon
me. For when my mind endeavored to have recourse back unto the Catholic
faith, I was still stav'd off again, for that that indeed was not the
Catholic faith, which I believed to have been. And I seemed more reverently
opinioned, if I should have believed thee, O my God, (to whom thy mercies
wrought in me do now confess) to be infinite in other parts, although on
that side by which Evil was set in opposition unto thee, I was constrained to
confess thee to be finite; than if in all parts I should imagine thee to be
finitely concluded within the shape of an humane body.

5. And it seemed safer for me to believe thee to have never created any evil,
(which to ignorant me seemed not some substance only, but to be corporeal
also: and for that I could not hit to think of any spiritual mind, unless
it should be a subtle body, and that diffused too by local spaces) than to
believe any thing could come from thee of that condition, which I imagined the
nature of Evil to be. Yea and our blessed Savior himself, thy only begotten
Son, reached (as it were) for our Salvation, out of the most bright mass of
thy Substance, I so thought of, as that I believed no other thing of him, than
that I was able to imagine by mine own vain fancy. Such a nature therefore I
thought could never be borne of the Virgin Mary, unless it were incorporated
(...) carni concerneretur. Concerni autem and non inquinari, etc.
into her flesh: and how that which I had on this fashion figured out to my
self, should be incorporated, and not therewithal defiled, I saw not. I
feared therefore to believe Christ to be borne in the flesh, lest I should be
enforced also to believe that he was defiled by the flesh. Now will thy
spiritual children in a mild and loving manner laugh at me, when they shall
read these my Confessions: But such a man I then was.

CHAP. 11. How be compared the Manichees Tenants with the Catholics.
1. FVrthermore, whatever these Manichees had found fault withal in thy
Scriptures, I thought not possible to be detended: but yet verily had I a good
will now and then to confer upon these several points with some man that were
best skilled in those books, and to make experience what he thought of the
matter: For the speech of one Helpidius, speaking and disputing face to face
against the said Manichees, had already begun to stir me, even whilst I was
at Carthage: when namely he produced such Texts out of the Scriptures, which
were not easily to be withstood, and that the Manichees Answer seemed but very
weak unto me.

2. which Answer they would not willingly be drawn to deliver in public
hearing but amongst our selves only in private; namely when as they said, that
the Scriptures of the New Testament had been corrupted by I know not whom, who
were desirous to insert the Law of the Jews into the Christian Faith: whereas
themselves all this while brought not out any Copies that had not been so
corrupted. But me, strongly captivated, and stifled, as it were, with beating
my thoughts about these corporeal fantasies, did these bulkes keep down;
under which struggling for the breath of thy truth, I was not able to take it
in pure and untainted.

CHAP. 12. The cunning tricks put at Rome by Scholars upon their Masters.
1. DIligently therefore began I to put in practice that for which I came to
Rome: that is, to teach Rhetoric. And first of all, to draw some to my
Lodging, to whom, and through whose means I began to be made known abroad:
when as behold I came to know how that other misdemeanors were committed in
Rome, which I could not endure in Afric. For those See Book 3. Chap. 3.
OVERTVRNINGS ('it is true) committed by desperate young fellows, were not here
practiced, as it was plainly told me: but yet, said they, to avoid payment of
their Masters stipend, diverse young Scholars plot together, and all on the
sudden, to avoid due payment to their Masters, these promise-breakers, who for
the love of money make no account of just dealing, remove themselves to
another. These sharking companions my heart hated also, though not with a
perfect hatred: Psalm. 139. 22.
For I more hated them (perchance) for that my self was to suffer by them,
than for that they played such dishonest pranks with every man.

2. Such verily be but base fellows, and they play false with thee, in loving
these fleeting mockeries of the Times, and in griping after this dirty gain,
which when it is got hold of, bemyres the hand; and in embracing this sleeing
World, and in despising thee, who abidest ever, and who call back, and
grantest pardon to man's adulterated soul that returns unto thee. And now I
much hated such wicked and perverse natures, though I could well love them were
they to be amended; and that they would once prefer Learning before their
Money; and above their Learning esteem of thee, O GOD, the Truth and fullness
of all assured good, and the most chaste peace. But I was even for mine own
sake more unwilling in those days to bear with those that dealt ill with me,
than desirous that they should at last become good for thy sake.

CHAP. 13. He goes to Millan to teach Rhetoric, and how S. Ambrose there
entertaines him.
1. When therefore they of Millan had sent to Rome to the Prefect of the
City, desiring to be furnished thence with a Rhetoricke-Master for their
City, taking order also for the Impertita etiam evectione publica. Sending of
Wagons or Horses, and a man to defray his charges upon the Cities purse. Thus
had the Ancients their public Horses or Wagons for the service of the State,
and defraying the charges of their ministers. Thus did Constantine oppoint
Coaches and Horses of Relay for the Bishops that were to come to the Council
of Nice. This is supplied by our Posthorses, and by the Secretary of State his
allowance of money to those that ride with Packets upon the Kings Service. The
former Translator, (whom I find no great Antiquary nor Critike in Grammar) not
standing to examine this turns Impertita etiam evectione publica; The Election
being public. Wilfully changing eve^^^ ^^ into electione. But what then shall
become of impertita? In a marginall Note upon the end of the last Chapter but
one, he challenges us to show where the Papists had corrupted the Fathers: Sure
here is Saint Augustine corrupted; if not out of malice, yet upon shrewd
susp^tion of ignorance, and a desire to be rid of his Task of Translating. The
collapsed Ladios he knew had no skill to examine the Latin. Your Implicit
Faith is your only Faith: Why? Because it is Roman Catholic.
accommodating him in his journey upon the public charges: I put on to stand
for the place, and that by means of those very Manichees (drunken with
vanities) to be rid of whom, I purposely went away: yet did neither of us know
certainly, whether upon my making a public Vt dictione proposita, me probatum
mitteret. This was, and still is the fashion, to make an Oration, or to read a
Lecture for a void Professors place in our Universities. The former Translator
turns it, would send me as approved from thence upon public provision to be
made. I understand not the man.
Oration for the Place, Symmachus (then Prefect of the City) would so far
approve of me, as to send me thither. Well; unto Milan I came, to Bishop
Ambrose, a man of the best fame all the world over, and thy devout servant;
(whose eloquent discourse did in those days plentifully dispense the flower of
thy wheat, He alludes to Psalm. 4. 7.
the gladness of thy oil, and the sober overflowings of thy wine, unto thy
people.) To him was I led by thee, ignorant of thy purpose in it; that by him I
might be brought to thee, more clearly knowing thee. That man of God
entertained me fatherly, and approved of the cause of my coming, as became a
Bishop.

2. I thenceforth began to love him; not at first verily as a Teacher of the
Truth, (which I utterly despaired to find in thy Church) but as a man of
courteous usage to me. And I very diligently heard him preaching to the
people, not (although) with so good an intent as I ought, but, as it were,
trying his eloquence, whether it were answerable to the fame that went of him,
or whether more or less than was every where given out of him; and I weighed
every word of his very attentively. But of the matter I was careless and
scornful. And verily with the sweetness of his discourse I was much
delighted; which, how-ever it were more learned, yet was it not so pleasing and
inveigling as Faustus his was, the manner of the Oratory I mean; though for
the matter there were no comparison. For Faustus did but rove up and down with
his Manichaean fallacies, but Ambrose taught salvation most soundly. But
salvation is farie enough from sinners, such as I was at that instant; and yet
drew I by little and little nearer toward it; but how, I knew not.

CHAP. 14. Upon his hearing of Saint Ambrose, he by little and little falls off
from his errors.
1. FOr though I took little heed to hearke^ to what he spoke, but merely to
the way how he delivered them: (for that empty care was now only left in me, I
despairing utterly to find a way how to come unto thee) yet together with his
words which I liked, the things also themselves which I neglected, stole in
upon my mind; (for I knew not how to part them) and whilst I opened my heart
to entertain How eloquently he expressed it, there also entered with it by
degrees, How truly he proved it. For first of all, the things began to
appear unto me as possible to be defended: and the Catholic Faith, in defense
of which I thought nothing could be answered to the Manichees arguments, I now
concluded with my self, might well be maintained without absurdity:
especially after I had heard one or two hard places of the Old Testament
resolved now and then; which when I understood literally, He alludes to that in
2 Cor. 3. The letter kills, but the Spirit gives life.
I was slain spiritually.

2. Many places therefore of those Books having been expounded, I blamed mine
own desperate conceit, whereby I had believed, Another of the Manichees
errors.
That the Law and the Prophets could no way be upheld against those that hated
and scorned them. Yet did I not resolve for all this, that the Catholic way
might be held safely; (seeing it might have it is Teachers and maintainers,
which might be able, both copiously, and not absurdly, to answer some
Objections made against it:) nor yet did I conceive that my former way ought to
be condemned; because that both sides of the defense were equalled. For in
this sort did the Catholic party seem to me not to be overthrown, as that
it appeared not yet to be altogether victorious. Earnestly hereupon did I bend
my mind, to see if it were possible to convince the Manichees of falsehood: and
could I but once have taken into my thoughts that there should be any
Spiritual substance, all their strong holds had been beaten down, and cast
utterly out of my mind; but I was not able.

3. Notwithstanding concerning the body of this world, and the whole frame of
Nature, which the senses of our flesh can reach unto, I now more seriously
considering upon, and comparing things together; judged diverse of the
Philosophers to have held much the more probable opinions. After the manner
therefore of the Academicks (as they are supposed) doubting now of every thing,
and wavering up and down between all; I absolutely resolved, That the
Manichees were to be ^^ndened; judging in that time ^: my suspense, that I
could not safely continue in that Sect, before which I now preferred diverse of
the Philosophers: to which Philosophers notwithstanding, for that they were
without the saving Name of Christ, I utterly refused to commit the curing of my
languishing soul. This therefore I determined, So long to be a An Audi^^r, or a
Disciple.
Catechumenus in the Catholic Church, (which had been so much commended unto
me by my parents) till such time as some certain mark should appear, whereby
I might steer my course.

SAINT AUGUSTINES Confessions. THE SIXTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1. How S. Augustine was neither Manichee, nor good Catholic.
O Thou my hope even from my youth, where were thou all this while, and whither
were thou gone? For had not thou created me, and set a distinction betwixt me
and the beasts of the field, and fowls of the Air? Thou had made me wiser
than they, yet did I wander through the dark, and over the slippery, and I
groped out of my self after thee, but found not the God of my heart, and I
drew near even to the bottom of the Sea; and I distrusted, and I despaired of
ever finding out the truth. By this time came my Mother unto me, (whom motherly
piety had made adventurous) following me over Sea and Land, confident upon thee
in all perils. For in the dangers upon the Sea, she comforted the Mariners,
(by whom the unexperienced passengers of the deep, use rather to be themselves
comforted) assuring them of a safe landing: because so much had thou assured
her by a Vision.

2. She found me grievously endangered by a despair of ever finding out the
truth. But when I had once discovered to her, that I was no longer now a
Manichee, not fully yet a Christian Here Saint Augustine was too blame; for he
should have said, A Roman Catholic, and not a Christian Catholic. And yet I
quit him: For sure that Bull of Roman Catholic, was not heard of in his time.
Luke 7. 14.
Catholic; she even leapt for joy; not as if she had heard of some
unlookt-for news, seeing she had been satisfied before concerning that part
of my misery, for which she bewailed me, not as one irrecouerably dead, but as
if there were good hopes of his reviving; laying me forth upon the Biere before
thee, that thou might say unto the son of the Widow, Young man, I say unto
thee, arise; And he should sit up, and begin to speak, and thou should
deliver him to his Mother. Her heart therefore parted not in any perplexed
kind of rejoicing, when she heard that to be already in so great part done,
which she daily with tears desired of thee might be wholly done; namely, that
though I had not yet attained the truth, yet that I was rescued from falsehood:
yea rather, for that she was most certain, that thou would one day perform
the rest, who had promised the whole; most calmely, and with an heart full of
confidence, she replied to me; How she fully believed in Christ, that she
should yet before she dyed, see me Fidelem Catholicum: A faithful Catholic.
See what we have noted in the first Book upon this word Fidelis. Mark: here
is Christianus Catholicus, and Fidelis Catholicus, but yet not Romanus
Catholic^^: it is strange that Saint Augustine should so soon have forgotten
Rome, from whence he came s^lately!
baptized into the Catholic Faith.

3. And thus much said she to me. But to thee, O Fountain of mercies, powered
she forth more frequent prayers and tears, that thou would hasten thy
help, and enlighten my darkness, that I might more studiously run unto the
Church, and settle my belief upon Ambrose his Preaching, and desire the
Fountain She means Baptism.
of that Water, which springs up into Life ever lasting. For that man she
loved as an Angel of GOD, because she presumed most assuredly, that I had
been brought by him in the mean time to that doubtful state of faith I was
now in, by which I was to pass from sickness unto health; some sharper Here
the former Translator incurres some suspicion of non sense: or of not full
understanding the place.
conflict coming between, in another Fit, as it were, which the Physicians
call The Crisis.

CHAP. 2. His Mother is turned from her Country Superstition.
1. When as my Mother therefore had one time brought unto the Oratories See
what we have noted upon the eighth Chapter of the former Book.
erected in memory of the Saints, as she was wont to do in Afric, certain
Pultes. There was the Roman Pulls, and the Africa^ or Punike Pulls. The making
of which is described in Cato de Re rustica, cap. 85. The chief substance
whereof was Wheat-meale, or grotes, tempred with water, Cheese-curds, Honey, and
Eggs: only this Pulls was boiled, and ours baked. I believe that that parched
Corn, mentioned, 1 Samuel 17. 17. was something like this Pulls of Africa. The
Hebrew word there is Kali, of Kalah, to parch. For they first parcht their
Corn, then they fried it, and lostly they boiled it to a paist, and then
tempred it as before, which they carried dry with them to the Camp, and so wet
the Cakes in wine or milk, etc. See Stuckius Antiqu. Conviv. l. 1. p. 58.
Cheese-cakes, and Bread and Wine; and had been forbidden to do it by the O
stiariius, the Doore-keeper. See our Preface.
Sexton: so soon as ever she knew that the Bishop had forbidden this, she did
so piously and obediently embrace the motion, that I my self wondered at it,
that she should so easily be brought rather to blame her own Country custom,
than to call the present countermand in question. For Wine-bibbing besotted not
her spirit, nor did the love of Wine provoke her to the hatred of the Truth, as
it does too many (both men and women) who being a little whittled once, turn
the stomach to a song of sobriety, as they would do at a draught of water.
But she, when she had brought her basket of these solemn lunkets, which she
meant to eat a little of first, and to give the rest away; never used to allow
herself above one small pot of Wine, well allayed with water, for her own
sober palate, whence she would sippe a Dignationem sum^ret.
mannerly draught. And if there were any more Oratories of the departed Saints,
that seemed to be honored in like manner, she still carried the selfsame pot
about with her, which she used every where, which should not only below
allayed with water, but very lukewarm with carrying about: and this would she
distribute to those that were about her by small sups: for she came to those
places to seek devotion, and not pleasure.

2. So soon therefore as she found this custom to be countermanded by that
famous Preacher, and the most pious Prelate (Ambrose,) yea forbidden even to
those that would use it but soberly, that so no occasion of riot might thereby
be given to such as loved drinking too well; and for that these Parentalia.
These Pultes, says S. Augustine, were used in Parehtalibus: and Pliny, lib.
18. c. 8. says, they were in his time used also in Notalibus, anniversary
seasts for their birth days,
funeral Anniversary Feasts, as it were, in honor of our dead Fathers, did
too nearly resemble the superstition of the I he former Translator well notes
in his margent, An inconvenient custom abrogated by S. Ambrose. I wish that
the Pope would do so with their Images of the dead Saints, upon the same
reason, for that they are too like the superstitious Images of the Genules. But
observe that S. Ambrose changed this custom, and that at Milian, so near Rome
too. Where was then the Popes Authority? The Archbishop of Millan dares alter
nothing now a days without the Popes License.
Gentiles, she most willingly forbear it ever after: and in stead of a Basket
filled with the fruits of the earth, she now had learned to present a breast
replenished with sinne-purging petitions at the Oratories of the Martyrs; and
to give away, what she could spare among the poor: that so the Communion of
the Lords Body might in that place be rightly celebrated where after the
example of his Passion these Martyrs had bin sacrificed and crowned.

3. But for all this it seems to me, O Lord my God, and thus thinks my heart
of it in thy sight: That my Mother would not so easily have give way to the
breaking of her. Country custom, had it bin forbidden her by some other man,
whom she had not loved so well as she did Ambrose, who in regard of my
salvation, she very entirely affected; and he bergaing, as well for her most
religious conversation, whereby s^ full of good works, so servent in the
spirit, she frequented the Church. Yea, so well he affected (...) that he
would very often when he saw me, break forth into her praises; congratulating
with me, in that I had such a Mother: little knowing in the mean time what a
son she had of me; who doubted of all these things, and least of all imagined
the way to life could possibly be found out.

CHAP. 3. The employments and studies of S. Ambrose.
1. NOr did I hitherto groan in my prayers, that thou would help me; but my
unquiet mind was altogether intentive to seek for Learning and to dispute
upon it. As for Ambrose himself, I esteemed him a very happy man according to
the world, whom personages of such authority so much honored: only his
remaining a (...) seemed Had it bin so general in those days, that all
Bishops and Priests must upon pain of losing their Orders, profess single
life; why should Saint Augustine think thus of Ambrose more than of other
Bishops of his time.
a painful course unto me. But what hopes he carried about him against the
temptations his excellent parts were subject unto, what struglings he felt, and
what comfort he found in his adversities, and how savourie joys that mouth
hidden in his heart fed upon in thy Bread, I neither knew how to guess at, nor
had I yet any feeling of. As little on the other side knew he of my privy
heats, nor of the pit of my danger. For I had not the opportunity to make my
demands to him, what I would, or how I would; for that multitudes of people
full of business, whose infirmities he gave up himself unto, debarred me
both from hearing and speaking with him. With whom when he was not taken up,
(which was but a little time together) he either refreshed his body with
necessary sustenance, or his mind with reading. But when he was reading, he
drew his eyes along over the leaves, and his heart searched into the sense, but
his voice and tongue were altogether silent.

2. Oft-times when we were present (for no man was debarred of coming to him,
nor was it his fashion to be told of any body that came to speak with him) we
still saw him reading to himself, and never otherwise: so that having long
sat in silence (for who durst be so bold as to interrupt him so intentive to
his study?) we were feign to depart. We conjectured, that the small time which
he gate for the repairing of his mind, he retired himself from the clamor
of other men's businesses, being unwilling to be taken off for any other
employment: and he was wary perchance too, left some hearer being struck into
suspense, and eager upon it, if the Author he read should deliver any thing
obscurely, he should be put to it to expound it; or to discuss some of the
harder questions; so that spending away his time about this work, he could
not turn over so many Volumes as he desired: although peradventure the
preserving of his voice (which a little speaking would weaken) might be a just
reason for his reading to himself. But with what intent soever he did it, that
man certainly had a good meaning in it.

3. But verily no opportunity could I obtain of propounding my demands, as I
desired, to that so holy an Oracle of thine, his breast, unless the thing
might be heard very briefly. But those commorions in me, required to find him
at his best leisure, that I might power them out before him; but never could
they find him so. Yet heard I him every Sunday, preaching the Word of Truth
rightly to the People; by which that apprehension of mine was more and more
confirmed in me, that all those knots of crafty calumnies, which those our The
Manichees.
deceivers had knit in prejudice of the Holy Books, might well enough be
untyed.

4. But so soon as I understood withal, That Man, created by thee after thine
own Image, was not so understood by thy spiritual sons, (whom of our
Catholic Mother thou have begotten by thy Grace) as if they once believed or
imagined thee to be made up into an humane shape: although I had not the least
suspicion, nor so much as a confused notion, in what strange manner a
spiritual substance should be: yet blushing did I rejoice, that I had not so
many years barkt against the Catholic faith, but against the fictions of
carnal imaginations. But herein had I been rash and anpious, that what I
ought to have learned by inquiry, I had spoken of as condemning. For thou, O
the most high, and the most near; the most secret, and yet most present with
us; have not such limbs, of which some be bigger, and some smal^^^, but art
wholly every where, circumscribed in no certain place; nor art thou like these
corporeal shapes; yet have thou made man after thine own Image, and behold,
from head to foot is he contained in some certain biding.

CHAP. 4. Of the Letter and the Spirit.
1. BEing thus ignorant therefore in what manner this Image of thine should
subsist; I something earnestly propounded the doubt, how that was to be (...);
but did not triumphing^y oppose against it, as if it peremptorily should
according to the Letter be believed: The anxiety therefore of resolving what
certainty I was to hold, did so much the more sharply even gnaw my very
bowels, by how much the more ashamed I was, that having bin so long deceived by
the promise of certaineties; I had with a childish error and stubbornnes,
prated up and down of so many uncertainties, and that as confidently as if
they had been certainties. For that they were mere falsehoods, it clearly
appeared to me afterward: yea, even already was I certain, that they were at
least uncertain, and that I had all this while believed them for certain.
when as (namely) out of a blind and contentious humor, I accused thy
Catholic Church, which though I had not yet found to (...) tr^^^, yet found,
it not ^o teach what I heartily (...) it, for teaching. In this manner was I
first confounded, and then converted: and I much rejoiced, O my God, that thy
only Church, the body of thine only Son, (wherein the name of Christ The
Primitive fashion it was, to impose the name when the party was first admitted
to be a Catechumenus, or when he desired baptism. This had Saint Augustine
done in 1 sickness, being a Child, as before he told us. This name was after
given up a little before the Baptism, and again repeated both a: Baptism and
Confirmation. And whereas be here speaks of the name of Christ: it is meant of
the custom of calling them Christians so soon as they gave up their names:
the day after they were styled Catechumeni, the day after that were they
exorcised. So it is plainly in the great Council of Constantinople, Canon 95.
And so S. Augustine himself in diverse places.
had been put upon me being yet an Infant) did not relish these childish
toys; nor maintained any such Tenet in her sound Doctrine, as to crowd up the
Creator of this All, under the shape of humane members, into any proportions of
a place, which, though never so great and so large, should yet be terminated
and surrounded.

2. And for this I rejoiced also, for that the Old Scriptures of the Law and
the Prophets, were laid before me now, to be perused, not with that eye to
which they seemed most absurd before, when as I misliked thy holy ones for
thinking so and so, whereas indeed they thought not so: and for that with
joyful heart I heard Ambrose in his Sermons to the people, most diligently
oftentimes recommend this Text for a Rule unto them, The letter 2 Cor. 3. 6.
kills, but the Spirit gives life: and for that those things, which taken
according to the letter, seemed to teach perverse doctrines, he spiritually
laid open unto us, having taken off the veyle of the mystery; teaching nothing
in it that offended me, though such things he taught, as I knew not as yet,
whether they were true or no. For I all this while kept my heart firm from
assenting to any thing, fearing to fall headlong; but by this hanging in
suspense I was the worse killed: for my whole desire was to be made so well
assured of those things which I saw not, as I was certain that seven and three
make ten.

3. For I was not so mad yet, as not to think that this last proposition might
not by demonstration be comprehended: wherefore I desired to have other things
as clearly demonstrated as this; whether (namely) those things should be
corporeal, which were not present before my senses; or spiritual, whereof I
knew not yet how to conceive, but after a corporeal manner. But by believing
might I have been cured, that so the eyesight of my soul being cleared,
might some way or other have been directed toward thy truth, which is the same
eternally, and in no point failing. But as it happens usually to him that
having had experience of a bad Physician, is fearful afterward to trust
himself with a good: so was it with the state of my soul, which could no
ways be healed The other Translator notes upon it, That the way of knowing in
Religion, is by first believing. True; but not Implicit Popish Faith, (which
be means) to believe ^^ the Church of Rome believes. Saint Augustine meant not
such a Faith.
but by believing; and left it should believe falsehoods, it refused to be
cured: resisting in the mean time thy hands, who have prepared for us the
Medicines of faith, and have applied them to the diseases of the whole world,
and given unto them Et tantam illis authoritatem tribuisti. This the other
Translator maliciously miscenstrues, with a purpose to weaken the Authority of
the Holy Scriptures, the Medicines of Faith here spoken of: Turning the words,
And recommended them to mankind by so great Authority: As if all the Authority
were in Gods recommending, and none else in the Scriptures. Fie upon it.
so great Authority.

CHAP. 5. Of the Authority and necessary use of the holy Bible.
1. FRom henceforth therefore I began first of all to esteem better of the
Cathe^^^ Doctrine, and also to think that ^e. did with more modesty, and
without any deceit, command many things to be believed, notwithstanding it were
not there demonstrated, (...) what it should be, or to Here I suspect S.
Augustins Copy to be imperfect; but it is not much material.
what purpose it should serve, nor yet what it should not be; than in the
Manichees doctrine, upon a rash promise of great knowledge, expose my easiness
of belief first of all unto derision, and suffer afterward so many most
fabulous and absurd things to be therefore imposed upon me to believe, because
they could not be demonstrated. Next of all, thou Lord, by little and little,
with a gentle and most merciful hand, working and rectifying my heart; even
while I took into my consideration how innumerable things I otherwise
believed, which I had never scene, nor was present at while they were in doing:
like as those many reports in the History of several Nations, those many
relations of places and of Cities, which I had never seen: so many reports
likewise of friends, so many of Physicians, so many of these and these men,
which unless we should believe, we should do nothing at all in this life:
Last of all, I considered, with how unalterable an assurance I believed, of
what parents I was descended; which I could not otherwise come to know, had I
not believed it upon hearsay: perswadedst me at last, that not they who
believed thy Bible, (which with so great authority Here the Authority by which
the Scriptures be settled, is originally attributed to God himself, and not to
the Church as the Topish Translator would have it. See our note upon lib. 7.
cap. 7.
thou have settled almost among all Nations) but those who believed it not, were
to be blamed: nor were those men to be listened unto, who would say perchance,
How know thou those Scriptures to have been imparted unto mankind, by the
spirit of the only true, and most true God? seeing this fundamental point was
above all the rest to be believed; and that because no wrangles of all those
cavilling Questions, whereof I had read so many controverted amongst the
Philosophers, could so far enforce me, as that I should at any time not
believe Thee to be whatsover thou were, (though what, I knew not) or that the
government of human businesses should not belong unto thee. Thus much though I
sometimes believed more strongly, and more weakly other-whiles, yet I ever
believed: both that thou were God, and had a care of us, though I were
utterly ignorant, either what was to be thought of thy substance, or what way
led or brought back again toward thee.

3. Seeing therefore mankind would prove too weak to find out the truth, by
the way of evident Reason; and even for this cause was there need of the
Authority of Holy Writ: I began now to believe, that thou would by no means
have estated such excellency Here again the Popish Translator notes in his
Margent, The Authority of the Church: whereas S. Augustine speaks of the
authority of the Scriptures. Wilful Sophistry.
of authority upon that Book all the world over, had it not been thy express
pleasure, to have thine own self both believed in by means of it, and sought
by it also. For those absurdities which in those Scriptures were went
heretofore to offend me, after I had heard diverse of them expounded probably, I
referred now to the depth of the mystery: yea, and the Authority of that Book
appeared so much the more venerable, and so much the more Mark this, ye
Papists. 1. What high terms he gives the Scriptures: whereas you call them A
nose of Way, a shipmans Hose, etc. 2. Here Is liberty for all to read them; you
look them under an unknown tongue, from the Laytie. 3. Here are they said it
be plain; but you fray the people with their difficulty profoundnesse, and
danger.
worthy of our religious credit, by how much the readier at hand it was for ALL
to read upon, preserving yet the Majesty of the Secret, under the profoundnes
of the meaning, offering it self unto ALL in words most open, and in a style
of speaking most humble, and exercising the intention of such as are not light
of heart; that it might by that means receive ALL into its common bosom, and
through narrow passages, waft over some few toward thee: yet are these few a
good many more than they would have been, had it not obtained the eminency of
such high authority, nor allu^ed on those companies with a bosom of holy
humility. These things then I thought upon, and thou were with me: I sighed,
and thou heardst me: I wavered up and down, and thou did guide me; I wandered
through the broad way of this world, yet did thou not forsake me.

CHAP. 6. The misery of the Ambitious: shown by the example of a Beggar.
1. I Gaped after Honors, gains, wedlock; and thou laughedst at me. In these
desires of mine I underwent most bitter hardships: wherein thou were so much
the more gracious unto me, as thou did less suffer any thing to grow sweet
unto me, which was not thou thy self. Behold now my heart, O Lord, who
would I should remember all this, that I might now confess it unto thee. Let
now my soul cleave fast unto thee, which thou have freed from that
fast-holding birdlime of death. How wretched was it at that time! it had
utterly lost the sense of its own wound; but th^^ did lance it, that
forsaking ^^ other things, it might be converted unto thee, who art above all,
and without whom all things would turn to nothing; that it might (I say) be
converted, and be healed. How miserable therefore was I at that time! and how
did thou deal with me, to make me sensible of my misery! that same day
namely, when I provided my self for an Oration in praise of the Emperor,
wherein I was to deliver many an untruth, and to be applauded notwithstanding,
even by those that knew I did so. Whilst my heart panted after these cares,
and boiled again with the favourishnesse of these consuming thoughts; walking
along one of the streets of Millan, I observed a poor beggar-man (half drunk
I believe) very jocund and pleasant upon the matter: but I looking mournfully
at it, fell to discourse with my friends then in company with me, about the
many sorrows occasioned by our own madness; for that by all such endeavors
of ours, (under which I then labored, and galled by the spurs of desire,
dragd after me the burden of mine own infelicity, increasing it by the
dragging) we had mind of nothing but how to attain some kind of Iocundnesse,
whither that beggar-man had arrived before us, who should never perchance come
at all thither. For that which he had attained unto by means of a few pence,
(and those begged too) the same was I now plotting for, by many a troublesome
turning and winding; namely to compass the joy of a temporary felicity.

2. For that beggar-man verily enjoyed no true joy; but yet (...) those my
ambitious designs, hunted after a much uncertainer. And certainly that fellow
was jocund, but I perplexed; he void of care, I full of fears. But should any
man demand of me, whether I had rather be merry or fearful? I would answer,
merry. Again, were I asked, whether I had rather be in that beggar-mans case,
or in mine own at that time? I would make choice of my own, though thus
overgone with cares and fears; yet was this upon a wilfulness; for was it out
of any true reason? For I ought not to prefer my self before that beggar,
because I was more learned than he, seeing my Learning was not it that made me
joyful: but I sought rather to please men by it; not so much to instruct them,
as merely to delight them. For this cause did thou even break my bones with
the staff of thy correction. Away with those therefore from my soul, who say
unto it; There is much difference The former Translator twice turns this
phrase from S. Austens purpose.
betwixt the occasions of a man's rejoicing.

3. That beggar-man rejoiced in his drunkenness; thou desiredst to rejoice in
a purchased glory. What glory, Lord? That which is not in thee. For even as his
was no true joy, no more was mine any true glory: besides which, it utterly
overturned my soul. He was that night to digest his drunkenness; but many a
might had I slept with mine, and had risen again with it, and was to sleep
again, and again to rise with it, I know not how often. But is there indeed
any difference in the grounds of a man's rejoicing? I know there is, and that
the joy of a faithful hope is incomparably beyond such a vanity. Yea, and at
that very time was there much difference betwixt him and I: for he verily was
the happier man; not only for that he was thoroughly drencht in mirth, when as
my bowels were grip't with cares: but also for that by his lusty Some Copies
read it optando, alluding to the beggars praying for his good masters: But the
last read it potando, as I do.
bowsing, he had gotten good store of Wine; whereas I, by a slattering
Oration, sought after (...) puff of pride. Much to this purpose said I at that
time to my dear Companions: and I marked by them how it fared with me; and I
found my self in an ill taking. I grieved for it, by which I doubled my ill
taking: and when any prosperity smiled upon me, it irkt me to catch at it;
for that almost before I could lay hand upon it, away it flew from me.

CHAP. 7. He disswades Alipius from his excessive delight in the These were
Chariot-races, etc.
Circensian games.
1. WE jointly bemoaned our selves for this, who lived like friends together;
but chiefly and most familiarly did I speak hereof with Alipius and Nebridius:
of whom Alipius was borne in the same Town with me, whose parents were of the
chief rank there, and himself younger than I; he had also studied under me,
first, when I set up School in our own Town, and at Carthage afterward. He
loved me very much, because I seemed of a good disposition to him, and well
learned: and I loved him again, for his great towardlines to virtue, which was
eminent enough for one of no greater yeer^^. But that Whirlepit of the (...)
thaginian fashions, (amongst whom those idler spectacles are hotly followed)
had already swallowed up him in immoderate delight of the Circensian sports.
But mean while that he was miserably-tumbled up and down that way, and I
professing Rhetoric there, had set up a public School; he made no use of me
as his Master, by reason of some unkindnesse risen betwixt his Father and me.
Although therefore I had found how dangerously he doted upon the Race-place,
and that I were grievously perplexed, that he took the course to undo so
good a hope as was conceived of him, or rather as me thought he had already
undone it: yet had I no means, either privately to advise him, or by way of
constraint to reclaim him, by interest of a friendship, or the awe of a
Master. For I supposed verily, that he had had the same opinion of me with his
Father; but he was not of that mind. Loying aside therefore his Fathers
Quarrel, he began to salute me, coming sometimes into my School, hear a
little, and be gone. By this means forgate I to deal with him, that he
should not for a blind and headstrong desire of such vain pastimes, undo so
good a wit.

2. But thou, O Lord, thou who sit at the stern of all thou have created,
had not forgotten him, who was one day to prove a chief Priest of thy
Sacraments. And that his amendment might plainly be attributed to thy self,
thou truly broughtest it about by my means, who yet knew nothing of it. For
when as one day I sat in my accustomed place, with my scholars before me, in
came he, saluted me, sat him down, and applied his mind to what I then
handled. I had by chance a passage then in hand, which that I might the better
illustrate, it seemed very seasonable to me to make use of a similitude
borrowed from the Circensian races; both to make that which I infinuated more
pleasant and more plain, and to give a biting quippe withal, at those whom
that madness had enthralled. God thou know, that I little thought at that
time of curing Alipius of that pessilence. But he took it to himself; and
conceived that I merely intended it toward him. And what another man would
have made an occasion of being angry with me, that good young man made a reason
of being offended at himself, and to love me the more fervently. For thou
had said it long ago, and put it into thy Book, Ribuke a wise man, and he
will love thee. Prove. 9. 8.


3. But for my part, I meant no rebuke toward him; but it is thou who make
use of all men, both knowing or not knowing, in that order which thy self
know, and that order is just. Out of my heart and tongue thou wrought'st
burning coals, by which thou might set on fire that languishing disposition
of his, of which so good hopes had been conceived, and might cure it. Let
such a one conceal thy praises, who considers not of thy mercies, which my
very marrow confesses unto thee. For he upon that speech, heaved himself out
of that pit so deep, wherein he had wilfully been plunged, and had been hood
winkt with the wretched pastime of it; and rowzed up his mind with a
well-resolved moderntion; whereupon all those filths of the Circensian pastimes
slew off from him, nor came he ever at them afterward. Upon this, prevailed he
with his unwilling Father, that he might be one of my Scholars. He yielded
and condescended: so that Alipius beginning to be my Auditor again, was
bemussled in the same superstition with me, loving that ostentation of
continency in the Manichees, which he supposed to be true and unseined. But
verily no better it was than a senseless and a seducing continency, insnaring
precious souls, not able yet to reach to the height of virtue, and easy to be
beguiled with a fair outside, of that which was but a wel-shadowed and a
feined virtue.

CHAP. 8. Alipius is taken with a delight of the Sword-plaies, These gladiators
or Fencers, were maintained by great men: who to please the people, would often
exhibit the^ upon the Stage, to fight at sharp, in good carnest for their
lives: be being accounted the bravest fellow, that look his wounds or death
with least shrinking.
which before he hated.
1. He not forsaking that worldly course which his parents had charmed him to
pursue, went before me to Rome, to study the Laws, where he was carried away
with an incredible greediness of seeing the Sword-players. For being utterly
against and detesting such spectacles, when he was one day by chance met
withal by diverse of his acquaintance and fellow students coming from dinner,
they with a familiar kind of violence, haled him (vehemently denying and
resisting them) along into the The Stage.
Amphitheater, on a time when these cruel and deadly shows were exhibited; he
thus protesting: Though you hale my body to that place, and there set me, can
you after that force me to give my mind, and lend my eyes to these shows? I
shall therefore be absent even while I am present, and so shall I overcome both
you and them too. His Companions hearing these words, lead him on never the
slower, desirous perchance to try, whether he could be as good as his word or
no. When they were come thither, and had taken their places as they could, all
that Round grew hot with merciless Pastimes.

2. But Alipius closing up the doors of his eyes, forbade his mind to range
abroad after such mischiefs; and I would he had stopped his ears also. For
upon the fall of one in the sight, a mighty cry of the people beating strongly
upon him, he (being overcome by curiosity, and as it were prepared, whatsoever
it were, to contemn it with his sight, and to overcome it) opened his eyes,
and was stricken with a deeper wound in his soul, than the other was in his
body, whom he desired to behold; and he presently fell more miserably than the
Sword-player did, upon whose fall that mighty noise was raised. Which noise
entered through his ears, and unlockt his eyes, to make way for the striking
and beating down of his soul; (which was bold rather than valiant hitherto;
and so much the weaker, for that it presumed now on it self, which ought only
to have trusted upon thee:) For so soon as he saw another man's blood, he at
the very instant drunk down a kind of savagenesse: nor did he turn away his
head, but fixed his eye upon it, drinking up unawares the very Furies
themselves, being much taken with the barbarousnesse of the swordfight, and
even drunk again with that bloody pastime. Nor was he now the man he was
when he came first thither, but become one of the throug he came unto; yea, an
entire companion of theirs that brought him thither. What shall I say more? He
looked on, he cried out for company, he was inflamed with it; carried home
such a measure of madness, as spurred him on to come another time: and that not
only in their companies who first enticed him, but to run before them too,
yea and hale on others also. Yet out of all this did thou with a most strong
and merciful hand pluck him notwithstanding, and taughtest him to repose no
more confidence in himself, but upon thee only. But this was not till a great
while after.

CHAP. 9. Alipius was apprehended for suspicion of thee very.
1. But thus much laid he up in his memory for a preparative hereafter: as that
also which fell out when he was yet my scholar at Carthage: where meditating
at noone time once in the Marketplace, upon something he was to say by heart
(as scholars use to be exercised) thou sufferedst him to be apprehended by the
Officers of the Marketplace for a Thief. For no other cause, I suppose, did
thou O our God, suffer it, but that he, who was hereafter to prove so great a
man; should now begin to learn that in judging of Causes, no man was not to be
condemned out of a rash credulity. For as he was walking by himself before the
place of Judgment, with his noting-tables and his pen, behold, a young man of
the number of the Lawyers Quidam Scholasticorum. No word has more altered the
signification: But in those days, and ancienter, it signified a Lawyer or
Advocate. So in the Council of Sardica, Can. 10. vel ex foro Scholasticus, a
Lawyer from the Court or Bar. The Greek word is the same with the Latin.
Then came it to be given to Rhetoricians, then to Poets, (as Prudentius was
called Hispaniarum Scholasticus:) Physicians, Musicians, any professor of the
liberal Sciences, were so styled. He that first made the Canon for the
Communion, was called Johannes Scholasticus. It Is now settled upon the
Schoolmen, but most anciently the Lawyers had it.
(who was the right Thief indeed) privily bringing a Hatchet with him (Alipius
never perceiving him) gate in as far as the leaden Cancellos. This was the
ancient sense or ornament for Courts of Justice. Hence the Judge came to be
called Cancellarius, and the Court, The Chancery. Chancels being thus parted
from the Churches, hence had their name also.
grate-works, which look down into the Vico Argentario. This could be no street
of silver smiths, or Silver-street, as the former Translator turns it, (for
what need he break into a street that way? he might easily come in.) But the
wary Ancients had their Courts of Justice, their Exchequer and Mint-house all
together oftentimes, and all in their Forum or public Marketplace. There
stood Saturnes Temple at Rome, which was their Exchequer and Mint-house: This
Saturnes Temple was in the Marketplace: there were also their Courts of
Justice: so was it at Millan belike; and therefore had their Forum its Aedituos,
Officers, or Watchmen, as before he said.
Mint-house, and began to chop in sunder the Lead. But the noise of the Hatchet
being heard, the Minters that were underneath, began to mutter, and sent forth
to apprehend whom-ever they should find. But the Thief hearing their voices,
ran away, leaving his Hatchet behind him, fearing to be taken with it.

2. Alipius now, who spyed him not when he came in, well perceived him as he
went out, and with what speed he made away. And being desirous to know what
the matter was, went into the place; where finding the Hatchet, he stood still
a while, admiring and considering upon it; when behold, those that were sent,
find him alone with the Hatchet in his hand, startled by the noise whereof
they had made thither: they lay hold upon him, hale him away, and gathering the
neighbors dwelling in the Marketplace about them, they congratulate one
another for taking so notorious a Felon, leading him away to the Justice
thereupon. But hither to was Alipius to be instructed. For presently, O Lord,
camed thou to the succor of his innocence, whereof thou were the only
witness. For as he was led along, (either to prison or to execution) there
encountered them a certain Architect, who had the charge of the public
buildings. Glad they were to meet him of all the rest, for that they were used
to come to him about suspicion of stolen goods, lost out of the Court or
Marketplace; that he might take notice at least by whom these kind of cheats
were used to be played.

3. But that party had diverse times seen Alipius at a certain Senators house,
whom he often came to visit; who presently taking knowledge of him, took him
aside by the hand, and privately enquiring the occasion of that mischance,
heard the whole carriage of the business from him: and wished all that Rabble
(all in an uprore, and threatening of Alipius) to go along with him. And to the
House they came of that young Lawyer, who had committed the fact: where (behold)
there was a Boy before the door, who was so little, as having not the wit to
fear doing his Master any hurt by it, was likely enough to disclose the whole
matter unto them. For he had followed his Master to the Marketplace. Whom so
soon as ever Alipius remembered, he told the Architect of him: and he showing
the Hatchet to the Boy, asked him Whose that was? Ours, (quoth he presently:)
and being further questioned upon the matter, he discovered every thing. Thus
was the burgl^ry laid upon the Master of that house, and the rude multitude
ashamed, which had already begun to insult over Alipius, who was hereafter to
be a dispenser of thy Word, and an Examiner of many If the Primitive Clergy
meddled with matters of Justice, they had Saint Paul's Commission, 1 Cor. 6.
which Possidonius in the Life of S. Augustine quotes: who shows how many
hours a day Augustine spent this way. He quotes also, 1 Timothy 5. 20. Those that
sin, rebuke before all: And this is a Divine fittest to do: there belongs
more to a Justice than the making of a Mittimus. He quotes also Ezekiel. 3. 17. I
have made thee a Watchman: yea, and as if this were a part of the Ministers
duty, he applies that in 2 Timothy 4. 2. Be instant, in season, out of season,
reprove, etc. No Antiqua^y but knows that the old Clergy had greater
authority in temporal matters, than our Justices of Peace in England; yet here
it is boggled at: But it is by those that would feign have their Church Lands.
Plainly, The Lord Chancellor, Keeper, and Master of the Rolls, the 6 Clerks,
Heralds, Masters of the Chancery, etc. have heretofore for the most part been
Clergy men, when it was never better with the Land. It Is true, the old Canons
forbid them to meddle in cases of blood, and that may they easily avoid. In
Geneva, I hope, the Minister has more authority than in England.
Causes in thy Church, who went away now, better experienced and instructed, by
this accident.

CHAP. 10. Of the great integrity of Alipius, and of Nebridius coming.
1. THis Alipius therefore I afterward light upon at Rome; where he knit in
with me with a most strong Tie; whence he went with me to Millan, both that
he might not break company with me, and that he might withal practice
something in the Law he had applied himself unto: and that to fulfill his
parents desire, more than his own. There went he through the Office of an
Assessor of Justice, with an admirable freedom from bribery in respect of his
other fellows: he wondering at others rather, who preferred gold before
honesty. His disposition was tempted besides, not with a bait of Covenesse
only, but with the spur of fear also. At Rome he had been Assessor to the
Lord Treasurer Romae assidebat Comiti largitionu^ Italicaru^. The Lord high
Treasurer of the Western Empire was called Comes sacrarum la^gitionum: he had
s^xe other Treasurers in so many Provinces, under him; whereof he of Italy was
one: Under whom this Alipius had some Office of Judicature, something like
(though fa^re inferior) to our ^aions of the Exchequer. See Sir Henry (...)
Glossary, in the word (...) And (...) l. 5. c. 40. The other Translator (...)
Assessor to the Prefect of the Contributioner of Italy. Ill.
of Italy.

2. There was at that time a most potent Senator, to whose favors many stood
engaged, whom many also were much afraid of. This great man would needs by his
usual power, have a thing pass the Court, which by the Laws was utterly
forbidden. Alipius crossed it; a bribe was promised him, he with all his heart
despised it: Threats were used, he trampled them underfoot: all men in the
mean time admiring so rare a spirit, which neither desired such a man (so
infinitely samed for the innumerable means he had, either to do a man a good
or a shrewd turn) to be his friend, nor feared to have him for his enemy. As
for the Judge himself, in whose Court Alipius was a Justice, although for his
own part he were unwilling to have it pass, yet did he not openly cross it,
but put the matter off to this Alipius; pretending that by him he was not
suffered to do it: for verily if he should have offered it, Alipius would
have gone off the Bench.

3. With this desire (and that in the way of his learning) was he only tempted;
that (namely) he might get himself a Library at such under-prizes as the
Praetors had their Books at. But consulting with Justice, he altered his
purpose to the better; esteeming Equity to be more gainefull, by which he was
prohibited that course, than Power could be, upon which he might take the
liberty. All this hitherto said of him, is but little: but He that is
faithful in that Luke 16. 10 11. 12.
which is least, is faithful also in much. Nor can that possibly be to no
purpose spoken, which proceeded out of the mouth of thy Truth. If ye have not
been faithful in the unrighteous Mamman, who will commit to your trust true
riches? And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who
shall give you that which is your own? Such a man as I have described, did at
that time adjoyne himself unto me; and wavered in his purpose as I did, what
course of life was to be taken.

Nebridius also, who having left his native Country near Carthage, yea and
Carthage it self, where for the most part he lived; leaving his Fathers lands,
which were very rich; leaving his own house, and a Mother behind, who meant
not (like mine) to follow after him; was by this time come to Millan, and for
no other reason neither, but that he might bestow himself with me, in a most
ardent desire after Truth and Wisdom. Together with me he sighed, and with
me he wavered; still continuing a most ardent searcher after happiness, and a
most acute examiner of the difficultest Questions. Thus were there now gotten
together the mouths of three Beggars, fighing out their wants one to another,
and waiting upon thee, that thou might Psalm. 145. 15.
give them their meat in due season. And in much anguish of spirit (which by
the disposing of thy mercy, still followed our worldly affairs) looking
toward the end, why we should suffer all this, darkness beelouded us:
whereupon we turned away mourning to our selves, saying, How long will things
continue at this stay? This we often said; but in saying so, we yet forsook
not our errors; for that we yet discovered no certainty, which when we had
forsaken them, we might betake our selves unto.

CHAP. 11. He deliberates what course of life he were best to take.
1. ANd I admired extremely, (pondering earnestly with my self, and examining
of my memory,) what a deal of time I had consumed since that nine and
twentieth year of mine age, in which I began first to be inflamed with the
study of wisdom: resolving, that when I had found that, to let pass all those
empty hopes, and lying phrenzies of vain desires. And behold, I was now going
of my thirtieth year, still sticking in the same clay, still possessed with a
greediness of enjoying things present, they as fast flitting and wasting my
soul; I still saying to my self, To morrow I shall find it out, it will
appear very plainly, and I shall understand it: and behold, Faustus the
Manichee will come, and clear every thing. O you great men, of the Academikes
opinion, who affirm, That no certain course for the ordering of our lives can
possibly be comprehended! Nay, let us rather search the more diligently, and
not despair of finding: for behold, those things in the Ecclesiastical
Books, are not absurd to us now, which sometimes seemed so: for they may be
otherwise, yea and that honestly understood. I will henceforth pitch my foot
upon that step, on which (being yet a child) my parents placed me, until such
time as the clear Truth may be found out.

2. But where-abouts shall it be sought for? When shall it be sought for?
Ambrose is not at leisure, nor have we our selves any spare time to read. But
where shall we find the Books to read on? Whence, or when can we procure
them, or from whom borrow them? Let set times be appointed, and certain hours
distributed for the health of our souls. We now begin to conceive great hopes;
The Catholic Faith teaches not what we thought it had, whereof we vainly
accused it: The learned men of that Faith, hold it for a detestable opinion, to
believe God to be comprehended under the figure of our humane body: and do we
doubt to knock, that the other mysteries may be also opened unto us? All the
forenoones our scholars take up, what shall we do the rest of the day? Why
go we not about this? But when Here Is an objection of flesh and blood against
the motions of Gods Spirit.
then shall we visit our greater friends, of whose favors we stand in need?
What time shall we have to compose some discourses to sell to Scholars? When
shall we recreate our selves, and unbend our minds from those cares they are
too earnest upon? Let all these thoughts perish, let us give over these vain
and empty fancies, and betake our selves solely to search out the Truth. Life
is miserable; Death uncertain; if it steals upon us on the sudden, in what
case shall we go out of the world? and where shall we then learn, what we
have here neglected? Or rather, shall we not there suffer the due punishment of
our negligence? If it be objected, That Death will quite cut off both care and
sense of all these things, and there is an end of them. Rather let that be
first inquired into. But God forbid that we should be of that mind. It is not
for no purpose, it is no idle toy, that so eminent a height of authority which
the Christian Faith has, is diffused all the world over. Should then such and
so great blessings be by the divine providence wrought for us, if so be that
together with the death of the body, the life of the soul should be brought
to nothing also? Wherefore then delay we time any longer, that giving over our
hopes of this world, we might give up our selves wholly to seek after God and a
happy life.

3. But stay a while: Another Objection of flesh and blood.
Even these worldly things are sweet, and they have some (and that no small)
pleasure. We are not too lightly to divorce our purposes from them, for that it
were a foul shame to make love again to them. See, it is no such great matter
to obtain some Office of honor; and what should a man desire more in this
world? We have store of potent friends, though we had nothing else; let us put
our selves forward, some place of preferment or other may be bestowed upon us:
or a Wife at least may be had with a good portion, to ease our charges: and
this shall be the full point of our desires. Many great persons, and those worthy
of our imitation, have addicted themselves to the study of wisdom in the state
of marriage.

4. Whilst these things we discoursed of, and these winds of uncontainties
changed up and down, and drove my heart this way and that way; the time still
passed on, but I was slow to be converted to my Lord God; and from one day to
another I deferred to live in thee, but deferred not daily to dye within my
self. Being thus in love with an happy life, yet feared I to find it in its
proper place, and fleeing from it, I sought after it. I thought I should be too
miserable, should I be debarred of the imbracements of a Woman: as for that
medicine of thy mercy which should cure that infirmity, I never thought of it;
and all because I had no experience of it. As for continency, I supposed it to
be in the liberty of our own Why then do the Papists enforce so many young
Maids and men to vow; as if it were in their own power? And why suffer they
those to keep the habit and place of Chastity, when as their Visitor knows
they have broken the Vow of Chastity?
power; (of which I for my part was not guilty) being so foolish withal, that
I knew it not to be written, Mat. 19. 11.
That no man can preserve his chastity unless thou give it. And that thou
verily would give it, if with cordial gronings I did knock at thine ears,
and with a settled faith did cast my cares upon thee.

CHAP. 12. A Contention betwixt Alipius and Augustine, about Marriage and
single life.
ALipius indeed was the man that kept me from marrying of a Wife; alleging,
That by no means could we enjoy so much undistracted leisure as to live
together in the love of Wisdom (as we long since had desired) should I take
that course. For he himself was so chaste that way, that it was a wonder to
see: for he had made trial of that Act in the beginning of his youth; but
having not engaged himself by it, he was sorry for it rather, and despised
it; living from that time until this present, most continently. For my part, I
opposed him with the examples of such men, as in the state of Matrimony had
professed wisdom, and were Promeruissent Deum: Which the Popish Translator
turns, And were grateful unto God. Very well; grateful, that is acceptable.
Seeing then promerita is but acceptablenesse, why should merita (the single
word) have so saucy a signification in Popish doctrine, as merits? Let them
mince the matter with Logike how they can, (by their distinction of condignity
and congruity of merits) sure they are gone by the Laws of Grammar; which
admits no such signification of promereo, or of merita, unless perchance our
Dictionaries have the word Merits, not in the genuine signification, but to
learn us to understand what the Papists mean by it.
acceptable unto God, and conversed faithfully and lovingly with their
acquaintances: of the greatness of whose spirit I was far enough short. Thus
I, delighted with the disease of the flesh, and with the deadly sweetness of
it, drew my shackles along with me, much afraid to have them knocked off: and as
if my wound had been too hard rubbed by it, I put back his good persuasions, as
it were the hand of one that would unchaine me.

2. Moreover, even by me did the Serpent speak unto Alipius, preparing and
laying by my tongue, most pleasurable snares in his way, in which his honest
and yet free feet, might be entangled. For when as he much admired at me,
(whom he slightly esteemed not of) for sticking so fast in the birdlime of that
pleasure, as resolutely to affirm, (so often as we had speech about it) that I
could by no means lead a single life: and that I used this for an argument,
(when I saw him so much wonder at the matter;) That there was a great deal of
difference betwixt the pleasure which he had tried by stealth and snatches,
(which he scarce now remembered, and might easily therefore despise) and the
delights of my daily lying at it; unto which might but the honest name of
Marriage be added, he would not wonder then, why I had not the power to
contemn that course of living: even he began to desire to be married; not as
if overcome with the lust of so poor a pleasure, as all out of a curiosity:
for he desired, as he said, to know what manner of content that should be,
without which my life (which was to him so great contentment) seemed not a life
so much, as a punishment unto me.

3. For his mind, that was free as yet from that clogge, stood amazed at my
thraldom; and out of that amazement, he proceeded to an itch of trying:
likely enough to have come to the experience of it, and from the bare
experience, to fall perchance into that bondage he in me so much admired at;
seeing he was so willing to enter into a Covenant with death: for He that loves
danger, shall fall into it. For the conjugall honor (if any there be) in the
office of well ordering the duties of a married life, and of having of
children, moved us but little. But that which for the most part did most
violently afflict me, (already made a slave to it) was the custom of
satisfying an insatiable lust; but him, that was hereafter to be inslaved, did
an admiration skrew up to it. In this case we continued, until thou, O most
high, not forsaking our lowliness, having compassion of us that stood in need
of it, did at length fetch us off, by admirable and secret devices.

CHAP. 13. Augustine lays out for a Wife.
1. AND much ado there was to get me a Wife: Now went I a wooing, and then
was the Wench promised me: my Mother taking most pains to beat the bargain:
her purpose in it being, that when I were married once, See what we have before
noted, page 36. in the margent.
the wholesome water of Baptism might cleanse me, (toward which she much
rejoiced to see me daily fitting my self;) observing, that all her own
desires, and thy promises, were to be fulfilled in my embracing of the Faith.
At which time verily, both by mine own entreaties, and her desires (and that
with strong cries of our hearts) did we daily beg of thee, that thou would
vouchsafe by some vision to discover something unto her concerning my future
marriage, but thou would never do it.

2. Yet saw she indeed certain vain and fantastical overtures, such as the
earnestness of her spirit, so busied about this matter, drew together. These
she told me of; not yet with that confidence she was wont, when thy self
afforded any visions unto her, but slighting them, as it were. For she could,
as she said (through I know not what relish she had, which in words she could
not express) easily enough discern how much difference there was betwixt thy
Revelations, and the dreams of her own spirit. Yet went we forward
earnestly, and the parents good will was asked; but the Maid wanted two years
of being marriageable. Yet, for that I had a good liking to her, I was content
to stay so long for her.

CHAP. 14. A new Plot laid and broken.
1. AND we were many friends of us, which debated of the matter; who
conferring about the detesting these turbulent molestations of a worldly life,
had now resolved, that sequestring our selves from company, to live retiredly:
and to lay this ground for our retirememt, that what stock every man was able
to make, we should put together, and make one household of al: that through the
plaine-dealing of a common friendship, one thing should not be this man's, and
another thing that man's; but what stock should be made up out of every man's
particular, should in the whole belong unto the interest of every single
person, and all together, unto all in general. It seemed to us, that there
might near be some ten persons in this kind of Academy: some of which were
very rich men; and Romanianus especially, our Townes-man (from his Childehood a
very familiar friend of mine) whom the hot pursuit of his business had brought
up to Quem tunc graves aestus negotioru^ suorum ad Comitatu^ attraxerant. This
the former Translator turns, That place of our residence. The man had ill
luck to miss at every hard place. He help him. Comitatus was like the place
where our Terms be kept: the Imperial Chamber at Spires in Germany, may
rightly be called Comitatus: The Emperors appointed it in any good Town where
they pleased, though themselves were not there: and at this time (for these
parts) it was at Millan. So plainly says Possidonius in the life of Saint
Augustine. Comitatus is the place whither subjects repair for the dispateh of
such business, as depends upon the Kings Courts of Justice. London is our
Comitatus, the Kings Chamber, for the South; York for the North. This word is
familiar to the Civil Lawyers. See the eighth and ninth Canons of the Council
of Sardica.
Court: who was most earnest of all the rest for this project: and therein was
his voice of great authority, and that because his estate was much fairer than
any of the rest.

2. And we had set it down, that two Officers should be yearly chosen, for
the making of necessary provisions, whilst the rest were quiet. But so soon
as we began to consider better of it, whether our Wives, (which some of us
already had, and others resolved to have shortly) would endure all this, or no?
all that so well laid plot fell to pieces in our hands, was utterly dashed and
cast aside. Thence returned we again to our old sighings, and gronings, and
wanderings, and to our former following those broad and beaten Mat. 7. 13.
ways of the world: for that many thoughts were in our heart, but thy
counsel stands Psalm. 33. 11
for ever. Out of which counsel did thou deride ours, and laid the
groundwork for thine own; purposing to give us Psalm. 145.
meat in due season, and to open thy hand, and to fill our souls with thy
blessing.

CHAP. 15. His old Concubine goes away from him, and he gets another.
1. MY sins in the mean time were multiplied, and that Mistress of mine which
was wont to be my bedfellow, (the hinderer as it were of my marriage) being
plucked away from my side, my heart cleaving unto her, was broken by this
means, and wounded, yea and blood drawn of it. Home again went she into
Affrike, (vowing unto A Vow of Chastity, says the Popish Tra^slator; and a
goodly one too: How many such Nuns has the Church of Rome, that then vow
chastity, when they are satisfied with lust? But well it were they had no worse
Nuns, than such as vow upon remorse of conscience, as this whore did. But
this was a private Vow yet, (which God knows how long she kept) and no formal
Nunnery Vow; she carried not her portion into the Nunnery with her. Money is of
the substance of the Nuns Vow now-a days, Chastity is but a formality. She
vows, not to know a man; but her money does not so; the Friars may know that.
The Primitives admitted no Nuns but pure Virgins: and if ever it could be
proved, she had played false before her Admission, she was canonically to be put
out of the House. Any cracked Chambermaid will make as good a Nun as the best
now-a days. Could Nuns keep their Vow, I would never speak against their
Order.
thee never to know man more) leaving a Bastard son with me, which I had
begotten of her. But unhappy I, who had not the heart to imitate a Woman,
impatient now of all delay, as if it were too long years before I was to enjoy
her who^ I went a wooing to, (being not so much a lover of wedlock, as a slave
to lust) quickly procured another (though not a Wife) by who^ that disease of
my soul might be nursed up, and kept alive, either as vigorous as it was, or
more fierce upon it; and that as it were by the assistance of my naughty
custom, continued from thence forward, till my advancement into the kingdom
of marriage; nor was that wound of mine as yet cured, which had bin made by the
cutting a way of my former Concubine; but after a most eager burning and
anguish it festered: and still it pained me, though after a more dull, yet
after a more desperate manner.

CHAP. 16. Of the immortality of the soul.
1. PRaise be unto thee, glory be unto thee, O Fountain of mercies. I became
more miserable, and thou nearer unto me. Thy right hand was ready by and by to
pluck me out of the mire, and to wash me thoroughly, but I knew not yet of it:
nor did any thing call me back from that deeper gulf of carnal pleasures,
but only the fear of death, and of thy judgment to come; which, although
diverse opinions I conceived of it, yet never went it utterly out of my breast.
I disputed in those days with my friends Alipius and Nebridius, concerning The
ends of Good and Evil: determining, that Epicurus in my judgment should have
worn the Garland, had I not verily believed that there remained a life for the
soul after the body was dead; and those Et tractus meritorum. This the Popish
Translator turns, And that which Merits do import. Mere non sense. And notes
in his margent, Merits. As if the place made for Popish merits. Doughtily
proved! as if Augustine, who was yet no Divine knew any thing of the Doctrine
of Merits. He ta^k^ before of the last Judgment, and here he talks of the
places of punishment or reward, which Epicurus Philosophy knew nothing of. If
he pleases to look his Dicticnary, he shall find Tractus to signify a Region
or Country. He alludes to other Philosophers believing of the several Regions
of Hell and Elysium, which were both under the earth, but distinguished into
several Quarters or Regions. Tractus is the Accusative case plural.
Regions where several deservings were rewarded, which Epicurus would not
believe.

2. And I put the question, That suppose we were to be immortal, and were to
live in perpetual enjoyment of bodily pleasure, and that without fear of
losing, why should we not the^ be fully happy, and wherefore should we seek
for any other thing? Little knowing that even this very thing was a part of my
great misery, that being thus drowned and blinded, I could not discern that
light of honesty and of beauty, (to be embraced for its own sake) which the
eye of the flesh cannot kenne, it being only by the inner man to be discerned.
Nor did I consider, wretch that I was, out of what vein it flowed, that even
these conceits, (filthy ones as they were) I with such pleasure conferred of
with my friends, (according to the opinion I then was of) how great abundance
soever of carnal pleasures beside, I enjoyed. Which friends verily I loved for
their own sakes, and I found my self to be in like manner beloved of them
again.

3. Out upon these intricate ways! Woe unto that and acious soul of mine,
which hoped, that had it forsaken thee, it should have had some better thing!
Turned it has, and turned again, upon back, sides, and belly, yet found all
places to be hard; and that thou art her Rest only. And behold, thou art near
at hand; and from our wretched errors thou deliveredst us, and settledst us in
thine own way, and do comfort, and say thus unto us: Run on, I will carry
you: yea, I will bring you to your journies end, and there also will I carry
you.

SAINT AUGUSTINES Confessions. THE SEVENTH BOOKT.
CHAP. 1. How rejecting corporeal Images, he began to know God to be
incorporeall.
BY this time was that wicked and abominable time of my Youth dead, and I went
on into a more solid Age: by how much the elder in years, so much the fouler
in vanity, who could not imagine any other kind of substance, than what I saw
with these eyes. Yet thought I not thee, O God, to be comprehended under the
figure of an humane body; since the time I began to hear any thing of
Wisdom, I always avoided that: and I rejoiced to have found thus much in the
faith of our spiritual Mother, thy Catholic Church. But what else I should
think thee to be, I knew not. And I being but a man, (and so mean a man too)
yet set I my self to believe thee to be the sovereign and onelytrue God: and
that thou were incorruptible, and inviolable, and unchangeable, with all the
powers of my soul did I believe: because not knowing how nor which way, yet
most plainly did I behold, and very sure I was, That that which may be
corrupted, must needs be worse than that which cannot be corrupted; and that
which cannot be violated, did I without any sticking at, prefer before that
which was subject to be violated: and that which suffers no alteration, I
judged to be much better than that which may suffer alteration.

2. My heart passionately cried out upon all my former phantasmes; and with one
blow I laid about me, to beat away all that sluttering troop of unclean
fancies, from the eye of my mind. And lo, being yet scarce put off by the
space of the twinkling of an eye, they came in multitudes again about me, they
pressed upon my sight, and so beelouded it, that though I thought thee not to
be of the shape of a humane body, yet was I constrained to imagine thee to be
some corporeal substance, taking up vast spaces of place: and that, either
infusea into this world, or else diffuse^ infinitely without it: yea, even of
that incorruptible, and inviolable, and unchangeable, which I preferred before
corruptible, and violable, and changeable, did I imagine thus. Because, that
whatsoever I deprived of these spaces, seemed to be nothing unto me; yea
altogether nothing, not so much as an emptiness verily: just as if a body were
taken out of it is place, and the place should remain empty of any body at all,
either earthly, or watery, or ayery and heavenly; but should remain a void
place, as it were a spacious nothing.

3. I therefore being thus grosse-hearted, not conspicuous so much as to my
very self; whatsoever was not stretched out over certain spaces, nor diffused
abroad, nor amassed up into bulk, nor swelled into breadth, or which did not or
could not receive some of these dimensions, I thought to be a just nothing: For
such forms as my eyes were wont to range over, even such like Images did my
heart now rove after: nor did I yet observe that very This Philosophical word,
the former Translator turns, This Action of my mind. Short of the sense.
Saint Augustine alludes to that in Philosophy, That all natural bodies to make
themselves perceived by the sense, do send and beam out from them, some
figure, Image, etc. by which the sense may app^hend them: which figure or shape
striking upon the sense, provokes it, and so makes it take actual notice of us
proper object. And this spiritual figure representing a real object, which
these bodies send out; do the Philosophers call their Intention. So that
Austens (...) fancying the like Images, he calls it the intention of his minds.
Intention of mine, by which I formed those Images, was not any such corporeal
substance, which yet could not have formed them, had not it self been some
great thing. In like manner did I conceive thee, O thou Life of my life, to be
some hugie corporeal substance, on every side piercing through the whole Globe
of this world; yea, and diffused every way without it, and that by infinite
spaces, though unbounded. So that the Earth should have thee, the Heaven should
have thee, all things should have thee, and that they should be bounded in
thee, but thou no where.

4. For as the body of this Air which is about the Earth, hindered not the
light of the Sun from passing through it, which pierces it, not by bursting or
by cutting, but by filling of it: so thought I, that not the body of the
Heaven, the Air and Sea only, but of the Earth too, to be at pleasure
passable unto thee, yea easy to be pierced by thee in all its greatest and
smallest parts, that all might receive thy presence, which by a secret
inspiration, both inwardly and outwardly governs all things which thou have
created. Thus I suspected; because any other thing I could not think of, and
yet was this false too. For by this means should a greater part of the Earth
have contained a larger portion of thee, and the less, a lesser: and then
should all things in such sort have been full of thee, as that the body of an
Elephant should contain so much more of thee than the body of a Sparrow, by
how much that should be bigger than this, and take up more room by it; by
which conceit should thou make thy parts present unto the several parts of
the World, by bits, as it were; great gobbets to great parts, little bits to
little parts of the world. But thus thou art not present. But thou had not as
yet enlightened my darkness.

CHAP. 2. Nebridius confutes the Manichees.
1. IT might have bin enough for me, Lord, to have opposed against those
deceived and deceivers, those dumb praters, (therefore dumb, because they
founded not forth thy Word:) That question might have served the turn, which
long ago, whiles we were at Carthage, Nebridius used to propound; at which
all we that heard it, were much staggered, namely, What, that I know not which
nation of darkness, which the Manichees were wont to set in opposition against
thee, would have done unto thee, had thou been minded to fight with it? For,
had they answered, It would have done thee some hurt, the^ should thou have
bin subject to violence and corruption: but if they answered, It could do thee
no hurt, then would there have been no reason brought for thy fighting with
it: especially for such a fighting, in which some certain portion or member of
thine, or some offspring of thy substance should have been mingled with those
contrary powers, those natures not created by thee; by whom it should so far
have been corrupted, and changed to the worse, that it should have been
turned from happiness into misery, and should have stood in need of some
assistance, by which it must both be delivered and purged: and that this The
other Tranlator renders it thus: And that this help must be the Soul, which
thy Word being free might succor. Succor a help? A mere Bull and Nonsense;
which utterly loses the force and meaning of the Argument.
Offspring of thy substance was our soul; which, being inthralled, thy Word
that was free; and being defiled, thy Word that was pure; and being may med,
thy Word that was entire, might every way releeve: and yet that Word it self
also be corruptible, because it was the offspring of one and the same
substance.

2. Again, should they affirm thee, whatsoever thou art, that is, thy
substance, to be incorruptible; then were all these fancies of theirs most
false and execrable. But if they should affirm thee to be corruptible; even
that were most false, and to be abhorred at the first hearing. This Argument
therefore of Nebridius verily had been enough against those, who deserved
wholly to be spised out of my overcharged stomach; for that they had no
evasion to betake themselves unto, without most horrible blasphemy both of
heart and tongue, thinking and speaking of thee in this fashion.

CHAP. 3. Free will is the cause of Sin.
1. But I as yet, although I both said and thought most confidently, that thou
our Lord God (who made not only our souls, but our bodies; and not only
both souls and bodies, but Us all, and all things else beside) were neither to
be corrupted or altered one way or other, yet understood I not hitherto, What
should be the cause of evil. And yet whatever it were, I perceived I ought in
that sense to inquire after it, that I might not be constrained to believe that
the incommutable GOD could be altered by it left my self should be made the
thing that I desired to seek After this therefore I inquired with more
security, being very certain that the Manichees Tenet (whom I dissented from
with my whole heart) was no way true: for that I discovered them, whilst they
enquired after evil, to be most full of maliciousness; they thinking that thy
substance did rather suffer ill than their own commit evil. Whereupon I
applied my industry to understand the truth of what I had heard, how that
Free Will Here flies my Popish Translator out upon Mr. Calvine, for teaching
Gods Decree and purpose by withholding of his Grace, to be the Causes of Sin
and Damnation. Verily Mr. Calvine is wronged that way: But this being an
Arminian Controversy, I had rather obey His Majesty's two Proclamations, and
one Declaration, than to be so soole-hardy as to meddle with it. I am neither
Calvinist nor Arminian, I am of the Religion of the Primitive Fathers, which
the Church of England professes.
should be the cause of our ill-doing; And thy just Judgment, that we suffered
ill. But I was not able clearly to discern it.

2. Endeavoring therefore to draw the eye of my soul out of that pit, I was
again plunged into it; and endeavoring often, I was plunged as often. But this
raised me a little up toward thy light, that I now knew as well that I had a
Will, as that I had a life: and when therefore I did either will or nill any
thing, I was most sure of it, that I did no other thing but will and nill: and
there was the Cause of my sin, as I perceived presently. But what I did
against my will, that seemed I to suffer rather, than to do; That judged I not
to be my fault, but my punishment; whereby, I holding thee most just, quickly
confessed my self not to be unjustly punished.

3. But I objected to my self again: Who made me? Did not my GOD, who is not
only good, but Goodness it self? Whence then came it that I can both will
and nill evil things, that there might be cause found why I should be justly
punished for it? Who was it that set this freedom in me, that ingrafted into my
stem this Cyon of bitterness, seeing I was wholly made up by my most sweet
God? If the Devil were the Author, whence is that same Devil? And if he
himself Here the Popish Translator commits a most negligent and gross
mistake, as if the soul of man had of a pure Angel, turned to a Devil. Saint
Augustine speaks not of the Souls turning Devil, but of him that was once
created a good Angel.
by his own perverse will, of a good Angel became a Devil, whence then
proceeded that perverse will in him, whereby he was made a Devil, seeing that
the whole nature of Angels was made good, by that most good Creator? And by
such thoughts as these was I again cast down and overwhelmed: yet not so far
brought down was I as the Hell of that Error, (where no man shall confess
unto thee) namely, that thou should be rather thought to suffer ill, than man
to do ill.

CHAP. 4. God cannot be compelled.
1. IN this sort did I endeavor now to find out the rest, as I had already
found, that what was incorruptible, must needs be better than that which was
corruptible: and THEE therefore, whatsoever thou were, did I acknowledge to be
incorruptible. For never yet soul was, nor ever shall be able to think upon
any thing which may be better than thou, who art the sovereign and the best
Good. But whereas most truly and certainly, that which is incorruptible, is
to be preferred before what is corruptible, (like as I did then prefer it) I
might very well have reached so high in my thoughts, as something that should
be better than my God, had not thou been incorruptible. Where therefore I
saw, that incorruptible ought to be preferred before corruptible, there ought
I to have sought out thee, and there to observe Whence evil should come; that
is, even whence corruption comes; by which thy substance can by no means be
infected.

2. For Corruption does no ways infect our God; by no will, by no necessity,
by no unlookt* for chance: because he is God, and what he wills, is good; and he
himself is that Good: but to be corrupted, is not good. Nor all thou, O God,
against thy will constrained to any thing, for that thy will is not greater
than thy power. But greater should it be, were thy self greater than thy
self. For the Will and Power of God, is God himself. And what chance can
surprise thee unlookt for, who know all things. Nor is there any nature of
things, but thou know it. And what should we use more arguments to prove,
Why that substance which God is, should not be corruptible, seeing if it were
so, it should not be God?

CHAP. 5. He pursues his inquiry after the root of sin.
1. AND I sought, Whence Evil should be, and I sought ill: nor did I see that
evil which was in this very inquiry of mine. I set now before the eyes of my
spirit, the whole Creation, and whatsoever I could discern of it; as the Sea,
the Earth, the Air, the Stars, the Trees, the mortal Creatures; yea and
whatever else in it we do not see; as the Firmament of the heaven; all the
Angels moreover, and all the spiritual inhabitants thereof. But yet as if all
these had been bodies, did my fancy dispose of them in such and such places,
and I made one great Mass of all thy Creatures, distinguished by their
several kinds of bodies; both those that were Bodies indeed, or which my
self had feyned instead of Spirits. And this Mass I made hugie enough, not
yet so great as in it self it was, (which I could not come to the knowledge
of) but as big as I thought convenient, yet every way finite. But thee, O
Lord, I imagined on every part environing and pen^trating it, though every way
infinite: As if there were supposed to be a Sea, which every where, and on
every side, by a most unmeasurable infiniteness, should be only a Sea; and
that Sea should contain in it some hugie Sponge, but yet finite; which Sponge
must needs be every where and on every side filled with that unmeasurable Sea:
So thought I thy whole Creation to be in it self finite, filled by thee who
art infinite; and I said, Behold God, and behold what God has created; and God
is good, yea, most mightily and incomparably better than all these: which God,
being himself good, created all them good; and see how he environeth and
full-fils them all.

2. Where is Evil then, and from whence, and how crept it in hither? What is
the root, and what the seed of it? Or has it at all no being? Why then do
we fear and beware of that which has no being? Or if we fear it in vain,
then surely is that fear evil, which in vain so gores and torments the
soul. Yea, and so much a greater evil, by how much that wants of being any
thing, which we stand in fear of, and yet do fear. Therefore is there some
evil thing which we fear, or else the very act of fearing is evil. Whence is
evil therefore? seeing God, who is good, has created all these things good;
that is, the greater and chiefest Good, has created these lesser goods; yea,
and he creating, and they created, are all good. Whence now is evil? Or, of
what did God make it? Was there any matter evil, and as God formed and ordered
it, did he leave any thing in it, which he did not convert (...) (...)? But
why did he so? Was ^ not able so to turn and chan^e the whole lump, that no
evil should have remained in it, seeing he is able to do any thing? Lastly,
why would he make any thing at all of that, and did not by the same omnipotency
rather cause that there should be no such thing at all? Or, to say troth, was
it able to be of it self against His will? Or if that evil matter had been
so from eternity, why suffered he it so to continue so infinite spaces of
times past, and was pleased so long while after to make something out of it?

3. Or if he were suddenly pleased now to go about some work, this rather
should the Omnipotent have done, have caused (namely) that this evil matter
should not at all have been, and that he himself should have been alone
that sovereign and infinite Good ^^ Or if it had not been good (...) who was
good, should (...) and create something also that were not good; then, that
evil matter being first taken away, and brought unto nothing, should he
immediately have taken order for some good matter, whereof he might create all
things. For he should not be omnipotent, if he were not able to create
something that were good of it self, unless he were assisted by that matter
which himself had not created. These thoughts tossed I up and down in my
miserable heart, overcharged with biting Cares, through the fear of death: and
though I had not found out the truth, yet did the Faith of thy Christ our Lord
and Savior, professed in thy Church, Here the Popish Translater grossly
plays the Papist, purposely wresting the sense, thus; Yet did the belief of
the Catholic Church, concerning thy Christ, stick fast in me. As if Saint
Augustine had held this Popish implicit faith, To believe as the Church
believes, had been enough. There is much difference betwixt a man's clear and
explicit knowledge of what he believes in Christ, and a blind implicit
belief as the Church believes, when he knows not what the Church believes.
firmly continue in my heart, though in diverse particulars verily, not yet
thoroughly perfected, and swarving from the right Rule of Doctrine; yet did not
my mind utterly leave it off, but every day took in more and more of it.

CHAP. 6. Divinations made by the Mathematicians, are vain.
1. BY this time also had I rejected those deceitful Divinations, and impious
dotages of the Astrologers. Let thine own mercies, out of the most inward
bowels of my soul, consesse unto thee for this, O my God. For thou, thou
altogether (for who else is it that calls us back from the death of all
errors, but even that Life, which knows not how to dye; and that wisdom
which enlightens those minds that need it, it self needing no light; by which
the whole world is governed, even to the falling away of the leaves of trees?)
thou tookest order for that stiff opinion of mine, by which I struggled with
Vindicianus, See the 3. Chap. of the 4. Book.
that sharpsighted old man, and with Nebridius that admirable-spirited ^ong
man: the first vehemently affirming, and the latter often though with some
doubtfulnesse) saying, That there was no Art whereby things to come, might be
foreseen: but that ^ens conjectures had oftentimes the help of Fortune; and
that ^^ talking many things, something to come was oft-times per^hance for
spoken of; the parties that spoke, little knowing of it; but stumbling now and
then upon the right, by their not saying nothing.

2. Thou therefore providedst a friendly man for me, and he (...) consulter
with the Astrologers: yet not thoroughly called in those Arts, but (as I ^^) a
curious consulter with ^^^; and one that knew something, which he had heard of
his Father, as he said; which, how far it might prevail to overthrow the
opinion of that Art, he knew not. This man therefore, Firminus by name, having
been finely bred, and well taught; asking my advice, as a dear friend of his,
concerning diverse affairs of his own, which his worldly hopes were big swollen
withal; and what I conjectured of him by his Constellations, as they call
them: and I, who now began to incline in this particular toward Nebridius
opinion, did not, to say troth, refuse to make conjecture upon it, and to tell
him as much as came in my unresolved mind: but told him withal, that I was
even almost persuaded in my heart, that these were but vain and ridiculous
follies.

3. He thereupon up and, told me, how his Father had been yet curious after
such Books, and how he had a friend as earnest as himself at them, who with
join study and conference were hot upon these toys, by the fire of their
hearty affections, insomuch that they would observe even the very minutes of
the bringing forth of young, of those dumb creatures which they kept about
their Houses, and made observations withal of the position of the heavens at
those minutes, to the intent to gather experiments of this Art, as it were. He
said moreover, how he had heard of his Father, that what time as his Mother was
big with him the said Firminus, a certain maidservant of that friend of his
Fathers, was big with child also, which her Master could not be ignorant of,
who took care with most diligent examination to get knowledge even of the
^ittering of his very Bitches: And how it so fell out, that when one for his
Wife, and the other for his servant, with the carefullest observation, reckoned
the days, yea, the hours; nay, the very least particles of the hours, that
both of them were brought to bed at the same instant; insomuch that both of
them were constrained to allow the very selfsame constellations, even to the
very same minutes, he for his sons birth, and the other for his little
servant. For so soon as the women began to fall in labor, they both gave
notice to one another of what was falue out in either of their houses, and had
messengers ready to send to one another, so soon as they had notice of what
was borne, which they could easily procure to have instant notice of, as being
in their own kingdom: and that the messengers sent from one another, met with
one another by the way, in such equal distance from either houses, that
neither of the Calculators could observe no other position of the Stars or
seconds of instances, than the other had done: and yet Firminus borne to a
fair fortune in his parents house, ran his course through the fair ways of
the world, throve well in riches, raised himself to honor: whereas that
little servant, not able any way to free himself of the yoke of slavery he was
borne unto, continued to serve his Masters: as himself told the story, who
well enough knew him.

4. Upon the hearing and believing of these things, for that such a man of
credit had told them; all that former resolute reluctance of mine, fell quite
to the ground. And first of all I endeavored to reclaim Firminus from that
curiosity, by telling him, that for me, upon the inspection of his
constellations, to foretell what shall truly happen to him, I ought verily
first to have seen in them, how his parents had been eminent persons among
their neighbors, and that be had been descended of a noble Family in his own
City, that he was free borne, educated like a Gentleman, and very well
studied. And if that servant, upon the same constellations, which were common
to him too, had asked me to tell him his true Fortune; I ought on the other side
to have seeue in them, the baseness of his liuage, the slavishnesse of his
condition, and those other particulars so much different, and so far distant
from the other Gentleman's. From, whence therefore it now came to pass, that
looking upon the same constellations, I should read so diverse fortunes, if I
should speak the truth; and if I should pronounce the same fortunes, I should
lie falsely: thence did I also collect most certainly, That whatever upon
consideration of these constellations was foretold truly, was not spoke out of
Art, but chance: and whatever was delivered falsely, was not out of the
unskilfulnesse of the Art, but out of the uncertainety of the chance.

5. Being thus entered into the business, and thinking with my self more
seriously upon such like arguments; that no one of those dotards (who lived by
such shifts, whom I had an itch even out of hand to cope withal, and with
derision to confute) might not hereafter confront me so, as if either Firminus
had informed me falsely, or his Father him: I bent my consideration upon those
that are borne Twins, who for the most part come out of the womb so near
one to another, as that small distance of time between them (how much force
soever in the nature of things these fellows avow it to have;) yet is it not
posible to make distinct collection of the difference by any observation of
man, or to have it at all charactered out in those figures which the
Mathematician is to look into, and pronounce the truth by them. Nor shall they
ever tell truth: for then; he that had looked upon the same figures, must have
told the same Fortunes both of Esau and of Jacob; whereas the same things no
ways happened to them both. Needs therefore must he have conjectured false:
or if he had conjectured truly, he must not have said the same things,
whereas he looked upon the same figures. Had he therefore pronounced truly, it
should have been by chance, and not by Art. For thou, O Lord most just, the
Ruler of this Universe, even while they that ask the advice, and those that
give it too, know not what they do, workest by so hidden an instinct, as that
whoever asked the Mathematicians advice, should hear such an answer as, out of
the un^^^^chable bottom of thy just Judgment, in respect of the hidden
deservings of the souls, thou think fit for him to hear. To whom, let not
man say, What is this? or Why is that? Let him not say so, never let him ask
such a question, seeing he is but a man.

CHAP. 7. He is miserably tortured in his inquiry after the Root of Evil.
1. ANd now, O my helper, had thou discharged me from those fetters: and
presently enquired I whence Evil should be, but found no way out of my
question. But thou sufferedst me not to be carried away from the Faith by any
waves of those thoughts; by which Faith I believed, both that thou were, and
that thy substance was unchangeable, and that thou had a care of, and
passedst thy judgment upon men; and that in Christ thy Son, our Lord, and
thy holy Scriptures, which the Authority of thy Church should acknowledge
Scripturis, quas Ecclesiae commendaret autoritas. Where Ecclesiae may be the
dative Case: and then may it go thus: Which Scriptures thy authority
recommended unto the Church: as before he said, lib. 6. cap. 5. See the place.
Here the Popish Translator would needs give Authority to the Church to teach
us what is Scripture. For that controversy, see our Preface.
, thou have laid out the way of man's salvation, to pass to that life which is
to come after death. These grounds remaining safe and irremoveably settled in
my mind, I with much anxiety sought, from what root the nature of Evil should
proceed. What torments did my teeming heart then endure, and what throws, O my
God! yet even to them were thine ears open, and I knew it not: and when in
silence I so vehemently enquired after it, those silent conditions of my soul,
were strong cries unto thy mercy.

2. Thou, and not man, knew how much I suffered. For, how great was that
which my tongue sent forth into the ears of my most familiar friends? And yet
did I disclose the whole tumule of my soul, for which neither my time nor
tongue had been sufficient? Yet did all of it ascend into thy hearing, which I
roared out from the groans of my heart; yea, my whole desires were said up
before thee, nor was I master of so much as of the light of mine own eyes: for
that was all turned inward, but I outward: nor was that confined to any place,
but I bent my self to those things that are contained in places: but there
found I no place to rest in, nor did those places so entertain me, that I
could say, It is enough, and it is well: nor did they yet suffer me to turn
back, where I might find well-being enough. For to these things was I
superior, but inferior to thee: and thou art that true joy of me thy Subject:
and thou have subjected under me, those things which thou createdst below me.

3. And this was the true temper, and the middle Region of my safety, where I
might remain conformable to thine Image, and by serving thee, get the dominion
over mine own body. But when as I rose up proudly against thee, and when I ran
upon my Lord with my neck, with the thick bosses of my Job 15. 26.
buckler; then were these inferior things made my over-matches, and kept me
under, nor could I get either releasement or space of breathing. They ran on
all sides by heaps and troops upon me, broad-looking on them; but having in
my thoghts these corporeal Images, they waylaid me as I turned back, (...)
they should say unto me; Whither go thou, O thou unworthy and base
creature? And these grew more in number even out of my wound; for thou have
humbled the proud like as him that is wounded, and through my own swelling was
I set further off from thee; yea, my cheeks, too big swollen, even blinded up
mine eyes.

CHAP. 8. How the mercy of God at length relieved him.
1. THou, Lord; art the same for ever: nor art thou angry with us for ever;
because thou have pity upon dust and ashes, and it was pleasing in thy sight
to reform my deformities: and by inward gallingsdidst thou startle me, that I
should become unquiet, till such time as it might be assured unto my inward
sight, that it was thou thy self. Thus, by the secret hand of thy medicining,
was my swelling abated; and that troubled and bedimmed eyesight of my soul, by
the smart eye salve of mine own wholesome dolours, daily began more and more to
be cleared.

CHAP. 9. What he found in some Books of the Platonists, agreeable to the
Christian Doctrine.
1. AND thou being desirous first of all to show unto me, how thou resistest
the I am 4. 6.
proud, but give grace unto the humble; and with what great mercy of thine
the way of humility is traced out unto men, in that thy WORD was made flesh,
and dwelt among men: thou procuredst for me, by means of a certain man, puffed
up with a most unreasonable pride, to see certain Books of the This was
likely to be the Book of Amelius the Platonist, who has indeed this beginning
of S. John's Gospel: calling the Apostle a Barbarian. Eusebius. in Praepara^.
Evang. lib. 10. cap. 10. Clemens Alexandrinus said that Plato was Ex Hebraeis
Philosophus. For he learned many things in Egypt of the Jews: and he and
Aristotle had seen the Septuagints Translation. Niceras in Nazianzeni Orat.
24. tells that Plato first of all the Gentiles came to Christ preaching in Hell,
believed, and was converted.
Platonists, translated out of Greek into Latin. And therein I read, not
indeed in the self same words, but to the very same purpose, persuaded by many
reasons, and of several kinds, That Ioh. 1. 1, 2, 3, 4.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and that Word was
God. The same was in the beginning with God. All things were made by him, and
without him was nothing made that was made. In him was life, and the life was
the light of men. And the light shined in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. And for that the soul of man, though it gives testimony
of the light, yet it self is not that light; but the Word of God is: for God
is that true light that lights every man that comes into the world. And
because he was in the world, and the world was Verse 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
made by him, and the world knew him not: and because he came unto his own,
and his own received him not: But as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the sons of God, as many as believed in his name; All this did
I not read there.

2. There again did I read, that God the Word was not borne of flesh nor of
blood, nor of the will of man, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God. But
that the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, did I not there read. I
found out in those Books, that it was many and diverse ways said; that the
Son being in the form of the Father, Philip. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, for that naturally he was the same
with him. But that (...) himself of no reputa^^^, taking upon him the form ^^
a servant, and was made in (...) likeness of men, and was sound in fashion as
a man, and humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross. Wherefore God has highty exalted him from the dead, and given him
a name over every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of
things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth. And that
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the
Father; those Books have not.

3. But that thy only begotten. Son, coeternall with thee, war before all
times, and beyond all times remains unchangeable, and that of his fullness all
souls receive what makes the^ blessed; and that by participation of that
wisdom which remains in them, they are renewed, that they may be made wise,
is there. But that he in due time dyed for the wicked; and that thou sparedst
not thine only Son, but Romans 8. 32.
deliveredst him for us all, is not there. For thou have hid these things from
the wise, and have revealed them unto babes; that they that labor and are
heavy laden, might come unto thee, Mat. 11. 28.
and thou might refresh them. Because he is meek and lowly i^heart: and the
meek he directs in Judgment, and such as be mild he teaches his ways,
beholding our humility and labor, and forgiving us all our sins. But such as
are puffed up with the high strain of a sublimer learning, hear not him saying
unto them, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly inheart, Mat. 11. 29
and you shall find rest to your souls. And, If they know Romans 1. 21, 22, 23.
God, yet they glorify him not as God, nor give thanks unto ^^^, but wax
vain in their imaginations; and their foolish heart is darkened; and professing
that they were wise, they became fools.

4. And there also did I read, that they had changed the glory of thy
incorruptible nature into Idols, and diverse shapes, into the likeness of the
image of corruptible man, and birds, and beasts, and Serpents; yea verily into
that Egyptian food, for which Esau lost his birthright; Genesis 25.
for that that people, which was thy firstborn, worshipped the head of a
foure-footed Beast instead of thee, turning in their heart back toward Egypt;
and bowing thy Image (their own soul) before the image of a Calfe that eats
hay. These Psalm. 106. 20.
things found I there; but I fed not on them. For it pleased thee, O Lord, to
take away the reproach of diminution from Jacob, that the elder brother should
serve the younger: and thou have called the Gentiles into thine inheritance.

5. And I my self came unto thee from among the Gentiles; and I set my mind
earnestly upon that gold which thou willedst thy people to take from the
Egyptians, seeing thine it was, Exodus 3. 22
wheresoever it were. And to the Athenians thou said by thy Apostle; That in
thee we live, Acts 17. 28
move, and have our being, as one of their own Poets had said. And verily these
Books came from thence. But I set not my mind toward the Idols of Egypt,
which they made of thy gold; even they who changed the truth of God into a lie;
and Romans 1. 25.
worshipped and served the creature more than the Creator.

CHAP. 10. Divine things are more clearly discovered unto him.
1. ANd being upon this admonished to return to my self, I entered even into
mine own inwards, thou being my Leader: and able I was to do it, for thou were
now become my helper. Into my self I went, and with the eye of my soul (such
as it was) I discovered over the same eye of my soul, over my mind, the
unchangeable light of the Lord. Not this, vulgar light, which all flesh may
look upon; nor yet another greater of the same kind; as if this should much
and much more clearly, and with its greatness take up all the room. This
light was none of that, but another, yea clean another from all these. Nor was
it in that manner above my soul, as Oil is upon water, nor yet as the heaven
is above the earth: but superior to my soul, because it made me; and I was
inferior to it, because I was made by it He that knows what Truth is, knows
what that light is; and he that knows it, knows eternity. Charity knows it.

2. O eternal Truth! and true Charity! and dear eternity! Thou art my God, to
thee do I sigh night and day. Thee when I first saw, thou liftedst ine up,
that I might see there was something which I might see; and that yet it was not
I that did see. And thou did beat back the infirmity of my own sight,
darting thy beams of light upon me most strongly, and I trembled both with
love and horror: and I perceived my self to be far off from thee, in the
Region of utter Unlikeness, as if I heard this voice of thine from on high: I
am the food of strong men, grow apace, and thou shall feed upon me; nor shall
thou convert me like common food, into thy substance, but thou shall be changed
into me. And I learned thereupon, That thou with rebukes have corrected Psalm.
39. 11
me for iniquity, thou made my soul to consume away like a moath. And I
said; Is Truth therefore nothing at all, seeing it is neither diffused by
infinite spaces of places, nor by finite? But thou cryedst to me from afar
off; Yea verily, I AM that I AM. This voice I Exodus 3.
heard, (as things are heard in the heart) nor was there any suspicion at all,
why I should doubt of it: yea, I should sooner doubt that I did not live, than
that it was not the Truth, which is clearly to be seen by Romans 1. 20.
those things which are made.

CHAP. 11. How the Creatures are, and yet are not.
1. ANd I cast mine eyes upon those other creatures beneath thee, and I
perceived, that they neither have any absolute being, nor yet could they be
said to have no being. A being they have, because they had it from thee: and
yet no being, because what thou art, they are not. For that truly has a
being, which remains unchangeably. It is good then for me to Psalm. 73. 28.
hold fast unto God: for if I remain not in him, I shall never be able to do
it in my self: whereas he remaining in himself, renews all things. And
Psalm. 26. 1.
thou art my Lord, neither do thou stand in need of my goodness.

CHAP. 12. All that is, is good.
1. ANd manifested unto me it was, that even those things be good, which yet
are corruptible; which, were they soveraignely good, could never be corrupted:
because if soveraignely good they were, they must needs be incorruptible: and
if they held no goodness in them at all, neither should they have any thing in
them to be corrupted. For corruption hurts every thing, but unless it could
diminish their goodness, it could not hurt. Either therefore corruption does at
all no hurt (which cannot be;) or, which is most certain, all which is
corrupted, is deptived of its goodness. If things then shall be deprived of
all their goodness, they shall have at all no being. For if they shall still
be, and shall not be at all corrupted, they shall thereby become better,
because they remain ever incorruptibly.

2. What more absurd now, than to affirm those things that have lost all their
goodness, to be made the better by it? Therefore, whenever they shall be
deprived of all their goodness, they shall also lose all their being. So long
therefore as they are, they are good: therefore whatsoever are, are good. That
Evil then which I sought, whence it should be, is not any substance: for were
it a substance, it should be good. For either it should be an incorruptible
substance, that is to say, of the chief sorts of good; or else should it be
some corruptible substance; which unless it were some way or other good, it
could not be corrupted. I perceived therefore, and it was made plain unto me,
that all things are good which thou have made: nor is there any substance at
all, which thou have not made. And for that all which thou have made are not
equal, therefore are they all good in general, because all good in
particular, and all together very good, because thou our God have made all
things very (...). 31.
good.

CHAP. 13. All created things praise God.
1. ANd to thee is there nothing at all evil: yea, not only in respect of
thee, but also not in respect of thy Creatures in general; because there is
not any thing which is without thee, which has power to break in, or
discompose that Order which thou have settled. But in some particulars of thy
Creatures, for that some things there be, which so well agree not with some
other things, they are conceived to be evil: whereas those very things suit
well enough with some other things, and are good; yea, and in themselves good.
And all these things which do not mutually agree one with another, do yet
suit well enough with this inferior part, which we call Earth; which has such
a cloudy and windy Region of Air hanging over it, as is in nature agreeable
to it.

2. God forbid now, that I should ever say that there were no other things
extant besides these, for should I see nothing but these, verily I should went
the better. And yet even only for these ought I praise thee (...) that thou
art to be praised, (...) things of the (...) do (...) Dragons, and all (...)
Hail Snow, ^ee, and (...) Wind, which fulful thy (...) Mountains, and all
(...), fruitful Trees, and all Cedars, Beasts, and all Cattle; creeping
things, and flying Fowls; Kings of the Earth, and all people; Princes, and all
Judges of the Land: Young men, and Maidens; Psalm. 148.
Old men, and Children, let them praise thy Name. Seeing also these in heaven
praise thee, let them praise thee, O our God, in the heights: Let all thy
Angels praise thee, and all thy Hosts, Sun and Moon, all the Stars and
Light, the Heaven of Heavens, and the Waters that be above the Heavens, let
them praise thy Name. I did not now desire better, because I had now thought
upon them all: and that those superior things were better than these inferior
things, but yet all together better than those superior by themselves, I
resolved upon in my bettered judgment.

CHAP. 14. To a sober mind, none of Gods Creatures are displeasing.
1. THey are not well in their wits, to whom any thing which thou have created,
is displeasing, no more than I my self was, when as many things which thou
had made, did not like me. And because my soul durst not take distaste at my
God, it would not suffer that ought should be accounted thine, which
displeased it. Hence fell it upon the opinion of two substances, and no rest
did it take, but talked idly. And turning from thence, it fancied a God to it
self, which took up infinite measures of all places; and him did it think to
be thee; and him it placed in its heart: so that it became once again the
Temple of its own Idol, which was to thee so abominable. But after thou had
refreshed my head, (I not knowing of it) and had shut up mine eyes that they
should no more behold vanity; I began to be quieted a little within my self,
and my mad Fit was got asleep: out of which I awaked in thee, and then
discerned thee to be infinite another manner of way. But this sight was not
derived from any power of my flesh.

CHAP. 15. How there is truth and falsehood in the Creatures.
1. ANd I looked after this upon other things; and I saw how they owed their
being to thee; and that all finite things are in thee: but in a different
manner; not as in their proper place; but because thou containest all things in
thine hand of truth. All things are true so far forth as they have a being;
nor is there any falsehood, unless when a thing is thought to be, which is
not. And I marked how that all things did agree respectively, not to their
places only, but to their seasons also: And that thou, who only art eternal;
did not begin to work after innumerable spaces of times spent; for that
all spaces of times, both those which are passed already, and those which are
to pass hereafter; should neither go nor come, but by thee, who art still
working, and still remaining.

CHAP. 16. All things are good, though to some things not fit.
1. ANd I both found and tried it to be no wonder, that the same bread is
loathsome to a distempered palate, which is pleasant to a sound one: and that to
sore eyes that light is offensive, which to the clear is delightful: and that
thy Justice gives disgust unto the wicked: yet not so much but the Viper and
smallest vermin, which thou have created good, but are fit enough to these
inferior portions of thy Creatures, to which these very wicked are also fit;
and that so much the more fit, by how much they be unlike thee; but so much
liker the superior Creatures, by how nearer resembling thee. And I enquired
what this same Iniquity should be: But I found it not to be a substance, but a
swarving merely of the will, crookt quite away from thee, O God, (who art the
supreme substance) toward these lower things; which casts abroad its inward
corruption, and swells outwardly.

CHAP. 17. What things hinder us of Gods knowledge.
1. AND I wondered not a little, that I was now come to love thee, and no
Phantasme instead of thee: nor did I delay to enjoy my God, but was ravished to
thee by thine own beauty; and yet by and by I violently fell off again, even
by mine own weight: rushing with sorrow enough upon these inferior things.
This weight I spoke of, was my old fleshly customs. Yet had I still a
remembrance of thee; nor did I any way doubt, that thou were he to whom I ought
to cleave; but yet I was not the party fit to cleave unto thee: for that the
body which is corrupted, presses down the soul, and Wisd. 9. 15.
the earthly tabernable weighs down the mind that museth upon many things.
And most certain I was, that thy invisible works from the creation of Romans 1.
20.
the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made,
even thy eternal power and Godhead.

2. The Popish Translator notes in his Margent, An high discourse: and so it is
indeed; too high for his reach: for he understands it not. Js a poor piece of
philosophy so high with him? He would same have that thought to be mystery,
which he makes nonsense.
For studying now, by what reasons to make good the beauty of corporeal
things, either celestial or terrestrial: and what proof I had at hand,
solidly to pass sentence upon these mutable things, in pronouncing; This ought
to be thus, and this must be so; plodding (I say) on this, upon what ground
namely I ought to judge, seeing I did thus judge: I had by this time found the
unchangeable and true eternity of truth, residing upon this changeable mind See
the beginning of Chap. 10.
of mine. And thus by degrees, passing from bodies, to the soul, which makes
use of the senses of the body to perceive by: and from thence to its The ^ive
outward senses represent the species or images which they have received unto
the three inward senses, The Common sense, Fancy, and Memory. Some deny memory
unto beasts: but the other two they have: and their Fancy is the chief power
of their soul, by which they judge of what ever corcernes the Beyond Fancy
they cannot go.
inner faculties, unto which the senses of the body are to represent their
outward objects; and so forward, as far as the irrational creatures are able
to go. Thence again passed I on to the Reasoning faculty, unto which
whatever is received from the senses of the body, is referred to be judged.

2. This also finding it self to be variable in me, betook it self toward
its own understanding; drawing away my thoughts from my old fleshly custom,
and withdrawing it self from those confused multitudes of fantasies, which
contradict one another; that so it might find out that light, which it now had
a glimpse of: presently upon the finding whereof, without all further doubting,
it cried out, that what was unchangeable, was to be preferred before what was
changeable, by which it had come to know that unchangeable. Which, unless by
some means or other it had known, it could never have had sure ground for the
preferring of it before the Changeable; nor have come so high as that which is
set within hence of the twinkling eyesight. And now came I to have a sight of
those invisible: things of thee, which are understood Romans 1. 20.
by those things which are made. But I was not able to fix mine eye long upon
them: but my infirmity being beaten back again, I was turned to my wonted
fancies; carrying along with me no more but a liking of those new thoughts in
my memory, and an appetite as it were to the meat I had smelt; which as yet I
was not able to eat of.

CHAP. 18. Only Christ is the way to Salvation.
1. THen set I my self to seek a means of recovering so much strength, as
should be sufficient to enjoy thee; but I could not find it, until I
embraced that Mediator 1 Timothy 2. 5
betwixt God and man, the Man Jesus Christ; who is over Romans 9. 5.
all, God blessed for evermore, then calling unto me, and saying, I am the way,
the truth, Ioh 14. 6.
and the life: who mingled that food which I was unable to take (his own
flesh) unto ou^ flesh. For the Word was made Ioh. 1. 14.
flesh, that by thy wisdom by which thou createdst ^ things, he might sackle
o^^ infancy. For I, not yet humbled enough, did not apprehe^ my Lord Jesus
Christ, who ha^ made himself humble; nor did I yet know what lesson that
infirmity of his would teach us. For thy Word, the eternal truth, being so
highly exalted above the highest of thy Creatures, reaches up those that were
cast down, unto it self: having here below built for it self a lowly Cottage
of our clay, by which he intended to abase from the height of their own 2
Cor. 10. 5
imaginations, those that were to be cast down; that so he might bring them
about unto himself; allaying the swelling of their pride, and cherishing of
their love: To the end they might go on no further in the confidence of
themselves, but might find their own weakness rather; seeing the Divinity it
self enfeebled at our feet, by taking our fleshly garment upon him: that so
being weary at length, they might cast down their selves upon it, and that
rising, might raise up them together with it.

CHAP. 19. What he thought of Christ's incarnation.
1. But I had before far other thoughts: conceiving only of my Lord Christ,
as of a man of excellent wisdom, whom no man could be equalled unto; and in
this regard especially, for that being so wonderfully borne of a Virgin,
(giving us an example how to contemn worldly things for the obtaining of
immortality;) that divine care of his seemed to have deserved so much
authority, as to be the Master over us. But what Mystery this might carry with
it, The Word was made flesh, I could not so much as imagine. Thus much I
collected out of what is Scripta trade rentur. Here the Popish Translator, (a^
every where he do^^) takes occasion to diminish the authority of the
Scripture: noting, that it came to us by tradition. It did so: but not only
so: we have history also for every book of it: and it self brings light with
it to show it self by: as by the light of the sun we see and know the Sun.
Have Popish Traditions either of these two proofs?
come to us being written of him, how that he did eat, and drink, and sleep,
and walked, and rejoiced in spirit, and was heavy, and preached: that, flesh
alone did not cleave unto thy Word, but our humane soul and mind also with
it. Every body knows thus much, that knows the unchangeablenesse of thy
Word: which I my self now knew, (as well as I could) nor did I at all make any
doubt of it. For, for him to move the limbs of his body by his will, and
other-whiles not to move them; now to be stirred by some affection, and at
another time not to be affected; now to deliver wise sentences, and another
while to keep silence: all these be properties of a soul and mind that are
mutable. And should these things be falsely written of him, all the rest verily
would be in suspicion of being a lie, nor should there be left at all in those
Books any safenesse of Faith for mankind.

2. Because therefore none but Truths are there written, I even then
acknowledged a perfect man to be in Christ. Not the body of a man only, a
sensitive soul without a rational, but a very man, whom, not only for his
being a person Now is he fallen from the Manichees, who held Christ not to have
a true, but a fantastical body or person only: and to have excellent gifts of
nature, but no truth of humane nature.
of Truth, but for a certain extraordinary excellency of humane nature that
was in him, I judged worthy to be preferred before all other men. As for
Alipius, he imagined the Catholics to have believed, God to be so clothed
with flesh, that besides God and flesh, there was no soul at all in Christ,
and that they had preached there was no soul of man in him. And because he
was verily persuaded, that those Actions which were recorded of him, could not
be performed but by a vital and a rational Creature, he was the slower
therefore in moving toward the Christian Faith. But understanding afterward,
that this was the error of the Apollinarian Heretics, he was better pleased
with the Catholic faith, and better complied with it. But something later it
was, I confess, ere I learned, how in this sentence, The Word was made flesh,
the Catholic Truth could be cleared of the heresy of Photinus. For, the
confuting of the Heretics, makes the opinion of thy Church more eminent, and
the Tenet which the sound doctrine maintains. For 1 Cor. 11. 19.
there must be also Heresies, that they which are approved, may be made
manifest among the weak.

CHAP. 20. Of diverse Books of the Platonists.
1. But having read as then these Books of the Platonists, having once gotten
the hint from them, and falling upon the search of incorporeall truth; I came
to get a sight of these invisible things of thine, which are understood by
those things which are made: and Romans 1. 20.
being put back again, I perceived, how that the darkness of mine own mind
was it which so hindered my contemplation, as that I was not suffered to be
certain, That thou were both infinite, and yet not diffused over finite and
infinite places: and that thou art truly the same that thou art ever, nor in
any part, nor by any motion, otherwise at one time than at another: and that
all other things are from thee, taught so by this one most firm demonstration,
that they are. Of these things I was certain enough, yet too too weak to
comprehend thee. I prated altogether like a skillful Fellow; but had I not
sought thy way in Christ our Savior, I had not proved The other Translator
has made most strange sense in these two or three former chapters: and here
twice together he has read potitus (as ^^ghesse) instead of pe^itus. So ^ any
of ^^^se negligences has be committed, in mis^^king one word (...) that I
verily be (...) it by Owle^^ght.
a skillful man, but a lost man. For now (forsooth) I began to be desirous to
seem wise; full of mine own punishment, yet could not weep for it, but
became more and more puffed up with my knowledge.

2. For where was that charity that should build me up from that foundation of
humility, which is in Christ Jesus? or when would these books have taught me
that? Yet upon these, I believe it was, thy pleasure that I should first fall,
before. I took thy Scriptures into my consideration; that I might print in
memory, how far those Books wrought upon my affections: and that when
afterward I should come to be made tractable by thy Books, (thine own
fingers undertaking the cure of me, and my wounds dressed) I might discern at
last and distinguish, how maine a difference there was betwixt Presumption and
Confession; betwixt those that saw whither they were to go, but knew nothing
of the way; and that path which leads unto that blessed Country, not to be
looked upon only, but dwelt in. For had I first been brought up in thy holy
Scriptures, and in the familiar use of them, thy self had grown sweet unto me,
and fallen upon these Philosophical volumes afterward; they might either have
withdrawn me from the sollid ground of piety, or if I had stood firm in that
wholesome disposition which I had there tasted, I might perchance have thought,
that a man, even out of these Platonike books, might have gotten the same, had
he studied them only.

CHAP. 21. What he found in the holy Scriptures, which was not in the
Platonists.
1. MOst greedily therefore laid I hold upon that venerable style of thy
Spirit: and upon the Apostle Paul above all the rest. Whereupon those
difficulties quite vanished away, in which he sometimes seemed unto me to
contradict himself, and wherein the Text of his discourse, seemed not to agree
with the testimonies of the Law and the Prophets. And there appeared unto me
that one face of that chaste Eloquence; and I learned to rejoice with
trembling. I set upon it, and found whatsoever I there read, to be true. These
things, to the praise of thy Grace, I there learned, that he which sees, may
not so glory, as if he had not received; not that only which he 1 Cor. 4. 7.
does see, but also that which he may see. For what has he, which he has
not received? Yea, both that he may be put in mind not only to see thee, who
art ever the same, but that he may be made strong, to hold thee: and that he
who from a far off is not able to see his way, may yet walk on, to the end
he may at last arrive, and see, and comprehend. For, though a man be delighted
with the Law of God after the inner man, yet how shall he do with that other
Law in his members, Romans 7. 22 23.
which wars against the Law of his mind, and brings him into captivity to
the Law of sin which is in his members? For, thou art righteous, O Lord, but
Dan. 9. 5. 7
we have sinned and committed iniquity, and thy hand is grown heavy upon us
^and we are justly delivered over unto that old Sinner, the President of death:
for he has wrought our will to become like his will, whereby he departed from
thy Truth.

2. What shall wretched man do? who shall deliver him from Romans 7. 24
the body of this death? but only thy Grace, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
whom thou have begotten coeternall to thy self, and possessedst in the
beginning Pro. 8. 22.
of thy ways: in whom the prince of this world found Ioh. 14. 30.
nothing worthy of death; yet killed he him; whereby the handwriting was blotted
out, which Col. 2. 14.
was contrary to us. None of all this do these Platonike writings contain.
Those leaves can show nothing of this face of peitie, those tears of
confession, that sacrifice of thine, a troubled Psalm. 51.
spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, the salvation of thy people, the
Spouse, the City, the earnest of the Holy Ghost, the Cup of our Redemption. No
man sings there, Shall not my Psalm 62. 1. 2.
soul wait upon God, seeing from him comes my salvation? For he is my God,
and my salvation, my defense; I shall not be greatly moved.

2. No man in those Books hears him calling, Come unto me all ye that
labor: yea, Mar. 11. 28 29, 25.
they scorn to learn of him, because he is meek and lowly inheart. For these
things have thou hid from the wise and prudent, and have revealed themunto
babes. For it is one thing, from the wild top of a Mountain He alludes to
Deuteronomy. 32 49.
to see the Land of Peace, and not to find the way thither; and in vain to
travel through ways unpassable, round about beset with these fugitive
Spirits, forsakers of their God, lying in ambush with that Ringleader of
theirs, the Lion and the Dragon: and another thing to keep on the way that
leads thither, which is guarded by the care of our heavenly General: where
they exercise no robberies, that forsook the heavenly Army: which they
abhor as much as their very torment. These things did by wonderful means
sink into my very bowels, when as I read that least of thy Apostles, and had
considered 1 Cor. 15. 9
upon thy works, and trembled. *

SAINT AUGUSTINES Confessions. THE EIGHTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1. How being inflamed with the love of heavenly things, he goes to
Simplicianus.
GIve me leave, O my God, with Thanksgiving, to remember, and confess unto
thee thine own mercies bestowed upon me. Let my bones be filled with thy love,
and let them say unto thee, Who is like unto thee, O Psalm. 86. 8. Psalm 116. 16,
17.
Lord? thou have broken my bonds in sunder, I will offer unto thee the
sacrifice of thanksgiving. And how thou have broken them will I now declare;
and all men who worship thee, when they hear of it, shall say, Blessed be the
Lord, both in Heaven and in Earth, great and wonderful is his Name. Thy words
had stuck fast even to the very roots of my heart, and I was hedged round
about by Job 1. 10.
thee. Of the eternity of thy life I was now become certain, though I had no
more than seen it in a glass, as it were, 1 Cor. 13. 12.
darkely. All my former doubtings, concerning an incorruptible substance, from
which all other substance should derive its being, was now quite taken away
from me; nor did I desire as now to be made more certain of thee, but better
assured in thee. As for mine own temporal life, all things were as yet
unresolved; my heart was to be purged from the old leaven. The 1 Cor. 5. 7
way (our Savior himself) I very Ioh. 14. 6.
well liked often but it i^ked me to follow him through those stre^ghts which he
had passed.

2. Thous did put into my mind, and it seemed good in mine own eyes, to go
unto Simplicianus, who seemed to me a faithful servant of thine, and that thy
grace shined in him: of whom I had further heard, that from his very youth he
had lived most devoutly toward thee. He was now grown into years; and by
reason of so great an age, spent in so good a purpose as following of thy
ways, he seemed to me to have gained experience of many things, and to have
been taught many things; and verily so he had. Out of which skill of his, I
desired him afford me some directions, (making him acquainted with my heats)
which should be the readiest way for a man in my case, to walk in thy paths.
For, the Church I saw to full; and one went this way, and another that way. But
very unpleasent to me it was, that I led the life of a wor^^ling: yea a very
grievous but them it was, (those desires after the hopes of honor and profit
inflaming me now no longer as they were wont to do) to undergo so heavy a
bondage. For, in respect of thy sweetness, and the beauty of thy house which I
loved, those thoughts delighted me no longer. But very strongly yet was I
enthralled with the love of women: nor had thine Apostle forbidden me to marry,
although he advised me to the 1 Cor. 7. 8.
better, earnestly wishing that all men were as himself then was.

3. But I being weak, made choice of the softer place: and because of this
alone, was languishing I, tumbled up and down in the rest; yea I pined away
with withering cares, because in other matters which I was unwilling to
undergo, I was constrained to accomodate my self to a married life, unto
which I voluntarily stood inthralled. I had understood from the mouth of Truth
it self, That there were some Eunuchs, which have made themselves Mat. 19. 12.
Eunuchs for the Kingdom of Heavens sake: but let him receive this saying that
is able. All those men verily are vain, in whom the knowledge of God is not;
and who could not out of these things which seem good, find out him that is
good indeed. But I continued no longer in that vanity, I was now gotten beyond
it; and by the testimony of all thy Creatures, had I found thee our Creator,
and thy WORD GOD together with thee, and the Holy Ghost one God also with thee,
by whom thou createdst all things.

4. There is yet another kind of wicked men, who knowing Romans 1. 21.
God, did not glorify him as God, neither were thankful: upon these also was
I fallen, but thy right hand sustained me, and delivering me out of their
company, placedst me where I might grow better: For thou have said unto man,
Behold, the Job 28. 28
fear of the Lord is wisdom: and, be not desirous to seem wise Pro. 3. 7.
in thine own eyes, because they who affirmed themselves to be Romans 1. 22
wise, became fools. But I had now found that Pearl of price, Mat. 13. 46
which I ought to have bought, though I sold all that I had. But I was yet in a
quandarie what to do.

CHAP. 2. How Victorinus, the famous Orator, was converted.
1. Unto Simplicianus therefore I went, the Father The former Translator says,
that he was either his Godfather, or his ghostly father. Bold man! Baronius in
Saint Ambrose his life, could have taught him, that this Simplicianus, being a
wise and a religious man, was sent by Damasus Bishop of Rome, unto Millan
purposely, to be the Adviser and Director of Saint Ambrose, then but a ^ong
Bishop; therefore did Saint Ambrose love him as his Father. To this
Simplicianus is Ambrose his second Epistle lib 4. directed. He also succeeded
Ambrose in his Bish^pricke.
at that time of Bishop Ambrose in his receiving of thy grace; whom verily he
loved as his own Father. To him I discovered the winding courses of my error.
But when I told him that I had read over certain Books of the Platonists,
which Victorinus, sometimes Rhetoric professor of Rome, (who dyed a
Christian, as I had heard) had translated into Latin, he much rejoiced over
me, for that I had not fallen upon any other Philosophers Writings, which use to
be full of fallacies and vain deceits, after the rudiments of this Col. 2. 8.
world: whereas in the Platonists, GOD and his WORD was many ways insinuated.
And the better to exhort me to Christ's humility, (hidden from the wise, and
revealed to little Mat. 11. 25
ones) he fell upon the mention of Victorinus, whom whilst he was at Rome he
had familiarly known: and of him he told this Story, which I will not here
conceal, seeing it affoords matter of much praise of thy grace, which ought to
be confessed unto thee.

2. He told me, how this most learned old man, most skillful in all the
liberal Sciences; one, who had read, and censured, and explained so many of
the Philosophers; one, that had been Master to so many noble Senators, who also
as an Ensign of his so famous mastership, had (which worldlings esteem such
an honor) both deserved and obtained a Statuae Famous Soldiers,
Commonwealthsmen, and Scholars, were, for encourage met of others, thus
honored at Rome.
in the Roman Forum: he remaining even till his old age a worshipper of Idols,
and a copartner of such sacrilegious solemnities, (with which almost all the
Nobility and people of Rome were inspired) and of that monstrous rabble of the
gally-maufry of Gods, and of Anubis the barker, which had sometimes maintained
the Bucklers against Neptune, Uenus, and Minerva Nep tune, Venus, and Minerva,
were three of the Tutelar Gods of Rome, as Anubis (worshipped in shape of a Dog)
was of Egypt: and the Romans having conquered many Procinces, brought house
their Gods, and worshipped them: So that Rome at last came to have 30000 Gods.
, whom Rome having once conquered, now worshipped: all which this old
Victorious with his thundering Eloquence, had so many years been the Champion
of, but now blushed not to become the child of thy Christ, and an Infant at
thy Font; submitting his neck to the yoke of humility, and subduing his
forehead to the ignominy of the Cross.

3. O Lord, O Lord, which Psalm. 144. 5
have bowed the Heavens and come down, touched the mountains and they did
smoke: by what means did thou conveigh thy self into that man's breast? He
read (as Simplicianus said) the holy Scripture, most studiously sought after
and searched into all the Writings of the Christians, and said unto
Simplicianus, (not openly, but after a private and familiar manner) You shall
now understand that I am a Christian. Simplicianus answered him, I will never
believe it, nor will I rank you among the Christians, unless I see you in the
Church of Christ. Whereunto he smiling upon him, replied, Is it the walls that
makes Christians? And this he often reiterated, that he was now a Christian:
and Simplicianus making the same answer, the conceit of the walls was as often
returned. For he feared to offend his friends, which were proud
Divell-worshippers, from the height of whose Babylonian dignity, as from the
top of the Cedars of Libanus, which the Lord had not yet brought down, he
supposed a storm of ill will would shower upon him.

4. But when once by reading and earnessnesse he had gathered strength, and
that he feared to be denied by Christ before his Angels, should he now Luke 9.
26.
be afraid to confess him before men; and that he appeared guilty to himself
of a mighty crime, in being ashamed of the Sacraments of the humility of thy
Word; whereas he had not been ashamed of the sacrilegious sacrifices of those
proud devils (of whose pride himself had been an imitater) he put on a
confident face against vanity, and was ashamed not to confess the truth: yea,
all on the sudden, when Simplicianus thought nothing of it, he says unto him,
(as himself told me) Come, let us go to the Church, I resolve to be made a
Christian. But he, not able to contain him self for joy, went along with him:
where, so soon as he was instructed in the first mysteries of Religion, he not
long after gave in his name, that he might be regenerated by Baptism: the
City of Rome wondering, and the Church rejoicing. The proud beheld it, and were
enraged; guashing upon him with their teeth, and even pining away with envy at
it. But the Lord God was the hope of his servant, who took no regard to
vanities and lying madness.

5. To conclude, when the hour was come wherein he was to make profession of
his faith, Here be diverse particulars of the Primitive fashion, in this Story
of Victorinus. First being converted, he was to take some wellknowne Christian,
(who was to be his Godfather) to go with him to the Bishop: who upon notice
of it, admitted him a Catechumenus, and gave him those six points of
Catechisticall Doctrine, mentioned Heb. 6. 1, 2. When the time of Baptism drew
near, the young Christian came to give in his heathen name, which was presently
registered; submitting himself to Examination. On the Eve, was be in a set
form, first, to renounce the Devil, and to pronounce, I confess to thee, O
Christ; repeating the Creed with it, in the form here recorded. The time for
giving in their names, must he within the two first weeks of Lent: and the so
lemne day to renounce upon, was Maunday Thursday. So bid^^ be Council of
Laodicea, Can. 45. and 46.
(which at Rome it was the custom of those that were shortly to come unto thy
Grace, to do in a set form of words, gotten by heart, and standing aloft upon
a more eminent place, where they might well be seen of all the faithful
people;) there was an offer made, (as he said) by the Priests unto Victorinus,
that he might make his Profession more privately, as the custom was to offer
that courtesy to some others, who were likely to be bashful and fearful at
the matter: but he chose rather to profess his salvation in the presence of
the holy Assembly. For whereas there was no salvation in that Rhetoric which
he had taught, and yet had he made public profession of that: how much less
therefore ought he to dread that meek slocke of thine, in the pronouncing of
thy Word, who in the delivery of his own words, had not feared the fullest
audience of mad men?

6. So soon therefore as he was mounted up aloft to make his profession, as the
rest had done, and were to do; every one that knew him, whispered his Name one
to another with the voice of congratulation. And who was there that did not
know him? and there ran a soft whisper through all the mouths of the
rejoicing multitude, Victorinus, Victorinus. Soon spoke they of him with
triumphing, for that they saw him; and as quickly were they whisted again,
that they might now hear him. He pronounced alowd the true Faith with an
excellent boldness, and every man would gladly have plucked him to them into
their very heart: yea greedily did they snatch him in, by loving of him, and
rejoicing for him. These were the hands with which they snatched him.

CHAP. 3. That God and his Angels do rejoice the more, at the conversion of a
greater sinner.
1. GOod GOD! what is that which is wrought in man, that he should more rejoice
at the salvation of such a soul as was in a desperate condition, and which
has been delivered out of the greater danger, than if there had still been
conceived good hope of him, or whose danger had been lesser? Yea, even thou
also, O most merciful Father, do more rejoice over one sinner repenting,
Luke 15. 7.
than over ninety and nine just persons, that need no repentance. And with much
joyfulnesse do we hearken so often as we hear it, how the lost sheep is
brought home again, upon the Shepherds 5.
shoulder rejoicing: and that the lost groat is put again into thy Treasury,
her friends and neighbors rejoicing with the woman that had found it. Yea, and
the joy conceived at the solemn Service of thy house, makes the tears come
out of our eyes, when as the Parable of This Lesson out of S. Luke, was much in
use in the Primitive Service Book: and especially after that Puritan opinion
of Novatus, who denied all pardon or absolution to be given by a Priest, to any
that committed a deadly sin after baptism. Which severity these Parables of
S. Luke did so cross, that the Ancients engraved the figure of a Shepherd
with the lost Sheep upon his shoulder, upon their Communion Cups, to show how
willing the Church was to receive Penitents to the Communion. See Tertul. l. de
pudicitia, cap. 7. and cap. 10.
the younger son is read in it, how he was dead, but made alive again; he was
lost, but found again. For thou rejoycest both over us, as also over thy
Angels, who continue holy, in holy charity. For thou art ever the same, and
ever know after the selfe-fame manner, all those things which of themselves
neither continue the same ever, nor after the same manner. What is that
therefore which is wrought in the soul, when as it is more delighted to have
either found or restored, those things which it loved, than if it ever had
possessed them? yea, and other creatures bear witness hereunto; and all things
are full of testimonies still crying out, That so it is.

2. The Emperor triumphs when he is a Conqueror; yet had he never
overcome, had he not fought: and how much the more danger there was in the
Battle, so much the more rejoicing is there in the Triumph. The Storm tosses
the Passengers, threatens Shippe-wracke, and every body waxes pale at his death
approaching: but the Sky cleeres up, and the Sea grows calm again, and they
are as much rejoiced as they were over-skared. A dear Friend of ours is sick,
and his blood-letting shows the malignity of the disease: all that wish his
good health, are thereupon sick in mind with him. He proves well again,
though not able to walk up and down so strongly as he was wont to do; yet is
there so great an expression of joy made, as never had been, when as before
his sickness, he was able to walk perfectly, sound, and lustily.

3. Yea, the very pleasures of our humane life, do we procure by preceding
difficulties: not those only which fall upon us unlookt for, and against our
wills, but even purposed by us, and desired. There is no pleasure at all in
eating and drinking, unless the pinching of hunger and thirst go before it.
The Drunkards eat certain salt meats, with purpose to procure a thirsty
hotnesse in the mouth, which whilst the drink quenches, the pleasure is
procured. The order also it is, that the Spouse already affianced, uses not
instantly to be given to her Sweetheart: for fear lest when he is an husband,
he should less esteem of her for being so soon obtained, whom whilst he was
a wooer he sighed not after, thinking her too long delayed. This is observable
in such joy as is dishonest, and to be abhorred; seen also in that joy which
is consented unto, and lawful; seen likewise in the most sincere honesty of
friendship; seen lastly, in him who was dead, and afterward revived; who was
lost, and is found. The greatest joy is every where ushered in by the greatest
painfulnesse.

4. What means this, O Lord my God, that whereas thou art an everlasting joy
unto thine own self, yet some things are ever rejoicing in thee, concerning
thee? What means this, that this inferious division of things thus alters up
and down, with going backwards and forwards, with fallings out, and making
friends again? Is this the fashion of them, and is this that proportion thou
then assignedst to them; when as even from the highest heavens, down to the
lowest of the Earth, from the beginning of the world to the last end of it;
from the Angel, to the Worm; from the first thing that moves, even unto the
last; thou did settle all kinds of good things, and all thine own just
works in their proper places, and accomplishedst all-in their due seasons?
Alas for me! how high art thou in the highest things, and how profound in the
lowest! neither do thou depart from us, nor are we hardly able to return
unto thee.

CHAP. 4. Why we are more to rejoice in the conversion of a great sinner.
1. Go on, O LORD, and make an end of it, stir us up, and call us back;
kindle us and pluck us to thee, inflame us, and grow sweet unto us: let us now
love thee, and now run after thee. Do not many a man out of a deeper dungeon
of blindness, than ever Victorinus was in, return unto thee, approach nearer
to thee, and are enlightened with the beam they receive from thee? which they
that once receeive, receive power also from thee to become thy Ioh. 1. 12.
sons: who yet if they be less known among people, even those that do know
them, are less joyful for them, seeing that when a many rejoice together, the
joy of every single man is the fuller; even for that they warm themselves, and
are inflamed by one another. Again, because those that are generally known,
are authors of salvation to the more, and give more example to follow them: and
even therefore those also which have gone before them, rejoice for them,
because they rejoice not for them alone. Far be it from our thoughts, that
in thy Tabernacle the persons of the rich should be accepted of before the
poor, or the Noble before the common people: seeing rather thou have chosen
the weak things of the world, to confound the mighty: 1 Cor. 1. 27.
and base things of the world, and things which are despised have thou chosen;
and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are.

2. And yet even that least of thy Apostles, by whose tongue thou soundedst out
these words, when as Paulus the Deputy had his pride beaten down by the Act.
13. 12.
spiritual warfare of that Apostle, and was set to draw in the easy yoke of
thy Christ, now made the subject of the Great King: he also instead of Saul,
which was his name before, desired to be called Paul afterward, in testimony
of so great a victory. For the enemy is more overcome by wringing a man from
him, of whom he has more hold, and by whom he has hold of many others. And
such as be proud he has the surer hold of, by reason of their Title of
nobility, and of many more under them, by reason of their authority. How much
more welcome therefore; the heart of Victorinus was esteemed, which the Devil
had made himself master of, as of an invincible place of retreat; and the
tongue of Victorinus, with which as with a mighty and a most keen weapon he
had slain many: so much the more abundantly became it thy sons to rejoice,
for that our King has bound the strong man, and that they saw Mat. 11.
his vessels taken from him and Luke 11.
cleansed, and to be made serviceable for the Lord, unto every good work.

CHAP. 5. What hindered his conversion.
1. But so soon as thy servant Simplicianns had made an end of his story of
Victorinus, I was all on fire to be imitating of him: yea, this was the end
he told it for. After which when he had subjoyned this relation of himself:
how that in the days of the Emperor Julian The Apostata.
, when there was a law made, whereby the Christians were forbidden to teach the
liberal Sciences or Oratoric; and how he obeying this law, chose rather to
give over his wordy school, than thy Word, by which thou make eloquent the
tongues of Infants: he seemed unto me not to have been so valiant, as happy
in it; for that by this means he found the opportunity to attend upon thee
only. Which opportunity my self also sighed for, thus bound as I was, not
with another man's Irons, but with mine own Ironwill. My willingness was the
enemy master of; by which he made a chain for me, and had therewith bound me,
Because, that of a froward will, is a lust made: and a lust ever obeyed,
becomes a custom: and a custom not resisted, brings on a necessity. By which
links as it were hanging one upon another (for which I might well call it a
chain) did a very hard bondage hold me enthralled. As for that new will which
now I began to have toward the free worshipping and enjoying of thee, O God,
the only assured sweetness; it was not able as yet to overcome my former
wilfulness, now hardened in me by so long continuance. Thus did my two Wills,
one new and the the other old, that carnal, and this spiritual; try masteries
within me, and by their disagreeing wasted out my soul.

2. Thus came I to understand (my self affording me the experiment) what I had
sometimes read: How the flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit Gal.
5. 17.
against the flesh. I verily lusted both ways; yet of the two, in that rather
which I approved of in my self, than in that which I disallowed: yet in this,
I now no more; because much of it I He alludes unto Romans 7. 18, 19, and 20,
ver. etc.
suffered rather against my will, than did it with my will. And yet was custom
now by mine own assistance, become more sturdy against me, even because I was
comen willingly, whither my will was not to have come. And who then can with
any equity speak against it, if just punishment follows upon wilful sinning?
Nor had I now that fair excuse, upon pretense of which I heretofore seemed to
my self, not as yet engaged to forsake the world to attend thy service, for
that the knowledge of the truth was hitherto uncertain unto me: seeing now I
stood assured of it. But I being pressed for the earth, refused to fight under
thy Banner. Yea, as He pleases himself here with a military Metaphore.
much afraid I was to be freed of what did hinder my march toward thee, as I
ought to have been afraid of what might hinder it. Thus with the Baggage of
this present world was I as sweetly overladen, as a man uses to be with
slumbering: and those thoughts with which I meditated upon thee, were like the
offers of such as would get up; who being yet overcome with a deep sleep,
fall again into it. And like as there is no man who desires to sleep always,
(for that in any sober man's judgment it is much better to keep waking:) yet
does a man oftentimes defer to shake off his drowfinesse, when he finds a
heavy sluggishnesse all his body over, and angry at himself for it, yet he
willingly takes another nap, notwithstanding it be high time for him to be
stirring: in like manner assured I was, that much better it were for me to give
up my self to thy charity, than to give over my self to mine own sensuality.

3. But notwithstanding that former course pleased, and overcame my reason, yet
did this latter tickle and inthrall my senses. Nor had I any thing now to
answer thee calling to me, Arise, thou that sleep and stand up Ephesians. 5. 14.
from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light: and whereas thou on all sides
shewedst me, that what thou said was true; I had nothing at al to answer for
my self, being convinced by that Truth; but certain lither and drowsy words
only; Anon, see, I come by and by; let me sleep a little while. But my now
and anon had no measure with them, and my little while drove out into a mighty
length. I in vain delighted in thy Law according to my inner man, when Romans 7.
21, 23.
another law in my members, rebelled against the Law of my mind, leading me
captive into the law of sin which was in my members. That law of sinnow, is
the violence of custom, by which the mind of man is drawn and holden against
it is will; deserving to be so holden, for that it so willingly slides into that
custom. Wretched I therefore, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death; but thy grace only, through Jesus Christ our Lord?

CHAP. 6. Pontitianus relates the life of St. Anthony.
1. AND the manner how thou deliveredst me out of the bonds of desire, which I
had unto carnal concupiscence, (wherewith I was most straightly fettered) and
from the drudgery of worldly business; will I now declare, and confess unto
thy name, O Lord my helper and my redeemer. My wonted unsetlednesse of mind
grew more and more upon me; and I daily sent up sighs unto thee. Thy Church I
resorted frequently unto, as my business (under the burden of which I groaned)
would give me leave. Alipius was now in company with me; having a time of
leisure from his law-businesse, now after the Post Assessionem tertiam.
third Sitting, expecting other Clients whom he might sell his counsel unto;
as I used to sell the skill of pleading; if that skill in the mean time, be
not a gift of nature, rather than a purchase of Art. Nebridius had now so far
condescended to our friendly requests, as privately to instruct Verecundus (a
very familiar friend to all of us) a Citizen and a Grammarian of Millan; who
vehemently requested, and by the right of friend ship did even challenge such
a friendly aid from our company, as he very much stood in need of.

2. Nebridius therefore was not drawn to that pains by any desire of profit
(for he might have taken more beneficial courses, if he had pleased to make
use of his learning:) but being a most sweet and tractable companion, out of
his respects of courtesy, would not slight the request we made to him. But he
carried it very discreetly, still wary of being known to those personages whom
the world esteemed great; declining thereby all breaking off the quiet of his
own mind, which he resolved to reserve free to himself, and at leisure as
many hours as might be, for the seeking, or reading, or hearing something
concerning Wisdom.

3. Upon a certain day therefore, Nebridius being absent (the occasion I do
not now remember) behold, there came home unto me and Alipius, one Pontitianus
a Country man of ours, an Affrican, who had an In Palatio militans. I here was
militia Togata, Ecclesiastica and Aul^ca, as well as Armata.
office of good credit in the Emperors Court. What he would with us, I now
know not: but down together we sat, and into discourse we fell. It so happened
that upon the table before us, which we used to play upon, he espied a book
lying, up he took, and opened it; and quite besides his expectation, found it
to be S. Paul's Epistles, whereas he rather thought it had been some of those
books, which I ware out my self in the teaching of. At which he smiling to
himself, and looking upon me (in congratulating manner as it were) wondered
not a little, that he had so unexpectedly found such a kind of book, and
only such an one lying before me. For he was both a Christian, and Baptized
too; and one that often used to prostrate himself before thee our GOD in the
Church, in frequent and daily prayers. Whom therefore when I had once told, how
that I bestowed much pains upon those writings; there began a speech (himself
being the relater) of Anthony the Monk of Egypt: whose name was in most high
reputation among thy servants, though for our parts we had not so much as once
heard of him to that hour. Which when he had discovered, he insisted the more
upon that discourse, insinuating the knowledge of so famous a man unto us, and
admiring at that our ignorance of him.

4. But we stood amazed on the other side, hearing such wonderful works of
thine; so generally testified, so fresh in memory, and almost in our own
times, to be done in the true faith and Church Catholic. We all wondered; we,
to hear such great things reported; and he, that we had never heard them.
From this story of Anthony, took he occasion to discourse of some companies of
Monasteries, and the fashions of thine own sweet smelling savor and the
Monasteriorum gregis, and mores suaveolentiae tuae, et vbera deser. ta eremi.
This the other Translator turns Great numbers of Monasteries, where these
things are performed which be so pleasing unto thee, etc. Judge Reader how the
Latin can bear his construction: and how to make it, he puts 2. sentences
into one. For Monasteries, see our Preface.
desert breasts of the Wilderness: of all which we knew nothing. And there was
at the same time a Monastery One Monastery at Millan the^, but how many, and of
how many several orders be there now? Some, both at Rome and Millan he calls
Diversoria (and not Monasteria) who had no rule but that of charity, and a
Priest to govern them. But in Monasteries they wrought for their livings. Aug.
li. de Morib. Eccles. cap. 31. and 33.
at Millan, full of good brethren, without the walls of the City, under
Ambrose the nourisher of it, and yet we knew nothing of it. He went on with
his tale, and we listened to him with great silence. Hereupon took he occasion
to tell, how himself (I know not at what time) and three other of his Comrades
(and it was at Triers when as the Emperor was taken up with seeing of the
Circensian chariot-races, one afternoon) went out to walk into the Gardens
next the City Walls; where as it fell out, they sorted themselves into two
companies, one of the three keeping with him, and the other two walking at
large also by themselves. But as these two were ranging up and down, they
stumbled by chance upon a certain little house, inhabited by diverse of thy
servant, poor in spirit, of whom is the Kingdom Mat. 5. 3.
of God: where they found a little book, wherein the life of Anthony was
described.

5. One of them began to read, wonder at it, and to be inflamed with it; and
even in the very reading to devise with himself upon the taking such a life
upon him, and by giving over his secular employments, to betake himself unto
thy service. And this man was one of those Officers of Court whom they style,
Agentes in rebus. There was a Society of them still about the Court. Their
militia or employments were: To gather in the Emperors Tributes: To setch in
offenders: To do Palatina obse quia, offices of Court, provide Corn, etc.
ride of ^rrands like Messengers of the Chamber, lie abread as Spies and
Intelligencers. They were often preferred to places of Magistracis in the
Provinces: such were called Principes or Magistriani. S. Hierome upon Abdias
cap. 1. calls them Messengers: They succeeded the Frumenta^ii. Between which
two, and the Curiosi, and the Speculatores, there was not much difference. The
other Translator because be understood none of this has quite left out the
sentence: Wisely.
Agents for the public affairs. Then suddenly being filled with an holy love,
and a sober shame fastness, even angry at himself again, he cast his eyes
upon his friend, saying; Tell me, I entreat thee, what preferment is that unto
which all these labors of ours aspire? what aim we at? what is it we serve
the State for? can our hopes in Court rise higher than to be the Emperors
Favorites? in which fortune what is there not brittle, and full of perils?
and by how many dangers arrive we at last unto one danger greater than all the
rest? And how long shall we be in getting thus high? whereas if I be desirous
to become the friend of God, lo I am even now made it.

6. This he said: And all in pain in the Travail of newness of life, he
turned his eyes again upon the book and read on, and was inwardly changed
where thou alone could discern him, and his mind was quite dispossessed of
worldly cares, as presently after it appeared. For as he read forward, and
rolled up and down those waves of his heart, he made expression of some
indignation at himself, felt an inward conflict, and resolved finally of much
better courses. And thus now become wholly thine, he says unto his friend,
even now have I broke loose from those ambitious hopes of ours, and am fully
resolved to serve God only; and this, from this hour forward, in this very
place, will I enter upon: as for thee, if it irkes thee to imitate me, yet do
not offer to dissuade me. Whereunto the other answered, that he also would
closely stick unto him, as his partner in so ample a reward, and his fellow in
so honorable a service. Thus both of them now become thine, reared up a
spiritual Tower with that treasure as is only able to do it, Of forsaking
all and following thee. Potitianus then and the other that was with him, that
had walked over other parts of the Garden in search of them, came in the very
nick into the same place where they were; and having there found them, put them
in mind of going homewards, for that it began to grow something late. But
they discovering their resolution and purpose unto them, and by what means
that will began, and came to be settled in them; humbly desired they would not
be troublesome to them, if so be they refused to join themselves unto them.
But Potitianus and his friend no whit altered from their old wont, did yet
bewail themselves with tears (as he affirmed) piously congratulating with
them, recommended themselves to their prayers; and turning their hearts toward
earthly things, returned into the Court. But the other two setting their
affections upon heavenly, remained in that Cottage. And both of them were
contracted to Sweet-hearts. Who having once heard of this business, Here the
Popish Translator notes, A ^ow of Virginity after contract. True. Alas what
would you have the poor wenches do having lost their Sweethearts? What Is this
to Popish vows? 1. Here Is Gods extraordinary motion: whereas Nunnories are as
much for the State as for the Church. 2. Most primitively were the Virgins kept
still in their Fathers houses, as these did for ought we know. See our Note
upon the next Chapter.
dedicated also their own Virginity unto God. This was Potitianus his story.

CHAP. 7. He was out of love with himself upon this story.
1. But thou, O Lord, all the while that he was speaking, did turn me
back to reflect upon my self; taking my intentions from behind my back,
where I had heretofore only placed them, when as I had no list to observe mine
own self: and thou now setst me before mine own face, that I might discern
how filthy, and how crooked, and sordide, and bespotted, and ulcerous, I was.
And I beheld and abhorred my self, nor could I find any place whither to flee
from my self. And if I went about to turn mine eye from off my self, yet did
that tell me as much, as Potitianus erst had done; and thou thereupon
opposedst my self unto my self, and thrustedst me ever and anon into mine
own eyes, to make me find at last mine own iniquity, and to loath it. I had
heretofore taken notice of it; but I had again dissembled it, winckt at it,
and forgotten it. But at this time, how much the more ardently I loved those
two, whose wholesome purposes I heard tell of, even for that they had resigned
up themselves unto thee to be cured: so much the more detestably did I hate my
self in comparison of them. Because I had already lost so many years, (twelve
or thereabouts) since that nineteenth of mine age, when upon the reading of
Cicero's Hortensius, I was first stirred up to the study of Wisdom; since when
(having first despised all earthly felicity) I too long delaied to search out
that, whose not finding alone, but the bare seeking, ought to have been
preferred before all the treasures and Kingdoms of this world already found,
and before all the pleasures of the body, though in all abundance to be
commanded.

2. But I, most wretched young fellow that I was, unhappy even in the very
entrance into my youth; had even then begged chastity at thy hands, and said,
Give me chastity and This was the Primitive practice, ever to premise prayer
before vowing; and still to intermix prayers for ability to go through their
vows. Surely J have seen diverse Massebooks Portuesses and peculiar to several
orders of Friars, and to the Nuns of S. Clare etc. yet never saw I there, a set
Prayer for the gift of Chastity. But perchance they desire it not yet, not
whilst they are young.
Continency, but do not give it yet: for I was afraid that thou would hear
me too soon, and too soon deliver me from my disease of Incontinencie; which
my desire was, rather to have satisfied, than extinguished. Yea I had wandered
with a sacrilegious superstition through most wicked ways of Manichisme: not
yet sure that I was right, but preferring that, as it were, before those others
which I did not so much seek after religiously, as oppose maliciously. And
this was the reason, as I think, why I deferred from day to day to contemn
all hopes in this world, and to follow thee only, for that there did not
appear any certain end, which I was to direct my course unto. But now was the
day come wherein I was to be set naked before my self, and when mine own
conscience was to convince me.

3. Where art thou my tongue? that tongue which saidest, how that for an
uncertainty, thou would not yet cast off the baggage of vanity. See,
certainty has appeared now! and yet does that burden still overload thee:
whereas behold, others have gotten wings to free their shoulders by flying from
under it; others, I say, who neither have so much worn out themselves with
seeking after that certainty, nor yet spent ten whole years and more, in
thinking how to do it. Thus felt I a corrosive within, yea most vehemently
confounded I was with a horrible shame, when as Pontitianus was a telling that
story. And he having done both his tale and the business he came for, went
his way: and I said unto my self; nay, what said I not within my self? with
what scourges of condemning sentences lasht I not mine own soul, to make it
follow me, endeavoring now to go after thee, which yet drew back? It refused,
but gave no reason to excuse its refusal by. All its arguments were already
spent and confuted, there remained a silent Remanserat muta trepid tio. This he
turns There remained only a kind of speech trembling. Noting in his margent,
A rare expression. As rare as non sense.
trembling; and it feared, like the death, to be restrained of the swinge of
custom, which made it pine away even to the very death.

CHAP. 8. What he did in the Garden.
1. IN the midst then of all this vast tempest of my inner house, which I had
so stou^ly raised up against mine own soul, in our Chamber, my heart; all
over troubled both in mind and countenance, upon Alipius I set, with open
mouth crying out, What tarry we any longer? what is this? what heardest thou
even now? The unlearned of the world start up and take the Kingdom by
violence, and we with all our learning wanting heart, see how we wallow us in
flesh and blood. Because others are gone before, is it a shame for us to come
after? or is it not rather a great shame not at all to go after them? Some
such words as these I then uttered, but what I know not: and in that heat away
I flung from him, while with silence and astonishment, he wisely looked upon
me. For my speeches sounded not now, in the kay they were wont to do: yea my
forehead, my cheeks, my eyes, my color, and the accent of my voice, spoke out
my mind more emphatically, than the words did which I uttered.

2. A Garden there was belonging to our lodging, which we had the liberty of,
as well as of any other part of the house; for the master of the house our
host, lived not there: Thither had the tempest within my breast now hurried me,
where no man might come to nonsuit that fiery action which I had entered
against my self, until it came to a good issue; but which way, God thou
know, I do not. Only I was for the time most soberly mad, and I dyed
vitally; sensible enough what piece of misery for the present I now was, but
utterly ignorant, how good I shortly was to grow. Into that Garden went I, and
Alipius followed me foot by foot: for I had no secret retiring place if he
were near; or when did he ever forsake me, when he perceived me to be ill
disposed. Down we sat us; as far yet from the house as possibly we could.
I fretted in the spirit, angry at my self with a most tempestuous indignation
for that I went not about to make my peace and league with thee my God, which
all my bones cried out upon me to do, extolling it to the very skies. A
business it is which we go not about, carried unto in Ships, or Chariots,
or upon our own legs, no not so small a part of the way to it, as I had comen
from the house, into that place, where we were now sitting.

3. For, not to go toward only, but to arrive fully at that place, required
no more but the Will to go to it, but yet to Will it resolutely and thoroughly;
not to stagger and tumble down an half wounded Will, now on this side, and
anon on that side; setting the part advancing it self, to struggle with
another part that is a falling. Finally, in these vehement passions of my
delay, many of those things performed I with my body, which men sometimes would
do, but cannot; if either they have not the limbs to do them withal; or if
those limbs be bound with cords, weakened with infirmity, or be any other
ways hindered. If I tear my self by the hair, beat my forehead, if locking
my fingers one within another, I beclasped my knee; all this I did because I
would. But I might have willed it, and yet not have done it, if so be the
motion of my limbs, had not been pliable enough to have performed it. So many
things therefore I now did, at such time as the Will was not all one with the
Power; and something on the other side I then did not, which did incomparably
more affect me with pleasure, which yet so soon as I had the Will to do, I
had the Power also; because so soon as ever I willed, I willed it thoroughly:
for at such a time the Power is all one with the Will; and the willing is now
the doing: and yet was not the thing done. And more easily did my body obey the
weakest willing of my souls in the moving of its limbs at her beck; then my
soul had obeyed its self in this point of her great contentment, which was to
receive perfection in the Will alone.

CHAP. 9. Why the soul is so slow to goodness.
1. Whence now is this monster? and to what purpose? Let thy mercy enlighten
me that I may put this question; if so be those concealed anguishes which men
feel, and those most undiscoverable pangs of contrition of the sons of Adam,
may perhaps afford me a right answer? Whence is this monster? and to what end?
The soul commands the body, and is presently obeyed: the soul commands it
self, and is resisted. The soul gives the word, commanding the hand to be
moved; and such readiness there is, that the instant of command, is scarcely
to be discerned from the moment of execution. Yet the soul is the soul,
whereas the hand is of the body. The soul commands, that the soul would Will
a thing; nor is the soul another thing from the soul, and yet obeyes it not
the command. Whence is this monster? and to what purpose? The soul (I say)
commands that it self would Will a thing, which never would give the command,
unless it willed it: yet is not that done, which it commanded.

2. But it wills not entirely: therefore does it neither command entirely.
For so far forth it commands, as it wills: and, so far forth is not the
thing done, which is commanded, as it wills it not. Because, the Will
commands that there In this and the former Chapter, has the other Translator
been a Translator indeed; that is, a very Cobbler.
be a Will; not another will but the same. Because verily it does not command
fully, therefore is not the thing done, which it commanded. For were the
willing full, it would never command there should be a Willing, because that
Willing was extant before. It Is therefore no monster partly to Will, and partly
to Nill; only an infirmity of the soul it is, that it being overloaded with
ill custom, cannot entirely rise up together, though supported by Verity.
Hence is it that there be two Wills, for that one of them is not entire: and
the one is supplied with that, wherein the other is defective.

CHAP. 10. The will of man is various.
1. LEt them perish out of thy sight O GOD, as those vain bablers, and those
seducers He confutes the Manichees.
of the soul do perish: who when as they did observe that there were two
Wills in the act of deliberating; affirmed thereupon, that there are two kinds
of natures, of two kinds of souls, one good, and the other bad. Themselves are
truly bad, when as they believe these bad opinions: and the same men shall then
become good, when they shall come to believe true opinions, and shall consent
unto the true, that the Apostle may say unto them, ye were sometimes
darkness, but now are ye Ephesians. 5. 8.
light in the Lord. But these fellows would be light indeed, not in the Lord,
but in themselves; imagining the nature of the soul, to be the same, that God
is. Thus are they made more gross darkness, for that they went back farther
from thee, through a horrid arrogancy; from thee, the true light that
enlightneth every man that John 3. 9.
comes into this world. Take heed what you say, and blush for shame: draw
near unto him and be enlightened, and your faces shall not be ashamed. My
Psalm. 34. 5.
self when sometime I deliberated upon serving of the Lord my God, (I had long
purposed) it was I my self who willed it, and I my self who nilled it. I, was
I my self; I neither willed entirely, nor yet nilled entirely. Therefore was I
at strife with my self, and ruinated by mine own self. Which ruining befell
me much against my mind, nor yet showed it forth the nature of another man's
mind, but the punishment of mine own. I therefore my self was not the causer
of it, but the sin that dwelt in me: and that as a punishment of that far
spreading sin of Adam, whose son I was.

2. For if there be so many contrary natures in man, as there be Wills
resisting one another; there shall not now be two natures alone, but many.
Suppose a man should deliberate with himself, whether he should go to their
Conventicle, or go see a Play; presently these Manichees cry out, Behold, here
are 2 natures: one good, which leads this way; and another bad, which draws
that way. For whence else is this mammering of the wills thus thwarting one
another? But I answer, that both these Wills be bad: that as ill, which carries
to their Conventiele; as the other, which leads unto the Theater. But they
will not believe that Will to be other than good, which brings men to them.
Suppose then one of us should deliberate, and through the dispute of his two
Wills should be in a quandary, whether he should go see a Play, or come to
our Church; would not these Manichees be as much in a quandary what to answer?
For either they must confess, (which by their good wills they will never
grant) That the Will which leads to our Church is the better, as it is in them
which go to their Church, who are partakers of her sacraments, and detained in
her obedience: or else must they suppose that there be two evil natures, and
two evil souls in one man, which combat one another: or must they (lastly) be
converted to the truth, and no more deny, that in the Act of one man's
deliberation, there is one soul destracted between two contrary Wills. Let
them no more say therefore, that when as they perceive two wills to be
contrary one to another in the same party, that there be two contrary souls,
made of two contrary substances, from two contrary principles, one good, and
the other bad, contending one with another.

3. For thou, O true God, do disprove, check, and convince them; like as
when both wills being bad, a man deliberates with himself, whether he should
kill a man by poison, or by the Sword? whether he should take in this piece,
or that, of another man's ground; when as he cannot do both? whether he should
purchase pleasure, with prodigality, or keep close his money, by
covetousness? whether he should go to the Chariot-race, or to the
Sword-playes, if they were both to be seen upon one day? I add also a third
instance; whether he should rob another man's house, had he the opportunity?
and a fourth I add, or whether he should commit adultery, had he the means? it
being presupposed, that all these concurred in the same instant of time, and
that all these acts be equally desired, which cannot possibly be all at one
time acted.

4. For verily they tare in sunder the soul amongst four several Wills,
clean contrary to one another: yea, in such variety of things which are
desirable, perchance among more than four: yet use they not to affirm that
there is any such multitude of diverse substances. Thus also is it in such Wills
as are good. For I demand of them, whether it be a good thing to be delighted
in reading of the Apostle? and, whether it be a good mind to be delighted in a
sober Psalm? or, whether it be a good art to discourse upon the Gospel? They
will answer to each of these, That it is good. What now if all these equally
delight us, and all together at the same time? Do not diverse Wills then rack
the mind as it were, when as a man is deliberating, to which of all these he
should chiefly betake him? yet are all these Wills good, although they all
contend with one another; till such time as one of the three be made choice
of, toward which the whole Will may be carried, being now united, which was
before divided into many. Thus also, when as eternity delights the superior
parts, and the pleasure of some temporal good holds fast the inferior; it is
but one and the same soul which wills not This or That with an entire Will;
and is therefore torn a sunder with grievous perplexities, whilst it
preferres This, overswayed by Truth; yet forbeares not That, made familiar to
it by Custom.

CHAP. 11. The combat in him betwixt the Spirit and the flesh.
1. THus soule-sicke I was, and in this manner tormented; accusing my self
much more eagerly than I was wont, turning and winding my self in my chain,
till that which held me might be utterly broken; which though but little, yet
held it me fast enough notwithstanding. And thou, O Lord, pressedst upon me in
my inward parts by a most severe mercy, redoubling thy lashes of fear and
shame, lest I should give way again, and lest the breaking off of that small
and slender Tie, which now only was left, should recover strength again, and
hamper me again the faster. For I said within my self, Behold, let it be
done now, let it be done forthwith. And no sooner had I said the word, but
that I began to put on the resolution. Now I even almost did it, yet indeed I
did it not: yet notwithstanding fell The difficulty of Conversion rarely
expressed.
I not quite back to my old wont, but stood in the degree next to it, to fetch
new breath as it were. Yea, I set upon it again, and I wanted but very little
of getting up to it, and within a very little, even by and by obtained I to
touch and to lay hold of it; and yet could I not get up to it, nor come to
touch, or lay full hold of it: still fearing to dye unto death, and to live
unto life: and the worse which I had been anciently accustomed unto, prevailed
more with me than the better, which I had never tried: yea, the very instant
of time, wherein I was to become another man, the nearer it approacht to me,
the greater horror did it strike into me. But for all this did it not strike me
utterly back, nor turned me quite off, but kept me in suspense only.

2. The very toys of all toys, and vanities of vanities (those ancient
favcurites of mine) were they which so fast withheld me; they shook me by
this fleshly garment, and spoke softly in mine ear, Can thou thus part with
us? and See the blandishments of Sin.
shall we no more accompany thee from this time forth for ever? and from this
time forth shall it no more be lawful for thee to do This or That for ever?
And what were those things which they suggested to me in that phrase This or
That, (as I said) what were those which they suggested, O my GOD? Such, as let
thy mercy utterly turn away from the soul of thy servant. Oh what impurities!
oh what most shameful things did they suggest! I heard Here has the former
Translator missed the sexse, in reading Contradicens for Contradicentes, and
Discedens for Discedentes.
them verily not half so near hand now, nor now so freely contradicting and
opposing me; but muttering as it were softly behind my back, and even now
ready to be packing, yet giving me a privy pluck to look once more back
again upon them: yet for all this did they make me now again delaying the
time, much slower in snatching away my self, and in shaking them off, and in
leaping from them, to the place I was called unto; namely, when as violent
custom thus rowned me in the ear, Think thou to be ever able to live
without This or That.

3. But by this time it spoke but very faintly: for on that side which I set my
face toward, and whither I trembled to go, was that chaste dignity of
Continency discovered; cheerful she was, but not dissolutely pleasant,
honestly tempting me to come to her, and doubt nothing: yea stretching forth
those devout hands of hers, so full of the multitudes of good examples; both to
receive, and to embrace me. There were in company with her very many both
Yongmen, and Maidens, a multitude of youth and of all ages: both grave widows
and ancient Virgins, and Continence her self in the midst of them all, not
barren altogether, but a happy Mother of Children of Joys, by thee her
husband, O Lord. And she was pleasant with me with a kind of exhorting quip,
as if she should have said, Can not thou perform what these of both sexes
have performed? or can any of these I am afraid, that God makes not all the
Friars and Nuns amongst the Papists. I doubt all have not the gift of
Continency: we have examples to the contrary. Formal vows, but material
breaches of chastity. Vowing, and yet burning.
perform thus much of themselves, or rather by the Lord their GOD? The Lord
their God gave me unto them. Why stand thou upon thine own strength, and
stand not at all? Cast thy self upon Him, fear not, He will not slip
away and make thee fall; Cast thyselfe securely upon Him, He will receive thee,
and He will heal thee. I blushed all this while to my self very much, for
that I yet heard the muttering of those toys, and that I yet hung in suspense.
Whereunto Continence again replied, Stop thine ears against those unclean
members of thine which are upon the earth, that they may be Col. 3. 5.
mortified. They tell thee of delights indeed, but not such as the law of the
Lord thy God tells thee of. This was the controversy I felt in my heart, about
nothing but my self, against my self. But Alipius sitting by my side, in
silence expected the issue of my unaccustomed sullevation.

CHAP. 12. How he was converted by a Voice.
1. SO soon therefore as a deep consideration even from the secret bottom of
my soul, had drawn together and laid all my misery upon one heap before the
eyes of my heart; there rose up a mighty storm, bringing as mighty a shower of
tears with it, which that I might power forth with such expressions as suited
best with them, I rose from Alipius: for I conceived that solitariness was
more fit for a business of weeping. So far off then I went, as that his
presence might not be troublesome unto me. Thus disposed was I at that time,
and he thought, I know not what, of it; something I believe, I had said before,
which discovered the sound of my voice to be big with weeping, and in that
case I rose from him. He thereupon staid alone where we sat together most
extremely astonished. I slung down my self I know not how, under a certain
Fig Tree, giving all liberty to my tears: whereupon the floods of mine eyes
gushed out, an acceptable acceptable sacrifice to thee, O Lord. And though not
perchance in these very words, yet much to this purpose, said I unto thee; And
thou, O LORD, how long? how long Lord will thou be angry, for ever? Remember
not our former iniquities: for I found my self to be still enthralled by them.
Yea, I sent up these miserable exclamations, How long? how long? still to
morrow, and to morrow? Why not now? wherefore even this very hour is there not
an end put to my uncleanness?

2. Thus much I uttered, weeping among in the most bitter contrition of my
heart: when as behold, I heard a voice from some neighbor house, as it had
been of a Boy or Girl I know not whether, in a singing tune saying, and often
repeating, TAKE UP AND READ, TAKE UP AND READ. His conversion by a voice from
Heaven.
Instantly changing my countenance thereupon, I began very heedfully to
bethink my self, whether children were wont in any kind of playing to sing
any such words: nor could I remember my self ever to have heard the like.
Whereupon refraining the violent torrent of my tears, up I gat me;
interpreting it no other way, but that I was from God himself commanded, To
open the book, and to read that Chapter which I should first light upon. For I
had heard of Anthony, that by hearing of the Gospel which he once came to the
reading of, he took himself to be admonished, as if what was read, had
purposely been spoken unto him. By this it appears that all Popish Fry^rs are
not divinely called, For that so few elder brothers take the Vow. Few rich
elder brothers that sell al; many poor younger brothers that have spent all.
So that a Monastery, is little other than an Hospital for the notsicke. They
sell not all to to go in; but go in when they have sold and spent all.
Go, and sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have
treasure in heaven, and come and follow me. And by such a miracle was he
presently converted unto thee.

3. Hastily therefore went I again to that place where Alipius was sitting;
for there had I laid the Apostles Book when as I rose from thence. I snatched
it up, I opened it, and in silence I read that Chapter which I first cast mine
eyes upon: Not in rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness,
not in strife and envying: But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ; and make not
provision for the Mat. 19. 21.
To. 13. 13.
flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof. No further would I read; nor needed I:
For instantly even with the end of this sentence, by a light as it were of
security now datted into my heart, all the darkness of doubting vanished
away. Shutting up the book thereupon, and putting my finger between, or I
know not what other mark, with a well quieted countenance I discovered all
this unto Alipius.

4. And he again in this manner revealed unto me, what also was wrought in his
heart, which I verily knew nothing of. He requested to see what I had read: I
showed him the place; and he looked further than I had read, nor knew I what
followed. This followed, Him that is weak Romans 14. 1.
in the Faith, receive: which he applied to himself, and showed it me. And by
this admonition was he strengthened, and unto that good resolution and purpose
(which was most agreeable to his disposition, wherein he did always very far
differ from me, to the better) without all turbulent delaying did he now apply
himself. From thence went we into the house unto my mother; we discover our
selves, she rejoices for it: we declare in order how every thing was done: she
leapes for joy, and triumphs, and blesses thee, who art able to do above
that which we ask or think; For that she perceived thee to have given her
more concerning me, than she was wont to beg by her pitiful and most doleful
groanings. For so thoroughly thou convertedst me unto thy self, as that I
sought now no more after a Wife, nor any other hopes in this world: thus being
settled in the same rule and line of Faith, in which thou had showed me unto
her in a vision, so many years before This vision mentioned lib. 3. cap. 11.
She saw in Tegula lignea, as I read it in stead of Regula, as here it is. I was
warranted to read it so, by my manuscript. And the Critieisme may pass: For
besides that S. August. uses to play upon the words, (Tegula and Regula,
lignea, and Linea) not improbable it is that his mother was then on the top
of the house praying, when she had her vision. There did S. Peter pray and had
his vision, Acts 10. 9. But I press not this. Sure it is that the Rule of
Faith, signified the Creed in those days. So that she vision assured her, that
her son should be of her Belief.
. Thus did thou convert her mourning into rejoicing, and that much more
plentifully than she had desired, and that much more dearly and a chaster way,
than she erst required: namely, if she had received, Grandchildren of my body.

SAINT AUGUSTINES Confessions. THE NINTH BOOK.
CHAP. 1. He praises Gods goodness; and acknowledges his own wretchedness.
O Lord, truly I am thy servant, Psalm. 116. 16, 17.
I am thy servant, and the son of thy handmaid, thou have broken my bonds in
sunder. I will offer to thee the sacrifice of praise. Let my heart praise thee
and my tongue; yea let all my bones say, O Lord who is like unto thee? Let them
say, and answer thou me, And say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. Psalm. 35.
10.
Who am I, and what manner of man? What evil have not I been? either my deeds
evil; or if not them, yet have my words been evil; or if not them, yet was my
Will evil. But thou, O LORD, art good and merciful, and thy right hand had
respect unto the profoundnesse of my death, and drew forth of the bottom of my
heart, that bottomless gulf of corruption: which was, to nill all that thou
willedst, and to will all that thou nilledst.

2. But where was that right hand so long a time, and out of what bottom and
deep secret corner, was my Free Will called forth in a moment, whereby I
submitted my neck to thy easy Math. 11. 30.
yoke, and my shoulders unto thy light burden, O Jesus Christ, my helper and
my Redeemer? Psalm. 19. 14.
How pleasant was it all on the sudden made unto me, to want the sweets of
those Toys? Yea, what I before feared to lose, was now a joy unto me to
forgo. For thou did cast them away from me, even thou that true and chiefest
sweetness. Thou threwest them out, and instead of them came in thy self,
sweeter than all pleasure, though not to flesh and blood; brighter than all
light; yea more privy than all secrets; higher than all honor; though not to
the high in their own conceits. Now became my soul free from those biting
cares of aspiring, and getting, and weltring in filth, and scratching off that
itch of lust. And I talked more familiarly now with thee my honor, and my
riches, and my health, my Lord God.

CHAP. 2. He gives over his teaching of Rhetoric.
1. ANd I resolved in thy sight, though not tumultuously to snatch away, yet
fairly to withdraw, the service of my tongue from those marts of lip-labor:
that young students, (no students in thy Law, nor in thy peace, but in lying
dotages, and law-skirmishes,) should no longer buy at my mouth the engines for
their own madness. And very seasonably fell it out, that it was but a few
days unto the Vacation In harvest and vintage time had the Lawyers their
vacation. So Minutius Felix. Scholars their Non Terminus, as here: yea
Divinity Lectures and Catechisings then ceased. So Cyprian, Epist. 2. The
Law-tearmes give way also to the great Festivals of the Church. Theodosius
forbade any Process to go out from 15. days before Easter till the Sunday
after. For the 4. Terms, see Caroli Calvi. Capitula, Act. 8. page 90.
of the Vintage: till when I resolved to endure them, that I might then take my
leave the more solemnly; when, being bought off by thee, I purposed to return
no more to be their mercenary. Our purpose therefore was known only unto
thee; but to men, other than our own friends, was it not known. For we had
agreed among our selves not to disclose it abroad to any body: although us, now
ascending from the valley of tears, and singing that He alludes to De
profundis.
song of degrees, had thou armed with sharp arrows, and hot burning coals to
destroy such subtle tongues, Psalm. 130. 1.
as would cross us in our purpose by seeming to advise us, and make an end of
us, pretending to love us, as men do with their meat: Thou had shot thorough
our hearts with thy charity, and we carried thy words as it were sticking in
our bowels: and the examples of thy servants, whom of black, thou had made
bright; and of Here the Popish Translator talks of a Beacon, do you see any?
dead, alive. Which charity and examples being piled together in the bosom of
our thoughts, did burn and utterly consume that lumpish slothfulness of ours,
that we might no more be plunged into the deepes by it. Yea, they set us on
fire so vehemently, as that all the blasts of the subtle tongues of gainsaying
might inflame us the more fiercely, but never extinguish us.

2. Nevertheless, because of thy Name which thou have sanctified throughout
the earth; and that our desire and purpose might likewise find commenders: it
would, I feared, look something too like oftentation for me not to expect the
time of vacation now so near; but beforehand, to give over my public
Profession which every man had an eye upon; and that the mouths of all the
beholders, being turned upon my fact (whereby I should desire to go off before
the time of Vintage so near approaching) would give it out, that I did it
purposely, affecting to appear some great man. And to what end would it have
served me, to have people censure and dispute upon my purpose, and to have our
good to be evil spoken of? Furthermore, for Romans 14. 16.
that in the Summer time my lungs began to decay with my overmuch
paines-taking in my School, and to breath with difficulty, and by the pain in
my breast to signify themselves to be spending; and to refuse too loud, or too
long speaking: I had been much troubled heretofore at the matter, for that
(namely) I was constrained even upon necessity, to lay down that burden of
Teaching; of if in case I could possibly be cured and grow sound again, at
least for a while to forbear it. But so soon as this full resolution to give
my self leisure, and to see, how that thou art the Lord; first arose, and was
afterward settled in me: God thou know how I began to rejoice, that I had
this, and that no unfeigned excuse, which might something take off the offense
taken by such parties, who for their childrens good, would by their good wills
that I should never have given over schooling.

3. Full therefore of such like joy, I held out till that Interim of time were
run. I know not well whether there might be some twenty days of it; yet I
courageously under-went them. But for that covetousness (which was wont to
bear part of the weight of my business) had now quite left me, I should have
utterly been oppressed, had not patience stepped up in its room. Some of thy
servants, my brethren, may say perchance, that I sinned in this; for that being
with full consent of heart enrold thy soldier, I suffered my self to sit one
hour in the chair of lying. And for my part I cannot defend my self. But
have not thou, O most merciful Lord, both pardoned and remitted this, amongst
other most horrible and deadly sins, in the holy water of Baptism?

CHAP. 3. Verecundus lends them his Countrey-house.
1. VErecundus became lean again with vexing at himself upon this good hap
of ours, for that being detained by some engagements, by which he was most
strongly obliged; he saw himself likely to lose our company, as being not yet
a Christian, though his wife were indeed baptized. And by her as being a clogge
that hung closer to him than all the rest, was he chiefly kept from that
journey which we now intended. And a Christian he would not (as he said) be
any other ways made, than by that way, which he as yet could not. However,
most courteously in truth did he proffer us, that we might freely make use of
his Country house, so long as we meant to stay there. Thou, O Lord, shall
reward him for it in the resurrection of the Just, seeing thou have already
rendered to him the lot of mortality. For although it was in our absence, as
being then at Rome, that he was taken with a bodily sickness; yet departed he
this life, being both made a Christian Christianus and fidelis factus: and
before, Nondum Christianus, conjuge fideli. By this appears the Primitive
order to make and call them Christians before they were baptized. And that what
ever degree of faith they had, yet did they not call them faithful, till they
were baptized. After which, though they proved Energumeni, to be possessed with
a Devil, yet still they called them Faithful. Nothing lost them that name,
but excommunication only.
, and baptized. also. Thus had thou mercy, not upon him only, but upon us
also; lest we remembering our selves of the humanity received from our friend;
and not allowed to reckon him in the number of thy Flock, should be tortured
with intolerable sorrow for him.

2. Thanks unto thee, O our God, we are now thine: Thy inspirations and
consolations tell us so. Thou, O faithful promiser, shall repay Verecundus for
his Country house of Cassiacum, where from the troubles of the world we rested
our selves in thee with the pleasantness of thy Paradise which is ever green:
for that thou have forgiven him his sins upon earth, in that mountain In
monte Cassiato, In the Mountains where Cassia and Spices grow. See Cantic. 8.
14. Cassiato better answers to Cassiaco, than Incascato does, which the printed
Copies read.
of spices, thine own mountain, that fruitful mountain. Verecundus
therefore was much perplexed, but Nebridius was as joyful as we. For although
when as he was not yet a Christian, he had fallen into the same pit of most
pernicious error with us, believing the flesh of thy Son to be fantastical:
yet getting out from thence, he believed as we did; not as yet entered into
any sacraments of thy Church, but a most zealous searcher out of the truth.
Whom, not long after our conversion and regeneration by thy Baptism, being
also baptized in the Catholic Faith, serving thee in perfect chastity and
continence amongst his own friends in Africa, having first converted his whole
family unto Christianity, did thou take out of the flesh; and now he lives in
the bosom of Abraham.

3. Whatsoever that estate be, which is signified by that bosom, there lives
Nebridius my sweet friend, thy child, O Lord, adopted of a freed-man, lives
there. For what other place is there for such a soul? In that place he lives,
concerning which he sometimes demanded of me unskilful man, so many
questions. Now lays he his ear no longer unto my mouth; but lays his
spiritual mouth unto thy fountain, and drinks as much of Wisdom as he is
able to contain, proportionable to his thirst; now without end happy. Nor do
I yet think that he is so inebriated with it, as Here the Popish Tran slaior
notes, that Augustine thought Nebridius prayed for him. Is here any word of
prayer? may not the Saints in general remember us, and what passed betwixt us
and them at the time of their death; and yet not pray for us? especially not
for our secret and particular wants, and things done since their death. The
place better proves the Communion of Saints, than the Prayers of the Saints.
to forget me; seeing thou, O Lord, of whom he drinks, art still mindful of
us Thus fared it then with us: sorrowful Verecundus we comforted, reserving
our friendship entire notwithstanding our conversion; and exhorting him to
continue in the fidelity of his degree, namely of his married estate. Nebridius
we stayed for, expecting when he would follow us, which being so near he might
well do: and even now he was about to do it, when behold those days of
Interim were at length come to an end. For long and many they seemed unto me;
even for the love I bare to that easefull liberty: that we might sing unto thee
out of all our bowels, My heart has said unto thee, I have sought Psalm. 27. 8.
thy face, thy face Lord will I seek.

CHAP. 4. What things he wrote with Nebridius.
1. NOw was the day come, wherein I was actually to be discharged of my
Rhetoric Professorship, from which in my thoughts I was already discharged.
And done it was. And thou deliveredst my tongue whence thou had before
delivered my heart. And I blessed thee for it, rejoicing in my self; I and
mine going all into the Country. What there in point of learning I did, (which
was now wholly at thy service, though yet sorely panting, and out of breath as
it were, in following the School He means that though he wrote of Divinity,
yet could be not so soon mean his Style, from Inke-horne Terms and affected
flowers of Oratory. For which he also complains of Alipius by and by.
of pride) my books may witness, both those which I disputed with my friends
present, and those which I composed alone with my self, before thee: and what
intercourse I had with Nebridius now absent, my Epistles can restifle. And when
shall I have time enough to make rehearsal of all the great benefits which
thou at that time bestowedst upon me, especially seeing I am now making have to
tell of greater matters? For my remembrance now calls upon me, and most
pleasant it is to me, O Lord, to confess unto thee, by what inward prongs thou
have thus tamed me; and how thou have taken me down, by bringing low those
mountains and hills of my high imaginations, This is the beginning of all
conversion, Gods beating a man from his own fleshly wisdom, pride, and
errors. Thus John Baptist first preached Christ Luke 3. 4.
and made my crookedness straight, and my rough ways smooth. And by what
means thou also subduedst that brother of my love, Alipius, unto the name of
thy only begotten Son our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, which he at first
would not vouchsafe to have it put into our writings. For, rather would he have
had them favor of the lofty Cedars of the Schools, which the Lord had now
broken down; than of those wholesome herbs of thy Church, which are so
powerful against Serpents.

2. Oh what passionate voices sent I up unto thee, my God, when as I read the
Psalms of David (those faithful songs:) Oh what sounds of devotion, quite
excluding the swelling spirit of ostentation! when (namely) I was yet but Rude,
was one of the Epithits of a Catechumenus. They were also styled Novices,
Raw-Soldiers, Whelps of the Church etc.
Rude in my kindly loving of thee, as being ^uta Catechumenus as yet in the
Country, whither I had withdrawn my self, together with Alipius a
Catechumenus also: and with my Mother likewise inseparably sticking unto us; in
a woman's habit verily; but with a masculine faith: void of worldly care as a
woman in her years should be, yet employing a matronely charity, and a
Christian piety. Oh, what passionate expressions made I unto thee in the
reading of those Psalms! Oh, how was I inflamed toward thee by them! yea, I
was on fire to have resounded them (had I been able) in the hearing of the
whole world, to the shame of the pride of mankind: though verily they be
already sung all the world over, nor can any hide themselves from thy Psalm. 19.
6.
heat. With what vehement and bitter sorrow was I angered at the Manichees?
whom yet again I pitied, for that they knew nothing of those Sacraments,
those Medicaments: and for that they were so mad at that Antidote, which had
been able to recover them. I heartily wished they had been somewhere or other
near me (I not knowing that they did then hear me, or were then so near me)
that they might have beheld my face, and heard my words, when as I read the
fourth Psalm in that time of my leisure, and how that Psalm wrought upon me.

3. When I called upon thee, thou heardest me, O God of my He exopoundeth the
4. Psalm.
righteousness, thou have enlarged me in my distress. Have mercy upon me, O
Lord, and hear my prayer. That they might hear (I say) what I uttered at the
reading of these words, I not knowing whether they heard me or no, lest they
should think I spoke it purposely against them: Because in good truth, neither
would I have spoken the same things, nor in the same manner, had I perceived
them to have both heard and seen me. But had I so spoken, yet would not they
so have understood; how with my self, and to my self before thee, out of the
familiar and ordinary affection of my soul, I quaked for fear, and boy led
high again Verse 2.
with hope, and with rejoicing in thy mercy, O Father. And all these
expressions of my self, passed forth both by mine eyes and voice; at what time
as thy good Spirit turning himself toward us, said, O ye sons of men how
long will ye be Quousque graves cord? These words be not now adays either in
the Hebrew or Vulgar, yet are they in Nazianzen his tenth Oration.
dull of heart? how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? For I
my self had sometimes loved vanity, and sought after leasing: But thou, O
Lord, have Verse 3.
magnified him that is godly; raising him from the dead, and placing him at thy
Right hand, whence from on high he should send his promise, the Comforter the
Spirit of truth. The Manichaeant acknowledged not the Holy Ghost, but held
Manichaeus to be the Paraclete and Comforter.
And he had sent him already, but I knew it not.

4. He had already sent him; because he was now exalted by rising from the
dead, and ascending up into heaven. For till then, The Holy Ghost was not
given, because Jesus was not yet glorified. And the Prophet cries out, How
long, O ye slow of heart? Why will ye love vanity and seek after leasing?
Know this, that the Lord has set apart his Holy one. He cries out How long; he
cries out, Know this: whereas I so long ignorant, have loved vanity, and sought
after leasing: yea, I both heard and trembled, because it was spoken unto such,
as I remembered my self sometimes to have been. For verily in those
Fantastical fictions which I once held for truths, was there both vanity and
leasing: wherefore I roared out many things sorrow fully and strangely, whilst
I grieved at what I now remembered. All which I wish they had heard, who yet
love vanity and seek after leasing: They would perchance have been troubled,
and have vomitted up their poison; and to Thou might have heard them, when
they cried unto thee: for He died a true death in the flesh for us, who now
makes intercession unto thee for us. I further read, (...) angry, This also
differs from the Hebrew. It seems to be according to the 70. seeing it is cited
Ephesians. 4. 26. There were infinite Latin Translations of old, especially of the
Psalter, till S. Hieromes time. The Romans used that of his, translated out of
the 70. which from them was called Roman^: the French and Germans used that
which he (...) by the 70 which Gregory Turonenst, (...) into France. This was
killed Gallicana, Th^^ Church of M. ^^ne used St. Ambroses Transla^^^. See Rad.
Tungrensis Propos. 8. he Church has (...) used a Translation of the Psalter
differen from the Bible, and so now does ours.
and sin not. And how was I moved, O my God, I who had then learned to be
angry at my self for things passed, that I might not sin in time to come?
Yea, to be justly angry; for that it was not any other nature of a different
kind of darkness without me, which sinned: as the Manichees affirm it to
be, who are not angry at themselves; and who treasure up wrath against the day
of wrath, and of the renelation Romans 2. 5.
of the just judgment of God. Nor indeed was my Good without me, nor to be
caught with the eyes of flesh under the Sun: seeing they that will take joy
in any thing without themselves, do easily become vain, and spill themselves
upon those things which are seen and are but temporally yea and with their
hunger-starued thoughts like their very shadows. And, oh that they were once
wearied out with their hunger, and come once to say, Who will show us day good?
Let us Verse. 4.
say so, and let them hear, The light of thy countenance is lifted John 1. 9.
up upon us. For we our selves are not that light which enlighteneth every man
that comes into the world; but we are enlightened by thee: as who having
been some times Ephesians. 5. 8.
darkness, may now be light in thee.

5. O that they might once (...) that Eternal Eight^^; which for that my self
had once tasted, I guashed my ^^th at them; because I was not able to make them
see it: (...) not though they should (...) me their heart in their (...) eyes,
(which are ever (...) from thee) that so (...) might say, Who will show Uerse.
^.
(...) good (...), even (...) was (...) self in my chamber: being inwardly
pricked there; offering my sacrifice there also, my Verse 5.
old man, and the meditation of my newness of life now begun in me: putting
my trust in thee. There begannest thou to grow sweet unto me, and to put
gladness in my Verse 7.
heart. And I cried out as I read this outwardly, finding this gladness
inwardly. Nor would I be any more increased with worldly goods; wasting away
my time, and being wasted by these temporal things; whereas I had in thy
eternal simplicity a store laid up, of Corn and Wine, and Oil.

6. And with alowd cry of my heart called I out in the next verse, O in peace,
O for that same peace! O what said he, I will lay ^^^ down and sleeps: Verse.
^.
(...) hinder us, when (...) saying shall be brought to pass which is written,
Death is swallowed up in victory? And thou surpassingly 1 Cor. 15. 54.
^t that same Rest, thou who art not changed, and in thee is that Rest which
forgets all (...) labors; nor is there any other besides thee: no, nor have
thou appointed me to seek after those many other things, which art not the
same that thou art: but In safety, say our copyes now adays.
thou Lord, after a special manner have made me dwell in hope.

These things I read, and burnt again; nor could I tell what to do to those
deaf and dead This is better language then the Papists use to give the holy
Scriptures. The popish Translater to avoid this commendatio^ tra^slates i^
doctrine.
Manichees, of whom my self was sometimes a pestilent member, asnarling and a
blind (...) against thy Scriptures, all behonyed over with the (...) of heaven,
and all lightsome with thine own light: yea I consumed away with zeal at the
enemies of these Scriptures, when as I called to mind every thing that I had
done, in those days of my retirement.

7. Nor have I yet forgotten, neither will I pass in silence, the smartnesse
of thy scourge, and the wonderful swiftness of thy mercy. Thou did in those
days torment me with the Toothache; which when it had grown so fierce upon
me, that I was not able to speak, it came into my heart to desire my friends
present, to pray for me unto thee, the God of all manner of health. And this I
wrote in wax, Here my former Translater notes the old kind of writing in Wax,
and in dust. Wax I allow: the Ancients playstered it thin upon boords, and
wrote with steel bodkins, by pricket or strockes. But for dust, see our note
upon lib. 4. cap. 16.
and gave it to them to read. Immediately, so soon as with an humble devotion
we had bowed our knees, that pain went away. But what pain? or how went it
away? I was much affrayed, O my Lord, my God; seeing from mine infancy I had
never felt the like. And thou gave me a secret Item by this, how powerful
thy Beck was; for which I much rejoicing in says, gave praise unto thy name.
And that says suffered me not to be secure, in the remembrance of my
forepassed sins, which hitherto were not for given me by thy Baptism.

CHAP. 5. Ambrose directs him what books to read.
1. AT the end of the vintage, I gave the Citizens of Millane fair warning to
provide their scholars of another Master to sell words to them; for that I had
made choice to serve thee; and for that by reason of my difficulty of
breathing, and the pain in my breast, I was not able to go on in the
Professorship. And by letters I signified to that Prelate of thine, the holy
man Ambrose, my former errors and presentresolution, desiring him to advise me
what part of thy Scriptures were best for my reading, to make me readier and
fitter for the receiving of so great a grace. He recommended Esaias the Prophet
to me: for this reason, I believe, for that he is a more clear foreshewer of
the Gospel, and of the calling of the Gentiles, then are the rest of the
Prophets. But I, not understanding the first part of him, and imagining all the
rest to be like that, laid it by, intending to fall to it again, when I were
better practiced in our Lords Scriptures.

CHAP. 6. He is baptized at Millane.
1. When the time was come, wherein They were baptized at Easter, and gave up
their names before the 2d Sunday in Lent: The rest of which, they were to spend
in fasting, humility, prayer, and being examined in the Scrutenyes. Tertul:
lib. de Bape^. ^^ Therefore went they to Millane, that the Bishop might see
their preparation. Adjoining to the Cathedralls, were there certain lower
houses for them to lodge and be exercised in, till the day of baptism. Eusbe.
lib. 10. c. 4.
I was to give in my name, we removed out of the Country unto Millane.
Alipius also was for company resolved to be borne again in thee; as having by
this time put on such humility, as is ^itting for thy Sacraments: and being
become so valiant ^ ^amer of his own body, as even to wear the frostie earth
of Italy with his bare feet This is (I believe) the ancientest example of any
good man that the barefooted Friars can produce, for this devout Will Worship.
St. Austen did it not, but censured other barefooted deuotoes, for heretics.
Libro de Haeres. cap. 68.
with an unusual undertaking. We took along with us the boy Adeodatus,
carnally begorten by me in fornication. Thy part of him was well made up: for
being now but almost fifteen years of age, he for wit excelled many agraue
and learned man. I confess unto thee thine own gifts, O Lord my God, Creator
of all, who art abundantly able to reform all our defects: for I had no part
in this boy, but the sin: for that we brought him up in thy fear, it was thou,
and none else, that inspired us. I confess thine own gifts unto thee. There
is a book of ours extant, called The Masters: a dialogue it is betwixt him and
me: God thou know, that all these conceits are his own, which go there
under the name of him that discourses with me. When he was once sixteen
years old, I had trial of many more admirable abilities of his. His great wit
struck a kind of horror into me. And who but thy self can be the
workmaster of such wonders?

2. Soon did thou take his life from off the earth; and so much the more
securer do I now remember him, for that I fear nothing committed either in
his Childhood or Youth, nor any thing at all in him. Him we took along to make
as old as our selves in grace, and to be brought up according to thy
discipline; and baptized we were together; instantly upon which, all anguish
of mind for our former ill-led life, vanished away. Nor could I be satisfied
in those days, while with admirable sweetness I considered upon the
deepenesse of thy counsels concerning the salvation of Mankind. How
abundantly did I weep, to hear these Hymns and Canticles of thine, being
touched to the very quick by the voices of thy sweet Church-song! The voices
flowed into mine ears, and thy Truth pleasingly distilled into my heart, which
caused the affections of my devotion to ouerflow, and my tears to run over,
and happy did I find my self therein.

CHAP. 7. A persecution in the Church miraculously diuerted.
1. NOt long before had the Church of Millane began to celebrate this kind
of consolation and exhortation, and that with the great delight of the
Brethren, singing together both with voice and hearts. For about a year it
was, or not much above, that Iustina, mother to the Emperor Valentinian,
prosecuted thy servant Ambrose, in favor of her heresy, to which she was
seduced by the Most probable it is, that the Te Deum was now made, because it
is so direct a confession of the Trinity, oppugned by the Arrians. It Is a Creed
set Hymnwise, believed to be made by S. Ambrose, and S. Austen.
Arriane; the devout people watched day and night in the Church, ready to dye
with their Bishop, thy servant: where my (...) thy handmaid, bearing a chief
part of those troubles and watchings, even lived by prayer: yea we also, not
yet vnfrozen by the heat of thy spirit, were yet stirred up by the example of
the amazed and disquieted City. At this time was it here first instituted after
the manner of the (...) Ignatius, who lived An. Christi 100. mentions singing
in the Eastern Churches. Epist. ad Remanos Quire-men only were to singing the
Church Anno 364. Council. Laodic. Can ^5.
Churches, that Hymns and Psalms should be sung, lest the people should wax
faint through the tediousness of Sorrow: which custom being retained from
that day to this, is still imitated by diverse, yea, almost by all thy
Congregations, throughout other parts of the world.

2. At that time did thou by a vision discover unto thy forenamed Bishop, the
place where the bodies of Ger^asins and Protasius the Martyrs didlye hid (whom
thou had in the Treasury of thy secret, preserved uncorrupted so many years)
from whence thou might thus seasonably bring the^ to light, to repress the
fury of this woman the Empress: for when as they were once discovered and digd
up, and with due honors translated to Ambroses Church; not only they who were
vexed with unclean, spirits (the devils confessing themselves to be so) were
cured; but a certain man also haning been blind many years, (a welknowne
Citizen of that City) asking and hearing the reason of the peoples confused
joy; sprang forth, desiring his guide to lead him thither: and being come to
the place, requested the favor, that with his handkerchiefe he might touch
the Bear of thy Saints, whose death is precious in thy sight. Which when he
Psa. 116 15
had done, and put unto his eyes, they were forthwith opened. Hereupon was the
same spread, hereupon were thy praises The cure was ascribed to God, not to the
Martyrs, as now in Popery.
zealously proclaimed to the view of the world, and hereupon was the mind of
that enemy, though not brought to be healed by believing, yet restrained
Another means did God raise up, namely our Countryman Maximus, who coming
with his Army of Britains into Italy, made her slay to Thessalonica. See
Zozomen. lib. 7. c. 13. Niceph. l. 12. c. 19.
from her fury of persecuting. Thanks to thee, O my God, whence, and whither
have thou thus led my remembrance, that I should also confess these
particulars: unto thee; which (having forgotten other great matters) I had
almost passed over.

And yet even then, when as the odors of thy ointments were so fragrant, did
we not run Can. 1. 2. 3
after thee: and for this reason did I more abundantly weep at the singing of
thy Hymns, as having once sighed my self out of breath after thee, and now at
last recovering so much of my wind again, as there can be freedom of air
afforded in this house of grass. Indow^ (...). Thus he translates a (...).


CHAP. 8. The Conversion of Euodius. A discourse of his Mother.
1. THou that make men of one mind to dwell in one house, did bring Euodius
a young man of our own City, also to consort himself with us. Who being an
Officer of Court, was converted unto thee and baptized before us, and having
quit his These Agentes in Rebus, were of the Soldiery, out of which the
Emperor chose some to serve his person in Court, and otherwhere. See our note
upon cap. 7 lib. 8.
Colors in his secular warfare, had devoted himself to fight under thy
baenner. We kept company with one another, intending still to dwell together in
our devout purpose; and seeking out now for some place where we might more
conveniently serve thee in, we removed thereupon back again into Africa:
whither ward being on our way as far as The Porttown^ next to Rome, where
they took ship for Africa.
Ostia, my mother departed this life. Many things do I ouerpasse, because I
make have. Receive my Confessions and Thankesgiuings, O my God, for innumerable
things which I am silent in. But omit I will not whatsoever my soul can bring
forth concerning that Handmaid of thine, which brought forth me: both in her
flesh, that I might be borne again, to this temporal light; and in her heart
too, that I might be borne again to the eternal Light. I will remember, not
her gifts, but thine in her. For neither did she give birth nor education unto
herself.

2. For then createdst her, nor did her father and mother know, what kind of
creature was to proceed out of their loynesd And it was the Scepter of thy
Christ, the discipline of thine only Son, that educated her in thy fear, in
a house of Christians, which was a good member of thy Church. Yet was she wont
not so much to commend the bare diligence of her mother in her education, as
the care of a certain decrepite servant of hers, who had also carried her
father being a Child, as little ones use to be carried at the backs of bigger
maidseruants. For which reason, Pick-pack according to the Country fashion
perchance or else for sport sake.
and because she was well in years, and of excellent conversation; was she
in that Christian family, very well respected by her master and mistress:
having thereupon the charge of her mistresses daughters committed unto her;
which she with much diligence performed, being sharp to hold them in, (when
need so required) with a holy severity, and using a grave manner of discretion
in teaching of them. For except at those hours wherein they were most
temperately fed at their parents table, would she not suffer them (were they
never so thirsty) to drink so much as a draught of water; preventing thereby a
naughty custom, and giving them this wholesome Item withal; Go to, now ye
drink water, because you are not suffered to have wine: but when once you come
to be married, and be made Mistresses of Buttries and Cellars, you will
scorn water then, but the custom of drinking will prevail upon you.

3. By this way of tutoring, and the authority she had in awing of them, did
she moderate the longing of their tender ages, yea and brought the (...)
thirst to so honest a moderation, as that now they would not of themselves take
more liberty, then what was comely. But there stole for all this, (as thy
hand-maide told me her son:) there stole upon her, a lickotish inclination
toward wine. For when (as the manner was,) Thee, being thought to be a sober
maiden, was bidden by her parents sometimes to draw Wine out of the Hogs-head,
she holding the I suppose the pot into which the wine was drawn from the tap,
had a little spout by which it was powered into a handsomer flagon, which was to
stand upon the livery cupboord.
Pot under the Tappe would at the mouth of it, before she powered the Wine into
the Flagon, wet her lipes as it were with a little sippe of it: for much would
not her taste suffer her to take in.

For she did not this out of any drunken desire, but upon such ouerflowing
excesses as yo^th is subject unto, who boil over with gamesomenesse: which in
youthful spirits is wont to be kept under, by the gravity of their elders.

3. And thus unto that Modicum every day adding a little more, (for who-euer
contemns small things, shall fall Ecclus. 19. 1
by little and little,) fell she at last to get such a custom, that she
would greedily take off her Cups brimmefull almost of wine. Where was then that
watchful old woman, with all her earnest countermending? was any thing of
force enough to prevail against a secret disease, if thy physic, O Lord, did
not watch over us? Her father, mother, and governors not being by, thy self
being at hand, who createdst, who calle^^ us, who also by means of these
people that are set over us, workest something toward the salvation of our
souls, what did thou at that time, O my God? how did thou cure her? which
way did thou heal her? did thou not out of that other woman's soul bring
forth a hard and a sharp Check, as it were a Chirurgions knife out of thy
secret store; and with one blow quite cut off that putrified custom of hers?

4. For that old maid which she used to go withal into the Celler, falling
to Ad cuppam unto the Pype or Hoggs-head.
words (as it happened) hand to hand with her little mistress, hither in the
teeth in a most bitter insulting manner, calling her Wine-bibber: with which
taunt she being struck to the quick, reflected upon the fowlenesse of her
fault, yea and instantly condemnd it in her self, ^auing it quite. Even as
friends by flattering make us worse so enemies oftentimes by reproaching, make
us better: Yet shall not thou render unto them according to that which by them
thou do, but according to that which themselves intended. For she being in
choler, had a desire rather to vex her young mistress, then to amend her; and
therefore did she it thus privately: either for that the opportunity of the
time, and place of their brabble found them thus alone; or else for fear her
self should have had anger, for discovering it no sooner.

But thou, O Lord, the Governor both of heavenly and earthly things, who
conuertest to thine own purposes the very depths of the running streams, and
disposest of the trouble some reuolutions of all ages ^ did by the fury of
one soul, thus cure the ill custom of another: And that lest any man, when
he observes this, should attribute it unto his own power, if another man
chance to be reformed by a word of his, whom The former Translater is here
bold to cross the sense by putting in of a negative whom be meant not to
reform.
he meant indeed to have reformed.

CHAP. 9. His mother Monica'es carriage toward her husband. A description of a
rare wife.
1. BEing thus modestly and soberly brought up, and made subject by thee rather
to her parents then by her parents unto thee; so soon as she proved
marriageable, was she bestowed upon a Husband, whom she was as serviceable
unto, as to her Lord: endeavoring thereby to win him unto thee, preaching *
Thee unto him by her Conversation; by which Thou made her to appear
beautiful, and reverently amiable, yea and admirable unto her husband. For
she so discreetly endured his wronging of her bed, that she never had any
jealous quarrel with her husband for that beastlynesse. Because she still
expected thy mercy upon him, that believing in thee, he might turn chaster.

And he was besides this, as of a passing good nature, so also very hot and
cholerike: but she knew well enough, *
That a husband in choler, is not to be contradicted; not in deed only, but
not so much as in word. But so soon as he was grown calm and quieter, that
she saw her opportunity, would she render him an account of her actions; if so
be he had been offended upon too slight an occasion.

2. In a word, when as many matrones, who had much milder husbands, carried the
marks of the blows in their dissigured faces, would in their gossippings tell
many a tale of their husbands manner of living; she as it were in jest,
gravely advised their too free tongues; That from the time they first heard
those Tables, which they call Tabulas matrimoniales. I he Ancients recorded the
conditions of the contract, the Joy ^ture, dowry, and marriage duties in
public sables, which were read (like our exnortations in the Communion book,
after marriage) openly on the day or matrimony: for these see Tertul lib. ad
(...), c. 3.
Matrimonial, to be first read unto them, they should account of them as
evidences, whereby themselves were made servants; and that therefore being
always mindful of their own condition, they ought not to pride up themselves
against their husbands. And when as they admired, (knowing what a choleric
husband she endured) for that it had never been heard, nor by any token
perceived, that Patricius had once beaten his wife, or that there had been any
one household difference between them for so much as one day; and whenas they
familiarly asked the reason of it, she taught them the Rule, which I have
before mentioned. Those wives that observed it, finding the good, gave her
thanks for it; those that did not, were kept under and afflicted.

3. Her mother-in-law also, being at first incensed at her by the whisperings
of naughty servants; she so far overcame by observance, perseuered so long in
patience and meekenes; that she of her own accord discovered unto her son,
the tales that the maid-seruants had carried be tweene them, whereby the peace
of the house had been disturbed, betwixt her and her daughter-in-law, requiring
him to give them correction for it. When he therefore, both out of obedience to
his mother, and out of a Core to the well-ordering of his family, and to
provide withal for the concord of his people, had with stripes corrected the
servants thus bewrayed, according to the pleasure of her that had revealed it,
her self also added this promise, that cuery one should look for the like
reward at her hands, whosoever, to pick a thank by it, should speak any ill
of her daughter-in-law: which none being so hardy afterward as to do, they
lived ever after with a most memorable sweetness of mutual courtesies. This
great gift thou bestowedst also, O God my mercy, upon that good hand maid of
thine, out of whose womb thou broughtest me; namely, that she ever did,
(where she wasable) carry herself so peace fully between any parties that
were at difference and discorded; as that after she had on both sides heard
many a bitter word, (such as swelling and indigested choler uses to break
forth into, whenas unto a present friend, the ill-brookt heart-burning at an
enemy, is with many a biting tittle-tattle, breathed up again) she never for
all that, would discover more of the one party unto the other, then what might
further their reconcilement.

4. This virtue might seem a small one unto me, if to my grief. I had not
had experience of innumerable companies, (I know not by what horrible infection
or sin spreading far and near,) who used not only to discover the
speeches of enemies angered on both sides, to one another; but to add withal
some things that were never spoken: whereas on the contrary, it ought to be
esteemed a mean virtue in a man, to forbear merely to procure or increase
ill will amongst people by ill speaking, unless he study withal how to
quench it by making the best of every thing. And such a one was she, thy self
being her most intimate Master, teaching her in the school of her breast.
Finally, her own husband (now toward the latter end of his life) did she
gain unto Thee; having now no more cause to complain of those things in him
when he was once baptized, which she had formerly borne withal, before he
was converted.

5. Yea, she was also the servant of thy servants; and whosoever of them knew
her, did both commend much in her, and honored and loved Thee: for that they
might well perceive thy self to be within the heart of her holy conversation,
the fruits of it being witnesses. For she had been The wife of one man; she
had repayed the 1 Timothy 5. 9
duty she ought unto her parents; she had governed her house very
religiously; for good works she had a good report; she had brought up her
childen, so often travailing in birth of them again, as she Gal. 4. 19.
saw them swaruing from thee.

Lastly, of all of us thy servants, O Lord, (whom for this favor received thou
suffer thus to speak, us, who before her sleeping in thee lived in society
together, having first received the grace of thy baptism) did she so take the
care of, as if she had been the mother to us all: being withal so
serviceable, as if she had been the daughter to us all.

CHAP. 10. Of a confernce had with his mother, about the Kingdom of Heaven.
1. THe day now approaching that she was to depart this life, (which day thou
well knew, though we were not aware of) it fell out, thy self, as I
believe, by thine own secret ways so casting it: that she and I should stand
all alone together leaning in a certain window, which looked into the garden of
the house where we now lay at Ostia; where being sequestered from company after
the weary somenesse of a long journey, we were providing our selves for a
sea-voyage into our own country, There conferred we hand to hand very
sweetly; and forgetting those things which are Phil. 3. 13.
behinds, we reached forth unto those things which are before; we did betwixt
our selves seek at that Present Truth, (which thou art) in what manner the
eternal life of the Saints was to be, which eye has not seen, nor Esaias. 49.
4.
ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man. But yet we gaped with
the mouth of our heart, after those upper streams of that Fountain which is
before thee; that being besprinckled with it according to our capacity, we
might in some sort meditate upon so high a mystery.

2. And when our discourse was once come unto that point, that the highest
pleasure of the carnal senses, and that in the brightest beam of corporal
lightsomenesse, was, in respect of the sweetness of that life, not only not
worthy of comparison, but not so much as of mention; we chering up our selves
with a more burning affection toward that, did by degrees course over all
these corporeals: that is to say, the heaven it self, from whence both Sun,
and Moon, and stars do shine upon this earth: yea we soared higher yet, by
inward musing, and discourse upon Thee, and by admyring of thy works. And last
of all, we came to our own souls which we presently went beyond, that we
might advance as high as that Region of neuer-wasting plenty: where Thou
feedest Israel for ever with the food of Truth; and where life is that
Wisdom by which all these things are made, and which have been, and which
are to come. And this Wisdom is not made; but it is at this present, as it
has ever been, and so shall it ever be: seeing that the Terms to have
been, and to be hereafter, are not at all in it, but to Be now, for that it is
eternal. For to have been, and to be, is not eternal. And while we were thus
discoursing and streyning our selves after it, we arrived to a little touch of
it with the whole stroke of our heart; and we sighed, and even there we left
behind us the first fruits of our spirits enchayned unto it; returning from
these thoughts, to vocal expressions of our mouth, where words are both begun
and finished. And what can be like unto thy Word, our Lord, who remains in
himself for ever without becoming aged, and yet renewing all things?

3. We said therefore: If to any man the tumults of the flesh be silenced,
let these He means, that whosoever has once overcome his own lusts, should no
more speak of, or listen after any thing but God. The other Translator makes
odd sense of it.
fancies of the earth, and waters, and air be silenced also: yea let the Poles
of heaven be silent also: let his own soul likewise keep silence; yea let it
surmount it self, not so much as thinking upon it self. Let all dreams and
imaginary revelations be silenced, every tongue, and every sign, and
whatsoever is made by passing from one degree unto another, if unto any man it
can be altogether silent: and that because if any man can hearken unto them,
all these will say unto him, We created not our selves, but He that remains
to all eternity. Thus much the creatures having uttered, if they be then
silent, (as having raised their attentions unto him that made them) then let
him speak alone; not by them, but by himself, that we may hear his own
Word; not pronounced by any tongue of flesh, nor by the voice of the Angels,
nor by the sound of thunder, nor in the dark riddle of a resemblance; but him
whom we love in these creatures, let us hear without the ministry of these
creatures; like as we two now streined up our selves unto it, and in a
rauishing contemplation arrived unto a touch of that eternal Wisdom, which
is oaer all. Should this exaltation of spirit have ever continued, and all
Other visions of a sarre inferior alloy been quite taken away, and that this
one exaltation should ravish us, and swallow us up, and so wrappe up their
beholder among these more inward joys, as that his life might be for ever
like to this very moment of understanding which we now sighed after; were not
this as much, as Enter into thy Masters joy? But when shall that Mat. 25. 21
be? Shall it be when we shall all rise again, though all shall not be
changed? 1 Cor. 15.


4. Such discourse we then had and though not precisely after this manner, and
in these selfsame words; yet, Lord thou know, that in that day when we
thus talked of these things, that this world with all it is delights grew
contemptible to us, even as we were speaking of it. Then said my Mother:
Son, for mine own part I have delight in nothing in this life, what I should
here do any longer, and to what end I am here, I know not, now that my hopes
in this world are vanished. There was indeed one thing for which I sometimes
desired to be a little while repriued in this life; namely, that I might see
thee to become a Christian Catholic before I died. My God has done this for
me more abundantly; for that I now see thee withal, having contemned all
earthly happiness, to be made his servant: what then do I here any longer?

CHAP. 11. Of the ecstasy and death of his Mother.
1. What answer I then made her unto these things, I do not now remember:
but in the mean time (scarce five days after, or not much more) she fell into
a fever, and in that sickness one day she fell into a swownd, being for a
while taken from her senses. We ran to her; but she quickly came to her
self again; and looking wistly upon me and my brother standing by her, said
unto us in manner of a question, Where was I? And fixing her eyes upon us, all
with grief amazed; Here, says she, shall you bury your Mother. I held my peace
and refrayned weeping: but my brother spoke something to her, insinuating his
desire to have her dye, not in a strange place, but in her own Country, as
being the happier. At hearing of which, she with an offended countenance,
checking him with her eye, for that he had not yet lost the relish of these
earthly thoughts: and then looking upon me; Behold (quoth she) what he says:
And soon after to us both, Lay (says she) this body any where, let not the
ear for that disquiet you: this only I request, That you would remember Here
the Popish Translater notes, That she desired to be prayed for. Not so; but
what remembering at the Altar means, see our preface.
me at the Lords Altar, where-euer you be.

2. And when she had delivered this her opinion, in words as well as she
could; she held her peace, her sickness growing more strong upon her. But I,
considering with my self thy gifts, O Thou my invincible God, which thou
instillest into the hearts of thy faithful ones, from whence such admirable
fruits do spring forth, did greatly rejoice and give thanks unto thee,
calling now to mind, what I before knew with how much carfulness (namely)
concerning her place of burial, she had always troubled her self; which
she had appointed and prepared by the body of her Husband. For because they
two had lived so lovingly together, her earnest desire had still been (as
humane nature is less capeable of divine considerations) to make this addition
unto that happiness, and to have it talked of by the people; That God had
granted unto her, after so long a pilgrimage beyond the seas, to have now at
last in her native country, both the bodies of man and wife covered with the
same earth.

3. But when this empty conceit began, by the fullness, of thy goodness to
be thrust out of her heart, I knew not: but I rejoiced with much admiration,
that I now so plainly saw it, to have done so: though indeed in that speech
which we had in the window, whenas she said, What do I here any longer? she
made show of no desire of dying in her own country. I heard afterward also,
that in the time we were at Ostia, how with a matronely confidence she
discoursed with certain of my friends when I was absent, about the contempt of
this life, and of the benefit of death: they being much astonished at the
courage of the woman, which thou had given her; withal demanding of her,
Whether she were not affrayd to leave her body so far from her own City?
unto which she replied, Nothing is far from God; nor was it to be feared
lest he should not know at the end of the world, the place whence he were to
raise me up. In the ninth day therefore of her sickness, and the six and
fiftieth year of her age, and the three and thirtieth of mine, was that
religious and holy Soul discharged from the prison of her body.

CHAP. 12. He laments his mothers death.
1. I Cloased her eyes; and there flowed withal an unspeakable sorrow into my
heart, which ouerflowed into tears: mine eyes at the same time by the violent
command of my mind, pumpt their Well dry, and woe was me in that same agony. So
soon as she had breathd out her last spirit, the boy Adeodates brake out into
a loud lamentation; till being pressed by us all, he held his peace. In like
manner also that childish passion of mine own, which slipped from me in tears,
being restrained by the manly voice of my heart, was at last silenced. For
fitting This same was S. Gregory Nazianzens opinion, Oratione 11. pro Gorgonia,
and also orat. 10. in funere Caesary Lachrymis a philosophia superatis
psalmodiis lachrimas sedantibus.
we did not think it, to solemnize that funeral with lamentations, tears
and howlings; for that this is the fashion whereby those that dye miserably, or
be utterly perished as it were, use to be lamented: whereas she did neither
dye in any miserable condition, nor indeed dyed she utterly. For thus much
were we assured of by the experience of her good conversation, her says
unfeigned, and other most certain arguments.

2 What might that be therefore which did thus grievously pain me within,
but a wound newly taken, by having that most sweet and dear custom of living
with her, thus suddenly broken off? I much rejoice to receive that testimony
from her, whereby in the latter end of her sickness, upon my performance of
all respectfull dutyfulnesse to her, she ever and anon speaking most kindly to
me, called me Pium.
a dutyfull Child: remembering with great affection of love, how that she never
heard any harsh word or reproachful term, to come out of my mouth against
her. But for all this, O my God, that made us both, what comparison is there
betwixt that honor that I perform to her, and that careful painfulness of
hers to me? Because therefore I was left thus destitute of so great a comfort,
was my very soul wounded; yea and my life torn in pieces as it were: which
had been made one, out of hers and mine together.

3 That boy now being stilled from weeping, Euodius took up the Psalter, and
began to sing, (the whole house answering him) the 101 Psalm, I suppose they
continued to the end of Psalm 102. This was the Primitive fashion: Nazianzen
says that his speechless Sister Gorgoniaes lips muttered the fourth Psalm; I
will lie down in peace and sleep. As St Austen lay a dying, the company
prayed. Possid. That they had prayers between the departure and the burial,
see Tertull. l. de Anima. c. 51. They used to sing both at the departure and
burial. Nazianzen. oral: 10. says, The dead Caesarius was carried from hymns
to hymns. The Priests were called to sing Chrysostom. Hom. 50. ad Antioch. They
sung the 116. Psalm usually. See Chrysostom. Homil. 4. in cap. 2. ad Hebraeos.
I will sing of mercy and judgment unto thee, O Lord. But when it was once
heard what we were a doing, there came together very many Brethren and
religious women: and whilst they (whose office it was,) were, as the manner
is, taking order for the burial; my self in a part of the house (where most
conveniently I could, together with those who thought it not fit to leave me)
discoursed upon something which I thought fittest for the time: by applying of
which plaster of truth, did I assuage that inward torment, known only unto
thy self, though not by them perceived; who very attentively listening unto me,
conceived me to be without all sense of sorrow. But in thy ears, where none of
them over heard me, did I blame the weakness of my passion, and refrain my
flood of grieuing: which giving way a little unto me, did for all that break
forth with his wonted violence upon me, though not so far as to burst out into
tears, nor to any great change of countenance, yet know I well enough what I
kept down in my heart. And for that it very much offended me, that these human
respects had such power over me, (which must in their due order, and out of
the Fatality of our natural condition, of necessity come to pass) I condoled
mine own sorrow with a new grieuing, being by this means afflicted with a
double sorrow.

4. And behold, when as the Corpse was carried to the Burial, we both went and
returned without tears. For neither in those Prayers which we powered forth
unto Thee, whenas the Sacrifice of our Here my Popish Translater says, that
the Sacrifice of the Mass was offered for the dead. That the Ancients had
communion with their burials, I confess. But for what? 1. To testi^^ their
dying in the communion of the Church. 2. To give thanks for their departure. 3.
To pray God to give them place in his Paradise. 4. And a part in the first
resurrection: But not as a propitiatory Sacrifice to deliver them out of
purgatory, which the Mass is now only meant for. See our preface.
Redemption was offered up unto thee for her, the Corpse standing by the Graves
side, before it was put into the ground (as the manner there is) did I so much
as shed a tear all the Here observe Burial with prayers.
Prayer time; yet was I most grievously sad in secret, and with a troubled
mind did I beg of thee (so well as I could) that thou would mitigate my
sorrow, which for all that, thou did not: recommending, I believe, unto my
memory by this one experiment, That the too strict bond of all humane
conversation, is much prejudicial unto that soul, which now feeds upon thy
not deceiving Word. It would, I thought, do me some good, to go and bathe my
self; and that because I had heard the Bath to take his name from the Greeks
calling of it (...), for that it drives sadness out of the mind. And this I
also confess unto thy mercy, O father of the fatherless; because that after I
had bathed, I was the same man I was before, and that the bitterness of my
sorrow could not be swette out of my heart.

5. I fell to sleep upon it; and upon my waking, I found my grief to be not
a little abated. Whereupon lying in my bed alone, there came to my mind those
true verses of thy Ambrose. For thou art the God that all things do create,
Who know the Heavens to moderate,
And cloath'st the day with beauteous light,
With benefit of sleep, the night,
Which may our weakened sinews make
Able new pains to undertake,
And all our tired minds well ease,
And our distempered griefs appease.


And then again by little and little as feelingly as before, calling to mind
thy handmayd, her devout and holy conversation toward Thee, her pleasing and
most obseruant behavior toward Us, of which too suddenly I was now deprived:
it gave me some content to weepein thy sight; both concerning her, and for
her; concerning my self, and for my self. And I gave way to these tears
which I before restreined, to over flow as much as they desired; laying them
for a pillow under my heart, and resting my self upon them: for there were thy
ears, and not the ears of man, who would have scornefully interpreted this my
weeping.

6. But now in writing I confess it unto thee, O Lord, read it, who will; and
interpret it, how he will: and if he finds me to have offended in bewailing my
mother so small a portion of an hour (that mother I say now dead and departed
from mine eyes, who had so many years wept for me, that I might live in thine
eyes,) let him not deride me; but if he be a man of any great charity, let him
rather weep for my sins unto Thee, the Father of all the brethren of thy
Christ.

CHAP. 13. He prays for his dead mother.
1. But my heart now cured of that wound, (for which it might be blamed for a
carnal kind of affection) I power out unto Thee, O our God, in behalf of
that handmayd of thine, a far different kind of tears; such as flowed from a
broken spirit, out of a serious consideration of the danger of every soul that
dies in Adam. And notwithstanding she for her part being quickened in Christ,
even before her dissolution from the flesh, had so lived, that there is cause
to praise Thy name, both for her says and conversation; yet dare I not say for
all this, that from the time of thy regenerating her by baptism, there issued
not from her mouth any one word or other, against thy commandment. Thy Son
who is Truth, has pronounced it, Mat. 5. 22.
Whosoever shall say unto his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of Hell
fire. In so much as woe be unto the most commendable life of men, if laying
aside thy mercy, thou should rigorously examine it. But because thou too
narrowly inquiredst not after sins, we assuredly hope to find some place
Either Heaven or Purgatory notes my papist: Is not purgatory well proved from
hence?
of pardon with thee. But whosoever stands to reckon up his own Merits unto
Thee, what reckons he up unto thee but thine Here he notes. We grow to have
Merits by the gift of God. A mere contradiction: for if merits, what need
gifts? and if gifts, then renounce merits. See To. 3. 27. 28
own gifts? Oh that men would know themselves to be but men; and that he that
glories, would glory in the Lord.

2. I therefore O my praise and my life, thou God of my heart, laying aside for
a while her good deeds, for which with rejoicing I give thanks unto thee, do
now See forward.
beseech thee for the sins of my mother. Hearken unto me by him, I entreat
thee, that is the true medicine of our wounds, who hung upon the tree, and now
sitting at thy right hand makes St. Austen would have been put n the
Inquisition for this; what? leave out the Virgin Mary and the Saints: This is
not Roman Catholic.
intercession for us. I know that she has doalt mercifully, and to have from
her very heart forgiven those that trespassed against her: do thou also
forgive her trespasses; what-euer she has drawn upon her self in so many
years, since her cleansing by the water of baptism, forgive her Lord, forgive
her, I beseech thee; enter not into judgment with her, but let thy mercy be
exalted above thy justice, and that because thy words are true, and thou have
promised mercy unto the merciful; which, that people might be, is thy gift to
them, who wilt have mercy on whom thou will have mercy; and wilt show deeds of
mercy, Rom 9. 1^
unto whom thou have been mercifully inclined. And I now Here he discouers the
opinion of the Church: none of the Fathers prayed for the dead so much as Austen
did, nor would he (perchance) have so earnestly prayed for any, but for his
Mother. Papists believe that the dead are yet in Purgatory, their sins yet
unpardoned. Saint Austens belief is different.
believe that thou have already done what I request of thee; but take in good
part, O Lord, these Prayers for the dead then, is but Will Worship grounded
upon no Command, comforted by no promise. All voluntary: Not so much as a
Council for it. Why is it urged?
voluntary petitions of my mouth.

3. For she, the day of her dissolution being at hand, took no thought to
have her body sumptuously wound up, or imbalmed with spices; nor was she
ambitious of any choice monument, or cared to be buried in her own Country.
These things she gave us no command for; but desired only to have her name See
the preface.
commemorated at thy Altar, which she had served without intermission of one
day; from whence she knew that holy Sacrifice to be dispensed, by which that
Handwriting that was against us, is Coll. 2 14.
blotted out; through which Sacrifice the Enemy was triumphed over; he, who
summing up our offenses, and seeking for something to lay to our charge; sound
nothing in Him, in whom we are conquerours. Who shall restore unto him his
innocent blood? who shall repay him the price with which he bought us, and so
be able to take us out of his hands? unto the Sacrament of which price of our
redemption, this handmaid of thine had bound her own soul, by the bond of
faith.

4. Let none pluck her away from thy protection: let neither the Lion nor the
Dragon interpose himself by force or fraud. For she will not answer that
she owes nothing, lest she be disprooued and gotten the better of, by her
crafty accuser: but she will answer, how that her sins are forgiven her by him,
unto whom none is able to repay that price, which he laid down for us, who
owed nothing. Plainly, right down Prayer for the dead had still exceptions
taken to it. St. Cyrill Caiech. 5 I know many will ask what good does it to
Souls? And they ever joined Alms to their Prayers. Will thou honor the dead?
Do Alms deeds to the poor for them. Chrrsost. Hom. 61. in Joan. But the
Priest that sings the di^ge etc. has now robbed the poor of that.
Let her rest therefore in peace together with her husband, before, or after
whom, she had never any: whom she obeyed; through patience bringing forth
fruit unto thee, that she might win him unto thee. And inspire, O Lord my
God, inspire thy servants, my brethren, thy sons, my masters (whom with
voice, and heart, and pen I serve) that so many of them as shall read these
Confessions, may at thy Altar Me desired not to have her prayed for, but
Commemorated at the Altar Himself in his Enchiridion cap. 10 teaches, that
such as were very good (and so he thought his Mother) needed but Thanksgiving
at the Al^ar for them. To those that were very evil, neither Prayers,
Sacrifice, nor Alms, could do good.
remember Monica thy handmayd, together with Patricius, her sometimes husband,
by whose bodies thou broughtest me into this life, though how I know not. May
they with devout affection be mindful of these parents of mine in this
transitory light, and of my brethren that are, under thee our Father in our
Catholic Mother: and of those who are to be my fellow Citizens in that
eternal Jerusalem, which thy people here in their pilgrimage so sigh after
even from their birth, unto their return thither. That so, what my mother in
her last words desired of me, may the more plentifully be performed for her in
the prayers of many; as well by means of my Confessions, as of my prayers.

The end of the Ninth Book.
Saint Agustines Confessions. The tenth Book.
CHAP. 1. The Confessions of the heart.
1 LEt me know Thee, O Lord, who know me: let me know thee, 1 Co. 13. 12
as I am known of thee. O thou the virtue of my soul, make thy entrance into
it, and so fit it for thy self, that thou may have and hold it without
spotte Ephesians. 5. 27.
or wrinkle. This is my hope, and therefore do I now speak; and in this hope
do I rejoice, when at all I rejoice. As for other things of this life, they
deserve so much the less to be lamented, by how much the more we do lament
them: and again, so much the more to be lamented, by how much the less we
do lament them. For behold, thou have loved truth, and he that does so,
comes to the light. This will I publish before thee in the confession of my
heart; and in my writing, before many witnesses.

CHAP. 2. Secret things are known to God.
1. ANd from thee O Lord, unto whose eyes the bottom of man's Conscience is
laid bare, what can be hidden in me though I would not confess it? For so
should I hide thee from me, not my self from thee. But now, for that my
groaning is witness for me, that I am displeased with my self: thou shinest
out unto me, and art pleasing to me, yea desired, and beloved of me: and I
will be ashamed of my self, yea I will renounce mine own self, and make
choice of thee; and never may I please thee, nor my self, but in thee.

2. Unto thee therefore, O Lord, am I laid open, what ever I am, and with what
fruit I may Confess unto thee, I have before spoken. Nor do I it with words
and speeches of the body, but with the expressions of my very soul, and the
cry of my thoughts, which thy care only understands. For when I am wicked
then to confess unto thee, is no other thing but to displease my self: but
when I am well given, to confess unto thee, is then no other thing, but not to
attribute this goodness unto my self: because it is thou, O Lord, that
blessest the Just, but first thou iustifiest him being wicked. My Confession
therefore, O my God, in thy sight, is made unto thee privately, and yet not
privately: for in respect of noise, it is silent, but yet it cries alowd in
respect of my affection. For neither do I utter any thing that is right unto
men, which thy self has not before heard from me: nor caust thou hear any
such thing from me, which thy self has not first said unto me.

CHAP. 3. The Confession of our ill deeds, what it helps us.
1. What therefore have I to do with men, that they should hear my
Confessions; as if they could cure all my infirmities? A curious people to pry
into another man's life, but slothful enough to amend their own. Why do they
desire to hear from me, what I am; who will not hear from thee, what
themselves are? And how know they, whenas they hear my self confessing of
myself, whether I say true or no; seeing none knows what is in man, but the
spirit of man which is in 1 Cor. 2. 11
him? But if they hear from thee any thing concerning themselves, they cannot
say, The Lord lies. For what else is it from thee to hear of themselves, but
to know themselves? and who is he that knowing himself, can say, It is false,
unless himself lies? But because Charity believes all things; (that is to
say, amongst those whom by knitting unto it self it makes one) I therefore, O
Lord, do so also confess unto thee, as that men may hear: to whom though I
be not able to demonstrate whether I confess truly; yet give they credit unto
me, whose ears charity has set open unto me.

2 But do thou, O my most private Physicion, make apparent unto me, what
fruit I may reap by doing it. For the confessions of my passed sins (which
thou have so given and covered, that thou might make me happy in thee, in
changing my life by thy says and Sacrament) whenas they are read and heard,
they stir up the heart that it may not sleep in despair, and say, I cannot;
but keep it self wakefull in the love of thy mercy, and the sweetness of thy
grace: by which any weak persons is made strong, who is by it made guilty to
himself of his own infirmities. As for these that are good, they take delight
to hear of their passed errors, (those I mean, that are now freed from
them:) yet are they not therefore delighted because they are errors; but for
that they having so been, are not so now.

3. With what fruit, O Lord my God, to whom my conscience, (more secure upon
the hope of thy mercy, then in her own inoce^cy) makes her daily confession,
with what fruit I beseech thee, do I by this Book before Thee also confess
unto men, what at this time I yet am, not what I have been? For, as for that
fruit, I have both seen and spoken of it but as for what I now am, behold, in
the very time of the making of these Co^fessions; diverse people both desired to
know it: both they that personally know me, and those also that did not; they
that had heard any thing either from me, or of me: but their care ouer-heares
not my heart, where-euer, or what-euer I be. They are desirous therefore to
hear me confess what I am within; whither neither their eye, nor ear, nor
understanding is able to diue; yet do they desire it, though they be tied to
believe me, not able to know me, because that Clarity (by which they are made
good) says unto them, that I would never belie my self in my Confessions. And
it is that Charity in them, which gives credit to me.

CHAP. 4. Of the great fruit of Confession.
1. But to what end would they hear this? do they desire to congratulate with
me, when as they shall hear how near (by thy grace) I am now come unto thee?
and to pray for me, when shall they once hear how much I am cast behind by
mine own heaviness? To such will I discover my self: for it is no mean
fruit, O Lord my God, to cause many to me thanks unto thee, and be entreated
for us, by many. Let the friendly mind of my brethren love that in me, which
thou teach is to be loved: and lament in me, what thou teach is to be
lamented: Let the mind of my brethren, not that of the stranger, not that of
the Strange children, whose mouth talks Ps. ^^4: 11.
of vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of iniquity; but that of my
brethren who when they approve of me, do also rejoice for me; and when they
disallow me, are sorry for me: because that whether they allow, or disallow me,
yet still they love me. To such will I discover my self: they will have a
respect to my good deeds, and sigh for my ill. My good deeds are thine
appoyntments, Where be Merits then? This is right Protestant divinity.
and thy gifts: my evil ones, are my own faults, and thy judgments. Let them
receive comfort by the one, and sigh at the other: Let now both thanksgiving
and bewailing ascend up into thy sight, out of the hearts of my brethren, which
are thy Censers.

2. And when thou, O Lord, art once delighted with the Incense of thy holy
Temple, have mercy upon me according Psalm. 51. 1.
to thy great mercy, for thine own names sake: and at no hand giving over what
thou have begun in me, finish up what is imperfect. This is the fruit of my
Confessions; not of what I have been, but of what I am: namely, to confess
this not before thee only, in a secret rejoicing mixed with trembling; and in
a private sorrow fulness, allayed with hope: but in the cares also of the
believing sons of men, sharers of my joy, and partners in mortality with me;
my fellow Citizens, and fellow Pilgrims: both those that are gone before, and
those that are to follow after me, and those too that accompany me along in
this life.

3. These are thy servants, my brethren; those whom thou willest to be thy
sons, my masters; whom thou commandedst me to serve, if I would live with
thee. But this thy saying were to little purpose, did it give the command only
by speaking, and not go before me in performing. This therefore I now do
both in deed and word: this I do under thy wings; and that with too much
danger, were not my soul sheltred under thy wings, and my infirmity known
unto thee. I am but a little one; but my Father lives for ever, and my
Protector is fit for me. For it is the very same he that begat me, and that
defends meet for thou thy self art all my goods; even thou, O omnipotent, who
art present with me, and that before I am come unto thee. To such therefore
will I discover my self, whom thou command me to serve: not discovering
what I have been, but what I now am, and what I am yet. But I will not judge
my self. Thus 1 Cor: 4. 3.
therefore let me be heard.

CHAP. 5. That man knows not himself thoroughly: and knows not God but in a
glass darkely.
1. But thou, O Lord, do judge me: because, that although No man knows the
things of a man but the spirit 1 Cor 2. 11
of man which is in him; Yet is there some thing of man, which the very spirit
of man that is in him, knows not. But thou know all of him, who have made
him. As for me, though in thy sight I despise my self, accounting my self but
dust and ashes; yet know I something of thee, which I know not of my self. For
surely, now we see thorough a glass darkely, not 1 Cor. 13. 12.
face to face as yet: so long therefore as I be absent from thee, I am nearer
unto my self ^ Cor. 5. 6.
then unto thee; and yet know I thee not possible to be any ways violated:
whereas for my self, I neither know what temptations I am able to resist, or
what I am not.

2. But there is hope, because thou art faithful, who 1 Cor. 10 3.
wilt not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able: but wilt with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it. I will
confess therefore; what I know by my self I will confess, yea and what I know
not. And that, because what I do know by my self, by thy showing it me, I
come to know it: and what I know not by my self, I am so long ignorant of,
until my darkness be made as the Nooneday Ps. 139. 1
in thy sight.

CHAP. 6. What God is, and how known.
1. NOt out of a doubtful, but with a certain Here has the former Translater
neglected this of conscience.
conscience, do I love thee O Lord: Thou have stricken my heart with thy word,
and thereupon I loved thee. Yea also the heaven, and the earth and all that is
in them, behold, they bid me on every side, that I should love thee; nor cease
they to say so unto all, to make them inexcuseable. But more profoundly will thou have mercy Romans 9. 15.
on whom thou will have mercy, and wilt have compassion upon whom thou will
have compassion: for else do the heaven and the earth speak forth thy praises
unto the deaf. What now do I love, whenas I love thee? not the beauty of any
corporal thing, not the order of times; not the brightness of Here sets he
down the Objects and pleasures of the five Senses.
the light, which to behold, is so gladsome to our eyes: not the pleasant
melodies of songs of all kinds; not the fragrant smell of flowers, and
ointments, and spices: not Manna and honey, nor any fair limbs that are so
acceptable to fleshly embracements.

2. I love none of these things, whenas I love my God: and yet I love a
certain kind of light, and a kind of voice, and a kind of fragrancy, and a
kind of meat, and a kind of embracement. Whenas I love my God; who is both the
light, and the voice, and the sweet smell, and the meat, and the embracement
of my inner man: where that light shines unto my soul, which no place can
receive; that voice sounds, which time depriues me not of; and that fragrancy
smells, which no wind scatters; and that meat tastes, which eating deuoures
not; and that embracement clingeth to me, which satiety diuorceth not.

This is it which I love, when as I love my God. And what is this? I asked the
Earth, and that answered me, I am not it; and whatsoever are in it, made the
same confession. I asked the Sea and the deepes, and the creeping things, and
they answered me, We are not thy God, seek above us. I asked the fleeting
winds; and the whole Air with his inhabitants answered me, That An old
Philosopher
Anaximenes was deceived, I am not thy God. I asked the heavens, the Sun and
Moon, and Stars, Nor (say they) are we the God whom thou seek.

3. And I replied unto all these, which stand so round about these doors of my
flesh; You have answered me concerning my God, that you are not he. And they
cried out with aloud voice, He made us. My questioning with them, is my
intention: What he means by Intention, see in our Marginall note lib. 7. cap.
1. page 342. like a Philosopher he puts Intention and Species together. He
means, that their having a shape and figure, showed them not to be Gods. This
is contrary to the Manichees.
and their answer is their figure and species. And I turned my self unto my
self, and said, Who art thou? And I answered, A man: for behold, here is a
soul, and a body in me, one without, and the other within. By which of these
two, am I to seek my God, whom my body had inquired after from earth to
heaven, even so far as I was able to send these beams of mine eyes in
embassage? But the better part is the inner part, unto which all these my
bodily messengers gave up their Renunciabant. This he translates, gave place,
ignorantly. See our note on lib 7. c. 17. pa. 396
intelligence, as being the President and Judge of all the several answers of
heaven and earth, and of all things that are therein, who all said, We are not
God, but He made us. These things did my inner man kn^w by the intelligence
given him by the outer man: And I the inner man knew all this; I the soul, by
means of the Senses of the body.

4. I asked the whole frame of the world concerning my God, and that answered
me, I am not He, but He made me. Does not this corporeal figure guidently
appear to all those that have their perfect senses? why then speaks it not
The 5. outward Senses represent what they see, hear, etc. unto the 3. inward
Senses: and then Reason takes the report or intelligence, and makes judgment,
and gives direction accordingly. The other Translater is much out here, for
want of a very little Philosophy.
the same things unto all? The creatures both small and great do see this
corporeal figure well enough, but they are not able to ask any questions of
it: because Judge Reason is not President over their Senses which are to give
up intelligence unto him. But Men are well able to ask that, so they may
clearly see the invisible things of God, which are understood by the things
that are made. But by inordinate love of them, they make themselves subjects
unto them: and slaves are not fit to be Judges. Nor will the creatures answer
to such as ask of them, unless the askers be able to judge: nor so much as
alter their voice, (that is, their out-ward appearance) if so be one man only
looks upon it, and another seeing it, withal enquires of it, so as it may
appear one way to this man, and another way to that man: but it appearing the
same way unto both, is dumb to this man, but makes answer unto that; Yea
verily it speaks unto all; but they only understand it, who compare that
voice received from without by the Senses, with the Truth which is within. For
Truth says unto me, Neither heaven, nor earth, nor any other body is thy God.
This, their very Nature says unto him that looks upon them; There is less
bulk in the part of a thing, then in the whole. Now unto thee I speak, O my
soul, Thou art my better part: for thou quickenest this bulk of my body, by
giving life unto it, which no body can give unto a body: but thy God is the
life of thy life unto thee.

CHAP. 7. God is not to be found by any ability in our bodies.
1. What is it therefore which I love, when as I love my God? who is He that
is above the top of my Soul? By this very soul will I ascend up unto him; I
will so are beyond that faculty of mine, by which I am united unto my body, and
by which I fill the whole frame of it with life. I cannot by that faculty find
my God; for so, the Horse and Mule that have no understanding, might Psalm. 32.
^.
as well find him; seeing they have the same faculty, by which their bodies
live also.

2. But another faculty there is, not that only by which I give life, but that
too by which I give sense unto my flesh, which the Lord has framed for me:
when (namely) he commands the eye that it should not hear, and the care that
it should not see: but orders that for me to see by, and this, for me to
hear withal; and assigns what is proper to the other Senses severally, in
their own seats and offices; which being diverse through every sense, yet I
the soul being but one, do actuate and govern. I will (I say) mount beyond
this faculty of mine; for even the Horse and Mule have this, seeing they also
are sensible in their bodies.

CHAP. 8. The force of the Memory.
1. I Will soar therefore beyond this faculty of my nature, still rising by
degrees unto Him, who has made both me and that nature. And I come into these
fields and spacious palaces of my Memory, where the treasures of innumerable
forms brought into it from these things that have been perceived by the
senses, be hoarded up. There is laid up, whatsoever besides we think, either
by way of enlarging or diminishing, or any other ways varying of those things
which the sense has come at: yea, and if there be any thing recommended to
it, and there laid up, which forgetfulness has not swallowed up and buried.
To this treasury when ever I have recourse, I demand to have any thing brought
forth whatsoever I will; whereupon some things come out presently, and others
must be longer enquired after, which are fetched (as it were) out of some more
secret receptacles: other things rush out in troops; and while a quite
contrary thing is desired and required, they start forth, as who should say,
Lest peradventure it should be we that are called for. These I drive away
with the hand of my heart, from the sight of my remembrance; until that at
last be discovered, which I desire, appearing in sight, out of its hidden
Cells. Other things are supplied more easily and without disorder, just as they
are desired: former notions giving way to the following by; which giving way
are they laid up again, to be forth-comming when-euer I will have them. Which
is altogether, whenas I repeat any thing by heart.

2. There are all things distinctly and under general heads preserved,
according to the several gates that each notion has beene-brought in at: as
light (for example) and all colors and forms of bodies, brought in by the
Eyes: and by the Ears all sorts of Sounds: and all Smells by the Nosethrils;
all tastes by the gate of the Mouth: and by the sense which belongs to the
whole The Touch, which has no proper Sea^ or Organ, as the other 4 Senses
have, but is diffused all the body over.
body, is brought in whatsoever is hard or soft; whateuer is hot, or cold;
whateuer is smooth or rugged, heavy or light, in respect of the body, either
outwardly or inwardly. All these does that great Receipt of the memory take in,
which are to be sorth coming, and to be called for again, whenas need so
requires. And there be, I know not what, secret and inexpressible nookes in
it; seeing all these notions of things each by his own Port, enter into it,
and are there laid up in it. And yet do not the things themselves enter the
Memory; only the Images of the things perceived by the Senses, are ready there
at hand, when ever the Thoughts will recall them.

3. Which Images who can tell how they come to be formed, notwithstanding it
plainly appears by which of the Senses each has been fetched in and locked
up? For even whilst I dwell in the darkness and silence; yet into my memory
can I draw colors, if I please, and can discern betwixt Black and White, and
what others I desire. Nor yet her Sownds break in, and disturb that notion
drawn in by mine eyes, which I am now considering upon: seeing these Sounds
be in the memory too, and laid up in secret, as it were apart by themselves;
and I can call for them if I please, and they present themselves to me at an
instant. And though my tongue be quiet, and my throat silent, yet can I sing as
much as I will; nor do the Images of those colors which notwithstanding be
then there, now encroach and interrupt me, when another piece of treasure is
called for which came in by the ears. And thus all other things, brought in and
laid up by other of the senses, do I call to remembrance at my pleasure. Yea I
discern the breath of lillies from that of violets, though at the instant I
smell nothing: and I prefer honey before sweet wine, smooth before rugged;
though at that time I neither taste, nor handle, but remember only. All this
do I within, in that hugy roomthynesse of my memory.

4. For there have I in a readiness, the heaven, the earth, the sea, and
what-euer I can think upon in them, besides those which I have forgotten.
There also meet I with my self, I recall my self, what, where, or when I
have done a thing; and how I was affected when I did it. There be all what ever
I remember, either upon mine own experience, or others credit. Of this
sentence my Translater has made very able Nonsense.
Out of the same store do I my self compare these and these likelyhoods of
things; either of such as I have made experience of, or of such as I have
barely believed upon experience of some things that be passed: and by these do
I compare actions to come, their events and hopes: and upon all these again
do I meditate, as if they were now present. I will do this or that (say I to
my self, in that great receipt of my soul) and this or that shall follow upon
it. Oh that this would come to pass, or that! God would deliver us from this
or that. Thus talk I to my self: which when I speak of, the Images of all
the things that I do speak of, are present, all out of the same treasury of my
memory; nor could I talk of any of these things, were the Images wanting.

5. Great is this force of memory, excessive great, O my God! a large and an
infinite roomthynes, who can plummet the bottom of it? yet is this a faculty
of mine, and belongs unto my nature: nor can I my self comprehend all that I
am. Therefore is the mind too straight to contain it self, not of capacity
Here he leaves out what he could not conster.
enough to hold there, what should be there. Is the memory therefore without
the mind, or rather is it not within it? how then is not the mind sufficient
to conteyne all it self?

6. A wonderful admiration surprises me, and an astonishment seazes me upon
this: that men go abroad to admire the heights of mountains, the lofty
billows of the sea, the long courses of rivers, the vast compass of the
Ocean, and the circular motions of the stars, and yet leave them selves
vnadmired. And that more is, all these things which I spoke of, I did not then
see the^ with mine eyes; yet could I not have spoken of them, unless those
mountains and billows, and Rivers, and stars, which I have seen, and that
Ocean which I believe to be, I had already seen inwardly in my memory, yea
with such vast spaces between, as if I had verily seen them abroad. Yet did
not I swallow them into me by seeing, when as with mine eyes I beheld them: Nor
are the things themselves now within me, but the Images of them only. And I
distinctly know by what sense of the body, each of these took impression in
me.

CHAP. 9. The memory of diverse Sciences.
1. ANd yet is not this all, that this unmeasurable capacity of my memory
bears in mind. Here also be all these precepts of those liberal Sciences as
yet vnforgotten; coucht as it were further off in a more inward place, though
properly no place: nor is it the Images Here by putting in of Only, he quite
marres the sense.
of the precepts which I bear, but the Sciences themselves. For, what Grammar,
or Logike is, how many kinds of Questions there be, whatsoever of all these I
know, it is in such manner in my memory, as that I have not merely taken in the
Image, and left out the thing, as though the noise of it having sounded, is
again vanished, like a voice left in the care by the Sicut vox impressa, per
ours vestigio quo quasi sonaret, cum iam non sonaret The former Translateris
lost; makes a mere noise only. Vestigium is that impression, scale or mark,
that a thing leaves behind it, which in Songs, Musicions call the Air. The
print of the hares foot, is the vestigium to the dogs eye; but the sent left
in it, is the vestigium to his nose. The memory (that is the bearing still in
mind) needs not this: but it is the remembering or the recalling to memory that
needs this vestigium, to discourse and hunt upon, for recovery of the lost
notion.
air of it, whereby it was to be called into memory, again, as if it now
presently sounded, whenas indeed it does not sound. Or like an Odor, even
while it passes away and is fanned into wind, does affect the smelling; whence
it conueighs the Image of it self into the memory, which remembering, we smell
over again: or like meat, which verily in the belly having now no taste; has
a kind of relish in the memory still: or like any thing that is by touching
sensibly felt by the body, which also being taken away, is notwithstanding in
our memory imagined by us still. For surely the things themselves are not let
in into the memory, but the Images of them only are with anadmirable swiftnes
caught in, and in most worderfull cabiners stoard up; whence they are as
wondersully fetched out again, by the Act of remembering.

CHAP. 10. Our Senses conueigh things unto our memory.
1. But now when I hear that there be three kinds of questions, Whether the
thing be? What it is? and of what rature it is? I do indeed hold fast the
Images of the sounds, of which those word; be composed, which I alsoknow to be,
toge her with the noise passed in by my ears not to be now in any being at
all. As for the things themse lues which are signified by those sounds, I never
so much as reached them with any sense of my body, nor ever discernd them
otherwise then by my very mind; yet have I laid up not their Images only, but
their very selves. Which how they gate in into me, let others tell if they can:
I for mine own part have run over all the Cinque Ports of my flesh, but
cannot find by which they gat in.

2. For mine eyes they say; that if those Images were colored, it was we then
that brought tidings of them. The ears they say, If they gave any sound, then
it was we gave notice of them. The Nosthrills they say, If they had any smell,
then they passed in by us. The sense of taste that says, Unless they had a
savor with them, never ask me for them. The Touch that says, Were it not a
body, I handled it not; and if I never handled it, then I gave no notice of it.
Look now, whence and which way gat these things into my memory? I for my part
know not how. For when I first learned them, I gave not credit to another man's
heart, but I took knowledge of them in mine; and approouing them for true, I
recommended them over unto my heart, there laying them up as it were, where I
might fetch them again, wheneuer I desired. In my heart therefore they were
even before I learned them, but in my memory they were not. Where were they
then? or wherefore, when as they were spoken of, did I acknowledge them, and
affirmed So it is, and it is true, unless because they were already in my
memory; though so far off yet, and crowded so far backward as it were into
certain secret caves, that had they not been drawn out by the advice of some
other person, I had never perchance been able so much as to have thought of
them?

CHAP. 11. The Species The Species be the fore notes or notions of things.
Scaliger. And these Species be indeed in the Soul, not diffused throughout
all, but seated in the understanding principally Aristotle l. 3. de Anima, cap.
4. which understanding is the Intellectiue memory.
of things are in the soul.
1. Wherefore we find, that to learn these things whose Images we suck not in
by our Senses, but perceive within by themselves, without Images, as they are;
is nothing else, but by meditating to gather together, and by diligent marking,
to take notice of those same notions which the memory did before contain more
scatteringly and confusedly; that so, being orderly and at hand as it were laid
up in the memory, (where before they lurked vncollected and neglected) they may
more easily make proffer of themselves unto our intention For Species
Intentionales, See the Philosophers See ^^^ note upon page 3. ^2
now made familiar unto them.

2. And how many of this kind does my memory still bear in mind which are
found out already, and as I said, ready at hand as it were; which yet we are
said to have He appears to be of the Platonist mind, and that to Know was
nothing but to Remember.
learned and to have known: which if I should give over to call to mind but
for some short space of time, they become so drowned again, and so give us the
slip, as it were, back into such remote and privy lodgings, that I must be put
again unto new pains of meditation, for recovery of them to their former
perfection. For other Quarter to retire The brain has no Cell to put
forgotten notions in.
unto they have not: but they must be rallied and drawn together again, that
they may be known; that is to say, they must as it were be collected and
gathered together from their dispersions: whence the word He means, that to
think or meditate upon a note, is to gather together the scattered notions of
it.
cogitatio^ is derived. For Cogo and Cogito are of the same form, as Ago and
Actito, Facio and Factito. Notwithstanding has the mind of man so properly
laid claim unto this word (Cogitation) as that now, not that which is gathered
together in any other place, but in the mind only, (that is drawn together,)
is by custom of speech properly now said to be (cogitated or) thought upon.

CHAP. 12. The Memory of Mathematicians.
1. THe Memory contains also the reasons and innumerable laws of Numbers and
Dimensions; none of which has been by any Sense of the body imprinted in it:
seeing they have neither color, nor sound, nor taste nor small, nor feeling. I
have heard the sounds of those words by which these things are signified, when
as they have been argued upon: but the sounds are of another nature from the
things. For the sounds are one way in Greek, and another in Latin: but the
things themselves are neither Greek, nor Latin, nor any other Language.

2. I have likewise seen the lines drawn by Architects, even as small as the
thread of a Spiders web; but these are of another kind; they are not the Images
of those Dimensions, For the Dimensions were Thick and Broad, but the lines,
neither.
which mine eye of flesh showed unto me. He knows them, who soever without
any thought of heart whatsoever, acknowledges them within himself. I have also
perceived even with all the the senses of my body, those numbers which we
number; but those numbers by which we make our account, are far different from
those numbers which we make our account upon; nor are they the Images of
these, and therefore are they diverse I read it variae sunt, and not valde sunt
as the printed copyes have it.
from them. Let him now laugh at me for these things, who understands them not;
and I will pity him, whilst he derides me.

CHAP. 13. The Memory of Affections.
1. ALL these things I well remember, and how I first learnt them do I well
remember. Many things most falsely objected against these things, have I both
heard, and do yet remember: which though they be false, yet is it not false
that I have remembered them; and that I have discerned withal, betwixt these
truths and these falsehoods, which are objected against them. And this I
remember too; and I perceive my self to discern these things one way now, and
remember my self to have oftentimes discerned them otherways, whenas I often
thought upon them. That I have therefore understood these things heretofore,
do I remember often; and what I now discern and understand, do I lay up in
my memory, that hereafter I may remember how I have understood it now.
Therefore also do I now remember myself to have remembered; like as if
hereafter I shall call to remembrance, that I have been able to remember these
things now; it shall be by the force of my memory, that I shall be able to call
it to remembrance.

2. My Memory contaynes also the Affections of my mind, not in the same manner
that my mind it self contaynes them, whenas it suffers them: but far
another way, like as the force of the Sicut sese habet vis memoriae. This he
turns. As that it descends only upon the force of the memory.
Memory contains it self. For even then when I am not merry, yet do I
remember my self to have been merry heretofore; and when I am not sad, yet
do I call to mind my forepassed sadness. And that I have been afraid
heretofore, I now remember without fear; and I sometimes call to mind a
forepast desire, without any desire at all, now. Sometimes on the contrary, in
a fit of joy do I remember my forepassed sorrow, and in a sad mood, call I to
mind the joy that I have sometimes enjoyed.

CHAP. 14. How, when we are not glad, we call to mind things that have made us
glad.
1. Which is not to be wondered at, if meant of the body; for the mind is
one thing, and the body another. If I therefore with joy remember some passed
pain of body, it is not so strange a thing. But now seeing this Mind is the
very same which the memory, (for that when we give command to have a thing kept
in memory, we say; Look to it, that you hear this well in mind: and so, when
we forget a thing, we say; It was in my mind even now, and, it is quite slipped
out of my mind, calling the memory the mind:) seeing therefore so it is, how
comes this to pass, that when in a cheerful veyn I remember a sad passage, my
mind thinking upon joy, and my memory at the same time upon sadness: my mind
upon the ioyfulnesse it conceiues, is full of joy, and yet my memory upon the
sadness that is in it, is not sad; does not the memory perchance belong unto
the mind? Who will say so? Doubtless therefore the memory is as it were the
belly of the mind; and joy and sadness, like sweet and sour meat, which
when they are committed unto the memory, be as it were passed away into the
belly; where stowage they may have, but taste none at all. Ridiculous it is to
imagine these to be alike; and yet are they not utterly unlike.

2. But behold, this also bring I out of my memory. whenas I say there be
four perturbations of the mind, desire, joy, fear, and sorrow: and how far
soever I am able to dispute upon these heads, both by dividing the whole, each
into his parts, and by defyning: in my memory find I what to say, and out of
my memory do I bring it: yet am I not moved for all this, with any of these
Perturbations, whenas by calling them to mind, I do remember them; yea, and
before I recalled and meditated them over, n my memory they were, and therefore
by calling to mind might they very well be fetched from thence. Perchance
therefore, even as meat is by chewing of the Cud, brought up again out of the
belly, so by recalling, are these brought up out of the memory. Why therefore
does not the disputer perceive the taste of it in the mouth of his Musing? why
does not the reme^berer feel (I mean) the swiftnes of joy, and the
bitterness of sorrow? is the comparion unlike in this, that it is not every
way the like? Who then would willingly discourse of these subjects, if so often
as we name grief or fear, so often we should be compelled to be sad or
fearful? and yet could we never spoake of them, did we not find in our
memory, not the sounds of the names alone according to their Images imprinted
in it by the Senses of the body, but even the very notions of the Things
themselves which we never received in, by any of the Cinque-parts of our body,
but which the very mind it self made sensible of by the experience of its
own passions, has committed unto the memory; or else which the memory has of
it self retained, being never committed unto it.

CHAP. 15. We remember absent things also.
1. But whether all this be done by the Images or no, who can readily affirm?
For when, for example, I name a Stone, I name the Sun at such time as the
things themselves are not before my Senses; yet even then do I conceive the
Images of them. I name some bodily pain, yet I do not feel it whenas nothing
aches about me: yet for all this, unless the Image were in my memory, I should
never know what I said, nor should in discoursing diserne pain from pleasure.

2. I name bodily health; whenas I am found in body, the thing it self is
present with me; and yet for all this, unless the Image of health also were
fixed in my memory, I could by no means recall into my remembrance, what the
sound of this name should signify: nor would sick people know when health
were named, what were spoken, unless the Image thereof were preserved by the
force of the memory, although the thing it self were far enough from the body.
I name some numbers by which we account, and they are in my memory; not their
Images, but themselves. I name the Image of the Sun, and that image is also
in my memory. Nor do I call to mind the image of that image, but the image it
self; that is it which is present with me, whenas I remember it. I name
Memory, and I acknowledge what I name. But where do I acknowledge it, but in
my memory it self? May the memory it self be present unto it self by its
owneimage, or not by it self rather?

CHAP. 16. There is a memory of forgetfulness also.
1. When I name forgetfulness, and acknowledge it withal; whence should I
acknowledge what to name, did I not remember it? I speak not now of the sound
of the name, but of the thing which it signifies: which if I had forgotten, I
could never acknowledge what that sound signified. When therefore I remember
memory, then is the memory it self present with me (...): but when I name
both forgetfulness and memory too, then is forgetfulness present also. Memory
is present by which I have remembered; forgetfulness is present by which I have
not remembered. But what is forgetfulness, but a privation of memory? How then
is that present for me to remember, which when it is so, I cannot remember?
Now, if we remember any thing, we hold it in memory; yet forgetfulness,
unless we did remember it, we could never at hearing of the name, acknowledge
the thing that is signified by the sound. Forgetfulness is retained in the
memory. Present therefore it is, that we might not forget it, which when it is
not, we do forget it. Is it to be understood by this, that forgetfulness is
not present vnto^ the memory (whenas we remem^er it) by it self, but by its
Image, because of it were present by it self, it would cause us not to
remember, but to forget?

2. Who now shall search out that? who shall comprehend how that should be?
For mine own part, Lord, I yet labor upon this, yea and A second doubt.
I labor in any self, and am become a soil that requires hard labor and
very much sweat. For we are not now quartering out the regions of heaven, or
taking the distances of the Stars, or devising where the hinges of the earth
should hang. It is I my self that remember, I the Mind. It Is then no such
wonder, if the knowledge of that be far from me, which I my self am not.
But what is nearer to me then my self? Yet lo, am not I able to comprehend
the force of mine own memory; no, though I cannot so much as call my self my
self, without it. For what shall I say, when I see it so certain that I
remember forgetfulness? Shall I say that that is not in my memory, which I
remember? or shall I say that forgetfulness is for this purpose in my memory,
that I might not forget? Both these are most absurd.

3. What is to be thought of this third doubt? How can A third doubt.
I say that the Image of forgetfulness is kept in memory, and not
forgetfulness it self, whenas I do remember it? with what color may I
affirm this also, seeing that when the Image of any thing is imprinted in the
memory, it is necessary that the thing it self be present first, by which that
image may be imprinted? For in this sort do I remember Carthage, and all
other places where I have been: thus remember I men's faces also, whom I have
seen, and the Reports of the other Senses: Nuntiata.
thus do I too, with the health or sickness of the body. For when these
object, were present with me, my memory received their images from them; which
as ever present, I might look unto and repeat over in my mind, when-euer I
desired to remember the objects themselves which were absent. If therefore this
forgetfulness should be held in memory by means of its image, and not
immediately by it self, then plainly, has it self been sometimes present,
that its image might be then taken. But (now) when it was present, how did it
write that image in the memory, seeing the property of forgetfulness is, by its
presence, to blot out what ever it finds there noted? Well! which way soever it
be, notwithstanding that way be past conceiving, and expressing; yet most
certain I am, that I do well remember this same forgetfulness, by which
whatsoever else we remember, is defaced.

CHAP. 17. A threefold power of memory.
1. GReat is this power of Memory; a thing, O my God, to be amazed at, a very
profound and infinite multiplicity: and this thing is the mind, and this thing
am I. What am I therefore, O my God? What kind of nature am I? A life various
and full of changes, yea vehemently insariable. Behold, in those innumerable
fields, and dens, and caves of my memory, innumerably full of innumerable
kinds of things, brought in, first, either by the Images, as 1
all bodies are: secondly, or by the presence of the things 2
themselves, as the Arts are: thirdly, or by certain notions 3
or impressions, as the Affections of the mind are, which even then when the
mind does not suffer, yet does the memory retain; for that whatsoever is in
the mind, is also in the memory. Through all these do I run and tumble;
myning into them on this side, and on that side, so sarre as ever I am able,
but can find no bottom. So great is the force of memory, so great is the
force of this life of man, even whilst he is mortal. 2


2. What am I now to do, O thou my true life, my God? I will pass even beyond
this faculty of mine which is called memory: yea, I will pass beyond it, that
I may approach unto thee, O sweet light. What say thou to me now? See, I am
now mounting up by the steps of my soul, toward ^hee who dwell above me.
Yea I will pass beyond this faculty of mine which is called memory, desirous
to touch thee, so far as thou may be touched; and to cleave fast unto
thee, where thou art to be laid hold upon. For even the beasts and birds have
memory; else could they never find their dens and nests again; nor those
many other things which they are used unto: nor indeed could they ever enure
themselves unto any thing, but by their memory. I will pass beyond my memory
therefore, that I may arrive at him who has separated me from the foure-footed
beasts and the fowls of the air, making me wiser then they: yea I will soar
beyond mine own memory. But where shall I find thee, O thou truly good, and
thou secure sweetness? But where shall I be able to find thee?

CHAP. 18. Of the Remembrance.
1. IF I now find thee without my memory, then am I unmindful of thee: and
how shall I find thee, if I do not remember thee? The woman that had lost her
great, and sought it with a light; unless she had remembered it, she had
never found it. For when it was found, whereby should she have known whether
it were the same or no, had she not remembered it? I remember many a thing that
I have both lost, and found again: whereby knew I that? even because that when
I was seeking for any of them, and somebody asked me, Is this it, or is that it?
so long said I no, until that were offered me which I sought for: which had I
not remembered (whateuer it were) though it were offered me, yet should I not
find it, because I could not acknowledge it. And at the same pass still we
are, as often as we find what we sought for.

2. Notwithstanding, when any thing is by chance lost from the eyes, not from
the memory (as every visible body) yet the Image of it is kept still within,
and is sought for until it be again restored unto the sight: which when it
is found, is known again by the Image which is within: Nor do we say that
we have found what we have lost, unless we know it again; nor can we know
it to be the same, unless we remember it. This was only lost to the eyes,
but surely preserved in the memory.

CHAP. 19. What Remembrance is.
1. When now the memory it self loses any thing, (as it falls out whenas we
forget any thing) and seeks out for the recovery of it; where at last do we
search, but in the memory it self? where, if one thing be offered in stead of
another, we so long refuse it, until we meet that which we seek for:
which so soon as we have met withal, we say, This is it: which we could never
do, did we not know it to be the same: and never could we do that, unless
we did remember it. Certainly therefore we had forgotten it; yet all of it
had not slipped us: but by that part whereof we had some hold, was the lost part
sought for; because the memory now feeling that it did not bear about so much
of it together, as it had wont to do, and halting as it were upon the may me
received in the loss of what it had been used unto; it eagerly lays about to
have that made up again, which was wanting. Like as some known man, (either
seen or thought on) if having forgotten his name, we study to recover it: what
ever name but his comes into our memory, it will not peize in with it; and all,
because that name was never used to be thought upon together with that man:
which name therefore is so long rejected, until that at length presents it self
unto the memory; with which, as having, been acquainted with the knowledge of,
it may euenly iump in withal. And from whence does that name present it self,
but out of the memory? for when being put in mind by some other man, we know
it to be the same, it is by virtue of the memory. Nor do we now believe it as
any new name, but upon the assurance of our Remembrance, do we allow it to be
the same that was named to us.

But were the name utterly blotted out of the mind, we should not then
remember it, when we were again put in mind of it. For we have not utterly
as yet forgotten that, which we remember our selves to have forgotten. That
lost notion therefore, which we have utterly forgotten, shall we never be able
so much as to seek after.

CHAP. 20. All men desire blessedness.
1. HOw then do I seek after thee, O Lord? For when I seek thee, my God, I
seek an happy life. I will seek thee, that my soul may live. For my body,
that lives by my soul: and my soul by thee. Which way then do I seek for
an happy life? seeing it is not to be found, until I can say It is enough in
that place, where I am to say it. How seek I it? Whether by way of
Remembrance, as one that had forgotten it, and yet remember my self to have
forgotten it? Or, by way of appetite to learn it as a thing unknown; which
either I never knew, or at least to have so far forgotten it, as that I do
not so much as remember that I have forgotten it? Is Here the other Translater
negligently mis-read his copy.
nor an happy life the thing which all desire; and is there any man that some
way or other desires it not? But where gate they the knowledge of it, that they
are so desirous of it? where did they ever see it, that they are now so
enamored of it? Truly we have it, but which way, I know not: yea, there is a
certain other way, which when any has, he is even then blessed. And some
there be, that be blessed in hope. These have it in a meaner kind, then those
who are in possession: who yet are much better then such as are neither blessed
in deed, nor in hope: which very same men for all this, had they it not in
some sort or other, would not so much as desire to be happy; which that they
do desire, is most certain.

2. How they come to know it, I cannot tell: and therefore have they it by, I
know not, what secret notice; concerning which, in much doubt I am, whether it
be in the memory or no: which if it be, then should we sometimes have been
blessed heretofore.

But whether every man should have been so happy as severally considered in
himself, or as in the loins of that Adam
man who first sinned, and in whom we are all dead, and from whom being
descended, we are all borne with misery; I now inquire not: but this I
demand, whether this blessed life be in the memory, or no? For, never should
we love it, did we not know it. We hear the name, and we all confess our
desire unto the thing: for we are not delighted with the sound only.

For when a Grecian hears the name sounded in Latin, he is no ways
delighted, for that he knows not what is spoken; but we Latins are
delighted with it, even as he is, if he hears it pronounced in Greek:
because the thing it self is neither Greek nor Latin, the attayning whereof
both Greeks and Latins do so earnestly look after, like as the men of other
Languages do. Known therefore unto all it is and could they with one voice be
demanded, Whether they would be happy or no? without doubt they would all
answer, That they would. And this could not be, unless the thing it self
expressed by this name, were still reserved in their memory.

CHAP. 21. We also remember, what we never had.
1. But is it so in memory as Carthage is to a man that has seeue it? No. For
a blessed life is not to be seen with the eye, because it is not a body. Do
we then so remember it, as we do numbers? Neither. For these, he that
already has in his knowledge, seeks not further to attain unto. As for
blessed lofe, we have that already in our knowledge, therefore do we love it,
and yet desire to attain, that we may be blessed.

Do we remember it then, as we do eloquence? Nor so. For although some upon
hearing of the name, do thereupon call to mind the thing, who yet were never
eloquent, and many do it, that desire to be so, whereupon it appears to be
already in their knowledge: yet having by their outward Senses observed others
to be more eloquent, they are both delighted at it, and desire to be so
themselves: notwithstanding, if by their outward notice they had not observed
it, they could not have been delighted with it; nor to be eloquent, but that
they were delighted with such as were eloquent. But what this blessed life
should be, we can by no sense of our body get the experience of.

2. Or is it so in memory, as the joy is that we remember? perchance so
indeed: for my joy I remember even whilst I am sad; like as I do a happy
life, even whilst I am unhappy: nor did I ever with any bodily sense either
see, or hear, or smell, or taste, or touch that joy of mine: but I found it in
my mind, wheneuer I rejoiced; and the knowledge of it stuck so fast in my
memory, that I was well able to call it to remembrance, with contempt
sometimes, and with fresh desire other whiles, even according to the diversity
of those things, for which I remembered my self to have rejoiced. For even at
unclean thoughts, was I sometimes ouerioyed; which calling to mind again, I
now both detest and curse. And other whiles do I joy at good and honest
thoughts, which I call to mind with some desire, although they perchance
present not themselves; and therefore again sad at it, do I call to mind my
former rejoicing. Where therefore and when had I any feeling of a blessed life,
that I should remember, and love, and desire it? Nor is it my desire alone, or
of some few besides, but every man verily would be happy; which, unless by
some certain knowledge we had notice of, we should not with so certain a
will desire it.

3. But what is this? If two men be asked whether they would go to the wars;
one, perchance, would answer that he would, and the other, that he would not;
but if both were asked, whether they would be happy, both of them would without
all doubting affirm, that they desire it: nor for any other reason would this
man go to the wars, and the other not, but to be happy: For perchance,
because that as one man reioyces upon this occasion, and another upon that; so
do all men agree in their desire of being happy: even as they would agree, it
they were asked, whether they desired to have occasion of rejoicing: (this I
read, Quod ipsum gaudium; instead of Atque ipsum gaudium; altering the
confused interpunctions and poyntings.
very joy being the thing which they call the blessed life:) and that joy,
though one man obtaines by one means, and another man by another means, yet
is this the thing agreed upon that they all strive to attain unto, namely,
that they may rejoice: which for that it is a thing, which no man can rightly
say, but that he has had some experience of, being therefore sound in the
memory, is it called to knowledge, wheneuer the name of a blessed life is
mentioned.

CHAP. 22. True joy, is this blessed life.
1. Far be it, O Lord, far be it from the heart of thy servant who here
confesses unto thee, far be it from me to imagine, that for every joy that I
rejoice withal, I should be made happy. For there is a joy which is not
granted unto the ungodly; but unto those only which love thee for thine own
sake; whose joy thy self art. And this is the blessed life, to rejoice unto
thee, concerning thee, and for thy sake: this is the happy life, and there is
no other. As for them that think there is another, they pursue another joy,
which is not the true one. Howeuer, their mind is not utterly turned aside
from some kind of resemblance of rejoicing.

CHAP. 23. Ablessed life what, and where it is.
1. IT is not certain therefore that all men desire to be happy, for that
those who have no desire to rejoice in thee, (which to do is the only happy
life.) do not verily desire the happy life. Surely My MS. reads it Sane in
stead of An, without an interrogatiue. else is the sense imperfect. Gal. 5. 17.
all me^ desire this: but because the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the
Spirit against the flesh, that they cannot do what they would, do they fall
upon that which they are able to do, resting themselves contented therewith:
For because, that they are not able to do, they do not will so earnestly, as
were sufficient thoroughly to make them able. For I demand of every man, whether
they had rather rejoice in the truth, or in the falsehood? They will as little
doubt to say, In the truth, as they would to say, that they desire to be happy:
For a happy life is a ioying in the truth: For this is a ioying in thee, who
art the truth, O God my light, the health of my countenance, and my God. This
is the blessed life that all desire; this life which is only blessed, do all
desire to joy in the truth is all men's desire. I have had experience of diverse
that would deceive, but not a man that would willingly be deceived. Where
therefore gaynd they the knowledge of this happy life, but even there, where
they learned the truth also? yea verily they love this truth, for that they
would not be deceived: and whenas they love a happy life (which is nothing else
but a ioying in the truth) then also do they love the truth: which yet they
would not love, were there not some notice of it remaining in their memory.

2. Wherefore then joy they not in it? why are they not blessed? even because
they are more strongly taken up with other things which have more power to make
them miserable, then that has to make them happy, which they remember so
little of. For there is a dim glimmering of light yet vn-put-out, in men: let
them walk, let them walk, that the darkness overtake them not. Why now
should truth bring forth hatred, and thy Minister become enemy unto them, whom
he preaches the truth unto; when as a happy life is loved; which is nothing
else, but a ioying in the truth: unless the reason be, because truth is in
that kind loved, that all, which love any other thing, would gladly have that
to be the truth, which they so love: who, because they would not willingly be
deceived, would not therefore be convinced of a falsehood? Therefore do they
hate the truth, for the same reason, which they love instead of the truth.

They love truth when it enlightens them, but they hate it when it reprehends
them. For because they would not willingly be deceived, and feign would
deceive; do they love it, when it discouers it self unto them; but they hate
it, when it discouers them to others. But thus shall it pay them in their own
coin; because, those who would not have themselves discovered by it, even
those in despite of their teeth shall it uncase; and yet not reveal it self
unto them. Thus thus; yea very thus, yea just thus, desires this pore-blinde,
this lazy, this slouenly, and this ill-behau'd mind of man, to muffle up it
self from the view of others; but that any thing should be conceald from it,
it desires not But the quite contrary does befall it; for that it cannot lie
undiscovered from the truth; but the truth shall be veyld up from it. Yet this
mind of man not withstanding, even thus wretched as it is, takes joy rather in
truths then in falsehoods. Happy therefore shall it one day be, if no
distraction interloping, it shall settle its only joy upon that Truth, by
which all things else are true.

CHAP. 24. That the memory contains God too.
SEE now, how I have coursed over all my memory in search of thee, O Lord; and
no where could I find thee, without it. Nor have I found any thing at all
concerning thee, but what I have kept in memory, ever since the time that I
first learnt thee: nor have I ever forgotten thee, since the hour I first
learnt thee; for where I sound Truth, there found I my God who is the truth it
self; which from the time I first learnt it; have I not forgotten. Since
therefore I learnd to know thee, have thou still kept in my memory: and there
do I find thee when ever I call thee to remembrance, and delight my self in
thee. These be my holy delights, which thou have bestowed upon me through thy
mercy, which had respect unto my poverty.

CHAP. 25. In what degree of the memory God is found.
1. But whereabouts in my memory is thy residence, O Lord? where about there
abidest thou? what ki^ of lodging have thou there f^^med for thy selfer what
manner of Sanctuary have thou builded for thy self? Thou have afforded this
honor unto my memory, as to reside in it; but in what quarter of it, that am I
now considering upon. For I have already passed beyond such parts of it, as are
common to me with the beasts, whilst I called thee to mind, (for as much as I
found not thee there amongst the Images of corporeal things:) and I proceeded
to these parts of it, whither I had recommended the Affections of my mind: nor
could I find thee there. Yea I passed further into it, even to the very seat
of the mind it self (which is there in my memory, as appears by the minds
remembering of it self:) neither were thou there: for that as thou art not
either any corporeal image, no more art thou any Affection of a living man;
like as when we rejoice, condole, desire, fear, remember, forget, or
whatsoever else we do of the like kind: No nor yet art thou the mind it
self; because thou art the Lord God of the mind. Moreover, all these are
changed, whereas thou remaynest unchangeable over all; who yet vouchsafest to
dwell in my memory, even since that first time that I learnt to know thee. But
why seek I now, in what particular place of my memory thou dwell, as if
there were any places at all in it? Sure I am, that in it thou dwell: even
for this reason, that I have preserved the memory of thee, since the time that
I first learnt thee: and for that I find thee in my memory, whenever I call
thee to remembrance.

CHAP. 26. Whereabouts God is to be found.
1. Where then did I find thee, that I might learn thee? For in my memory
thou were not, before I learned thee. In what place therefore did I find thee,
that so I might learn thee, but even in thine own self, far above my
self? Place there is none; we go backward and forward, but particular place
there is none to contain thee. Every where O truth, art thou President of the
Council to those that ask Counsel of thee, and at one dispatch do thou
answer all, yea though they ask thy counsel upon diverse matters. Clearly
do thou answer them, though all do not clearly understand thee. All may
advise with thee about what they will, though they always hear not such
answer as they desired. He is thy best servant, that looks not so much to
heart that from thee, which himself desires; as he that is willing with that
rather, which from thee he hears.

CHAP. 27. How God draws us to himself.
1. TOO late began I to love thee, O thou beatty both so ancient and so
fresh, yea too too late came I to love thee. For behold, tho^ were within me,
and I out o^ my self, where I made search for thee; deformed I, wooing these
beautiful pieces of the workmanship. Thou indeed were with me; but I was not
with thee: these beauties kept me far enough from thee: even those, which,
unless they had their Being in thee, should not be at all. Thou calledst, and
criedst unto me, yea thou even brakest open my deafness. Thou discoueredst
thy beams, and shynedst out unto me, and did chase away my blindness. Thou
did most fragrantly blow upon me, and I drew in my breath and panted after
thee. I tasted thee, and now do bunger and thirst after thee. Thou did touch
me, and I even burn again to enjoy peace thy.

CHAP. 28. The misery of this life.
1. When I shall once attain to be united unto thee in every part of me, then
shall I no more feel either sorrow, or labor: yea, then shall my life truly
be alive, every way full of thee. Whereas now verily, for that whom thou
fillest, thou also raysest, am I a burden unto my self, because I am not full
of thee. The joys of this my life which deserve to be lamented, are at strife
with my sorrows which are to be rejoiced in: but which way the victory will
incline. I yet know not. Woe is me O Lord, have pity on me; My sorrows that
be bad, are in contention with my joys that be good: and which way the
victory will incline, I yet know not. Alas for me, O Lord, have pity upon
me. Woe is me; behold, I hide not my wound^: thou art the Physician, and I
the Patient: thou merciful, and I miserable; Is not the life of man upon earth
a very temptation?

2. Who is he that would willingly endure troubles and difficulties? These
thou command to be borne, not to beloved: for no man is in love with the
cross which he takes up, though he loves well enough to take it up. For
notwithstanding that he reioyces to bear, yea much rather had he that there
were no cross for him to bear. In adversity, I desire prosperity, and in
prosperity am I afraid of adversity: what middle place now is there betwixt
these two, where this life of man is free from temptation? Woe is threatened
unto the prosperity of this world again, and again; both for the fear of
adversity, and lest our joy should be marred. Woe unto the adversities of this
word, again and again, yet woe the third time unto them: and that because of
the great desire men have unto prosperity. Adversity therefore being so hard a
thing, and which makes Some compies read it Na frangat roler antiam, and
others, naufragat.
shipwreck often times of our patience, is not the life of man a very temptation
upon Earth, and that without intermission?

CHAP. 29. Cur hope is all in God.
1. NOw is all my hope no where but in thy very great mercy, O Lord my God.
Give me patience to endure what thou command, and then command what thou will. Thou imposest continency upon me; and when I perceived as one Ait quidam
The pi^ce quo ^ed (...) which slight men^t^ning of the Author, he gives us to
note, that he did not rank this book of Wisdom among the Canonical
Scriptures; nor quoted it as Gods word, but man's. One says St Augustine honors
these Apocryphal books oftentimes by quoting them: but does not Canonize
them. This same One says, has the Popish Translater left out, as seeming too
slight a phrase for his vneanonicall Apocrypha.
says, that no man can be continent, unless thou give it, and that this was
a point of wisdom to know whose gift it was. By continency verily, are we
bound up and brought into unity with thee; from whom we were scattered abroad
into many divisions: for needs must he love thee less, who loves any thing
together with thee, which he loves not for thee.

O thon love, which art ever burning, and never quenched! O charity, my God!
kindle me I beseech thee. Thou enioynest me continency: give me what thou
command, and then command what thou will.

CHAP. 30. The deceitfulness of dreams. 1 Ioh. 2. 16.

1. VErily thou command me to contain my self from the lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the ambition of this world. Thou command me also
to abstain from carnal copulation; and concerning wedlock thou did the
popish Translater notes, That chaslity is better then marriage. But does that
appear by this passage? perchance to those that have the gift of conti^ency
(as St. Austen now had) it is indeed, nay it had been a sin for him to have
married: but for others, it is better to marry then to burn.
now advise me to a better course, then that was which thou leftest me my free
choice in. And because thou gave it, ^t was obtained, and that before I
became a dispencer of thy Sacrament.

But yet still there live in my memory, (which I have now spoken so much of)
the Images of such things, as my ill custom had there fixed; and which rush
into my thoughts (though wanting strength) even whilst I am broad waking: but
in sleep obey come upon me, not to delight only, but even so far as
consent, and most like to the deed doing: yea, so far preuailes the illusion
of that Image, (both in my soul and in my flesh) as that these false visions
persuade me unto that when I am asleep, which true visions cannot do, when I
am awake. Am I not my self at that time, O Lord my God? And is there yet so
much difference betwixt my self and my self, in that moment wherein I pass
from waking to sleeping, or return from sleeping unto waking?

2. Where is my reason at that time, by which my mind when it is a wake,
resists such suggestions as these? at which time, should the things
themselves press in upon me, yet would my resolution re maine unshaken. Is my
reason clozed up, together with mine eyes? or is it lulled asleep with the
senses of my body? But whence then comes it to posse, that we so often even in
our sleep make such resistance; and being mindful of our purpose, and
remain most chastely in it, we yield no assent unto such enticements? And yet
so much difference there is, as that when any thing has otherwise happened in
our sleep, we upon our waking return to peace of conscience: by the distance
of time discovering that it was not we that did it, notwithstanding we be
sorry that there is something someway or other done in us. Is not thy hand
able, O God almighty, to cure all the discases of my soul, and with a more
abundant measure of thy grace, also to quench the lascivious motions of my
sleep?

3. Thou shall increase, O Lord, thy graces more and more upon me, that my
soul may follow my self home to thee, wholly freed of that bird^ly me of
concupiscence; that it may no longer rebel against it self, nor may in
dreams not only not commit these adult erous uncleannesses, by means of
these Imagines animales.
sensual Images, procuring pollution of the flesh, but that it may not so much
as once consent unto them. For to hinder that no such fancy, (no not so much as
should need any check to restrain it,) do its pleasure in the chaste
affection of those that sleep, (not in this life only, but even in this age
of youth) is not hard for the Almighty to do, who is able to do above all
that we ask or Ephesians. 3. 20.
think. And for this time, in what case I yet am in this kind of naughtiness,
have I confessed unto my good Lord; rejoicing with trembling in that grace
which thou have already given me, and bemoaning my self for that, wherein I am
still imperfect; well hoping, that thou will one day perfect thy mercies in
me, even unto a fullness of peace: which both my outward and inward man shall
at that time enjoy with thee, whenas death shall be swallowed up in victory. 1
Cor. 15. 54.


CHAP. 31. The temptation of eating and drinking.
1. THere is another evil of the day, which I wish Math. 6. 34
were sufficient unto it, that we are feign by eating and drinking to repair
the daily decays of our body, until such time as thou destroyest both 1 Cor.
6. 13
belly and meat, whenas thou shall kill this emptiness of mine, with a
wonderful fullness, and shall cloth this incorruptible, 1 Cor. 15. 54.
with an eternal incorruption. Butin this life, even necessity is sweet unto
me, against which swetnes do I fight, lest I should be beguiled by it; yea, a
daily war do I make, bringing my body into subjection by my fastings; the
pinchings whereof are by the pleasure I take in it, expelled. Hunger and Thirst
verily are painful: they burn up and kill like a fever, unless the
physic of nourishments relieve us. Which, for that it is readily to be had,
out of the comfort we receive by thy gifts, with which both land and water,
and air serve our necessities, are our calamities termed our delicacies. Thus
much have thou taught me, that I am to take my meat, as sparingly as I would
do my Physic.

2. But in the while I am passing from the pinching of emptynesse, unto the
content of a competent replenishing; does that snare of lickorishnesse, even in
the very passage, lie in ambush for me: For that passage between, is a kind
of pleasure, nor is there any other way to pass by, but that which necessity
constraines us to go by. And whereas health is the cause of our eating and
drinking, there will a dangerous lickorishnesse goes a-long, with health like a
handmayd, yea endeauours oftentimes so to go before it, as that I eat that
for my tooths sake, which I either say I do, or desire to do, for my healths
sake. Nor is there the same moderation in both; for that which is enough in
respect of health, is nothing near enough in respect of lickorishnesse: yea
very uncertain it is oftentimes, whether the necessary care of my body still
requires sustenance, or whether a voluptuous deceiueablenesse, of Epicurisme
supplies lust with maintenance. And for that this case is uncertain, does my
unhappy soul rejoice, and prouides it thereby of a protection of excuse:
rejoicing for that it cannot now appear what may be sufficient for health;
that so under the cloak of health, it may disguise the matter of Epicurisme.

3. These enticements do I endeavor to resist daily: yea I call thy right
hand to help me, and to thee do I refer my perplexities; for that I am
resolved of no counsel as yet, whereby to effect it. I hear the voice of my
God commanding, Let not your hearts be ouercharged with Luke 21. 34.
surfeting and drunkenness. As for drunkenness, I am far enough from it,
and thou will have mercy upon me, that it may never come near me. But
full-feeding has many a time stolen upon thy servant: but thou will have mercy
upon me, that it may hereafter be put far from me: for no man can be
temperate, unless thou give it. Many things thou vouchsafest unto us, which
we pray for; and what good thing soever we have received before we pray,
from thee have we received it; yea to this end have we already received it,
that we might acknowledge so much afterward. Drunkard was I never: but I have
known many a drunkard made a sober man by thee. Thy doing therefore it is,
that such should be kept from being drunkards hereafter, who have not been
that way faulty heretofore; as from thee it also comes, that those should not
continue faulty for ever, who have been given to that vice heretofore: yea
from thee it likewise proceeds, that both these parties should take notice,
from whom all this proceeded.

4. I heard also another Ezekiel. 18.
voice of thine, Go not after thine own lusts, and from thine own pleasures
turn away thy face. Yea by thy favor have I heard this saying likewise, which
I have much delighted in, Neither if we eat, 1 Cor 8. 8
are we the better; neither if we eat not, are we the worse: which is to
say, that neythes shall this thing makes me rich, nor that miserable. Also
another voice of thine have I heard. For I have learned in whatsoever state I
am, therewith Phil. 4. 11, 12.
to be content: and I know how to abound, and how to suffer need. I can do
all things through Christ that strengthens me. See here He means St. Paul:
who spoke this.
a soldier indeed of thy celestial armies; on: not of the same moulds that
we are made of: but remember Lord that we are dust, and that of dust thou
have Genesis 3.
made man, who was lost and Luke 15. 32
is found. Nor yet could He do this of his own power, because he was of the
same dust, him I mean whom I did so heartily love for this, saying by thy
inspiration, I can do all things (says he) through him that strengthens
me. Strengthen me, that I may be able; give what thou command, and command
what thou will. Even S. Paul confesses to have received, and when he glories,
in the Lord he glories. Another The place is found in Ecclesiasticus 23. 5.
6. which being Apocryph all he quotes not the Author so reverently as he did
St. Paul even now: See our note upon cap. 29.
also have I heard begging of thee, Turn from me (says he) the greedynesse
of the belly. By which it appears, O my holy God, that the power is of thy
giving, when any thing is done which thou command to be done. Thou have
taught me good Father, that Unto the pure, all things are pure; but that it is
evil unto Titus 1. 15
the man that eats with offense. And, that every Creature To. 14. 20
of thine is good, and nothing to be refused, which is received with
thanksgiving. And that meat commends us not to God: And, that no 1 Timothy 4.
4.
1 Cor. 8. 8.
man ought to judge us in meat or drink. And, that he which Romans 14. 13
eats, Let him not despise him that eats not; and let not him that eats
not, judge him that eats. These things have I learned, thanks and praise be
to thee therefore, my God and Master; even to thee that knockest at the door
of mine ears, the enlightener of my heart: do thou deliver me out of all
temptation.

6. It is not any uncleanness in the meat which I fear, but the uncleanness
of mine own gurmandizing. I know, that liberty was granted unto Noah, to eat
of all kind of flesh that was good for food. That Genesis 9. 3.
Eliah was fed with flesh: 1 King 17. 9
that John Baptist, endued with an admirable abstinence, Math. 3. 4.
was not polluted by those living creatures the Locusts, which were granted him
to feed upon. And on the other side, I know that Esau was deceived by longing
after the potage of Genesis 25. 34
Lintels: and that David was blamed by himself for desiring 2 Samuel 23. 15, etc.
a draught of water: and that our King was tempted, not concerning flesh, but
bread; Math. 4. 3.
and the people in the wilderness therefore deserved to be reproved, not so
much for desiring flesh, but for murmuring against the Lord, out of a lust to
lickorish meats. My self therefore amidst Number. 11. 14
these temptations do strive daily against mine own appetite of eating and
drinking. For it is not of such a nature, as that I am able to resolve to cut my
self short of it once for all, and never to touch it afterward, as I was able
to do concerning carnal copulation. The bridle of the throat therefore is to
be held between a temperate slacknesse and a stiffenesse: and who is he, O
Lord, that is not some whit transported beyond the lists of necessity? what
ever he is, a great man he is; and let him magnify thy name for it. But for
mine own part, I am not the man, for that I am a sinner. Yet do I magnify
thy name too; yea, and Her makes intercession to thee for my sins, who has
overcome the world; who accounts me among the weak members of his body;
because thine eyes have seen my Psa. 139. 16
substance being yet imperfect, and in thy book were all my members written.

CHAP. 32. Of our delight in smelling.
1. AS for the tempting delight of sweete-smels, I am not too much taken with
it. When I miss them, I do not seek them; when I may have them, I do not
refuse them: yea always indifferent I am, always to be without them: At
least to my self I seem to be, though perchance deceived I may be. For even
that natural darkness is much to be lamented, wherein the knowledge of mine
own abilities so far lies concealed; as that when my soul makes enquiry
into her self concerning her own powers, it conceyues it not safe, too
lightly to give credit unto it self; because that what is already in it, l^es
many times so closely muffled up, as nothing but experience can reveal it; nor
ought any man to be secure in this lift, (which may well be called one
continued temptation) whether that he whom it has been possible of worse to
make better, may not likewise of better, be made Hence the Popish Translater
observes, That no man can be sure of his soluation. But is that to be proved
from this place? St. Austen means, That he best man is not secured from
falling in to sin, that's all. But plainly he has translated ill.
worse again. Our only hope, our only confidence, the only assured promise
that we have, is thy mercy.

CHAP. 33. The pleasures taken in hearing.
1. THe delights of mine cares verily, have heretofore more strongly inucigled
and engaged me; but thou have brought me off, and freed me. Yet still at
hearing of those Ayers which thy words breat he soul into, whe^as they are
sung with a well tuned and a well-gouerned voice; I do, I confess, receive a
little contentment: not so great though, as that I am enchanted by it, but that
I can go away when I please. But yet for all this, that those Ayers may
together with these words (by virtue of which they receive life) gain full
admission with me; do they aspire to be entertained into a place of no mean
honor in this heart of mine. Nor can I scarce afford them a room be fitting
for them. At another time forsooth do I seem to my self to attribute more
respect unto them then is seemly; yea even whilst together with those sacred
ditties I perceive these minds of ours to be far more religiously and
zealously The excellent use of Church music skilfully handled.
blown up unto a flame of devotion, whenas these ditties He means that as the
moodes or time of the music be either sad or cheerful, so is sadness or
cheerfulness of Spirit Procured. The other Translater has made no Music here.
are thus sung; then they would have been, had they not been so sung: yea and I
perceive withal, how that the several affections of our spirit, according to
a sweet variety, have their proper Moodes answerable to them in the voice and
singing, by I know not what secret familiarity whereof, they be stirred up.

2. But this contentment of my flesh, (unto which it is not fit to give over my
soul to be effeminated:) does very often beguile me; when (namely) the sense
goes not so respectfully along with the reason, that it can with any patience
endure to come behind it; but upon this consideration only, that because
Reason for the Senses sake gaynd admission; therefore would the contentment of
the Sense, even run before Reason, and be her leader. Thus in these things I
sometimes sin by surprise, but afterward I find mine own fault. Again at
another time thorough an indiscreete weariness of being inueigled, do I err
out of too precise a severity: yea very fierce St. Austen had some Puritanicall
thoughts now and then, objected to him by fleshly, wisdom, which, reason and
devotion presently again put out of him.
am I sometimes, in the desire of having the melody of all pleasant Music,
(to which David's Psalter is so often sung (banished both from mine own ears,
and out of the whole Church too: yea and the safer way it seemed unto me,
which I remember to have been often told me of Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria, who caused the Reader of the Psalm to sound it forth, with so
little warbling of the voice, as that it was nearer to pronouncing, then to
singing.

3. Notwithstanding so often as I call to mind the tears I shed at the hearing
of thy Church-songs, in the beginning of my His mother bred him up in the true
faith: then the Maniches corrupted him; from whom he was newly now reouered.
recovered faith; yea and at this very time, whenas I am moved, not with the
singing, but with the thing sung, (when namely they are set off with a clear
voice and skilfully governed) I then acknowledge the great good use of this
institution. Thus floate I between peril of pleasure, and an approved
profitable custom: inclined the more (though herein I pronounce no irreuocable
opinion) to allow of the old usage of singing in the Church; that so by the
delight taken in at the ears, the weaker minds may be rowzed up into some
feeling of devotion. And yet again, so often as it befalls me to be more moved
with the voice then with the ditty, I confess my self to have grievously
offended: at which time I wish rather not to have heard the music. See now in
what a perplexity I am! weep with me, and weep for me, O all you, who
inwardly feel any thoughts, whence good actions do proceed. As for you that
feel none such, these things move not you. But thou O Lord my God, look upon
me, hearken, and behold, and pity, and heal me thou, in whose eyes I am now
become Mihi quaestio factus sum. Quaestio was the ^ortures used to the
Christians by the persecutors: so called, for that they begun with this
question, Art thou a Christian? So Saint Cyprian Epist. 9. ^olerastis
durissi^^am quae stionem, nec, cessistis supplieijs. And In dolor patientes,
in quaestione victores. This the other Translater turns. In whose eyes I know
not how I stand. Take which you please.
a torture to my self, and that's the perplexity I languish upon.

CHAP. 34. The euticements coming in by the eyes.
1. THere remains the pleasures of these eyes of my flesh, concerning which I
am now to make this Confession unto thee; which let the cares of thy temple,
those brotherly and devour ears, well hearken unto; that with it we may
conclude our discourse, concerning the temptations of the lusts of the flesh,
which as yet solicit me, groaning earnestly, and desiring to be clothed
upon with my house from heaven. Mine eyes take delight in fair forms, and
varieties of them: in beautiful and pleasant colors. Suffer not these to hold
possession in my soul; let my God rather be Lord of it, who made all these:
very good they be indeed, yet is He my good, and not they. Verily, these
entice me broad waking every day, nor find I any rest from these sights, as
I have had often, when silence was kept after sweet voices. For this Queen of
Colors, the light, shedding it self into all whateuer we behold, so often as I
enjoy the day light, glyding by mine eye in its varyed forms, does most
sweetly inueigle me, wholly busiec about another matter, and taking no notice
of it. For it so forcibly insinuates it self, that if at any time it suddenly
be withdrawn, it is with much longing looked after again; and if missing too
long, it besaddeth the mind. O thou light, which Tobias Tob. 4.
beheld, when with his eyes cloazd up, he directed his son the way to life;
himself going before with the feet of charity, never misleading him: Or that
light which Isaac beheld, when as his Gen 27. 1.
fleshly eyes being dim, so that he could not see, he blessed his sons,
not able to discern which was which; though in blessing of them, he deserved
to have discerned them. Or that light which Jacob beheld, when taken blind in
his old age, he, with an illuminated heart, in the persons of his own sons,
gave light unto the fortunes of the several families of people, Genesis 48. 14
etc.
foresignified to be deryued from them: and as when he laid his hands upon his
grandchildren by Joseph, mystically laid a-crosse, not as their father by his
outward eye corrected them, but as himself by a beam of light from within,
wittingly discerned them, This is the light indeed; yea the only light, nor is
there any other: aye, and all those are one, who see and love that light. As
for this corporeal light which I now spoke of; it Duice diue condit vitam,
etc. This he translates, It blocks up this life of ours in blind affections.
Ignorantly deryuing Condit, from Condo, and not from Condio; and negligently
misreading Amoribu^ (as I guess) for Amatorious Had this discourse of blind
men hurt his eye sight?
be-sawces this present life for her blind lovers, with a tempting and a
dangerous sweetness: whereas those that know how to praise thee for that
light, do spend it O, God all-Creator, in singing thy hymns, and are not
taken up from it, in their sleep. Thus desire I to be employed.

3 These seducements of the eyes do I manfully resist, lest my feet wherewith
I am to enter upon my way, should be ensnared; yea and I lift up mine invisible
eyes unto thee, that thou would be pleased to pluck my feet out of that
snare: yea thou do ever and anon pluck them out, for they are ensnared.
Thou ceasest not to pluck them out; though I entangle my self at every snare
that is laid: because thou that keep Israel, shall neither Psa. 121. 4.
slumber nor sleep. Oh how innumerable toys made by diverse Arts and
manufactures, both in our apparel, shoes, vessels and such like works; in
pictures also and diverse feigned images, yea and these far exceeding all
necessary and moderate use, and all pious significations, have men added to
tempt their own eyes withal: outwardly following after what themselves make,
inwardly forsaking him by wom themselves were made; yea defacing Exterminantes
quod facti sant, having before spoken of Images, he here alludes to Gods Image
which men were made after. This being something hard; the former Translates
has left quite out. wisely, Here perchance St. Austen taxetil the use of
pictures of holy things, used in blind devotion by some private m^n of his
times. For the Church hitherto knew no ^^^ges.
that Image, in which themselves were once made.

4. For mine own part, O my God and my beauty, I even therefore dedicate an
hymn unto thee, and do sacrifice praise unto my Sanctifier; because of those
beautiful patterns which through men's souls are conueighed into their
cunning hands; which all descend from that beauty, which is above our souls,
which my soul day and night sighed after. But as for these framers and
followers of those outward beauties, they from thence derive the manner of
liking them, but fetch not from thence the measure of using them. And yet there
it is (though they perceive it not) that they might not go too far to seek
it, but might preserve their strength only for thee, and not wear it out upon
tyring delicates. But for my own part, (who both discourse upon, and well
discern these things) I verily bend my steps toward these outward Beauties:
but thou pluckest me back, O Lord, thou pluckest me back; because thy mercy
is before mine eyes. For I am miserably taken, and thou as mercifully pluckest
me back; and that sometimes when I perceived thee not; because I ha^^ too
earnestly settled my thoughts upon them: and otherwhiles grieved to part with
them, because my affections had already cleaued to them.

CHAP. 35. Of our Curiosity in knowing.
1. Upon this, another form of temptation assayles me; and that many ways
more dangerous. For besides that concupiscence of the flesh, which lurketh in
the delight of all our Senses and pleasures, (which those that are slanes unto,
be mad in love with; those namely, that withdraw themselves far from thee:)
there is conueighed into the soul by the same Senses of the body, a certain
vain and curious itch; not of delight-taking in the flesh, but of making
experiments by help of the flesh; which is masked under the title of Knowledge
and Learning. Which, because it is seated in the natural Appetite of Knowing,
and that for the attaining of knowledge, the eyes be the principal of all the
Senses; is in holy writ called, The lust of 1 Ioh. 2. 16
the eyes: For to see, belongs unto the eyes properly: yet we apply the word
of Seeing to other senses also, wheneuer we employ them toward knowing. For
we do not say, Hark how red it is, or smell how white it is; or taste how
shining it is; or feel how bright it is; because all these are said to be
seen: and yet we say not only, See how it shines, which the eyes alone can
perceive: but we say also, See how it sounds, See how it smells, See how
it tastes, See how hard it is. The general experience of the Senses thereof
is it, (as was said before) which is called The lust of the eyes: for that the
office of Seeing, wherein the Eyes hold the prerogative, do the other Senses
by way of similitude, usurp unto themselves, when-so-euer they make search
after any knowledge.

2. But by this may the difference evidently be discerned, betwixt the
pleasure and the Curiosity that be acted by the Senses; for that pleasure
affects Objects that be beautiful, cleare-sounding, sweete-smelling,
sauoury-tasted, soft-touching: whereas Curiosity for trials sake, pryes into
Objects clean contrary to the former: not to engage it self in the trouble
they bring, but merely out of an itch of gayning the knowledge and experience
of them. For what pleasure has it, to see that in a torn carcass, which
would strike a horror into a man? and yet if any such be near lying, they all
flock to it, even of purpose to be made sad, and to grow pale at it: being
afraid also, lest they should see it in their sleep; as if somebody had
forced them to go and see it while they were awake, or any report of the fine
sight had persuaded them unto it. And thus is it in the other senses also, all
which it were too long to prosecute. And out of this disease of curiosity, are
all those strange sights presented to us in the Theater. Hence men proceed to
make discovery of those concealed powers of nature (which is besides our end)
which does them no good to know, and wherein men desire nothing but to know.
Hence proceeds that also, if out of the same outward end of knowing, the
magical Arts be made use of to enquire by. Upon this curiosity also even in
religion it self, is God tempted; when (namely) certain signs and wonders
from heaven are demanded of him: not desired for any saving end, but merely
for our experience.

3. In this so vast a wilderness, so full of snares and dangers; see how many of
them I have cut off, and thrust out of my heart, according as thou, O God of my
salvation, have given me the grace to do. And yet for all this, when is the
time that I dare boldly say, (so many of this kind of things daily importuning
this life of ours:) when may I boldly say, that my self is by no such like
thing provoked to look toward it, or out of a vayne^ desire to covet it? True
it is, that the Theaters do not now adays carry me away* nor do I much now
regard to know the courses of the stars; nor has my soul at any time
enquired answers at the Ghosts departed: all sacrilegious compacts I utterly
detest. But at thy hands, O Lord my God, to whom I owe all humble and
singlehearted service, by what fetches of suggestions has that spiritual
Enemy deal: with me, to desire some sign?

4. But This zealous Obtesation is like that in cur Letany By thine Agony etc.
had this been thought Coniuring, St. Austen who here detests such compacts,
would not, so soon have added it or would have Retracted it?
by our King I beseech thee, and by that country of Jerusalem so pure and
chaste; that like as any consenting unto such thoughts has been hitherto
far enough from me, so ever let it be further and further. But for the
health of any when I entreat thee, the end of my intention then is far
different from the former: and thy self doing what thou please in it, give
me the grace, and willingly ever wilt give me, to obey it.

Notwithstanding, in how many petty and contemptible trifles is this curiosity
of ours, daily tempted: and how often, we do slip that way, who is able to
recount? How often when people tell vain stories, do we at first bear with
them, as it were for fear of giving offense to the weak; and yet by degrees
by and by, we willingly give ear to them? I become not the spectator now a
days of a dogs coursing of a Hare in the public In Circo
game-place: but if in the field I by chance ride by, such a sport may, per
adventure, put me off from some seriouser thought, and draw me after it: not
to turn out of the road with the body of my horse, but yet with the
inclination of my heart: yea, and did not thou, by making me see my
infirmity on the sudden, give me a private Item; or upon the sight it self,
by some contemplation to raise my self toward thee, wholly to despise and
pass it by; vaynel should presently be besotted with it.

5. What shall I say, whenas sitting in mine own house, a Lizard catching
flies, or a Spider entangling them in her nets, oft-times makes me too
intentive to them? Because these are but small creatures, is the curiosity in
me the less? I proceed hereupon to laud Thee the wonderful Creator and
disposer of all; but that is not the occasion of my beginning to be intentive
to them. One thing it is to get up quickly, and another thing, not to fall at
all. And of such toys, is my life full, and my only hope is in thy wonderful
great mercy. For when this heart of ours is made the Receipt of such things,
and ouer-charges it self with the throngs of this superabundant vanity; then
are our Prayers thereby often interrupted and distracted; and whilst in thy
presence we direct the voice of our heart up unto thine ears; that so
important a business is broken off, by I know not what idle thoughts rushing
in upon us.

CHAP. 36. The sin of Pride.
1. But did I account of this also, amongst such things as are to be
contemned? or shall aught bring us back to our hope, but the whole Sum of
thy mercy, since thou it is that have begun to change us? And in what degree
thou have already amended me, thy self best know; who did first of all
rcouer me from that burning desire of revenging my self: that so thou might
the better be favorable unto all my other iniquities, and heal all my
infirmities, and redeem my life from corruption, and crown me with thy pity
and mercy, and satisfy my desire with good things: even because thou have
curbed my pride with thy fear, and tamed my neck to thy yoke. Which now I
bear, and it is light unto me; because so have thou promised, and so have
thou made it: and verily so it was, but I knew it not, for that I feared to
take it.

2 But tell me now, O Lord, (thou who only raignest without the ruff of
pride; because thou only art the true Lord, who have no Lord:) tell me; has
this third kind of temptation given me over, or can it altogether forbear me
in this life; this namely, To desire to be feared and loved of men, and that
for no other end, but that we may receive a private rejoicing in it? which
indeed is no true joy. A miserable life this is, and a dishonorable kind of
bragging. For hence especially it comes, That men do neither James. 4. 6
purely love, nor fear thee. And even therefore too do then resist the
proud, and gonest grace unto the humble: yea, thou thunderest down upon the
ambitious designs of this world, and the foundations of the mountains tremble
at it. Because now of performing certain effices amongst humane society, it is
necessary both to be loved and feared of men, even therefore does the
adversary of our true blessedness lay hard at us, every where spreading his
snares of Well-done, well-done; which whilst we too eagerly gather up, we may
be unawares taken in them, and brought to disioynt our rejoicing from thy
truth, and to settle it i^ the deceiving opinions of men; pleasing our selves
with being loved and feared, not for thy sake, but in thy stead: by which
device the adversary may make us his own, we being so nearly conformed unto
him already; not joined with him in any concord of charity, but into the
fellowship of punishment: even of him, who aspired to advance his throane in
the North; that people following Esaias. 14. 1^
him in his wrye and crooked ways, and become all darkened and befrozen, might
be made his vassalls.

3. But we, O Lord, behold, we are thy little flock; keep thou still the
possession of us: stretch thy wings over us, and let us fly under them. Be
thou our glorying; Let us be beloved for thy sake, and let thy Word be feared
in us. Whoeuer is ambitious to becommended of men, when thou discommendest him;
let him not be defended of men, when thou indgest him; nor delivered, when
thou co^demnest him. When now a sinner misses of his so cordially desired
commendations, and the evil doer has not the good word of the people; on the
contrary, when another man being well spoken of for some good parts which thou
have given him; yet pleases himself better in the hearing of his own praises
then in the good parts, for which he is commended: this man also as well as the
other, is discommended by thee, even whilst he is commended by men. Yea,
better is the commender then the commended: seeing to the one, the gift of God
bestowed on man was pleasing: but the other was better pleased with the gift of
man, then of God.

CHAP. 37. Praise and dispraise, how they move us.
1. Assailed daily we are by these temptations, O Lord; yea we are assaulted
incessantly. The furnace we be daily tried in, is the tongue of men. And in
this kind also thou command us to be continent. Give what thou command,
and command what thou will. Thou know what groans my heart, and floods mine
eyes, ^end up unto thee for this. For easily can I not discern how cleansed I
am, more or less, from this pollution: yea, and do I much fear my secret
sins, which thine eyes perceive well enough, though mine cannot. For in other
kinds of temptations. I have the ability (such as it is) of thoroughly examining
my self: but in this, scarce any at all. For, from the pleasures of the flesh,
and from the superfluous curiosity of knowing, I well perceive how much I have
gained upon my self, in the refrayning of my mind: whenas (namely) I want the
things themselves; or the Will, when the things are away; or the necessity,
when they are not to be had: for then can I ask my self how troublesome it is
unto me more or less, not to have them? But as for riches, which are for this
end desired, that they may serve a man in some one of these three The lust of
these eyes, the lust of the flesh, of the pride of (...) John c. 16.
Concupiscences, or in any two, or all of them; if the soul be not able to
discern, whether, when it has them, it can contemn them; they may be cast
aside, that a man may make experience of himself that way.

2. But for the enabling of our selves to want praise, and for making trial
what we can do in that kind, is it our course to live ill, so desperately
and out of all compass, that every body that knows us, may detest us? what
madder trick can either be said, or thought of? But now if Praise both uses,
and ought to be the companion of a good life and of good works; we ought as
little to for go that Company, as this good life. For I neither know, whom I
can well be without, or how well or ill contented, unless when he is absent.
What shall I therefore confess unto thee in this kind of temptation, O Lord?
What, but that I am very much delighted with mine own praises: but yet with
the truth, more then with the praises? For were I put to my choice, whether I
would play the mad man, or the fool in every thing, and be generally
commended for it; or be well settled and most assured of being in the rights,
and be generally discommended for it: I see straight what I would choose.

3. Yet unwilling I am, that the praise given me by another man's mouth, should
increase my joy for any good I have; and yet does praise not only increase it,
but disprayse does diminish it. And when much troubled I am at this hard case
of mine, I presently bethink my self of an excuse; which how sufficient it
is, God thou know, for it leaves me uncertain. And for because thou have
not commanded us Continency alone, that is, from what things we should
refrain our love: but Justice also; that is, which way we should bestow that
love: and, that it is not the will to have us love thee only, but our
neighbor also: do I oftentimes seem unto my self to be delighted with
(...) proficiency or toward (...) of my neighbor, when I (...) delighted with
the commendations given me by him, that understands what he says; and I am
sorry again for this want in him, when I hear him disprayse either that which
he understands not, or what is good. For I am sometimes very sorry at mine
own praises, when (namely) those things be praised in me, in which I mistake
my self, or that lesser and lighter good things in me are more esteemed, then
in reason they ought to be.

4. But how again come I to know this? am I therefore thus affected, bcause I
would not have my commender dissent from me in things that concern my self;
not for that I am moved with the care of his good, but for that the same good
things in me which very well please me, are the more pleasing to me, when they
are so also to another? For in some sort I am not then praised, when mine own
judgment of my self is not commended: for as much as either those things are
praised which please me not at all; or those are too much commended, which please
me but a little. Am I therefore uncertain of my self in this matter? Behold, O
Truth, in thee I see it; that I ought not so much to be moved at mine own
praises, for mine own sake; as for the good of my neighbor. And whether so I
be, or not, verily I know not For I know less of my self in this, then Thou
do.

5. I beseech now, O my God, discover me unto my self, that I may confess
unto my brethren who are to pray for me, what I now find my self defective
in. Once again let me more diligently ask my self: if so I be moved with the
good of my brethren in mine own praises, why then am I less moved at another
man's being unjustly discommended then at mine own? Why am I more nettled with
that reproach which is cast upon my self, then at that which is cast upon
another in my presence, for the same fault? Am I ignorant of this also? or is
this it at last that I should now seduce my self, and neither think nor
speak what is Truth before thee? This madness put far from me, O Lord.
Psalm. 141. 5
lest mine own mouth prove the oil of sinners unto me to break my head. I
am poor and needy: yet in better case, whilst in my, private groaning I
displease my self, and seek for thy mercy; until my wants be supplied, and
perfectly made up into such an estate of peace, which the eye of the proud is
not acquainted withal.

CHAP. 38. Virtue is endangered by Vain glory.
1. THereport of the peoples mouths, and our own famously known actions,
carry along with them that most dangerous temptation of the love of praise:
which, for the advancing of a certain private excellency of our own,
endeauours to draw unto it self, the poorly begged voices of the people; And
that, at such time too, whenas I say a secret blame upon my self for it: yea,
even in that very particular, for which I reprehend it. For with a greater
vanity does a man glory oftentimes, of his contemning of vainglory; for which
reason he cannot be said to glory, in his contempt of vainglory: for He
does not truly contemn it, who inwardly glories at it.

CHAP. 39. Of Self love.
1. THere is yet another p^iuie disease in the same kind of temptation, where
with such people puff themselves up, as take pleasure in themselves, howeuer
other be pleased or displeased; (...) in the regarding to please (...) ^o^kes.
These may please themselves; but thee do they dis please highly: not only for
pleasing themselves in things not good, as if they were good; but also for so
doing in thy gifts as if they were their own: or if as thine, yet as given
them for their own merits: or, if also as proceeding from thy mere grace, and
not their deseruings; yet not as neyghborly rejoicing, but as envying others
for it. In all these perils and travels, and others of the like kind, thou
see, O Lord, a trembling of my heart: yea and I well feel my wounds to be by
thy self rather cured in me, then not inflicted upon me.

CHAP. 40. His striving against sin.
1. WHere have thou not gone along with me, O thou Truth, teaching me both what
to beware, and what to desire; when I once made report unto thee of the
surueigh I had taken of these things below, (so well as I could) and asked thy
advice upon them? With my outward senses so well as I might) I took a master of
this world; being heedfull above all, unto this bodily life of mine, these
Senses of mine own. Thence turned I inwardly into the with drawing chambers of
my memory, those many fold large rooms, so wonderfully well furnished of
innumerable varieties, I considered, and stood amazed; being able to discern
nothing without thy help, yet finding none of all the ^^to be thy self. Nor
was I the finder of these things, I, who went them over all, and who now
labored to distinguish and to vslew every thing according to its proper worth:
taking some things upon the report of my Senses, and working out other things
that were of a mixed nature, by way of Dialogue with mine own self; yea and
taking particular notice and tale of the The Senses both outward and inward.
Reporters themselves; and anon thoroughly canuassing over those other things
laid up in the large treasury of my memory, storing up some of them there
again, and for my use drawing out the rest.

2. Neither was I my self who did all this, (that is, that ability of mine
own by which I did it;) no nor was that ability it self, the same that thou
art: for thou art that neuersaying light, which concerning all these I still
advised with all; what her they were, what they were, and how to be (...) they
were: For ^ouch heard thee directing and commanding life (...) and this I do
very (...). This is delights me; yea and (...) loose (...) what (...) necessity
^^ies upon me, unto th^^ pleasure have I recourse. For in all these which I
thus run over by thy directions, can I not find any one safe place to settle
my soul in, but in thy self only; into whom let all my scattered pieces be
gathered together; nor let any thing of mine be turned back from thee. At some
times thou inwardly infusest into me a delight that I am not usually
acquainted with, a ^^ee^^nesse of I know not what kind: which, could it be
once perfected in me, it should be I know not what manner of height; which this
life shall never arrive unto. But by certain (...) some weights a^^ I tumbled
down again, yea quite swallowed up by mine old wort, and fast holden by it
(...) I bewayre my selfe^: yet strongly am luistil h^^d down Such power (...)
the but then of a bad custom, to ouerloade a man. In this estate I am able to
stay, but unwilling: in the other I would willingly be, but am not able: thus
am I miserable in both conditions.

CHAP. 41. God and a lie cannot stand together.
1. I Considered therefore the ill-disposed habit of my Sin, in that
threefold The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life.
concupiscence: and I called thy right hand to my help. With a wounded heart
have I beheld thy Brightness, and b^ing beaten back, I said, Who can attain
thither? I am cast away 1 Ioh. 2. 16
from the sight of thine eyes: Thou art the Truth which sit president over
all. Loath I was through my covetousness, to forgo thee; but gladly would I
together with thee, have possessed a lie: like as no man there (...) desirous
to speak safely (...) that himself may be hindered ^y it from knowing the
truth. Verily therefore have I lost thee, because thou vouchsafest not to be
enjoyed together with a lie.

CHAP. 42. Angels cannot be our Mediators.
1. WHom could I find to reconcile my self unto thee by? was that office to
be undertaken by an Angel? upon what prayers? by what Sacraments? Many a man
endeavoring to return unto thee, and being not able of himself; has, as I
here, made trial of this way: but has fallen into the desire of curious
visions; being worthy therefore to be deluded. For they being high-minded,
have sought thee in the pride of their learning, strutting out rather, then
knocking up on their breasts: and so by the agreement of their heart have they
drawn unto themselves the Princes of the Air, their fellow conspirators in
pride; by whom through the force of Magic, they were decerued, even while they
sought for a Mediator, Here my Popish Translater thinks himself subtle in
using that distinction (as common as a Cow-path) of Mediators of Intercession
(which office he affirms the Angels may have) and of Redemption; which he is
content to allow Christ. But St Austen here speaks of none but evil angels:
Though the Papists have many Mediators, yet I never thought they would have had
The devil and all.
by whom they might be purged: but there was none to be found; For the devil
it was, transfiguring now himself into an Angel of light.

2. Many ways therefore was he able to entice proud flesh, for that him self
was not of any fleshly body. For fleshly men were mortal, and sinnefulli; but
thou, Lord, to whom they this proud way sought to be reconciled, art immortal,
and without sin. A mediator (now) between God and man, must have something
like unto God, and something like unto men; lest, that being like unto man in
both natures, he should be too far unlike God: or if like unto God in both
natures, he should be too far unlike unto men: and so be a Mediator neither
way. That deceitful The devil
Mediator therefore, by whom in thy secret judgment man's pride deserved to be
deluded, has one thing indeed common with himself to men, and that's Sin:
and desires to seem to communicate in another thing with God; that because he
is not clothed with any mortality of flesh, he might thereby vaunt himself to
be immortal. But for that the wages of sin is death, Rom 6.
this has he common to himself with men, for which he might together with
them ^^ condemned unto death.

CHAP. 43. Christ only in the all-sufficient This Title is flat against the
new popish distinction above rehearsed: this calls Christ the Intercessor,
(that is, Mediator of Intercession, and not Angels. And therefore has the
popish Translater changed Intercessor into Mediator.
Intercessor.
1. But the true Mediator, whom out of thy secret mercy thou have showed forth
unto the humble; and whom thou sentest, that by his example they might learn
the true humility: that 1 Timothy 2. 5
Mediator therefore between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, appeared
betwixt mortal sinners and the immortal Just One: being mortal as men, and
just like God: that because the reward of righteousness is life and peace, he
might by his righteousness which was joined to God, make void the death of as
many of the wicked, as were by him justified, which death, his will was to have
common both to them and him. He was showed forth unto Holy men of old; to the
intent that they might be saved, through says in his passion to come, like as
we are through says of it already passed. For how farre-forth he was a man,
so far-forth was he a Mediator: but so farre-forth as he is the Word, he is
not merely midway to God, because he is equal unto God, and God with God; and
together with the Holy Ghost one God.

2. How have thou loved us, O good Father, that have not spared thine only
Son, but have delivered him unto death for us wicked men? how have thou loved
us; for whom, He that thought it no robbery to be equal with God, was made
subject unto death, even the death of the cross? he that was only free among
the Phil. 2. 6, 8
dead, that had power to lay Psalm. ^8. 5.
John 10, 18
down his life, and power to take it again: for us was he unto thee both the
Conqueror, and the Sacrifice: yea and therefore the Conqueror, because the
Sacrifice: for us was he unto thee both Priest and Sacrifice: and therefore
the Priest, because the Sacrifice: of slaves making us thy children, by being
borne of thee, and by becoming a servant unto us. Deservedly therefore is my
hope strongly settled upon him; that thou will by him cure all my infirmities:
even by him that sits at thy right hand, and makes intercession for us;
whereas otherwise, I should despair utterly. For many and great are those
infirmities of mine, yea many they are and great; but thy medicine is more
sovereign.

3. Imagine we might, that thy Word was far enough from being united with
man; and so despair of our selves, unless It had been made flesh and dwelt
amongst us. Affrighted John. 1.
thus with mine own sins and the burden of mine own misery, I cast these
thoughts in my heart, bethinking my self of fleeing into the Here the other
Translater takes occasion to extol the perfection of Eremits that live in the
Wilderness. But is this a place fit for that, which shows that St. Austen was
forbidden it by God himself?
Wilderness: but thou for baddest me, and strengthenedst me, saying:
Therefore Christ dyed for all, that they which live, may now no longer live
unto themselves, but unto him that dyed for them. See, Lord, I hence forth cast
all my care upon thee, that I may live, and consider the wonderful things, of
thy law. Thou know both my unskillfulness, and my infirmities; Oh teach me,
and heal me. That only Son of thine, in whom are hid all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge, has redeemed me with his blood. 2 Cor. 5. 15.
Col 2. 3^
Let not the proud speak evil of me now; for that I meditate upon the price
of my redemption, and do eat and drink and give unto the poor; and being
poor my self, desire to be filled by him, amongst those that eat, and are
satisfied, and they shall praise the Lord who Psalm. 32. 26
seek him.

The end of the tenth Book.
Saint Augustines Confessions. The eleventh Book.
CHAP. 1. Why we confess unto God who knows all.
Can thou that art the Lord of all eternity, be ignorant of what I say unto
thee? or do thou see but for a time, that which passes in time? To what end
then do I lay in order before thee so many ^arrations? not to this end do I
it, that thou might come to know them upon my relation; but there by to
stir up mine own and my Readers devotions toward thee, that we may say all
together, Great is the Lord, Psalm. 96. 4.
and greatly to be praised. Now have I said, and again say it I will, For the
love of thy love make I this Confession. For we use to pray also: and yet Truth
it self has said, Your Father knows what you have Mat. 6. 32.
need of, before you ask. It Is our affection therefore which we hereby lay
open unto thee, while we confess our own miseries, and thy mercies upon us,
that thou might thoroughly set us free, seeing already thou have begun to make
us leave to be wretched in our selves and to be happy in thee: seeing thou
have called us, that we may become poor in spirit, and Math. 5.
meek, and mournful, and bungry, and thirsty after righteousness, and
merciful, and pure in heart, and peacemakers. See, I have told thee many
things, such as I could, and such I was desirous to do; because thou desire
first that I should confess unto my Lord God. For thou art good, and Psalm.
118. 2
that thy mercy endures for ever.

CHAP. 2. He sueth to be delivered from his sins and errors, and to be
guided unto the true knowledge.
1. But when shall I be able with the pen of my tongue to set forth all thy
Exhortations, and all thy terrors, and comforts, and directions, by which thou
have brought me up to be a Preacher of thy Werd, and a Dispencer of thy
Sacrament unto thy people? If I now be able to declare these things to thee in
order, the very He alludes to the How^^-glasses of (...) time, which went by
water, as ours do now by ^and.
drops of time are precious with me; and I have long since had a burning
desire to meditate in thy law; and by it to confess both my skill and
unskillfulness unto thee, the morning light of thy enlightening me, and the
relikes of darkness in me, so long remaining swallowed up by till infirmity
be strength. Nor will I suffer my hours to be squandered away upon any other
thing, which I find free from the necessities of refreshing of my body, and
the recreating of my mind, and the complying in those offices of service which
we owe unto men; yea also which we owe not, and yet pay them.

2. Give ear unto my prayer, O Lord my God, and let thy mercy hearken unto my
petition: because it stryueth not to entreat for my self alone, but to be
beneficial also to my brethren. Thou see my heart, that so it is; and that I
am ready to sacrifice unto thee the best service of my thoughts and tongue: now
give me, what I am to offer unto thee. For I am Psalm 8^. 1.
poor and needy, but thou art To 10. 11.
rich to all those that call upon thee; who not distracted with cares thy
self, take the care of all us. From all rashness and lying, do thou
circumcise both my inward and my outward lips: Let my chaste delights, be
thy Scriptures: let me neither be deceived in them, nor deceived by them.
Hearken Lord, and have mercy upon me, O Lord my God, O thou light of the blind,
and the strength of the weak; yea also the light of those that see, and the
strength of the strong; hearken thou unto my soul, and hear me crying unto
thee out of the Deep. For if thine ears be not with us also in the Deep,
whither then shall we go? to whom shall we cry? The day is thine, and the
night is Psalm. 74. 16
thine: at thy back the time passes away.

3. Afford out of it some spure time, for my meditations upon the hidden
things of thy Law; which I beseech thee shut not up when they knock for
entrance at it. For in vain it was not, that thou would have so many leaves
full of darkesome secrets committed unto writing: nor are those Fortests
without their Hearts which retire themselves into them, making their range, and
walks in them; feeding, lodging, and chewing the Cud in them: Perfect me, O
Lord, and reveal them unto me. Behold, thy voice is my joy; yea thy voice
exceeds the abundance of all pleasures. Give me what I love: for verily I
do love it; and this love is of thy giving: Forsake not therefore thine own
gifts, nor despise Nec herbam tuam spernas sitilentem. ^his he translates, Nor
despise thou this withering grass of thine, which thirsts for the dew of thy
Grace. Whereas St. Austen still follows this conceie of the forest and Hearts,
with all alluding to Psa. 42. 1
thou him that thirsts after thy herbage. Let me confess unto thee
whatsoever I shall find in thy books; and let me hear the voice of praise;
and let me drink thee up; and let me consider of the wonderful things of thy
law: even from the very Beginning; wherein Thou made the heaven and the
earth, unto that everlasting kingdom of thy holy City which is before thee.
Have mercy, Lord, upon me, and hear my petition: for it is not I suppose, of
the earth; not for gold and siuer, or precious stones, or gorgeous apparel, or
honors and offices, or the pleasures of the flesh: or necessaries for the body,
or for this life of our earthly pilgrimage: all which shall be added Mat. 6. 33
unto those that seek thy kingdom and thy righteousness. Behold, O Lord my
God, what it is that I now desire. The ungodly have sometimes told me what
themselves delight in: but they are not like the delights of thy Law. See now
whence my desire proceeds.

4. See, Father, behold and approve; and let it be pleasing in the sight of
thy mercy, that I shall find so much grace with thee, as that the Secrets of
thy Word may be opened unto me when I knock. By our Lord Jesus Christ thy
Son I beseech thee, that man on thy right hand, that Son of man, whom thou
have appointed a Mediator betwixt thy self and us, by whom thou soughtest us,
who little sought for thee: yet did thou seek us, that we might seek thee,
and thy Word by whom thou made all things, and me amongst them; Thy Only
Son by whom thou have called the believing people unto thee, and me amongst
them: by Him I beseech thee, who sits at thy right hand, and makes
intercession for us, in whom are hid all the treasures Col. 2. 3.
of wisdom and knowledge. Him do I seek in thy books: of Him Moses wrote;
this he says, this Truth says.

CHAP. 3. He desires to understand the holy Scriptures.
1. LEt me hear and understand how thou In the beginning have made Heaven and
Earth. This Moses wrote of; he wrote and passed away, he passed from hence
unto thee: for he is not at this present before mine eyes; for if he were,
then would I lay hold of him and entreat him, and for thy sake would I beseech
him to open these things unto me: yea I would lay mine ears unto his mouth.
But should he speak in the Though in Plautus time the Hebrew were the vulgar
language of Africa; and that there be 6. or 7. Hebrew words still to be found
in St. Auste^s works: yet in those 600. years betwixt Plautus and S. Austen,
and by the Romans enforcing the Provinces to learn Latin, we see the Hebrew
so disused, and corrupted in Africa, that at the most, the 2 tongues did but
agree in most words, as Austen says. l. 2. contra Petilliter. c. 104. which
agreeme^nt yet was not so much, that the natives of Africa could naturally
understand Hebrew. The other Translater rather abuses St. Austen then credits
him, in affirming him to have skill in Hebrew.
Hebrew tongue, in vain should he beat mine ears, for never should he come
near my understanding: whenas if he spoke Latin, I should well enough know
what he said.

2. But how should I know whether he said true or no? and if I could learn
this too, should I know it by him? For within me, in that inward house of my
thoughts, neither the Hebrew, nor the Greek, nor the Latin, nor any other
language, but even Truth it self, and that without any helps of the mouth and
tongue, without any sound of sillables should tell me He says true; and my
self thereupon assured of it, would confidently say unto that servant of thine,
Thou speak truth. Seeing I have not now the means to confer with Moses, I
beg of thee my God (inspired by whom he vttred these truths) I beg of thee, the
pardon of my sins: and thou that enabledst that servant of thine to deliver
these Truths, enable me also to understand them.

CHAP. 4. The Creatures proclayme God to be their Creator.
1 BEhold, the heavens and the earth are already, they proclaim themselves to
have been created: for they are changed and altered from what they were.
Whereas whatsoever is not made, and yet has a being, has nothing in it now,
which it had not before: which to have, were indeed to be changed and
altered. They proclayme also, that they made not themselves but say, Therefore
we are, because we are made: and therefore were we not, before our time was
to be, as if we could possibly have made our selves. Now the euidentnesse of
the thing, is this voice of the Speakers. It Is thou therefore, O Lord, that
made them: thou who art full of beauty, they being fair also: thou who art
good, they also being good, even Thou who have Being, seeing these have their
Beings: yet are they neither so fair, so good, nor are so, as thou their
Creator art; compared with whom, they are neither fair, nor good, nor are at
all. Thus much we know, thanks to thee for it: yet is our knowledge, in
comparison of thine, but mere ignorance.

CHAP. 5. How the world was made of nothing.
1. IN the beginning God made Heaven and Earth. But how did thou make them?
and what Engine had thou to work all this vast fabric of thine? For thou
wentest not about it like a fleshly artificer, who shaping one body by another,
purposes according to the discretion of his mind, to cast it into such a
figure, as in his fancy he sees fittest by his inward eye. But whence should
he be able to do all this, unless thou had made him that fancy? and he
puts a figure upon some Material, that had existence before; suppose, clay, or
stone, or wood, or gold, or other thing: but whence should these materials have
their being, had not thou appointed it them? It Is thou that made the
Artificer his body, thou that gave a soul to direct his limbs, thou made
the stuff of which he makes any thing; thou made the apprehension whereby he
takes his art, by which he sees in himself what he has to do. Thou gave
him the Senses of his body: which being his Interpreters, he may from his mind
unto his stuff, conueigh that figure which he is now a working; which is to
signify unto his mind again, what is done already; that the mind upon it
may ask advice of its President truth, whether it be well done or no. Let all
these things praise thee, the Creator of these all.

2. But yet which way do thou make them? how O, God, did thou make heaven
and earth? Verily, neither in the heaven, nor on the earth stoodest thou, when
thou made heaven and earth: no, nor yet in the air, or waters, seeing these
also belong unto the heaven and the earth. Nor yet standing in the whole world
together, did thou make that whole world; because there was no place where to
make it, before it was made, that it might have a Being. Nor did thou hold
any thing in thy hand, whereof to make this heaven and earth: For how should
thou come by that, which thy self had not made? For what has any Being, but
only because thou art? Therefore thou spakest, and they were made, and in thy
Word thou made them.

CHAP. 6. He disputes curiously, what manner of Word, the World was created by.
But how did thou speak? after the same way that the voice came out of a
Cloud, saying, This is Mat. 3. 17.
my beloved Son. As for that voice, it was uttered, and passed away, had a
beginning and ending; the sillables made a sound and so passed over; the second
after the first, the third after the second, and so forth in order, until the
last came after all the rest, and silence after the last. By which most clear
and plain it is, that the motion of a Creature expressed it, performing thy
eternal Will in it, it self being but temporal. And these words of thine
thus made to serve for the time, did the outward care give notice of unto the
intelligent soul, whose inward ear lay listening to thy eternal Word. But
whenas this latter had compared these words thus sounding within a proportion
of time, with that eternal Word of thine, which is in the Silence; it said,
This Word is far another from that, a very far different Word, these words are
far beneath me, nay they are not at all, because they flee and pass away; but
the Word of God is far above me, and abides for ever.

2. If therefore in sounding and passing words, thou spakest that heaven and
earth should be made; and that way did create heaven and earth: then was
there a corporeal creature even before heaven and earth, by whose motions
measured by time, that voice took his course in time. But there was not any
creature before heaven and earth; or if there were, surely then thou did,
without such a passing voice create that, whereof thou might make this
passing voice, by which thou were to say the word, Let the heaven and the earth
be made. For whatsoever that were, of which such a voice were to be made,
unless by thy self it were made, it should not at all have any being. That a
body therefore might be made, by which these words might be made; by what word
of thine was it commanded?

CHAP. 7. The Son of God is the Word coeternall with the Father.
1. THou call us therefore to understand the word, who is God, with thee God:
which word is spoken unto all eternity, and in it are all things spoken unto
everlasting. For never is that finished which was spoken; or any other thing
spoken after it, that so all may come to be spoken: but all are spoken at
once, and unto everlasting. For otherwise there should be time and alteration;
and no true eternity, no true immortality. Thus much I know, O my God, thanks
to thee therefore. This I know, as I confess to thee, O Lord; yea he knows
and blesses thee as I do, whoeuer is not unthankful to thy assured Verity.

2. We know, Lord, we know; that in as much as any thing is not now, what
sometimes it has been: or is now, what heretofore it has not been, so far
forth it is borne, and dies. Nothing therefore of thy Word does retire, and
come in place again: because it is truly immortal and eternal. And
therefore unto thy Word coeternal unto thy self, thou do once and for ever
say all that thou do say; and it is made, whateuer thou say shall be
made. Nor do thou make it otherwise then by saying: and yet are not all
things made together, or everlasting, which so thou make by saying.

CHAP. 8. The Word of God is our teacher in all.
1. Why I beseech thee, O Lord my God, is this so? Verily I see it after
afort; but how to express it, I know not, unless thus it be: namely, that
whatsoever begins to be, and leaves off to be, begins then, and leaves off
then, when in thy eternal reason it is resolved, that it ought to have begun
or left off: in which Reason nothing does either begin, or leave off. That
Reason is thy Word, which is also the Beginning, John. 8. 25.
the same that likewise speaks unto us. Thus much said it in the Gospel, by
our Lords humanity: and so much sounded outwardly in the ears of men, to the
intent it might be believed and sought for inwardly, and found in the eternal
verity; where that good and only Master taught all his Disciples. There Lord,
hear I thy voice speaking unto me; because he there speaks unto us, who
teaches us; but he that does not teach us, though he does speak, yet to us
he speaks not.

2. And who now is able to teach us, but the unalterable Truth? seeing that
when we receive any admonishment from a mutable creature, we are but led
along unto that unalterable Truth: where we learn truly, while we stand to
hear Him, rejoicing John. 3^ 29
greatly because of the Bridegroomes voice: and return our selves back to
that Truth, from whence we are deryued. Which is therefore the beginning,
because unless it should remain firm, there should not, when we erred, be
any certainty whither to turn our selves unto. Now when we return from error,
it is, by knowing (verily) that we do return: and that we may know, he
teaches us; because he is the Beginning, and speaks unto us.

CHAP. 9. How the Word of God speaks unto the heart.
1. IN this Beginning, O God, have thou made heaven and earth, namely, in thy
Word, in thy Son, in thy Power, in thy Wisdom, in thy Truth; after a
wonderful manner speaking, and after as wonderful a manner making. Who is
able to comprehend it? Who can declare it? What is that which shines through
me, and strikes upon my heart without hurting it? at which I tremble with
horror, and yet burn with love? I tremble, in as much as I am unlike unto it;
I burn in as much as I am like it.

2. It Is Wisdom, Wisdom it is which thus shines into me; even breaking
through my Cloudynesse: which yet again ouershadowes me now frequently
faynting; even under the gross fogge and heavy load of mine own pains. For
my strength is pulled so low Psalm. 30.
in this poor case of mine, as Psalm. 102
that I am not able to endure that which should be for my good; till thou,
Lord, becoming favorable to all mine iniquities, please to heal my
diseases. For thou also shall redeem my life from corruption, and shall crown
me with loving kindness and tender mercies: Psalm. 103. 4 5.
yea thou shall satifie my desire with good things, because my youth shall be
restored like an Eagles. For by hope we are Romans 8. 28
saved: wherefore we through patience awaite for thy promises. Let him that is
able, hear thee inwardly discoursing to him: For my part, in the words of
thine Oracle will I boldly cry out, How Psalm. 104 ^4
wounderfull are thy works, O Lord, in Wisdom have thou made them all; and
this wisdom is that Beginning: and in that Beginning have thou made heaven
and earth.

CHAP. 10. Gods Will knows no beginning.
1. Lo, are they not full of their old leaven, which demand of us, How did God
employ himself before he made Heaven and Earth? For if he were vn-imployed
(say they) and did no work, why the^ does he not now from hence forth, and for
ever abstain from working, like as heretofore he did? For did any new motion
rise up in God, and any new Will to make a creation, which he had never made
before? how can there be a true eternity, where then rises up a new will, which
was not there before? For the will of God is not a creature, but before every
creature; seeing that nothing could have been created, unless the will of the
Creator had been before it.

CHAP. 11. Gods eternity not to be measured by the parts of time.
1. THe Will of God therefore is belonging unto his Substance. And if aught be
newly risen up in Gods Substance, which was not there before; then cannot that
Substance be truly said to be Eternal. Again, if the Will of God had meant
from eternity that there should be a Creation, why also was not that Creation
from all eternity? They that prate thus, do not yet understand thee, (O thou
Wisdom of God, thou light of our Souls) they understand not yet how these
things be made: which by thee, and in thee are made: yea they strive to
relish eternal things, though their heart be flickering hitherto between
the motions of things partly passed, and partly to come, and be very
uncertain hitherto.

2. Who is able to hold it hard to, and so to fix it, that it may be settled a
while, and a little catch at a beam of light, from that euer-fixed eternity,
and to compare it with the Times which are never fixed, that it may thereby
perceive how there is no comparison between them: and how that a long time
cannot be made long, but out of a many motions still passing on wards, which
cannot at the same instant be drawn all together: and that all this while in
the eternal nothing is flitting, but all at once present; whereas no time is
all at once present: and that he may perceive all time passed, to be driven
away by time to come; and all time to come, to follow upon the passed: and that
all both passed and to come, is made up, and flows out of that which is always
present? Who now shall so hold fast this heart of man, that it may stay, and
see, howthat Eternity ever still-standing, gives the word of command to the
times passed or to come, it self being neither passed nor to come? Is this
hand of mine able peradventure to make stay of this heart? or is the hand of my
mouth by any persuasions able to bring about so important a business?

CHAP. 12. What God did before the Creation of the world.
1. SEE, I now return answer to the demand, See Chap 10.
What God did before he made heaven and earth? But I will not answer so as one
was said to have done merrily (to break the violence of the question:) God was
a preparing hell (says he) for those that would pry into such profound
mysteries. It Is one thing to look what God did, and another thing to make
sport. This shall be none of my answer; rather had I answer that I know not,
what indeed I do not know, then answer so, as may make him laughed at, that
asked such high questions; and the other commended, that returned so false an
answer. But this I say, O our God, Creator I read it Creator, and not
Creatorem: and lay this sentence into the following, putting a Colon in stead
of a Period.
of every creature: and if under the name of heaven and earth, every creature
be understood; then I will boldly say; That before God made heaven and earth,
he did not make any thing. For if he did, what did he make but a creature? And
would to God I knew whatsoever I desired to know, to mine own profit, as well
as I know this, That no creature was made, before there was made any creature.

CHAP. 13. That before those times which God created, there was no time.
1. IF any giddy brain now should wildly roaue over the images of fore-passed
times, and wonder with himself, that thou the God omnipotent and All-creator,
workmaster of heaven and earth, did if or innumerable ages forbear to set
upon such a work, before thou would make it: let him wake himself and
consider well; how that he wonders at mere faife conceyts. For how should
such innumerable ages pass over, which thou made not; thou being the Author
and Creator of all ages? or what times should these be, which were not made by
thee? or, how should they pass over, if so be they never were? Seeing therefore
thou art the Creator of all times; if any time had passed before thou made
heaven and earth; why then is it said, that thou did rest from thy work? For
that very time did thou make: nor could there any time pass over, before
thou had made those times. But if before heaven and earth there were no time,
why is it then demanded, what thou Then did? For there was no THEN, when as
there was no time. Nor do thou in Time, precede Time: for so thou should
not precede all Times.

2. But thou go before all time passed, by the high advantage of an
euer-present Eterniti^: and thou go beyond all times to come, even because
they are to come; seeing that they shall no sooner come, but they shall be
past: whereas thou art still Psalm. 101. 27
the same, and thy years fail not. Thy years neither go nor come; whereas
these years of ours, do both go and come, that (in their order) they may all
come. Thy years are in standing all at once, because they are still at a stay:
nor are those that go, thrust out by those that come, for that they pass not
away at all; but these of ours shall all be, even when they shall not all be.
Thy years are one day; and thy day, is not every day, But to day: seeing thy
To day gives not place unto To morrow, nor comes in place of yesterday. Thy
Today, is Eternity: therefore did thou beget Him coeternall to thy self,
unto whom thou saydst, This day have I Psala. 7.
begotten thee. Thou have made all times; and before all times thou art:
neither in any time, was there not a time.

CHAP. 14. Of the nature and three differences of time.
1. IN no time This he translates There was therefore no time, wherein thou
made not (...).
therefore, did thou not make any thing: because very time it self is of thy
making: and there be no times coeternall with thee, for that thou still
remainest the same. But should they still be so, verily they should not be
times. For what is time? who is able easily and briefly to explayne that? who
is able so much as in a conceit to comprehend any one term drawn from the
nature of time, aptly to express time by? What now in our usual discourse do
we more familiarly and knowingly make mention of, then Time? And surely, we
understand it well enough, when we speak of it: and we understand it so,
when in speaking with another, we hear it named.

2. What is time then? If nobody asks me, I can tell: but if I were desirous
to explayne it to one that should ask me, plainly I cannot tell him. Boldly
for all this dare I affirm my self to know thus much; that if nothing were
already passed, there should be no past time: and if there were nothing to
come, there should be no time to come: and if there were nothing in present
being, there should now be no present time. Those two times therefore, passed
and to come, in what sort are they, seeing the passed is now no longer, and
that to come, is not yet? As for the present, should it always be present and
never pass into time past; verily it should not be Time, but Eternity. If the
present (now) be even therefore made Time, because it passes into time past;
how then can we say that to be, whose Cause of being is, to make it not to
be: that we cannot forsooth affirm Time to have any being, but for this
reason only, that it goes onward to a not-being.

CHAP. 15. No time can be said to be long.
1. AND yet we say, Time is long, and, time is short: though neither do we
speak this, but of the time passed or to come. A long time past, (for example)
we call an hundred years since: and a long time to come, an hundred years
hence. But a short time passed, we call (suppose) ten days since; and a short
time to come, ten days hence. But in what sense is that either long or short,
which at all is not? For the passed, is not now; and the future, is not yet.
Let us not therefore say, It is long; but of the past time let us say, It has
been long; and of the time to come, It will be long. O Lord my God, my light,
shall not thy truth laugh at man for this? For what passed time has been
long? when it was already passed, has it been long, or when it was yet
present? For then was it in best possibility to be long, when that was in
present being, which should be long. As for the passed time, it was now no
longer; wherefore had that no possibility to be long, which had at all no
being. Let us not therefore say, Time passed has been long: for we shall
never find, what has been long, seeing that ever since it was past, it is no
more. But let us say, That present time has been long: because, when it was
present, then was it long. For having not hitherto passed away, that so it
could not be; even therefore had it such a present being, as was in
possibility to have been long: whereas after it was once past, that term at
once ceased to be long, which ceased to be at all.

2. Let us see therefore, O thou soul of man, whether yet the present time may
be long: For to thee it is given to be sensible of the distances of time, and
to measure them. What now will thou answer me? Are an hundred years in
present, a long time? See first, whether an hundred years may be present, or
no. For if the first of these years be now a running; that one is present
indeed, but the other ninety and nine be to come, and therefore are not yet.
But if the second year be now current, then is one past already, another in
present being, and all the rest to come. And if we suppose, any middle year of
this hundred to be now present; all before it, are past, all after it, to
come. Wherefore an hundred years cannot possibly be present. See again,
whether that one which is now a running, be now present; seeing that even of
that, if the first month be now a running, then are all the rest to come. If
the second, then is the first past, and the rest not yet come on. Therefore,
neither is the year now a spending, all present together: and if it be not all
present, then is not the year present. For twelve months are a year; of which
that one now a running, is present; all the rest either past, or to come.
Although neither is that month now a running, present; but one day of it
only: if the first, the rest are to come; if the last, the rest are past: if
any of the middle, then is that between the past and the future.

2. See how the present time, (which only we found meet to be called long)
is now abridged to the length scarce of one day. But let us examine that also;
because not so much as one day is wholly present. For four and twenty hours of
night and day, do fully make it up: of which, the first has the rest to come;
the last has them passed: and any of the middle ones has those before it,
already past, those behind it, yet to come; yea, that one hour is wasted out,
in still-vanishing minutes. How much soever of it is flowne away, is past;
whatsoever remaynes behind, is to come. If any instant of time be conceived,
which cannot be divided either into none, or at most into the smallest
particle of moments; that is the only it, which may be called present; which
little yet flies with such full speed from the future to the passed; as that
it is not lengthened out with the very least stay. For lengthened out if it
be, then is it divided into the past and the future. As for the present, it
takes not up any space: where then is the Time, which we may call long? Is it
to come? Surely we do not say, that that is long; because that of it is not yet
come which may be long: but say, It will be long. When therefore will it be?
For if even then, seeing that is yet to come; it shall not even then be long;
because that of it which may be long, shall not be yet come. But if it shall
only then be long, when from a time to come (which is not yet) it shall begin
now to be; and shall be made present, that so it may now be, that which may be
long; then does the present time cry out in the words above rehearsed, That it
self can never become long.

CHAP. 16. Of our measuring of times.
1. AND yet, Lord, are we sensible of the distances of times; yea, we can
compare them one with another, and say, that some are shorter, and others
longer* We measure also, how much this time is longer or shorter then that,
and we find this to be double, or thrice as long; and that but once; or this
just so much as that. Yea as the times are upon passing, do we measure them;
when by casting them over in our minds, we observe them. As for the past times,
which now are not; or the future, which yet are not, who is able to measure
them: unless perchance some one man be so bold to affirm, that That may be
measured, which is not? All the whole time is a passing, it may be observed
and measured well enough: but when it is once passed, it possibly cannot,
because it is not.

CHAP. 17. Where time past, and to come now are.
1. I Ask, Father, I affirm nothing: tutor me, O my God, and direct me. Who
is he that will tell me how there are not three Times, as we learned when we
were boys, and as we taught other boys, the Past, Present, and the Future;
but the Present only: because the other two are not at all? Or have they a
being also; but such as proceeds out of some unknown secret, when out of the
Future, the Present is made; and returns it into some secret again, when the
Past is made out of the Present? For where had they, who have foretold things
to come before seen them, if as yet they be not? For that which is not,
cannot be seen. And so for those that should relate the things Past: verily
they could not relate true stories, if in their mind they did not discern
them. Which if they were none, could no way be discerned. There are therefore
both things past and to come.

CHAP. 18. How times passed, and to come, be now present.
1. YEt give me leave, Lord, to look further. Suffer not, O thou my hope, my
intentions to be disturbed. If (now) there be times passed, and times to
come; feign would I know where they be: which yet if I be not able to
conceive, yet thus much I know, that wheresoeeuer they now be, they are not
there in the nature of future, past or present. For if there also future they
be, then are they not there yet: if there also they be past, then are they not
there still. Wheresoever therefore and whatsoever they be, they are in no other
nature there, but as present. As for things passed, when ever true stories are
related, they be then drawn out of our memory: not (I mean) the things
themselves which are gone and past, but such words as being conceived by the
images of those things; they, in their passing through our Senses, have, as
their own footesteps, left imprinted in our minds. For example, Mine own
Childhood, which at this instant is not, yet in the time past is; which time at
this instant is not: but as for the image of it, when I call that to mind, and
tell of it; I do even in the Present behold it: and that, because it is still
in my memory.

2. Whether or no, there be a like cause of foretelling things to come, that
(namely) of those things which as yet are not; the images may in the present
be fore-conceyued, I read it Prasentiantur (as the margent of one printed
copy directs me) and not prasententur. We have Prasensio, a few lines after.
as if already extant, I confess unto thee, O my God, that I know not. This
one thing surely I know; that we use very often to premeditate upon our
future actions, and that that forethinking is present: but as for the action
which we forthink our selves of, that is not yet in being, because it is yet to
come. Which, so soon as we have set upon, and are beginning once to do what
we premeditated; then shall that action come into being: because then it is no
longer future, but present. Which way soever therefore this secret
Foreconceyuing of things to come be held to be; nothing surely can be seen,
but that which now is in being. As for that which now is, it is not future, but
present. Wheneuer there fore things to come are said to be seen, it is not the
things themselves which as yet are not; that is, which are to come hereafter;
but the causes per chance, or the fignes of them which are seen: and those are
indeed now in being Future therefore they are not but present unto the Seers:
out of which these Future things fore conceived in the mind, are foretold.
Which fore-conceptions again are now present: yea, and those who foretell the
things, do behold the conceptions already present before them.

3. Let now the numerous variety of things produce me some example. I look
upon the day breaking, and I fore show upon it, that the Sun is about to
rise. That which I look upon, is present that which I foresignifie, is to
come: not the Sun, I mean, which already is; but the Sunn-rising which is
not yet. And yet if I did not in my mind imagine the Sunrising it self, (as
now I do, whilst I speak of it) never could I foretell it. But neither is
that Break of day which I discern in the sky, the Sunrysing, notwithstanding
it goes before it; no nor that Imagination of my mind neither: which two are
seen now in present, that the other may be foretold to be a coming
hereafter. Future things therefore are not yet: and if yet they be not, at all
they are not: and if so they be not; possible to be seen, they are not: yet
foretold they may be by somethings Signs, Causes, or fore-conceptions: as
before he said.
present, which both are already, and are seen.

CHAP. 19. He demands of God, how Future things be foreknowne.
1. But tell, O thou Reigner over thy cretures: what is the manner, by which
thou teach souls these things that are to come? For thou have already
taught thy Prophets, which is the way that thou unto whom nothing is to come,
do teach things to come; or rather out of Future, do inform us of things
present. For, that which is not, cannot be taught. Too too far is this way out
of my kenning: it has gotten out of my reach, I cannot by mine own power
arrive up to it; but by thy assistance I may again: even when thou shall
vouchsafe me that most sweet light, of the inward eyes of my soul.

CHAP. 20. These three differences of times how they are to be called.
1. Clear now it is and plain, that there are neither things to come, nor
things past: Nor do we properly say, There be three times, past, present, and
to come. And yet perchance it might be properly said too, There be three three
times; a present time, of passed things; a present time, of present things; and
a present time of future things. For indeed three such as these in our souls
there be; but other-where do I not see them. The present time of passed things
is our Membry; the present time of present things, is our Sight; the present
time of future things, our Expectation. If thus we be permitted to speak,
then see I three times; yea and I confess there are three. Let this also be
said, There be three ttmes, Past, present, and to come; according to our
mis-applyed custom, let it so be said: See, I shall not much be I troubled at
it, neither gainsay, nor find fault with it; provided that be understood
which is said, namely, that neither that which is to come, have any being now;
no nor that which is already passed. For but a very few things there are, which
we speak properly; but very many that we speak improperly, though yet we
understand one another meaning.

CHAP. 21. How time may be measured.
1. AS therefore I was even now a saying; We take such measure of the times in
their passing by, as we may be able to say, This time is twice so much, as that
one; or, This is just so much, as that: and so of any other parts of time,
which be measurable. We do therefore (as I said) take measure of the times as
they are passing by. And if any man should now ask me, How know thou? I
might answer, I do know, because we do measure them: for we cannot measure
things that are not; and verily, times past and to come, are not. But for the
present time now, how do we measure that; seeing it has no space? We measure
it therefore, even whilst it passes; for when it is passed, then we measure
it not: for there will, be nothing to be measured.

2. But from what place, and by which way, and whitherto passes this time while
it is a measuring? whence, but from the time Future? Which way, but by the time
present? whither, but into the time passed? From that therefore, which is not
yet: by that, which has no space: into that, which is not still. Yet what is
it we measure, if not time in some space? For we use not to say, Single, and
double, and triple, and equal, or any other way that we speak of time; but
with reference still to the spaces of times. In what space therefore do we
measure the time present? Whether in the Future space, whence it passed? but
that which is not yet, we cannot measure. Or in the present, by which it
passed? but no space, we do not measure: or in the past, to which it passed?
But neither do we measure that, which is not still.

CHAP. 22. He begs of God the resulution of a difficulty.
1. MY some is all on fire to be resolved of this most intricate (...). Shut
it not up, O Lord God, O my good father; in the name of Christ I beseech thee
do not so shut up these usual, but yet hidden things; from this desire of
mine, that it be hindered from piercing into them: but let them shine out unto
me, thy mercy, O Lord, enlightening me. Whom shall I make my demands unto
concerning these points? And to whom shall I more fruitefully confess my
ignorance, then unto thee, whom these studies of mine (so vehemently burning to
understand thy Scriptures) are no ways troublesome? Give me, Lord, what I
love: for love I do, and this love have thou given me. Give it me, Father,
who truly know to give good gifts unto thy Math 7. 1.
Children. Give me, because I have taken upon me to know thee: and This he
translates. And my labor is apparent to thee
it is painful Psalm. 73 16
unto me until thou openest it.

2. Even by Christ I beseech thee, in the name of that Holy of holies, let not
man's answer disturb me. For I believed, and therefore do I psalm. 116. 10
speak. This is my hope, this do I pant after, that I may contemplate the
delights of the Lord. Behold, thou have made my days I read it breues, in
stead of veteres: for that is nearer the sense of Psalm. 39. 5. which the Latin
copies refer us to in their margents.
short, and they pass away, and I know not how. And we talk of time and
time, and times, and times. How long time is it since he said this; how land
time since he did this: and how long time since I saw that: and this syllable
has double time, to that single short syllable. These words we hear, and
these terms we understand, and are understood again. Most manifest and
ordinary they are, and yet the selfsame things too, deeply hidden: yea, the
finding out of the secret of them, would prove a very new device.

CHAP. 23. He cleares this question, what Time is.
1. I Heard a learned man once deliver it, That the motions of the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, and not the years, were the very true Times. But why then
should not the motions of all bodies in general rather be times? But what if
the lights of heaven should cease, and the potters wheel run round; should
there be no time by which we might measure those whirlings about: and might
pronounce of it; that either it moved with equal pauses: or, if it turned
sometimes flower, and other whiles quicker, that some rounds took up longer
time, and other shorter? or even whilst we were a saying this should we
speak in Time? or, should there in our words be any syllables short, and
others long, but for this reason only; that those took up a shorter time in
founding, and these a longer. Grant unto us men the skill; O God, in a little
hint to descry those notions, as be common to things both great and small.

2. The stars and lights of heaven, it is true, be appointed Gen 1. 14 This
he translates, There are also Stars and lights in signs and in seasons, and
in years, etc
for signs, and for seasons, and for years, and for days. They be indeed:
yet should I never, (on the one side) affirm, The whirling about of that fiery
The Sun, though Sommalius copy reads it ligneolae; as if he meant the Potters
wheel.
wheel to be the day; nor though it were not, that therefore (on the other
side) there were no time at all, let Him affirm either of these: I for my
part, desire to understand the force and nature of time, by which we are to
measure the motions of bodies; as when we say, (for example) this motion to
be twice longer then that. For I demand, Seeing this is it which is called the
day; not the stay only of the Sun upon the earth, (according to which
account the day is one thing, and the night another;) but its whole circuit
that it runs from East to East again; according to which account we say,
There are so many days passed: because that the days being reckoned with
their nights, are usually called So many days, and that the nights are not to
be out of the reckoning. Seeing therefore that a day is made complete by the
motion of the Sun, and by his circuit from East to East again; I thereupon
demand, whether it be the motion that makes the day; or the stay in which
that motion is finished, or both? For if the first be the day; then should we
have a day of it, although the Sun should finish that course of his in so
small a space of time, as one hour comes to. If the second, then should not
that make a day, if between one Sunrise and another, there were but so short
a stay, as one hour comes to; but the Sun must go four and twenty times
about, for the making up of one day. If both, then could not this neither be
called a day, if the Sun should run this whole round in the space of one
hour: no nor that; if while the sun stood still, so much time should over
pass, as the Sun usually makes his whole course in, from morning to morning.

3. I will not therefore demand now, what that should be which is called day:
but, what Time should be: by which we measuring the circuit of the Sun,
should say that he had then finished it in half the time he was wont to do;
if so be he had gone it over in so small a space, as twelve hours come to:
and when upon comparing of both times together, we should say, that this is
but a single time, and that a double time; notwithstanding that the Sun should
run his round from east to east, sometimes in that single time, and other
sometimes in that double time. Let no man therefore say unto me hereafter,
That the motions of the celestial bodies be the Times; because that when at
the prayer Joshua. 11.
of a certain man, the Sun had stood still, till he could atchieue his
victorious battle. The Sun stood still indeed, but the time went on: for in
a certain space of time of his own, (enough to serve his turn) was that
battle stricken and gotten. I perceive time therefore, to be a certain
stretching. But do I perceive it indeed, or do I but seem to my self to
perceive it? Thou, O the Light and Truth, shall more clearly show it me.

CHAP. 24. Time is it, by which we measure the motion of bodies.
1. Do thou command me to allow of it, if any man should define Time to be
the motion of a body? No, thou do not bid me. For there is no body (that I
hear of) moved, but in time. This thou say: but that the motion of a body
should be time, I never did hear: nor do thou say it. For when a body is
moved, I by Time then measure, How long it may have moved, from the instant it
first began to move, until it left moving? And if so be I did not see the
instant it began in; and if it continues to move so long, as I cannot see
when it ends; I am not then able to measure more of it, but only perchance,
from that instant I first saw it begin, until I my self leave measuring.
And if I look long upon it; I can only signify it to be a long time, but
not how long: because when we pronounce how long, we must do it by
comparison; as for example, This is as long as that, or this twice so long as
that, or the like. But were we able to make observation of the distances of
those places, whence, and whither a body or his parts go, which is moved; (as
if suppose it were moved in a Turn) then might we precisely say, how much
time the motion of that body or his part, from this place unto that, was
finished in.

2. Seeing therefore the motion of a body is one thing, and that by which we
measure how long it is, another thing; who cannot now judge, which of the two is
rather to be called time? For and if a body be sometimes moved uncertainly,
and stands still other sometimes; then do we measure, not his motion only,
but his standing still too: and we say, It stood still, as much as it moved;
or it stood still twice or thrice so long as it moved; or any other space
which our measuring has either perfectly taken, or guessed at; more or less,
as we use to say. Time therefore is not the motion of a body.

CHAP. 25. He prays again.
1. NOw I confess to thee, O Lord, that I yet know not what time is: yea, I
confess again unto thee, O Lord, that I know well enough, how that I speak
this in time, and that having long spoken of time, that very long is nothing
else but a pawse of time. How then come I to know this, seeing I know not what
time is? or is my not knowing, only perchance a not hitting upon the way of
expressing what I know? Woe is me, that do not so much as know, what that is
which I know not. Behold, O my God, I protest before thee, that I lie not; but
as my mouth speaks, so my heart thinks. Thou shall light my candle, O Lord:
O my God, enlighten thou my Psalm. 18. 28.
darkness.

CHAP. 26. The measuring of the feet, and syllables of a verse.
1. DOes not my soul most truly confess unto thee that I do measure times?
But do I indeed measure them, O my God, and yet know not what I measure? do
I measure the motion of a body in time, and the time it self do I not
measure? Or could I indeed measure the motion of a body, how long it were; and
in how long space it could come from this place to that, unless I could
withal measure the time in which it is moved? This same very time therefore,
which way do I measure it? do we by a shorter time proportion out the measure
of a longer; as by the space of a cubit, we do the space of a longer beam;
for so indeed we seem by the space of a short syllable, to measure the space
of a long syllable: and to say that one is double to the other. Thus measure
we the spaces of the Staves Metimur spacia carminumspa cijs versuum. I suppose
that Carnen here, signifies the several Stanzaes or Staves of a poem, rather
then the whole poem: for a staff consisting of so many verses of several
kinds; was then by measure acknowledged a true staff, when it had the
complete number, variety, and order of verses; as an Hexameter verse was by
measure found true, when his seete were of their due kind, number, and order.
of a Poem, by the spaces of the verses; and the spaces of the verses, by the
spaces of the feet; and the spaces of the feet, by the spaces of the
syllables; and the spaces of long syllables, by the spaces of short syllables.
I do not mean measuring by the pages; for that way we should measure places,
not times: but when in our pronouncing, words pass away, we say it is a long
Stanza, because it is composed of so many verses: they be long verses, because
they consist of so many feet; long feet, for that they are stretched out into
so many syllables; it is a long syllable, because double to a short one.

2. But neither can we this way comprehend the certain measure of time:
because it may so fall out, that a shorter verse if it be pronounst leysurely,
may take up more time then a longer verse, pronounst roundly. And so for a
verse, a foot and a Syllable. Upon which ground it seems unto me, That time
is nothing else, but a stretching Distensionem: and so in the next Chapter,
Tendebatur in spacium.
out in length; but of what, I know not. O what wonder is it, if it be of the
very mind? For what is it, I beseech thee, O my God, that I now measure;
whereas I say (either at large) that this is a longer time then that: or (more
particularly) that this is double, to that? I know it to be time that I
measure: and yet do I neither measure the time to come, for that is not yet:
nor time present, because that is not delivered me in any space: nor time past:
because that is not still. What then do I measure? Is it the times as they are
passing, not as they are passed? for so was I a saying.

CHAP. 27. He begins to resolve the former question, How we measure time.
1. COurage my mind, and bend thy intentions strongly upon thine own self.
It Is God that is our helper, Psalm. 100. 3
he that has made us, and not we ourselves. Look out, see where Truth
begins to clear up: Come on, let us put the case: The voice of a body
begins to sound, and it does now found, yea it sounds still; but list, now it
leaves sounding: it is silence therefore now; and that voice is quite over, and
is now no more. This voice, before it sounded, was to come, and so could not
then be measured, because as yet it was not, neither just now can it, because
it is no longer. Then therefore, whilst it sounded, it might; because there
was something that might be measured. But yet even then made it no stay; for
onward still it went, and past at length quite away. Might it then be measured
the rather, for that? By this passing on therefore, was it stretched out into
some space of time, by which it might be measured; because the present has no
space. If therefore then, it might; then, lo, let us put the case, that
another voice has begun to sound, and still does, with the same continued
tenor without any distinction: let us now while it sounds, measure it: seeing
when it has left sounding, it will then be past, and nothing left to be
measured.

2. Let us measure it verily, and tell how much it is. But it sounds still; nor
can it be measured but from the instant it began in, unto the end it left in.
For the very space between, is the thing we measure, namely, from some
beginning, unto some end. For which reason, a voice that is not yet ended,
cannot be measured, as that it may be said how long, or short it is; nor can
it be called equal to another, or double to a single, or the like: and so
soon (again) as it is ended, it shall be no more. How may it then be
measured? We measure times, for all this; and yet neither those, which are not
yet come; nor yet those which are now no longer; nor yet those, which are not
lengthened out by some pawse; nor yet those which have no bounds. So that we
neither measure the times to come, nor the past, nor the present, nor the
passing times; and yet do we measure times.

3. O God All creator! this verse of eight syllables, interchangeably varies it
self between short and long syllables. Four therefore be short, namely the
first, third, fifth, and seventh: which be but single, in respect of the four
long, namely the second, fourth, sixth, and eighth. Every one of these, to
every one of those, has a double time: I pronounce them over and over; and
even so I find it, as plainly as sense can show it. So far as Sense can
manifest it, I measure a long syllable by a short, and I sencibly find it to
have twice so much: but now when one sounds after another, if the former be
short, and the latter long, how shall I then hold fast the short one; and how
in measuring the long, shall I so lay them together, as that I may find this to
have twice so much as that; seeing the long cannot begin to sound, unless the
short leaves sounding? yea, that long one it self do I measure as not present,
seeing I measure it not till it be ended. Now his ending is his passing away.
What is it therefore that I measure? where is that short syllable I read it qua
in stead of quam.
by which I measure? where is that long one which I am to measure. They have
sounded up their sound, they are both flowne, and gone; they are now no more,
and yet do I measure them? Yes; and confidently do I answer (so far as a man
may trust a well-experienced Quantum excercitato sensui creditur. So I read
it, and not Sensu.
sense) that this syllable is but single, and that double; in respect of space
of time I mean: and yet could I not do thus much, unless these syllables were
already past and ended.

4 It Is not therefore these voices (which now are not) that I measure: but
something it is even in mine own memory, which there remaynes fastened. It Is in
thee O my mind, that I measure the Times. Do not thou clamorously contradict
me now, in that which is so; nay, do not disturb thine own self with these
rowtes of thine own impressions. In thee (I say) it is, that I measure the
times. The impression, which things passing by, cause in thee, remaynes even
when the things are gone: that is it which being still pressent, I do measure:
not the things them selves; for they purposely pass away, that this impression
may be made. This do I measure, whenas I measure the times. Either therefore
they are the times, or they are not which I measure.

5. But what when we measure Silence; and say that this Silence has held as
long time as that voice did; do we not then lengthen out our thoughts to the
measure of a voice, even as if it now sounded; that so we meditating or
conning something in these vacant He means, that a verse or speech repeated
in silence, takes up as much time as if it were pronounced. ^o that though
silence be not measured by long and short syllables, as words are, yet it takes
up Time. So that it is not motion only that makes time. The other Translater
has done it other-wise, which I leave to censure.
distances of Silence, may be able to say it over in a space of time? For when
the voice and tongue give over, yet then in our meditations go we over Poems,
and Verses, and any other discourse, or Dimensions of Motions; yea, and for the
spaces of times, how much this is in respect of that, do we (in our thoughts)
repeat over; no other wise then if vocally we did pronounce them. Suppose a
man were about to utter a long speech; and in his thoughts should resolve how
long it should be: this man has even in silence already spent a space of
time; and in commending it to his memory, has already begun to utter that
speech, which continues sounding, until it be brought unto the end proposed.
Yea it has sounded, and will sound; for so much of it, as is finished, has
sounded already, and the rest will sound. And thus passes it on, until the
present intention conueighs over the Future into the past: by the diminution of
the future, the past gayning increase; even until by the universal wasting
away of the future, all grows into the past.

CHAP. 28. We measure times in our mind.
1. But how comes that future, which as yet is not, to be diminished or wasted
away? or how comes that past, which now is no longer, to be increased? unless
in the mind which acts all this, there be three things done? For it
expects, it marks attentively, it remembers; that so the thing which it
expects, through that act or power which marketh, may pass into that which
remembers. Who therefore can deny, that things to come are not as yet? and for
all that, is there in the mind, an expectation of things to come. And who can
deny, past things to be now no longer? and yet is there still in the mind a
memory of things passed. And who can deny that the present time wants space,
because it passes away in a point? and yet our attentive marking of it
continues still, through which the future passes to be away. The future
therefore (which is not yet) is not a long time: but the long future time, is
merely A long expectation of the time to come. Nor is the time past (which is
not still) a long time; but a long passed time, is merely A long memory of the
passed time.

2. I am about to repeat a song that Quod no^i. That I have by heart, says
the other translater which quite matreth the sense, seeing he speaks not ^i^l
afterward, of the taking ^ into (...)
I know. Before I begin, my expectation alone retches it self over the
whole: but so soon as I shall have once begun, how much so ever of it I
shall (by repeating) take into the passed; just so much is retcht along in my
memory: yea and doubly retcht is the life of this action of mine; into my
memory, so far as concerns that part which I have repeated already; and into
my Expectation too, in respect of what I am about to repeat now: yea, and all
this while is my marking faculty present at hand, through which, that which was
Future, is conueighed over, that it may become the passed: which how much the
more diligently it is done over and over again; so much more the Expectation
being shortened, is the memory enlarged; till the whole Expectation be at length
vanished quite away; when namely that whole action being ended, all shall be
absolutely passed into the memory. What is now done in this whole song, the
same is done also in every part of it, yea and in every Syllable of it. The
same order holds in a longer action too; whereof perchance this song is but a
part. This holds too, throughout the whole course of a man's life, the parts
whereof be all the Actions of the man. It generally holds also, throughout the
whole age of the sons of men; the parts whereof be the whole lives of men.

CHAP. 29. How the mind lengthens out it self.
1. But because thy loving kindness is better then Psalm. 63. 3.
the life it self; behold, my life is a thing merely stretched out: but thy
right hand has received me, even in my Lord the Son of man, the Mediator
betwixt thee that art but one, and us that are many, in many sins, by many
sufferings; that by him I may apprehend even as I am apprehended, and that I
may be recalled from my old conversation, to follow that one thing, and forget
what is behind: not called back, to follow those things that be future and
transitory: St. Austen loves to play with the word; which ofttimes makes him
hard to translate, and most commonly loses the conceit.
not stretched forth immoderately, but unanimously bent toward those things
which are before me: not (I say) too immoderately stretched out, but with a full
bent follow I hard on, for the garland of my heavenly calling, where I may
hear the voice of thy praise, and contemplate that sweetness of thine, which
is neither not now to come, nor ever to pass away. But now are my years spent
in mourning, and thou, O Lord, my father everlasting, art my comfort. And even
now have I ranged up and down after an inquisition of Times, whose order I am
yet ignorant of: yea my thoughts remain distracted with tumultuous varieties,
even the inmost bowels of my soul; until I may be run into thee, thoroughly
purified and molten by the fire of thy love.

CHAP. 30. He goes on in the same discourse.
1. ANd after that, will I leave running, and grow hard in thee, appearing in
mine own form, thy truth: nor will I endure the questions of such people, who
in a hot fever thirst for more then their bellies will hold; such as say,
What did God make before he made heaven and earth? Or, What came in his mind
to make any thing then, having never made any thing before? Give them grace, O
Lord, well to bethink themselves what they say; and to find, That they cannot
say Never, where there was no Time. That he is said therefore Never to have
made, what is it else to say, then in no time to have made? Let them see
therefore, that there cannot possibly be any Time, without some or other of thy
Creatures: and let them forbear this so vain talking. Let them strive rather
toward these things which are before; and understand Phil. 3. 13
thee the eternal Creator of all times, to have been before all times; and
that no times be coeternall with thee: no nor any other creature, although
there should have been any creature, before there were any times.

CHAP. 31. How God is known, and how the creature.
1. O Lord my God, what bosom of thy deep secrets is that, and how far
from it have the Consequentia. which are not ill habits and customs of sin,
as the other Translater notes.
consequences of my transgressions cast me? O cure mine eyes, that I may take
joy in thy light. Certainly if there be any mind excelling with such eminent
understanding and foreknowledge, as to know all things past and to come, so
well as I knew that one Song; truly that is a most admirable mind, able with
horror to amaze a man. For where is that He, from whom nothing done either in
the former, or to be done in the after-ages of the world, is no more
concealed, then that song was to me whenas I sang it; namely, what and how
much of it I had sung from the beginning, what, and how much there was yet unto
the ending? But far be it from us to think, that thou the Creator of this
Universe, the Creator of both souls and bodies; far be i^ from us to
think, that thou should no better know what were passed, and what were to
come. Far, yea far more wonderfully, and far more secretly, do thou
know them. For it is not, as when at the note of the singer, or the well-knowne
song of the hearer, through expectation of the words to come, and the
remembering of those that are passed, the affection of the parties be diuersely
stirred, and their Senses strayned up to it; that there can in like manner any
thing chance unto thee that art unchangeably Eternal; that is, the Eternal
Creator of Souls. Like as therefore thou in the beginning knew the heaven
and the earth, without any variety of thy knowledge; even so did thou in the
beginning create heaven and earth, without any distinction of thy action. Let
him that understands it, confess unto thee: and let him that understands
it not, confess unto thee also. Oh how high art thou? and yet the humble in
heart are the house that thou dwell in: For thou vayself Psalm. 146. 4
vvthose that are bowed down: and never can they fall, whose strength thou art.

Saint Augustines Confessions. The twelfth Book.
CHAP. 1. It Is very difficult to find out the truth.
MY heart, O Lord, Here does the other Translater (as his manner is) help out
a false translation, with a marginal note. In his Title he makes the
Scriptures difficult, in stead of the Truth
touched with the words of holy Scripture, is busily employed in this poverty of
my life. And even therefore in our discourse oftentimes, appears there a most
plentiful poverty of humane understanding: because that our enquiring spends
us more words, then our finding out does; and we are longer about demanding,
then about obtaining; and our hand that knocks, has more work to do, then
our other hand that receives. A promise have we laid hold of, who shall
defeat us of it? If God be on our side, who can be against us? Ask, and
Mat. 7. 7.
ye shall have; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened
unto you. For every one that asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds: and to
him that knocks, shall it be opened. These be thine own promises: and who
needs fear to be deceived, whenas the Truth promises?

CHAP. 2. That the heaven we see is but earth, in respect of the heaven of
heavens, which we see not.
1. Unto thy Highness, the lowlynesse of my tongue now confesses: because
thou have made heaven and earth; this heaven (I mean) which I see, and this
earth that I tread upon: whence is this earth that I bear about me? Thou
made it. But where is that Heaven of Heavens made for the Lord, which we
hear of in the words of the Psalmist? The heaven, even the heavens are the
Lords; but the earth Psa. 115 16
has he given to the children of men. Where is that Heaven which we see not?
that in comparison whereof, all this heaven which we see, is but mere earth.
For this heaven is wholly corporeal. For all this which is wholly corporeal, is
not every where beautiful alike in these lower parts; the bottom whereof is
this earth of ours: but in comparison of that Heaven of heavens, even the
heaven to this our earth, is but earth: yea both these great bodies, may not
absurdly be called earth, in comparison of that I know not what manner of
heaven, which is the Lords, and not given to the Sons of men.

CHAP. 3. Of the darkness upon the face of the Deep.
1. AND now was this Earth without Or, invisible. Genesis 1. 2. A great part of
this book, is discourse a the manner of the creation of the world.
shape and void, and there was, I know not what profoundnesse of the Deep,
upon which there was no light, because as yet it had no shape. Therefore did
thou command it to be written, that darkness was upon the face of the deep:
which what other thing was it, then the Absence of light? For if there had been
light, where should ^^ have been bestowed, but in being over all; by showing
it self, and enlightening others? Where therefore as light was not yet, what
was it that darkness was present, but that light was absent? Darkness
therefore was over all hitherto, because light was absent; like as where there
is no found, there is silence. And what is it to have silence there, but to
have no sound there? Have not thou, O Lord, taught these things unto the soul,
which thus confesses unto thee? Have not thou taught me Lord, that before thou
createdst and diuersifyedst this unshapen matter, there was nothing, neither
color, nor figure, nor body, nor Spirit? and yet was there not altogether an
absolute nothing: for there was a certain vnshapednes, without any form in it.

CHAP. 4. Of the Chaos, and what Moses called it.
1. ANd how should that be called, and by what sense could it be insinuated to
people of slow apprehensions, but by some ordinary word? And what, among all
the parts of the world can be found to come nearer to an absolute
vnshapednesse, then the Earth and the deep? For surely they be less
beautiful in respect of their low situation, then those other higher parts
are, which are all transparent and shining. Wherefore then may I not conceive
the vnshapelynesse of the (first) matter which thou createdst without form (of
which thou were to make this goodly world) to be significantly intimated unto
men, by the name of Earth without shape and void?

CHAP. 5. That this Chaos is hard to conceive.
1. When herein the thoughts of man are seeking for somewhat which the Sense
may fasten upon; and returns answer to it self, It is no intelligible form
as life is, or as Justice is; because it is the matter of bodies. Nor is it any
thing sensible; for that in this earth, invisible as yet, and without form,
there was nothing to be perceived. Whilst man's thoughts thus discourse unto
himself, let him endeavor either to know it, by being ignorant of it; or to
be ignorant, by knowing it.

CHAP. 6. What himself sometimes thought of it.
1. FOr mine own part, O Lord, if I may confess all unto thee, both by tongue
and pen, what-euer thy self have taught me of that matter, (the name whereof
having heard before, but not understanding, because they told me of it, who
themselves understood it not) I conceived of it as having innumerable forms
and diverse, and therefore indeed did I not at all conceive it in my mind: I
tossed up and down certain ugly and hideous forms, all out of order; but yet
forms they were notwithstanding: and this I called without form. Not that it
wanted all for me, but because it had such a misshapen one: insomuch as if any
unexpected thought, or absurdity, presented it self unto me, my sense would
straight ways turn from it, and the fraylenesse of my humane discourse would
be distracted. And as for that which my conceit ran upon, it was (me
thought) without form, not for that it was deprived of all form, but it
comparison of more beautiful forms: but true reason did persuade me, that I
must utterly uncase it of all remnants of forms whatsoever, if so be I meant
to conceive a matter absolute without form: but I could not. For sooner would
I have imagined that not to be at all. which should be deprived of all form;
then once conceive there was likely to be any thing betwixt form and nothing;
a matter neither formed, nor nothing; without form, almost nothing.

2. My mind gave over thereupon to question any more about it with my spirit,
which was wholly taken up already with the images of formed bodies, which I
changed and varied as me listed: and I bent my enquiry upon the bodies
themselves, and more deeply looked into their mutability, by which they both
leave to be, what they have been; and begin to be, what they have never
been. And this shifting out of one form into another, I suspected to be
caused by I know not what thing without form, not by nothing at all: yet this I
was desirous to know, not to suspect only. But if my voice and pen should here
confess all unto thee, whatsoever knots thou did vnkn^t for me in this
question; what Reader would have so much patience to be made conceive it? Nor
shall my heart, for all this, cease at any time to give thee honor, and a Song
of praise, for all those things which it is not able to express. For the
changeable condition of changeble things, is of it self capeable of all those
forms, into which these changable things are changed. And this changeableness,
what is it? Is it a soul, or is it a body? or is it any figure of a soul or
body? Might it be said properly that nothing, were something, and yet were not;
I would say, This were it: and yet was it both of these; that so it might be
capeable of these visible and compounded figures.

CHAP. 7. Heaven is greater then Earth.
1. But whence are both these, but from thee; from whom are all things, so far
forth as they have being? But how much the further off from thee, so much the
vnliker thee. I do not mean Here Sommalius edition reads it better then
others. Neque enim in locis. Itaeque cu domine etc. In stead of Ista tu,
without a period at locis.
farrenesse of places. Thou therefore, O Lord, who art not another in another
place; nor otherwise, in another place: but the same, and the very same, and
the very selfsame, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God almighty, did in the
Beginning, which is in thine own self, in thy Wisdom, which was borne of
thine own Substance, create something, and that out of nothing.

2. For thou createdst heaven and earth; not out of thine own self; for so
should they have been equal to thine only Begotten Son, and thereby unto
thine own self too: whereas no way just it had been, that any thing should
be equal unto thee, which was not of thee. Nor was there any thing besides
thy self, of which thou might create these things, O God, who art One in
Trinity, and Three in Unity. Therefore out of nothing have thou created Heaven
and Earth; a great thing, and a small thing: for thou art omnipotent and good,
to make all things good, even the great heaven, and the little earth. Thou
were, and nothing else was there besides, out of which thou createdst Heaven
and Earth: two certain things; one near thee, the other near to Because at
the first creation it had no form nor thing in it.
nothing. One, for thy self to be superior unto; the other, which nothing
should be inferior unto.

CHAP. 8. The Chaos was created out of nothing, and out of that, all things.
1. But that Heaven of heavens which was for thy Psa. 115. 16
self, Lord, and this earth, which thou gave to the Sons of men to be seen
and felt; was not at first, such as we now both see and feel: for it was
invisible, and unshapen, and there was a deep, upon which there was no light:
or, darkness was upon the deep, that is, more then in the deep. Because
this deep of waters (visible now adays) has in his deepes, a light proper
for its nature; perceiueable howeuer unto the Fishes, and creeping things in
the bottom of it. But all this whole, was almost nothing; because hitherto it
was altogether without form: but yet there was now a matter that was apt to
be formed. For thou Lord, createdst the World, of a matter without form;
which being next to nothing, thou made out of nothing: out of which thou
might make those great works, which we sons of men so much wonder at.

2. For very wonderful is this corporeal heaven; which firmament between
water and water, the second day after the creation of light, thou commandedst
it to be made, and it was made. Which Firmament thou calledst heaven: the
heaven, that is, to this earth and sea, which thou createdst the third day, by
giving a visible figure unto the unshapen matter, which thou createdst before
all days. For even already had thou created The other Translater calls this
The Imperial heaven. The man would or should have said, The Empyreall.
an heaven, before all days: (but that was the Heaven of heavens:) because In
the beginning thou createdst heaven and earth. As for the earth which thou
createdst, it was an vnshapely matter, because it was invisible and without
form, and darkness was upon the deep. Of which invisible earth and without
form, of which vnshapelynes, of which almost nothing, thou might create all
these, of which this changeable world consists; which continues not the same,
but mutability it self appears in it, the times being easy to be observed
and numbered in it. For times are made by the alterations of things; whilst
(namely) their figures are varied and turned; the matter whereof, is this
invisible earth aforesaid.

CHAP. 9. What that Heaven of heavens is.
1. THe Spirit therefore, the Teacher of thy Of Mos^^.
servant, whenas it recounts thee to have in the beginning created heaven and
earth; speaks nothing of any times, nor a word of any days. For verily that
Heaven of heavens which thou createdst in the beginning, is some Intellectual
creature; which, although no ways coeternall unto thee, O Trinity: yet being
partaker of thy eternity, does through the sweetness of that most happy
contemplation of thy self, strongly restrain its own mutability: and without
any fall since its first creation, cleaving close unto thee, has set it self
beyond all rolling interchange of times. Yea, neither is this very
vnshapelynesse of the invisible earth, and without form, once numbered among
the days. For where no figure, nor order is; there does nothing either come,
or go: and where this is not, there plainly are no days, nor any interchange
of temporal spaces.

CHAP. 10. His desire to understand the Scriptures.
1. O Let truth, the light of mine heart, and not mine own darkness, now
speak unto me. I fell off into that, and became, all be-darkned: but yet even
for this, even upon this occasion came I to love thee. I heard thy voice
behind me calling to me to return; but scarcely could I discern it, for
the noise of my sins. But see here I return now, sweating and panting after
thy fountain. Let no man forbid me; of this will I drink, and so shall I
live. For I am not mine own life; if I have lived ill, my death is far from
my self; but it is in thee that I revive again. Speak thou unto me, discourse
thou with me. I have believed thy Bible, but the words of it be most full of
mystery.

CHAP. 11. What he learnt of God.
1. NOw have thou with a (...) voice, O Lord, spoken in my inner care; because
thou art eternal, that only possessest immortality: by reason that thou can
not be changed by any figure or motion; nor is thy Will altered by times:
seeing no Will can be called immortal, which is now one, and then another: all
this is in thy sight already clear to me, and let it be more and more cleared
to me, I beseech thee; and in the manifestation thereof, let me with sobriety
continue under thy wings. Thou toldest me also with a strong voice, O Lord, in
mine inner care, how that it is thy self who made all those Natures and
substances, which are not what thy self is, and which yet have their being:
and how, that only is not from thee, which has no being: no nor the Will that
slydes back from thee that art (eminently,) unto that which has an inferior
being, because that all such backeslyding is transgression and sin; and that
no man's sin does either hurt thee, or disturb the order of thy government,
first or last. All this is in thy sight now clear unto me, and let it be so
more and more, I beseech thee: and in the manifestation thereof, let me
soberly continue under thy wings.

2. With a strong voice thou toldest me likewise in mine inner care; how, that
neither is that creature coeternall unto thy self, whose desire thou only
art; which with a most perseuering chastity greedily drinking thee in, does in
no place and at no time, put off its natural mutability, and thy self being
ever present withit, (unto whom with its whole affection it kepes it self) it
having neither any thing in future to expect, nor conueying any thing which it
remembers, into the time past; is neither altered by any change, nor stretched
along into any times. O blessed creature, (if any such there be) even for
cleaving so fast unto thy blessedness: blessed in thee, the eternal Inhabitant
This shows that by this creature he meant the Heaven of heavens; whereas the
other Translater in 4 marginall notes, thinks he meant the Angels.
and Enlightener thereof. Nor do I find what I am more glad to call the Heaven
of heavens which is the Lords, then thine own House; which still contemplating
that delight This phrase being in the ninth chapter applied to the Heaven of
heavens, she Angels. creature.
which in thee it finds, without any forsaking thee to go into other; a most
pure Chap. 9 he calls is An intellectual And so Chap. 13.
mind, most peacefully continuing one, by that settled estate of peace of those
holy spirits, those Citizens of thy City in heavenly places; which are far
was that it is not here meant of the above those heavenly places that we see.
By this now may the Soul understand, how far she is cast off, by her own
straggling: if namely Psalm. 42. 3.
she now thirsts after thee; if Psalm. 27. 4.
her own tears be now become Psa. 102. 27
her bread, while they daily say unto her, Where is now thy God? If she now
seeks thee alone, and require this one thing, that she may dwell in thy house
all the days of her life.

3. And what is her life, but thou? And what are thy days, but even thy
eternity? like as thy years are, which fail not, because thou art ever the
same. Hereby therefore let the Soul that is able, understand, how far thou
art above all times, eternal; seeing that thy very house, Domus. This the
other Translater twice or thrice turns Family; and all to countenance his
fancy of the Angels; The Angels (as it is thought) were created together with his
heaven; but yet they are not this heaven, for St Austen calls them Citizens of
it.
Which has at no time departed from thee, although it be not coeternall unto
thee; yet by continually and inseparably cleaving unto thee, suffers not the
least changeableness of Times. All this is clear unto me in thy sight, and
more and more let it be so, I be seech thee, and in the manifestation thereof,
let me abide under thy wings.

4. There is, behold, I know not what vnshapednesse in the alterations of these
last made, and lowest creatures: and who shall tell me what; unless such a
one as through the emptynesse of his own heart, wanders and tosses himself up
and down, with his own fancies? Who now but even such a one would tell me,
That if all figure be so wasted and consumed away, as that there only
remains vnshapelynesse, by which the thing was changed and turned out of one
figure into another; that that were able to show unto us, the changeable
courses of the Times? Plainly it can never do it: because, without the
variety of motions, there are no times: and there is no variety, where there is
no forms.

CHAP. 12. Of two creatures not within compasso of time.
1. THese things considred, for as much as thou give, O my God, for as much
as thou stirrest me up to knock, and forasmuch as thou openest to me when I
knock, Mat. 7. 7.
two things I find that thou have made, not within the compass of times;
notwithstanding that neither of them be coeternall with thy self. One, which
is so formed, as that without any ceasing The Heaven of heavens, he means.
to contemplate thee, without any interruption of change; though in it self it
be changeable, yet having been never changed, it may thoroughly for ever enjoy
thy eternity and unchangeableness. The other was so vnshapely, as that it had
wherewithal to be changed out of one form into another; either of motion, or
of station: whereby it might become subject unto time. But this thou did not
leave thus vnshapely; because before all days, thou in the beginning did
create Heaven and Earth; the two things that I spoke of.

2. And the Earth was invisible and without shape, and Gen 1. 2.
darkness was upon the Deep: In which words, is the vnshapelynesse noted unto
us: that such capacities may hereby be drawn on by degrees, as are not able
to conceive so utter a priuatio^ of all the form of it, as should not yet come
so low as a mere nothing: out Out of which earth without shape and void, which
is the Materia prima.
of which another Heaven was to be created, together with a visible earth and
a well furnished: and the Waters replenished with their kinds, and whatsoever
beside is in the setting forth of the world, recorded to have been, not
without days, created: and that He means, that though the Heaven of heavens,
and the first matter of the shapelesse earth, were created without time; that
is, in the beginning of time, either the first day, or before it; yet every
thing else is mentioned to be created in time and upon such days; because they
were to be subject to time and change, from which he exempts the former two.
because they are of such a nature, that the successiue changes of times have
power over them by reason of their appointed alterations of motions and of
forms.

CHAP. 13. The nature of the Heaven of heavens described.
1. THis, O my God, is my private judgment in the mean time, whenas I hear
thy Scripture saying, In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth: and the Earth
was without shape and void, and darkness was upon the deep: and not once
mentioning what day thou createdst them. This I in the mean time judge to be
spoken, because of the Heaven of heavens, that intellectual Heaven; where to
understand, is to know all at once; not in part, not darkly, not through 1 Cor.
13 12
a glass; but in whole, clearly and face to face: not this thing now, and
that thing anon; but (as I said) know all at once, without all succession of
times: and I judge it spoken also, because of that invisible and void Earth,
exempted in like manner from all interchangeablenesse of times, which uses to
have this thing now, and anon that: the reason is, that where there is not any
figure, there can be no variety of this or that. Because of these two, that
One first formed, utterly unperfected Heaven, meaning the Heaven of heavens,
and this other earth, meaning the invisible and shapelesse earth: because of
these two, as I judge in the mean time, did thy Scripture speak without
mention of any days, In the beginning God created Heaven and Earth: He
confirms his Judgment by two arguments.
seeing presently he added what earth he spoke of; and because also the
Firmament being recorded to be created the second day, and called Heaven;
gives us to note, of which Heaven he before spoke, without mention of any
days.

CHAP. 14. The depth of holy Scripture.
1. VVOnderfull is the depth of thy Scriptures; which at first sight, little
ones please themselves withal: and yet are they a wonderful deepnesse, O my
God, a most admirable profundity. Here falls my papist out with fawcy and simple
women (as he styles them for daring to read the Scriptures without license
because they be hard. But does the Popes license make them the easier? If none
should read but such as understand, the St Austen had been barred. I wish our
women would read more, and interpret less. They must read more that they may
understand; not all but something. But if our women have too much, I am sure
yours have too little reading.
A depth, striking horror to look into; even a horror of honor, and a
trembling of love. The enemies of it do I hate vehemently; oh that thou
would slay them with thy two-edged sword, that they might no longer be
enemies unto it: for thus do I love to have them slain unto themselves, that
they may live unto thee. But now behold others not fault-finders, but extollers
of thy book of Genesis: The Spirit of God (say they) which by his servant
Moses wrote these things, would not have those words thus understood: he would
not have it understood, as thou faiest, but so as we say; Unto whom, making
thy self Judge, O thou God of us all, do I thus answer.

CHAP. 15. The difference betwixt - the Creator and the creatures. Some
discourses about the Heaven of Heavens.
1. DAre you affirm it to be false, which with a strong voice, Truth told me
in my inner care, concerning the eternity of the Creator: namely, that his
substance is no ways changed by time, nor his Will separated from his
Substance? Where upon he wills not onething now, and another thing anon, but
that once, and at once, and always, he wills all things that he wills: not
again and again, nor now this, now that: nor wills afterward, what before
he would not: nor be unwilling with that now, which he was willing with
before: because such a will is mutable, and no mutable thing, is eternal: but
our God is eternal. Again, this is told me also in my inner ears, That the
Expectation of things to come, is turned to Sight, whenas they are once come:
and the same Sight again is turned to memory, so soon as they be once past.
Now every Intention which is thus varied, is mutable; and no mutable is
eternal: but our God is eternal. These collections I make, and put together,
and find that God, even my eternal God, has not upon any such new Will made
any creature; nor that his knowledge suffers any transitory passion.

2. What will you then reply, O ye gainesayers? are these things false? No,
they say, What is this? Is this false (...)* That every nature that is formed,
and every matter capable of form, has no other being, but from Him who is
supremely good, because supremly he has his being? neither (say they) do we
deny this. What then? do you deny this, that there is a certain sublime
creature, with so chaste aloue cleaving unto the true, and true eternal God; as
that notwithstanding it be not Coeternall to him, yet that upon occasion of no
variety and turn of times, does it let go its hold, or parts with Him; but
rests it self contented in the most true contemptation of him only? Because
thou, O God, unto him that loves thee so much as thou command; do show
thy self, and give him satisfaction: and even therefore does he neither
decline from thee, nor toward himself. This is the house of God; not of
earthly. mould, no nor of any celestial bulk corporeal: but a spiritual
house, and partaker of thy eternity, because it remains without blemish for
Psa. S 48. 6
ever. For thou have made it fast for ever and ever, thou have given it a law
which shall not be broken. And yet is it not coeternall unto thee, because it
is not without beginning, for it is created. For notwithstanding we find no
time before it, yet has Wisdom been created, before all things: not that
Wisdom, I mean, which is altogether Jesus Christ.
equal and coeternall unto thee his Father, by which all things were created,
and in whom being the beginning, thou createdst heaven and earth; but that
Wisdom verily which is created; that is to say, the Pet. Lombard. lib. sent
2. did. 2. affirms that by Wisdom Eccles. 1. 4. the Angels be understood,
and the whole spiritual, intellectual nature, namely, this highest heaven, in
which the Angels were created, and it by them instantly filled.
Intellectual nature, which by contempiating of the light, is become light.
For this, though created, is also called Wisdom.

3. But look what difference there is betwixt that light which enlighteneth,
and the light that is enlightened; so much is there betwixt that Wisdom that
creates, and this. Wisdom which is created: like as there is betwixt that
Righteousness which iustifyeth, and that righteousness which is made by
justification. For we also are called thy Righteousness: for so says a
certain servant of thine, That we might be 2 Cor. 5. 22
made the righteousness of God in him. Therefore Wisdom has been created
before all things, which was created a rational mind and an intellectual, of
that chaste City of thine, our mother which is above; and is free, and eternal
in the heavens. In what heaven, if not in those that praise thee, even the
Heaven of heavens? because this is also the heaven of heavens made for the
Lord. And though we find no time before it, (because that which has been
created before all things, has precedence of the creature of time) yet is the
eternity of the Creator himself even before it; from whom that (being created)
took beginning not beginning of its time (for time was not yet in being) but
of its creation. Hence comes it so to be of thee our God, as that it is
altogether another from thee, and not thou thyselfe: because though we neither
find time before it, nor in it, (it being most meet ever to behold thy face,
nor is ever drawn away from it, for which cause it is not changed by any
alteration:) yet is there a mutable condition in it for all this, which would
cause it to wax dark, and cold: but for that by so strong an affection, it
cleaves unto thee, that it receives both light and heat from thee, as from a
perpetual noone.

4. O house most lightsome and delightsome! I have loved Psalm. 26. 8.
thy beauty, and the place of the habitation of the glory of my Lord, thy
builder and owner. Let my way faring here sigh after thee; and to him I speak
that made thee, that he would take possession of me also in thee; seeing he
has likewise made me. I have gone Psalm. 119. 176.
astray like a lost sheep: yet have I a good hope upon the shoulders of my
Shepherd, thy Luke 15. 5.
builder, to be brought back into thee. What say you now unto me, O ye
Gaynsayers that I was speaking unto? you that believe Moses to have been the
faithful servant of God, and his books to be the Oracle of the Holy Ghost?
Is not this house of God, though not coeternall indeed with God, yet after its
manner, eternal in the heavens; where you seek for the changes of times all
in vain, because there you shall never find them? For it far ouergoes all
extention, and all running space of Age: the happiness of it being, Ever to
cleave unto God. It is so, say they; What part then of all that which my heart
has so lowdly uttered unto God, whenas inwardly it heard the voice of his
praise; what part (I say) of all this, do you at last affirm to befalse? Is
it because (I said) that the first matter was without for me; in which by
reason there was no form, there was no order? But then, where no order was,
there could be no interchange of times: and yet this almost nothing, in as
much as it was not altogether nothing, was from him certainly, from whom is
whatsoever is, in what manner soever it is. This also, say they, do we not
deny.

CHAP. 16. Against such as contradict divine truth: and of his own delight in
it.
1. With these will I now parley a little in thy presence, O my God, who grant
all these things to be true, which thy Truth whispers unto my soul. For as
for those praters that deny all, let them bark and bawle unto themselves as
much as they please; my endeavor shall be to persuade them to quiet, and to
give way for thy word to enter them. But if me they shall refuse, and give the
repulse unto; do not thou hold thy peace I beseech thee, O my God. Speak thou
truly unto my heart; for only Thou so speak: and I will let them alone
blowing the dust withou doors and raising it up into their own eyes: and
myself will go into my chamber, and sing there a loue-song unto thee;
mourning with groans that cannot be expressed, and remembering Jerusalem, with
my heart lifted up toward it, Jerusalem my country, Jerusalem my mother; and
thy self that rule in over it, the enlightener, the Father, the guardian, the
husband, the chaste and strong delight, and the solid joy of it; and all good
things that be unspeakable; yea all at once, because the only Sovereign,
and true good of it. Nor will I be made give over, until thou wholly gather
all that is of me, from the unsettled and disordred estate I now am in, into the
peace of that our most dear mother; (where the first-fruites of my spirit be
already, whence I am ascertayned of these things) and shall both conform, and
for ever confirm me in thy mercy, O my God. But as for those who no ways
affirm all these truths to be false; which give all honor unto thy holy
Scriptures set out by Moses, estating it as we did, in the top of that
authority This Top of Authority, my papist notes to be The authority of the
Church. He should have done well to have made sense of it then, (for I always
look not for Reason from him) To place the Scriptures in the authority of the
Church; what can he make of that? St. Austen gives the Scriptures the top of
Authority; and this Top is higher then the Church. Such marginall notes have
too often creptin to the Text, and corrupted the Fathers by it.
which is to be followed: and do yet contradict me in some thing or other,
to these I answer thus: Be thy self Judge O our God, between my Confessions
and these men's contradictions.

CHAP. 17. What the names of Heaven and Earth signify.
1. FOr they say, Though all this that you say, be true, yet did not Moses
intend those two, when by revelation of the Spirit he said, In the beginning
God created Heaven and Earth. He did not under the name of heaven, signify
that Spiritual or intellectual creature which always beholds the face of
God: nor under the name of earth, that vnshap't matter. What then? That man of
God, say they, meant as we say, this was it he declared by those words. What Is
that? by the name of heaven and earth would he signify, say they, all this
visible world, in universal and compendious terms first; that afterward in
his sorting out the works of the several days, he might joint by joint as it
were, bring every thing into his order, which it pleased the holy Ghost in such
general terms to express. For such gross heads were that rude and carnal
people to which he spoke, as that he thought such works of God as were
visible, only fit to be mentioned unto them. So that, this invisible and
vnshap't earth, and that darkesome Deep (out of which consequently is shown,
all these visible things generally known unto all, to have been made and
disposed of in those six days) they do, and that not incongruously, agree
upon, to be understood to be this vnshapely (first) matter.

2. What now if another should say, That this vnshapelynesse and confusednesse
of matter, was for this reason first insinuated to us under the name of Heaven
and earth, because that this visible world, with all those natures which most
manifestly appear in it, (which we often times use to call by the name of
heaven and earth) was both created and fully furnished out of it? And what if
another should say, that the invisible, and visible natures were not indeed
absurdly called heaven and earth; and (consequently, that the universal
creation, which God made in his. Wisdom that is, In the begininng, were
comprehended under those two words. Notwithstanding, for that Al these be not
of the substance of God, but created out of nothing, (because they are not the
same that God is, and that there is a mutable nature in them all; whether they
stand at a stay, as the eternal house of God does; or be changed, as the soul
and body of man are:) therefore the common matter of all visible and invisible
things, though yet vnshap't, yet shapeable; out of which both heaven and earth
was to be created, (that is, both the invisible and visible creature now newly
formed) was expressed by the same names which the Earth as yet invisible and
unshapen and the darkness upon the deep, were to be called by: but with this
distinctiou, that by the earth invisible hitherto and unshapen; the corporeal
matter be understood, before the quality of of any form was introduced: and
by the darkness upon the deep; the spiritual matter be understood, before
it suffered any restraynt of its unlimited fluidenesse, and before it received
any light from wisdom.

3. There is yet more liberty for a man to say, if he be so disposed; that
(namely) the already perfected and formed natures (both visible and invisible)
were not comprehended under the name of heaven and earth, when we read, In
the beginning God made heaven and earth: but that the yet vnshapely rough
hewing of things, that Stuff apt to receive shape and making, was only called
by these names; and that, because in it all these were confusedly contained, as
being not distinguished yet, by their proper qualities and forms: which being
now digested into order, are called Heaven and Earth; meaning by that, all
spiritual creatures, and by this, all corporeal.

CHAP. 18. Diverse Expositors may understand one Text, several ways.
1. ALL which things being heard and well considered of, I will not strive
about 2 Timothy 2. 14
words: for that is profitable to nothing, but the subversion of the hearers;
but the law is good to edify, if a man 1 Timothy 18. 5.
use it lawfully, for that the end of it is charity, out of a pure heart and
good conscience, and faith unfeigned. And well did our Master know, upon which two
commandments he hung all Ma. 22. 40
the law and the Prophets. And what prejudice does it me now confessing
zealously, O my God, thou light of my inner eyes, if there may be several
meanings gathered out of the same words, so that withal, both might be true?
What hinders it me, I say, if I think otherwise of the Writers meaning, then
another man does? All we Readers verily, strive both to find out and to
understand the authors meaning whom we read; and seeing we believe him to
speak truly, we dare not once imagine him to have let fall any thing; which
our selves either know or think to be false. Whilst every man endeauours
therefore, to collect the same sense from the holy Scriptures, that the Penman
himself intended; what hurt is it if a man so judges of it, even as thou, OF
the light of all true-speaking minds, do show him to be true, although the
Author whom he reads, perceived not so much; seeing he also collecteth a
Truth out of it, though this particular truth he perchance observes not?

CHAP. 19. Of some particular apparent truths.
1. FOr true it is, O Lord, That thou made Heaven and Earth; and it is true
too, that that Beginning is thy Wisdom, in which thou createdst all: and true
again, that this visible world has for his greater parts the Heaven and the
Earth, which in a brief expression, comprehend all made and created natures.
And true too, That whatsoever is mutable, gives us to understand that there is
a want of form in it, by means whereof it is apt to receive a form, or is
changed, or turned, by reason of it. It is true, that that is subject to no
times, which cleaves so close unto that To God.
unchangeable form, as that though the nature of it be mutable, yet is it
self never changed. It Is true, that that vnshapednesse which is almost nothing,
cannot be subject to the alteration of times. It Is true, that that whereof a
thing is made, may by a figurative kind of speaking, be called by the name of
the thing made of it: whence might heaven and earth be said to be that
vnshap't Chaos, whereof heaven and earth were made. It Is true, that of things
having form, there is not any nearer to having no form, then the earth and
the deep. It Is true, that not only every created and formed thing, but
whatsoever is apt to be created and formed, is of thy making, of whom are all
things. It Is true, that whatsoever is formed out of that which had no form, was
unformed before it was formed.

CHAP. 20. He interprets Genesis 1. 1. otherwise.
1. OVt of these truths, of which they little doubt whose internal eye thou have
enabled to see them; and who irremoueably believe, thy servant Moses to have
spoken in the Spirit of truth: Out of all these therefore, I say, he
collecteth another sense unto himself, who says, In the beginning God made
the heaven and the earth, that is to say, in his Word coeternall unto himself,
God made the intelligible and the sensible; or the spiritual and the
corporeal creature. And he another, that says, In the beginning God made
Heaven and Earth; that is, in his Word coeternall unto himself, did God make
the universal bulk of this corporeal world, together with all those
apparently known creatures, which it contains.

2. And he another, that says, In the beginning God made Heaven and Earth:
that is, In his word coeternall unto himself, did God make the formelesse
matter both of the creature spiritual and corporeal. And he another, that
says, In the beginning God created Heaven and Earth; that is, In his Word
coeternall unto himself, did God create the formeles matter of the creature
corporeal, wherein heaven and earth lay as yet confused: which being now
distinguished and formed, we at this day see in the bulk of this world, And he
another, who says, In the beginning God made heaven and earth, that is, In the
very beginning of creating and of working, did God make that formelesse matter,
confusedly containing in it self both heaven and earth; out of which, what
were afterward formed; do at this day eminently appear, with all that is in
them.

CHAP. 21. These words, The Earth was void, etc. diversely understood.
1. ANd forasmuch as concerns the understanding of the words following, out of
all which truths, that Interpreter chooses one to himself, who says. But the
Earth was invisible, and unfashioned and darkness was upon the deep: that is,
That incorporeall thing that God made, was as yet a formelesse matter of
corporeal things, without order, without light. Another says thus: The Earth
was invisible and unfashioned, and darkness was upon the deep: that is, This
All now called heaven and earth, was a shapelesse and darksome matter hitherto;
of which the corporeal heaven and the corporeal earth were to be made, with
all things in them, now known unto our corporeal senses. Another says thus:
The Earth was invisible and shapeless, and darkness, was upon the deep: that
is; This All, now called heaven and earth, was but a formelesse and a darkesome
matter hitherto; out of which was to be made, both that intelligible heaven,
which is other where called The Heaven of heavens: and the Earth, that (...)
say, the whole corporeal (...) which (...) understood this corporeal heaven
also; that, ^^^ely, out of which every visible and invisible creature (...) be
created.

^ mother says thus, The ^^rth was invisible and shapelesse, and darkness was
upon the deep, that is, The Scripture did not call that vnshapelynesse, by the
name of Heaven and Earth; for that vnshapelynes, says he, was already in
being, and that was it he called the Earth invisible without and shape and
darkness upon the deep: of which he had said before, that God had made
heaven and earth, namely, the spiritual and corporeal creature. Another
says, The Earth was invisible and without shape, and darkness was upon the
Deep, that is, the matter was now a certain vnshapelynesse, of which the
Scripture said before, that God made heaven and earth: namely, the whole
corporeal bulk of the world, divided into two great parts, upper and lower;
with all the common known creatures in them.

CHAP. 22. That the waters are also contained under the names of Heaven and
Earth.
1. But if any man shall attempt to dispute against these two The 2 last of the
former Chapter. That which follows, is the Confirmation of the Argument.
last opinions with this argument: If you will not allow, that this
vnshapelynesse of matter seemd to be called by the name of heaven and earth;
Ergo, there was something which God never made, out of which he was to make
heaven and earth. Nor indeed has the Scripture told us, that God made this
heaven and earth; but merely to have us understand, that matter to be
signified either by the name of heaven and earth together, or of the earth
alone; whenas it said, In the beginning God made the heaven and earth: that so
by that which follows, And the Earth was invisible, and without form,
(although it pleased Him to call the formlesse matter by those terms,) yet may
we understand no other matter, but that which God made, in that Text where it is
written, God made Heaven and Earth.

2. The mayntayners of those two latter opinions (either this or that) will
upon the first hearing, return this answer: We do not deny this formelesse
matter to be indeed created by God, of whom are all things which are very
good: for as we affirm that to be a greater good, which is created and formed;
so we confess likewise, that to be a lesser good, which is made with no more
then an aptness in it to receive Creation and Creab le and formabile. He
begins to answer their objections


form: and yet even that is good too. But b yet has not the Scripture set
down, That God made this vnshapely Chaos; no more then it has set down those
many other things that He made; as the Cherubins, and Seraphins, and the rest
which the Apostle distinctly speaks of Thrones, Dominions, Principalities,
Powers: all which that God made, it is most apparent. Col. 1. 16.


3. Or if in that text where it is said, He made heaven and earth, all things be
comprehended; what shall we then say of the waters, upon which the Spirit of
God moved? For if all things be understood to be named at once in this word
Earth; how then can this formelesse matter be meant in that name of Earth,
when we see the waters so beautiful? Or if it be so taken; why then is it
written, That out of the same vnshapely matter, the Firmament was made, and
called Heaven; and That the waters were created, is not written? For the waters
remain not formlesse and invisible unto this day, seeing we behold them
flowing in so comely a manner. But if they at that time received the beauty
they now have, whenas God said, Let the waters under the Firmament be gathered
together unto one Genesis 1. 9.
place, that so the gathering together of the waters, may be taken for the
forming of them; what will they answer for those waters which be above the
Firmament? seeing if they had not any form at all, never should they have
been worthy of so honorable a seat; nor is it written, by what Word they were
formed.

4. So that if Genesis has said nothing of Gods making of some one thing,
(which yet no sound faith nor well-grounded understanding once doubts, but
that he did make) let no sober knowledge once dare to affirm these waters to
be coeternall with God; for that we finding them to be barely mentioned in the
book of Genesis, do not find withal where they were created. Why, (seeing
truth teaches us) may we not as well understand that formelesse matter (which
this Scripture calls the invisible and vnshap't Earth and darksome deep) to
have been created by God out of nothing, and therefore not to be coeternall to
him: notwithstanding that this story has omitted to show where it was created?

CHAP. 23. In interpreting of holy Scripture, truth is to be sought with a
charitable construction.
1. THese things therefore being heard and perceived, according to the
weakness of my capacity, (which I confess unto thee O Lord that very well
know it) two sorts of differences do I perceive likely to arise, whenever
any thing is by words related, though even by the truest reporters. One, when
the difference rises concerning the truth of the things: the other, when it is
concerning the meaning of the Relater. For we enquire one way about the making
of the thing created, what may be true; and another way, what it is that Moses
(that notable dispencer of thy faith,) would have his reader and hearer to
understand in those words. For the first sort, away with all those which once
imagine themselves to know that as a truth, which is in it self false; and for
this other sort, away with all them too, which once imagine Moses to have
written things that be false. But let me ever in thee O Lord, take part with
them, and in thee delight my self in them, that edify themselves with thy
truth, in the largeness of a charitable construction: yea let us have recourse
together unto the words of thy book, and make search for thy meaning in them,
by the meaning of thy Servant, by whose pen thou have dispensed them.

CHAP. 24. The Scripture is true, though we understand not the uttermost scope
or depth of it.
1. But which of us all shall be so able, as to find out this full meaning,
among those so many words which the seekers shall every where meet withal;
sometimes understood this way, and sometimes that way; as that he can
confidently affirm, This Moses thought, and This would be have understood in
that story; as he may boldly say, This is true, whether he thought this or
that? For behold, O my God, I thy servant who have in this book vowed a
Sacrifice of Confession unto thee; do now beseech thee, that by thy mercy I
may have leave, to pay my vows unto thee.

2. See here, how confidently I affirm, That in thy Incommutable Word thou
have created all things visible and invisible: but dare I so confidently
affirm, That Moses had no further meaning, when he wrote, In the beginning
God made Heaven and earth? No. Because though I perceive this to be certain in
thy truth; yet can I not so easily look into his mind, That he thought just
so in the writing of it. For he might have his thoughts upon Gods very
entrance into the act of creating, whenas he said, In the beginning: he might
entend to have it understood by Heaven and Earth, in this place; no one nature
either spiritual or corporeal, as already formed and perfected; but both of
them newly begun, and as yet unshapen.

3. For I perceive, that whichsoeuer of the two had been said, it might have
been truly said; but which of the two he thought of in these words, I do
not perceive so truly. Although, whether it were either of these, or any sense
beside, (that I have not here mentioned) which so great a man saw in his mind,
at the uttering of these words: I nothing doubt but that he saw it truly, and
expressed it aptly. Let no man vex me now, by saying, Moses thought not as you
say, but as I say: For if he should ask me, How know you that Moses thought
that which you inter out of his words? I ought to take it in good part; and
would answer him perchance as I have done heretofore; or something more at
large, if I were minded to put him hard to it.

CHAP. 25. We are not to break charity about a different Exposition of
Scripture.
1. But when he says, Moses meant not what you say, but what I say; yet denies
not, what either of us say, these may both be true. O my God, thou life of the
poor, whose breast harbors no contradiction: rain thou some thoughts of
mitigation into my heart, that I may patiently bear with such, who differ not
thus with me, because they favor of divine things, or be able to discover in
the heart of thy servant, what they speak: but because they be proud; not
knowing Moses opinion so well, as loving their own: not for that it is truth,
but because it is theirs. Otherwise, they would as well love another true
opinion, as I love what they say, when it is true (...) they say: not because it is
theirs, but because it is true; and is therefore theirs no lon^^^ even because it
is true. But would they therefore love it, because it is true? then becomes it
both theirs, and drive: for that all the lovers of Truth, have a common
interest in it.

2. But whereas they are so earnest; that Moses did not mean what I say, but
what they say; this I neither like, nor love: for suppose so it Here the Popish
Translater notes, That Truth is a Catholic benediction. I allow it, if he
excepts Roman.
(...); yet is this rashness of theirs, no sign of knowledge; but of
ouer-boldnesse (...) has seeing further, but (...) bigger, begotten it. (...)
therefore O Lord, are ^y judgments to be trembled at; seeing that thy truth
is neither mine, nor his, nor a thirds; but belonging to us all, whom thou
call to partake of it: warning us in terrible manner, not to account it
private to our selves, for fear we be deprived of it. For whosoever
challenges that as proper to himself, which thou propoundest to all in
general; and would make that his own, which belongs to all; that man shall be
driven from what is common to all, to what is properly his own; that is, from
truth, to a lie. For he that speaks a lie, speaks it of his Ioh. 8. 44.
own.

3. Hearken O God, thou best Judge; hearken O thou Truth: what answer shall I
return unto my Gaynsayer? listen, for befere thee do I speak it, and before
my brethren, who employ thy lawfully, that is, to the end of charity: hearken
and be^^^^ if it please thee, what I (...) say to him. For thi^ brotherly and
peaceful word will I return unto him suppose both of us see that to be true
that thou (...) ^ and both again see that to be true that I say: where I
prithee, do we si^ it? I verily see it not in (...), nor thou in me: but
^^th of us in the selfsame unchangeable Truth, which i^ above both our
souls. Seeing therefore we vary not about the very light of the Lord our God,
why strive we (...), the thoughts of our ^^^ghbour? which, it is ^^^^ssible for
us so clearly (...) into, as we may (...) the unchangeable truth: (...) that,
if Moses himself (...) appeared to us and said, (...); yet nor so should we
haueseene it, but believed it.

4. Let us not therefore be puffed up in favor of one, against another; above
that which is written, Let us love the Lord our God with all our heart, with
all our soul, and withal our mind: and our neighbor as our self. For which
two precepts of charity, did Moses mean, whatsoever in those books he meant:
which unless we believe, we shall make God a liar, whenas we imagine
otherwise of our fellow servants mind, then he has taught us. Behold now,
how foolish a conceit it is in such plenty of most true opinions, as may be
fetched out of those same words; rashly to affirm, which of them Moses
principally meant: and thereby, with pernition contentions* to offend charity
it self; for whose sake (...) spoke euerything, whose (...) we go about to
expound.

CHAP. 26. (...) was fit to write the Scriptures in.
1. FOr mine own part, O my God, thou height of my humility, thou rest of my
(...), thou which hear (...) Confessions, and which (...) give my sins:
seeing (...) command me To love (...) neighbor as my self, I can. (...)
believe that thou gave (...) gift unto Moses thy (...) servant, then I (...)
have wished or (...) thee to have given my (...) had I been borne in the (...)
he was, and that thou (...) set me in the same (...); whereby the service
(...) heart, and tongue, those books might be dispensed, which, ^or so long
time after were to profit all nations, and throughout the whole world from such
a It Is a marvel that my Papist put not in some Romish pinnacle, (higher then
that the devil set our Savior on) to ouertop this height of the, Scriptures
authority.

What, never a marginall note out against the Scriptures? that's marvel.


height of authority, were to surmount all false and proud opinions.

2. I should have desired verily, had I then been Moses, (for we are of the
same lump: and what is man, saving that thou art mindful of him?) I would
therefore I say, had I been in his case at the same time, and that the book
of Genesis had been put upon me to write, have desired the same faculty of
expression to have been given me, and the selfsame manner of enditing too,
that so, neither they who cannot as yet understand how God creator might not
reject the, style, as beyond their capacity; and yet they who are already able
to do it, upon what true opinion soever their meditations had pitched; might
find it not to have been omitted in those few words of that thy Servant: and
if another man had by the light of truth disco^^^d another; neither should
that have failed to be picked out of the selfsame words.

CHAP. 27. It Is best drawing at the Fountain.
1. FOr as a fountain pent within a narrow compass is the more plentiful, in
his waters; and with his streams serves more rivers, and larger spa^^^ of
ground, then any one of those rivers, do, which after along tract of land
be(...), is deryued out of the same fountayn; even so this Text of that
dispenser of thine, that it might benefit the more people who were to preach
upon it; does out of a narrow scantling of language, over flow into such
streams of clearest truths as out of it every man may to his own sense, (as
well as he can upon these subjects, he, one observation, and he, another)
draw out the truth, by larger circumlocutions of discourse.

2. For some, whenas they read, or hear these words, presently conceive God
to be like some man; or like some hugie bulk endued with unlimited powers;
which by some new and sudden resolution, had of it self, as it were with some
places between, created heaven and earth; even two great bodies, above and
below: wherein all things were to be contained. And when they hear God say,
Let that thing it made, and it was made; they think the words to have had
beginning and ending, to (...) sounded in time, and so (...) passed away;
immediately whereupon, the thing became in Being, which was commanded so to do:
and such other like conceits, which their familiarity with flesh and blood
causes them to imagine. In little ones, as yet whilst their weakness is
(...) along in this humble manner of speech, as it it were (...) bosom of a
mother) their says is wholesomely ^ursed up; and they by it assured and
confirmed in the (...), that God made all these Natures, which in admirable
variety their eye beholds round about them. Which words, who ever shall
despise, as if too simple, and with a proud weakness but once offer to crawle
out of his cradle; he shall, a also, catch a most miserable fall. But take
thou, O Lord God, some pity upon them, that such as go by the way, tread not
upon this unfeathered young bird, and send thine Angel See, here ^e one part of
the Angels office; who are Ministering spirits to the heirs of salvation.
to put it into the nest again, that it may be bred up there, till it be
able to fly.

CHAP. 28. How diversely this Scripture is understood by others.
1. But others, unto whom these words are now Heb. 13. 14
no longer a Nest, but like somewell-filld Fruit-yards; in which they
discovering some fruits concealed under the leaves, gladly flock thither; and
with cherefull chirpings seek out, and pluck off these fruits. For thus much,
at the reading or hearing of (...) words, do they discern ^ how that all
things (...) to come, are out(...) by thy eternal and (...) continuance at the
(...): and how there is (...) all that, any one of the (...) all creatures,
which (...) of thy making, O God. those Will, because it is the ^^^ that thy
self is, is no ^^^s changed: nor was it ^^^ Will newly resolved vp^^ or which
before was not ^^ thee, by which thou createdst all things: not out of thy
self, in thine own simili^^^ which is the form of ^^ things) but out of
nothing, ^^ a formelesse unlikeness to ^^ self; which might after ^^^ formed
by thy similitude; ^^^ ^^king its recourse ^^^ thee who art but one, (...) to
the capacity (...) for it, so far as is given to each thing in his kind) and
might all be made very good: whether they abide near about thy self; or
which being by degrees removed further off, by times and by Places; do either
make or suffer many a goodly narration. These things they see, and they rejoice
in the light of thy truth; according to all that little, which from hence they
are able to conceive.

2. Another bending his observation upon that which is spoken, In the beginning
God made heaven and earth; has a conceit, that that beginning is Wisdom;
because that also speaks unto us. Another aduising likewise upon the same
words, by Beginning understands the first entrance of the things created:
taking them in this sense, In the beginning he made, as if he should have said.
He at first (...). And among them that understand. In the beginning, (...), In
thy Wisdom thou createdst heaven and earth: One believes the mat^^^^ of which
the heaven and earth were to be created, to be there called heaven and earth.
Another the natures already formed and distinguished. Another, under the (...)
of Heaven, conceiues ^^^ one formed nature, and that the spiritual one to be
(...): and under the name of Earth, the other formelesse (...) of the
corporeal matter. And as for them that under the names of heaven and earth,
understand the matter as yet unformed; out of which heaven and earth (...) to
be formed: neither let they understand it after (...) manner: but One, (...)
matter out of which both the intelligible and the sensible creature were to be
made up: Another, that matter only out of which this sensible corporeal bulk
was to be made; which in his mighty bosom contaynes these natures so easy to
be seen, and so ready to be had. Neither yet do even they understand alike,
who believe the creatures already finished and disposed of, to be in this
place called heaven and earth: but one, understands both the invisible and
visible nature: another, the visible only; in which we behold this lightsome
heaven, and darkesome earth, with all things in them contained.

CHAP. 29. How many ways a thing may be said to be first.
1. But he that no otherwise understands In the beginning he made, then if i^
were said, At first he made; has on ground whereupon with any truth he may
understand heaven and earth, unless he withal understand the matter of
heaven and earth: that is to say, of the universal intelligible and corporeal
creature. For if he would have the universe to be already formed; it may be
rightly demanded of him, If so be God made this first, what then made he after
wards? After the universe, surely, he will find nothing at all: whereupon must
be against his will hear of another question; How is a thing first, if after
it there be nothing? But when he says, God made the matter unformed at first,
^ad formed it afterward, there is no absurdity committed: provided, that he
be able to discern, what (...) first in eternity, what in time, what in
choice, and what in Origin.
Original. First in eternity, so God is before all things: first in time; so
is the flower before the fruit: first in choice, so is the fruit before the
flower: first in Original, so is the sound before the Tune. Of these four,
the first and last, that I have mentioned, are with extreme difficulty obtained
to be understood, but the two middlemost, easily enough. For too subtle and too
losty a vision it is, to behold thy eternity, O Lord, unchangeably making these
changeable things: and so in that respect to be before them.

2. And who in the second place, is of so sharpe-sighted an understanding, as
that he is able without great pains to discern, how the sound should be
before the Tune? yet is it so, for this reason; because a Tune is a sound that
has form in it; and likewise (...) that a thing not formed, may have a being:
whereas that which has no form, can have no being. Thus is the matter, before
the thing made of ^^ Which matter is not before the thing in this respect, for
that it makes the thing; seeing it self is rather made into the thing: nor is
it before in respect of distance of time; for we do not first in respect of
time utter formelesse Tunelesse noyses.
founds without singing, and then tune or fashion the same sounds into a form
of singing afterward: just as wood or silver be served, whereof a chest or
vessel is fashioned. Such materials indeed, do in time precede the forms of
those things which are made of them: but in singing it is not so: for when a
man sings, the sound is heard at the same time: seeing that he does not make a
rude formelesse sound first, and then bring it into the form of a Tune
afterward.

3. For a sound just as it is made, so it passes; nor can thou find aught
of it, which thou may call back and set unto a tune by any Art thou can
use: therefore is the tune carried along in his sound; which sound of his, is
his matter: which verily receives a form, that it may become a tune. And
therefore (as I said) is the matter of the sound, before the form of the tune:
not before, in respect of any power Here my M. S. and Sommalius copy well
reads it Per saciendi potentiam: whereas other Editions have it ^erfioiendi
potentia.
it has to make it a tune: for a sound is no way the workemaster that makes
the tune: but being sent out of the body, is like materials subjected to the
soul, to make a tune out of. Nor is it first in our choice; seeing a sound is
not better then a tune: a tune being not only a bare sound, but a graceful
sound. But it is first in Original, because a tune receives not form to cause
it to become a sound; but a sound receives form, to cause it to become a tune.
By this example, let him that is able, understand the matter of things to be
first made and called Heaven and Earth: because Heaven and Earth were made out
of it. Yet was not this matter first made in respect of time; because that the
form of every thing is it that discouers the time of it: but that matter was
sometimes without form; but is now observed to be together in time with its
form. And yet is there not any thing to be said of that matter, but as if it
were its form in respect of time, whenas indeed it is considered of as the
latter of the two. Because doubtless, better are things that have form, then
things that have no form; yea they have precedence in the eternity of the
Creator: that so there might be something out of nothing, of which somewhat
might be created.

CHAP. 30. The Scriptures are to be searched, with honorable respect unto the
Penman.
1. IN this diversity of most true opinions, let Truth it self procure
reconcilement. And our God have mercy upon us, that we may use the law
lawfully, the end 1 Tm. 1. 8.
of the Commandment being pure Charity. By this if a man now demands of me,
which of all these was the meaning of thy servant Moses; such discourses were
not fit to be put among my Confessions, should I not confess unto thee, I
cannot tell: and yet this I can tell, That they are all true senses (those
carnal ones excepted) of which I have fully spoken mine opinion. As for those
little ones of good hopes, them do not the words of thy Bible terrify, which
deliver high my steries in so humble a phrase, and few things in so copious an
expression. And as for all those, whom I confess both to have seen and spoken
the truth delivered in those words; let us love one another: yea and jointly
together let us love thee our God, the fountain of truth; if so be our thirst
be after truth, and not after vanities: yea, let us in such manner honor this
servant of thine, the dispencer of this Scripture, so full of thy Spirit; that
we may believe him, when by thy revelation he wrote these things, to have bent
his intentions unto that sense in them, which principally excels the rest, both
for light of truth, and fruitfullnesse of profit.

CHAP. 31. Truth is to be received, whoeuer speaks it.
1. SO now, when another shall say, Moses meant as I do: and another, Yea the
very same that I do: I suppose that with more religion I may say, Why meant
he not as you both mean, if you both mean truly? And if there may be a
third truth, or a fourth; yea if any other man may discover any other truth in
those words; why may not He be believed to have seen all these; He, by
whose ministry, GOD that is but One, has tempered these holy Scriptures to
the meanings of a many, that were both to see true, and yet diverse things? For
mine own part verily, (and fearelessely I speak it from my heart) that were I
to endite any thing that should attain This is the third time that St Austen
has given the Scriptures this style; and never mentioned any subjection of the
Scriptures unto the Church, which the Papist would so feign have
the highest Top of authority, I would choose to write in such a strain, as
that my words might carry the sound of any truth with them, which any man were
apprehensiue of, concerning these matters; rather then so clearly to set down
one true sense only concerning some one particular, as that I should thereby
exclude all such other senses, which being not false, could no ways offend
me. I will not therefore, O my God, be so heady, as not to believe, that this
a Moses.
man obtained not thus much at thy hands. He without doubt both perceived, and
was advised of, in those words, whenas he wrote them; what truth soever we
have been able to find in them: yea and whatsoever we have not heretofore
been able, no nor yet are: provided, that this truth be possible to be
found in them at all.

CHAP. 32. He prays to obtain the right meaning.
1. LAstly O Lord, thou that art a God, and not flesh and blood, what though a
man should not see all, yet could any part of that be concealed from thy good
Spirit, (who shall lead me into the land of uprightness;) which Ps. 143. 10.
thou thy self were by those words to reveal unto the Readers of all times to
come, notwithstanding that he that delivered us these words, might among many
true meaning, pitche his thoughts perchance upon one only? Which if so it be,
let that meaning then be granted to be more excellent then the rest. But do
thou, O Lord, either reveal that very same unto us, or any other true one
which thou please: that so, whether thou discouerest the same unto us, which
thou did unto that servant of thine, or else some other by occasion of
those words: yet do thou thy self edify us, and let not error deceive us.

2. Behold now, O Lord my God, how much we have written upon a few words, yea
how much I beseech thee? What strength of ours, yea what ages would be
sufficient to go over all thy books in this manner? Give me leave therefore
brieflyer now to confess unto thee, concerning them; and to make choice of
some one true, certain, and good sense that thou shall inspire me withal:
yea and if many such senses shall offer themselves unto me (where many safely
may) leave My M. S. reads it Easine confessionimeae, and not Ea fide
confessionimeae, as the Printed copies do
them also to be confessed by me: that I may at length preach the same, which
thine own minister intended, both rightly and most profitably: for that is the
thing which my duty is to endeavor, which if I may not attain unto, yet let
me preach that, which by those words, thy Truth was pleased to tell me, which
sometimes revealed also unto him, that which it pleased.

The end of the twelfth book.
Saint Augustines Confessions. The Thirteenth Book.
CHAP. 1: He calls upon God.
1. I Call upon thee, O my God, my mercy; upon thee that createdst me, and who
have not forgotten him, that had forgotten thee. I enuite thee into my soul,
which by a desire that thy self inspireth into her, thou now preparest to
entertayne thee. Forsake me not now when I call upon thee, who^ thou
preuentest before I called: having been earnest with me with much variety of
repeating calls; that I would hear thee from a far, and suffer my self to be
converted, and call at length upon thee, that now calledst after me, For thou
Lord have blotted out all my evil Mala merita, and bona Merita. If Merita in
the Fathers must needs signify merits; why did not my Papist here tanslate
it Euilt merits and good merits? The word anciently signifies service or
deseruings, good or bad. If God prevents us, how can we in a proper and strict
sense be said to merit of him? and if the Recompense be due to God. where is
your condignity, or confidence to be recompe need for yout merits?
dseeruings, left thou should be forced to take vengeance upon my hands,
wherewith I have fallen off from thee: and thou have Prevented all my well
deseruings too; that thou might return a recompense unto thine own hands
with which thou made me; because that before I was, Thou art. Nor was I any
thing, upon which thou might bestow the favor to cause me to be: and yet
behold, I now am, merely out of thine own goodness, preventing both all this
which thou have made me, and all that too, whereof thou have made me. For
thou neither had any need of me, nor yet am I of such good use, as any
ways to be helpefull unto my Lord and God: nor am I made to be so assistant
to thee with my service, as to keep thee from tyring in thy working; or for
fear thy power might be less, if my service should be wanting: nor so to
ply thee with my service, as a man does his land, that unless I tilld thee,
thou must lie faellow: but made I am both to serve and worship thee, that I
might receive a well-being from thee; from whom it proceeds, that I have such
a being, as is capeable of a wellbeing.

CHAP. 2. Of the creatures dependancy upon their Creator.
1. FOr by the fullness of thy goodness, does thy creature subsist; that the
good, which could no ways profit thee, nor though of thee, no ways equal
unto thee; yet being of thee, might not be wanting. For what did Heaven and
Earth, which thou made in the beginning deserve of thee? Let those spiritual
and corporeal natures which thou made in thy Wisdom, say how they deserved
thee: that, things both now begun, and unformed as yet, (every one in its
own kind, spiritual or corporeal) yea now falling away into an immoderate
liberty and farre-distant unlikeness unto thee, should still have their
dependence upon thee. The Spiritual nature even without its due form as yet,
is far more noble then any corporeal nature though fully formed: and a
corporeal thing though not yet formed, better then if at all it had no being.
And in this manner should all things have for ever depended upon thy Word,
unformed; were they not by the same Word reduced unto thy Unity, endued with a
form, and improued by Thee the only Sovereign Good, to become very good.
What can these formelesse natures deserve a being of thee; seeing they could
not have so much as a being, unless they had it from thee?

2. What did that corporeal matter deserve of thee, that it should be made so
much as invisible and shapelesse? seeing it could not be so much as so, had
not thou made it so? and therefore because it was not at all, it could not
deserve of thee to be made. Or what could the spiritual creature even now
begun to be created, deserve of thee, that it might at least all darkesomely
flit up and down, like unto the Deep, but very unlike thee; unless it had
been by the same word called back unto that, by whom it was created: and by
the same also enlightened, that it might be made light some by it; although
not in any equality, yet in some conformity unto that form which is equal
unto thee? For like as to a body, simply to be, is nor all one with being
beautiful; for then it could no ways be deformed: so likewise to a created
spirit to line, is not all one with lining wisely: for then should it ever
continue wise unchangeably. But good it is for it to stick close unto thee;
lest what light it has obtained by turning to thee, it may lose again, by
turning from thee; and relapse into a state of life, resembling the darkesome
deep. For even we our selves, who according to our souls are a spiritual
creature, when we were Ephesians. 5. 8.
sometimes turned away from the our Light, were very darkness in that estate
of life: yea and still we labor amidst the relics of our old darkness,
until in thy only One we be made thy Righteousness, which is like the
Psol. 36. 6
great mountains. For we have sometimes under gone thy Judgments, which are
like unto the great Deep.

CHAP. 3. All is of the grace of Gods.
1. BY that which thou saydest in the first creation, Let there be light, and
there was light; I do, not unfitly, understand the Spiritual creature:
because even then was there a kind of life, which thou might illuminate.
But yet as then it had done nothing whereby to deserve of thee, that there
might be such a light: even so when already it was come to be, could it not
deserve of thee, to be enlightened. For neither could its formelesse estate be
pleasing unto thee, unless it might be made light: light, not by an absolute
existing of light in it self, but by beholding thee the Light
all-illuminating, and by cleaving unto it; that so, the life that is lived at
all, and the life that is lived thus happily, it might owe to nothing but thy
grace: being now converted by a better change unto That, which can never be
changed either into worse or better: and that is unto thee thy self only,
because thou only Art simply; unto thee it being not one thing to live, and
another thing to live well: seeing thy self art thine own happiness.

CHAP. 4. God needs not the Creatures, but they him.
1. WHAT therefore could have been wanting unto thy good, which thou thy self
art; although all these creatures should never have been, or have remained
utterly without form: which thou made not out of any want, but out of the
fullness of thy goodness, holding them in and converting them to form, with
no thought, as if thy joy were to receive any accomplishment thereby? For unto
thee who art absolutely perfect, is their imperfection displeasing: that so
they be perfected by thee, and thereby please thee: not as if thou were
imperfect, or were to receive perfection from their being perfected. Thy good
spirit indeed moved upon the waters, yet was not borne up by the waters, as
if he stayed up himself upon them: for upon what waters thy good Spirit is
said to stay, those did he cause to be stayed up in himself. But thy
uncorruptible and unchangeable Will, which is in it self all-sufficient for it
self, moved upon that life, which thy self had before created: unto which,
lining is not all one with happy living, seeing it does but live flitting up
and down in its own obscurity: and which yet remains to be converted unto
him, by whom it was made: and to live more and more near by the fountain of
life; yea and in his light to see light, and to be perfected at last, and
enlightened, and made happy.

CHAP. 5. His Confession of the blessed Trinity.
1. Lo, now the Trinity appears unto me in a glass aarkly; which is Thou my
God: because thou, O Father, in the beginning, that is, in thy Wisdom borne
of thy self, equal and coeternall unto thee; that is to say, in thy Son,
have created Heaven and Earth. Much now have we said of the Heaven of heavens,
and of the invisible and unshapen earth, and of the dark some Deep, according
(namely) unto the wayning of spiritual deformity, which ever it should have
wandered in, unless it had been converted unto him, from whom that life which
already it had, was received: by whose enlightening it might be made a beauteous
life, and become the heaven of that heaven, which was afterward set between
water and water. And under the name of God, I now understood the person of the
Father, who made all; and under the name of beginning, the person of the Son,
in whom he made all; and thus believing, as I did, the Trinity to be my God, I
searched further into thy holy Word, and lo, his Spirit moved upon the waters.
See here the Trinity, my God, the Father, and Son, and holy Ghost, the
Creator of all thine own creatures.

CHAP. 6. Of the Spirits moving upon the waters.
1. But what was the cause, O thou true-speaking light? unto thee lift I up my
heart, let it not be taught vanities, dispell thou the darkness of it; and
tell me by our mother charity, I beseech thee; tell me the reason, I beseech
thee, why after the mention of heaven, and of the invisible and shapelesse
earth, and darkness upon the Deep, thy Scriptures should even then at length
make the first mention of thy Spirit? Was it because it was meet so to have
Him insinuated, as that he should be said to move upon? and so much could not
truly be said, unless that were first mentioned, upon which thy Spirit may
be understood to have moved. For verily, neither upon the Father, not upon the
Son, was he moved; nor could he rightly be said to move upon, if there were
nothing yet for him to move upon. First therefore was that to be spoken of,
which He was said to move upon; and then He, whom it was requisite not to have
named otherwise, then a* He was said to move upon. But wherefore yet was ^^
not fitting to have Him insinuated otherwise, unless He were said to move
upon?

CHAP. 7. Of the effect or working of the Holy Ghost.
1. FRom hence let him that is able, follow with his understanding thy Apostle
where he thus speaks, Because thy love is shed abroad in our hearts by the
holy Ghost which is given unto us: and where concerning spiritual gifts, he
teaches and shows unto us a more excellent way of charity; and where he
bows his knees unto thee 1 Cor. 12. 21.
for us, that we may come to Ephesians. 3 19.
learn that most excellent knowledge of the love of Christ. And therefore even
from the very beginning, did the Spirit supereminently move upon the waters.
Whom shall I tell it unto, and in what terms shall I describe how the hugy
weight of lustful desires, presses down into the steep pit; and how charity
rayses us up again by thy Spirit which moved upon the waters? Unto whom shall
I speak it? and in what language utter it? For they are no certain places
into which we are plunged, and out of which we are again lifted. What can
be liker, and yet what vnlikeer? They be Affections, they be Loves; they be
the uncleanness of our own spirits, that ouerflow our lower parts with the
love of cares: and it is the holiness of thy Spirit that rayseth us upwards
again by the love of our safeties; that This sentence was most generally in
the Churchseruice and communion. Nor is there scarce any one old Liturgy but
has it Sursum cordas. Hab^mus addominum. psalm. 69. 2.
we may lift our hearts up unto the Lord, where thy Spirit is moved upon the
waters; and that we may come at length to that repose, which is above all
rests: when namely, our souls shall have escaped over these waters where we
can find no ground.

CHAP. 8. How Gods Spirit cherishes feeble souls.
1. THE Angels fell, and man's soul fell; and all thy Spiritual creatures in
general had shown the way unto the deep, which is in that most darkesome
bottom; had not thou said, Let there be light, and there was light; and
unless every spiritual creature of thy heavenly City, had continued in
obedience unto thee, and settled it self upon thy Spirit, which moves
unchangeably, upon every thing that is changeable. Otherwise, had even the
heaven of heavens it self, for ever continued a darkesome Deep; whereas now
it is light in the Lord. And now by that miserable restlesnesse of the falling
spirits, and by their discovering of their own darkness, (the garment of thy
light being plucked off them:) do thou sufficiently reveal how noble the
reasonable creature is, which thou have created; unto which nothing will
suffice to settle its happiness and rest upon, that is any way inferior unto
thy self: and therefore cannot herself give satisfaction unto herself. For
it is thou, O Lord, that shall lighten our darkness: from thee must grow these
our garments; and then shall our darkness be as the noone day.

2. Give thy self unto me, O my God, yea restore thy self unto me: for I love
thee; and if it be too little, let me now love thee more affectionately. I am
not able to measure my love, that I may so come to know, how much there wants
of enough: that my life may even run into thy embracements, and not tnrne
from them again, until I be wholly hidden in the secret of thy presence. This
one thing am I sure of; that woe is me if I be not in thee: yea not so only if
I be without my self, but ill will it go with me, though I be hidden within
my self: yea all other plenty besides my God, is mere beggary unto me.

CHAP. 9. Why the Spirit only moved upon the waters.
1. BUT did not the Father also, or the Son, move upon the waters? And if we
understand moving as it were in a place, like a body; then neither did the
Spirit move. But if the excellent highness of the divinity, above every
changeable creature, be understood: then did both Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost move upon the waters. Why therefore is this said of thy Spirit only? Why
of him only, as if there had been some place, where indeed there is no place
for it: of which only it is written, that He is thy gift? Let us now take up
our rest in this thy gift; there let us enjoy thee, O our rest, and our place.

2. Love preferres us thither, and thy good Spirit aduances our lowlynesse from
the very gates of death. In thy good pleasure lies our peace, our body with his
own lumpishnesse swaies us toward its own place. Weight makes not downward
only, but to his own place also. The fire mounts upward, a stone sinks
downward. All things pressed by their own weight, go toward their proper
places. Oil powered in the bottom of the water, yet will swim on the top
of it: water powered upon Oil, sinkes to the bottom of the Oil. They are
weighed down by their own hea-luinesse, they go to seek their own centers.
Things a little out of their places, become unquiet: put them in their order
again, and they are quieted. My weight, is my love: that way am I carried,
whithersoeuer I be carried. We are inflamed by thy gift, and are carried
upwards: we wax hot within, and we go forwards. We ascend thy psalm. 84. 5.
ways that be in our heart, and we sing a song of degrees; inwardly enflamed
with thy fite, with thy The Holy Ghost, and not a furious blind zeal
good fire, and we go; even because we go upwards to the peace of Jerusalem:
for glad I was when as they said unto me, We will go up into the house of psalm.
122. 1.
God. There let thy good pleasure settle us, that we may desire no other
thing, but to dwell there for ever.

CHAP. 10. All is of Gods gift.
O Happy creature The Angels.
which knows no other thing but that whenas it self was another thing, even
by thy Gift which moves upon every mutable thing, it was so soon as created,
and no delay of time between, taken up in that call whereby thou saydest, Let
there be light, and there was light. Whereas in us there is distance of time
between our having been darkness, and our making light: but of that creature
it is only said, what it would have been, if it had not been enlightened.
And this is spoken in that manner, as if it had been unsettled and darkesome
before: that so the reason might now appear, for which it was made to be
otherwise; that is to say, that it being converted unto the light that never
fails, might it self be made light. Let him understand this that is able:
and let him that is not, ask it of God. Why should he trouble me with it; as
if I could enlighten any man that comes into John 1. 9.
this world?

CHAP. 11. Of some Impressions or resemblances of the blessed Trinity, that be
in man.
1. Which of us does sufficiently comprehend the knowledge of the almighty
Trinity? and yet which of us but talks of it, if at least it be that? A rare
soul it is, which whilst it speaks of it, knows what it speaks of. For men
contend and strive about it, and no man sees the vision of it in peace. I could
wish, that men would consider upon these three, that are in themselves. Which
three be far another thing indeed, then the Trinity is: but I do but now
tell them, where they may exercise their meditations, and examine and find how
far they are from it. Now the three that I spoke of, are, To Be, to Know, and
to Will. For I both Am, and Know, and Will: I Am Knowing and Willing: and I
Know my self to Be, and to Will: and I would both Be, and Know. Betwixt these
three, let him discern that can, how inseperable a life there is; yea one
life, one mind, and one essence: yea finally how inseperable a distinction
there is, and yet there is a distinction. Surely a man has it before him; let
him look into himself, and see, and then tell me.

2. But when once he comes to find any thing in these three; yet let him not
for all this believe himself to have found that unchangeable which is far
above all these, and which IS unchangeably, and Knows unchangeably, and Wills
unchangeably: But whether or no where these three be, there is also a Trinity,
or whether all three be in each several one, or all three in every of them:
or whether both ways at once, in admirable manner, simply and yet manifoldly
in its infinite self, the and unto it self, by which end it is, and is known
unto it self, and that being vnchangebly ever the same by the abundant
greatness of its Unity, it be all-sufficient for it self, what man can
readily conceive? who is able in any terms to express it? ^ who shall dare in
any measure rashly to deliver his opinion upon it?

CHAP. 12. The water in Baptism is effectual by the Holy Spirit.
1. Proceed in with thy Confession of the Lord thy God, O my faith, O holy,
holy, holy Lord my God, in thy name have we been baptized, O Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost: because that even among us also, in Christ his Son did God
make an heaven and earth, namely, the spiritual and carnal people of his
Church. Yea and our earth, before it received the form of doctrine, was
invisible and unformed; and we were covered over with the Romans 6. 17.
darkness of ignorance. For thou have chastised man for his iniquity, and thy
Judgments Psalm. 36. 6.
were like the great deep unto him.

2, But because thy Spirit moved upon the waters, thy mercy forsook not our
misery: for thou saydst, Repent ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven Math. 3. 2.
is at hand. Repent, Let there be His conceit here in putting Repentance and
light together is, for that Baptism was anciently called illumination, as Heb*
6. 4 Psa. 42. 6.
light. And because our soul was troubled within us, we have remembered thee,
O Lord, concerning the land of Jordan, and that hill which being Christ. Phil.
2. 6, 7 Ephesians. 5, 8.
equal unto thy self, was made little for our sakes: and upon our being
displeased at our own darkness, we turned unto thee and were made light. So
that behold, we having sometimes been darkness, are now light in the Lord.

CHAP. 13. His devout longing after God.
1. BUT yet we walk by 1 Cor. 5. 7
faith still, and not by sight: for we are saved by hope; but hope that is
soene, is not hope. Romans 8. 24
And yet does one deep call unto another in the voice of thy water-spoutes:
and so Psalm. 42. 7.
does he that says, I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, 1 Cor.
3. 1
but as unto carnal: even He who thought not himself to have apprehended as
yet: and who forgot those things which are behynd, and Phil. 3. 13
reached forth to those things which are before: yea he groaned earnestly; and
his soul thirsted after God, as the Heart after the waterbrooks, saying, Psalm.
42. 1
When shall I come? desiring to be clothed upon, with his house which is from
heaven: he 1 Cor. 5. 1.
calls also upon this lower Upon mankind.
deep, saying, Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by the
renewing of your mind. And, Be Romans 12. 2
not children in understanding: but in malice, be ye children, that in
understanding ye may 1. Cor. l 4. 20.
be perfect. and O foolish Galatians, Gal. 3. 1.
who has bewitched you?

2. But now speaks he no longer in his own voice; but in thine who sentest
thy Acts 2.
Spirit from above; by his mediation who ascended up on Ephe. 4 ^
high, and set open the floodgates of his gifts, that the force of his streams
might make glad the City of God. Him does this friend of the Psalm. 46. 4
bridegroom sigh after; though John. 3. 29
having the first fruits of the Romans 8. 13
Spirit in himself already, yet groaneth he within himself as yet, waiting
for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of his body; to him he sighs, as
being a member of his Bride; toward him he burns with zeal, as being a
friend of the Bridegroom: toward him he burns not toward himself;
because that in the voice of thy water-spowtes, and not in his own voice, does
he call to that One deep calls upon another, man's misery upon Gods mercy.
Other Scriptures as Apoc: 14. 2. by waters understand the people
other deep, for whose sake he is both jealous and fearful, lest that as
the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so their minds should be
corrupted from 2 Cor. 11. 3. where St. Austen read castitate, in stead of
Simplicitat. These words with others before, would the Popish Translator wrest,
as if spoken by St. aul now in heaven and praying for, and saving of souls:
whereas they be only the Confession of St. Austens own zeal, borrowed out of
St. aul's words.
the simplicity that is in our Bridegroom thy only Son. Oh what a light of
beauty will that be, when we shall see that Bridegroom as He is; when all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes, which have been my meat day and night,
whilst they daily say unto me, Where is now thy God?

CHAP. 14. Our misery is comforted by faith and Hope.
1. ANd so say I too; Where art thou O my God? see, where art thou? In thee
take I comfort a little while, whenas I power out my soul by my self in the
voice of joy and praise, which is the sound of him that keeps holyday. And yet
again is it besadned, even because it relapseth again; and becomes a
darkesome deep; or perceiues it self rather even still to be one. Unto it
thus speaks my faith which thou have kindled to enlighten my feet in this my
night, Why art thou so 1 Ioh. 3. 2.
sad, O my soul, and why art Apoc. 7. 17
thou so disquieted within me? Ps. 42. 4, 5.
Ps. 119. 105
Trust in the Lord; his word Esa. 26. 20
is a lantern unto thy feet: Ephesians. 2. 3.
trust and abide on him, until the night, the mother of the wicked, until the
wrath of the Lord be ouerpast: the children of which wrath, our selves who
were sometimes darkness, have been: the relics of which darkness we
still bear about us Ephesians. 5. 8.
in our body, dead because Rom 8. 10
of sin; until the day break, and the shadows flee Cant. 2. 17
away.

2. Hope thou in the Lord, in the morning I shall stand in thy presence, and
contemplate thee: yea I shall for ever confess unto thee. In the morning I
shall stand in thy presence, and shall see the health of my countenance, even
my God, who also shall Psalm. 42. 11
quicken our mortal bodies, Romans 8. 11
by the Spirit that dwells in us: who in mercy sometimes moved upon our
inner darkesome and floating deep: from whom in this our pilgrimage we have
received such a pledge, as that even now we are light: even already in this
life, whilst we are saved by hope, made the Children of light, and the
Children of the day, not the Children of the night, nor of the darkness which yet
sometimes we have been. Betwixt which Children of darkness and us, in this
uncertainty of humane knowledge, thou only can Here the popish Translater
falls foul upon the Caluenists, for affirming their Church, to consist only of
the Elect. He should have done well to have quoted some Author; Mr. Calvin
himself says only, That the church properly consists of the Elect. though
many wicked be of the outward Church, with whom he says, we are commanded to
hold communion. Institut. lib. 4. c. 1.. 7.
divide; thou, who prouest the hearts, and call the light, day, and the
darkness, night, For who can discern us, but thou? And what have we, that
we have not received of thee? Out of the same lump are some made for vessels
of honor, and others for dishonor.

CHAP. 15. By the word Firmament, is the Scripture meant.
1 But who except thou, O our God, made that Firmament of the Authority of thy
divine Scripture to be Romans 9. 21
over us? as it is said, The heaven Apoc. 6. 14
shall be folded up like a book; and is even now stretched over us like a skin.
The Popish Translaters note That by men the Scriptures came to have authority
over us; is false unless men made the Firmament, man's, nay the Penmans
authority is here called Ministry; and that's service, not true authority. Nay
the next words show, that man's authority obscured the Scriptures authority;
which was eminenter after the Penmen were dead.
For thy holy Scripture is of more eminent authority, since those mortals
departed this life, by whom thou dispensest it unto us. And thou know O
Lord, thou know, how thou with skins did once apparel Adam and Eve.
men, so soon as they by sin were become mortal.

Whereupon have thou like a skin stretched out the Firmament of thy book;
that is to say, those words of thine so well agreeing together; which by the
ministry of mortal men thou spreadest over us. For by the death of those men
is that solid strength of authority appearing in the books set by them, more
eminently stretched over all, that be now under it; which strength whilst
they lived on earth, was not then so eminently stretched out over us. Thou
had not as yet spredde abroad that heaven like a skin; thou had as yet,
every where noysed abroad the report of their deaths.

2 Let us look, O Lord, upon the heavens the work of thy fingers; clear our
eyes of that mist with which thou have over cast them: there is that testimony
of thine, which gives wisdom unto the little ones: perfect, O my God, thine
own praise cut of the mouth of babes and sucklings. Nor have we known any
other books, which so destroy pride, which so beat down the adversary, and
him that stands upon his own guard; that stands out upon terms of
reconciliation with thee, in defense of his own sins. I know not, Lord, I
know not of any other such chaste words, that are so powerful in persuading
me to Confession, and in making thy yoke easy unto my neck, and in inuiting
me to serve thee for very loves sake. Grant me to understand them, good
Father: grant me thus much that am placed Here is my papist forced to confess
the Scriptures to be above all humane authority, and that the churches power is
but to declare which be Scriptures
under them: because that for them who are placed under them, thou have settled
them so surely.

3. Other Waters also there be above this firmamenent immortal they be, as I
believe, and separated from all earthly corruption. Let those supercelestiall
people, thine Angels, praise thee, yea let them praise thy name: they, who have
no need to receive this Firmament, or by reading to attain the knowledge of
thy Word. For they always behold thy face, and there do they read without
any syllables measurable by times, what the meaning is of thy eternal will.
They read, they choose, they love. They are ever reading; yet that never passes
over which they read: because by choosing, and by loving, do they read the
unchangeableness of thy counsel. Their book is never closed, nor shall it
be ever clasped: seeing thy self is that volume unto them, yea thou art so
eternally. For thou have ordained them to be above this Firmament, which thou
have settled over the infirmenesse of the lower people: where-out they might
receive and take notice of thy mercy; which sets thee forth after a temporal
manner; even thee that made times. For thy mercy, O Lord, is in the Heavens,
and Psalm. 36. 5
thy truth reaches unto the clouds. The clouds pass away, but the heaven
abides: the Preachers of thy Word pass out of this life into another; but thy
Scripture is spread abroad over the people, even unto the end of the world.

4. Yea both heaven and earth shall pass, but thy Mat. 24. 3
words shall not pass away: because the parchment shall be folded up: and the
grass over which it was spread out, shall with the goodlynesse of it Eay. 40. 6
8.
also pass away; but thy Word remains for ever. Which word now appears
unto us under the darkness of the clouds, and under the glass of the
heavens, and not as in 1 Cor. 13. 12
it self it is: because that even we, though the well-beloued of thy Son,
yet is it not hitherto manifest what we 1 John. 3. 2
shall be. He stands looking through the lattis of our flesh, Cant: 2. 9.
and he spoke us fair, yea he set us on fire, and we ran after the sent of
his odors. 1 John. 3. 2
But when he shall appear, then shall we be like him, for we shall see him as
he is. Grant us, Lord, to see him that is our own, though the time be not
yet come.

CHAP. 16. God is unchangeable.
1. FOr fully, as in thy self thou art; thou only know; thou, who ART
unchangeably, and know est unchangeably, and willest unchangeably. And thy
essence both knows, and wills unchangeably. And thy knowledge Is, and wills
unchangeably: and thy will Is* and knows unchangeably. Nor seems it right in
thine eyes, that in the same manner as an unchangeable light knows it self,
so it should be known of a thing changeable, that receives light from another.
My soul is therefore like a land where no water is, because that as it Psalm.
143. 6
cannot of it self enlighten it self, so can it not of it self satisfy it
self. For so is the fountain of life with thee, like as in thy light we shall
see light. Psalm. 36. 9


CHAP. 17. What is meant by dry land, and by the Sea.
1. Who gathered Here the other Translater mistoole a a little in turning it,
Bitter waters.
bitter spirited people together into one society? Because that all of them
propound to themselves the same end of a temporal and earthly felicity; for
attayning whereof they do, whateuer they do, though in the doing, they waver
up and down with innumerable variety of cares. Who, Lord, but thy self who
once commandedst That the waters should be gathered Genes 1. 9
together into one place, and that the dry land should appear, Psalm. 143. 6
which thirsts after thee. For the Sea is thine, and thou have made it, and thy
hands prepared the dry land. Nor is the Psalm 95. 6
bitter spiritednesse of men's wills, but the gathering together of the waters,
called Sea: yet do thou also restrain the wicked desires of men's souls,
and set them their bounds, how far the waters may be suffered to pass;
that their waves may break one against another: and in this manner make thou
it a Sea, by the order of thy dominion which goes over all things.

2. But as for the souls that thirst after thee, and that appear before thee
(being by other bounds divided from the society of the Sea) them do thou so
water by a sweet spring, that the Earth may bring forth fruit: and thou, O
Lord so commanding, our soul may bud forth her works of mercy according to
their kind: when we love our neighbor in the relief of his bodily
necessities: having seed in it self according to its likeness: Whenas out of
the consideration of our own infirmity, we so far compassionate them, as
that we are ready to relieve the needy: helping them, even as we would desire
to be helped out own selves, if we in like manner were in any necessity; And
that not in things easy to v^ aloue, as in the green St. Austen still alludes
to the manner of the creation, Genesis 1 His meaning is, that we should not only
do slightly for our neighbor, as we do for an herb, which having feed in it
self, needs but our setting but be like a tree to him, afford him fruit,
strength, and shadow.
hear^ which has seed in it; but also in affording them the protection of our
assistance w^^ Psa. 85. 11
our best strength; like the tree that brings forth fruit: that is to say, some
right good turn for the rescuing him that suffers wrong, out of the clutches
of him that is too strong for him: and by affording him the shelter of our
protection, by the powerful arm of just judgment.

CHAP. 18. He continues his Allegory, in alluding to the works of the Creation.
1. SO, Lord, even so I beseech thee, Let it spring out, as already thou make
it do, as already thou give cheerfulness and ability, Let Genesis 1. 12
Truth spring out of the Earth, and righteousness look do^n from Heaven, and
let there be lights in the Firmament. Let us break our bread unto the Esaias 58 7
hungry, and let us bring the poor that is cast out, into our own house. Let
us cloth the naked, and never despise those of our own flesh. Which fruits
being once sprung out of the earth, see that it is good: and let our temporary
light break forth; and we our selves, from this inferior fruitfulness of
Action, arriving to that superior word of life in the delightfulness of
Contemplation; may appear at length like the lights in the world, fast settled
to the Firmament of thy Scriptures. For there by discourse thou so clearest
things unto us, as that we be enabled to divide between Intelligible and
sensible creatures, as betwixt the day and the night; or between souls given
either to Intellectual, or unto sensible creatures: insomuch as not only thou
thy self in the secret of thine own Judgment, like as before ever the
Firmament was made, thou deuidest between the light and the darkness, but
thy spiritual children also set and rancked in the same Firmament, (thy grace
now clearly shining throughout their Orb) may now give then light unto the
earth, and divide betwixt the day and the night, and be for signs of times
and seasons, namely, that old things are passed with the^, and lo, all things
are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17
and that our salvation is now nearer then when we first believed: Romans 13. 11
12.
and that the night is passed, and the day is at hand: and that thou will crown
the year Pal 65. 11
with thy blessing; send laborers Math 9 38
into thy harvest, in the sowing whereof, others have taken pains before;
sowing the seed also for another harwest, which shall be in the end of the world.
Ma. 13. 3*


2. Thus give thou life to him that seeks (...) and thou blessest the
years of the (...) But thou art the same, and in thy years which fail not,
thou preparest a beginning for the years that are a passing. For thou in thy
eternal counsel do in their proper seasons bestow thy heavenly blessings
upon the earth: for to one there is given by thy Spirit, the word of wisdom,
resembling the greater light, (for them who are delighted with the brightness
of perspicuous truth) rising as it were in the beginning Genesis 1. 16
of the day. To another is given the word of knowledge by the same Spirit,
resembling the lesser light: To another faith; to another 1 Cor. 12. 8 10.
the gift of healing; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy;
to another discerning of Spirits; to another diverse kinds of tongues: and all
these resemble the lesser stars. All these works the same Spirit, dividing
what is fit for every man, even as it will; and causing the stars to appear
in their brightness, unto each man's edification.

3. But as for the word of knowledge, wherein are all the Sacraments are here
taken in the largest signification.
Sacraments contained, which are varied in their seasons like the Moon;
together with those other notions of gifts, which are afterward reckned up,
like the startes: they so much come short of the brightness of wisdom, in as
much as their rising is in the beginning of the night. But yet are these
necessary unto such, as that wisest servant Moses says the other Translater,
St. Paul, say I. The phrase is St. Paul's 1 Cor. 3. 1
of thine could not speak unto, as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal men;
even he, who also speaks wisdom among those that are perfect. As for the
natural man, like him who is a babe in Christ, and a sucker of milk; till
such time as he grows big enough for He alludes to the Primitive practice,
which admitted not their Catechumenos or unbaptized, to hear the higher points
of religion handled, till they were enlightened, that is, baptized; yet these
he advised to rest contented with their catecheticall knowledge. The other
Translater is puzzled Esaias. 1 16 He alludes to the Sacrament of Baptism. Genesis
1. 11, 30. Here the other Translater misread his copy, populi for pabuli, and
mis points the next sentence.
strong meat; and can look steadily against the Sun, let him not utterly
forsake his night, but rest himself contented, with what light, the Moon and
the Stars afford him. These discourses hold thou with us, O our most wise
God, in thy Bible that Firmament of thine; that we may learn by it how to
discern of all these things, in an admirable contemplation: though still but
in Signs, and in times, and in days and in years.

CHAP. 19. Our hearts are to be purged from vice, that they may be capable of
virtue. He still continues his Allegory of the creation.
1. But wash you first, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings out
of your own hearts, and from before mine eyes, that the dry land may appear.
Learn to do good, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow, that the
earth may bring forth the green herb for meat, and the tree bearing fruit:
and then come, let us reason together, says the Lord, that there may be light
in the Firmament of the heaven, and let them shine upon the earth. That rich
young man demanded Mat. 19. 16 17
of our good master, what he should do to attain eternal life. Let our good
master tell him, (whom he thought to be no more then a man, who is good,
because he is God) let him tell him, That if he would enter into life, he
must keep the commandments: let him put away the bitterness of malice and
wickedness; let him not kill, nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor bear false
witness: that the dry land may appear, and bring forth the honoring of
Father and mother, and the love of our neighbor: All these (says he) have I
kept.

2. Whence then comes such stoare of thorns, if so be the earth be
fruitful? Go, stubbe up those thick bushes of covetousness; sell that thou
have, and fill thy self with standing corn, by giving to the poor; and
follow the Lord, if thou will be perfect; that is, associated to them, among
whom he speaks wisdom; he that well knows what to distribute to the day,
and what unto the night; that thou also may know it, and that for thee there
may be lights made in the Firmament of heaven: which never will be, unless
thy heart be there: nor will that ever be, unless there thy treasure be
also; like as thou hear of our good master. But that barren earth was sorry
at that Here my papist foysts in the word Counsel, into St. Austens words;
very feign would he countenance the popish vow of pouerly; which they say is
counsayled though not commanded.
saying; and the thorns choked the word in him.

2. But you, O chosen generation, you weak things of the world, who have
forsaken all, that ye may follow the Lord; go ye now after him, and confound
the strong; go after him, O ye beautiful feet, and shine ye in the
Firmament, that the heavens may declare his glory; you, that are midway
between the light and the perfect ones; though not so perfect yet as the
Angels; and the darkness of the little Mat. 13. 7.
ones; though not utterly despised. 1 Cor. 1. 27
Shine ye over all the Romans 10. 5
earth; and let one day enlightened by the Sun, utter unto another day, a
speech of Psalm. 19. 2.
Wisdom; and one night, enlightened by the Moon, show unto another night, a
word of knowledge. The Moon and Stars shine in the night; yet does not the
night obscure them; seeing they give that light unto it, which it is capeable
of. For behold, as if God had given the word, Let there lights in the Firmament
of heaven; there came Acts. 2. 2.
suddenly a sound from heaven, as it had been the rusking of a mighty wind,
and there appeared cloven tongues like as it had been of fire, and it sat
upon each of them; and there were made lights in the Firmament of heaven, which
had the word of life in them. Ely every where about, O you holy flies, O you
beauteous fires; for you are the light of the world, nor are you put under a
bushel; he whom you claue unto, is exalted himself, and has exalted you.
Ran you abroad, and make your selves known unto all nations.

CHAP. 20. He allegorizes upon the creation of spiritual things.
1. LEt the Sea also conceive, and bring forth These Allegories had some
meaning against the Manichees: seeing in his book de Genesi, contra
Manichaeos, they be again repeated, which see.
your works ^ and let the waters bring forth the moving creature that has
life. For you by separating the good from the bad, are made the mouth of God,
by whom he said, Let the waters bring forth: not a living soul which the earth
brings forth, but the moving creatures having life in it, and the winged fowls
that fly over the earth. For thy Sacrament, O God, by the ministry of thy
holy ones, have moved in the midst of the waves of temptation of this present
world, for the trayning up of the Gentiles unto thy name, in thy baptism: In
the doing whereof, many a great wonder was wrought; resembling the huge Whales:
and the voices of thy Messengers flying above the Earth, in the open Firmament
of thy Bible; that being set over them as their authority Now what will the
papists say to this most clear authority of the Scripture? Do the popish
Emissaries fly hither under this, or with this authority? No, but rather with
the popes. Nay fly they not contrary to this authority? If not, why do they so
much complain of, and vilyfie the Scripture, where its authority serves not
their turns? Psalm. 19. 4.
under which they were to fly, whithersoeuer they went. For there is no speech
nor language, where their voice is not heard: Seeing their sound is gone through
all the Earth, and their words to the end of the world: because thou, O Lord,
have enlarged them by thy blessing.

2. Say I not true, or do I mingle and confound, and not sufficiently
distinguish between the knowledge of these lightsome creatures that are in the
Firmament of heaven, and these corporeal works in the wauy Sea, and those
things that are under the Firmament of heaven? For of those things whereof the
understanding is solid, and bounded within themselves, without any increases of
their generations; (like the lights of Wisdom and Knowledge as it were) yet
even of them, the operations be corporeal, many, and diverse, and one thing
growing out of another, they are multiplied by thy blessing, O God, who have
refreshed our soon cloyed mortal senses; that so the thing which is but one
in the understanding of our mind, may, by the motions of our bodies, be many
several ways I he same sentence may R^scius Act, and Cicero describe several
ways.
set out, and discoursed upon. These Sacraments have the Waters brought forth:
yea indeed the 1 Hoe aludes to Baptism in water, accompanied with the Word of
the Gospel; of the Institution whereof, man's misery was the occasion.
necessities of the people estranged from the eternity of thy truth, have
brought them forth in thy Word, that is, in thy Gospel: Because indeed the
Waters cast them forth; the bitterness whereof was the very cause, why these
Sacraments went along accompanied with thy Word.

3. Now are all things fair that thou have made; but lo, thy self is
infinitely fairer, that made these all: from whom had not Adam fallen, this
brackishnesse of the Sea had never flowed out of his Ioines: namely, this
mankind, so profoundly, and so tempestuously swelling, and so restlesly
tumbling up and down. And then, had there been no necessity of thy ministers
to work in many waters, after a corporeal and sensible manner, such mysterious
doings and sayings. For in this sense have those moving flying creatures, at
this present fallen into my meditation; in which, people being trained up and
admitted into; though they had received corporeal Sacraments, should not for
all this be able to profit by them, unless their soul were also quickened up
unto a He means that Baptism which is the Sacrament of Initiation, was not
so profitable without the Lords Supper, which the Ancients called the Sacrament
of perfection, or consummation.
higher pitch, and unless after the word of admission, it looked forwards to
Perfection.

CHAP. 21. He allegorizes upon the Creation of Birds and fishes; alluding by
them unto such as have received the Lords supper, are better taught and
mortified, which are perfecter Christians then the merely baptized.
1. ANd hereby, by virtue of thy Word; not the deepnesse of the Sea, but the
earth it self once separated from the bitterness of the waters, brings forth,
not the creeping and flying creatures of seules having life in them; but the
living soul it Genesis 1. 20
self, which has now no Genesis 2. 7.
more need of Baptism, as the heathen yet have, and as it self also had,
when it was covered heretofore with the waters. For there is entrance into the
kingdom of heaven no other way, Baptism, which is necessary generally, though
not always, and particularly, where the means are not.

And the Schoolmen teach, that Martyrdom, and an earnest desire, do
counteruaile the want of Baptism.


since the time that thou have instituted this Sacrament for me^ to enter by:
nor does the living soul any more seek after miracles to work Belief; nor
is it so with it any longer, That unless it sees signs and wonders, it will
not believe; now that the faithful Earth is separated from the waters that
were bitter with infidelity; and that tongues are for a sign, not to them that
believe, but to them that believe not. 1 Cor. 14. 22
The Earth therefore which thou have founded upon the waters, Psalm. 24. 2
has no more need now of that flying kind, which at thy word the waters
brought forth. Send thou thy word into it by thy Messengers: for their labors
indeed they are which we speak of; but yet thou art he that works in them,
that they may work a soul to have life in it.

2. The Earth brings forth: that is, the Earth is the cause that ^ they work
this in the Gods messengers.
soul: like as the Sea was the cause that they wrought upon the moving things
that have life in them; as also upon the fowls that fly in the open firmament
of heaven: of whom this Earth has no need; although it seeds upon that fish
which was taken out of the deep, upon that Table which thou have prepared for
the faithful. For therefore was He means Christ; the first letters of whose
^ames did in Sybiles Acrosticke verses make up the word (...), A Fish. He was
also resembled by Jonas drawn out of the Fish and Deep, And himself was
raised from the Grave and Hell. He is fed upon at the Communion See also Luke
24. 36
He taken out of the Deep, that he might feed the Dry land: and the Foul,
though bred in the Sea, is yet multiplied upon the Earth. For of the first
preachings of the Evangelists, man's infidelity was the cause; yet give they
good exhortations unto the faithful also: yea, and many ways do they bless
them from day to day. But as for the living soul; that took his beginning
from the Earth: for it profits not the faithful, unless they can contain
themselves from the love of this world: that so their soul many only live unto
thee, which was dead while it lined in pleasure; in such pleasures, Lord, as
bring death with them. For it is thou, O Lord, that art the vital delight of a
pure heart.

3. Now therefore let thy Ministers work upon this with i not as sometimes
they did upon the waters of Infidelity, when they preached, and spoke by
miracles, and Sacraments, and mysterious expressions: when as Ignorance, the
mother of Admiration, might give good care ^o the^, out of a reverent fear it
had toward those secret wonders. For such is the entrance that is made unto
faith by the sons of Adam forgetful of thee: while they (...) themselves
from thee, and (...) become a darksome deep. But let thy Ministers work ^ow as
upon dry: land, that is separated from the gulfes of the great deep: and let
them (...) pattern unto the faithful, by living before them, and ^^ stirring
the up to imitation. For thus are men to hear; not with an intent to hearken
only, but to do also. Seek the Lord, and your soul shall live* Psalm. 69. 32
That the Earth may bring forth the living soul. Be not Rom 12. 2
conformed to this world; Contain your selves from it: then shall your souls
live by avoiding it, which dyed by affecting it.

4. Contain your selves from the immoderate wild humor of pride, the litherly
voluptuousness of lust, and the false name of knowledge: 1 Timothy 6. 2^
that so the wild beasts may be tamed; the cattle made tractable, and the
Serpents, harmless. For these be the motions of our mind under an:
Allegory; that is to say, the haughtynesse of pride, the delight of lust, and
the poison of curiosity: these be the motions of a dead soul: For the soul
dies not so utterly, as that it wants all motion; because it dying by departing
from the fountain of life, is there upon taken up by this transitory world,
and is con^^^ed unto it. But thy word, O God, is the fountain of eternal
life; and that never calls away: wherefore this departure of the Soul is
restrained by thy word, when (...) said unto us, Be not conformed unto this
world; that so the Earth may in the fountyne of life bring forth a (...) soul:
that is, a soul (...) continent by virtue of (...) Word, delivered by thy
(...), and by follow^^^ the followers of Christ. Cor. 11. 1
(...) is indeed to live after (...); because the emution a man takes, is from
^^ friend. Be ye (says he) Gala. 4. 12
^ am, for I am as you are. (...) in this living soul shall (...) be good That
is, good motions.
beasts, meek (...) actions. For thou (...) commanded, Go on with Ecol. 3. 17
thy business in meekness, so shall thou be beloved of all men. And there
shall be good cattle in it too; which neither of they eat much, shall have
nothing over, nor if they Exo. 16. 18
eat little, any lack: and good Serpents; not dangerous, to do hurt; but
wise, to take heed: Math. 1^. 9
such as will make such a search into this temporal nature, as may be
sufficient; that Gods eternity may be clearly seen, being understood Rom 1. 20.
by the things that are made. For these Creatures are then obedient unto
Reason, when being once restrained from their deadly preuayling upon us, they
live, and become good.

CHAP. 22. Of Regeneration by the Spirit He allegorizes upon the Creation of
man.
1. FOr behold, O Lord, our God, our Creator, soon as ever our affections are
restrained from the love of the world, by which we died through our
euill-liuing; and began to be a living soul, through our good living; and
that the word which thou have spoken be thy Apostle, shall be made good in us, Be
not conformed to this world: Rom: 12. ^
that next follows upon it, which thou presently subioynedst, saying; But be
ye transformed by the renewing of your mind: not as living now after your kind,
as if you followed your neighbor next before you; nor yet as living after the
example of some better man: for thou did not say, Let man be made after his
kind; but, Lei us make man Genesis 1. 26
after our own Image and similitude: that we might prove what thy will is.

For to this purpose said that dispencer of thine, (who begets Children by the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 3. 2. 3
that he might not ever Heb. 5. 2.
have them babes, whom he must be said to feed with milk, and bring up
like a nurse:) Be ye transformed (says he) by the renewing of Rom: 12. 2
your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, that acceptable and perfect
will of God. Wherefore thou say not, Let man he made, but, Let us make man.
Nor saydst thou, According to his kind; but, After our own Image and likeness.
For man being renewed in his mind, and able to discern and understand thy
truth, needs no more any direction of man, to follow after his kind: but by thy
showing does he prove what is that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of
thine: yea thou teach him that is now made capeable, to discern the Trinity
of the Unity, and the Unity of the Trinity. Whereas therefore it was spoken in
the plural number, Let us make man, vet is it presently inferred in the
singular, And God made man: and whereas it is said in the plural number, After
our own likeness; yet is inferred in the singular, After the Image of God.
Thus is man renewed unto the knowledge of Col. ^ 3. ^
God, after the Image of him that created him: and being made Spiritual, he
now judges all things, (those namely that are to be judged) yet he himself
is judged of no 1 Cor. 2. 15
man.

CHAP. 23 Of what things a Christian may judge. He allegorizes upon man's
dominion over the creatures.
THat he now judges all things, this is the meaning; That he has dominion
over the fish of the Sea, Genesis 1. 26
and over the fowls of the air, and over all cattle and wild beasts, and
over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.
For this he exercises by the understanding of his mind, by the which he
perceives the things of the Spirit of 1 Cor. 1. 14
God; whereas otherwise, Man being in honor, had no understanding, and is
compared Psalm. 49. 20
unto the unreasonable beasts, and is become like unto them. In thy Church
therefore, O our God, according to thy grace which thou have bestowed upon it
(for we are thy workmanship, created Ephesians. 2. 10
unto good works:) are there not those only who govern spiritually, but they
also which spiritually Clergy, and layty.
obey those that are over them: for male and female have thou made man, even
this way too, in the account of thy grace spiritual; in which, according to
Sex of body, there is neither male nor female, because neither Jew, nor
Grecian, neither bond nor free. Col. 3. 11


2. Spiritual persons therefore, (whether such as govern, or such as obey,)
do judge spiritually; not upon those spiritual thoughts which shine in the
Firmament, (for they ought not to pass their judgment upon so supreme
authority:) for they may not censure thy Bible, notwithstanding something in it
shines not out clearly enough: for we submit our understanding unto that, and
hold for certain, that even that which is shut from our eyes, to be most
rightly and truly spoken. For so a man, though he be Spiritual and renewed
unto the knowledge of God after his Image that created him; yet may he no
presume to be a Judge of the Against this most clear place my papist notes,
That the Doctors may judge of scripture, not to control it, but to expound it.
But may they expound as they list, what authority has the Scripture then?
James 4. 11 Math. 7. 16
law, but a doer only. Neither takes he upon him to judge of that
distinction of Spiritual and carnal men; not of those namely which are known
unto thine eyes, O our God, and have not as yet discovered themselves unto us
by any of their works, that by their fruits we might be able to know them: but
thou, Lord, do even now know them, and have already distinguished them; yea
and called them in secret, or ever the Firmament was created.

3. Nor yet as he is spiritual, does he pass his censure upon the vnquier
people of this present world: For what has Ignorant he to do to judge those
that are 1 Cor. 5. 12
without? which of them is likely to come hereafter into the sweetness of thy
grace; and which likely to continue in the perpetual bitterness of unbelief?
Man therefore whom thou have made after thine own image, has not received
dominion over the light of Heaven; nor over the secrets of heaven it self: nor
over the day and the night, which thou calledst before the foundation of the
world: nor yet over the gathering together of the waters, which is the Sea: but
he has received dominion over the Fishes of the Sea, and the Fowls of the
air, and over all Cattle, and over all the Earth, and over all creeping
things which creep upon the Earth. For he judges and approves that which is
right; and he disalloweth what he finds amiss: be it either in the solemnity
of that Sacrament by which such are admitted into the Church, as thy mercy
searches out among many waters: Observe here, that he gives a hint of but two
Sacraments.
Or in that other, in which that Fish is received, which once taken out of the
Deep, the devout earth now feeds upon: See chap. 21. in the margent.
or else in such expressions and sounds of words, as are subject to the
authority of thy Bible; (like the Fowls as it were flying under the Firmament)
namely, by interpreting, expounding, discoursing, disputing, consecrating or
praying unto thee with the mouth, with expressions breaking forth and a loud
sounding, that the people may answer, 1 Cor. 14. 16. Thus the Primitive Laity
used to say when the Bishop had done consecrating of the Sacrament; and when he
gave* the Gratia, that is the consecrated piece into their hand, with such a
prayer as we now do. Tertul. l. de Spectac. c. 26. Euse b. ^. 6. c. 36.
Amen.

4. For the vocal pronouncing of all which words, the occasion grows from the
darksome Deep of this present world, and from the blindness of flesh and
blood; seeing that by bare conceiving in the mind, they cannot be perceived:
so that necessary it is to speak loud unto our ears. This, notwithstanding
the flying Fowls be multiplied upon the earth, yet they derive their beginning
from the Waters. The Spiritual man judges also by allowing of what is right,
and by disallowing what he finds amiss, in the works and manners of the
faithful: yea and in their alms too, which resemble the Earth bringing forth
fruit: and of the whole living Soul, that has tamed her own affections, by
chastity, by fasting, and by holy meditations: and of all those things too,
which are subject to the senses of the body. Upon all these is he now said to
judge; and over all these, has he absolute power of correction.

CHAP. 24. He allegorizes upon Increase and multiply.
1. But what is this now, and what kind of mystery? Behold, thou blessest
mankind, O Lord, that they may increase and multiply, and replenish the Earth:
do thou not give us a privy hint to learn something by? why did thou not
as well bless the light, which thou calledst day; or the Firmament of heaven, or
the lights, or the stars, or the Earth or the Sea? I might say O God, that
created us after thine own Image; I might say, that it had been thy good
pleasure to have bestowd this blessing peculiarly upon man; had thou not in
likemaner blessed the Fishes and the Whales, that they also should increase and
multiply, and replenish the waters of the Sea, and that the Fowls should be
multiplied upon the Earth. I might say likewise, that this blessing pertayned
properly unto those creatures, as are bred of their own kind; had I found it
given to the Fruit Trees, and Plants, and Beasts of the earth. Here the other
Translater by putting in of Not, co^tradicts both the Scripture and himself;
But I pardon him; for Sommalius false copy deceived him.
But neither unto the Herbs, nor the Trees, nor the Beasts, or Serpeuts is it
said, Increase and multiply: notwithstanding that all these as well as the
Fishes, Fowls or Men, do by generation both increase, and continue their kind.

2. What then shall I say to it, O thou Truth my light? Shall I say that it was
idly? that it was vaynly said? Not so, O Father of piety, far be it from a
Minister of thine own Word to say so. And notwithstanding I fully understand
not what that Phrase means, yet may others that are better, that is, more
understanding then my self, make better use of it; according as thou, O my
God, have enabled every man to understand: but let this confession of mine be
pleasing in thine eyes; for that I confess unto thee, O Lord, how that I
firmly believe, thou speak not that word in vain; nor will I conceal that,
which the occasion of reading this place has put into my mind.

3. For most true it is, nor do I see what should hinder me from thus
understanding the figurative phrases of thy Bible. For I know a thing to be
manifoldly signified by corporeal expressions, which the mind understands all
one way: and another thing again understood many ways in the mind, which is
signified but one way by corporeal expression. See (for example) the single
love of God and our neighbor, in what a variety of mysteries, and innumerable
languages; and in each several language, in how innumerable phrases of
speaking, it is corporeally expressed: and thus does this Fry of the waters
increase and multiply. Observe again, Reader, who ever thou art: behold, I
say, that which the Scripture delivers, and the voice pronounces one only way,
In the Beginning God created Heaven, and Earth; is it not understood many a
several way; not with any deceit of error, but in several kinds of very true
senses? Thus does man's of spring increase and multiply.

4. If therefore we can conceive of the natures of things, not allegorically,
but properly; then may the phrase, Increase and multiply, very well agree unto
all things whatsoever, that come of any kind of Seed. But if we entreat of
the words as figuratively spoken, (which I rather suppose to be the purpose of
the Scripture, which does not, I believe, superfluously attribute this
benediction unto the increases of watery and humane creatures only:) then
verily do we find multitudes, both in creatures spiritual, and creatures
corporeal, as in Heaven and Earth; and in Souls both righteous and
unrighteous, as in light and darkness; and in holy Authors, who have been
the Ministers of the Law unto us, as in the Firmament which is settled betwixt
the higher and the lower Waters; and in the society of people yet in the
bitterness of infidelity as in the Sea; and in the studies of holy souls, as
in the dry land; and in the works of mercy done in this life, as in the herbs
bearing seed, and in the fruitful trees; and in spiritual gifts shining
forth for our edification, as in the lights of heaven; and in men's affections
reformed unto temperance, as in the living soul: in all these instances we
meet with multitudes, abundance, and increase.

5. But that such an increase and multiplying should come as that one thing may
be understood and expressed many ways; and one of those expressions understood
several ways too; we do no where find, except in words corporeally
expressed, and in things intelligibly divided. By these words corporeally
pronounced, we understand the generations of the waters: and that for the
necessary causes of fleshly profundity: by these things intelligibly divided,
we understand humane generations; and that for the fruitfulness of their
reason. And even therefore we believe thee Lord to have said to both these
kinds, Increase and multiply: for that within the compass of this blessing, I
conceive thee to have granted us a power and a faculty, both to express
several ways that which we understand but one; and to understand several
ways, that which we read to be obseurely delivered but in one. Thus are the
waters of the Sea replenished, which are not moved but by several
significations: thus with humane increase is the earth also replenished, whose
dryness appeared by its affections, over which reason rules.

CHAP. 25. He allegorically compares the Fruits of the Earth, unto the duties
of piety.
I Will now also deliver, O Lord my God, that which the following Scripture
puts me in mind of: yea I will deliver it without fear. For I will utter the
truth, thy self inspiring me with what thy pleasure was, to have me deliver
concerning those words. But by no other inspiration then thine, can I believe
my self to speak truth; seeing thou art the very truth, and every man a liar.
He therefore that speaks Ps. 116. 11
a lie, speaks it of his John 8. 44
own: that therefore I may speak truth, I will speak it from thee. Behold,
thou have given unto us for food every herb bearing seed, Gene. 1. 29
which is upon the face of all the earth: and every tree, in which is the fruit
of a tree yielding seed. And that not to us alone, but also to all the Fowls
of the air, and to the beasts of the earth, and to all creeping things: but
unto the Fishes and to the great whales, have thou not given them.

2. Now by these fruits of the earth we said before, that the works of mercy
were signified, and figured out in an Allegory; which for the necessition of
this life are afoorded as (...) of a fruitful earth. Such an Earth was the do^
out Qu^siph^rus, unto whose housethou gave mercy, who often refreshed thy
Paul, and was not ashamed of his 1 Timothy 1. 16
chain With such a crop were those Brethren fruitful also, who out of
Mecedonia supplied 2 Cor. 8. 2
his wants. But how much grieved he for such trees, as did not aff^^rd him the
fruit due unto him where he says, At my first. ^^swere no man stood by me,
(...) men forsook me. I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge. For
these fruits are due unto such as minister the Spiritual Rationalem. An old
Epithet to most of the holy things. So, Reasonable service. Romans 12. 1 (...)
1. pet. 2. 2 sincere milk Cle. Alex. calls baptism so. Pedag l. 1. c. 6. And
in Constitut. Apost. l. 6. c. 23. the Eucharist is styled A reasonable
Sacrifice. The word was used to distinguish Christian mysteries, from Jewish.
Rationale, est spirituale.
doctrine unto us, out of their understanding of the divine Mysteries: and they
are due ^^ unto them, as they are (...) yea and due so unto them also, as unto
living (...), in that they give themselves as patterns of imitation, in all
continency: and so are they due unto them also, as they are flying (...) for
their Blessings which are multiplied upon the (...); because their found i gave
out into all lands.

CHAP. 26. The pleasure and the profit redounding to us, out of a (...) turn
done unto our neighbor.
1. THey now are fed by these fruits, that are delighted with them: nor are
those delighted with them, whose belly is their God: Neither yet even in them
that yield them, is that the fruit which they yield; but the mind, with which
they afford them. He therefore that served God, and not his own belly, I
plainly see the thing that caused him so to rejoice; I see it, and I rejoice
with him. For he had received fruit from the Philippians, who had sent it by
Spaphrodit^s unto him: and yet I still perceive the cause of his rejoicing. For
that which he rejoiced, upon that he fed: because he speaking, as truth was,
of it; I rejoiced, (says he) greatly in the Lord, that now at last your (...)
of m^ has flourished again, wherein ye were also careful, but it was
tedious unto you. These Philippians therefore had now even rotted away with a
longsome irkesomnesse, and withered as it were, in respect of the fruit of this
good work: and he now rejoices for them (not for himself) that they
fliurisht again, in as much as they now supplied his wants. Therefore says he
afterward; This I speak, not in respect of want, for I have learned in
whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. I know both how to be abas^i,
and I know how to abound: every where, and in all things I am instructed both
to be full and to be hungry; both to abound, and to suffer need. I can do all
things, through him which strengthens me.

^. Of what art thou so glad, O great Paul? of what art thou so glad? what is
it thou so feedest upon, Othou man, renewed in the knowledge of God after the
image of him that created thee, thou living soul, of so much co^tinency, thou
tongue of the flying fowls speaking such mysteries? (for to such creatures, is
this food due) what is it that thus feeds thee? Joy? list then to what
follows: Notwithstanding ye have well done, that ye di^communicate with my
affliction. Phil. 4. 14
For this he rejoices, upon this he fed: ever because they were beneficia
unto him; not because hi^ straight was eased by them his, who says unto thee
Thou have enlarged me when Psalm. 4. 1.
I was in distress: for that he knew to abound, and to suffer want, through
thy self who strengthenest him. For ye Philippians know (says Phi. 4. 15
he) that in the beginning of the Gospel, when I departed from Macedonia, no
Church communicated with me as concerning giving and receiving, but ye only For
even in Theffalonica ye sent 16.
once and again unto my necessity.

3. Unto these good works, he now rejoices that they are returned; and he is
as glad that they flourished again, as at the fruitfulness of a field that
begins to grow green again. But was it for his own necessities, that he
said, Ye sent unto my necessities? Rejoices he for that? Verily not for that.
But how know we that? Because himself says immediately, not because I desire
a gift, but I desire fruit. I have learned of thy self, O my God, to
distinguish betwixt a gift, and fruit. A gift, is the very thing which he gives,
that imparts these necessaries unto us; as money, meat, drink, clothing,
harbor, help: but the fruit, is the good and the upright will of the giver.
For our good Master say, not barely, He that receives a Prophet, but adds,
in Math. 10. 41
the name of a Prophet. Nor does he only say, He that receives a righteous
man, but adds, in the name of a righteous man: one verily shall 42.
receive the reward of a Prophet; and the other, the reward of a righteous man:
Nor says he only, He that shall give to drink a cup of cold water unto one
of my little ones: but he added, in the name of a Disciple: and so concludes,
Verily I say unto you, he shall not lose his reward. The Gift h^re is, To
receive a Prophet, to receive a righteous man, to give a cup of cold water to a
Disciple: but the fruit is to do it in the name of a Prophet, in the name of a
righteous man, in the name of a Disciple. With the fruit was 1 King 17
Eliah fed by the Widow that knew she fed a man of God; and that even
therefore she did feed him: but with the Gift did the Raven feed him. Nor
was the inner man of Eliah so fed, but the outter man only: who might also for
want of that food have perished.

CHAP. 27. He allegorizes upon the Fishes and the Whales.
1. I Will here therefore, O Lord, speak what is true in thy sight: namely,
that when ignorant men and infidels (for the gayning and admitting of whom into
the Church, these Sacraments of beginnings, and the mighty workings of miracles
are necessary, which we have supposed to be signified under the name of
Fishes and Whales) do give entertaynment for bodily refreshment, or otherwise
succor with something useful for this present life, unto thy Children; whenas
themselves be ignorant, either what to do, and to what end; neither do those
feed these, nor are these fed by those: because that neither do the one sort
do it our of an holy and upright intent; nor the other sort rejoice at their
gifts, whose fruit they as yet behold not. For upon that is the mind fed, of
which it is glad. And therefore do not the Fishes and Whales feed upon such
meats, as the Earth brings not forth, until after it was separated and divided
from the bitterness of the Sea-waters.

CHAP. 28. Very good, why added last of al?
1. ANd thou O God, saw every thing that Genesis 1. 31
thou had made, and behold, it was very good. Yea even we have seen the
same, and lo, every thing is very good. After every several kind of thy
works, when thou had said the word that they should be made, and they were
made, thou then saw both this and that, that it was good. Seven times have I
counted it to be written, that thou saw that every thing was good, which thou
made: and this is the eighth, that thou saw every thing that thou had
made, and behold, it was not only good, but also very good; as being now all
together. For severally, they were only good; but all together, both good, and
very good. In this manner is every kind of body said to be fayrer; by reason
that a body is far more beautiful, which is made up of all its members, then
the same members are, when by themselves: by whose most orderly coniuncture,
the whole grows to be complete; notwithstanding that the members severally
viewed, be also beautiful.

CHAP. 29. Gods works are good for ever.
1. ANd I more narrowly looked to find, whether it were seven, or eight times
that thou saw that thy works were good, when as they pleased thee: but in
that Seeing of thine I found no times, by direction of which I might understand
how that thou saw so often, that which thou had made. And I said; Lord, is
not this thy Scripture true, since thou art true, and thou who art Truth have
set it forth? why then do thou say unto me, That in thy Seeing there be no
times; whereas, behold, thy Scripture tells me, that what thou made every
day, thou saw that it was good; and when I counted them, found how often.
Unto this thou answerest me (for thou art my God, and with a strong voice thou
tellest thy servant in his inner ear, breaking through my deasenesse, and
crying) O man, that which my Scripture says, that I my self say: and yet
does that speak in time, whereas mine own Word falls not within the compass
of time; because my Word consists in equal eternity with my self. Even thus
the selfsame things which you men see through my Spirit, do I also see; like
as what you speak by my Spirit I my self speak. And on the other side, when
as you see the very same things in compass of time, I do not see them in the
compass of time: as in like manner, whenas you speak the same things in the
compass of time, I my self do not speak them in the compass of time.

CHAP. 30. Against those who dislike Gods works.
1. AND I ouer-heard, O Lord my God, and I licked up a drop of sweetness out
of thy truth: and I understood, that certain The Manichees.
men there be, who mislike of thy good works: and who say, that thou made
many of them, merely compelled by necessity; instancing in the Fabric of the
heavens, and in the ordering of the Stars: and that thou never made them of
thy self, but that they were otherwhere ready created to thy hand; which thou
only drewest together, and ioynedst one to another, and framedst up, at such
time as against thine enemies now newly overcome, thou raysedst up the Walls of
the world; that by this building they being utterly now defeated, might never
again be able to rebel against thee. As for other things (they say) thou
never at all made them, nor ever so much as ioynedst them together:
instancing in all kinds of flesh, and in all sorts of these, smaller creatures,
and whatsoever thing has its root in the earth: but that a certain mind at
enmity with thee, and another nature which thou createdst not, and which was
contrary unto thee; did, in these lower stages of the world, beget and fiame
these things. Mad men are they to affirm thus: because they look not upon thy
works by the Spirit; neither do they know thee in them.

CHAP. 31. The Godly allow that, which is pleasing to God.
1. But whosoever by Thy Spirit discernes these things, it is Thou that
discernest in them. Therefore when they see that these things are good, Thou
see that they are good; and what soever for thy sake gives content, it is Thou
that give content in it, and what by means of thy Spirit please us, they
please Thee in us. For what man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of
a man which is in him? even 1 Cor. 2, 11
so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God. Now we (says he)
have received, not the Spirit of the world, but the Spirit which is of God,
that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. I am here
upon put in mind still to say, That the things of God knows no man, but the
Spirit of God: how then can we know, what things are given us of God? Answer
is made me. That those things which we know by his Spirit, no man in that
manner knows them, but the Spirit of God. For as it is rightly said, unto
those that were to speak by the Spirit; It is not you that speak, so Mat. 10
20
is it as rightly said to them that Know through the Spirit of God. It is not
you that know. Never the less therefore as it is rightly said to those that See
through the Spirit of God; It is not you that see: so what soever through the
spirit of God they see to be good, it is not they, but God that sees that it is
good.

2. It Is one thing therefore for a man to think that to be ill which indeed is
good, as the forenamed Manichees do: and another thing, that what is good, a
man should see to be so, because indeed it is so. Even just as thy creatures be
pleasing unto diverse, because they be good; whom for all that Thou Thy self
do not please in those creatures; so that rather had they enjoy them, then
Thee. Yea and another thing it is, That when a man sees any thing that it is
good, it is God that sees in him that it is good; and that to this end plainly,
That himself might be loved in his creature: for he should never be loved, but
by the Holy Ghost which he has given. Because the love Romans 5. 5
of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us:
by whom we see that a thing is good, whatsoever any way has any Essence. For
from him it Is, who Himself Is not by any way that other things are, but
originally of himself IS what he IS. Exodus 3. 14


CHAP. 32. He briefly sums up the works of God.
1. THanks to Thee, O Lord. We behold the Heaven and the Earth, be it either
the corporeal part, superior and inferior; or the Spiritual and corporeal
creature: and in the adorning of these (integrall parts) (of which the
universal pile of this world, and the whole creation together does consist)
we see light made, and divided from the darkness; we see the Firmament of Genesis
1. 4
heaven, or that which between the spiritual upper waters ^^ the Inferior
corporeal waters is the first compact body o^ the world next above this space
of Air (which it self is This piece of philosophy, vncertaynely grounded on.
Genesis 1. 7 he afterward re^ants, Retractationum l. 2. c. 8
also styled heaven) through which wander the fowls of heaven, even betwixt
those waters which are in vapors lifted up above it, and which in clear nights
distill down in dew again; and those heavier waters which run through and
upon the Earth.

2. We behold a face of waters gathered together in those fields of the Sea;
and the dry land both unfurnished and replenisht, that it might be visible and
fully shaped; yea and the matter of herbs and Trees. We behold the lights
shining from above, the Sun to serve the day, the Moon and the Stars to
^heate the night; and in all these the several Seasons to be marked out and
signified. We behold on all sides a kindly moisture blessed with ability, to
be fruitful in fishes, beasts and birds: and that the grossness of the Air
which bears up the flights of Birds, thickneth it self by the Exhalation of
the waters.

3. We behold the face of the Earth decked up with earthly creatures, and Man
created after Thine own Image and likeness, even for that Image and likeness
sake (that is the power of Reason and understanding) made superior to all
unreasonable creatures. And like as in his soul there is one power which bears
rule by directing, and another nature made subject, yt it might obey: even so
verily was there a woman made, who in the mind of her reasonable understanding
should have a parity of nature with the man but in the sex of her body, should
be in He alludes to Genesis 1. 16. Here the Popish Translation fayles both in
Grammar and Philosophy; turning it Thus. As the appetite of performing humane
actions, is made subject to a reasonable understanding, that so discretion may
be engendered between them. That is (as he is feign to note in his margent)
between the affection and th reason.
like manner subject to the sex of her husband; as the appetite of doing is
feign to conceive the skill of Right doing, even from the rational direction
of the understanding. These things we behold, and they are all severally good,
and altogether very good.

CHAP. 33. How every creature ought to praise the Creator.
1. LEt all thy works praise Thee, that we may love Thee; yea let us love
Thee, and let all Thy works praise Thee: even those which from Time have their
beginning and their ending, their rising and their falling, their growth and
their decaying, their form and their privation. They have therefore their
succession of morning and evening, part insensibly, and pa^tly more apparently:
for they were of nothing, made by thy power, not of Thy substance; not of any
thing that is not thine, nor of any thing that was before, but of a matter
concreated, that is, All at once created by Thee: because that into that matter
which was He alludes to Genesis 1. 2. And here the other Translater is out again,
turning it thus, Because thou did then create the Informity thereof without
any interposition of time. Flat nonsense.
without form and void, Thou did introduce a Form, without any distance of
time between. For seeing the matter of Heaven and Earth is one thing, and the
form of Heaven and Earth is another thing, Thou made the matter, of merely
nothing; but the form of the world Thou producedst out of the unformed matter:
yet made both matter and form so just at one instant, that the form should
follow the matter, without any respite of delay between.

CHAP. 34. Of the order and various fruit of a Christian life.
1. WE have also looked into this, Here the old translater misses again,
propter quorum figurationem, After whose pattern or figuring out, as the
Latin is, which he translates. For whose sake.
After whose pattern desire thou to have these things made in this order, or
described in this method? And we have seen, That all things are good singly
of themselves, and one with another very good, in Thy Word, even in Thy only
Word, both Heaven and Earth the head and the body of the Church in thy
Predestination, before all times, without Another mistake, upon his reading
sieve for sine.
succession of morning and evening. In which notwithstanding Thou begannest in
Thy good time to put in execution Thy predestined decrees, to the end Thou
might reucale hidden things, and rectify disordered things; for our sins
hung over us, and we had sunk into the darksome deepenesse, and Thy good
Spirit houered over us, to help us in due season; and Thou did justify the
ungodly, and distinguishedst them from the wicked, and Thou settledst the
authority of Thy Bible between the governors of the Church, who were to be
taught by Thee, and the Inferior people, who were to be Subject: thus were the
people of a Diocese or Church, called subiect^ of the Priest or Bishop over
them. And the bishops seat at Church, or chair Episcopal, was called A
Throne; even in Ignatius time, presently after the Apostles.
subject to them: and thou have gathered together the society of Here he
translates Believers for Unbelievers, and notes upon it, The Church is no
Church, unless it be in unity and perfect agreement. St. Austen alludes to
that conspiracy Ps. 2 ^. which in here pre^tily made a note and pattern of the
Romish Church.
unbelievers into one conspiracy, that the studies or the faithful might be
more apparent, and that their works of mercy might^ Another negligence. He
read paterent for parerent.
obey Thy commands, they distributing to the poor their earthly riches, to
obtain Heavenly.

2. And after this did Thou kindle certain lights in the firmament, even Thy
Holy ones, having the word of life; set aloft by Spiritual gifts, shining with
eminent authority: after that again for the instruction of the unbelieving
Gentiles, did Thou out of a corporeal matter produce the Sacraments, and
certain visible miracles, and Forms of words, according to the Firmament of
thy Bible; by which the faithful should receive a blessing. Next after that
have Thou formed the living souls of the faithful, through their affections
well ordered by thee vigor of Continency: and the mind, after that, subjected
to thy self alone and needing to imitate no humane authority, have thou
renewed after Thine own Image, and similitude; and have subjected its rational
actions to the excellency of the understanding, as a woman to a man; and to all
offices of Ministry, necessary for the perfecting of the faithful in this
life. Thy great will is, that A noble place for the mayntenance of the Clergy,
which if well paid, shall be beneficial to the souls of the Laity hereafter.
for their temporal uses, such good things be given by the said faithful, as
may be profitable to themselves in time to come. All these we see, and they
are very good, because Thou see them in us, who have given unto us thy
Spirit, by which we might see these things, and might love thee in them.

CHAP. 35. He prays for peace.
1. GRant O Lord God, thy peace unto us: for what ever we have, thou have given
us. Give us the peace of quietness, the peace of the Sabbath; a Sabbath of
peace without any evening. For all this most goodly array of things so very
good, having finished their courses, is so pass away; for a morning and an
evening was des^in^ed (...) them.

CHAP. 36. Why the seventh day has no evening.
1. But the Seventh day is without any evening nor has it any Sunset: ever
because thou have sanctified it to: an everlasting continu(...) that, that
which Thy self did after Thy works which were very good, Another miss in
(...) who ^urnes it, That thy creatures (...) might also rest from being
created: and more as ill sense as this, and as far from St. Austens meaning
rest (namely) the seventh day, (although ^^on those works thou createdst
without breaking Thy rest) the same may the voice of thy Bible speak
beforehand unto us; namely, that we also after our works. (which are
therefore very good, because Thou have given us grace to do them) may rest in
Thee in the Sabbath of life everlasting.

CHAP. 37. When God shall rest in us.
1. FOr in that Sabbath Thou shall so rest in us, as thou now workest in us:
and so shall that Rest be thine, by us; even as these works are Thine too, by
us. But thou, O Lord, do work always, and rest always too. Nor do thou
see for a (...) nor art thou moved for a time, nor do rest for a time; and
yet thou make those viewes which are made in time, yea the very times
themselves, and the rest which proceed from time.

CHAP. 38. God be holds created things one way, and man another way.
WE therefore behold these things which Thou have created, even because they
Are: but they Are, even because Thou see them. And we look upon their
outside, because they have a Being: and we discern* their Inside, that they
are good in their Being; but Thou saw them there already made, where Thou
saw them there-after to be made. And we were not till after that time moved
to do well, that our heart had conceived the purpose of it by Thy Spirit: but
before that time we were inclined to do evil, even when we forsook Thee:
but (...) O sovereign God, one and good, did never cease doing good for us.
And some certain works of ours there be that be Good: but it is by Thy Grace
that they are so, which yet are not of continuance sempiternall. After them we
trust Upon this word Trust or hope, the Popish Translater rayses this note: He
hops to go to heaven like a Catholic: he makes not himself sure of it
like a Protestant, Just. like a Catholic indeed, that is, like a Primitive
Catholic. for here is o (...) of Purgatory, which the Papist* cannot miss.
Again, no marvel if the Papists do but hope for Salvation; I wonder they
dare do so much, having so uncomfortable a Religion, Sure, a Hope cannot be
founded on these points; not ^^ their own Merits, Saiats intercession, etc.
to find repose in Thy grand Sanctification. But Thou being the Good, stand
in need of no good: Thou art at rest always, because Thy Rest Thou art Thy
self. And what man is he that can teach another man to understand this? or
what Angel, another Angel? or what Angel, a man? Let this mystery be begd
of Thee, be sought at Thy hands, knocked for at Thy gate; so, so shall it be
received, so shall it be found, and so shall it be opened Amen. *

FINIS.
The order of the chief passages in these Confessions: Which may serve for a
Table.
SAint Augustines childhood. page 24

His first sickness: and deferring of his baptism. p. 33

His first studies. p. 38

His Youth described. p. 66

Goes to study at Carthage. p. 71

Robs a Pear tree. p. 78

Falls in love. p. 100

Haunts stage plays. p. 101

Conuerses with young Lawyers. p. 106

Begins to be converted by reading of Ciceroes Hortensius p. 109

Is ensnared by the Manichees. p. 114

Describes their doctrine. 121

He derides it. p. 136

His mothers dreams. p. 138

A Bishops answer to her. p. 142

He teaches Rhetoric. p. 149

His answer to a wizard. p. 151

Is reclaymed from Astrology. p. 152

Laments his friends. death. p. 158

Baptism, the wonderful effects. p. 160

He writes a Book of Fair and Fit. p. 186

His incompareable wit. p. 199

Faustus the Manichee described. p, 211. 220. 225.

Austen falls from the Manichees. p. 230

Sails to Rome. p, 234

Recouers of a fever. p. 141

The Manichees opinions. 253

Goes to Millaine. p. 257

Begins to be converted by Saint Ambrose. p. 261

Is neither Manichee nor good Catholic. p. 265

His Mother converted from her country superstition. p. 269.

Saint Ambroses employments. p. 274

Alipius dissuaded from Chariot races. p. 295

Doates after sword-playes. p. 301

Apprehended upon suspicion of the every. p. 305

His integrity. p. 311

Disputes with Austen against-marriage. p. 322

Nebridins coming. p. 311

He confutes the Manich e^. p 345

Austen lays out for a wife. p. 327

His concubines. 150. and 332

His disputes about evil, and its cause. p. 348

God discouers some things to him. p. 381

Begins to reflect upon Christ, p. 398

Studies the Platonists. p. 374 and 404

Goes to Simplicianus. p. 412

Victorinus connerted. p. 418

What hindered Austens conversion. p. 436

St. Anthonies story. p. 44^

Austen, out of love with himself. p. 452

His inward conflict in the garden. p. 457

Difficulty of conversion, p. 472

He is converted by a voice. p. 478

He gives over his School. 488

Goes into the country. p. 493

St. Ambr. directs his studies. 511

St. Austens Baptism. p. 513

Monica, an excellent wife. 529

Her death. p. 544

Her burial. p. 554

He prays for her. p 559

Confession, the use of it. p. 571-575

Why we need confess to God. p. 721

Discourses about memory. p. 590

Dreams are deceitful. p. 656

Of the pleasures of the taste. p. 661

Of bearing. p. 673

Of seeing. p. 678

Of curiosity of knowing. p. 685

Of the sin of pride. p. 694

Of praise and dispraise. p. 699

Of vaynglory. p. 706

Of self-loue. p. 707

Angels cannot be mediators. p 713

Christ the only Intercessor. p. 716

He praeyes to understand the Scriptures. p. 730

Of Christ the Word. p. 737

Disputes about time. p. 754.

Truth hard to find out. p. 810

Of the Chaos. p. 814. 822

Of the Creation: he begins his disputes about it. p. 850

First, how many ways. p. 888

Of the Scriptures. p. 894

Trinity, his Confession of it. p. 911

Some impressions of it in man. p. 923

Diverse literal and Allegorical Interpretations of the first chapter of
Genesis, Book thirteenth, thorowout.

FINIS.
Some of the more material faults escaped in the Printing.
Page 28. right against the 13. line, add in the marge^t Psalm. 22. 2. p. 55.
l. 25 in stead of for, read, so. and the whole next line read thus: We wander
from thee in a vo-. p. 108 in the margent after Wits, add, see lib. 5. chap.
8. and chap. 12. p. 111. l. 4 for meanedst, r. meantest. p. 114. l. 4 for grew,
r. should grow. p. 147. the last word, for Pers. r. Iuv: p. 159. l. 8. for was
not, r. had been. and l. 9. for, I had, r. I now had. l. 10, for, wrapped, r.
warpt. p. 117. l. 12. for, our friends. r. his friend. p. 209. l. 24. for, but
run, r. but they run, p. 271. l. 2. for to a song. r. at a song. p. 305. l.
20. put out not. p. 333 l. 6. for too. r. two. p. 458. l. 23. for wisely, r.
wistly. p. 470. l. 16. for tare, r tear. p. 471. l. 4. for, art, r. act. p.
495. l. 1. put out also. p. 506. l. 26. for like, r. lick. p. 522. l. 14. put
out again. p. 565. in the margent, for chap. 10. r. chap. 110.


