Certain PlaCEs GATHERED OVT OF.S. Austens Book entitled de essentia
diuinitatis, very necessary to understand certain dark places of the bible
and especially the Prophets gathered by Herman Bodius a faithful preacher*
and now lately turned into Inglysh.

Imprynted At London, at the sign of the Hill, at the west door of Paul's. By
Wyllyam Hill. And there to be sold.

Cum Gratia et Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum

THE PREFACE to THE Reader
YT is well said of the philosophers (gentle reader) a good thing is not to
be prysed after the greatness thereof but after the goodness. The which
saying well waighed does much speak against the peruerseiud gements of manymen
now adays which esteem al things by the greatness and especially books
setfourth concerning religion which be daily set fourth more and more to the
glory of God (who be thanked therefore) and to the profight of the weak
breathren. They think in these little books is small goodness. Me think such
men as write so briefly do be of all for only they put in that which is
necessary leaving out other trifles and those books I compayre to preciouse
stones who in quantyt^ being small yet in virtue be great neither is the
greatest stone of most value and as we try stones so would I have us tri books
not judging the^ either by greatenesse or lytlenesse but by the goodness
vsinge the rule that Saint Ihon gives try the spretes wether they be of God
and Paul assaye all things keep that y^ is good. which ye must do by the
word of god as, S. Paul teaches i, Timo.iiii all scripture is profitable to
teach and reprove this rule if ye use I doubt not but thou will like good
gentle reader this book of S. Austens by me feithfully translated. Of whose
praise I need not to speak. This only would I warn the of briefli that thou
read it or thou judge it, This done I co^myte the to God whose holy spirit
lead the in to all truth,

FINIS.
THE EXPOSITION of dark Places gathered out of. S Austen
ALmighty God the father ye son and holy gooste are three and one One in
substance three in parsones Who only is unvisible and can not be seen, only
immense and incomprehensible only uncircumcised only unchangeable with out
bodi and everlasting. Every where present but hidden every where whole but yet
with out measure.

Invisible because in his substance he can not be seen as ye Apostle
writes.i. Timo.vi. whom no man has seen and in the gospel. John.i. no man
did see god at any time.

Without body because he has no bodily shape in him ne is compacte of any
members as. John.iiii. god is a sprete they that adore him must worshype him
in sprete.

Immensus or with out measure For his quantite biggnes greatness longnes or
other his quantityes or qualitees can not be me asured of any creature.

Vncircumscript or discryueable. For as much he cannot be dyscryued by any
means.

In no place because he stireth not from one place to another.

Unchangeable because he cannot be changed from that he is as he witnesses by
the prophet malachie I am the Lord and am not changed. The same God is called
unchangeable because nether wrath rage repentance forgetfulness and calling to
remembrance and other like affectyons can change by any means in his
substance.

He is called immortaul or everlasting in that he cannot die and wheresoever in
the sacred bible ye holy scripture does ascribe affections or motions of the
mind or any parts of man's body unto God as head hear eyes and other like
these and such other are not to be understood if ye will understand them
truly not after ye letter as the story lies after which sort the Iewys and
heritiques only wise in yearthly things, take it

Imagening God to have abody and to be contained in a place

But all those must be taken spretuallye and so granted to be in him. And if
any man suppose that God has means members and is led with the
affectyones of the mind as (...) be, with out dowbte that men makes him
Self an Idol or a false GOD in his own heart.

Wherefore when we read a head given to GOD yt must be understand in a figure
as I told before whereby is mente the godhead which was before all things and
to which al things ar in subieccion.

By the hears of his head fyguratyuely must be understand the holy
aungelles or all the elect and chosen saints of GOD. Daniell.vii. I did
behold till seats were set and the old aged sat him down his clothes were
as white as snow the hears of his head like pure wolle. The same is meant by
the white clothes or garments that is declared by the white hears that is the
holy aungelles and the great number of Saints all in white.

GOD is said to have eyes in that he sees all things and nothing is hydden
from him. In whose sight as the Apostle writes no creature is inuisyble
hebre.iiii. For all things are open and bare before his eyes in an other sort
of speaking the eyes of the Lord do signefy a respect as ye eyes of ye lord
upon ye just

Also the eyes of the Lord do signefy mistycally his commandment whereby is
mynistred to us the light of knowledge. Psalm.xviii. The Commandment of the
bright geuyng light to the eyes.

The hears of the Lords eye liddes are the secret hydden and incomprehensible
judgments of god or by them a spiritual phrase of speaking in the holy bible
is noted whereof is said in the psalm the hears of his Eyelyddes to ask the
Children of men, try them.

Ears are given to God because he hears al things and nothing is counceled
from him Sapiencie, i. the care of heaven hears all things.

By the nosethrilles of God is meante his inspiration in to the hearts of the
feythful.ii, Regum.xxii. the smoke came down from his nosethrilles.i. They be
wailful unquietness of the repentau^te through his inspiration,

The face of god the knowledge of his godhed to men. Psalm, lxxix Show thy face
o Lord and we shall be safe that is give us the knowledge of ye which is
manyfested to men by thy sone. Other wise ye face of god does signefye the
invisible substance of ye god head of the son of god.

whereof he says him self answering moses by his angel. Exo xxxiii thou shall
se my back or my hi^der parts my face thou may not see i^ which sayng this
is imported my incarnation thou shall see in the latter days my Godhead thou
may not see.

The mouth of the Lord is the son of God the father Jesus christ our Lord of
whom Jeremy in ye voice of the Jews theruor, i, because we have stirred his
mouth to anger: otherwise it is taken the mouth of the Lord for his
commandment Esaias.xviii. The mouth of the Lord has spoken.

The word of the Lord is the son of God the father as in the psalm by the
word of the Lord the heavens wear establyshed he sent his word and healed
them,

The tongue of God mystecally does signefy the holy ghost by whom god the
father does open his secrets to men psalm.xliiii. mi tongue the pe^ne of a
writer that writethe fast.

The lips of the Lord the concordaunce Or agreement of both the testamentes
whereof is written Proverb, xvi. prophecyenge in his lips his mouth shall not
err in judgment,

The arm of God the father singularely is taken for his son as hiere, xxxii,
And now O Lord my God which brought thy people out of the Land of Egipte
by strong hand and a bent ar me.

And for his cause the sone of God is called the fathers arm that every chosen
creature in him is preserved, Act.xxiiii.

The right hand of God the Father is his only Begotten son psalm, Cxvii.
the right hand of the lord maid virtue the right hand of the LORD promoted
me, Otherwise it does sygnefye the glory of the Father and his bliss endless
psalm.Cix, sytte on my right hand, the right hand of the Lord does sygnefye
all his elect Saints either in heaven or in Yearthe on the other side by his
left hand is meante reprobrate and parlones cast a way as the Devil and all
the ungodly.

The hand of the Lord is the Son be cause by him all things are made
Otherwise it Does sygnefye the power of GOD as in Ieremye.xviii, As the claye
in the potters hand so ye O house of Israel are in my hands.

Thyrdly it betokens his scourge, whip or vengeance Sophonie.i. and I will
streache furthe my hand upon Judah and Jerusalem Job.xix. The hand of the lord
touched me.

The finger of God put in the singular nombre does signify the holy ghooste by
whom the law was written in the mount Sinai in two tables of stone. Luke.xi.
If I cast out deuels in the spirit of God. etc.

Fingeris in the plural number does mean the holy prophets by whom the hosy
ghost did writ the books of the law and prophets by his inspiratio^
Psalms.viii

I shall se the heavens, the works of thy fingers by the heavens are
understand the books of the law and prophets by the fingers the holy
prophets:

The image of God the father who is unvisible it is his only be gotten son
Collossians.i. He is the image of God the father who can not be seen.

The heart of god the father is figuratively the hidden priuitie of his wysdom
psalm.xliiii. My heart has breathed out a good word

God also is said to have wings in so much as he does lovingly defend his
own as the hen gathering her chicke^s under her wings. psalm under the
shadow of thy wings defend me.

God also is said likewise to have shoulders because he does bear patiently
the weak members of Jesus Christ as it were on his shoulders and in carii^g he
defe^deth the^ psalm.xc. with his shoulders he has ouershadowed the and under
his wings thou shalt trust

The belly of God does signify the hidden misterye and spring of his
substance or knowledge psalm, Cix: out of my bealy before the day star have
I forgotten the. Secundarily it does import the incomprehensible and hidden
judgments of God.

The hinder or backparts is his incarnation. Exo.xxxiii: my hinder or back
parts you shall see,

The fete of God are the establishement of his might and power in that he is
every where and all things are subject to him Esa. lxvi. heaven is my seat
and the earth is the footestole of my feet Secondarily as by the head his
godhead is meante so by his fete figuratiuelie is betokened his man head
psalm.viii. al things under his feet sheep and al o xe^, by ye feet of Jesus
christ is meant his holy prophets or prechers Deuteronomy xxxiii they yt approach nigh
his seat shall take of his learning,

The clothes of the son of god is his flesh taken up in to heaven of his
godhead Esa, xxxv. who is this ye comes from Edom which died clothes from
bosra otherwise by his garments is meant his holy church which is Ioigned to
him by faith and love.

The book of god is ye holy church Genes.xlvi. he shall wash in wine his
clothes.i, the blood of his passion his sheshe and in the blood of ye grape
his cloak yt is his church.

The shoone do signefy mistecally his incarnation psalm.lix. I will streache
fourth my shoone into Idomea.i. I will manifest mine incarnation to the
gentiles.

The walki^g of the lord ye co^mi^g of ye son of god i^to the world and his
return to his father psalm, lxvii. thy walki^g was see^, o, god ye ingoi^g of
my god y^ dwells in the holy.

God is said to ascend when the son of god carried in to heaven flesh taken
of us as it were prisener psalm.lxvii, he ascended into the high leading which
with him captivity as aprysoner.

God is redd to hide his face when he does keep from certain wicked parsons
according to their deserts the true knowledge of him as we see it now co^to
pass in the people of the Jews.

He does show his face when he entrethe to the hearts of the faith full with
his favorable mercy in a pryuy secret and close inspiration pouringe in to
their hertes his love to love him abundantlye

GOD does sit not bodily as men do but in power above every creature
psalm.lxvi: the Lord has reigned over the heathen god does sit on his
holy seat. God is said to sit upon the rubin which is interpreted the
fullness of knowledge or multitude whereby is meant holy angels or the souls
of the godly and spiritual men wherein godsitteth and reigns invisibly for,
he sits in them that are replenished with the knowledge and love of him
proverb the soul of the just the fear of the wisdom.

When ye read that god comes down in to the world thereby ye shall
understand that he does so me thing among men that was not done before after
this sort is the son of god said to have come down when he did take to him
a true man's body of the blessed virgin mary for our satuatio^ of whose down
coming or incarnation is written psalm.xvii. he bowed down the heavens he came
down and a mist under his feate he bowed the heavens because before his
coming be sent his messengers the a^gells and prophets to preach his co^mi^g
to me^ a mist was under his fet in that the ungodly blinded through there own
wyckednes could not acknowledge his incarnation neither as yet can.

God is said to stand when he sufferethe the weak patiently to amend there
life through penance or repentance Aba.iii. he stood and mensured the earth
and did loose ye gentiles when he stood to aid them and did undo or loose the^
y^ believe in him fro^the bands of sin.

God is said to pass over or pass by when wha^ he gives out of ye hearts of
any man forsi^ne in whom he was thought to dwell before through faith and
lerning him goes to an other as from ye Jews to the gentiles from ye
heritikes to ye faithful and godly which he is not wo^^ to do either by
chaungi^g of place or visibly but inuisibli by the secret and just judgment of
god.

God is said to walk not by going from one place to an other so to believe is
heresye, but his walking is to have a delyghte in the hearts of his elect
Saints as it is written yet I will dwell in them and walk in the^ and I will
be their lord or at the leastwyse the walking of God is to goo from place to
place in the Holy preaching of his gospel.

The speech of god is inuisyble without the sound of any voice or any other
whysper by puti^g in secretelye into minds of the godly what his will is
geuynge them a true vnderstandi^g either by opening to them things to come as
to the holy prophets the which speakinge by the mouth of god as some will
have it is taken three manner of ways. The first through a creature subject
as to Moses when he appeared in the bushe and fire and to Abraham or Jacob to
whom he did appear by angels the second way by dreams as to Jacob the
prophet zachary and Joseph the husband of the blessed Mary and other holy men
to whom he would open his secret y^ third was neither by creature that can be
seen neither by a dream but by his secret inspyracyon touching the hearts of
the feythefull inuysyblye he makethe them speak as in the prophets it is red
when they themselves when ye spre^e of god came on the^ cry alowd saying this
says the lord To see of the lord is to allow ye that is well done as in.
Gene.x, and god did see all that he had made and they were very good otherwise
to se i^ hi^ is to disalow ye wickedness of me^ in knowing it Esaias. lix and ye
lord did see and evil did appear in his eye^. Thirdly to se i^ him is to make
us se yt is to say knowing or vnderstandi^g psalm: cxxxviii. try me lord and
know my heart and. cet. and see if y^ way of iniquiti be in me Job. xxviii:
the^ he did se her show her and search her out.i. he made us seeing her shewi^g
her telli^g other of her and serching her out. To know in god is to make me^
know as Gene xxii: now do I know yt thou seruest ye lord his knowledge begineth
not in any time sei^g he knows al things before be i^ aid therefore god is
said to kno when he makes me^ know yt they which were unknown to them selfs
before what they were by his asking.i. trying they may be known to the^ selfs
of this sort is yt i^ ye law spoken of ye people of Israel den.xiii, yt I may
assay the^ wether they keep mi co^ma^deme^tes or no:

Not know in god is to refuse or reiecte certain cast awayes and reprobate
parsons Luke.xiii. I know ye not whence ye are, hence from me ye that do
wickedness.

God is said to be ialouse when he does chastise scourge and correct his
creature whom he would not have perrissh and thereby calls him back to him
again either is he said to be ialouse when he suffers no sine unpunished.
God is said likewise to be a^gry not by any mocyon of the mind or other
perturbacyon which can not chance in him, but because he does iustlye
punisshe the wicked he is said to be angrye that is to reward them as they
have deserved and that is called the vengeance of God his angry wrath rage or
fury.

GOD is said to repent not because he is sorye for any thing that he has
doonne as Men are for he that knows al things before they be done can not
repent him of any thing that he has done the repentance of god is to
change any thing that he had done before as to change that which was
begone this way after an other sort either from good to evil as of Saul
whom the lord repented him that he made him King either from evil to good
this change from good to evil from evil to good as often as it chances
either by the secret and just judgment of GOD either by the extreamytie of
his justice or by his mercy we say that god does repent.

When the scripture says that God does not repent thereby is meante that in
no case he changes such things as he had appointed psalm. Cix. The lord
has sworn and he will not repent.i. The father to the son thou art an
everlasting preiste of the order of Melchisedech The son of God is called the
priest of the father not in that he is god but me^ in which part.i. manhed he
offered up him self by his passion and death an acceptable Sacrifice to God
the father for that he should be the priest also which is the sacrifice.

God is said to forget when he does not take mercy upon certain sinners and
ungodly persons not by cruelty which can not be in him but through his
secret and just judgment.

God is said to harde^ the hearts of certain me^as it is written of Pharao not
becaue almightye God does harde^ there hearts through his almightinesse for to
believe is wicked but when there oun naughtiness aski^g ve^gea^ce he takes not
away the hardness of heart which they them selfs do norishe by evil doyeng as
though he does harden them him self where as he does permit the^ to be
hardened by the just judgment of god.

God is said to sleep when ye only begotten son of the father did vouchsafe
dye for us in manhead which he had taken upon him whose death was well called
a sweet sleep otherwise God is said toslepe when his father does not watch
but sleep i^ the hearts of certain faithful being in prosperity this sleep did
our Savior figure in him self Mathewe.viii. when he slepte in the ship in
the mydde waves thyrdelye when GOD does succoure and aid his chosen with the
sloweste being in great Danger in the world he is said to sleep. Psa.xliii
A rise lord why do thou sleep

God does watch when he shows him self ready to defend his chosen and
avenge his aduersarye.

These and such other which at attributed to God by the text of holy
scripture are not to be understand as the plain text liethe but figuratiuelye.
For God almighty in the substance of his godhed is a sprete and no flesh
inuisble without body not made of man's members and for this cause he is not
to be looked out with the bodily eyes but with eyes of the mind as it is
written blessed be the clean hearted they shall see God and to see God is to
believe in him truly and love him with all our hearts to this saying of God that
we may all attain first let us pray God to give us faith then to increase it
finally to make it perfect ye which if we have we shall understand al these and
such other places as they ought be in the mean season to the weaker I trust
my labor shall not be lost surely this was mine endeavor the which if
chance hereby God the glory and praise him in all his works to who^ be all
praise honor and glory now And ever world without End Amen *

FINIS *^
Imprynted At London, at the sign of the Hill, at the west door of Paul's. By
Wyllyam Hill. And there to be sold.

ANNO.M.D.XLVIII The.xiii. day of (...).

Cum Gratia (...) ^^^^^legio ad Imprimen^^^ ^olum

A Notable collection of diverse and so^dry places of the sacred scriptures /
which make to the declaratyon of the Lords prayer / Comenly called the Pater
noster.

Gathered by the famous Clerk (...) Peter viret / Frenchman.

And translated out o^ French into Inglysh / by Anthony Scoloker. The.viii.
Day of June. Anno.

1548

IMPRINTED at London / by Anthony Scoloker Dwelling without Aldersgate And
Wyllya^ Seres Dwelling. In the ^^^^rentes in holbo^^^.

Cum Gratia et (...) solum (...)


