Special Orders and directions By the Queens Majesty's commandment, to all
Justices of Peace, and all Majors, Shiriffes, and all principal Officers of
Cities, Boroughs, and Towns corporate, for stay and redress of dearth of
Grain;

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, printer to the Queens most excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1600.



A new charge for execution of sundry Orders published the year 1595. for stay
of dearth of Grain; Now this present year to be well observed and executed.
WHere in some parts of this Realm Corn without any just cause for any thing
that has hitherto appeared is suddenly risen to a far greater price then has
been expected. To the end that the true cause thereof may be known and found
out, and that al good means may be used to prevent all occasions that might
move any further dearth of Grain hereafter; Her Majesty has thought good by
the advice of the Lords and other of her Privy Counsel, to publish and set
forth these Orders following from henceforth to be observed.

1 THat the Justices of Peace in every County (not being ingrossers or buyers
of Corn to the intent to sell the same again) divide themselves into several
Lymits, and from time to time from henceforth do use all care and diligence
to be truly informed without partiality to any person what store of Grain
any person has in any Parish to spare above what may be for his own needful
use and expenses, and of what kind.

2 That they use for their better help herein, such persons and in such manner
as they shall think most fit and convenient for the furtherance of this
service.

3 And to that end that they be charged diligently and carefully to inform
themselves, and to make due inquiry, search and trial what quantity of any
manner of Grain they or any other within their Parish, as well Justices of the
Peace as others whatsoever have in their Barnes, Grayners, Lofts, Cellours,
Floores or otherwise to be delivered unto them upon any bargain, more then
will conveniently serve for their own needful expenses.

4 Item, what number of Badgers, Kidders, Broggers, or Carriers of Corn,
Butter, Cheese or other like Victuals, inhabit within the said Parish, And
whither they do use to carry their Corn or other Victuals which they do buy,
and where they do usually buy the same, and what their names be, and how long
they have used that trade, and by whose license, and to see the same Licenses
of what tenor they are of.

5. Item, what number of Malt-makers, Bakers, Common brewers, Inkeepers or
Tiplers, dwell within the said Parish, and who they are by name, and how long
they have used that trade, and how much they bake or brewe in the week, and
what other trade they have whereby otherwise to live.

6 Item, who within the said Parish be Ingrossers or buyers of Corn, or do
use to buy or have bought any Corn or Grain to sell again, and what
quantity they have bought, and of what kinds, and at what price sithence
Michaelmas last, and how much thereof they have sold, and at what prices. And
above all others to take special care that the storehouses and Grainers of al
such Ingrossers, Badgers, and buyers of Corn to sell again be thoroughly and
perticularly viewed and looked unto, and perfect notice taken what store of all
kinds of Grain every such person has.

7 Item, whether any Tanner within the same Parish does use any Malt, Barley, or
other Grain in or about the tanning of any kind of Leather, if any do, then
what quantity they use or spend about the same.

8 Item, who within the same Parish buyeth, or have bought or sold any Grain
upon the ground, of whom and to whom has the same bent bought or sold, and at
what price, and to certify unto the Justices of the premises, and of every
part thereof on the first day of July now next coming, and to every part of
these Articles the parties assigned shall bring answer from point to point.

9 The Justices of the Peace within their several Divisions, shall take
special care that the Orders ensuing be well observed, and duly put in
execution, as themselves will answer the contrary, and that they once every
Month at the furthest, do certify unto the Lords of her Majesty's Privy
Council, in what state their Country stands for plenty or scarcetie of
Corn and Grain, and the prices thereof, and how the Orders ensuing be put in
execution and obeyed, and whether they or any of them shall be found by
experience profitable and convenient, or otherwise unprofitable or inconvenient
to be put in execution in the same Countries.

The Orders to be observed are these. Viz.
THat none be permitted to buy nor sell any manner of Corn but in the open
Market, unless the same be by special license, or by commission or warrant
for her Majesty's service, or to some poor handicrafts men, or day laborers
within the Parish wherein they do dwell, that cannot conveniently come to the
Market towns by reason of distance of place, according to such direction as
shall be given in that behalf by the Justices of the Peace of that Division
within which they do dwell, or two of them: and to none of these poor above
one bushel at a time, and thereof the party shall keep a particular note in
writing to whom he shall so sell weekly, and at what prices, so as the same may
appear to the Justices to be done without fraud or abuse.

2 That the Justices of the Peace within their several Divisions have special
regard that Ingrossers of Corn be carefully seen unto, and that thereupon
they may be severely proceeded with, and punished according to the Law: and to
see that none be permitted to by any Corn to sell again, but by special
license; and such to be drawn to sell some reasonable portion to the poor at
reasonable prices both in the Markets and otherwise.

3 That no Badgers be permitted, but such as the Statute does limit; and that
no servant of any be licenced to be a Badger, except six of the Justices at
the least shall in open Sessions for some necessary cause allow any such, and
that none at all be allowed a Badger, except he be allowed in open Sessions,
and the Badger allowed, not to make provision or sell in any foreign country
but with the priuity and allowance of some Justices of the Peace of that
country. And furthermore, that none be permitted to buy or provide Corn in
the Market in gross, as a Badger or Baker, Brewer or Purueyour, and such like,
upon pain of imprisonment, until two hours after the full Market be begun
in the Summer time, and one hour in the Winter time, that the poor may be
first served.

4 Where in some parts of the Realm diverse Millers, who ought only to serve
for grinding of Corn that shall be brought to their milles, have begun lately
a very corrupt trade, to be common buyers of Corn, both in Markets and out of
Markets, and the same do grind into meal, and do use as Badgers, or otherwise
to sell the same at Markets and in other places, seeking thereby an inordinate
gain, besides the misvsing of other men's Corn brought thither to be ground,
by delay of grinding, or that worse is, by changing and altering of their good
Corn to the worse: It is thought very necessary that the Justices of the
Peace, who are not owners by any title of any milles, nor masters or landlords
to any Millers, shall first inhibit all Millers upon pain both of imprisonment
and fine to use any such trade of buying of any grain to be sold either in
Corn or Meal, but to charge them to continue the orderly use of grinding of
all manner of Corn that shall be brought to them, in reasonable good sort, and
upon reasonable toll. And for better performance hereof, some of the Justices
not affectionated to the Millers shall sometime personally themselves resort to
the milles to ouersee the doings of the said Millers, and compel them to do
their duties. And where none of the Justices can as need shall be weekly look
thereto, they shall appoint certain honest persons weekly to attend thereto,
and to inform themselves of the poorer sort how they are used in this time of
dearth for their grinding and their toll, and present the defaults to the
Justices, to be speedily reformed with all due severity.

5 Higlers and Purueyors for the City of London or any other City, not to be
permitted to buy Corn or other victual but in open Market, and that two hours
after the full Market in the Summer and one hour in the Winter. Nevertheless,
for the better furnishing of the said Cities with necessary provisions and in
convenient manner it is ordered that further provisions shall be from time to
time made for them in such sort as the Lords of her Majesty's Council shall
further direct in that behalf.

6 That the Justices use all other good means possible that are not mentioned
in these orders, that the Markets may be well served, and the poor relieved in
their provisions during all times of dearth. And that in times of dearth no
expense of any grain meet for bread to feed men be wasted upon feeding of dogs
or other beasts, neither that any at any time be spent in making stuff called
Starch, or in tanning of any kind of leather.

7 That where need shall so require all good means and persuasions be used by
the Justices in their several Divisions, and by admonitions and exhortations
in Sermons in the Churches by the Preachers and Mimsters of the Word, that the
poor may be served of Corn at convenient and charitable prices. And to the
furtherance thereof, that the richer sort be earnestly moved by Christian
charity to cause their grain to be sold under the common prices of the Market
to the poorer sort: A deed of mercy that will doubtless be rewarded of
Almighty God.

8 That the Justices be straightly commanded to see by all good means that
houses of Correction be provided and furnished, and there idle vagabonds to be
punished, and set on work according to the statute.

9 That the Justices do their best to have convenient stocks of money or wares
to be provided in every Division or other places, according to the statute, for
setting the poor on work: and the Justices to use all other good and politic
means within their several Divisions to continue and maintain the poor
people in work within the Parish, according to the statute, and namely in
clothing countries to charge the Clothiers that have in former times gained by
that trade, to continue the same, whereby the poor may be set on work.

10 That the maimed and hurt Soldier, and all other impotent persons, be
carefully seen unto to be relieved within their several Parishes, Hundreds or
Divisions, according to the Law there in provided: and that where the
provisions formerly made and assessed upon the householders in every parish be
not sufficient, it may be now for this time of dearth charitably increased. And
where any Parish is not able to give sufficient relief to such their poor,
that parish to have the supply of such other parishes nere adjoining as have
fewer poor, and are better able to give relief. And no vagabond or any other
be suffered to wander abroad under color of begging in any town, field or
high way, but that the statute in that behalf be duly put in execution.

11 If there be any special part within any Shire that has as a liberty by
special Commissions any Justices of the Peace within the same, the Shirife of
the Shire shall send unto the principal owner or officer of such Liberty
notice of these orders, and shall charge them that the Justices of the Peace
within such Liberty do their duties for execution of all these orders, as
far forth as shall be requisite, and therein also to use by conference the
advice of some other Justices next adjoining.

12 That no transportation of Corn or Victual be but from port to port within
this Realm, and that but in cases needful, as for the provisions of London,
shipping, her Majesty's service, or such like. And that be done by the view and
ouerseeing of her Majesty's officers of the Custom house of the Port where the
same shall be laden, or of the most part of them, and of the chief Magistrates
of the Town in which that port is, and also of some of the Commissioners of
the County in which that port is, and for that purpose assigned. And that in
such case good bonds with sufficient sureties be taken to her Majesty's use for
the delivery thereof at the Port to which the same shall be assigned. And for
bringing back in convenient time not only a true Certificate of the vnlading
thereof at the same port so assigned from her Majesty's officers of the Custom
house of that port to the Customer of the port where the same was laden, but
also another Certificate from the chief Magistrate of the Town of that port
where the same shall be assigned to be unladen: and from some of the
Commissioners of the County in which that Town is for the purpose assigned,
unto the Commissioners and chief magistrate of that port where the same was
laden, of the due and just vnlading thereof at the port assigned. And
transcripts of those Certificats to be made and certified into the Eschequer in
the beginning of every Term.

13 And if the commissioners for that purpose assigned shall not do their best
endeavors to make stay of the transporting of Corn, as by authority of their
commission they ought to do, then any other Justice by authority of these
orders shall make stay of all such transportation, and in his so doing shall be
allowed and maintained. And this is thought meet to be in this sort directed,
for that it may be doubted that amongst so many as are appointed in the
foresaid commission against transportation some may be mistaken, being
themselves either transporters, or friends or favorers to transporters, or
negligent in the execution of the charge committed to them.

14 That special care be taken that the Fishdayes and days of Fasting and
abstinence be very strictly and duly kept.

15 That those that are Ingrossers or hoorders up of Corn, and bring little
quantity to the Market, that from such persons provision may be made for her
Majesty's shipping, the service of Ireland, and other public services, as
need shall require.

16 To take order that the multitude of Badgers and buyers both of Butter and
Cheese, as also of Corn to sell again, may in every County upon conference
amongst the Justices be reduced to a competent number, and those of the fittest
persons for that purpose, and the residue to be removed.

17 That such of these Badgers and buyers as shall remain, be only permitted
to make provision to furnish the Markets of such Cities and other great Towns
and places, which otherwise are not able to be sufficiently provided for, of
those provisions in the Countries near adjoining, for that they are only
needful for those places.

18 To foresee that no couenous practices be used between the Farmer or
Maulster, and the Badger, Baker, Brewer, or buyer to sell again, whereby the
Farmer or other should deteine his Corn or Malt do the end of the Market to
the hinderance of the Market: But if any such be found then such offender to be
duly punished.

19 That in such Towns and Parishes where any dearth shall be, the Justices of
those Lymits or places do from time to time assign some one honest person to
be a Baker, to serve only the poorer sort, and to make for them such bread,
and at such assise and price as the said Justices shall assign, allowing to
such person as shall take the pains therein, a reasonable proportion of gain
for his or her travail and charges, as shall be thought fit by the same
Justices, And that the Justices have special care that the Assise of bread and
drink be duly seen, and that weights and measures be according to the
Standerds.

20 After view taken of the number of Alehouses, Victualling houses, and
Tippling houses in every Town, parish, village and Hamlet within their
jurisdictions, to consider what number of them is necessary and fit for every
Town, parish, village and hamlet to continue. And thereupon to discharge the
superfluous number, and such as are unmeet to keep the same, and to allow but
a convenient number, and no more then shall be needful, and those but in places
necessary, and the same to be in the midst and heart of the said Towns and
villages, and in no sort to allow any at the ends of any Town, village, or
hamlet, nor in out places or places distant from the rest of the town or
village. And hereafter no license to be granted for Victualling or tippling, but
in the open quarter Sessions, and that by the consent of the most part of the
Justices there present, whereof some of them to be of the Lymite in which the
house is, whose names with the number of ye houses licenced in every town or
village, the Clearke of the Peace shall insert in a Book, or roll to be kept
for that purpose. And that no greater number be hereafter admitted to keep
Tippling houses in any Town, village or place, but such as shall be agreed at
this first view, and order to be taken therein.

21 To take strait order by Bond or otherwise with the common Brewers, that
they serve no Beer or Ale to any Iunekeeper, Alehousekeeper, Victualler or
Tipler, but at such rate and price as by the Justices of the Peace shall be set
down and appointed by authority of the Statute of 23. Hen. 8. Cap. 4. And yet
the same to be well sodden, and well brewed of wholesome Grain as it ought to
be, which order is thought fit to be done at the quarter Sessions by a
general consent.

22 That no Inkeeper or Tipler that may conveniently be served from any Brewer,
be suffered to brew in their houses, but that they take from the Brewers such
drink only and of such reasonable syse, as shall be fit for traueilers and
passengers, and as the Justices of the Peace of that place or Lymit shall
assign or set down as fit for that purpose, wherein they are to have special
respect that the drink be such only as may serve for necessary use, and not
for drunkenness or excess; And that no Victualing or Tippling house have
drink of any better goodness then another.

23 That the same Justices take order in like manner where no Common brewer may
be had, to serve these houses, that some one house of these brewe for
themselves and the other Inkeepers and Tiplers in that town Beer of one
assise and vrice, as the same Justices shall set down and appoint so be sold
as is aforesaid.

24 That such as usually haunt Tauernes, Innes or other Tippling houses, and
shall be there found tippling extraordinarily, and such other as use to drink in
these places to drunkenness, or other extraordinary excess, be bound with good
Suerties to their good behavior, which if they shall refuse to do, then the
Justices to commit such so refusing to the common Gaile, there to remain
until they shall find such Suerties as is aforesaid.

25 That they which shall be allowed to be Alehouse keepers and Victuallers shall
be of honest conversation, and of reasonable value, and to enter bonds with
good sureties to her Majesty's use to perform the orders following: which
bonds shall be by the Clerk of the Peace presented to the Justices in their
Sessions to be seen whether the conditions are broken: and thereupon the
Custos Rotulorum or his deputy to certify the same into the Eschequer, and
such of them as shall refuse to be bound not to be permitted to keep any
Alehouse or Victualling house.

26 That no Victuallers, Tiplers, and Alehouse keepers have in their houses, or
do permit to be brought into their houses any Cards, Dice, or Tables, nor to
suffer any to play in their houses, yards, or backsides, at any Cards, tables,
dice, or other unlawful games.

27 That no Victualler, Tipler, or Alehouse keeper shall dress or suffer to be
dressed or eaten within his house any flesh upon any forbidden day, saving in
case of necessity of sickness, according to the statute in that behalf
provided.

28 That they suffer none to eat and tiple, or victual in their houses but
such as are wayfaring men, that shall take the same to refresh themselves in
their passage or journey, or such as shall be appointed to lodge or take diet in
their houses, but to deliver out of their houses that quantity of drink which
their neighbors of the poorer sort shall have need of, to be drunk in the
houses of those who fetch or send for the same, and not elsewhere.

29 To permit no drunkenesse in their house, nor any tippling at all on the
Sabbath day, or holy day in time of Divine service, nor after eight of the
clock in the afternoon.

30 That no Victualler, Tipler, or Alehouse keeper shall permit and suffer any
person or persons to lodge in his house above a day and a night, but such as he
will answer for, as the statutes in that behalf made do require.

31 To give strait order and charge to every Constable or other inferior
officer to whom it may appertain, that every of them shall once in every
fifteen days search and inquire of the defaults and disorders aforesaid, and
shall inform the Justices of the Peace of the same defaults and disorders if
any be, that the offenders therein may thereupon be proceeded on and punished
according to the law. And if it shall seem to the Justice that the petty
constable be either a Victualler, or one that shall favor the Victuallers in
their faults, then some other meet person to be appointed to make the said
Inquisition and Certificate.

32 No Tipler to buy any goods of any wayfaring man, or other that shall bring
the same to their houses to sell, but of such as shall be well known unto them
to be of honest conversation, and whom they shall be able always to produce,
or have to be forth coming.

33 All these with such other necessary Articles as the Justices of the
several Counties (to whom the estate of the Shire is best known) shall think
necessary in the several Counties to be added, the Alehouse keepers and
Victuallers shall be bound to observe.

34 Whosoever shall use tippling or victualling without license, or shall break
the Orders as aforesaid to be prescribed to them, to be proceeded withal, and
severely punished, according to the statute and law in that behalf, and to be
displaced.

35 Lastly, and if any shall offend against the true meaning of these
instructions, or of any part thereof, or shall use any sinister mean to the
defrauding thereof, that such be severely punished according to the Laws: and
for such obstinate persons as shall not conform themselves the Justices shall
at their discretion bind them to appear before the Queens Majesty's Privy
council by a day certain, there to be further dealt with by severe
punishment, for the betterensample of all others.


