Orders taken the x. day of October, in the third year of the reign of our
Sovereign Lady, Elizabeth Queen of England, France and Irelande, defender
of the faith. etc. By virtue of her Majesty's letters addressed to her
highness Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical as follows.
INprimis, for the avoiding of much strife and contencion, that has
heretofore risen among the Queen's Subjects in diverse parts of the Realm, for
the vsyng or transposynge of the Roode loftes, Fontes and Steps, within the
Queers and Chauncels in every parryshe Church. It is thus decreed and
ordained, that the Roode loftes, as yet, being at this day aforesaid
vntransposed, shall be so altered, that the upper part of the same, with the
Soller be quite taken down, unto the upper parts of the vautes, and beam
runnyng in length over the said vautes, by puttyng some convenient crest upon
the said beam toward the Church, with leauyng the situation of the seats
(as well in the Quere as in the Church) as heretofore has been used.

Provided yet, that where any Parryshe, of their own costs and charges by
common consent, will pull down the whole frame, and reedifying again the same
in Ioyners work (as in diverse Churches within the City of London does
appear) that they may do as they think agreeable, so it be to the heyght of
the upper beam aforesaid.

Provided also, that where in any Parrish Church the said Roode loftes be
already transposed, so that there remain a comely particion betwixt the
Chauncell and the Church, that no alteracion be otherwise attempted in them,
but be suffered in quiet. And where no particion is standing, there to be one
appointed.

Also that the Steps which be as yet at this day remaynyng in any Cathedral,
Collegiat, or Parryshe Church, be not styrred nor altered: but be suffered to
continue, with the Tombs of any noble or worshypfull personage, where it so
chances to be as well in Chauncell, Church, or Chapel. And if in any
Chauncel the Steps be transposed, that they be not erected again, but that
the place be decently paued, where the Communion table shall stand out of the
times of receyuyng the Communion, having thereon a fair lynnen cloth, with some
covering of Sylke, Buckram, or other such like, for the clean keeping of the
said cloth on the Communion board, at the cost of the Parryshe.

And further, that there be fixed upon the wall, over the said Communion
board, the Tables of Gods precepts Imprinted for the said purpose.

Provided yet, that in Cathedral Churches the Cables of the said precepts be
more largely and costly painted out, to the better show of the same.

Item that all Chauncels be clean kept and repaired within as without, in the
windows and other where as appertains.

Item that the Font be not removed from the accustomed place: And that in
Parryshe Churches the Curates take not upon them to confer Baptism in
Basens: but in the Font customablye used.

Item that there be no destruction or alienacion of the Belles, Steple, or
Portche belongyng to any Parryshe Church, by the private authority of any
person or persons, without sufficient matter showed to the Arch bishop of the
province, of his and their doings, and by them allowed: Except it be for cause
of repayryng the same.

Item that neither the Curates, nor the parents of the children, alter the
common used manner for Godfathers and Godmothers to answer for the children,
nor shall condemn the accustomable usage in the same.

Item that it shall not be lawful to any Ordinary to assign or enjoin the
Parishes to buy any books of Sermons or expositions, in any other sort, then
is already, or shall be hereafter appointed by Public authority.

Item that there be none other days observed for holy days, or fasting days,
as of duty and commandment: But only such holy days, as be expressed for
holy days in the Calendar late set forth by the Queen's authority. And none
other fasting days (to be so commanded) but as the laws and Proclamacions by
the Queen's Majesty provided in the same, do appoint.

Item that the Parson, Uicar, or Curate, with the Churchwardens, shall yearly
make and exhibit unto the Regesters of the Ordenarye, the names and surnames
of all persons married, Christened, and buried, within their said parryshes, by
byll indented, with the subscription of their hands: Noting the day and year
of the said Christeninges, marriages and buryalles, out of their oryginall
regester kept in custodye, as is appointed by the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions.

Item that no Parson, Uicar, or Curate, of any exempte Churches, or otherwise
called lawless Churches, do attempt to conioyne by solemnizacion of
Matrimony, any persons not being of his parryshe, without sufficient testymony
of the banes asking in the Churches where they dwell: or otherwise be
aucthorised lawfully to mary.

Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard by Richard Judge, Printer to the
Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


