ARTICLES DEVISID by the holle consent of the kings most honorable
counsel, his gracis license opteined thereto, not only to exhort, but also to
enfourme his loving subiectis of the truth.

The kings most honorable counsel to the residue of his loving subjects.
SIns it is the part of all honorable and elect persons chosen by the prince,
when they do declare and utter matters of weight, to observe an equity and
truth in vtteryng of them, and to show benevolence to the people, which be
under their prince, in admonysshinge them of things, which are necessary for
the^ to know: We therefore the king our souerayns most faithful counsaillours
and subjects, with hole assent and by his license have thought most convenient
and necessary to intimate unto you (the rest of his subjects) these articles
following, for your better erudicion and knowledge, and to open unto you truly
the manifold injuries done unto our king and souerayn, which (we being his
true and feithful subjects) may in no wise sustain or suffer: But study and
endeuoyr our selfs by all ways to us possible, to redoube and requite the
same, and to take the injuries and wrongs done to his person (in whom is all
our wealth and joy) more ernestly, than if it were done to us alone. And so
shall we do according to our duties, and thereby deserve merit of god, to whom
most humbly we pray, that he will vouchesafe to have, supporte, defend, and
keep under his wynge and tuicyon our most noble prince, the queen, now being
his wife, with their issue, and all us his true and loving subjects.

Quia in te domine speramus.

The first Article.
First the mere truth is, that no lyuinge creature, of what astate, degree,
or dignytie so ever he be, has power given him by god, to dispense with gods
laws, or law of nature. Which thing is confirmed and determined in our
princis case, by an infinite nombre of well learned men strangers, by the most
part also of all the most famous universities of Christendom: And specially,
and above all (to our estimations) the hole clergy of this realm. Whereupon
and in discharge also of his conscience, being auctorysed by act of
parlyament our Metropolytane Archebyshoppe of Canturbury, has adjudged the
first matrimonye, to be contrary to goddis laws, and thereby not laufull, and
this present matrimony now enjoyed, laufulle and perfyte. Wherefore we all
(that be our princis true subjects) ought in this his just and true
matrimony, to live and dye with him, and his, of this venture come, or coming

The.ij. Article.
SEcondly, the counsayles of Nyce, Melyuence, and Aphricane, with others also,
have determined, that causes of strife or controversy, being ones begone in any
region, shall there, and in the said region, be finally determined, and none
other where, expressly denienge the courts of beyond the sea, to oblige any
manne to appear at them for diverse weighty considerations in them expressed,
which notwithstanding the bishop of Rome by some men called Pope, the usurper
of gods law, and infringer of general counsels, has hitherto wrongfully
detained at Rome, and would do stylle, except otherwise our prince and his
parlyament had provided, his great and weighty cause, contrary to all right
and conscience, to the utter undoing of this realm. Which things the prince
and his holle parlyamente considering, and taking some light upon the
forsaide general counsels, and waying also other wise and politic reasons,
thinking verily this amongst other co^sideratio^s, that it were not mete that
the inheritance of this realm should depend upon the bishop of Rome, or any
other straungiers will and pleasure, which other by affection, mede or fear,
might and would order it after his worldly affections and appetites, as it well
appears this holy bishop of Rome would: have made a commodious and welthy
law lately, both for us and him, By which, good people (living within the
limittes of true matrimony within this realm) shall not by malice, or evil will
be so long deteyned and interrupted from their right, as in times passed,
they have been, Nor unjust matrymonye shall have his unlawful and incestuous
demoure, as by delays to Rome, it was wont to have, which may evidently apere
now, by that, that our Princes weighty and long protracted cause of
Matrimony, has now here his final and prosperous end, with brefe success
of issue all ready had, and other like to follow, lauds be unto god, thonly
werker of the same: with which issue both you and we, must both live and
dye, according to our allegeaunce.

The.iij. Article.
THirdly, it is to be taken for a truth and equity agreing with lerning, that
an excusatour in any bysshoppes court of the world, the party either not
being bound personally to appear there (as by al lerning our prince is not at
Rome) or being impedite by any other lauful causes, which they by their own
law have limited, should be admitted to answer for the part, against which
equity, the bishop of Rome has also rejected our princis excusatour, which
injury although it be not yet put in execution ageinste any other person
(saving our prince and king) yet that example shall remain for a president, in
prejudice of al princis and potestates. Wherefore, we would advise them briefly
to look upon it, and we and ye the rest of his subjects, so to deteste this
great injury done to our prince, and consequentely to us, that the bishop
of Rome, and all his, shall se, that except it and all other injuries done to
our prince and sovereign, be shortly redoubed, we will revenge it to the
uttermost of our power, and in so doing, we do but our duty, yet surely we
doubt not but it shall be very acceptably taken by our prince and king.

The fourth Article.
FOurthely the right believe of all true christien people is, that the general
counsel (laufully gathered) is superior and has power over al bishops and
spiritualle powers, not exceptynge the bishop of Rome. In confirmation of
which opinion the approbate conseyle of Basil says these words: Who so ever
opponeth him self obstinatly against this truth, is to be taken by all true
christen people, as an heritike. Wherefore, loving friends, let us so handell
our self both in words and deeds, that we be not taken, for any fo^de
scruple in this trap, and let not herein our eyes be so blinded, nor our ears
made so defe with the sayingis or prechinges of any papystes, that we ron
heedlonge ageynste the true believe of all right Christen people.

The fyfte Article.
Fifthly, by the law of nature it is granted and admitted for lauful, that a
man being grieved, vexed, or troubled iniustely, may appele from the bishop
of Rome, to the general counsel, which so being, then specially such
liberty is most convenient for princis, and they not to be rejected therfro,
nor it is not a thing by them to be neglected or omytted, which have but two
ways principally where none other can prevail, to atteyne right the one
against the other, that is to sey, in causes concerning the soul and mere
spiritual, appellation to the general counseyle, In temporal, the sword only,
except by mediacyon of friends, the matters may be compounded, so that who so
ever would go about to take away any of these naturelle defenses from them, is
to be manly withstand both by the prince and his subjects. And thereto, we be
animate by our right father, which redeemed us, our lord Jesus Christ, in that
he seyth, Obey ye princes above all, and then their deputies, not gyuynge
power to any other within their rules and dominions.

The.vi. article.
Sixthly after that appellatio^s be laufully made from the bishop of Rome
(which calls him self pope) unto the general counsel, he is bound by the
law neither to do, ne attempt any further process, in prejudice of the
appellant, which, if he do, by the forsayde laws, his doings can not
prejudice the appellante, and also it stands void, The effect of which
law must now take his strength in the benefit of our prince, except to great
injury be ministered unto him. For our prince and king, according to the
liberty of nature and constitucions of general counsailles (as before) has
both provoked and appeled to the general counsel next ensuinge, rightfully
congregate, from the usurper of gods laws, and infringer of general
counsailles, which callethe him self Pope. In the which our princis doings,
all just and true christen men, I doubt not, will supporte and meynteyne him,
which prouocations and appellations also standing in force, and being intimate
to the person of the said usurper (as in deed they be) sequestreth him
rightfully from all manner of process belonging or in any wise apperteinyng to
our princis fact and matter, in any of his courts. Other diabolike acts and
statutes by some of his predecessors made, as hereafter shall appear, not
withstanding. Wherefore, what censures, interdictions, or other his cursed
inventions, what so ever they be, ought to be despised and mannefullye
withstand, for they be naught in deed, and we (so doing) shall have for our
buckeler, the latter and better part of this verse ensuing, And the maligners,
the fore part of the same, Psalm. 36.
which is, Quoniam qui malignantur exterminabuntur, sustine^tes aute^ dominu^,
ipsi here ditabunt terram.

The.vii. Article.
SEuenthely the sentence of excommunication, ought not to be executed by any
minister of Christ's church, against any creature, except it be for deedly syn
prohibit by gods law and scripture, nor yet then, except the party stand
in contumacie or be heddye: how sklenderly should we then esteem his censures
and curses, which extends them upon us chefly, because we have made wholesome
laws, for the commodity and welthe of our prince and realm, secondly,
because they do preiudicate his worldly appetites and profit, Thirdely because
our prince will not (contrary to his conscience, directed by goddis law, and
thoppinions of the most part of all the best learned men in christendom, as
before is rehearsed) live an incestuous life and abhomynable? These things be so
contrarious to equity, reason and justice, that by his doings it may appear,
what manner a man he is, according to a text of scripture, which says: Ex
operibus eorum cognoscetis eos. Mat. 7.
Wherefore, we al (our princis true subiectis) ought to reckon, as reason and
learning leads us, besides the due obedience to our prince, that the curse of
him, which ministrethe hit iniustly, as this is ministered, though it were
within his jurisdiction, as it is not: shall redounde to him self, and hurt
no man else. Wherefore in this, let us all show our selfs like true and
obedient subjects, not estemynge or hangyng upon any living creature, save
only our prince and king, according to an old proverb here in England, of
old time paste, much wont to be set by, and often times by true men rehearsed,
which is, One god and one king, minding thereby, that al other folkis doings
should be despised, which in any point may be contrary to them, in confirmation
whereof the prophet David says these words, Psalm. 36.
Inimici uero domini mox honorificati fuerint et exaltati, deficientes
quemadmodum fumus deficient.

The.viij. Article.
Eighthly, it is the office of all manner of bysshoppes, and a grant also
indifferentely made to them all by God, that they should first frendely
admonysshe, and secretelye reprove. Secondely, before record charitably to
refourme (if they can) all manner of offenders of goddis laws within their
dioces, not using any compulsories, except the parties persiste obstinate and
in contumacie, which happenyng, then is it laufull for them to use censures
and excommunications. And this manier of ways only, ought every bishop to
use, all though the bishop of Rome, would them to do never so much to the
contrary, for they be bound more to obey god, then man, Which office and
ways, (according to his duty) our good bishop of Canturbury (now
living) has begone to show and follow. For first he apperceyuinge when he came
to his dignitye, that his prince and sovereign lived in unlawful and vnsytting
matrimony (according to his duty) mekely did admonyshe him, and therein
also reproved him, exhortyng him to leave it, or else he would do further his
duty in it, So that at the last, according to gods laws, he did separate
his prince from that unlawful matrimony. In which doing, we think that
every true subject should much the better esteem him, because he would
execute goddis commandment, and set this realm in the way of true heirs.
And how God herewith is pleased, we think it does euidentely appear by many
things. First so briefly upon this latter and lawful matrimony, so soon
issue had: Secondely, so fair wether, with greatte plenty of corn and
cattal: Thirdly peace and amity lately sought by diverse princis and
potentatis, of our Prince: Fourthely the pureness of air without any
pestilenciall or contagious disease, by so long time during, which things we
ought to thank god for, and to take them for demonstracions, that he is
pleased, both with our prince and his doings. Wherefore, let us all that be
his true subjects, both rejoice in it, and apply us accordyngly to serve
both god, him and his in it, according to our bounden duties.

The.ix. article.
NInthely, that where in deed by scripture, there is none authority ne
jurisdiction granted more to the bishop of Rome, then to any other, Extra
prouinciam, yet because that sufferance of people, and blyndenes of Princis
with their supportacyon hitherto, has sustained the same, doing them selfs
thereby to great injury, it is thought now convenient, and more then
necessary, to open the same to the world, to the intent it esteem not, ne
honor him as a god, for fear of idolatry, he being but a man, and what
manner a man, a man neither in life nor learning, Christis disciple, a man also,
though the sea apostolic were of never so high authority, contrarious,
vnlaufulle also by their own decrees, to occupy and enjoy his usurped place.
For first he is both baste and came to his dignity by Symony, and now in
denieng the provocation and appele of our soueraygne lord the king, and
supportinge the diabolike decree of his predecessor Pius, is determined by a
general counsel Vere haereticus, that is to say, an Heretycke.

Wherefore, all we (being true christen people, he thus contynuynge) ought to
despyce both him and his factes, and be no longer blinded with him, but give
our selfs holly to the observance of Christis law, in which is all swetnes
and truth, adioyninge with it the laws of this realm, utterly relynquyshynge
the other, in which is nothing else, but pomp, pride, ambition, and ways
to make them selfs rich, which is much contrarious to his profession, our
lord amend him, and give us grace no longer to be blinded with him. Amen.

Finis.
LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI. M.D.XXXIII. CVM PRIVILEGIO.


