An admonicion or warnyng, to all the Kings Majesty's Justices of Peace, in
the name of the Lord Protector, and the rest of the Kings Majesty's
counsel, spoken in the Sterre Chamber, by the Lord Cha^ncelor of England,
the fourth of May, in the second year of the reign of our sovereign lord
King Edward the sixte. etc.
IT has been used and accustomed before this time, to call at certain times
the Justices of peace, before the Kings Majesty's counsel, to give unto them
admonicion and warnyng, diligentely as their duty is, to look to the
obseruyng of such things, as be committed to their charges, according to the
trust, which the Kings majesty has in them. How be it, now at this time,
we call you before us, not only of custom, but rather of necessity: For
hearing daily and perceiuyng as we do, the great negligence, and the little
head which is taken and given, to the obseruyng of the good and wholesome
Laws, and orders in this realm, whereupon much disordre does daily ensue,
and the Kings Majesty's Proclamacions and orders, taken by the counsel (as
we are advertised) not executed, the people brought to a disobedience, and in
manner all his Majesty's study and ours, in setting a good and most Godly
stay, to the honor of God, and the quiet of the relame, spent in vain, and
come to nothing. The which, as we have great hope and trust, not to be
altogether so, yet so much as it is, and so much as it lacks, of keeping the
realm in a most Godly order and state: we must needs impute, and lay the
fault thereof in you, which are the Justices of Peace in every Shire: to whom,
we are wont to direct our writings, and to whose trust and charge, the Kings
majesty has committed, the execucion of all his Proclamacions, of his Acts,
of Parliament, of his Laws.

We are infourmed that many of you, be so negligent and so slack, in that,
that it does appear, that you do rather look, as it were through your fingers,
then diligently to se, for the execucion of thesaied Laws and Proclamacions:
For if you would according to your duties, to your oath, to the trust, which
the Kings majesty has in you, give your diligence and care, toward
thexecucion of the same, most Godly Statutes and Iniunccions, there should no
disobedience, no disordre, nor evil rule, be begone, or arise in any part of
the realm, but it should by and by be repressed, kept down, and reformed.

Mary it is feared, and the thing it self gives occasion thereto, that diverse
of you, do not only set furthe, but rather hinder, so much as lies in you,
the kings majesty's procedynges: and are content that there should arise some
disobedience and that men should repine against Godly orders, set furthe by
his Majesty, you do so slackly look to the execucion of the same. So that in
some Shires, which be further of, it may appear that the people has never
hard, of diverse of his majesty's Proclamacio^s, or if they have hard that you
are content to wincke at it, and to neglecte it, so that it is all one, as
though it were never commanded. But if you do considre, and remember your
duties, first, to almighty God, and then to the kings Majesty, the wealth
of the whole Realm, the safegarde and surety of your own selfs, you must
needs se, that except such ordres, as the kings Majesty has set, and
shall herafter appoint to be kept, neither the realm can be defended, if the
enemy should invade, nor in peace it cannot stand, but upon the contempt of
good and wholesome laws, all disordre and inconveniences should come, the
people should be wild and savage, and no man sure of his own. And if at any
time there was occasion and cause, to be circumspect and diligent about
the same, there was never more time then now: How we stand in Scotland you
know, and that other foreign power makes great preparacion to aid them, and
in deed does come to their aid, we are surely informed and certified.
Wherefore, if there should not be good order, and obedience kept in the realm,
the realm were like utterly to be destroyed. Never foreign power could yet
hurt, or in any part prevail in this realm, but by disobedience and
misordre within out selfs, that is the ways wherewith God will plague us, if
he mind to punish us: and so long as we do agree within our selfs, and be
obedient to our Prince, and to his Godly ordres and laws, we may be sure
that God is with us, and that foreign power, shall not prevail against us nor
hurt us. Wherefore once again, and still we must and do lay this charge upon
you, that are the better of the Shire* and Justices of Peace: that with so
convenient speed as you can, you do repair down into your countries. And you
shall also gave warnyng, to the Gentle men of the Shire, which have not
necessary business here, that they repair down each man into his country,
and there both you and they, who be reconed the stay of every Shire, to se
good order and rule kept. You, that your Sessions of Jail delivery, and
quarter Sessions, be well kept, and therein your metynges, to be such, that
Justice might be well and truly ministered, the offenders and malefactors
punished, according to the Laws of the realm, without any tear of any man,
or that for favor, you should suffer those to escape* which with their evil
example, might bring other to like mishappe, and that all Vacaboundes, al lewd
and light tale tellers, and sedicious berers of false news of the Kings
Majesty, or of his counsel, or such as will preach without license, be
immediately by you represte and punished. And if there should chance, any lewd
and light fellows, to make any routes or riottes, or unlawful assembles, any
sedicious metynges, vprors, or vprisynges, in any place, by the sedicious and
deuilishe mocio^, of some privy traitors, that you and they appease them at
the first, and apprehende the first aucthors and causers thereof, and certify
us with speed.

The lightness of the rude and ignorant people, must be represte and ordered,
by your gravity and wisdom: And here you may not (if any such thing
chance) dissemble, with those such lewd men, and hide your selfs. For it
shall be required of you, if such misordre be: and surely without your aid and
help, or your dissemblyng such misordre cannot be. Nor we do not say this,
that we fear any such thing, or that there is any such thing likely to
chance, but we give you warning before, least it should chance. We have had
to much experience in this Realm, what inconvenience comes of such
mattiers, and though some light persons, do not in their rage consider it,
yet we do not doubt but that you weigh it, and know it well enough. And if
it should chance our enemy (who is maintained, by other foreign powers, and
the Bushoppe of Rome) should suddenly arrive, in some place of England, either
driven by tempeste, or of purpose, to do hurt, ye should se such ordres
kept, by fieryng of Beacons, as has all ready been written unto you by our
letters, to repulse the same, in so good arraie as you can, as we do not doubt
but you will, for the saufegarde of your country: so that the enemy shall
have little joy of his coming. And for that purpose, you shall se diligently,
that men have Horse Harneis, and other furniture of weapon ready, according to
the Statutes, and good orders of the realm, and the Kings Majesty's
commandments.

God save the King.
Excusum Londini, in aedibus Richardi Graftoni, Regij Impressoris.

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.


