A work of the predestination of saints written by the famous doctor S.
Augustine bishop of Carthage, and translated out of Latin into English, by
Nycolas Less, Londoner.

Item, another work of the said Augustyne, entytuled, Of the virtue of
perseueraunce to thend, translated by the said. N. L.

L^ndini. Anno* 1. 5. 50.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the right virtuous Ladi Anne, douchesse of Somerset etc. her faithful and
daily orator Nicholas Less, wissheth the grace of god, with the increasse of
al godly vertuse.
FOrsomyche as among many, there is on corrupt sort of heretics, and malicious
despisars of the most benign, and liberat grace of God (right godly disposed
Ladi) which will have, that his, omnipotent, and almighti majesty should be (as
it were) after a certain fashion bound to there viel fragylyte and weakness, and
not rather them self to his omnipotency and infinite power, deneyeng his
eternal predestination maki^g it none otherwise to be certain, tha^ as, they
will have yt them selves: yea, many of them utterly denieng, that there is any
predestination, at al, which are of y^ great masters: and stout defendars of
fre will, having in there heddes y^ eyse of coca^rices in there to^gs the stings
of adders, and in there stomachs the poison of, todes, kiuered and cloked over
with goodly words, such as a man would think did com from the mouth of god him
self with outward religion, and sanctimony of life, being able to deceive yea
those which at wise men, ^iche more the simple and unlearned people: I have
therefore taken upon me to show unto them, yea, not to them, but to those who^
they go about to deceive, y^ this doctryn of predestination, which the go^ly
men do reche, and they most wyckedly denied, is no strange and new doctryn,
but sic^e as the old church has always firmly believed and constantly defendid,
translating this noble work of the great doctor saint Augustine, entitled, of
y^ predestination of sayncts, which at the elect and chosen people of god,
forth of the laten, into our mother tongue, that al men may se before there
eyes, how rank and dedly there poison is, and so take heed and beware thereof in
time. And lykwis as this book is to be set abroad to convince them which do
stond in y^ denial of the predestination of god, which this godly doctor did
wryght against certain heretics that denied the grace of god to be a fre
gift, proceeding of his own goodness, and not of our deseruings even so, it
seemed to me a thing very necessari, for this present time, against these
venemose beasts which do enfect al most al me^, who^ they do but look on, with
the dedlieys of there poysonos docryn I do mean the anabaptysts and fre will
masters* which are so much more daungerouse, as there myschefe is cloked with a
dobl face of holiness ten tyms more religious to sem to than were y^
supersitious and arrogant papystes: which beasts (and say) do hold a contray
heresy to those who^ saint Augustine did imponge, granting that the beginning
of our belefe is the gift of god which theye denied, but with toothe and nail
defendyng, that al good works are of our self, (which the other ascribed to ye
gift of god) and that al good works are in our own power either to do the^, or
to leave them undone, procedi^g of our own fre will, affyrmyng al so most
erronyosly, that his works do none otherwise take effect in us, than we will of
our self receive them, making his heavenly majesty bound to a sort of
encarnate deuyls, (for how may he be called omnipotent, if any part of his
omnypotency stondeth in the will of man?) I thought it I say, necessari to
ioyn to this his forsaid book of y^ predestination of saints the second book
which he wrote of the virtue of perseverance, or continuance in goodnis to the
end, ye forsomiche, as they do condemn al men of this age which are of a
contrary judgment unto them, we might now se what fault they can find in this
great doctor by what reason there erronyos opinions should not be condemnid as
most detestable and dangeros to be, suffered and born ye little flok of Christ
But I suer they will not come abrod. For they do lork i^ cornats, they do crep
secretly into men's bosoms, seking who^ they may sting like unto snakes which do
lie hid under y^ gre^ grass. I would counsel al men to beware of the^. For the
end of al there studys and labors (how holy a pretense soever they have) at,
not only the destruction of y^ souls of men but also the utter confusion and
subversion of whole commen welthes: declaring thereby, y^ they at a more
pestelent sect than ever were the papists. Which papists although they were
right naught for y^ soul yet were they good and profitable for the body for
civil common welthes, for the me^tinaunce of cyuil justice, and al good
politic orders. But as for these, they ar nether good for ye body nor for the
soul yea they are most mortal enemies and cruel murderers to both.

Forthermore, by these two small works, your grace shall perceive how
necessary a thing it is, that the predestination of god should be known
among the people, y^ ignorance whereof, what is it else but the very lack of
knoledge of y^ grace of god. And that not known, as it ought to be, how can
the glory of god be praised as it should be, yea how is it not by that means
obscured, and hid from them which should have it, and so give to god his
right praise?

To the confusion therefore, and shame of those detestable and shamles
heretics, and for the erudition of the rest of the people, which are
unlearned and easi to be deceived, I have brought these works into our mother
tongue that all men may* understand them, being so boulde under your graces
favor as to dedicate them to your grace as to a faithful mother of all good
works, that thereby the truth may be known, and god praised in all things:
whose spirit I beseech to be with your grace that your soul may be edefied
and made strong in him which is the only author of al godlynes So be it.

The first book of the great doctor Aurelius Augustyne, which he wrote of
the predestination of saints.
The first Chapter.
WE are certain that the Apostell Paul spoke to y^ Philippians after this
manner, Philip. 3.
saying. To write of the self same things to you again, shall grieve me
nothing at all, and to you it is a sure thing: The same Apostell, writing to
the Galathians, Galathi. ^.
after he perceived that he had been long enough with them, and that he had done
as much as was necessary, in teaching and preaching unto them, said these
words. Hereafter let no man mosest and trouble me.

But as touching unto my self, although I cannot deny, but that I am very
sorye, that the word of God, being so many fold, and also so manifest (which
word teaches us the grace of God, the grace of god.
which in no wise can be grace, if it be given after our merits) is not
believed nor credeted as it ought to be, yet your godly desire, he temmende^
them for there good desyr toward the amendment of them which were in error
and brotherly love (my derely beloved children, Prosper and Hylary) whereby you
declare your self so sorry for their error, and so desirous of their amendment,
that although I have written many works and epistels also as touching that
matter, yet you would that I should write hense thereof again. he means of
the fre grace of god
That same your brotherly love, and desire of their amendment (I say) I do
commend and praise so much, that I cannot speak, and express it, and yet not
so much as I am bound to do. Wherefore, here I do write again unto you, and
although that I am not present with you, yet by you, do I the self same thing
again, which me thought, I had done before sufficiently.

After that I had read your lettres, and pondered them well, I judged with my
self, that those brethren, for whom you do take care, and godly thought, lest
they should take the opinion of the Poet, which says: let every man's trust,
and hope be in him self, and so should run, and fall into that, which is
spoken, not of the Poet, but of the Prophet, Iieremy. ^
saying: Cursed are all men, which have their trust in man: I judged, (I
say) that they must be handeled after that fasshyon, as the Apostell did
those to whom he did say (and if ye be otherwise minded, Philip. 3
God shall open this thing alsoo unto you. For yet they are blind in the
question, which is of the predestinacion of saynctes. But if they be in that
point, of any other mind and judgment, they have already enough, whereout
God shall make the matter open, and manifest unto them, if they do abide and
walk still in that, whereto they are come already. For the which cause, when
the Apostell said (if ye be of any other mind, god shall make that also open
unto you) yet he added these words also (let us proceed and go forward in
that where unto we are come.

Those brethren, for whose sakes ye do take all this godly pain and labor,
have profited so much, and are grown so far, that as the church of Christ
does, so they do believe, A^l men are borne gyltye of sin (...) there A^am
that al mankind is borne gylty of the sin of the first man and that they
cannot be delivered from this evil any otherwise, tha^ by the justice of the
second man. They have been, yea they are brought to this point, The graci^ of
god preue^^teth our will beginning and endyng our (...) works,
that they do grant the will of man to be prevented by the grace of God, so by
their own confession and words, no man is able or sufficient of him self,
either to begin, or to make an end of any good work. If they do keep these
things well in their mind, whereto they are come, they shall declare them
selves to be far from the error of the Pelagians* Wherefore, if they do walk
in these things, Prayer (...) weapen age^inst error ^ blyndnes
and pray unto him which does give understanding and knowledge, if they do
think at this present any otherwise of predestination, then theye owght^ for
to think, he shall at the length open this also unto them. Yet, let us also
for our part, show, and declare the affection of the same love, which we do
bear toward the^, therein, and bestow our labor, and diligence, in teching, so
much as pleasethe him to give unto us (upon whom we do call) that in these our
wrytyngs, we may say and speak, those things, which should be meet, and
proffitable for them. For what can we tell, whyther our lord, will work in
them, by this our service, wherein, we do serve to them, in fre love, and
charity, yea or nay?

The second Chapter.
First therefore, we must prove, that says by the which we are Christians, is
ye gift of god, (if it be possible for us to do it, faith is the gift of god.
with greater diligence, than we have done already in so great, and many books
which we have written thereof before this time.) But now, as I do perceive, we
must make answer unto them, which do say, that the testymonys of the
scripture, which we have allegyd for this matter, in other of our works, do
serve and make (as they say) that we should believe, Agenst thot which say
that faith is of our self but y^ encreas the^ of (...) god.
that faith it self, has the beginning of our self, but that ye increase of
that same faith, whereby it is made greater, is of god, as though, faith it
self were not given to us of god also, but only encreasyd and made greater in
us by him, as a thing by us deserved, to be had at his hand, because we did
first of our self begin to believe. And herein they do varry and dyffer
nothing, from that mind and opinion, Pelagians error condemned in the
counsel at Palestyne.
which Pelagian in the synod or counsel of the bishops held at Palestyn (as
the register and acts of that same counsel do bear wytnes) was compelled to
deny and condemn, whose opinion was, that the grace of god is given after our
deseruings: as though the beginning of our belief, or to begin to believe in
us, should pertayne nothing to the grace of God, but that thing only which
is added thereunto, that is to lay, that we do more fullye more perfectli, and
more feruentli believe. And by this their reason, we do first give unto God, the
beginning of our ^aithe, that he might reward us again, with the increase
thereof, and geuyng to us other things, which we do ask of him faithfully.

But against this their savenge* wherefore do we not give ear, and harken to
the words of the Apostel, which does say: Roman. (...)
What man has given any thing first unto god, and it shall be rewarded to him
again? For of him, by him, and in him, are al things. And then* the
beginning of our faith, of whom should it be, but of him? We ea^ not say,
this thing excepted all other things are of him. But al things are of him, by
him and in him. But what man will say yt he which begins to believe of him
self deserves nothing of him, in who^ he first believed? So that by this
reason, al other things are given to him for his own deseruynge, as a reward
given to him of god, and so, the grace of God is given as we do merit and
deserve. Which opinion being laid to Pelagia^s charge, he did reprove and
condemn. because he would not be condemned hi^ self. Therefore, who so will
clean void, and be out of ye danger of this damnable opinion, let him truly
understand y^ which y^ apostle spoke saying: To you it is given freely for
christ's sake yt you should not only believe in him, but also yt you should suffer
for him. The Apostle does teach us that both to believe, (...). 1
and to suffer for him are the gifts of god, in that he does say, yt both to
believe in him, and also to suffer for him, are given freely unto us. He does not
sai, No man ca^ (...) ^xcept it (...) given to him that he should believe
a more perfect, and a greter faith to believe in hi^, but he says yt you should
believe in him, is given unto you. The same Apostle does not say, yt he has
obtained mercy, yt he should be made more faithful / ^ut that he should believe,
and be faith^ul because he knew rightwel, that y^ beginning of faith, was not
of him self, which he, being man might give first unto god, and so be
rewarded again of god with y^ increase thereof, but that he was made faithful of
him, of whom he was made apostle. How, and by what means he began to believe, it
is written and red openly in ye church, yt al me^ do know it. For, when he did
hate, and abhor ye faith, which he persecuted, being a great ennemy thereto.
suddenly he was converted, unto y^ same faith, by a grace, which was more
mighty, and of more power, tha^ he was the being y^ conuerter of hi^, to whom
it was said by ye prophet, yt he should so do, with these words, (Thou
converting us, psalm* 84^
shall quicken us, and give life unto us,) yt he should be made I say, not only
one yt would be desirous to believe, of one which would not, but also of a
persecutoure, a man ready to suffer persecution, in the defense of of the same
faith. For it was given to him of Christ, that he should not only believe in
him, but also that he should suffer for him. And therefore, geuinge commendacion
and praise unto this grace of god, which is not given after any meryts, or
deseruynge of us, but which both work al good merits of him self, he said
these words folowi^g. ^ Corin ^. 4.
Not that we are able of our self so think any good thing, as of our self,
but all our sufficiencye and ablenes is of god.

Let those men here mark well and consider these words, which do folyshly
think, that the beginning of our faith is of our selfs, By the antecede^t he
proves ^he con^^uene,
and that the augmentyng and increase thereof is of god. What man does not se
and perceive, that the thought of the thing believed does precede and go before
the belief* For no man does believe any thing, which he has not minded, and
thought on before, The thou^^ht is the beginning of belief, but the thought
is the (...) of god. (...) the beginni^g of believe is the gift of god.
how it is worthy to be believed. Although that certain cogitations, and
thoughts in the mind, be they never so quick and sodeine, do as it were fly
before the will to believe, the which thoughts the will does accompany and
follow so nighe, that it can be no nigher, and as it were at the very heles,
yet it is necessary, that al things which are believed, be believed by a
certain cogitation or minding of the thing believed going before, although,
belief is nothing else but the agremente in the thought, what is (...)
believe,
unto that thing which is thought on. For every man, which does think on a
thing does not straight way believe that thing, whereon he thinks: for many men
do think on some things which they would not believe, but he, which does
believe, does first think, and in thinkinge believes, and beleuinge thinks.
Wherefore, The conclusion of his argument,
as touching that point of our religion, whereof the Apostell speaks, if we
be not sufficient to think any thing, as of our own selves, but that our
sufficiencye is of GOD, truly we are not able to believe any thing of our
self, as of our self, which thing can not be without the thought, but our
sufficiency, by the which, we begin to believe, is of God* Wherefore, as no man
is sufficient and able of him self, either to begin, or to end any good
work, as these our brethren do acknowledge to be true (as their own writings
do declare) whereby in every good work, both in the beginning, and ending,
our ablenes is of God, even so, no man is able of him self, either to begin to
believe, or to continue therein, but all that, which we do, is of god. For faith,
if it be not first thought on, and had in mind, it is nothing, and we are
not able to think any thing of our selves, as of our selves, but that
which we do, and are able for to do, is of god. Well beloved brethren, A
preparation to an other argument proui^g by ^ge promise of god that faith is
y^ work of god.
we must beware and take good heed, that no man does extol him self against
god, which is, when he does say, that he him self does that thing, which
god promised for to do. Was not the faith of the gentyls, promised unto
Abraham, and he, giving the glory and praise thereof unto god believed strongly,
because he knew that he, which promised, was able to do, and perform yt thing
which he promised? Th^n it is he, which does work, Roman, 4*
and makes the faith of the gentyls, being able to do that thing, which he
promised. If god therefore does work our faith, workynge after a strange and
marueylouse fashyon in our hearts, that we should believe: is it to be feared
least he is not able to do the whole work, and therefore man should vyndicate
and challenge unto him self, the first part, or the beginning of faith,
that thereby he might deserve to receive of him again for that beginning sake,
so much as remains behind unperformed* I pray you se, whyther they do mean
any other thing in thus saying and doing, than that the grace of god, one
way or other, should be given to us, for that we have deserved it: and sothe
grace of god should not be grace. For after this manner, it is given to us as a
thing of dewty, which is dew unto us, and not as a fre gift, for by that
reason the beleuer should deserve of god, that he should increase his faith, so
that the encreasse of his faith should be nothing else but the reward of his
faith, which was first beg^ne in him, of him self. They do not mark that when
they say, and speak these words, that they do take it to be a reward given
of dewty to them, which do believe, for there deserving, and not of grace. But
wherefore theye do not attrybute, and give all the whole unto man (for somuche as
he could begin to do the thing of him self, which he had not before, that
he might also go through with all, and make an end thereof, lykwyse of him self,
as he did begy^ne) I can not tell the reason, why they should not, except
because the scriptures of god at so manifest and open, that they cannot be
resysted, by the which scriptures, faith, which is the beginning of all
godlynes, is declared to be y^ gift of god, as y^ sayi^g of y^ apostle teaches
us, which says: he has reparted, and given to every man faith after a
measure. ^^ma, 1
And that saying also, peace be to the brethren and charity, with faith from
god the father, and from our lord Jesus Christ. And such other. Because
these testimonies of the scripture, (...),
ar so manifest, man will not go clean against them, that he will take al to
him self, but yet he will ye beginning of his faith to be of him self as
though he would be at a composition with god, that he him self should have the
one part of faith, and ye other part should be for god, and in that thing,
which he would have divided between them both, he sets him self before, and
god behind, ascribing the beginning, and first part to him self, and the
rest which follows, unto god.

The third Chapter.
THe godly, and lowly doctor (I do mean blessed Cypryane) was not of such
judgment, S Ciprian
and mind, as they are of, whose saying was, that we should not boast our self
of any thing: for so much as nothing is out own. And for the proof thereof, he
took ye apostle to wytnes, sai-yng on this wise, what haste thou that thou have
not received? if thou have received it, wherefore art thou proud, Augusti
confesses (...)
as though thou haste not received it? By the which testimony, I was likewise
overcome, when I was in like erour, thinkinge ye faith by the which, we do
begin to believe in god, was not the gift of god, but of our self, with in us,
and yt by yt same faith of our self, we do obteyn gifts, and rewards of god, by
the which gifts, we do live honestlye, ryghtwisely, and virtuously, This was
the judgment of (...) augustine i^ his er^or before (...) it.
in this world. I did not then think, that the grace of God did prevent, and
go before our feith, but I thought, that we could not believe, without the
knowledge of the verity had, and declared before* But to give consent, and
belief unto the gospel, after it has been preached, and declared unto us, ye
thing, I thought, was our own proper, and of our selves, in our selves.
Which mine error diverse of my works do declare, being written before I was
bishop, in the which you shall find that also, which you speak of in your
letters, where I took on me to expound certain propositions taken forth of
the epistell to the Romans.

To be short, when I went about to retracte all my works, putting the same
re^ractatio^ into writing, I had made an end of two books thereof, before your
letters (being somewhat prolyx and long) did come to my hands. And when I
came to this book, which I promised to retracte in my first volume, I spoke
after this manner* saiinge. S Augusti (...) the words wherein he erred in (...)
king faith to be the work of (...)
Also as I was dysputyng and reasonynge, what god had elected, and chosen, in
him which was not yet borne, to whom he said, the elder should do service,
and what thing likewise he did reprove in the elder, before he was borne, of
whom it was rehersyd, though it were long after, or the prophet did speak
the words, saing (I have louyd Jacob, but Esau I have hated) I brought my
reason to this, ^alach. (...).
that I said, then god has not electid the works of any man, in his
prescyence, and foreknowledg, but the faith of a man, that whom he knew, by
his foreknowledge y^ would believe, him he has chosen, to whom he would give y^
holy ghost, that by well and good working, he might com to everlasting life. I
had not yet well sought, nor found out, what election of grace that is, whereof
the Apostel does speak, saying: The remnaunt is sauyd thorough the election of
grace, (...). 11
which is no grace if any merytts do precede, or go before, lest yt thing
which is given, not of grace, but of deserving, should be given as a reward
for our merits, and not freely. Therefore as I have always said, ^ Corinth 12
for so says the same Apostel, there is but on god, which works al i^ al.
Whereupon, In those words of y^ ap^^t^l* (...) works he (...).
and by the which words I did conclude and say, yt our faith and beleffe, is
our own proper, and of our self, but to work that thing which is good, is
his, and of him: which does give the holy ghost, to them which do believe, and
yet I would not have so said, if I had not known perfectly, that the same faith
also is found, to be among the gifts of god, which is given in the same spirit.

It follows then, that both to believe, and to work well, ar our own as
toching our will, and yet both are given to us, by the spirit of feythe and
charity. For charity is not given alone, ephesians. (...).
but as it is written, charity with faith from god ye father, and our lord Jesus
christ. And as to^^i^g ye and ^^yd, a lyghtel after, speaking these words (for,
to believe, and to will is our own, but god does give unto them, which do believe,
and ar wyllinge, the pour to do well, by the holy spirit, by the which spirit,
love is poured in our hearts) my words ar true, but, as I said, that the pour
to do well, Both the will and the power of y^ will are the gifts of god,
is of god, even so do I say, by the self same rule, that both the one, as
well as ye other is his, because he does prepare the will. And so lykwyse, both
ar our own, because they are not done agenst our will, but with our will. And by
this reason, which I did, speak afterward, saing, because we can not will,
except we be called, and also, when we do show our self willing after we are
called, nether our will, nor yet our endeavor in ronni^g do suffyse, or preuayll,
except god does give strenght unto the^ which do ron, and bring them also,
whyther he does call them, I concluded after this wise, saying. It is manifest,
that it is nether the will of hi^, which wills, nor the ronnyng of ye ronnar,
that we do work good things, but it is the mercy of god, which makes us to do
well. This saing is true.

two kynds of vocation
But as touching ye vocation which is after the porpose and pleasure of god, I
have not much dysputed. For that vocation perteyneth not to al men, vocation ^
election ^^ not on thi^
which are called, but to the^ only which are electid. So yt which I did say
following (likewise as faith is the beginning of meryt and deseruyng, Faith
in those which are electid, and not works, that it may be the gift of god,
that they do work / even so infydelyte and impyete agenst god, Infid^l^te
is the beginning of that we do merytt, and deserve pain, yt by ye same pain we
should work euel) is right truly and well spoken of me. And in an other place I
said, Of whom he takes mercy, he makes him to work well, and whom he does
obdurat, and harden, him he does relinquish and leave, that he can work
nothing but y^ which is evil. Yet, that mercy is attributed and ascribed to
the meryt of faith preceding, and this obduration, or hardenyng, unto
infidelite and impitie which precedyd. Which thing is true, it can not be
denied. But yet this question ought to be demanded, A question
whither y^ merit of faith does prevent and go before the mercy of god, that is
to say, whyther god is merceful to man for that only, because he is faithful,
or else, whither he showed his mercy to man for yt he should be faithful. For we
do read the saing of the Apostel (which is) I have obtained and got mercy, that
should be faithful, ^he does not say because I was faithful. It is given
therefore to the faithful man* But how? Truly, because he should be faithful.
Wherefore, in an other place of y^ same book, I spoke these words very well, as
follows (for if we be called to faith and beleffe by the mercy of god, not by
works, and the same mercy is given to them, which do believe, that they should
work well, no man ought to be greuyd and offendyd because the ge^tils have ye
same merci. And yet I did not so dylygently handell that vocacion, which is of
the porpose and mind of god, as I ought and should have done

The fourth Chapter.
Now verily you do se, what mind I was of then, co^cerninge faith, and works
(although my chief study, and labor should have been, to set forth the grace
of god) in the which opinion, these our brethren (I perceive) are now, because
they have been more diligent, and desirous to read my works, then to take any
fruit or profit by them, as I did* For if they had: they should have found
this question opened, and made plain to them, in the first book of those
twain, which I did write (when I was first made bishop) unto the blessed
father Simplician, bishop of the church of Milan, which succeeded in the said
office, to holy father Ambrose, except (paraduenture) they have not seen those
works* If they have not, se that you cause them to look on them.

Of this first book (of the twain which I did wryt to Symplician) in my
second book of retractations, I said these words following

Of all the works, which I did write, after I was bishop, the first twayn,
were made and dedicated unto Symplician, the head father, He does not call him
m^lord of myla^. as we say my lord of ^ondon my lord of wynchester
and minister of the church of Milla^ (which was bishop there next to Ambrose)
about diverse questions, taken forth of the epistel of Paul unto the romans.
About two of the said questions, I spent all the first book. Of the which,
the first question was, upon this place of Paul, where it is written: What
shall we then say, is the law synn? god forbid, continuing to that place,
where the Apostle does say: who shall deliver me from the body of this death?
The grace of god, through Jesus Christ our lord: Upon the which words of the
Apostell: the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, and such other words, where
the flesh is declared to fight against the spirit: I made mine exposition, as
though man was there described to be yet under the law, and not under grace.
But a good while after, I perceived and found, that it perteyned, yea also to
the spyrytuall man, which is the more probable and true opinion*

The second question of that first book, began from that place, where
Paul does say: not only that, but also Rebecca was got with child, by one
who was our father Isak, contynuynge to that saying, where he does say,
except the lord of Sabbath had left unto us sede, we had be^ as Sodo^, and like
unto Gomor. In the solution of this question, I took on me to prove fre will to
be in man, but the grace of god went beyond me and ouercam me. I was brought
to this point, and farther I could not go, that the words of the Apostel
should be found very true, where he said, who does dyscerne or prefer^e
the? what haste thou that thou haste not received? if thou have received it,
why doeste thou boaste thy self as though thou haste not received it?

The holy martyr Cypryane, willing to show him self, to be of this mind,
did prefyxe and set this tytule following, before a certain book which he
made containing this whole matter, that is, we ought to boste us of nothing
because we have nothing of our own. Behold, for what cause I said, that I
was overcome by the testimonye of the Apostle, when I was of a contrary mind,
in the book, which I wrote to Symplycian, otherwise, tha^ god has now made
open unto me. This testimonye of the Apostle, when he spoke those words, to
pluck in ye proud heart, and great boasting of man, will not suffer, that any
faithful man should say, I have faith of my self which I received not.

This proud answer is put aside by the words of the Apostell. Yea and that
also is wiped away clean by the self same words, that they cannot say,
although I have not a perfect faith of my self, yet have I the beginning
thereof, by the which I do believe, first in Christ* for thereto answer is
made, where the Apostel says, what have thou that thou have not receuid, if
thou haste receuyd it, whereof do thou bost the, as though thou haste not
receuyd it*

The v Chapter
But whereas they do say, (...) on at the (...)
that these words, what have thou which thou have not receuyd, do not
pertayne, nor are to be understood, spoken of this faith (because it does
abyed and remayn still in y^ same nature, now being corrupt^d, which nature,
(...)
was at the first given to us, whole and perfect) these there words do make no
thing for their purpose, that they would have them make for, if they do
consider and mark well, for what intent and purpose the apostel did speak
the^. For his mind and purpose was, that no man should be proud or bost him
self of any man. For there were risen dyssentions, and varyances among y^
Corinthians, which were christians, new come to y^ faith, so that one said, I
hold on paul an other said I am Apolos dyscyple* and an other, I take part with
Cepha. For this cause said he, god has chosen the folysh of the world to
confound the wise men thereof, and the weak to confound y^ strong and mighty,
the abiects, and most vile persons, and that which is nothing, for to
euacuate, make void, and naught worth, those things, which d^^pere to be of
great price and value, y^ no flesh should bost it self of any thing in this
present life. Here every man may se the mind of the apostel, yt he meant nothing
else, but to pluck in, and to destroy the pride of man, yt no man should be
proud (...) any man, and so by that, nether i^ him self. Furthermore, when he
said, that no flesh should be proud before god (that he might show to us also,
in whom man ought to rejoice, and be proud) he added these words: Of him,
(says he,) are ye in Christ Jesus, which is made unto us the wisdom it
self, by god, which is made our rightwysnes, our sanctification, and our
redemp^^o^, yt as it is written, who so reioiseth let him reioise and be proud
in y^ lord Hervpo^ had he occasion to rebuke them, saying, for yet are your
carnal. For somuche as there is emulatio^ strife and contention among you are
not ye fleshly and carnal? and walk ye not after the manners of men? men? For
when any of you do say, I am Paul's disciple, or I am Apollos, are not ye men?
What I pray you, ^s Paul, What is Apoll^? They are ministers by who^ ye have
believed. And to every man (as god has given grace) I have planted, Apollo has
watered, but god has given the en^rease. So nether he, For god did* give that
grace ^^to them, that they would plant and water,
which does plant, is an^ thing, nor he which does water, but god which
gives the increase. Do not you se, that the Apostle entendeth nothing else, but
that man should be brought low / and made meke, and god only exalted, sithe
that in them which are planted, and in them, which are watered, he does say,
that neither the planter, nor yet the waterer, to be any thing, but god which
gives y^ increase* Yea: and also the self same thing that the one does plant,
and the other water, the Apostell does attribute, and give unto God, and not unto
man, saying: as god has given to every man, I have planted, and Apollo has
watered. So the Apostell, procedynge in the self same matter, came to that he
said, let no man therefore be proud, nor have his reioysyng in man, for he
said before, he which reioyseth, and is proud, let him rejoice, and be
proud in the lord.

After he had spoken these words, and diverse other, continuyng still in that
same purpose and matter, he said: These things brethren, I have described in
mine own person, (...)
and in the person of Apollo for your sake, that ye might learn by us, that no
man, above, and more than that, which is written, should swell one against
another, for any man's cause. For who prefers the? What haste thou, that thou
haste not receuyd? If thou have receuyd it, why reioysest thou as though thou
had not receuyd it? To suppose and think, y^ by these words, which the
Apostel does speak against the pride of man, yt no man should rejoice in man
but in god, the natural gifts, which god has given to man are to be meant and
understood (whither it be y^ self same nature, which god did give at the
first, pure and clean (...) else ye remnant of that nature now corruptyd) I
take it to be to far from al reason. Do you think that these gifts of
nature, which ar common to al men* do prefer on man before an other? For at
the first he said, who does prefer* the? wh^rto he adedd these words, what
have thou, that thou have not receuyd? For otherwise on man swelling against an
other, might say, mi faith my justice, and right wysnes^ and if he has any
thing else to speak of^ does pref^r, me before the, and syche like other words
But against all syche manner of cogitatio^s, and thoughts, this godly doctor,
making a bar, and leing (as it were) a stop, said, what (...) thou that thou
have not receuyd? Off whom haste thou any thing but of him, which does
prefer y^ before that man, to whom he does not give those gifts, which he
has given unto the?

But if thou haste received (says he) why art thou proud, ar though thou have
not received it? Does he say any other thing, I pray you, but that he which
does rejoice should rejoice in the lord? But there is nothing so repugnant and
contrary to this ^^ns and mind of the Apostell, as if a man should rejoice in
his merits, as though he did work them his own self, not the grace of god,
but that grace or gift, which seperatethe y^ good people, from the evil, not
yt grace which is common, both to y^ good and bad, as well indifferent to the
one, as to the other. Let nature have her grace, The dyffer^nce of gra^^^ man.
by the which we are creaturs, endued with reason, reasonable, being by that
grace seperatyd and divided from brent bea^tes. Let nature also have an other
grace, or gift, which does make a certain dyfference, between man and man,
as bewti, or favor of bodi, and wysdom, which makethe a difference between the
well favored and the wise man, from the ill favored and folyshe persons, and so
forth in such like. But that man, whom the Apostall counselyd not to be proud,
did not swel up or bost him self against any br^^t or unreasonable beast, nor
yet against any other man, about any gift of nature, which gift, the worst
and noughtyest person that lives, may naturally have in him, as well as the
best: but because he swellyd up, and was proud of some good thing perteynyng to
a good life, ascrybyng it unto him self, and not unto god, wherein he deseruyd,
to be said to of Paul, who does prefer the? For what thing have thou,
which thou have not receauyd.

And although I should grant, that it were a thing natural, that a man may
have faith in him, does it therefore follow. yt he has faith in him? 1.
Thessa* (...).
For every man has not faith, although it were possible for every man to have
faith. But the Apostell does not say, what thing may thou have, which thou
have not received, that thou may receive it, but he says, what haste thou,
which thou have not receued? Therefore, that a man may have faith, as well as a
man may have charity, it is natural to al men, but for to have faith in deed,
as to have charity, pertains to the grace of the faithful. That ^ame nature
then, wherein the possibilite to have faith, is given to us, does not prefer
one man before another: but faith truly is the thing, which prefers the
faithful before the unfaithful. So by these sayings, what man does prefer y^,
what have you that thou have not received, who soever does say, I have faith of
mi self, then have I not received it, does speak verily agenst the most open,
plain, and manifest verite, not because either to believe, or not to believe, is
not in the will of man, but in those which are elected, the wilts prepared of the
lord. It follows that these words (who do prefer the, and what haste thou
that you haste not received) does pertain unto the same faith, which is in the
will.

The syxth Chapter.
THere are many, He preuenteth the objection with would pr^^ feyth to be of
man, and dispro^^th it.
which do hear the word of the verity, of whom some do believe, and some do
not believe: but contrary wise, do clean speak against it. It does follow by
that reason, that those men will believe, and the other will not believe. What
man does not already know this? what man would deny it But for so much as god
prepares the will of some men, and to some again, he does not, we must make a
difference, what comes of the merci of god, and what of his judgment, and
ryghtwysenes. The Apostel says, Israel obtained not that, which it sought
after, (...)
but election did obtain it, as for the rest are blinded * as it is written*
God has given to the^, the spirit of unquietness, eyes, that they should not se,
and ears, that they should not hea^e, even unto this day. And Dauyd says,
let their tables be made to them a snare, to take them withal, and an occasion
to fall, psalm* l^viii,
and a reward unto them.

Let their eyes be blinded, that they se not, Testimonies of the scriptures,
containing the doctrine of the merci and judgment of god
and bend thou down their back always. Here may you se, both mercy and
judgment, mercy, in election, which election has obtained mercy, and
judgment upon those, which are blinded, and yet they which would, did believe,
the other, because they would not, did not believe. I do conclude here by, that
mercy and judgment are wroughte in the wylles. For this election, is of grace,
and not of our deseruynge. For the Apostle said a little before (so then is
it in this time, the remnaunt are saved, through the eleccion of grace.)

But if it be of grace, then is it not of our works. For if it should be of our
work, then grace were no grace. Freely therefore and without deserving of our
works, has election obtained that thing which it has* There was nothing,
which did precede or go before that election of there own, which they might
give first, and afterward be rewarded again, for that which they did give. For
he has sauid them without any reward, freely. The other* which are blinded, to
them it was given (as it is written), for a reward. All the ways of the lord
ar mercy and verity. His ways are inuestigable, and unable to be serched
out. It does follow then, that his mercy, by the which ^e does give salvation
freely, and his verity whereby he judges rightwiselye, are unsearchable.

The seventh Chapter.
But paraduentur they will say, He reherseth another of there ob^^tione, and
re^re^yth it
that the apostle does sever and deuyde faith, from works. The Apostle say
they, does say, that grace comes not of our works, he says not, say
they, nor denyethe that grace comes of faith.

It is so in deed, but Jesus him self does say, that the same faith, also is
the work of god. And this work does he command us forto work. For the
jews said unto him, what shall we do that we may work the works of god?
Ihon: (...).


Jesus answered to them and said, This is the work of god, that ye do
believe in him whom he has sent. After that same fashyon does the Apostle
separate faith from works, making the^ as two several things, after that
sort as in the two kyngedomes of the Hebreus, The reason why we are iustefyd
by faith.
ye do read that Judas was separated from Israel, although that Judas him
self was Israel. But the Apostel does say, that man is justified by faith, not
by works, because that faith is first given to us, whereby al other things are
obtained and got, which are properlye called good works, in the which works,
we do live justly and godly. For he does say, by grace are ye made safe,
through faith, and that not of our selves, but it is the gift of god, that is
to say, that which I said, (thorough faith) is not of our selves, but it is
the gift of god. And now faith is not of works (says he^ lest some man
(paraduenture) would be proud thereof. So faith (...) gardene ^who by th^^
e^ample p^oueth that a man before faith may be (...) and ^od (...) by his
goodness to be rewarded of god.
For it has been a common saying among men, he has deserved to believe, and
to be faithful, because he was a good man, ye before he believed. Which thing
might be said, and spoken of Cornelius, whose alms deeds were acceptyd, and
his prayers herd, before he believed in Christ. But yet he did not give his
alms and pray with out al faith. For how did he make invocation, in whom he
had not believed? But if he might have been sauyd without the faith of Christ,
the great work master, and Apostel peter should not have been sent unto him,
that he might be edefied, and builded up, by him. For except, that god does
build the house, the buylders do spend their labor in vain. And you say,
faith is of our self, but al other things part^yning to the works of
rightwisnes, are of god, as though faith did not parteyn to this building, as
though, I say, the foundation parteyne the not, nor were part of the house.

But if it does partaine unto the building, then does he labor in vain, in
building up faith, by his preaching, except the lord, showing his mercy,
and compassion, does inwardly buyld it. Therefore, what soever Cornelyues did
work: before he bleuyd in Christ, (...) and afterward also, al to gyther is to
be ascrybed unto god, lest any man (peraduentur) would rejoice, and be proud in
him self. There fore y^ same only master and lord, when he said th^s words,
which I rehersyd before. (This is the work of God that ye should believe in
him whom ^e has sent) at the self same time, said also, I have said unto
you, because you have seen me, and have not believed me, all that my father does
give unto me, shall come to me.

The.viii. Chapter.
WHat is meante by these words (shall come to me) but this, To com to the son
is to believe in the son
shall believe in me. Ihon. vi
But to believe in the son, is the gift of the father. And afterward he
said. Murmor ye not among your selves, no man can come to me, except my
father, which sent me, does draw him, and I will raise him up again in the
lattre day. It is written in the prophets, (...)
and all shall be taught of god. Al, which have hard, and be taught of the
father, and have also learned that, which they have been taught, do come*
unto me. What is that to say, every man, which has hard of the father,
and is learned of him, but this, that there is no man, which does hear, and is
learned of the father, There comes none to the son: but whom the father
teachyth* the cause then why they do not come is, because god both not teach
them
but does come unto me. For if that every man, which has herd of the father,
and is also learned of him does come, then he, which does not come, has
neither hard, nor is learned of the father.

For if he had hard, and had learned, he should have com. For there is no man,
which ever hard, and was learned of the father, that is not come. But eueri
man, (as wytnessethe the veryte yt self) which has hard and is lernid of my
father, does com.

This scholl is very strange, and far from the sensis of the flesh, in ye
which schol the father is hard, wherein he teaches, how a man may com unto his
son, In yt same scholl is the son also, for he is the word of him self, by
whom the father does so teach, and that thing, he does not with the ears of
the flesh, but with the ears of the heart. In that schol is also the spirit of
the father and of the son, The father, the son, and the spirit of them both
d^o ^ea^h a^ in our scole.
for the spirit is not ydel but teachi^g also, and that not severally from the
other, but iointli with them, For, as we have said, the works of the trynite
ar inseparable. And that same spirit is the holy ghost, Wherefore is it called
the deed of the father* when we (...) whom the father teaches (sith that y^
son and y^ holy ghost as also present in tha^ deed of teaching) he refers
the reader (...) the (...) which he (...) of the (...).
of whom the Apostell speaks these words (having the self same spirit of
faith). But therefore, this deed of teaching, is namly and princypally ascrybed
to the father, because the son was begotton of him, his only begotten son from
whom also procedyd the holy ghost, whereof it were to long to dispute every
thing at large, for as much as I have written fyften books of the trinite,
(which is god) which books I do think are come to your hands or this time.
This scholl, I say, is set far from all human, and fleshly understanding
wherein the father is hard, and does teach. We do se many, which do come unto
the son, because we do see many which do believe in Christ. But where and
how, they have herd, and learned this of the father, we do not se. Truly this
is a secret grace? And what man does doubt therein, but it is grace?

Therefore this grace, what thing does grace work in the heart of man
which is secretly put into man's heart, on the mere liberalite of god, is
received of no hard and stony heart. For this cause, is it poured into man's
heart, that it may first take away the hardness of the heart. Therefore, when the
father is herd in the heart and teaches that they should come unto the son,
then does he take away the hardness of the stony har^, and gives in the stead
thereof, an heart of flesh, as he promised by the prophet. For after this
fashyon, does he make y^ children of promyssion, and y^ vessels of mercy, which
he has prepared to glory.

But wherefore does he not teach al men, an ob^ection with the answer
that they should come unto Christ, but because he teaches of his own mercy
and compassyon, al those whom he does teach? And the cause, why he does not
tech the other, is of his rightwysnes and judgment. For on whom he wills, he
takes mercy and compassion, and whom him pleases, he does obdurate, and
harden. But in geuyng yt which is good, he shows him self merciful, and in
that he hardens, he rewards worthily.

But if thou wylt say, that these words are not the words of the Apostle: but
of some other, spoken unto him, that they should seem to say (then god is
merciful, on whom he will have mercy, and hardens who^ he will harden) with such
other words, as do follow, as (wherefore does he complain? who is able to be
against his will, or to resyst hi^?) Did the Apostle make answer to them
again with these words: Answer
O man, thou do say untruly? No ^orsoth, but he answered too them again
(if I should grant them to be the words of some other man, spoken to the
apostle) saying again to them. O man, what art thou, which do reason and
murmur against god? Does the po^she^de say unto the potter, wherefore haste
thou made me thus?

Wherefore have thou thus fashyoned me? has not the potter power and liberty,
to make of the self same claye. etc. as you do know the words of the Apostle.

And yet after a certain fashion the father does teach all men to come unto
the son.

For, it is not in vain written in the prophets (and all men shall be taught
of god). Which testimony, after he had rehersyd unto them, he added these
words, By this (...) teaches the understanding of these w^rdes* all m^n are
taught of.
saying: (every man, says christ, which has hard and learned of my father,
does come unto me). Lykwyse as when we do speak, and say when ou^ talk and
communication is of a master, which teaches in town, or cite, we do say, This
man teaches all our town or cytte, or else all the children of the town or
cytte, not because all the children of the town or cytte, do learn, but bycaus
no man does lern, or go to schol but they which do learn, or go to schole
with him: even so do we say very well and truly, God teaches all men to come
to Christ, not that al do come, but because noone do come, but they which are
learned* and taught of him. But the cause, wherefore god does not tech al me^,
the Apostel has declared so far, as he thought necessary, and expedient to be
opened, saying these words, (because he would show his wrath, and make his
pour known, he brought forth with great patience the vessels of wrath, which
at ordeinyd and made to perdition, that he might declar the riches of his
glory, on the vessels of mercy, which he has prepared to glory.) This is y^
cause, wherefore the word of the veryte is folishnis, to them, which do peryshe,
but to the^, which are saved it is the virtue of god. Al these, god does tech to
com to Christ, all these he will have saved and comme to the knowledge of the
veryte. For, if he would teach them also to comme to Christ, which do esteem,
the prechi^g of the cross to be folishfolyshnes, there is no doubt, but they
would com also, as well as the other. For he deceuyth no man, nor is deceyuyd of
any, which does say, every man, which does here of my father and is learned
of him, commythe unto me. God forbid therefore, that we should say, that any
man should not com, which has hard, Another (...) lection
and is lernyd of the father. But for what cause (say they) does he not teach
al men? If we should say, that they would learn, whom he does not teach,
Aunswer^
answer would be made unto us on this wise, of the^ again, saying: What say
you to that, which is written, (O lord, psalm, ^4.
when thou do convert us, thou shall quycke^ us, and give us life. Or else, if
god does not make them, which are not wyllinge, for to be wylling, wherefore does
the church pray, (as god commands for the persecutours thereof? For so
would holy Cypryane have that to be understood, math 6.
when we do say iu our daily prayer: Thy will be fulfilled, and done in earth
as well as it is in heaven. That is to say, * the understanding of the
second petition of the lords prayer.
after the mind of Ciprian as it is fulfilled in them, which do believe, and
are therefore, as it were in heaven, so it may be fulfyiled in them, which do
believe. and therefore are yet but in yea^the. Wherefore do we pray for them
which do not believe, but that god would work in them the will to believe* The
Apostell speaking of the Jews, does say: Brethren, the will of my heart is
good, and my prayer is for them, that they may be saved. He does pray for
them which do not believe. Does he in so doing, pray for any thing else but
that they should believe? for otherwise then by belief, they can not come to
salvation.

If the faith then of them, which do pray, A other obie^^on.
does prevent the grace of god, does the faith of them, for whom they do
pray prevent and go before the grace of god, or nay^ for we do pray, for them
which do not believe, yt is to say, which have not faith, that faith might be
given to them. When the euengil is preched, some do believe and some do not
believe, Answer^
but they which do believe when the preacher does pronounce his wordsoutwardly
those (I sai) do here, and learn inwardly in the heart being taught of the
father. But they, which do not believe, do here, with there outward ears, and
they have no manner of inward heatinge, or lerning of the father, that is to
say, to them, it is given, that they do believe, to the other it is not given.
For no man (says he) comes to me, except my father which ^ent me, does draw
him, which is afterward more plainly spoken. For after these words, when he
did speak of the eating of his flesh and drinking of his blod, some of his
dyscyples said, this is very hardly spoken of him, Ihon. vi.
who ca^ hear him? Jesus knowing within him self, y^ his dyscyples murmeryd at
his words, said unto the^, does this that I have said, offend you? And again he
laid, The words, which I have spoken to you, are spirit and life, but there
are among you, which do not believe. The^ y^ evangelist of him self said, Ie^us
knew from the beginning, who they were, which did believe, and whom he was,
which should betray him. And christ said. Therefore I have said unto you, that no
man can com unto me, it be given to him of my father.

It follows, The understanding of these wo^ds to be drawn of the father
that to be drawn of the father unto Christ, and to hear, and learn of the
father, that they may come to Christ, is nothing else, but to receive the
gift of the father, whereby they might believe in christ. For he, which said, no
man can com unto me except it be given to hi^ of my father, does not dyscerne,
and prefer those which are the hearers of the gospel, before them, which do not
here* but he prefers those which do believe and are faithful, before them,
which do not believe* and are unfaithful

The ix Chapter
IT follows then that both, the beginning, ^e concludes that (...) also
(...) to the gift of god.
and ending of faith is y^ gift of god.

And, that this gift is given to some, and to some agai^e it is not given, no man
doutethe therein, except he will withstand, and go against the manifest
scriptures of god. But because he will not give it to almen* no faithful man
ought to be mouyd thereat, If all men ^oulde (...) it were (...) of rye^^ are if
(...) not of (...) but of me ^ye
which does believe, that of, and from on man, al men at go^ into judgment and
condemnation most just unto them (no man can say the contrary) so that no man
can find any falt in god. although no man were delivered from that judgment,
nor sauyd. Whereby it is evident, that It is the greatt grace of god, that many
ar sauyd. And by them, which are not delivered from the just judgment of god,
they do acknoledge, what of right is dew unto the^self, if they had their own
deservings, bycaus that they which do rejoice, should not rejoice in there own
merytes, which are no better, the^ thyrs which are condemnid, Hieremy. ^
but should rejoice only in the lord.

But the cause, wherefore he does deliver this man more than that man, who can
find, his judgments who can search out? And his ways ar in vestigable. For it
is more convenient, and comely, for us to say, and here with the Apostel, (O
thou man what art thou, which do reason with god,) than that we should be
bold for to speak any thing therein, as though we knew that thing, which he
would have kept close, and hid from us: which will nothing that is unjust,
and vnryghtwyse.

As touching that, which you do remember: I have spoken in a certain work
which I wrote against ^urphurye, entytuled (of the time of Christian relygron)
I did so speak it, that I passed over and medelyd not, with this dysputacion
of grace, because it was a weighty matter, and required great dylygence. And
yet I did not so sleyghtly slyppe it over, but I declared that and would
feign have spoken more than I did of it, and y^ it might be more commodiouslye,
at an other time treated and reasoned of / when it should be more mete for the
matter. For among other words, which I spoke, making answer to a certain
question, which was put unto me wherefore it was so long or Christ came, I
said the^e words. For so much as they do not object to Christ, for what
cause all men do not follow him, and his doctrine (for they do perceive: that
they can make no such objection, no not too the wysedom of there philosophers,
yea nor yet to the power of their gods) what will they say and answer thereto
(if I would let pas, and not speak of the deep and pro^ounde wysdom, and
knoledge of god, wherein, peraduenter a much more hid, and secret matter does
lie hyd, tha^ I am able to express or tell of, if I do pasouer I say al other
causes, and rea^o^s, which other wise me^ would bring forth, and say no more
but this in few words, concerni^g this question, that Christ did apere and
show him self unto men, preachinge his doctrine, when he knew, and where he
knew, that there, and then, should be found me^, which would believe in him. For
in those times and places, where, and when, his euangill is not preachyd, he knew
well enough before, that he should have sych audytors, and hearers of his
preching, as were many (not all) at the time of his corporal presence being in
yerth, which would not believe in him, yea though he did reyse up the dead forth
of there graves. As we do se yet at this day many, which, although, ye
prophecyes, which were of him, do apere, and a^ most perfectly complished and
fulfilled, as they were spoken of him, yet will not believe but do chose rather,
with humayn subtylte, and craft, to resist and strive against the aucthorities
of god, which ar blowe^ over all the world, tha^ lowli to submyt and give place
un them. So long as the knoledg of man is small and weak, man's igno^rance cann
not after n^ to the dep^ wisdom of god*
it can not draw nyghe unto the verytye of god. What mervayl is it therefore,
if Christ, knowing the world then to be so full of unfaithful me^, would not
then be seen of them nor have his doctrine preched among them, whom he knew
nether by his words, nor yet by the working of miracles would be brought unto
beleffe?

Yt may be, that, at that tym al were syche, as have been many from his coming,
and a^ yet at this day* and yet for all that, from the first creation of
mankind otherwhyell more darkly, otherwhyl more openly and plainly, he ceased
not, to prophecye, as he saw the time required, and there were also, from the
time of Adam to Moses, ye and among the people of Israel some, to who^,
singular, and special misterye, the prophecyes, were committed, yea, and also
among other nations of men before the incarnacyo^ of Christ, there were many
which believed. For, sith that in the holy scripturs of ye hebreus, there is
mention made of many after the time of Abraham, which were nether of his
lynage, nor yet of the people of Israel, nor yet of any of those, which came and
joined them self to the people of Israel, and yet were partakers of this
sacrament, why should we not believe that in other nations and countris also,
there should be some, though they are not spoken of, which did believe? So the
salvation of this religion, which is y^ only true religion, by the which only
the true and parfect health, and salvation is promised, never failed any man,
which was worthy of it, and who that had it not, was not worthy thereof. And
from the first time, that, man was mad, there has been always preching, to some,
to their judgment, and co^demnacion, to some again, to there salvation. And to
whom the word of god was not preached, god knew from the beginning, y^ they would
not believe, and where it was prechid, and not believed, it was showed to them to
there great judgment. And where it was taught and believed they are preparyd to
the feloweshyppe and company of angels, and of his sayncts, in the kingedome
of heaven.

Do you not now perceive, that I was in mind, yea, and did speak these words,
of the p^escience, and foreknowledge of Christ, nothing preiudicatynge, the
secreate and hid counsel of God, nor hindering any cause or reason, that
may be showed, and spoken therwhiche, me thought to be sufficient to convince,
the pagans of their in fro^litie, which did object this question unto me?
Therefore, where as ^ said, that Christ would then show him self among men, and
have his doctrine preached unto them, where and when he knew would be such as
would believe in him, it might be said also, that Christ would then appear
unto men, and have his doctrine preached unto them, when he kn^we, and where he
knew to be such, as were elected in him, from the first foundation of the
world. But if I should have said so much then, I should have given occasion
to the reader to have required and demanded of me, those things which now
are necessary (geuynge them warning of the Pelagians error) to be dysputed
more substancyally, and with greater diligence. I thought it therefore, for that
time sufficient, to speak briefly thereof, not dyscussynge the profounde depenes
of the wisdom and knowledge of god, nor yet medelynge wi^h other causes
thereto belonging, which, not the^, but at other times, I thought more mete and
convenient to be reasoned and dysputed of.

The tenth Chapter.
ALso, where as I said, that the salvation of this religion failed never any^
man, which was worthy, and tha^ he was not worthy, which had it not, if it
should be demanded how, and which way a man is worthy, there are which
will say, Whereby is men worthy to receue (...), which is by the faith of
christ, of his own^ (...) or otherwise*
that the will of man makes the man to be worthy. But we do say, that man is
made worthy, by the grace and predestination of god. Now what dyfference is
between grace, and predestination, I will tell you. Predestination, is a
preparation of grace. Grace is the free gift it self. The difference between
predestinatination, and grace.
That saying therefore of the Apostell, which is: not of works, that no man
should rejoice (for we are his work, created in Christ Jesus, into good works)
is the grace whereof we do speak. And yt saying of ye same Apostell, which
follows afterward, (which god has prepared, yt we should walk in the^) is
predestination, which cannot be without prescience or forknowleg, but ye
forknoledg, or prescience of god* may be with out predestination, whereof it is
said, he has made and wroughte those things, which shall be. He has also
y^ prescience, or foreknowledge of those things which he works not, The
prescyence of god may be without predestination, b^^ predestination cannot
(...) without the prescience.
as of al sins, which have been, are, and shall be committed. For although
there is certain syn, which of it self is the pain, and ponishment of syn,
whereof it is written. God has delivered the^ over, into a reprobat mi^d, for
to do those things which are not mete to be done ^her it is not the fault of
God, * the (...) of syn.
but the judgment of god. Grace i^ (...) of predestination.
Wherefore the predestination of god, which is in goodness, is as I said, the
preparation of grace, and grace is theffect of y^ same predestination.
Therefore, when god did promise to Abraham, in his seed, the faith of the
gentyls, saying: I have ordained and set the, to be a father of many nations,
upon the which words the apostle speaking, said: For yt cause by faith (says
he) yt ye promis might be firm and sure to all seeds, he did not make this
promise too the power and strength of our will, but upon his own
predestination. For, he promised that he him self would do it, not that men
should do it. For although that men do many good things, * god makes men to
work well.
which pertayne to the worship of god, yet it is god, which makes them to
do these things, which he has commanded to be done. Their works and deeds,
do not cause him, that he should perform that, which he has promised. For if
it should be so, then were it in man's power and not in the power of God, that
the promise of god, should be performed, and that also, which god did
promise, they should be the cause that it is performed unto Abraham.

Abraham believed not after that fashion. He believed and gave glory unto god,
because he knew that he was able to perform those things, which he did
promise. He does not say he is able to tell the^ thereof before, nether does he
say God is able to have the foreknoledge of these things (for, he cann both
show before, and also know before those things which he does not) but he
says, god is able to do them as well as to promise them, and so they are his
own works and deeds, and not other men's deeds, which cause him to perform that
which he promised.

Or wylt thou say, an objection
that god did promise to Abraham, nothing but the good works of the gentyls
which he would work in his sede, that he might promise to him that thing,
which he does work and perform him self, and that god did not promise there
faith to him, by because it is not his work, as they say, but there is? * they
said that faith (...) ^he work of man* and all (...) works are of god.
And will thou say that y^ forknoledge, which god had of their faith, which
was, that they would believe of them self, did cause, and make him to promise yt
thing to Abraham, which he does work? The Apostell speaks no syche words*
He says, The answer to the objection,
that god promised to Abraham, childern, which should follow the steps of his
faith, which thing he speaks plai^ly and openly. But if so be, god promised,
the works of y^ gentyls, and not the faith of them, truly, because good
works can not be except they be of faith (for the rightwyse lyuethe by faith
and all that which is not of faith is sin, and without faith it is vnposseble
to please god) it must needs follow, by that there reason (according to the
apostels saying? that it is in man's power, that god shall perform that thing,
which he has promised* For by there saing, except man does perform that thing,
which pertains unto them, to do of them self, without the gift of god, which
is there faith, This is a soul and (...) noble (...) that god should be
bound to our works ^^dedes.
(as they lay) God does not perform that thing, which he has promised, that y^
works of rightwysnis should be given unto them. And so after there mind, that
god may perform his promise, it stondeth not in the pour and (...) of god, but
in the power and will of man. Which thing for so much as the veryte does deny,
and forbyddeth that we should believe it ^o be as they say, let us with Abraham,
believe as he did, because god is able to perform those things which he has
promised. For he promised children unto Abraham, which thing they can not be,
if they have no faith It does then follow, that he does give also the faith,
whereby we do believe

The.xi. chapter
I Do meruayll truly, forsomyche as the Apostel does say, (therefore by faith,
that according to grace, the promise may be fyrme, and certayne^ that men had
rather commyt them self to them self, trusting to their own infyrmite and
weaknys, than to y^ certain and most sure promise of god.

But he will say unto me, I am uncertain of the will of god, what thing shall
become of me. And art thou sure upon thyn own, will, what shall become of the,
that thou fearyst nothing? ^ corinth. (...)
Let him: which seems to him self to stand, take heed that he does not fall.
For So Much therefore, as both are uncertain, for what cause does not man commyt
his faith, his hope, and charity unto the stronger* rather, than to the weaker?

But when they do heat these words spoken unto them, Obiecti^^
which were the words of the lord (if thou be leuest thou shalt be sauid)
they do answer, and say, that one part of this saying is required to be had at
our hand, and yt second part thereof is given unto us. That part, which is
required of us, is in our own pour (say they), and that part which is given
unto us, aunswer^
is in the pour of god. Wherefore is not both, as well that, which he
commands, as that which he gives in the power of god? For we do desire him
in our prayers, that he would give to us, that thing which he commanndeth
us for to do. The faithful, do make their petition, desiringe that he would
increase their faith. They do pray also for them, which do not believe, that
faith might be given unto them, that as well the beginning, as ye increase of
faith, might (as it is i^ deed) be ye gift of god. For it is all one manner of
speaking, Romans 8.
to say, if thou beleuest, thou shalt be saved, and to say, if ye do mortify
the deeds of the flesh, ye shall live. For in this text, there are two things,
on commanded, and another given unto us. If ye do mortyfye the deeds of the
flesh. etc. Then to mortifye the deeds of the flesh, by the spirit, is
required of us, and that (ye shall live, is given unto us. Would ye therefore,
by this reason say, To mortifye the deeds of the (...) is the gift of god
that the mortyfyenge of the deeds of the flesh, is not the gift of god, and
that we should not confess it to be his gift, because it is demanded of us,
with a reward promised, for the perfourmynge thereof? God forbydde, that those
which are partakers of grace, and defendars thereof, should be of that mind.
For this is the damnable error of the Pelagia^s, whose mouths streightway, the
apostel does stop, 1. cor. 1^
with these words, saying: As many, as are led by the spirit of god, they
are the sons and children of god: because we should not think that the
mortifienge of the flesh, is done by our own spirit, and not by the
spyryte of God.

Of this spirit of god, thapostel did speak, when he sayde^ al these things,
none other but that self same spirit does work, deuyding, and dystrybutinge
his own proper gifts, to every man, as it pleases him. Among all the which
things (as ye know), he named faith. Likwyse then, as the mortefieng of the
flesh, although^ it be the gift of god, is required of us, and a reward also
promised of life, so is feyth also y^ gift of god although it be requyret of
us. Wherefore be we commanded to do this or that, of we cannot do it, (...)
god giuethe ^t to us.
with a promysse of salvation, when it is said if thou do believe, thou shalt
be sauid. For this cause therefore, both we are commanded to do these things,
and are taught also that theye at the gifts, of god, yt we might understand,
Hezethi^. 11
both that we do them, and also, that god does make that we may do them, as by
the mouth of the prophet Ezechyel, he speaks very plainly* for what can be
said more plainly, than when he does say I will make, that ye may do them?
Mark the same place of the scriptur well (good brethren) and ye shall se, Al
humayne meryts are condemned by the word of god, and (...) them as (...)
that he does promysse, that he will work, that ye may do that, which he
commands to be don. In that sam place also he speaks of there own meryttes,
calling them evil and noughty, to whom he declarethe, that he does render good
things for evil, in that same doi^g when he does make them to have good works
afterward. when he works* that theye may work, and keep the
co^mmau^dementes of god

The xii. Chapter.
ALthough this reason, by y^ which we do defend y^ grace of god, through Jesus
Christ our lord to be grace in deed, that is to lay, not to be given to us,
according to our merits, is evidently enough prouid, and confirmed, by the
strong testimonies of the word of god: yet among them, which would fayn have
some thing, for to come, and to be of them self, which they might first give
unto god, So fayeth in other sort if we be sa^uid by faith, (...) should we
work.
for to be rewarded of him again, except they have this thing granted unto
them, that they do some thing of them self, they do think that they are clean
plucked away from doi^g of all virtuous works and godlynes.

Well, as ^^chynge those, which by reason of their age have the, use of their
will, we will grant and say, what meryts do men find in youge children, by
the which they are sau^.
that they do work sometime. But, when we do talk of young children, and of
the mediator between god, and man, the man Christ Jesus, then, al assertion, and
defense of humayne merits, precedynge y^ grace. of god, does quayle. For
neither young children, are by any good works, precedinge the grace of god,
preferred before other, that thereby, (...).
they should pertayne to the redemer of mankind, nor yet christ Jesus, being
also made man, was made the savior, and redemer of mankind, by any humayn
merits, preceding the grace of god. For what man could abide to here, y^ young
children, because of y^ good deds, which they would have done, if they had lived
long^r time, are baptized, before they do depart forth of this life, and
again, that oother young children, because because of evil deeds, which they
would have committed, if they had lived to the years of dyscretion, are
taken out of this life before that are baptized, and that god does nether
reward the life, which they do live, before they die, as good, nor yet
condemn it as bad, and noughty, but only having respect to the works,
which they would have done in time to come, (if they had continued in this
world) does either reward or condemn them.

But man's folysh brayn, ought not to go beyond the mark, ^omano, 14
which the Apostell has leyd before us, whose words are these, following We
shall al stand (^eyth he) before y^ judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receue after the doing, and work, which he hade don in his body, (there good or
evil. The Apostel seyth (which he has done) not adding thereto, or shall do.
But how or which way, this reason should fall into their heads, I cannot tell,
that the merits, which are to come (which shall never be any, if they do dye
in their infancy) should be rewarded or condemned. He makethe an objection
against the words of the apostell whereto he aunswerethe showing the
understanding of the apostles sayyng
For what cause is it written, that man shall be judged, after the deeds that
he has done in his body, when we do se and know, that many things are done,
and committed in ye mind only, not by the body, nor by any member belonging
to the body, yea often time so great offenses, y^ they deserve most just
punyshme^t, as among other offenses (which I pass over) this one is
mencyoned: The unwise man said in his heart, there is no god? What now shall we
say to the words of the Apostel, which are (according to the works, which
he has done by his body, but that it is mente: after the deeds, which he
has done in the time of his body, while he was here in life, that by the
body, we should understand the time of the body. For, after the being once
of this body, no man shall be in it again, until the last resurrection,
which shall be, not to do any new meryts, but to receive according to the
old, reward and praise, if they were good, or punishmente, if they were
evil. In the mean time, between the forsaking of the body, and the rysyng up
thereof again, as they have done, during the time of their bodies, so their
souls, Of this sa^yeng, there ca^ be no purgatory proved.
are either at rest, or in pain.

Unto the time of the being of the body in earth alive, origynall sin is
referred, which, the Pelagyans do deny, but the church of Christ* does
confess it, that original sin, is either by ye grace of god pardoned, or not
pardoned, according to his judgment, that I say, infantes, by the merit of
regeneration, do depart from evil to well, or else by the merit of original
sin, they do go from evil to evil. This thing the catholyque faith,
knowledgeth to be true, wherein certain heretics do not agree with us. But
that a man should be judged, not only after the meryts, which he has done
in his body, but after, those which he had not done, butt might have
done, if he had lived longer in the body. I can not tell, how or which
way, they being so great wise men, as by your letters they should appear
to be, could think it, yea, I would not believe, that they wear of any such
mind, wear it notte not, ye I must needs believe y^ thing to be true, which
you do write, and certifye so to be. But I trust, god will teach them, and put
into their heads, that they shall se, as touching those sins, which are not
yet committed, if those same sins may be iustlye punished in the^, which at
not baptized, that by the grace of god, they may as well be forgeuen, in those
which are baptized. For who soever does say, that transgressions to com, which
are not done, may be punyshed by the judgment of god, and may not, by his
mercy be also forgeuen, let him consydre what great iniurye he does unto
god, and to his grace, in that he does say, that sins not committed, are in
the foreknowledge of god, to be ponyshed, but that it is not in his power to
forgive them.

If it be a great absurdity so for say, then is it expedyent, and necessary,
that infantes should be succored by baptyme, sith they do die, in their young
age, and should have been more greuouse offenders, if they had lived longer
time.

The.xiii. Chapter.
But, if so be theye do say unto me, that they which do repent, have
forgyuenes of their synn, and therefore those children do dye wtoute baptysm in
their young age, because they are in the foreknowledge of god, that they would
not repent if they should have had longer life, and those which are baptized,
and after their baptyme do die in their infancy, are also in the foreknowledge
of god, that if they had lived longer, they would have repented and been sorye
for their sin, let them take heed what they do say, and mark well, if it
be so, as they do say, Answe^^:
that thou original sin is not punyshed in them, which do dye without
baptyme, but those synns only, which they would have committed, if they had
longer space of life. And also let them perceive, y^ by their reason, those,
which are baptized, are not by the fountain of baptime washed, and cleansed,
from their original sin* but from those synns: which they would have
committed, if theye had lived any longer time. For till the time of more
perfection of years, they could not sin. But because god knew, that some,
would repent, and some would not, therefore some were baptized before they
dyed, This's the reason of the which say that (...) are saved* or codmened,
for that which god knw they would do if they had lived.
and then departed, and they which would not repent, departed without
baptyme. If the Pelagians hard this their reason, they would not stycke much,
to utterly deny original sin, and seek some other place of rest for
children, for somuche as they are persuaded, that they cannot have life
everlasting, which have not eaten the flesh, and dronken the blood of
Christ, and again because they are thus persuaded, that in them which have
no sin, baptyme is of none effect* which baptyme is given in the remyssyon
of sin. For, they would say, that there wear no orygynall sin at all,
but that infantes departing from this life, in their infancye, either are
baptized acacording to the good deeds, which theye would have done in longer
time, or not baptized acordinge to the euel deeds. And likewise they would say,
that after the same reason of meryttes, good or bad, they do eat and drynk
the flesh and blood of Christ, or other wise, without the which, no man can
have life eternal. They would say also, that young children are baptized in
the true remyssion of synn, although theye took no sin of Adam, because they
ar taught, that ye sins which infants would have done, (whereof god knew
they would have repentyd if they had lived) ar clensyd and taken away by
baptyme. After this fasshion they might easly handel the matter, and have the
victory, which do deny original syn to be in man, holding opinion, that the
grace of god is given non otherwise, but after out deserui^g. But, because the
works, (...) deeds, which are not yet done, are nothing at all, because they
are not done (as every man may easelye perceive) neither can the Pelagians
(much less the other) either say, or defend any such thing. Truly, it
greueth me very much, and more tha^ I can speak, to se that these men, which
most catholykely, do condemn the error of the pelagians, do not se, and
perceive that thing, which the pelagians them self do se, to be very false
and far from al reason. H.

CYprian wrote a book, He uses y^ test^mony of Cyp^ane, to prove that no man
is ponished for any thing that he has not (...) though (...) have done it, if
he had lived
of the mortality of man, which work is much set by, of them which have
al godly writings in estimation, and is almost in every man's hand, wherein
he says, that death is not only, not unprofitable, but very co^modiouse,
and profitable unto the faithful. because it does pluck and deliver them from
the peril and danger of sin, setting them in a security, and safenes for
to sin no more. But what does that profyt, if those sins, which a man
has not done, are punyshed (as they do say?) The said Cyprian says
furthermore very copyousely, and fruitefully* that in this life, there is
always peril and danger of sin, which after this life cease, and is no
more: And, that same his saying he proves by the testimony, taken out of the
book of wisdom, where it is thus written* (he is taken away, lest malice
should have altered his understanding.) Which testimoni being alleged of me,
you say they do make light as a thing written of no canonical writer, as
though, if the testimonye of this book were not at al, the thing it self,
which we would prove by this testimonye, were not clear, and manifest enough,
without it. For what christen man can deny, but that a just man is at rest, if
he be taken forth of this life, while he is just

Whosoever does say thus, that he is at rest, is there any man so mad that
would go against it?

Also if a man would say, if a just manne doothe fall from from the right
way, in the which he has long and many a day, By these questio^^ be proves
the sent^nce of the book of wisdom to be true: that death is profitable to
the good (...) perso^^. that so departi^g they should o^^end no more
continued, and so dies in that ungodliness, wherein he is fallen, wherein he
lived but one year, yea peradventure, but one day, that he so departinge,
does go to pain, dew for wickedness, and that his rightwysenes, which is
paste, wherein he lived (before he fell so long time, shall profit him nothing
at all, is there any faithful man, which can deny this open and manifest
verity? Furthermore, if a man would demand this question, saying, what and
he dyed, when he was just which^r should he find pain or rest, should I doubt
to make answer, and say, that he sh^ld find rest? This is altogether,
wherefore it was said, and written, He is taken away, lest malice should
corrupt, and alter his mind. This saying was spoken, concerning the peril, and
danger of this life, the prescyence of god is of things tha^ shall be an^ ^ot
of that which shall not be
and not touching the foreknolege of god, which foreknowledg does know before,
that thing, which shall be in deed, not that which shall not be. That is to
say, he knew, that he would give to him a short life, that he should be
taken away, not feeling any thing, what temptation is. It was not in his
prescyence, that he should sin, when he would not suffer him, to continue,
and to abide the temtacion of syn. For as touching this life, it is read in
the book of Job. Is not the life of man upon the earth, temtacion? But the cause
why it is given to some, to be taken forth of the perils of this life, while
they are just, and some, which are just, are suffered here to abydestyl, so
long, till they do fall from their ryghtewisenes, who does know the^ mind and
purpose of god? And yet by this we do know, that those just man which do live
in godlynes, and virtue, till they be very oulde men, ye, to the later day of
their life have no cause to rejoice, and be proud in their own merits, but in
the lord because that he, which took away the just man from this life, that
he should not live lenga^, and afterward fall, that same (I say) preserved
also the just man, till the very extremity and uttermost end of his years,
that malice should not alter, and turn his mind.

But, for what cause they did not cleave and stick ^aste unto him, which
might take the just man forth of this life before he does fall his judgments
are most rightwise, and likewise unsearchable.

Sith that these things are thus the sentence of the book of wisdom ought not
to be refused, Thus do they (...) did to Augustyn willing all thing to be
tried, by the doctors.
which has deserved to be read so long time in the church, and to be herd
with all godly veneration of all Christen men, both of the bishops, and of the
lay men, from the highest to the lowest. For truly, if I should prove, and
confirm this sentence of the book of wisdom, by the judgments of those,
which have been writers before my time, upon the holy scripture, which now
we are constrained to do, much more diligently, and copyousely, then we were
wont to do, against a new error of the Pelagians, defending, that the grace
of god, is not given after our merits, but that it is given frelye, to whom it
is given (for it is neither in the willer, Roma. 19.
nor in the runner, but in god, which take the pytye,) and compassion, and
that to whom it is not given, it is by the just iudgmente of god (for there is
none vnrightwysenes with god) If we do prove (I say) this sentence, and make
our defense good* by the authorities of the writers upon the holy scripture,
which have been long before us, then would these brethren (as ye do wryghte me
by your letters) be satisfied, pleased, and fu^l answered. But what need have
we to search their works, for that matter, which, before this heresye did
spring up, had no need to spend their time, and labor, in dyscussynge this
hard question, which thing without doubt they would have done, if they
had been constreyned thereto, as we are. And therefore, they did but briefly,
and ^ as it were) passing over, touch this matter in certain places of their
works, declaryng their judgment, and mind, as touching the grace of god,
and spente more time and matter about those things, which they dysputed
against other enemies of the church, and in their e^hortatio^s to virtue, how
men should live godly, that they might please God, and come to the true, and
eternal life. In their godly conuersatio^s and prayers, ye grace of god
apeared, what thing it was. For those things, which god commanded to be done,
should not be desired, and prayed for of god, except they should be given of
him to them that they might be done. But these persons, which would be
instructed, by the sentences, and wrytinges of doctors, I would have them
prefer this book of wysdom, wherein this saying is written (he is taken away,
lest malice should alter his mind) before all the doctors, Sap^. (...)
and writars, which have written, because they them self, which were next to
the time of the apostles, did prefer that same book before their own
judgments, which, I say, alledgynge that same book as wytnes, and as a
confirmation of their writi^ges, believed that they did allege nothing but the
heavenly testimonies of god. And truly it is manifest, that the right
virtuous, and godly man Cypryane, did dyspute in the commendation and praise
of the benefits, which do come by death, when he sayethe, they are taken from
the peryles of sin, which do make an end of this life, Cypriane would, have
us rejoice when we (...) sith
wherein they may, ye, and do commyt sin, so long as they are in it. In the
same book, S. Ciprian among other things, does say, wherefore (sith that thou
shall be with Christ, that we shall depart from mys^^y, and sin no more.
and art suer of the promise of the lord) do not thou receive, welcome, and
enbrace tha^kfully, that thou art called to come is Christ? Why art thou not
glad, that thou do go from the devil, and so to be out of his danger?

And, in another place he sayethe* Young children do escape the peril of the
slyppery and brykle age. And in another place also, he says: Wherefore do we
not haste us, and to me, that we might se our countreye, and salute our
parents?

There do a great number of our friends look for our coming, of our
parents, of our brethren, and of our children. Many there? are* which do
desire to have us with them, being on their own behalf certain, and sewer,
that they are out of all danger, and peril, being careful for us also.

With these, and such like words* that same doctoure, openly in the mids of
the church, does testifye, that the danger and peril of sin is to be
feared, until ^hende of this life, and leaving of this body, and after that,
not to be feared, that we shall suffer any such thing. Which thing, although
this doctor had not testified, what christian man would ever doubt thereof? How
should it not have been merueylous profitable to him, which had fallen, and
so ended his life myserably (Departing hens to the pains, which he has
deserved) if god had taken him out of this life, from these temtations, before
he had fallen, and tra^sgressed? And so this shall be sufficient, to end this
question, about the text of the book of wisdom ^he is taken away lest
malice should alter his mind) if any reasonable answer can serve them, and will
not be to contentiouse.

And beside that matter, the same book of wysedom, which has been so long
received and continued in the church, so many years, ought not the less to
be regarded, and set by, because it speakethe against them, whom humayne
meryts do deceive and beguyle, whicauseth them to go against the manifest grace
of god, which most of all does appear in children, which some of them (dienge
after they are baptized, and some before they come to baptyme) do declare
sufficiently, both the mercy, and judgment of god, that his mercy is given
freely, and his judgment is most dew, and right unto us. For if so be that
men should be judged after the merits, and deeds which they have not done, by
reason thet are prevented by death (which merits, and deeds they should have
had and done, if they had lengar lived) it should have been no profyt to him,
which is taken out of this life, that malice should not change and alter his
mind, and also it should have been nothing at all profitable to the wicked,
which do depart in their wickedness, yea though they had been taken away out
of this life, before they fell, and were wicked, which thing no christen man
would ever affirm or houlde:

Therefore these our brethren, which do labor, and take pain with us in the
defense of the catholic faith, impognynge the error of the Pelagians as we
do, should not bear so much with them, in this error, wherein they do think
that the grace of god, is given after our merits, that they should appear to
mi^ish, take away, or improve the authorite of this sentence, which is both
true, and right christian, that is, (he is taken away) etc. which thing the
Pelagians them self dare not do, and so affirm that, which we think no man
will not only believe, yea not so much, as once dream, that any man after his
death, should be judged, according to the deeds which he would have done,
if he had lived, annye longer time.

And so it is invincible, which we do say, and defend, that the grace of god
is not given after our meryts. wherefore I marvel such wise men would be
brought to speak such things, as are not to be hard, nor yet so much as
thought on.

The.xv. Chapter.
WHat goodlyer la^terne, or light of predestination, and of grace, ^^ym iii
can we have, than our savior him self: which is the mediator between god
and man, the man Christ Jesus? By what merits precedinge the grace of god,
either of works, or of faith, did the humayne nature which is in him: obtain
and get, that he was made, the man Christ Jesus, and mediatoure between god,
and man? I would fayn know with what merits, that man Christ deserved, that he
by ye word, which word is with the father coeternal, being assumpted into the
unite of person, was made the only son of god? Show me one good thing what
so ever it be, which went before this grace? What thing did he work before?
what did he believe before? what did he pray, and ask of his father before
this, that he might thereby, be so high exalted as he is, and so high, as no
man is able to speak? Was it not by the word, which did make, and receive
him, yt, yt man (from ye which time of his manhood, he begane to be the son
of god) was his only begotten son? Did not that woman, after she was
replenysshed, and filled with grace, conceive this only begotten son of god?
Was not this only begotten son, borne of the holy ghost, and of y^ vyrgin
Marye, not thorough any fleshly desire, but by the only gift of god? Was there
any thing to be doubled, and fearid of, lest that that man Christ, when he
should com to yers of dyscrecyon, would of his own fre will sin? Or do you
think therefore, that he had not fre will in him, or rather, that it was ^o
much the more in him, how much the more he could not be subject, and
servant to ^ynne? Truly, al these high and meruaylos exelent gifts, (which
do pass al man's reason) and al other, which are proper to him only, which no
man has but he, the humai^, yt is to ^ay, our nature, did receue. i^ him,
after a syngular fashion, without any of his merytts precedinge. Here let man
reason with god, (if he dare), and say unto him, wherefore do not and receue
these gifts, as well as he?

If so be this saying of the apostel, (O man, what art thou, which do reason
with god) will not pluck the in, ^oma, 9
and stey the, but rather make the to be more folyshe, that thou will say,
how do I here these words: (what art thou o man)? For So Much as I am that
thing, which I do here, that is to say, a man, as Christ is, wherefore the^, am
not I as he is? I do say to the, that grace, made him, such a man as he is,
and so great as he is.

But for what cause (thou wylt say unto me) is grace so dyffere^t, more and
greater in him, than in me, whereas is all one nature? Truly, God (thou will
say) is no acceptor of persons.

What christian man, yea what mad man, would speak these words yea think
any such thing. (...)
Let us therefore behold the fountayn of grace, in our head, whe^s, he does
power out the same, grace upon all his members, to every man, according to
measure. By the same grace, every man, whatsoever he be, ye, from the
beginning of his faith, is made a christian man, which grace did make that
man, from his beginning to be Christ. Of the same spirit, ^ The self same^is
the predestination of the saint (...) which was of christ, (...) b^ otherwise
predestined
that he was borne of, whosoever is a christian, is also regenerated, and borne
a new. By the self same spirit, we do obteyn remission of our sin, which
made him to be without sin.

God verelye knew before, that he would do all these things. That same
therefore is y^ predestination of saints, which does shine so clear above all
brightness in him, which is the holy one of all holy, which predestination no
man can deny, having the right knowledge, and understanding of the scryptures.
For we do se, that he him self, (which is the lord of glory) in that he was
made the son of god, was predestined.

The doctor of the gentiles, S. Paul in the beginning of his epistels, speaks
these words openly, saying. Paul, the servant of Jesus Christ, called to
the rome of Apostelship, put apart, to preach the gospel of god, which he
promised before, by his prophets, in the holy scriptures of his son, which
son, he made to him self, forth of the seed of Dauyd, after the flesh,
being predestined to be the son of god, with power, after the spirit, * he
proves by the testymonie of paul, that christ was predestined,
which sa^ctifieth, sinse the time that he did rise again from the dead.
Christ then was predestined, that he, which should be the son of David,
after the ^leshe, should be (that notwithsta^standing, the son of god, with
power, after the spyrit of sanctyfication, which is borne of the holy ghost and
of the virgin Mary. This man Christ, was after a meruaylous, and straung manner
begotten of god, by the word, that he should be the son of god, and the son of
man both together, the son of man, because of the manhod, which he took on
him, and the son of god, because god receuyd him, and made him to be his only
begotten son, that the number should not excede the number of three, of the.
number of thr. commethe this vocabl^^ (...)
which is the trynyte, to be believed on, of all men. That this humayne nature
was exalted so high, to be the only begotten son of god (nothing being in y^
world that can be greater, as there was nothing, more basse and low, whereto
the godhede might submytte it self, than to take upon him the nature of man,
susteininge, and beating the infyrmite of man, yea to the death of the cross,
all this was by the predestination of god. Wherefore, lykwys, as he only was
predestined of god to be our head, so we are many predestined, where now are
become our grease merits that we boa^te of so much. if we lost them in one
fore (...), Adam
that we should be his members.

Therefore, in this matter, let al humayne merytts be put aside, let them not
be spoken of. For when Adam fell, the merittes also of man decayed with him and
were lost. Let the grace of god bear reule and raygne, as it does, if christ
had of him left no meritt^s whereby he was made our sau^our out only (...) of
grace, then our merits ar (...)
through our lord Jesus Christ, which is the only begotton son of god our
lord.

Who so ever can find any merits in CHRIST our head, which did precede
this heavenly and singular generation, then let him seek also, in his
members, the merits, of the regeneration, of so many, as are regenerated, and
borne a new in Christ.

For that birth and generation was not given, nor rewarded to Christ, for any
of his merits, but frelye, it was given to him, that he should be pure, and
clean, from all manner of contagion, and bondage of syn, and be borne of the
holy ghost, and of the vyrgyn. Even so it was not given to us, for any of our
deseruinges, that we should be regenerated, and new borne out of the water,
and the spirit, but freely, by the grace of god. he touches (...) which
(...), that they have faith of the self.


And therefore, if faith did bring us, to the fountain of our regeneration, yet
we may not think, that there was any thing of our self first, which was
the cause thereof. For he did make us to believe in Christ, which made Christ,
for us, in whom we should believe. Yt is he, which works in men, both the
beginning, and endinge of our faith in Jesus, which did make man, to be the
head, and fore of our faith, Christ Jesus. So is he called by name, (as ye
know) in the epistell, which is to the Hebrewse.

The.xvi. chapter.
FOr god does call many, which are his children predestined, that he might
make them to be the members, of his only begotten son, which was
predestined, not with that manner of calling, as they were called, which
would not come to the marriage, For with that vocation were y^ Jews called, to
whom Christ crucyfyed is an effundicle, and a cause of sclander, and also the
gentyles, to whom Christ crucified is taken for folyshnes. But he does call
the^, which are predestined, with that vocation, which y^ Apostel speaks of
severally from the other making a dyfference between them, there ar two kinds of
(...)
saying, that he does preche Christ, to be the pour, and the wisdom of god,
to those Iewse, and greks, which are called. For thus he speaks, that he might
show to them. which are called, those which are not called, knowing yt there
is a certain vocation of them, which are called, after y^ purpose of god, who^
he knew before and predestined, to be like to the image of his son.

This vocation did he mean when he said. Not of works, roma, 9
but of him, which does call, it was said him, (that the elder should serve to
the younger.) Did he say (I pray you) Not of works, but of him, which
beleueth-Nay, he took this thing clean from man, that he might give
altogether unto god. And therefore, said he, but of y^ caller, and not that,
after every manner of vocation, but with that vocation, whereby he is made
faithful.

This vocation did he consider, when he said. The gifts, and calling of god,
are without repentance. For I would have you mark, and look well upon it,
what thing the Apostle, went then about when he spoke these words.

For when he said, I would not have you be ignorant brethren, in this secret,
least ye should stand in your own conceyttes, that that partly, blyndenes,
is happened unto Israel, so long, till the fulness of the gentyls be come in,
and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written* There shall come forth of
syon, he which does deliver, and which will turn away ungodliness, Esaye. 5
from Jacob. And this is my covenant with them, when I shall take away their
sins* And after these words, the Apostell said.

As concerning the gospel, they are enmyes for your sakes, but after
election, they are beloved, for their fathers sake. What is this to say (after
the euangell, they are enemies for your sake) but ye their envy, and malice,
wherewith they slew Christ (as we do read in the euangell) was without doubt
profitable, * be ^^^oundeth the saying of the a^^stel.
and good to you. And this thing the apostel said, that it came to pass, as it
did, by the dysposition, and order of god, which can make yea, the evil, to be
profitable, and also to do good. Not that the vessels of wrath, should do to
him any profitte, but according as he does well order them, they should be
profitable, and good to the vessels of mercy. What thing could be spoken,
more plainly, then ye which he said (according to the gospel, they are
enemies, for your sake) It is then in the power of the wicked for to sin (ye
will say unto me. (...) on with the answer.
) That they should sin, I say, and maliciously commit this thing, or that
thing, that is not in their own power, but in the power of him, which does
divide, and ordeyne the darkness at his pleasure, that thereby, whatsoever, they
do agenst the will of god, in that same y^ will also of god, is fulfilled. We do
read in the acts of the apostles, y^ after the Jews had sent the Apostles
away from them, he proves that the Jews did no more to christ than was
ordained of god, that he may make his answer good
and were come among their fellows, which were the rest of the dyscyples, and
had showed to them, what opprobrye, the prestes, and the eldars, had done, and
spoken to them, they did lift up their voice altogether with one consent of
mind, unto y^ lord, and said. Lord. thou art he, which have made heaven and
earth, the sea, and all that in them is, which by the mouth of our father Dauyd,
thy holy child have said: Wherefore have the gentyles raged, and studied for
vain things? The kings of the yerth have risen up, and the princes have
gathered their hedes together, agenst the lord, and against his Christ. For
hete truly in this city, Herod Pylat, and the people of Israel, have gone
into counsel, against thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anoincted, that they
should do so much, as thy hand, and counsel has predestined for to be done.
This is meante by that saying, which is (according to the euangell, they are
enmies for yoursake) For the hand, and counsel of god has predestined, yt the
wicked Jews should do so much, as was necessary for the gospel, to our health.
But what does the apostell say more? But as toching election (says he) they
are belouid for the fathers sake. Ar those enemies the^ elected, and beloved,
which in there wickednys and hatred, have perished, and yet still do peryshe,
being of ye same people and against Christ? Godforbyd? There is no man so
much a fool so to say. But yet, both these things, although they ar of them
self contracti, that is to be enmies, and to be beloved, and do do not serve
both for one manner of men, yet, both to be enemies, and to be beloved,
pertains to al one nation, being of the Jews, and to the carnal seed of
Israel, to some of them, that he should stumble, to some again, to the
blessyng of Israel. This sens, and understanding the apostell more plainly
opened before, where he says: Israel, obtained not that, which it did seek,
but election did obteyn it, al other are blinded, and yet in both of the^ is
the self same Israel. As touching the first part of that sayi^g: (Israel has
not obtained, or the rest are blinded) in that place, and for that place, you
must understand these words to serve, (they are enemies for your sake) and in
the other part, which is selection has obtained there must you understand,
(beloved for the fathers sakes, to the which fathers, these things are
promised. For the promyses, were made to Abraham, and to his sede. Hereby, is
the branch of the gentiles graffed into this olive tre^ Here must we have in
mind the election whereof he speaks saying, (according to grace, and not after
merytts) because the remnaunt is sauyd by ye election of grace. This election,
has obtained, the rest are blinded. After this election, the Israelytes at
beloved for the fathers sake, For they wet not called with that vocation
wherwyth they were, to who^ it was said (There at mani called, etc. but with
that vocation wherwt the elects were called. And for this cause, after he had
said these words, beloved for ^he fathers sakes, he spoke these words, which
is to our matter (the gifts, and vocation of god, are with out repentance,
(that is to say) they at firm and stable, without any mutation or change. Al
those, which dopertayne to this vocation, they are all taught of god. Nether
can any of the^ say, Still he touches their opinion.
I believed, because I would be called. The mercy of god, did prevent him, by the
which mercy he* was so called, that he should believe. For all those, which at
taught of god, do come to the father, for they have heard, and lernyd of the
father by the son, who does say plainly, al those which have heard and are
learned of my father, do come unto me. Ihon. vi.
Of those, none do perish. For all that my father has given to me, he will
leese thereof nothing. Therefore, who so ever is of this sort shall never
perish. For there can be none of them, that can perish. Therefore it is
written. They went forth from among us, but they were not of us. For if they
had been of us, Ihon. 2.
they had bydde still with us.

The.xvii. chapter.
LE^te us therefore understand this vocation, which does make the electes,
not yt theye are elected, because they believed, but that they are elected,
because that they might believe. This vocation, the lord him self does make
open, and plain, when he says: Ye have not el^cted and chosen me, but I have
elected you. For if they had been elected, because they believed, then did they
first elect, and chose god, by their belief in him, that so they might
deserve to be elected of him again. But that is clean: taken away, by this
sayenglye have not elected me, but I have elected you* And so they also did
choose him, when they believed in him. But for this cause only did he speak
these wori^des (Ye have not chosen me, but I have chose^ you because they have
not chosen him, that he should chose them again afterward, for he did chose
them first, because his mercy did prevent them, according to grace, and not
according, to meryt and reward. He did then chose them out of the world, what
time he was here in flesh, but they were also already, elected and chosen in
him self, yea, before the sou^dacion of the world.

This verity of predestination is not able to be moved, nor yet once styrred,
by any mean that can be thought. For what is that the apostell does say, (as
he has chosen us in him self, before the beginning of the world). Ephesians. 1.
This truly (if it was spoken and said, because god knew before, as they do
say) that they would believe in him, and not because he would make them for to
believe: agenst that manner of prescyence, and forknowlege, does the son of god
speak, saying: (Ye have not elected: and chosen me, but I have chose^ you)
for so much as by their reason, he should have had in his foreknowlege, that
they would chose him first: yt they might deserve to be elected, and chosen of
him again.

So y^ truth is, y^ they were elected before the foundation of the world by
that same predestination, in the which predestination, god knew before those
works, which he would do of his own self. And they were elected, out of the
world, by that vocation, wherewith god did perform that thing, which he
(...) before predestined. For whom he has predestined, them has he
called, with that same vocation, which is according to his purpose and
determination. Then has he called those, and none other. But who^ he has
predestined, them has he called, and none other. And again whom he has
thus called, them also has he justified, and none other* And whom he has
predestined: justified, and called, them has he glorified, in that same end,
which has no end. It does follow, that god has chosen the faithful: that
they might be faithful, not that they were faithful before they were chosen.
The apostel James does say (has not god chosen the^ poor in this world to
be rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to them,
which do love him? It does follow that by election he does make me^ rich in
faith, as well as heirs of his kingdom: And it is well and truly said* that
he does chose the^, because he has chosen them, that he might work his
election in them. I pray you what man hearing ye lord say: (ye have not
chosen me, but I have chosen you) durst be so bold to say, that men do believe,
because they might be chosen, when in deed they are chosen, that they might
believe, least they should (agenst the saying of Christ) be thought first to
elect and chose Christ, to whom Christ says, ye have not chosen me, Ihon. 15^
but I have chosen you.

The xviii Chapter
WHat man hearing the Apostell say, blessed is god the father of our lord Jesus
christ, which has blessed us with al heuenlye blessinge in spiritual things
in christ, as he has chose^ us in him self before y^ foundation of the world,
that we might be holy, and without spot in his sight in all love, predestening
us* in to the adoption of children, by christ Jesus in to him, according to the
pleasure of his will, in the which will he has accept^d us, in his welbelouyd
son, in whom we have redemption, through his blod, and forgiveness of our
sin, after the riches of his grace, which he has declared upon us
aboundauntly, according to his infynite wysdom, that he might show to us the
mystery of his will, acording to his good will, which he has pourposed in him
self, that it should be preached when the time was full com, that al things
should be accomplished in Christ, both the things, which at in heaven, and
also in earth, in him, in whom we have obtained, ye lot of enherytaunce, which are predestined after the purpose of his will, which does work al things after
the purpose of his own will, yt we may be to the praise of his glory. What man
hearing this diligently, and understanding it, durst doubt any thing of this
open veryte which we do defend? God did chose in christ, his members before the
beginning of the world, and how could he chose the^, which yet were not, but
by predesteni^g the^? He the^ did elect, and chose us predesteni^ge us. Would
he elect, and chose, those which are wicked and unclean? For if a question
should be asked, whyther he does chose those, which are wicked and unclean, or
the other which are holy, and without blame what answer would a man, make unto
it? Would he not answer, that the godly are elected and chosen? Upon this reason
does it follow (says Pelagia^) that he knew before who should be holy, and
cleanne, Pelagians objection
by the lyberte and fredo^ of there own will. And therefore he did elect and chose
them, before the beginning of the world, in that prescyence and forknowlege,
whereby he knew before, that they would be such. And so (says he) god did
predestinate them, before they were, whom he knew, would be immaculate and
holy. Then did he not make the^ to be holy. nor yet did he se before that he
would work any such holiness and purenys in them, but that only, did he se
before, that they would of them self be such as were holy. The answer to
pelagians objection
Let us now consider and wet y^ words of the Apostell, and let us se, whyther
he did elect and chose us before the beginning of the world, because he knew
yt we would of our own will be such, as ar holy and vertuose, or else, because
we might be made such by him.

Blessed (says he) is God the father of our lord Jesus Christ, which has
blessid us, with al spiritual blessing, in spiritual things, in Christ, as
he has chosen us in him self, before the beginning of the world, that we
might be holy and without blame. It was not then, because we should be holy
of our self, but because we might be made holy. For it is true and certain,
that therefore we should be such, because he has chosen us; predestenynge us,
that we might be made such by his grace.

So then has be blessed us, with his spiritual blessinge, in heavenly things,
in Christ Jesus, as he has chosen us, in him self, before the ground of the
world, that we might be holy and immaculate, in his sight, in love,
predesteninge us, into the adoption of children, by Christ Jesus in him self.

Also, mark what the apostle does say furthermore* concerning this matter
(after ye pleasure, says he, of his will), least in so great a benefyte of the
grace of God, we should take pride in the pleasure of our own will, in the
which grace, he has accepted us, in his beloved son, in the which will, he
has also accepted us. For this vocable or word, gratified, is deryued from
this word grace, as this word iustefied, from this vocable and word, justice.

In whom (fayeth the apostle) we have redemption, through his blood, and
forgiveness of our sin, after ye riches of his grace, which grace has been
abou^dantly poured upon us, according to his omnipotent wisdom, that he might
show to us the mystery, or secret of his will, according to his own good will
and pleasure.

In this mystery of his will, he laid and set up the riches of his grace
according to the goodwil of him self, not after our will, which in no wise
cann be good, except he after his good will does make yt good. But after the
Apostel had spoken these words (after his good will) he added these words
thereto (which will, he has pourposed in him) that is to say, in his
welbelouyd son, that it should be preached, when the time was full come, yt al
things should be gatheri^ together by Christ, which ate in heaven, and which
ate in yerthe, by him, by whom we have obtained then heritaunce, we, which were
predestined before, according to the purpose of him, which does work al
things, acording to the counsel of his own will that we might be to the land,
and praise of his glory.

It were to long to stond, and dispute upon every word hereof. For, I know well
ye do perceue, with how plain, and open words, the Apostel does defend this
grace, against the which grace, the merittes, and works of men, are extolled,
as though it were in man's power, to give to god some thing first as a present,
whereby he might deserve to be rewarded of him again. God has chosen us
therefore in Christ, before the beginning of the world, predestening us to be
his children by adoption, not because we would be holy and pure of our self but
because he has chosen and predestenid us, that we should be such. And this did
he work after y^ pleasure of his own will, that no man should have any cause
to rejoice of his own will, but of y^ will of god, toward him. This did he work
after the riches of his grace, according to his own good will, which will, he
pourposed in his well-beloved son, by who^ we have our enherytaunce which are
predesti^ed after the purpose, not of our self, but of hi^ which does work al
things, not so much, as the will of man exceptid, but it is wroght by him in
us. He does work it after the counsel of his will, that we may be made to
the praise of his glory. And therefore do we cry out, that no man should
rejoice in man, and so not in him self, but he which does rejoice, let him
rejoice in the lord, that we may laud and praise his glory. For he does
work after the porpose of his own will, y^ we should be holy and pure, to the
laud and praise of his glory, for the which thing he has called us,
predestenyng us before the beginning of the world.

Of this purpose of god, is this vocation, which is proper to the elects, to
whom al things are wrought to there commodite and profet, because after the
purpose of god, they are called holy. For the gifts and vocation of god, are
without repentance:

The xix Chapter
But these our brythren, for whose sakes, we do take this pain, ephese. (...)
do sai per aduentur, that the pelagyans are easy to be convynced, and brought
from their error, by the testimonye of the Apostell, where he does say, that we
are electyd in Christ, and predestined before the foundation of the world,
that we might be holy and pure in his light, in charity. For the pelagians do
think, (...)
that after we received the commandments, we a^e made puere and clean in his
syghte, by our own ste will, which thing, because god knew before (say
they) therefore he has electyd us, and predestenyd us before the beginning of
the world in Christ. Which is not according to the words of the apostel,
which says, (not because he had in his foreknowledge that we would be such,
but yt we might be such by the election of his grace, with the which, he has
accepted us, through his well-beloved son. Forsomuche then, as he has
predestened us, he knew before, his own work, which does make us holy, and
immaculate. And therefore, by this testimonye, the Pelagians error is
convinced. pelagians whole opinyon concernyng^ the grace of god


For, we do say (says Pelagian) that our God did no more, but know before,
that same says, whereby we do begin so believe, and then did he chose us, and
predestinate us, that we might be holy, and pure, by his grace, and help. But
let them mark a little better, the self same testimonye of the Apostell,
where he says, we have obtained the enheritance, we (I say) which are
predestyned, after the purpose of his will, which works al thing. Then does
he work in us, the self same, that we do believe, which does work al things.
For this vocation, (whereof it is written, the gifts, and calling of god, are
without repentance: Whereof it is written also, (not of works, but of the
caller when he might have said, but of the beleuer: And this also election,
which y^ lord did mean, when he said, ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you) this vocation I say, no not faith does precede or go^ before, but faith
is prevented of it. Ihon. 6.


For he did not chose us, because we do believe, but because we might believe,
that it should not be said, that we did first elect and chose him. And so we
should make Christ a liar, which said, ye have not cholen me, but I have chose^
you. Godforbyd we should think any such thing. And we at called, not because
we believed before, but we are called, that we might believe. And the self same
vocation, which is without repentance does perform, and work thoroughly in
us, that we do believe. What need me reply any more in this matter? We have
said enough thereof.

Fynalli, y^ apostel after these words, gave thanks to god, for them which
believed: not because the ghospel was declared unto them, but because they
beleuid. For he speaks after this wise (on who^, ye also believed after that ye
hard the word of the truth, namly the gospel of your salvation, wherein ye
believed, ye were sealyd with the holy spirit of promise, which is the pledge,
and earnest of our inheritance, to our redemption, that we might be his own,
to the praise of his glory. For this, I also (says he) after I hard of your
faith in Christ Jesus, and of your love to all the saynctes, do not cease,
geuynge thanks for you.

The faith of them, was yet, but young and tender, when they hard the euangell
preached unto them, of the which their faith, when the apostell had heard, he
gave thanks to God for them. If one man should give thanks to another for a
thing, which he thought or knew well that he could not perform. or do, it
might be named, a mock, or a scorn, better than a thanks geuynge. Let us
not brethren, Gala. 6.
in no wise be deceived: for God will not be mocked, nor skorned of us. For
faith, (ye y^ beginning thereof,) is the gift of god, or else the apostle
should have given thanks, and praise, to him* where he deserved none. What say
you to this? Was not the faith of the Thessalonians perceived, what time they
begann to believe: for the which the Apostell gave thanks unto God, These. 2,
saying. (Therefore do we give thanks to god without ceasynge, because when ye
heard the word of god preached and taught of us, ye received it not as the
word of man, but as it is in deed, as the word of god, which word does
work in you, which have believed.

What is it, that the Apostel gives thanks for? Truly, it were a folyshe,
and an ydell thing that he should give thanks to him, for that thing which
he did not. But because his thanks are not in vain, and ydell, treulye god to
whom he gave thanks, did work that deed, that after they had hard, and
perceived the word of god by the preaching of the Apostel, they should also
receive it, as the word of god, according as it does deserve, not as the
word of men.

Then it is god, which works in the hearts of men, (with that vocacyon,
which is after his purpose, whereof we have spoken so myche) that the word of
god should not be heard in vain, but after they had heard it, they should be
converted, and believe, receyuynge it, not as the word of man, but, according
to right, as the very word of god.

The.xx. Chapter.
THis also does certifye us, that the beginni^g of faith is the gift of god*
when the Apostel in the beginning of his epistle to the Colossia^s, colloss, 4
, meaning the very beginning of faith, spoke these words, saying: be steadfast
in prayer, watchynge therein, with thanks geuynge, and praying also for us, By
these words he meant that god would (...)
that god would open the door of the word. that we may speak the mystery of
Christ, for the which. I am also, now in bonds, that I may (I say)
manifest, and declare that same misterye, as I ought for to speak it.

How is the door of the word opened? But when the sense or understanding, of
the hearer is made open, that he might believe, and so the beginning of faith,
being made by god, he may also receive those things, which are preched, and
disputed, to the setting up, and furtheraunce of wholesome doctryn* least his
heart being shyt up, through infidelyte, and want of belief, he should disprove,
and cast from him, those things which are taught. For that cause, he does
say in the epistle to ye Corinthians. Corin 16.
I will abide at Ephesus, til the penthecost. For I have a great, and wide door,
made open unto me, and there are many adversaries. What other thing may be
meant, and understood by these words, but that, after he began to preach the
gospel in that place, many did believe, and many also there were, which were
aduersarys to that faith, acording to the words of the lord, No man does
comme to me, except it be given to him of mi father. And also, Ihon. 6.
the lord Jesus Christ says, (to you it is given to know the mysterys of the
kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. The doar then is made open, in
them, to whom it is given, and there were many aduersarys, among the^, to whom
it was not given. 2. Cor. 2
Also the same Apostell in the second epistel to the Corinthyans (when I was
com says he, to Troaoa to preche the gospel, and a doar was opened unto me
in the lord, I was not quiet in my spirit, because I did not find my brother
Titus, but taking my leave of them, I departed thens to Macedonia. Of whom did
he he take his leave, but of them which did believe, in whose hearts the doar
was made open to him, preching the gospel. But what he said more I would ye
should mark, (Thanks be to the lord, says he, which makethe us tryumphe and
to have the victory in Christ, and openythe the savor of his knowledge by us
in all places. For we are to god the good savor of christ in those which are
saved, yea and also among them which peryshe. To these, we are the sauore of
death unto death, but to the other, we are the savor of life unto life. Behold
for what cause this fearce warriar, and mighty defender of grace, being in
vincyble, does give thanks. Because (says he) the Apostels ar the swette
savor of Jesus Christ unto god, both in them, which are saved by his grace,
and in them, which do perish by his judgment, and most rightwise justice.

But, that they which do not understand these things, should not be offendyd,
he doothe warn them thereof, As though he had said no man is mete thereto of
him self
when he says, who is meet thereto?

Yet let us return to the opening of the doar, whereby, the apostel did sygnifie
the beginning of y^ faith of the hearers. For what does he mean, when he
says, (prayeng also for us, that god may open to us the doer of the word)
but a plain and an open demonstration, that y^ very beginning of faith, The
prayer of a thing does argue and prouer^ the gift of the thing prayed for
is the gift of god. For it should not be desired of him by prayer, and
petition, except they believed, that it were the gift of him. This gift of the
heavenly grace, ^cius 16
descended down into the woman, which sold purple, to whom as the scripture
does say, in the acts of the apostels, God had opened her sense, and
understanding, and so she did harken dilygently, to the preaching of the
Apostell. For so was she called, that she might believe. God verily does work
what him pleseth in the hearts of men, either by his merciful help, or by his
rightewyse judgment, that by them, all should be fulfilled, which, his hand
and counsel, has predestined for to be done.

Therefore, they speak unwisely, where as they do say, that, that thing does
not serve for this matter, which we have sufficientlye proved by the
scriptures, taken out of the book of the kings, and of the cronicles, that
when god will have a thing to be done, which must be done by the will of
men, there hearts are first inclyned and made for to will that same thing (god
being the inclinar, the motioner and styrrar thereto, god worke^ both y^ will and
the ded^ of y^ will
which after a maruaylous, and unspeakable manner, does also work, yea that
same which we do will in us). But what they do mean, by that they do speak
nothing thereof, and yet are against it, I cannot tell, except they have
declared unto you some reason, wherefore they should so think whose saying, you
had rather let pass, then to open it by writing. Or peraduentur, because we
said, that god did work in the hearts of men, bringing the wylls of the^,
whom him pleasyd, to this, that Saul or Dauyd should be made king: Did they
therefore think that this served not for the purpose, which we do treat of,
bycaus this temporal kingdom, here in this world is on thing, As though god
does rule the heart of men in wordly matters and not in heavenly.
and for to ^eynge with god for ever, is an other?

Or do they think that god does inclyne, move or styrte, the wylles of them,
whom him pleasethe, to the creatynge, and setting up of earthly princes, and
not to the obteynynge of the heavenly kyngedom? But I do think: that these
sayings of the scripture, where it is written (Inclyne mine heart to thy
testymonyes) and that saying, (the steps and goings of men, are governed of
god, and he shall will his wey) and also, The will is prepared of the lord. And
this also, (Let the lord be with us, as he was with our fathers, let him not
relinquyshe and forsake us nor yet torn us away from him, but let him
inclyene and bend our hearts to him, that we may^ walk in all his ways.
Yet, there is another saying of the scriptur: (I will give to them an heart
to know me, and ears to hear with.) Again (I will give to them another
heart, and a new spirit I will give to them. Let them hear this also, (I will
give my spirit in you, and I will make, that ye shall walk in my justification,
and rightwisnes, and to observe, and keep my judgments, and decrees. And this
saying (god does govern and rule the steps of man, how can a mortal man know
his own ways?) Again, (Every man does think him self just, and ryghtwyse,
but god does govern the hearts. Let them here this saying, (They believed, as
mani as were ordained to life everlasting.

These sayings I do think, were spoken concerning the kingdom of heaven, and
not the erthly kyndom of this world. Therefore let them give ear unto these
sainges of the scriptures, and to al other, which I have not rehearsed, by the
which we are taught, that god does prepare, and convert the wylls ^of men unto
the kingdom of heaven, and to eternal life, as well as to the kingdom of this
world. I pray you mark and consider with your self, what manner a thing
that is, which they do say, that we should believe that god does work the
wyls of men, about the establishi^g of worldly kingdoms, but as toching the
way to come to the kingdom of heaven, that men therein do work there own wylls.

We have spoken many words, and fewar had bin (peraduentur) sufficient to have
persuaded this matter, but we do speak unto good wits, as though they were
dull, to whom, yea that, which in deed is more than enough, is not enough.

The.xxi. Chapter.
But we desire the^ for this time, to hold us excused. For a new moved
question did drive us thereto, because that we (in our formarbokes sufficiently
prouyng, that faith is the gift of god) there was a new matter against that
invented, for the proof whereof, those men, brought the self same
testimonies agenst us for them, which we had for our proof, whereby they
would show, yt the increase of faith is the gift of god, but the beginning
thereof, (which is, when we do first believe in Christ), is of man him self,
and not the gift of god, Here (...) the opinion, of the contrary past^
saying, that god would have us to take all other good things, following this
beginning of faith to be the gift of god, given to us for our deseruynge,
because we did first believe, and that we received no good thing, as a free
gift, of god. And yet for all their saying, in those same gifts, the grace
of god is only taught and preached, which is no grace, except it be freely
given.

The which thing, how great absurdity it does conteyne in it, ye do openly
se, and perceive. For the which cause, we have been as diligent, as we might
be, to show, that the beginning of faith, as well as thencrease thereof, is the
gift of god. And although we have been long in doing thereof, more prolyxe
and lengar, than they would, for whose sake we took the pain, yet, ar we
content to be rebuked and il spoken by of them, therefore, so that at the last,
they for our greater labor than thank, bei^ge made werye, with reding thereof
(which do understand, and perceue the matter well enough) do confess and
grant that we have performed, that thing which we pourposed, that is to say,
that we have taught the beginning of faith, as well as al other virtues, as
chastity, justice patience, and godly lou^ (in the which they do agree with us)
to be the gift of god. Therefore let us make an end of this work, lest the
prolixite and bygnes thereof, should offend, and be tediose to the redare.

Here ends the first book of saint Augustine of the predestination of saints.
The second book of S. Augustine, entitled, of ye godly continuance in
goodness to the end, wherein he proves, that all, and every part, of the
life, which is good, is the gift of god, as well as the beginning thereof.
The first Chapter.
NOw with some what more diligence, must we handell, and dispute this matter
of perseueraunce. For in the first book, wherein we disputed of the beginning of
faith, we touched this thing somewhat. Therefore, our assertion is, now, that
the virtue, called perseueraunce (whereby we do continue in Christ, till the
end) is the gift of god. Perseuera^ce to the end is the gift of god.
I do mean that same end, which is, when this life cease in us, in the
which end, is all the great danger, and peril, lest then we should fall.
And so, as long as man is in this life, till that time, whether he has
received this gift of contynuynge to the end, yea or nay, no man (what so
ever he be) can tell. For if he falls, before he leaves this life, we do
say, that he has not perseuered, and continued to the end in goodness. And
that is very true. What man ^oth perse^er to thend
For by what reason can we say, that he either received, or had the gift of
perseuerau^ce, which has not perseuered? For, if so ^e, a man has now y^
virtue of co^tinencye, or chastity in him, and afterward falls from it,
becommynge incontinent, and unchaste, and lykwise, if he had ons these virtues,
as justice, equity, and patience in him, yea and faith it self also, and then
falls again from those virtuous, he may be well said that he had those
virtuous, before he fell from them, but not now For he was chaste, just,
pacient, and faithful, so long as he had those virtues. But, after he ceased
to be that he was, he is not that same he was before. But he, which has not
perseuered, and ben steadfast: how can you say, that he did persevere and was
steadfast, for so much as by his perseueraunce, and stedfastnes, every man is
declared to be steadfast: which thing is not declared nor spoken of him, which
does not stand still and abide in that virtue, which he once had:

But to avoid this objection, that may be laid against us, as if they would
ask this question, and say: if a man, from the time that he began first to
be faithful, did live as for example^ the space of.x years, Objection.
and in the mids of those ten years, did fall from the faith, shall we not
say, that he did persevere, and was steadfast for ye space of five years, wherein
he was faithful? Aunsuere
I will not contend about ye word, whither that same ought to be called
perseueraunce, during ye time, when he, did continue faithful, or nay. But
as touching ye same perseueraunce, whereof we do speak and treat, wherein we
do continue, beleuynge in Christ, ye till the end, that man in no wise can
be said, that he ever had it, which does not persevere, and continue to
the end. But that man rather should be called steadfast, which has lived but
one year faithful, yea and as much less time, as thou wylt, so that when he
left this life, he lived and ended in faith, rather (I say) than that man,
which lived faithful, many years, and before his death, did fall from it,
though the time of his fall before his death, was never so small.

The second Chapter.
THis being granted, let us se, whither this perseuerau^ce or stedfastnes
(whereof it is written, Matheu. x.
he which continues to the end, shall be saved) be the gift of god, or nay.
If it be not the gift of god, how can the words of the Apostel be true, where
he says, it is given to you for christ's sake, that ye shall not only believe
in him, Philip. 1.
but also that ye shall suffer for him, Of the which saying the first part
perteneth to the beginning of faith, the latter part, to the end of the same
faith. And yet both of these two parts, as well the beginning as the ending,
at the gifts of god. For he says, that both are given to us, (as we have
rehearsed before) For, what better beginning can a christian man have than to
believe in Christ? What better end, than to suffer for Christ? But as toching
the faith or belefe in christ, whereas they devised an objection, whereby they
would prove, that the beginning of faith was not ye gift of god, but thencrease
only of y^ said faith, we trust in the lord, y^ it is sufficyentli answered to,
of us in the first book. But what can they say, why perseueraunce or
stedfastnes to the end, should not be the gift of Christ to that man, which
has receuyd the gift to suffer for Christ, or (to speak more plainly) to
whom it is given to dye for Christ? For Peter, declaring this also to be ye
gift of god, does say, It is better for us doing well, i. Peter. (...)
for to suffer (if it be the will of the lord) than doing evil. When the
Apostel does say, if it be the will of the lord, he does show, that it is
given from god above to al seinets, He makes an objection, proving that in all
me^, perseverance is the gift of God
that they shall suffer for Christ. And theye whom Christ will have com to
the experyence, and glory of sufferinge, can not those but comme to the
kingdom of god if theye do persevere, and be steadfast in Christ to the end.
But what man can say, that this perseuerannce, and stedfastnes, is not given to
those men, which by sycknes of the body, or some other way, do depart, forth
of this life, in Christ, when it is given to those men, much more hardly, and
straightly which do suffer death for Christ? Those men do much more hardelye
persevere, The gift of perseuera^ce is given to some more easelye then to some,
to some, with persecution, to some without persecution.
and continue, to the end, when they are persecuted because they should be
turned, and brought from their stedfastnes. And therefore, they do stand
fast, yea unto death, that they may be found steadfast. Therefore to the other
it is given after a more easy fashion: tha^ unto these, which are thus
persecuted.

But to whom nothing is hard nor impossible, it is light and easy to give it,
as easily to the one, as to the other, that it shall not appear and more
straight thing to y^ one, tha^ to the other* By the promise of god he prouethe
that stedfastnes is the gift of God*
For god promised this stedfastnes, when he said, I will give my fear into
their hearts, yt they may not go from me. By the which words, what is else
to be meant, but that the fear of me shall be such, and so great in them,
which I will give into their hearts that they shall steadfastly cleave unto me.
But for what cause is this stedfastnes prayed for of god, if he be not the
gyuer thereof? Is not this a petition to mock god with all, when that a thing
is asked of him, which thing, they do know he does not give, but is thought
to be in man's own power to have it, without the gift of god, of him self? And
this is none otherwise, but even like, as they do, which do thank him for that
thing, which he* did nether give nor work.

But as I said in mine other book, so do I say, her again, begyle no^ your
selfs (says ye apostle) god will not be mockid. O man, god is a witness, not
only of those words, which y^ speak, but also of thy cogytacions and
thoughts. If you do ask any thing of so rych a lord (and yt in faith) believe
that thou do receue it of hi^ of whom thou do ask y^ thing* wherefore thou
prayest. Honor thou him, not with thy lyppes, extollinge thy self in thy heart
above him, and beleui^g that thou have of th^^ own self, that thing which
thou would seem to ask of him. Do we not pray unto him to have this
perseverance given to us? He y^ does deny that, needs not to be convinced and
ouercom with my disputation, but to be prayed for, that he may be revoked from
this error, by the good prayers of the saints. Is there any of the godly,
which do not de^ice i^ there petition, y^ they may persevere, and continue
steadfast in him when they say the lords prayer (which is so called, because ye
lord made it) where in, almost, nothing else is understood to be prayed for of
the^, but that they may persevere, He exhorts men, to the readinge of the
exposition of Cyprian, upon the lords prayer.
and be steadfast? I would therefore have you read sometime therpositio^, which ye
holy martyr Cipria^, did make upon ye prayer in his book entitled (of the
lords prayer) and se how many years before, how great and strong a medecyn was
prepared agenst this foul, and poysonos heresy of ye pelagia^s, whose time and
being, The three capital hereseis of the pelagians contrary to these godly
opynyons, defended of the church.
was long after. For there are.iii. points above al other which ye catholic
church does defend agenst the^. One point is, that the grace of god is not
given after our merits (for those same our merits, and good works are also the
gift of god, and by the only grace of god do the just men receive al there
merytts. The second poi^t is that no man (be he never so just) does live
without sin in this corruptible body. The third is, that man is borne in the
syn of the first man fast bound with the bond of damnation, except that same
offense which he has by his first birth, be losed and taken away, by the
new birth of regeneration. Of this last point, the holy father Cipria^ did not
treat in his book. But of the twane first points, he does so plainly and
openly dispute, that these new heretics, enemis to the grace of Christ, were
confounded many years before they were born. Therefore among the merytes of the
saints, which ar no merytes if they be not the gift of God, he names this
perseueraunce for to be, speking after this manner. We do say (says Cyprian)
on this wise. Let thy name be hallowed, not, Hallowed b^ thy name*
that we do wyshe or pray for god, that he might be sanctified by our
prayars, but that we do ask and desire of him that his name may be sanctified
in us. Who the^ does sanctefie god, which does sanctify, and is only the
sanctifiar, But because he said, He prove the that we do pray for
perseueraunce is in the first^ petition of the lords prayer.
be ye holy, for I am holy, we do ask and pray for that thing, that we being
sanctified in baptyme, may persevere and continewe still in that which we have
begone. And a lyghtell after, dysputing that same matter, and teaching us to call
upon god for stedfastnes (which we should do nether well, nor justly, if it were
not his gift we do (says he) pray, that this same sanctification and holiness
may abied in us* And because our lord* and judge does command us, yea and
lykwise thretenid him, whom he healed, and restored to life* that he should
offend no more, lest some worse thing should happen to him* therefore do we make
this petition in our continual prayers, we do daily, and nightly ask for
this, that that same sanctification, and holiness of life, which is received of
y^ grace of god, may be preserved, and kept in us, by his protection, and
defense. This doctor, ye may se does understand in this petition, that we do
pray for perseverance and stedfastnes in our sanctification (that is to say)
that we may persevere, and continue in the sanctification and holiness, wherefore
do we ask of god that thing which we have rece^^^.
which we have received, when we being sanctified do say, let thy name be
sanctified. For what other thing do we mean, when we do ask that thing which
we have received, but yt he would grant to us, that we do not lose y^ thing
which we have receaued^ Even so, as he, which is holy, does in his petition
pray, that he may so continue, so likewise, the chaste the just, the
virtuous, and godly person, and such other (which v^rtues, we do defend
agenst the Pelagians, to be the gifts of god) when they do pray, they do
ask these things without doubt, that they may continue still in that same
goodness, which they do knowelege, that they have received. And if they do
receive those gifts, for so ^he they do also receue the gift of
perseuera^nce, Let thy kingdom come*
which is y^ great gy^t af god by the which all other gifts are preserved and
kept. Also when we do say, Let thy kingdom come, do we ask and desire any
other thing, than that yt kingdom may com unto us, perseue^^^ in the second
petition*
which we do know certainlye shall come to all those which are sanctyfied?
Those persons then, which are already sanctyfied, what do they else desire in
there petition, but that they may continue in that holiness, which is given to
them? Otherwise the kingdom of god, shall not com unto them. For we are
certain that it shall com to non, but to them which do contynew to the end

The iii Chapter
THe third petition is, Let thy will be done
let thy will be done, in heaven, and in earth, or as it is read in certain
books, and commonly used of them, which do pray (as it is in heaven, so also
in earth). Which petition diverse do understand after this fashion^ as the
angels do work thy will so let us work thy will) But this godly doctor, and
martyr Cyprian, will have, What is me^t by these uocables, heaven and earth.
that by these words, (heaven and earth) should be meant and vnderstonded the
spirit, and the flesh. And that our prayer is, that both our spirit and our
flesh, may agree and go together, in workinge the will of god. And beside this
sens, and understanding, he perceuid an other meaning, right agreeable, and
consonant to our faith, whereof we spoke before, that by these words, the
faithful men do pray for the vnfeythful, which are but earth, bearing about
them no thing else, but the yearthly man, of there first natiuite and berth,
which faythfu men, are worthily (forsomuche as they are endued and cled with
the heavenly man) named, and called by this word, heaven. In ye which his
words, he does show euydently, and plai^ly, that y^ beginning of faith, is the
gift of god, sith that the holy church does pray, not only for the
faithful, that their faith may be increased, and he made firm and steadfast
in them, but also for the unfaithful, that they may begin to have the same
faith, which they have not, yea, which do bear most enuyouse, and hateful
hearts age^ste it. But now, we do not dispute of the beginning of faith,
whereof we have largely spoken in the first book, but of that perseueraunce,
and stedfastnes, which we must have continuing to the^d, for the which: the
sanctified persons, those, I say which do the will of god, do make their
petition, and say in their prayer: Perseuera^ce (...) prayed for of god in our
third petition
Thy will be done. For sithe the will of god is done in them already, wherefore
do they pray for it, but that they should persevere, and continue to be as they
have bego^^ and so to abide in that godly purpose to the end. And yet it may
here be said, yt the saints do not pray yt the will of god, should be
fullfylled in heaven, ou^ that it may be done in earth, as it is in heaven,
that is to say, in earth, that the earth may follow heaven, which is as much
to say, as, that man may follow the angels, Another (...) and understa^ding
of the third petition
or: that the unfaithful, may follow the faithful. And so, by this reason, the
saints do in this place pray, that, that thing may be which is not yet done,
not that the thing, which is done may continue. For, although men at never so
holy, yet are they not equal with the angels of god, and therefore the will of
god is not done in the^, as it is in heaven. If it be so, the^ truly: where as we
do pray, that the unfaithful may be made faithful, we do not in y^ petition,
pray for perseverance, but for that which is the beginning thereof. But when we
do desire, and pray, that men might be made equal, and like to angels in
doing the will of god, then do we desire, and pray for perseverance, and
stedfastnes. For no man does come to that high bless, which is in heaven,
except he continues to the end, in that holiness, which he received in earth.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THe fourth petition is: The fourth petition, in the Which perseuera^ce is
desired of god.
Give us this day, our daily bread. In this petition, the blessed man Cyprian
does show, that perseverance and stedfastnes, is vnderstonded to be asked, and
prayed for, to be had of god. For among other words, the holy man Cyprian,
speaks these following: We do pray (says he) that this bread, Ciprian
calls this sacrament, by the name of bread, of thanks geuynge, and of the
body of Christ.
may be given every day unto us ^lest that we, which are in Christ, and do
receive daily, the sacrament of thanks geuynge, for our helthfull food,
through some grievous offense, which we should commit, between the times of the
receiuinge thereof, should worthily and justly for the said offense deserve to
be seprated and put from the body of Christ. These words of this holy man, do
declare, that the saynctes of god, do pray to god, for perseueraunce and
stedfastnes, when they do pray, saying, (give to us this day, our daily bread)
yt they should not be separated from the body of Christ, but y^ they may
continue still in such holiness, as they should not commit any crime, for y^ which
they should deserve, to be separated, and put from it.

The v Chapter
IN the fyfte part, Forgive us (...) ^respa^^e*
or peticion of this prayer, we do say, forgive to us our trespasses, as we do
forgive them, which have trespassed against us. And in this place only of y^
prayer, stedfastnis is not called and prayed for, as it is in the other parts
thereof. For we do here ask pardon, for those syns, which are paste. But
stedfastnes, which does save us for ever, seruythe for the whole time of this
life, not y^ which is past, but for y^, which is to com and abides to ye end.
Here again it is a wonderos matter to se, and worthy to be noted, how in this
petition, those heretics, which did spring and roye up long time after, were
at that time by the tongue of Ciprian, Pelagians ^e^resye that a just man may be
without^ ut (...) world and that of such con^^teth the chu^che of Christ here
in ear^^
as it were with a weipon of invincible verite confounded, and overcome. For
the pelagians are so bold, that they do hold opinion, affyrmyng, that a just
man does commit no sin in this life, and that of such men now at this present
time is the church, which has nether spot nor wrinkel, nor any such like
deformite, which church only is the spouse of Christ. As though that church,
were not the spouse of Christ: which through all the world: does pray, as
they were taught of him, which said, forgive us our trespasses. But mark well
after what fashion this holy man Cypria^ does thrust the^ down and (as it were)
sleye them with the weapon of the verytie. For in thee said his exposition upon
the lords prayer, among other words which he did speak upon this part,
said these words. Now necessarily, how warely, and how health fully, are we
admonished and taught that we are sinners, by the which admonition, we are
constrained to pray for our sins, that while the pardon and forgiveness of
those sins is asked, and prayed for of god, the mind of us does call to
remembrance our own conscience, that no man should make of him self, as though
he were innocent, and so in extollyng him self, should perysh more damnably. We
are also instructed, and taught that we do daily offend, and syn, forsomich
as we are commanded to call every day for pardon and forgyuenes of our sins.
Of the which mind was Ihon i^ his epistel, when he said: It we will say y^ we
have no sin, we deceue our selfs, and the verite is not in us, and so forth
which were to long to be rehersid*

The vi. Chapter.
BUt now, when the saynctes do pray saying (bring us not into temtatio^ but
deliver us from evil) what thing do they else pray for, Bring us no^ into
te^ptati^^
but that they should persevere, and contynewe in holiness? For truly after they
have this gift of god granted unto them (which must needs be the gift of god,
forsomuche as it is asked, and prayde for to be had at his hands) after I say,
they have this gift that they shall not be sed into temtation, granted unto
them, then there is non of them which have it, but have this perseverance, and
stedfastnes of holiness, yea to the end. For no man does cease from the the
purpose of christian godliness, or from the holiness which a Christen man ought
for to have, except he be first brought into temtation. If then this petition
be granted unto him, that he should not be brought into temtation, he does
then persiste and continue still by the gift of god, in that same holiness,
which he receued of the gift of god.

But these our brethren (as we do perceue, by your writing) would not have, that
this stedfastnes, and perseverance, should be so preached and taught, that it
should be obtained and got by humble petition, and also that we should not say
that when a man has it, he cannot stoberneli lose it, when be would. Wherein
the^ to not mark well what they say. For we do speak of that perseueance and
stedfastnes, which does continewe to the end. If it does not continwe to
the end, then is it not that stedfastnes, A man can not stobernly cast away
and le^se the gift of perseueraunce after he has once received tho gift
whereof we do speak: then it is not given unto them, as we have sufficie^tli
spoken before. Therefore let no man say that he has stedfastnes and
perseverance given unto him, till the end does com, when he, to whom it is
given, is found that he has been steadfast in deed. We do say, and call him a
chaste man, whom we do know at that present to be chaste, whither he does
persyst and continewe still in that virtue or nay.

And lykwyse, if he has any other godly virtue, which may be kept still or
lost we do say, that he has the same gift so long, as he has it: but after y^
he has lost it, the^ do we say that he had such a gift. But perseverance and
stedfastnes to y^ end, because no man has, but he which does continue to to
the end, mani a man may have it, but no man after he has it, can lease it.
Nether shall any man need to fear, lest when he does continue to the end, any
evil or noughti will should rise in him whereby he should not be steadfast to the
end.

Therefore this gift of god may be obtained and got by humble, and lowly
petition, but after it is granted, it can not be lost again by any ^tobernes.
For when a man has continuyd to the end, nether can he lease this gift
nor yet those gifts, which he might have lost before the end. For how can y^
thing be lost, which does preserve, and kep from losing, that which may, be
lost.

But lest peradventure, they will say unto me, yea and grant, that
perseuerannce, and stedfastnes to the end, can not be lost, after it is ons
given, that is to say, when they have continued to the end, but that then it
is (as it were) lost, Objection.
when a man proudly, and stobernly does work, that he might not come thereto,
after the manner of our speaking, when we say, that he which has not
continued to the end, has lost the life of everlasting bless, not because
he had once received that same life already, and afterward has lost it
again, but because he should have received and had it, if he had continued to
the end. Answer.
Let us take away these contentions, and brablinges, which are about bare,
and naked words, and grant that a thing may be lost, which is not had, but
is in good hop and trust to be had. Let any man (what so ever he be) tell me,
whyther god is not able to give that gift, which he commanded to be asked, and
called for of him? He which would say, that he were not able, I would not say
that he were unwise, but I would abide by it, that he were mad: But god did
command his saints to say in there prayer, Math. vi.
led us not into temptation. Therefore who soever does obtain his petition in
that behalf of god, The temptation of ^^o^ernes.
he is not led into temptation of contumacye or ^^obernes, whereby he should
deserve to lease the gift of continuance in holiness.

But yet* Objection.
thou will say to me, Who so ever forsakes god, does forsake him with his own
will, that he may deserve worthily to be for sake^ of god again. What man will
deny y^ to be true? Answer.
And for ye cause do we ask, and desire of god, that we should not be
brought in to temptation, lest we should by our own forsaking of god,
deserve to be forsaken of him again. For there is nothing don, but either he
does it, or he suffers it too be done.

Then is he able to torn the wills of men, from evil to good, and to
convert them, which are ready to fall, and to set them in that way,
which pleases him to whom it is not spooken in vain, psalm. lxxxii^^^.
when we do say: O LORD, when thou dooeste converte us, thou gyueste us
life And again, psalmus. lx^^
give not my foot to move forth of the way:

And also, (deliver me not o lord from my desire to the sinner. And finally to
pass al other testimonies, which we might rehearse, this saying is not spoken
in vain, when we do say: Led us not into temptation. For whosoever is not led
into temptation, forsooth he is not brought into the temtation of his own evil
will. And he, which is not brought into the temptation of his own noughty
will, is brought into non at all. For every man is tempted, as it is written,
being en^ysed, and abstract from godlynes by his own concupiscence, God
te^pteth^ no man to hurt him.
and noughty lust. For god does tempte no man, with any temptation, that shall
hurt him. Two kynds of te^ptatio^^.
For there is a temptacion, which is profitable, when we are not deceived and
overcome with temptation, but proved only, as it is writ, prove me (o god) and
tempt me. Thecfore, that same temptacion, which the apostle does mean, when
he does say, To be temptyd, and to be brought i^ to temptation ar different
(least peradventure he should tempt you, which is the tempter, and then ye
should labor in vain) that same I say is an unprofitable temptation, ye and
an hurtefull unto you.

For god does tempt no man, as I have said (that is to say) he endu^eth nor
leads any man into temptation. For, a man to be tempted, and not to be
brought into temptation is none evil thing, yea it is good and proffitable.
For that is as much as to be proved. Therefore when we do say to god (Led us
not into temptation) what other thing do we say, than suffer us not to be
brought into temptation? And with those words, many use to make their prayer,
when they do pray, as it is written in many books ^suffer us not to be led
into temptation. And so does holy Cyprian wryght it. But after the ghospel, as
it is written in the greek toonge, we do not find in any place, any otherwise,
than, led us not into temptation. And therefore we do live more surely and
without danger, if we do ascrybe, and give all the whole unto god, not gyuinge
part to him, and reseruinge part to our self, as this reverent and godly
martyr did well perceive. For when he did expound that same part of the lords
prayer, Cypriane.
after other words, which he spoke, he said these folowinge. But when we do
pray, (says he) that we may not com in to temptation, we are put in mind of
our infyrmite and weaknys in that we do make that petition because that no man
should sullenly, and proudly extol him self, that no man should vendicat and
chaling any thing unto him self, arogantly that no man (I say) should say,
when he confesses gods truth and suffers for Christ, that it is and commythe
of him self, forsomuche as the lord him self teachinge us humylyte, does
say, (watch and pray, lest ye do com in to temtation, Mathe. xxv^^
the spirit truly, is ready, but the flesh is weak) that, when an homble, and
a lowly confession does go before gyinge the whole praise of al things to god
what so ever (I say) we do ask of him humbelye with fear, might by his
goodnys, be performed unto us

The.vii. Chapter:
Therefore, if there were none other thing, wherebye we might be instructed: this
prayer of the lord oneli were sufficient, for the matter of grace, which we
have taken upon us to defend. For this prayer, I say, does leave nothing unto
us, wherein, as in that, which is our own, we should rejoice, and be proud.
For it does teach us* that it must be given to us of god that we do not go,
and depart from him, when it teaches us, that we must ask and pray for it
of god. For he which is not brought into temptation, does not depart from
god. This thing in no wise can be in the power and strength of fre will:
Agenst fre will.
such is the weakness now of man. It was in his power and frewil, before he did
fall. Which strength, and power of frewyll, how great and strong it was, in
the first state, and condition of mankind when he was first made, Man in his
first creation had fre will.
it does appear in those angels, which when the devil, with his company
fell down, did stand fast in the verity, and so deserved to come to that
certayntie, never for to fall, in the which we do know for a surety, that
they are in, at this present. But after the fall of the first man, god would
not have it pertayne to any other thing, than to his grace only, that man
should come to him, and that alsoo, that man should not depart, and fall
from him. This grace* God has set and leyde up in him, Neither our coming to
god, nor (...) dinge still in him, is in any part of our power but in the
grace only of god.
in whom we have obtained our enheritans, being predestined after the mind
and purpose of him, which works all thing. And so by this reason, as he
does work, that we should com unto him, so does he work, that we should not
depart from him.

For the which cause it was said unto him by the prophet. Let thy hand be
upon the man of thy right hand, psalm. lxxix
and upon the son of man whom thou haste confirmed to thy self, that we do
not depart, and fall from the:

Truly, what is me^^ by the hand of god, upon the man of thy right ^ad
this man is not the first Adam, in whom we did fall from god, but it is the
last Adam, upon whom the hand of god is, that we should not depart from him.
For Christ, with all his members, defe^deth ye church, which church is his body,
and his fulness. Therefore when the hand of god is upon him, that we should not
depart from him, the^ does the work of god come unto us. For this thing is
the hand of god, because it is done by the work of god, that we may abide still
in Christ with god, not as we were in Adam departing, and going from god. For
in Christ we have obtained the enheritance, we I say, which ar predestined
after the purpose of his will, which works al things. This is therefore the
hand of god, and not our hand, that we do not go from god, I do say, that* it
is the hand of him, which said I will give my fear into their hearts, Hierem.
xxii^
that they may not depart from me. For y^ which cause, he will have that men
shall be seuters unto him and pray, that we be not led into temtation. For if we
be not brought into temptacion, we can by no means depart from him.

This thing he might have given to us without our prayer, The cause whyc god
does not give it to us that of our own power we may come and abide still in him.
but he would monysh and warn us by our own prayar, that we should knoledge
of whom we do receue these benefits. Of whom do we receue those benifytes, but
of him, of whom we are commanded to call and ask for them. As toching this
matter let the church in no wise look for great resonyngs, and long
dysputation but let it behold and consider our dayle praiars. The church does
ask and pray of god, that the unfaithful may believe and be faithful. Then it
is god which does convert them to y^ faith. The church does pray that they
which do believe may continue and be steadfast in there belefe, The^ it is god,
which does* give perseueraunce and stedfastnes to y^ end. God knew before
that it should ^e so. This is the predestination of saynctes, whom he has,
chose^ in Christ, before the foundacyon of ye world, that they might be holy
and pure in his syghte in charity, predestening them unto the adoption of his
children, by Jesus Christ, in to him self according to y^ pleasure of his will,
to the laud and praising of his grace, in the which grace he has accepted us
in his well-beloved son* in whom they have redemption, through his blood, and
forgyuenes of there sins, acordinge to the abou^da^t riches of his grace:
which does abound and is plentiful upon them in all wysdom, that he may show
unto them, the mystery or secret of his will* acording to his own good will,
which he has pourposed in him self, that it should be preached, when the time
was full com, that al things should be gathered together by Christ, both the
things, which are in heaven, and the things, which are upon the earth, even
by him, by who^ we are com to the enheritaunce, we which were thereto
predestened before according to the purpose of him, which works all
things, after the counsel of his own will. Agenst so open and manifest a
testimony of the verity, what man being of a sober, and an honest watchi^g
feith, can abide to hear the folysh bablyng voices, and words of men^

The.viii. Chapter.
But, why the grace of God is not given for our merrits.
for what cau^ (says he) is the grace of god not given, according to our
merits? I do answer and say, because that god is merciful. The (...) he to me
again. Wherefore is he not so, that is, merciful toward al men? Whereto, I
answer saying. Because god is a just judge. And by that reason, the grace,
which he does give, is given freely, without any deserving. And to the other to
whom grace is not given, it is by his just: Mark well this doctrine
and rightwise judgment, made manifest and open, how great a benefytte they
do receive to whom grace is given. Therefore let us not be unthankful,
because (according to the pleasure of his will, to the laud and praise of the
glory of his grace) the great mercy of god does deliver so many from
damnation, If non were saved, we had, but right, and God did therein no wrong.
which damnation of right is dew unto them also, which are delivered, i^ so
much y^ if he should deliver none therfro^, yet in so di^og he should do no
wrong. For all men from one man, are justly iuged y^ children of wrath to
co^nation, and that not wrongfullye nor agenst justice. Therefore, let that
man, which is delivered from condemnation, make much of the grace of god, and
he which is not beliuered from the just judgment of god, let him think and
believe, that he has receuid no wrong, but y^ thing which he has most
rightwisly deseruyd.

If by the forgyuenes of the debt the goodnis of god is declared and made
manifest, Herin is both the goodness and ryghtwyse justice of god known
and by the streyghte exactyng and demanding of his right, his equity and
justice known, then can there be none vnrightwisnes found in god.

But then, for what cause (says he to me) is the judgment of god in young
children so different, and in y^ two twynse, as Jacob, and Esau, sithe the on
had no more cause tha^ the other, but were in all one cause and had nether of
them deseruyd better tha^ the other, nor worse tha^ the other? Is it not a like
question if I would demand of the again, (...) answers to a contrary question^
for what purpose, was the like, and al one judgment and sentence where the
matter and cause, was not like, but difference? Let us therefore call to our
remembrans those workmem, which wrought in the vyenyarde all the wholl day,
and those which wrought but one hour. Here you do se, that there labor is not
al one, and yet the judgment in the paieme^t, which they receuid, was al on,
as much to the one, as to the other. What answer was made to the workmen,
which were offendyd, because the other had as great a reward as theye* Did
they hear any other answer of there master but this: It is my will, and
pleasure so to do. Syche was his liberality to the one sort, that to the other
he did no wrong. These sayings, I will have it, percyneth to (...), and his,
T^ke that thou have ^eserued, percyneth to justice.
And yet both of the^ were counted in the number of the godly.

But as touching these twain, justice, and grace, as concerning him, which is
saved, it may well be said, I will have it so, and to him, which is
condemned, it may well be said, take that thou haste deserved, and go thy
ways. For to this man, will I give that which is not his deuty to have, but
of my liberalite. May not I do, what me pleases? Haste thou a wicked eye
because I am good? Now, if he would say to him again, and ask him,
wherefore god is not as good to him, as to another: It may well be answered to
him. O thou man, what art thou, which make this aunsuere to god, whom thou
perceiuest toward the other to be tall, and in the, to be a straight demaunder
of his right? And yet thou can not say, that he is unjust, when he should
do nothing but iustlye, if he did punysh, both the one as well as the other.

He which is delivered from condemnation, has the greater cause to give
thanks, and he which is condemned, can find no fault in God, that he does
condemn him. But if it be so (says he) y^ god wuld not save all, The more
benefyt the greter thanks.
but condemn, soome, that in them, which are condemned, Objection
he might show, what all men have deserved, and so he should with more thanks
pour out his grace into the vessels of his mercy, for what cause, sith the one
has deserved, no bettar than the other but are in like case as touching
their deseruynge, doothe he rather ponysshe me, thanne him, or deliver him,
than me? If thou do ask of me, wherefore he does so, I do confess, that I
can not find, what answer to make to thy demand. If thou ask me, wherefore I
ca^ fi^d no answer to make I do say unto the, that in this matter, as his
wrath and angere is most just and rightwyse, so is his mercy great, and his
judgments inscrutable. Objection.


Yet, let him make, an other objection unto me, and say, for what cause has he
not given to sum men, which have faithfully believed and worshipped him,
Answer.
the gift of perseueraunce, and stedfastnes, to the end, that they might
continewe still in there good beleffe to the end* Wherefore think thou? But
because he is no liar, which says they went forth from among us, but they
were not of us, for if they had been of us, they would have contynnuyd still with
us. Are men then made of two natures? God forbid, If there were two naturs of
men then were the grace of god nothing then salvation, and delyueraunce from
condemnation, should not be of the fre gift of god, if it were the deserving of
nature. To man's judgment it seems, that al those men, which do apere good,
and faith full ought of duty to have the gift of perseverance, and
continuance to the end, given unto them. But god judges a better way than
that, wherefore does god suffer the wicked and the godly to be mixed together.
and that it should be a thing more conueniente for his purpose, to have some
among his sayintes, which would not contynew to the end. And also, that his
saints should not be carles, and with out all fear, which is not profitable for
them so to be. For being in this fear, doothe abate the arrogance, God will
have his saints to be always in fear
and pride of men, that they should not think ought of them self, according
to the saying of the Apostell. Wherefore, that man, which does think him
self too stand, let him beware and take heed that he falls not. For he
which falls, does fall by his own consent, and will: i. Corinth. x
but he which stands, does stand by the will of god. For god is able to
stable him, and to make him steadfast, and then not he him self, To fall is in
man's power but to stand (...) not.
but god. It is good therefore, not to be high minded nor to be to wise in a
man's own self but to fear. For every man in his knowledge, does either stand
or fall. For as the Apostell does say, whose saying I have rehearsed in my
first book, We are not sufficient of our self to think any thing, as of
our selves, but all our sufficiencye is of god. The which words: the blessed
man Ambrose, was not afraid to rehearse, as follows. For our hearts, and our
thoughts (says he) are not in our own power, as every humble and true
faithful man knows to be true, and nothing more true.

These words Ambrose did speak in a certain book which he wrote
entitled (of the flyenge from the world) wherein he taught that we should void
and shone, the incommodities of this world, not with the body, but with the
mind.

And that thing he prouyd: impossible to be done of our self wtoute the help
of god. For these are his words. We do talk mich, and make many words, how
we should fly, and aparte us from this world, but I would that that our
hearts, were as ware, and as careful therefore, as our tongues are busy to talk
thereof. But there is a worse thing. For often times, the entisementes of the
yerthly desires do come stealing, and creping on us, and an heap of vanities
does ouerwhelme our minds, in so much, that, that thing, which thou wuldest
have furthest of from the, thou do do most of all think on, It is not the
going into a cioister that puts such things out of a man's mind
being therewith in thy mind most troubled, which is hard for any man to
beware of: and so to put it clean out of his head, that he be no more combered
therewith, it is impossible. And finally, thou may sooner wysh, and desire to
have it taken from the, than to bring it to effect thy self, (as the prophet
witnesses) saying. Inclyne, and turn my heart to thy testymonies, and not to
auaryce. For our hearts and thoughts: are not in our own power, which being
suddenly overwhelmed, do confou^d both our wits, and our minds, settinge us
in that case, that we can not tell, what to do, pluckinge and drawing our
minds otherwise than we were purposed. They do call us away: other while, to
seculyar and worldly business, they do thrust worldly matters into our
heads, they do put us in mind of such, and such pleasures, diverse
entysementes are laid before us: ye and when we are most readyest to lift up
our mind, then being filled up with such vain cogitations: are often times
suddenly thrown down to the ground. It is not then in the power of man, that
men should be made the children of of god, but in the power of god.

For of him truly they do receive that same pour, who gives to men's hearts
good thoughts, Galathia. v.
whereby they may have faith, which works by love. Which gift, y^ we may
either receue or keep still, and so to contynew steadfastly in it to the end, we
cann of our self, think no manner of thing, ii, Corint. iii^
which is able to perform it, but al our abelnes is of god, i^ whose power,
ar our hearts, and al our thoughts. Therefore of the two young children, which
are bound, with the bond of original syn, wherefore the on is taken to mercy*
and the other not, and also, of ye it persons being both of lawful age* and
both wicked, why the one is so called, y^ he does follow the caller, and the
other either is not called, or else is not so called, that he does follow the
caller: I say the judgments of god herein are inserutable. But of this one
point al faithful me^ must be certain, Predestination.
and out of doubt, that the on of them, is predestined the other not. For if
they were of us, said one of them, which were predestyned and dronk this
secret out of the breast of the lord, i. Ihon. ij.
they would truly have bydden still with us. I pray you what is meant by these
words (they were not of us, for if they had bynne of us, theye would have tarried
with us)? Were theye not both created of god?

Came theye not both of Adam? Were they not both made of the yerthe, and
receuyd of him (which said, I mad al things, that has breathe) sowls al of
one nature, and making, and finally were they not both called? Did they not
both follow ye caller? were they not both justified from there own wyckednes?
And were they not both renewed by ye fou^tayn of regeneration being so made new
persons? But if so be, a man hard these words, which knows what they are,
and what y^ meaning of them is, he might well answer and say, that all these
words are true. And after the reason of these words, it can not be denied: but
that they were of us. But after another difference, and respect, they were not
us. For if they had been of us, they would have continued with us. For what
cause were they not of them.
What difference is that I pray you, which makes that they are not of us? The
books of god are open enough, that you may read them. Let us not wynke, and
shit our eyn from the^. They were not of the^, because they were not called
after the purpose of the caller. They were not elected in Christ before the
world was made. They obtained not the enheritance in him. They were not
predestined according to the purpose of him, which does work al thing. For
if they had been so, then had they ben of the^, and had without doubt, continued
still with them. What should I say y^ it is possible to god, to convert and tourn
the froward and malycyous minds of men to faith, and so to work in their
hearts, that they shall give place to none adversity, nor yet by any manner of
temptation, depart from god, for so much as he can (as the apostle witnesses so
work: that he shall not suffer them to be tempted more, and above that they
are able for to bear.

The ix. Chapter
I Would say also y^ god might, Of this he spoke largely in his first book.
and it had been his pleasur (forsomuche as he knew before that they would syn)
have taken them forth of this life, before they had committed any sin. But
what shall we medel wtthis matter any more? What need we dyspute again of this
thing, or labor to show how great absurdity it is to be said, that god
does judge me^, which are dead, according to their syns which they wuld have
committed: if they had lived longer time. It does so much abhor any man's
ea^se to hear it spoken (much more a christian man's ears) y^ I am ashamed to
spend any more time in writing agenst it. The^ must we say yt ye gospel which
has be^ declared and opened great labors, and pains and bitter sufferings
of the saynes, has been taught, and preched in vayn, if that men might, be
judged without any hearing of the euangill, according to the proud, and heddy
stobernis, which god knew before certainly, that they would have if they had
lived till it had bynne preached unto them. By that reason, Tyrus, and Sydon,
should not have been condemned (although they are more gently dealt with all,
than those cyttes, where our lord wroughte his miracles, and yet was not
believed. For if those miracles, had been wrought in those cyttes as theye were
in the other, they had done penance sitting in ashes, and sakcloth (as the
scriptur does testefye) in the which words the lord declared to us, the
secret mystery of predestination.

If it should be demanded of us, for what cause so great and many miracles, were
wrought among them, which miracles (for all y^ they saw them done before their
eyes) would not believe, or rather, wherefore they were not wrought among the^
which would have believed, if they had sen them? What shall we answer thereto?
Shall we say, as I said in a certain book, wherein I made answer to sir
questions, which y^ Paganse did put unto me, nothing preiudicating by mine
answer the causses of predestination, which causses wise and sober men may
search out? I did answer, as ye do know well, what time they demanded of me the
cause, why it was so long or Christ came, that at those times and in those
places, where and when his gospel was not preached he knew before, that al they
at his chinge should be found such, as were many at the time of his being
here in his corporal presence, which would not believe in him, yea, when he did
raise up the dead, forth of their grave, giuinge life again to them, which
had lost it. Likewise in the self same book, a littel after I did say, about
the same question, what marvel is it (said I) if that Christ, when he knew
before, how full of unfaithful people, the world would be in those ages, would
not that his euangell should be preached unto them, and that worthily, whom he
knew before, would not be leave, neither, that which he would speak, or work.
Thus much truly, we ca^ not say of Tirus, and Sidon and yet in them we do know,
and find, that the iugementes of god, do pertain to ye causes of
predestination. Which causes, being secret, and hid, I said then, should
should remain, as they were, nothing preiudicated by my answer. For a man may
easly, put the fault thereof, in the infidelite of the Jews (which infidelity
does come of fre will) which Jews, This is the fair flower of our free will.
I say, after so many, and so great miracles wrought, yet would not believe.

For the which infidelity, the Lord rebuked them saying: Woe be to ye
Corola^m, and Bethsaida, for if those virtues, had been showed and ^one in Tire
and Sydon, which have been in you, they would long ago have repented them,
sitting in ash^s* and ^acke clothe. But can (...) say now, that the people of
Tirus, and Sydon did not believe, when such miracles were wroughte among them,
or that if there had been wrought that they would not have believed then? The
lord him self does wytnes, that they would have taken great repentance, with
all lowlynes, and humility, if these tokens of the heavenly power, had been
showed among them, and yet for all that, they shall be ponyshed at the day of
judgment, although not so grievously as the other cities, which would not
believe, when they saw the^ wrought before their face. After this the lord
says. But I say to you. Tyrus and Sydon shall be more easily entreated, at ye
day of judgment, than they shall. It follows the^, y^ these cities shall be
more sharply ponished, and the other more gentilly, and yet they shall be both
ponished. But after al these words, He throwe^^ them down with the^^ own
argument.
if dead men are judged according to ye works and deeds, which they would have
wrought, if they had lived, then truly the people of Tyrus, and Sidon, which
would have believed, if the miracles had been wrought among them, and the gospel
preached, shall not be ponysshed. But they shall be ponyshed:

Then it is false, that men (as they do say) are judged according to the
works, which they would have done, if they had had longer respete to live.

If this be false, then can they not lay, New comes (...) ^o the matter of
infantes, which read with judgment.
as touching infantes, which do perish, departing without baptyme, that they
do deserve justly to perysh, because god knew before, that if they had longer
lived, and the gospel also preached unto them, they would not believe. It
doothe therefore follow, that they are only ^as^e bound with original sin,
and for that only, they do go into condemnation. For we do see, the other
young chyldern, which are in all one sta^e and condition, that they are none
otherwise forgeuen, than by the grace of god, in their regeneration, and that
by his secret, and just judgment. For there is none vnrightwisenes with god.
Some me^ also we do se, which after their baptyme, through their ill living have
peryshed, which have been kept still in this life, till they have so
offended, that they do perysh, which should not have perished, if the death of
the body had prevented their fall. For no dead man is judged after the good or
bad works which he would have done, if he had lived longer time. For if that
were true* then the people of Tyrus and Sydon should not be punished* for that
they have done, but rather should have obtained salvation, for that which
they would have done, beleuyng in CHRIST, if the miracles and and virtues had been done in the^, which were done in the other cities.

The.x. Chapter.
A Certain catholic doctor, He recyteth a certain doctors mind, which he
derideth as folysh.
a man of no small name, does expound this place of the scripture, after this
wise, saying, that God knew before that the Tirians, and Sydonites, would depart
again from the faith, after they should have once received it through the
workynge of miracles, and preaching of the gospel. And for that cause (said
he) god having pity and compassion over them, wuld not work his miracles, and
show his doctrine among the^, because they should deserve greater punysshmente,
if they had forsaken that faith, which they had once r^ceiued, than if they
had never believed. What needs me to tell, what things may be noted, and
gathered out of this subtyl wise man's saying, since that his own saying, (as
he does speak the words) does make for our purpose. For if god moved with
compassion, and pity, did not work his wonders among them, whereby they
mightbe made faithful, lest they wuld offend more grievously, when they should
afterward forsake it again, because he knew before, they would forsake their
says, after they had received it: by that reason is it openly declared, that
no man is judged for those d^edes, which god knew before he would have
wrought afterward, if he be taken away before he does them, or some otherwais
is helped, tha^ he does not commyt any such offenses, as Christ did help the
Tyryans and y^ Sydonits, if yt exposition be treue, who^ he had rather should
not com to the faith, tha^ they afterward with a greater offense should forsake
it, which thing, he knew before they would do, if they had once com to it. But
if you will say again unto me, for what cause did he not so work that they
might believe, and that they might also be taken out of this life, before they
should fall from the faith, which they had receuyd, I know not what answer to
make thereto. For he which does say, yt they which would forsake there faith, had
this benefit granted, and given unto the^, that they should not have y^ thing,
which they would with greater impiety* and wickedness, to their judgment cast
away, from the^, and so lease it again, y^ same man, which so does say
confesses, and declares plai^ly y^ a man is not iuged for any thing, which
according to ye forknolege of god, he would have don, if he had on way or other
bin prevented, y^ it is not don. Yt follows then: yt that man was provided for
and helped of who^ the scripture speaks saying: He was taken away etc. But
peradventure, yesame exposytor, will say again to me, Wherefore then, were not ye
me^ of Tyrus, and Sido^ provided for, after that same manner, that they might
believe, and so be taken out of this life lest malice should alter their mi^d.
Truli as toching this matter, I think it suffycie^t, yt after his own words,
and saing I have prouyd, yt me^* are not judged for any thing, which the^e have
not don, although y^ forknoledg of god knew that they would do it if theye had
lengar lived. For as I said before (although it is shame to spend any long
tymme in wryghtinge against this opynion, that men at judged for those deeds,
which they ar known before that they would do, if they might have space of
life to do the^, yet because we should in no wise apere, and seem to bear with
it or any thing allow it, we thought it more convenyent and bettre, with this
dysputation to pluke it in, and to stey it, from going, and growing farther
abrod, than to let it palse unspoken of.

The.xi. Chapter
ANd therefore (as the Apostell does say) it is not in him which wills nor in
him which roneth, but in god, which takes mercy, which does prouyd for
young children, acording to his own will and pleasure, for whom he will, which
yo^g children do nether will nor roon, whom he has chosen in Christ, before
the foundation of the world, gyuing also his grace to the^ freely without any of
there deserving, or merits preceding his grace, either of there faith, or of
works. And as toching those, which are of age although he does know, that
they would believe, if miracles, were wrought among them, yet whom he will not,
them he does not help, of whom in his predestination which is unknown and
hid unto us, he has otherwise determined and judged, and that justly. For
there is none vnryghtwysnes with god. His judgments ar inscrutable, and his
ways unable to be serchyd and found out. For all the ways of the lord, are
mercy, and veryte, Then is his mercy inuestigable by y^ which he has mercy on
whom him pleases, without any of there merytts or deserui^ges, for the which he
should reward them again. And this veryte is inuestigable, by y^ which he does
obdurat, and harden whom him pleases, and that through the meryts, and
deserving of the^ which are so obdurated, which are the merits, and deserving
also of them, of whom he takes mercy as well as of them, whom he has
hardenyd. As by example we do find in Jacob, and Esau, the on being takeng to
mercy, Our merits and deserving to goo ward are all one of goodness
the other not, and yet as there merytts, and deseruinges were all one* so was
not there end. Of the which twayn, he one of them, was delivered by the
goodnis of god: that other was co^demnyd by the justice and rightwysnes of god.
Shall we say, y^ god is not just? God forbid. But his ways ar inuestigable. And
therefore i^ those, which are sauyd, let us believe the mercy of god, and in those
which are condemned let us believe the ryghtwysnes of god. without any
doubtinge. Nether let us reasone after those things, which are not able to be
answered, nor search after that, which can not be found out For out of the
mouth of infantes, and young lukkinge children does he set forth his praise,
that that thing, which we do se in these, being saved, which had no meryts,
where with thy might deserve salvation, and in those which are condemnid by the
merits of origynal sin, preceding there condemnation, we should not doubt, but
it is also the very like in those which are of age. That is to say, that we
should not think, that any man does first any works, whereby, he obteineth salua
nor yet, that any man is damnyd, without his own meryts, whither there causes ar
al one, or diverse (as I have said before) that he which does stand, may take heed, he does not fall, and he which reioyseth, may rejoice in the lord, and
not in him self.

But what is the matter, that these men, which do hold with us against the
Pelagians, as tochinge original syn, which syn, by one man enterid into the
world, and by on man, al men, are gone into condemnation* wherefore will theye
not grant, that the cause of salvation and damnation, which is in young
children, should not be compared, and lykened, unto the cause, which is in
persons of more age. This thing the Manaches also do not understand, which do
not only set light by the testimonies of y^ old testament, but also those
scripture which are of the new testamente* (as though they had a privilege to
do with them, what they would) they do abuse at their own plesur. For they will
take, and forsake, what them lysteth, as they shall appear to make or mar
for, or against their purpose, alowing or disalowinge them. Agenst those
Manaches. I did write in the books, which I wrote upon fre will, out of the
which books, these men do take hold agenst me. And where as in the said books,
many great and weighty questions came in the way, beside the principal matter,
I would not dyscusse them exactly, nor go thorough with them, least the work
should have been to great, and specially, because I saw, that the authority of
the holy scriptures, did preuayl nothing, agenst such peruerst and ungodly
persons. And yet I might (as I did although I did not expressly and plainly
determyne the verytie of every on of those matters) after a certain fashyon
conclud that god is in all things to be praised, with out any necessyte, that I
should believe (as they would have us) that there are two substances coeternal both
to gyther, of good, and evil, in god.

To be short, in my first book of retractations, which work ye have not yet
red, when I came to retract those boks, which I did wryght upon frewyl I, spoke
after this wise. In these books (said I), are dysputed so many matters, that
many questions do com between, which questions, either because I could not
dyscusse to the vttermoste, or else because at this time they do require lengar
space and more business, I will so put them of till an other tym, that what part
so ever ye do consider, of those questions, where as I could not find the truth
out, yet my reasoninge did so conclud, that, whyther this, or that part were
the truth, or in which soever of them it did lie hid, The beginning of evil
comes of fre will.
god was always believed, at the lest, he was declared, in all things to be
praised. For truly I took ye dysputatio^ in hand because of the^ which do deny
that the original, and beginning of our euel, commyth of fre will, which also
do earnystly hold, and defend, that god being the maker of al naturs, The
Manaches error.
is to be blamed, ente^ding according to there wicked error (I do mean the
Manaches) to introduce, and bring in this ^oulle error, that there is in god a
certain nature of evil, which is immutable, coeternall, and everlasting with
him. And a litel after in an other place, I said these words. I did speak
(said I) of the misery, which synnars most rightwisly sustain, (rom the
which men are delivered, by the grace of god. For man can fall by him self,
that is to say, by his own frewill, so can he not rise up again. Unto the
which misery of just damnation, Ignorance and blyndnes of heart are borne and
brought with us, into this World.
ignorance and hardness of heart do pertayn, which diseases, al mankind has,
eue^ from the beginning of his birth. And from this evil, no man is delivered,
but by the grace of god.

This misery of blyndnes, and hardness, the pelagians do deny for to com^, and
proceed of just damnation. For they do deny original sin, And as touching
ygnoraunce, and hardness of heart, if they were nothing else, but the natural
beginning of man* yet god is not to be blamed, but to be praised, according to
my disputation, in that same third book which disputation, should be had
agenst ye Manaches, which do not understand the scripturs of the old testament,
by the which, original sin is declared and taught. And what soever is read
thereof in the writings of the Apostels, they do say, with a detestable, and
shameless bouldnes, that those their wrytynges are depraved, and corrupted, of
syche, as have thrust such se^tences into their writings, as though the
apostell did not speak and write all those words, which are found in their
writings.

But agenst the Pelagia^s, we must defend, that there is original syn, which
the scripturs, both old, and new, do confirm. And yet they say that they do
profess, and hold with the scriptures, as well as we. These words did I
speak in my first book of retractation, when I did call in, those books,
which I made of fre will.

And beside these words which I have rehearsed, Augustine retractethe his
books of free will.
I did speak mich more, as touching those books of frewyll, which I thought to
long to rehearse in this work, and not necessary, as ye will (I know well)
say, when ye have red them all.

Therefore although in the third book, which I wrote upon fre will, our
disputation was such, as touching young children, that although it were true,
that the Pelagia^s do say, that ignorance, and hardness (without the which no man
is born into this world) are but the natural begynnyngs, of every man, and not
rather the ponishment of nature, yet y^ Manaches, should be overcome, and put to
silence, which do hold, that there ar in god two natures, that is to say, of
good, and evil, from before the beginning coeternal. But although that were
true, that ignorance and hardness, are but the natural beginning of humayne
nature, and not the punysshmente, or pain of that same nature (as it is in
deed) should therefore our faith, which the catholyke church does defend,
against the Pelagians, be forsaken, Ignorance and hardness is the pain iuged
to the nature of man, for his first fall.
or doubted of, which does hold, that there is original sin: the gylte, or
fault where of, being got to us, by our first generation, can none otherwise
be losed, but by the second birth, which is our regeration? And therefore if
these our brethren do confess that same (as we do) for to be true* that we
and they both together, may destroy y^ error of the Pelagians, wherefore should
they doubt, but that god does pluk young children (to whom he does give his
grace, by the sacrament of baptime) from the pour of darkness, transportynge
them, into the kingdom of the brightness of his son? Therefore in that he does
give his grace to some, and to some not, wherefore do they not therein, sing
laud, and praise to the mercy and judgment of the lord. But why he does
give it to one more than to an other, who knows the mind of the lord? Who is
able to search his inscrutable iugments? Who is able to seek out his ways,
which are inuestigable?

The.xii. Chapter
IT is the^ sufficiently proved yt ye grace of god is not given after the
merits of the^, but after ye pleasure of his will, to the praise, and glory of
his grace, that he, which does rejoice, may rejoice: not in him self, but in
the lord, which does give his grace, to who^ it pleases him because he is
merciful. And although, that he would not give it, yet: were he not therefore
unjust. Also he does give it to none, but to whom it is his will to give it,
that he may make known the riches of his glory upon the vessels of mercy.
Grace is not in his right kind, except it come freely.
For in that he does give it to some, which do not deserve, therein he will show
his grace to be fre, without deseruyng* and so to be grace in the right kind.
And again in that he does not give his grace to al men, he does declare what al
me^ do deserve. He is good in his liberality toward some, he is just in
taking punishment upon the other: and yet he is good in all thing. For it is
a good thing when that deuty and right is paid. And he is just in all thing.
For it is a just thing, when that y^ deutye, and right is paid, without doing
wrong to any man. But we do hold, and defend, that the grace of god is given
without meryts. And that is in deed, the right, and true grace. And although
it were true, as the pelagians do say, that young children which are taken out of
this life after they are baptized, are not delivered and plucked away from the
power of darkness, because they had no sin in them, whereof they should be
gyltie (as they do think) but yt they are no more but transposed, The pelagians
do deny original syn in young children.
and taken out of this life, into the kingdom of the lord, yea and so it is
granted, that the kingdom of god is given freely, without any merits, or
good works, and to who^ it is not given, it is not without their evil merits:
that they have it not. And thus do we make answer, agenste the Pelagians, when
they do object unto us, castyng us in y^ teth, that we do attribute: and
ascribe grace unto desteny, because we say that it is not given after our
merits. But they rather do make the grace of god in young children to be
destenye, which do say, that where as no merit, or deserving is, there is
destenye. For according to the saying of the pelagians, there can be found no
merits in young children, for the which, some of the^ are sent up to heaven,
and some shit forth from thens. And likewise, as I have declared, and proved
now, that the grace of god is not given after any merit (which thing I
thought good to prove, as well by their own words, and sayings, as by our
judgments and minds, that is by our opinion, The pelagians do call original
syn, nothing else but a natural infirmity and weakness.
which do hold that young children ar born in original syn, and by theirs,
which do deny, y^ there is original syn. And yet, for all that we have made our
matter good, and prouid it true by there own saying, we must in no wise
doubt, but that young children have in them that which he must forgive to
them, which does save his people from there sins. Even so, was I fayn in the
third book, which I did wright on frewyl, to resyst the Manaches with there
own sayings, as well, as with our demonstrations and proffes about that
question, whyther ignorance and hardness of heart were the ponyshment of our
nature, coming of just damnatyo^ (as we do say) or else, as they do say,
nothing other, than naturali infyrmitie and weakness perteini^g naturally to al
men (for no man is borne without them, or nay. And yet I am not of there mind.
And also in yt same book I proved suffycyently yt ignorance, and hardness of
heart, are not ye natural beginnyngs of man, as he was first instituted and
made, but yt it is the plain ponyshment of man which is condemnyd. Therefore
they do labor in vain, in yt they do go about to bring yt my bok (which I wrote
a great while ago) now against me, that I should not now dispute the cause of
young chyldern as I ought to do, and so to prove euydently (that al men may se,
and perceue the truth) that the grace of god is not given for the meryts of men.

For, and if, what time I did begin first to wryght those books which I did
wryght upon fre will being at Rome, when I was a temporal man, and endyd them
in Afrik, after I was pressed, I had been (as they do say) in doubt, as tochinge
the condemnation of infants, not regeneratyd, yet I do think no man to be so
unjust, but he could be content, y^ I should amend and increase in knolege,
rather tha^ to continue always in doubt. But yet if it had pleased them, they
might have understood the matter other wise: that I did not then doubt thereof,
asthough I had doubted in ded, but because I thought that way best to overcome
the aduersarys, that whyther ignorance, and hardness of heart were the
ponysshmente of the original syn, which is in children (as the truth is) or
not, as many being out of the right way do suppose, yet for all that, the error
of the manaches, could not make us to believe, that there is a myxture of two
contrary naturs in god, of good and evil. God forbid we should be so negligent,
in the cause of yo^g children, that we should doubt whither those children,
which do dye after they be regeneratid, do depare to eternal salvation, and
they which are not, to the second death. For that same scripture (by on man syn
enteryd into the world, and by sin death, and so into al men) can non
otherwise be vnderstonded. And also, from eternal death, which is most
worthily rewarded for syn: no man, old, or young, can be delivered, except he,
which suffered death for to forgive both our original, and our own syn also
(having in him self no manner of syn) does deliver us. But wherefore he does
deliver some, more tha^ some, I have told you diverse tyms, and yet will tell the
again. Romanos. ix
O thou man what are thou, which wylt reason with god? His iugments ar
inscrutable, and his ways ar inuestigable. And more, than that, I will say
unto the* Search not for those things which do excede thy capacyte, and such
things as are myghtiar, and stronger, tha^ thy self, m^del not with them. Do
ye not se, how foul an heresy it is, and how far from y^ purnes of our
faith, to hold opinion, that young children when they do depart hens, do receue
there judgment, acording to those works, which god knew before that they would
do, if they had lived, any longer time on the yerth? Into this error, (which,
al men having any reason in the world, and specially those which have
professed Christ, do abhore) ar they constreyned to fall in, which have so
forsaken the pelagia^s errors, yt yet they do think it necessary to be believed,
yea and with dysputation to be defended, yt the grace of god, through Christ Jesus
(by the which only, after the fall of our first parent we are helped), is
rewarded after our merytts and deseruinges. Which error Pelagyan him self
did improve, and condemn before y^ bishops of y^ east co^try, when they did
sit in judgment upon him for fear lest he should have bin condemned of them if
he had not. But if this their opinion is not true, nor to be spoken, as
concerning y^ works of them which be dead, which works they would have
done, if they had lived, good or bad (and by that reason, being no works at al,
because they were in the foreknowledge of god, y^ they should never be) if this
then I say ought not to be spoken (which you se how erronyous it is to be
said) what else does follow, but that the grace of god is not given after our
merits, and that we should so (without any further dark reasoninge thereon)
confess it, as the catholic church does defend it to be, agenst the heresy of
y^ pelagians, which thing we do find most euydent, and open in young infantes.
For god is not constreined to help some children more than some, by any
destine, for so much, as their cause, and matter is al one, By the providence of
god all is ordained and governed, not by destenye.
the one no better than the other. Nor yet must we think that the world is
governed, by things, which do com by chance, or by a natural ma^er of
proceeding of things here in this world, but by y^ prouyde^ce of god, for so much
as al reaso^able souls must either be sauid or da^nyd, and also not so much as a
lyghtel sparow can fall down to the ground, with out the will of our father,
which is in heaven. Or else the negligence of the parents should be blamid,
being imputed to there faut, that there children do depart without baptim, so
that by this reason, the iudgmente of god herin should have nothing to do, as
though those children, which do depart in so euel a state, had chosen to them
self by there own will such neglygente parents of whom they should come.

What need have I to tell you, how that often tyms, a young child, before he can
be baptized, does dye? Yea and often tyms the parents, making never so much
have, that the child might be christened, yet y^ will of god was not, that it
should come to the fountain of regeneration, which did not keep y^ child in
the world so long that it might come. Yea and also we do se, that the children
of those, which are unfaithful, have bynne kept alive till the tym, that they
have com to baptim and the children of the faithful have not. In this point
treuly is declared, that god does not accept on person more than another. For
if he were an acceptor of persons, be would rather deliver the children of those,
which at his worshippars than of those which at his enmies.

The xiii. Chapter
But now forsomuche as we do reason and dispute of the gift of perseverance to
the end, what is the matter* that the child which departs without baptyme,
is not baptized before he departs? And again, what is ye cause, yt he, which
is baptized, and will fale after his baptyme, is not taken out of this life,
before he does fall? Except we will stond still in that inconvenience, yt we will
say, it proffetethe a man nothing to be taken out of this life, before he
does fall, for so much, as he shall be judged (as they say) according to the deds
which god knew before, that he would do if he had lived any lengar time. What
man can patiently abyd to hear this deuelish madness, Into what blind errors the
opinion of merits, does bring men.
which is so much against our faith? And yet, they are constrained so to say,
which are of that opinion, yt grace is given acording to our merits. For they
which will contend and hold that every man, which dies is judged acording to
those works which god knew that he would do if he had bin sufferid to have lived
lengar time, if they would (I say) consider how falsely and untruly, they do
speak, they shall have no cause to affirm that, which Pelagian has
condemnyd, which error the church caused him to deny, that y^ grace of god, is
given after our merits, sith that they do se sum children, not being
regenerated goinge to condemnation, and some which are regenerated, to eternal
life. And again, sith that they do perceue, and se, that of those which are
regenerated, some do persevere to y^ end, and so do depart hense, and some again
after there regeneration, are kept in this world till they do fall, and then in
that fall they do depart, which should not have fallen if they had been taken
from this preseu^ life, before that they did fall, and also, that some, after
they are fallen do not depart hens, till they com into the way again, which
with out doubt should peryshe, if they had dyed before they did repent and
amend. By the which thing it is manyfestlye declared unto us, that the grace
of god (by the which grace, we do both begin to do well, and also continewe to
y^ end) is not given after our merits but it is given to us freely, after his
most just, lyberal and wise will and pleasure, because whom he has
predestined, them also has he called, with that vocation, whereof it is
written, and said (The gifts and vocation of god, ar without repentance) unto
the which vocation no man can tell, what man does perteyne, so long as he is
in this world, but when he departethe from hence. Therefore in this life which
is nothing but temtation upon the yerth, he which thinks him self to stand*
let him take heed he does not fall. And for this cause (as I have said before)
those persons, For what cause has god myxt the wicked among the godly
which shall not persevere and contynew to the end, are myxt among those which
shall contynew: which things done by the most wise and prouydent counsel of
god, that we may learn not to be high in our own wysdom, but that we may
consenting to those, which are lowly in spyrite, work with fear and trembeling
our own health, For God is he, which does work both the will, and also the
ded, and work of the will. It is expedient and proffytable for us, both to say
so, and to believe so. This is godli: this is true: that we may make an
humble, and a lowly confession that all the whole, without reserving any part
thereof unto us, may be given, and ascribed to god. For we do first think and
afterward believe, we do first think and afterward speak, we do first think and
afterward work, and do what we do. And as toching the right and treu way of
godly living and ye true service, and worshypping of god we are not able to
think any thing of our self, Our hearts and thoughte^ are not in our power.
as of our self, but al our sufficyenci, and al our habelnes is of god. For
our hearts, and our thoughts, are not in our own power. And therefore saint Ambros
does say, what man is so blessed, which does continualy assend and rise
always in his heart. But how can this thing be don, without the help of god? By
nomeans forsooth. Forthermore, the said godly man speking and treating upon the
said scripture alleged these words of the psalmyst, which are, That man is
blessed, Psalm. lxxxiii
whose help is from the O lord, and whose assendynge, and rysynge up in
heart, is of the^. The cause wherefore he said so, he did not only find, in
the holy scripture, but he felt it, in his own heart. Therefore, those words,
which are spoken by the minister, at the time of the ministration of y^
sacrament, commanding us, that we should lift up our hearts unto god, that
very same thing, which is (to lift up our hearts to god) is the gift of god,
for the which gift* they are admonished of the preiste, to give thanks unto
god, to whose words* they do make answer, and say (it is worthy, and right,
that it be so). For So Much therefore, as our hearts, are not in our own pour,
but are lift up by the help of god that they may assend, and rise up, and so
understand, and be wise in heavenly things, Colos. iii.
where Christ is, sitting on the right hand of the father, and not in yearthly
and worldly things, who does deserve to have thanks for that same, but he
only which does the thing, our lord god, which by so great his benefits,
delyueryng us, has chosen us from the bottom of this world, and predestened
us, before the foundation of the world was laid.

The.xiiii Chapter.
But they do say, yt the declaration and openinge of the matter of
pred^stination, Objection.
is a thing which hyndereth and is much against the right order of preachi^ge.
Answer.
As though the preching and teaching of the Apostel was let, and hyndered
thereby. Did not the doctor and master of the gentyls, faithfully, and truly,
many times commend, By the teaching of thapostel he proves the doctrine of
predestination to be bid.
and praise predestination, and yet ceased not to prech and teach the word of
god? I pray you, because he said, that god is y^ worker in us, both of the
will, and of the work also, according to his own good will, did he therefore
not exhort them (to whom he spoke those words) that they should both will, and
desire, yea and to work those things, which are acceptable and pleasant unto
god? Or else, because he said, that he, which began that good work in you,
will alsoo perform it, and bring it to an end in you, even till the day of
our lord Jesus Christ, did he not for all that, exhort, and counsel men, both
to the beginning and to the continuance therein to the end? The lord also
him self commanded men to believe, saying: If ye do believe in god, then believe
in me. Yet that same sentence was not false, nor the definition thereof,
unprofitable, which the same lord, spoke also, saying: No man comes to me,
that is to say, no man believes in me, but to whom it is given of my father.
And again, it does not follow, because this diffinition is true, that therefore
the command mente, that they should believe, is void or unprofitable.

For what cause then, should we think, that the openinge of predestination,
should be the cause, that men might not preach and teach and in preachinge,
command, exhort, reprove, yea, and correct, which things are much used in
the scripture, wherein predestination is commended, and set forth unto us? As
there any man so bold, which will say, that god did not know before, to
whom he would give the gift, to believe? Or else, that he knew not before,
what they were, whom he would give to his son, of who^ he should lease none?
Which things, if god knew before, he knew also before, those his benefits,
by the which benefits, he does vouchsafe to deliver them. What is
predestination.


This predestination of saints, is nothing else but a foreknowlege, and a
preparation, of the benefits of god, by the which benefits, al men are saved,
which have and shall obtain salvation. Al other beside these, in what case are
they^ and where are they left, but in the dow of perdition, and that by the
most just, and right judgment of god. In that same state and condition, were
y^ people of Tyrus and Sidon left, which might also have believed, if they had
seen those great signs and miracles of Christ: which he wrought. But
because it was not given to them, The cause why the people of Tire and Sydo^,
did not believe.
that they should believe: the signs and tokens, whereby they might have been
brought to belief, were withdrawn, and kept away from them, and denied
them. By this a man may perceive, that many men, naturally, have such an
heavenly gift of understanding, yt they may thereby, be moved to the faith* if
either they be taught by words, or else do s^ signs, and tokens, according
to the disposition of their minds. And yet for all that if they be not, by the
profounde, and deep judgment of god, thoroughe the predestination of grace,
separated from the dow of perdition, they are suffered nether to hear the
words, nor to se the meruellouse works, whereby they might be brought to
faith, yea, nor yet they cannot believe, although, they did both here and se
them. In that state of perdition, were the Jews left, which could not
believe the great works and wondrous virtues, which they saw wrought before
there eyes. The cause wherefore they could not believe, the euangill does not hyde
from us, saying (when he had wrought so great wonders and signs, among
them, they believed not in him, that the saying of Esaias the prophet, might be
fulfilled, which he spoke saying, (who has given credyt and belief, to that
which we have hard? Or to whom is the arm of the lord known? And therefore
they could not believe, for Esaias said more ^He has shyt up their eyes, and
hardened their hearts, that they should not se with their eyes, nor
understand with their hearts, and convert, and be healed.

The eyes, and hearts of the people of Tyrus and Sydon, were not shyt up, and
hardened after such a fashion, for they would have believed, if they had seen
the signs, and wonders, which these men did se:

But it profyted them nothing, that they could have believed, because they
wear not predestened of him, whose iugementes are inscrutable: and whose ways
are not to be serched out. And again it should not have hyndered the other, yt
they could not believe, if they had been so predestened, that god would lyghten
their eyes which were blinded, and molefy ye stony hearts of the^ which were
hardened. But as touching that, which the lord spoke, of ye Tirians and the
Sidonites, it may peradventure some otherwise be taken and understood. But
yt now no man does come to Christ, but to whom it is given, and that it is
given to them, which are elected in him, It profeteth small to here with thy
fleshly ears, if the ears of thy soul be stop^.
before the foundation of the world, every man doubtless, will confess, which
with their flesshely ears, do hear the word of god, what he does say
therein, if the ears of their hearts be not stopped and made deaffe. And yet
this predestination, which is set forth openly, by the words of the gospel,
did not hinder, and let the lord to counsel and exhort men to begin to do
well, when he said, if ye do believe in god believe in me. Nor yet, when he
exhorted them to the perseueraunce in that faith, in commaundynge them always
to pray, and never to fail.

Those persons to whom it is given to both hear the words, and work
thereafter. But they, to whom it is not given, whyther they do hear or here
not, do work not a whytt the more. For to you it is given (says he) to know
the mysteries and secrets of the kingdom of god, but to them it is not given.
The first part of this same saying of the lord, perteyneth to mercy and
compassion, the latter part thereof, perteyneth to the judgment, and rightwys
justice of him, to whom our soul does say, He concludes by the example of
the doctrine of Christ and of his apostels, that predestination, hinders
nothing to teachinge of good living
I will sing and praise before the, o lord, thy mercy and judgment. So nether
the preching of faith, either to begynn, or to contynew therein, (that they, to
whom it is given, may both hear those things, which they ought to here, and
also obey them in deed working thereafter) should not be hynderyd by the
preachinge and teachinge of predestination. (For how should they here without a
precher, nor yet by the preachinge of faith, which teaches how we should
begin to believe, The effect and end of the doctrine of predestinacion.
and continue there in, the teaching of the article of predestination should be
minished or hyndered, that by the teachinge of the said predestination, he
which lives faithfully, and obedientlye, should not be proud of his
obedyence, as though it were of him self, and not the gift of god: but that he
which reioyseth may rejoice in the lord. For, we must be proud of nothing:
for so much as nothing is our own to be proud of. This thing the holy father
Cyprian did perceive very well, and was boulde to affirm that same, by the
which he taught, and opened most certain predestination. For if we must be
proud of nothing, because nothing is our own, truly no man can be proud of his
obedience, and good life, be it never so perfect and steadfast. Nor yet must
we call it ours, as though it were not given to us of god from above. For it is
the gift of god, which he knew before, that he wuld give to the^ which are
called with this vocation, whereof the scripture speaks saying: The gifts
and vocation of god are without repentance) which thing is to be confessed of
every man. This then is the predestination, which we do faithfulli, and with
all humblenes preach and teach. And yet he taught predestination.
And yet for all that, this man was both a preacher and a teacher, and also a
worker, which believed in Christ, and lived steadfastly, in holy obedience, even
till the time that he suffered his passion for Christ sake, not therefore
ceassynge to preach the gospel, exhorting men to faith and perseueraunce to
the end, bycaus he said, we should be proud of nothing, since y^ nothing is our
own. And in that saying he opened to us, the very right, and true grace of god
(that is to say) which is not given after our meryts, which grace god knew
before that he would give to us.

In these words of Cyprya^ predestination verily is taught, and preached unto
us, which predestination if it did not let, and hinder Cyprya^, from y^
preaching of obedience, why should it be any let unto us, but that we may do ye
same? For although we do say, that obedyence is the gift of god, yet do we
exhort men to the keeping of it. But unto them, which do obediently here the
exhortation of the veryte, the gift of god is given, (that is to say) to here
it, and to obey unto it. And to them which do not hear it after that fashion,
y^ they do not obey it, it is not given. For Christ, whose words ar to be
believed does say* Ihon. vi.
(No man comes unto me, but to whom it is given of the father. And to you it
is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of heaven but to the^ it is not
given. Mathe. xix.
And also, as toching the virtue of continency, and chastyte, every man (says
he) does not receive, and take this word, but they to whom it is given. And
also, i. Corint, uii
when the Apostel exhorted men to a chaste living in matrymony; I would wyshe
(says he) that all men were as I am, but eueri man has his proper gift of
god, some on way, some another. In ye which place he teaches, that not only,
the chaste life, without wedlok, is the gift of god, but also that the chaste
and honest conversation of life between man and wife in wedlok, is the very gift
of god. Which thing sith it is true, that as well the on as the other is the
gift of god, we, (for all that it is the gift of god) do exhort people thet
unto as much as is given to us to exhort. No man can exhort Well except it be
given to him of god so to do.
For, to exhort, is the gift also of god, in whose hands both our words, and
our bodies are. Whereupon the Apostel spak these words, saying: After the grace
which is given to me, like to a prudent and a wise master carpenter, I have
leyd the foundation. And in an other place, Unto every man (says he) as god
has given, I have planted, and Apollo has watered but god has given the
increase. So, nether he which planteth, nor he, which waters is any thing,
but he, which gyuethe the increase, which is god.

Even so, likewise, as no man precheth and exhorts well, but he, which has
receuid the gift of god, so that man does obediently hear him, which
precheth, and exhorts, to who^ the gift of obedience is given. Our obedient
is the gift of god.
This is the cause, why the lord, when he spoke to them which had there
fleshly ears open hearing his words, said: He that has ears to hear, let him
hear: Which ears (such as he spoke of) he knew well enough, al men had not*

And of whom theye should obteyn those ears (whosoever has them) the lord him
self shewethe; where he says: I will give to them an heart to know me and
ears to hear with. Then, to have ears to here with, is the gift of obedience,
that they, which have that same gift, may com to him, to who^ no man comes,
but to whom it is given of his father. We therefore do preach, Who has ears
to here
and exhort, and they which have ye ears to hear, do hear us obedie^tli. But
they which have not that same ears, it comes to pas in them, as it is
written, that hearing with their ears, they do not hear, that is to say,
hearing with the ears of the flesh, not with the agreement, and consent of
the heart.

But why the one has ears to hear, and the other not (that is to say)
wherefore it is given to them of the father, to com to the son, and to the
other not given, who knows ye mind of the lord? Or what man has been of his
counsel? Or what art thou, O man, which wylt answer against god? Shall we
therefore deny that thing to be true, which we manifestly do se, because we
cannot comprehend that thing thereof, which is hid from us, I say again shall
we say, that that thing is not true, which we do se with our eyes, because we can
not find the cause, why, and wherefore it is so as it is?

The.xv. Chapter.
But they do say again (as ye do wryt) that no man can be brought to
amendme^t of life, if we should speak openly before the congregation, in the
hearing of a multitude after this, wise and say, This, as concerning
predestination, is the certain, determinate, and very will of god, that some
of you shall receive the will of obedience, and forsake your infydelyte and
come to the faith, and so-to contynew to the end. And as toching the rest of
you, which do abide still in the delyght and pleasure of syn, for that cause are your not risen up from your sin, because the helpi^g grace of mercy and
compassion, has not lift you up from your sin. How be it if there be any of
you, All these are the words of him which make the ^^obiection.
which are not yet called, who^ his grace has predestenid for to be electyd,
ye shall hereafter receue ye same grace, by the which grace, ye also may have
the will to desire the same, and to be elected. And again if any of you be now
obedient, which are predestenid to be forsaken, and to be cast of from grace,
the same power which ye have now to obey, shall be taken from you, that ye
shall obey no more.

When they do thus spek unto us Thaunswer
wherefore should we be afraid to confess the grace of god, that is to say,
which is not given after our meryts? And why should we fear to testefy the
predestination of saints, more tha^ we are afraid to knoledge the prescyence,
and foreknoledge of god, as if a man would say, whither ye do now live well, or
euel ye shall be afterward such as god has you in his foreknoledg to be, when
mann does se hym^selfe out o^ the law o^ god let him doubt the^ worste^ an^
have him that he may be i^ that way which is of thelectes.
that is to say, good, if ye be so forknowen of him, or else bad and evil if he
has you in his forknowlege for to be bad. I pray you, if a man hearing these
words spoken of the prechar would give him self from labor to slogishnis, and
so to idelnes and noughty lusts, following his own noughtye and evil
concupiscencys, and stynkynge desires, should we therefore think, that, the
saying, which was spoken of the prescience, and foreknoweledge of god, were
false and untrue, because of his or their leudnes? If god has them in his
foreknowledge, that they will be good, shall they not be good, how bad so ever
they be at this present? Or if god does know before, that they shall be
evil, shall they not be evil for all the goodness, they do seem to be in now?
There was a certain man in our monastery, which being rebuked of his
brethren, because he lived not as he ought to do, but clean contrary,
neglecting those things which were commanded, and doing yt which was
prohibited, answered to them again with these words, (what manner of man
soever I am now, it makethe no matter: I shall be such a one, as god in his
foreknowledge, knows that I shall be. This man without fail, spoke the
truth, but yet for all that, there was in him small amendment, for he was worse
and worse, in so much that he forsook the company of the monastarye, and playde
as the dog, returning to his vomet again. But yet what manner a man he
shall be, we cannot tell. For these causes therefore, which they do allege, shall
we deny these things to be true, which are spoken about the prescyence, and
foreknowledge of god? Or shall we houlde our peace, and speak not a word
again, when we do here those matters spoken of, yea, then specially, when by
houlding still our tongue, men might, fall into others errors?

The.xvi. Chapter.
THere be also some persons, Objection.
which either do pray nothing at al, or else if they do, it is very coldly
don, because theye have learned that the lord does say, that he knows what
thing is nedful for us before we do call upon him. Thanswer
Shall we for such men's ungodliness, deny the verite of the sentence, which the
lord spoke, and so scrape it out of the book of the ghospels? Yea forsomych as
it is certain ye god has ordained some things to be given before they be
desired and prayed for, as the beginning of our faith, and some thing again not,
except it be desired, and prayed for, as the gift of perseverance to the end,
truly that man, which thinks that he has that same virtue of him self,
Perseuera^ce must be obtained by petition.
without intercession, he does not pray, that he may have it. We must therefore
take heed, lest, whyll we be in doubt and fear of so many things, godly
exhortation do w^x could, the heatte of prayer be quenchyd, and presumption of
our own self kindelyd in us.

Therefore, let the truth be told, specially, when any such question is
moved, which requires answer to be made acording to the veryte, and let them
take it which can, lest peradue^tur, when the verite is hid and not confessed,
because of them which can not take it, they which are able to take it, should
not only be depryued of the knoledg of the verite, but for lake thereof should be
snared, and taken in a trape of talse and untrue doctrine. It makes no great
matter, yea it is proffytable that some veryte should not be spo^ken, because of
them, which are not able to receue it. That was y^ cause why the lord spak these
words (yet have I many things to tell you, but ye are not now able to bear
them. And that saying of the Apostell, (I could not talk to you, as to
spiritual men, but as to carnal and fleshly men, and as to young children in
Christ. I gave you therefore milk to drink, and no strong meat, for ye were
not able to take it nor yet ar. And yet, after some manner of speaking, it may
be well, that, that thing, which is spoken, is both milk to young children,
and strong meat also, for them which are great.

As for example. In the beginning was the word, and the word, was with god,
and god was the word. What christian man can hold his peace, and speak not
these words? And again, what man ca^, or is able to vndertstond them to the
bottom Or what higher matter in all the holy scripture can be found, tha^ this
is? And yet it is not left unspoken, because of young infa^tes, being not hid
and kept nether from young nor old. But to tell the truth is one thing, and for
a necessary cause not to speak it, is another.

It were to long a busynes, to search out al causes, why the truth should not
be spoken at al times, of the which causes, this following is one, lest we should
make them which do not understand, to be the worse, while we go about to make
them, which have understanding to be the wysar, when they, who^ we would
instruct, as they are not the wyser, when we do not speak the truth, so nor
yet the worse holdinge our peace.

But when the matter is such that we know for a surtye, y^ that man which can
not understand, and perceue the thing, A cause why it ought not be ^yd.
is made the worse when we to spek of it, what shall we then do for hi^ which is
able to take it and to understand it, being in y^ company and in the presence
of the other? Is it not more mete, y^ we should tell the truth, that he, which
can tak it, may take it 'than not for to speak it, where by not only both of
them can not receue it, but he also which is able to take yt, if it were
spoken, should be made ye wors by y^ keeping of it hyd? For if he herd it, and
understood it, by him other me^ might, and would lern. For the more ready and able
he is to lern, the more apt he is to teache other. Now, he which is an enmy to
the grace of god, does lie hard upon us, laboring all that he may, that we
should believe, yt the grace of god is given acording to our meryts, and so the
grace of god should be no grace? Yet we will speak yt thing, which we may be
boulde to speak by the scripturs. But we do fear lest, if we do speak, we should
offend that man, which can not receue the verite: and should we not fear, lest
by keeping close, and byding of the verite ye man which is able to receue yt,
should be trappid and deceuid with false doctrine Either must we teache and prech
predestination, as the holy scripture speaks openly unto us, y^ in those
persons, The great inconuenie^ce which comes of predestination not taught.
which are predesteni^ the gyfts, and vocation of god, ar without repentance:
or else we must confese, and grant that grace is gygyuen to us after our
mety^ts, as the Pelagyans do hold opinnio^* although this their opinion (as I
have often times said) is found in y^ acts of the bishops of the east part
condemned by the mouth of Pelagian him self.

But these me^, for whose cause we do take all this labor, do not hold in all
points with the error of the pelagians heresy, wherein these men do dyffer from
the pelagians.
some thing they do go from it, that although, they will not grant those me^ to
be predestined, which are by the grace of god made obedient, and so do
continue, yet they do confess that this grace does prevent the will of them to
whom it is given. But therefore, they will not grant them to be predestined,
because grace should not be believed to be a free gift, as the verite teaches,
but according to the merits of the will preceding, as the pleagians most false,
and untrue* doctrine does affirm. It follows then, y^ grace does prevent,
faith, otherwise faith does prevent grace, y^ will also does preuente grace, for
faith can not be without the will. But if grace does go before faith, because
it does go before the will, truly it does prevent, and go before al our
obedience, it does go before charity, which only causes us, wyllingly and
truly to obey: which altogether grace does prevent, yea and works them in
him, to whom it is given.

The.xvii. Chapter.
There is no mor behynd now, but to continue in these good things to y^ end.
And that is perseueraunce, which is prayed for in vain if the lord by his
grace does not work that same in him, whose prayar and petytion he does hear
and grant. Perseuera^ce is the gift of god.
Mark now, how for from the truth, it is to deny, yt perseverance to the end
of the life is the gift of god, forsomych as when his pleasure is, he may
shorten this life at al tims, and make an end thereof, which if he does give
before the man does fall, he makes him to persevere and continewe to the end.
But the great liberalite of the goodnys of god, is more open and apparent in
the eyes of ye faithful, because they do perceue and se, that this grace, is
given, yea to young children, to whose age the gift of obedience perteyneth not.
These gifts truly to whom soever god does give the^, there is no doubt (...) he
knew before in his forknoeledg, that he would give them, and in his prescience,
he did ordeyne them for to be given

Those then, whom he has predestenid, he has called with that vocation, whereof
it greueth me nothing to make often mention, as it is written (the gifts^ and
vocation of god, ar without repentance. For in his pres^^^ence, which cannot be
deceived and is also immutable, the disposition of those things, which he will
work is none other thing but predestination. But lykwise, as yt man whom god
knows before, or has in his forknolege yt shall be chaste, (he him self having
no certain knowledge thereof) does work y^ he may be chaste: so, that man, whom
he has predestened to be chaste, though it be uncertain, and unknown to him,
y^ he is predestened, cease not to work yt he may be chaste, although he does
here that it is ye gift of god. that he shall be, as he shall be, but his charity
reioyseth, and is glad thereof, not being proud and puffed up in him self, as
though he should not receive it, as the gift of god.

The preaching therefore, of predestination does not only not hinder, and pluck
a man back from working of this and such other good works, but it does help
him forward, that when he reioyseth, he may rejoice in the lord. The self same
thing, that I have spoken and said of chastity, do I understand also of
faith, of the love of god, of charity, of perseueraunce, and to be short of al
other kind of obedience unto god. But those men, which do set the beginning
of our belief, and the continuance therein to the end, so much i^ our own power,
yt they do not think the^ to be y^ gifts of god, nor yet, yt god does work our
mynds. and wyls, that we may obtain and get them, and so obtained, keep them
still, do grant al other things, beside faith and perseueraunce, to be his gift
obtenid, through the meryt or deserving of the faith of the beleuer. Wherefore
then do theye not fear, By their own techi^g he prouethe that the openinge of
predestination does not hinder but further godly living.
lest by the openinge of predestination, the exhortation unto those things,
which they grant to be the gift of god, should be hinderyd? Or (peradventure)
do they say y^ those things which they do contesse to be the gyfts of god, are
not predestyned? If they be not predestined, then are they not given of god, or
else he knew not before, that he would give them.

But, and if they be given of him, and he knew also before, Objection.
that he would give them, then are they predestenid of him.

Lykwyse then, Answer.
as they them self do exhort to chastyte, to charity, to love toward god, and
to other godly virtues, which they do confess to be y^ gifts of god, known
of him before he gave them, and so can not deny, but they are predestenid, and
that their exhortacions ar nothing hindered by the preching of the
predestination of god, that is to say, by the prechi^g of ye prescience of god,
in those gifts which shall be given: even so, let them think that their
exhortacions unto faith, and to perseverance therein, ar nothing hyndered,
although they are the gifts of god seen before of him, yt is to say:
predestened to be given, but rather y^ by this preching of predestination: yt
same pernicious and dangerous error is plucked back, and hindered, ye and
subverted, which defends that y^ grace of god is given after out merits, that
by ye preching of predestination they which to rejoice, may rejoice, not in
them self, but in the lord. And let them, to who^ it is given to have a quiker
wit, to perceue things with les speking, take it pacie^tly, and be content with my
often r^pe^ig of somthinges, which thing I do for there co^modite which are
so^what dull, and hard of understanding, y^ they may perceue it ye better.
Thapostel James does say, James. (...).
if any of you do lack wysdom, let him ask it of god which gives to al me^
abounda^tly and casts his gift in the teeth to no man, and it shall be given
to him.

For it is written in the proverbs.

The lord does give, wysdom.

And as toching continency, or chastise of life it is written in yt book of
wysdom (whose authorite has been allowed of great lernid me^, which have trauelid
in ye scripturs long before our time. It is written (Isai) with these words, when.
I did know perfectly yt no man can be chaste except god does give to him ye
gift thereof, this thing also perteined to wysdo^ to know whose gift it was.
These then (that is to say,) wysdo^ and chastyte, as well as all other virtues
(which I do pas over) are the gyfts of god, And so do these men say also. For
theye are not as the pelagians, which with obstynate, and heretiqual stobernis
do conte^d against the manifest, and open veryte. But yet these our men do say,
that our faith does impetrate and obteyn of god, ye these vertuse should be given
to us, which faith (say they) does begin in us of our self by our own pour.
The beginni^g whereof, as well as the continuance to the end, they do hold and
defend to be of the^ self, as though we had not this also of the gift of god,
i. Corin. iiii
as well as the other. And in this point they are against the apostel, which
says, what haste thou, that thou have not receuyd? They are also against the
holy martyr Cypryan which says, we must be proud of no thing, for so much as
we have no thing of our self.

For all this that I do speak, and many other words more, which I am weary to
rehearse and repeat so often, and for all that I have prouyd, that the beginning
of our faith, and the perseverance therein to the end, are the gifts of god
and that there are none of his gifts but he knew before, what gyfts they were,
which he would give, and to whom he would give them, and so by that reason, that
they also ar predestenyd, whom he does deliver and crown, they do make answer
and say, that the openinge of predestination does let and hinder the commodyte
of preching in exhortation, because (as they do suppos^ when men do here the
matter of predestination spoken of, and declared unto them, they will not for
any thing that a man can do, by exhorting to virtue or reprehe^ding of vice,
and noughtines, endeavor them self, and study to be y^ better. And by these
their words, they will not that any man, should preach, that the first coming
to faith, and the continuance therein, are the gifts of god, least, that
desperation should bear more ruele among me^, than good and godly exhortation,
when the hearers do with the^ self consider, that no man can tell (such is
ma^s ignorance,) to whom god does give these his gifts, and to whom not.
Wherefore then do they, as well as we, preach and teach, that wisdom and
chastity at the gifts of god? And, if so be, when these are taught to be the
gifts of god, and so preched by them, there exhortation is not let, nor
hinderid by the which they do exhort men to be wise and chaste, what cause is
there I pray you, wherefore they should think that the exhortation, which is to
faith and to the contynuans therein should be hinderid, more than there
exhortation which is to wysdom and chastity? And if these be the gifts of god,
as by ye scripturs, which are witness of them self, we have prouyd, let us now
let pass, and spek no more of the gift of chastyte but only in this place
disput and reason of the gift of wysdom. For the said Apost^l Iamys (of whom
we spoke of) says these words. The wysdom, which is from above is al chaste
and pure, it is also peassable and quiet, it is sober and gentyl, and easy to
be entreatyd treated, full of mercy and good fruits without grudging and
dissimulatio^. Do you se and perceive (I pray you) how many and how great
virtues, this wisdom has, which comes down from the father of light? For
every good gift. and every perfect gift (as he says) is from above, and
comes down from the father of lyghtes.

To be short we do rebuke those, which are unchaste and contentios persons, and
yet we do preche and teache unto them, that the wysdom which is chaste, and
gentyl, is the gift of god, having no doubt nor fearing lest they, whom we do
exhort (when they are not certain to whom god does give this wisdom) should by
this preachinge take occasion to fall into desperation, rather than to receive
any fruit of good exhortation. And again, fearing nothing, that they by our
rebukyng of their vice, should not only not be moved agenst them selves, but
agenst us, because we do rebuke them, which have not those virtues, which
virtues we do say are not brought forth by the will of man, but ar given
liberallye by the bountefull goodness of god.

Wherefore did not the preachinge of this grace pluck back the apostell James,
from rebukynge of them, and saying unto them, these words: If you have the
zeal of anger and strife in your hearts, be nothing proud thereat, nor yet ly
not against the verity. For that is not the wisdom, which comes down from
above, but it is an erthly wisdom, a beastly, and a deuelysh wisdom. For
where as zeal, and contention is, there is unsteadfastness, and all evil works.

Lykwise then, as we may, by the authority of the holy scriptures, and as our
own deeds do make mention in the same doing (I say their deeds as well as ours)
rebuke those persons which are unquiet, and troublous, although we do preach
that the wisdom, which the Apostell names, is the gift of God, which
wisdom does amend, and correct those that are contentiouse, and brawling
persons: even so, those persons, which are unfaithful, and those, which do
not continue in the faith which they have received, (although we do preach,
and tech the grace of god, whereby both faith it self, and perseverance therein
ar declared to be the gyfts of god) may also be rebuked and toulde of their
unfaithfulness, and unsteadfastness. For although, that, yt godly wisdom is
obtained through faith (according to the saying of y^ apostel*) If any man lack
wisdom, let him ask it of god, which gives to al men abundantly, James. ^*
and vpbreadeth no man, and it shall be given to him, (and says forthermore,
let him ask it boldly in faith, having no mistrust) yet we must not say,
because we obtain that wysedom through faith, therefore faith is of our self,
and not the gift of god. For faith is given to him which has received it,
before it is asked or prayed for. For the apostel Paul speaks plainly and
openly, saying, Peace be to the brethren, and charity with faith from god our
father, and our lord Jesus Christ. From whom we have peace a charity, from
him have we faith.

For the which cause. we do desire, and pray, that in them them which have
already receuyd the faith, he would encrese it, and to them which have it not,
that he would vouchsafe to give it. And also, they them self, which do cause us
to make al these words, which do cry out, that the prechinge of
predestination and of grace, is a let and stop that men can not exhort
frutfully, as they might, if predestination were not spoken of, theye I say,
them self do not only exhort men unto those vertuse, which they do hold to be
of them self (as the beginning of faith, and the continuance therein, to thend)
which thing they are bound to do that by there exhortations they which are
unfaithful may believe, and the other to continue still therein, but they do
exhort them to the other vertuse alsoo, which are the gifts of god (as they
say) only and not the other.

But as toching those things which they do confess against the pelagians
error to be the gyfts of god, as chastyte, continency, patience, and other
vertuse perteyning to a godly life, which are obtained by faith, they should
show, and teache the people to call and to pray to god for these virtues, He
teachethe them how they should exhort people to uertues.
for them self and for other, that he would give those vertus unto them, and
not that they should exhort and bid them only to have them, and to keep them.

For somych then as they do exhort people to these vertuse also, The beginning
the ending and the mids of our life, are the gifts of god
which they do confess to be the gifts of god, as well as to faith and
perseverance, which they deny to be of god but of there own working, and in
that they do exhort men unto them (declaring themself to be men) they do
sufficiently manifest, and make open unto us, that the prechynge of
predestination, and of the grace of god, is no hynderance to that, that men
should exhort other unto faith, and perseueraunce to the end, for so much as we
do prech, that these also, (that is to say) faith and perseueraunce are the
gifts of god, and that no man has these gifts of him self, but ar given to
him of god.

But yet no man can deny, but that it is his own fault and blame, what soever
he be, which does forsake this faith, in giving place to tentacion, whereby he
is brought from yt faith, which he has received. And again, although it be
his own fault that he does go from the faith, we may not therefore deny, that
the virtue of perseverance to the end, is y^ gift of god. For, for this same
peruerance iv. faith to thenv, that man does make his daily petition, which
says, Led us not into temptation. And if his prayer be hard, he does receive
his petytyon.

And so by that reason, prayenge daily that he might persevere and co^tinu, he
does not set the hope of his perseverance and stedfastnes in him self, but in
god, I will not amplyfye, and exaggerate the matter with many more words, but
rather I will leave it to them to think, and consider with the^ self what manner a
thing they have taken in hand to persuade, which is, that by the preching and
opening of predestination, the herers thereof should receive more cause of
desperation, than fruit of godly exhortacio^. Which is as much to say as men ar
taught to despair of salvation, when they do learn to put their confidence not
in the^ self but in god. And yet the prophet does cry out with a loud voice
saying: Cursed are all they, which do put there hope in man. These gyfts truly of
god, which are given to the elect, which elect are called after y^ purpose of
god (among y^ which gifts, is the beginning of faith, and the contynuance also
therein to the end, as we have prouyd by many authorytes of the scriptur, and
by strong and substancyal reasons) i^ there be no predestination, which we
defend and hold strongly fore to be, then are they not in his forknowledge. But
these gifts ar in the forknolege of god, then is there predestination, which
we ernestly do defend and maintain.

The xviii. Chapter.
ANd therefore in some places of ye scripture, Prescie^ce is sometime taken in
the scripture for predestination
a man shall find this predestination to be signified unto us in the vocable of
prescience, or forknoledge, as the Apostel speaks, saying: God has not cast
of his people whom he has forknowen* This word, which he says (foreknowen)
can non otherwise be well vnderstonded, but it be taken for predestenid, as the
circumstance of the place and matter does tech us. For he speaks in that place
of the rest of the Jews, which are saved, the other peryshing. For before he
came to this place where the prophet, speking to Israel said (All the day
long I have opened my hands to an unbelieving and a resysting people) and
again as^ though this questyon (where ar the promises, which were made to
Israel) had been demanded of him: he aunsweryd incontynetly these words,
saying: (do I say therefore that God has forsaken, and cast of his people? God
forbid. For I am an Israelyt, of the ^ed of Abraham, of the trybe of Beniamyn)
as though he would say, I my self am also of that people. Then did he speak
these words, whereof we now do common, saying god has not cast o^ his people,
which he has foreknowen. And, for to show that the remnant, was reserved by
the grace of god, not by the merets of there own works, he said thus much more,
do ye not know what the scripture speaks in H^ly, how he called on y^ lord
against Israel* and so forth. But what answer made the lord unto him (says
the Apostel? I have left unto me, (says the lord) seven thousand men, which
have not o^s bent there kne before Baal. He said not there are left unto me, Mark
how he death wey^ge words of the lord.
or else, they have left them self unto me. But he said, I have left unto
me. And so then says the apostel, in this time the remnaunt is sauyd by the
election of grace, But if it be of grace, the^ does it not com of works. For
then grace were no grace. And so, joining, and knitting these things up together
(as I have rehearsed) what the^ (said he)? And to that he said: That, which
Israel sought after it did not obtain, election did obtain it, the rest were
blinded. It follows, that in this love of god, and in the remnant, which is
saved through the election of grace, the Apostell will have the people to be
meant and vnderstonded, which people for that cause god did not cast of,
because he did forknow them. This is that same eleccion, whereby god did chose
the^ whom him pleased in Christ, that they should be holy and pure in his
sight, in charity, predestening them into the adoption of children. No man
therefore which does understand this matter, can either deny or doubt, but
these words, which thapostle does speak, (He has not cast of ye people, Ephe.
(...),
which he has forknowen) do signifi non other thing than predestination. For
in his for knowledge, he knew before the remnaunte, which he would make after
the election of grace (that is to say) which are predestened. And without
doubt, if he did predestinat the^, he knew it before, that he would so do. But
to predestinate is as much as to know before what he would do afterward. What
thing then should let us, when we do read in holy writers these words (the
prescience of god) specially, when they do treat of y^ vocation of the elects,
but that we may understand, and call it predestination. For peradventure they do
use this word and vocable prescience the more, because it is more easy to be
vnderstonded, and beside that, it is not against, ye it is right agreeable to
the vetitie, which is taught as touching y^ predestination of grace. This I
am sure of, that no man (except he would err wyllingly) can dispute agenst
this predestination of grace, which we do defend, by the authorities of the
holy scripture.

The.xix. Chapter
ANd me thinks, to those men, which at desyros to know the mynds and
judgments, of those, which are wrytars concerning this matter, these two holy,
and vertuose men, Ciprian, and Ambrose, being men hyghly commended both for
there pureness of faith, and great knowledge in all godly doctryn whose testimonis
we have rehersid, should be sufficient, both that they should thoroughly believe,
and so preche and tech that the grace of god, is a fre gift, as it ought to
be believed and taught and also that they should not think the preching of y^
said grace to be any hinderance or let, to y^ preching, wherein we do exhort
those which are slothful to go from there slothfulnis, and rebuke those which
are noughtye and evil, from their leudnes, for so much as these godly me^, did
so highly extol, and set forth the grace of god, insomuch that th^ne of the^
said, (we must be proud of nothing, because nothing is our own, and the other
said. That, nether our hearts, nor our thoughts ar in our own power. And yet
they in their prechyng, did both exhort, and rebuke, as they saw cause, ye the
commandments of the lord might be wrought and don. They fered not lest any
would say to the^, wherefore do you exhort us? wherefore do you rebuke us, if
we have no good thing of our self, and if our hearts and thoughts are not in our
own pour? They were afraid of no such words, being of so godl^ a judgment y^
they knew well, there were very few or no^, which had receuid such a gift at y^
mouth of god, or else by some angel. that they should have the knowledge of the
heavenly doctrine, without the help of any man, preaching unto them. But
co^trarywise, they knew many, to whom it was given, that by the preaching and
teaching of me^, they should come to faith and belief in god. How be it, which
way soever the word is spoken and declared to a man, he that does give such
ear unto it, that he does follow, and obey it, that same is y^ gift of god. So
these foresaid holy wrytars, being most godly expositors of the word of god,
did both preach the grace of god, as it ought to be preched (that is to say)
which grace no humayne merits do precede, and also did most instantly, and
earnestly exhort men to the keeping of the commandments of the lord, that
they which have the gift of obedience, may here and perceive, wherein they
should be obedient. For if any of our meryts do precede the grace of god, it
must be y^ meryt either of so^ deed, Ciprian
or word, or thought of ours, in the which, the will of man is vnderstonded to
be good. But that man did in few words comprehend al kind of merits, which
said: We must be proud of nothing, Ambrose
forsomych, as nothing is ours to be proud of. That man also which said, that
our hearts, and our thoughts are not in our power he left nether words, nor deds
vnment. For there is no ded, or word, which any man does work or spek but it
commith out of the thought of y^ heart. What thing could this holy matter, and
godly doctor Cyptyan do more, concerning this matter, than, where he taught us
speking upon the lords prayer, y^ we must pray for the enemies of Christ's
faith, in the which lesson, we are taught, that the beginning of our faith is
the gift of god, after his mind and judgment. He taught us also. y^ the church
of Christ, does daily pray for perseverance, that it may persevere and continue
to the end. For god does give that to non* but to them which have perseuered to
the end. Blessed Ambros also, where he treats upon these words of the
Evangelist Luk, which words ar. Whither this word (it likes me well is spoken
of our own will or of the workinge of god of that same will in us so to speak.
(It seemed to me well and good) it might well be (said Ambrose) that the thing
did like and please him whereof he spoke. For things (said he) do not only
like us well in our own conceyts and wills, but even so as it plesed him, which
does speak in us, which is Christ, which does work in us, y^ that thing which
is good in deed, may so sem, and appear unto us. For on whom he takes mercy,
and compassion, him he calls. And therefore, that man, which does follow Christ
(being demanded y^ question, For what cause he would be a christian man) may
well make answer, and say, it lyked me well, and it thought me good so to do.
For when he speaks those words, he denies not, but that it pleased god, that
he should so be. For the will of men is prepared of god.

For it is also the grace, and gift of god, that he should be honored of his
saynetes. Mark this great note of ambrose, and the free will masters shall find
small comfort thereat.


Also in the self same work (that is to say) in the exposition of y^ said
ghospel, when he came to this place, where we do read, that the Samaritans, would
not receue Christ, coming toward Jerusalem* mark also (says Ambrose) and
lern this with you, y^ Christ would not receue them which were not with a simple.
and an unfeigned heart, and mind, co^verted unto him. For, if he would, he might
have made them devout and godly, where as they were not. But the cause, why
theye receuid him not, y^ Evangelist him self ope^i^h, sayng: (Bycaus he had
tornid his face away to go to Jerusalem. But his disciples, would fayn have been
receuid. But god does call whom he will, and makes holy, whoom him pleases.
What thing more evident and plain, than this, do we look for, in the holy
wrightars, and expositors of the word of god, if, we have any pleasure to her
and lern of them that thing, which is open and manifest in the scripturs? But
although these two doctors, were sufficient, yet will we ad and ioyn Gregory,
for the therd man unto them. which witnesses, that both to believe in god, and
also to confess that thing, which we do believe is a gift, saying after this
wise. That is to co^fes three persons and one god.
We pray you, confess the trinite, of on deyte, and we will pray unto god that
the voice of that confession, may be given to you of the holy ghost (that is
to say) he shall be desired, that he would suffer, the voice to be given to you,
with the which voice ye may confess that, which ye do believe and he will give
it: I know well. For he which did the first, will give also, that follows: And
he, which did give to you the gift to believe, will give to you also the gift to
confess your beleffe.

Forsomych then, as these, which are so noble doctors do say, that we have
nothing as of our self to be proud of, but that it is the gift of god,
whatsoever we have, yea that nether our hearts, nor our thoughts. ar in our own
power, where whereby, we do give al to god, knoledging and confessinge, that we
do receive al of his liberalite, that we may so continue, Here you do find,
boothe the head, the foot, and the whole body of al uertues and godly deeds
to be the only gift of god.
and be converted to god, and that, that thing which is good, may appear also
to us to be good: and that we may will the same, that we may honor god and
receue Christ* that of undevout, and vnholi we may be made virtuous and godly,
and finally, yt we may believe in the trinite, and contes that same with our
mouths al, and every one of these things, these foresaid doctors do attribut to
ye grace of god, knolegi^g yt they at y^ gifts of god, and so testifieng, yt we
have al these good things of him, and not of our self.

Is there any man, which will say that these men did so knowledge, and confess the
grace of god, that they durst, or would be so boulde to deny his prescyence, and
forknowlege, which not only the lernyd, but also the rude, and unlearned do
confess and allow? Finally, if these men did so know, that god was the geuer of
these things, that they do grant, that he knew the same, before that he would
give them, and that he could not be ignorant, to whom he would give his gifts,
doubtless, if they knew all this, them knew they alsoo predestination, which the
apostels preched, and we do defend all that we may withal diligence, agenst a
sort of new heretics. And yet for all that, when they preched obedience: and
exhorted men diligently to the keeping thereof, no man could well and justly say
to them: If you will not have obedience wex cold, whereunto you do exhort us, and
make it faint in our stomachs, prech no more to us, this grace of god. which
we confess, that god does give and you do exhort us alsoo a that we should
work it.

The.xx. Chapter
Wherefore, sith the Apostels, and doctors of the church which succeeded after
them, did both, (that is to sai) both preche truly the grace of god, which is
not given after our merits, and also with holsom precepts, That is too good
works.
and lessons tech, and exhort men unto godly obedience, what cause have they
against the invincible veryte, that they can somych as think ye they do speak
well, in that they do say, although it be true, that is spoken of the
predestination of the benifits of god, yet it should not be taught a broad to
the people. Yes truly, it ought, and must be preched, that they, which have
ears to here may here. If any does not perceue and understand it, let him
refuse it, and medel not wtal, so yt he which does receue, and understand yt,
may receue it to him self, and drynk it into his heart, and so live. For lykwise
as the love to god ward must be preched, that god may be worshipped of him,
which has ears to here with, and likewise chastity, that he which has ears to
here, may commit no unlawful and unclean deed with his fleshly members, and so
charity, that of him, which has ears, both god and his neighbor may be
loved, even so, as well must the predestination of the benefits of god be
preachid, The final e^d of the preaching of predestination.
that he which has ears, to here may rejoice not in him self, but in god.

But as to that, which they do say, that it is no need, that the hearts, and
the minds of the vnlernid, and of those which have small intelligence, and
understanding, should be trobled with such doubtful disputation, This is thee
last ancor hold of them which would not have predestination openly taught.
and reasoning, forsomich, as y^ catholyque and universal faith, has been many
years, well and sufficientlye defended, and yet this matter of predestination
not medelyd with all, both against the erroneous opinyons of diverse, and
specially against the pelagyans, in so many books, and works of good catholyque
men: ye and in mine own works also, before this matter was taken in hand, I do
much meruayl at their thus spekyng, that hey do not consider, and way (I will
not speed of other men's doyngs) those yea min own works which I wrote and set
forth, before there was any name or mention of the pelagians wherein they may se,
that not yet kowing of any heresi, y^ pelagian should be author of in many
places of my books I believed, and also taught the same grace, by the which god
does deliver us from evil opynions and noughtie manners, which grace no good
works or me ^ituose deeds do preced (god working that same grace acordinge to
his bounteful and fre mercy.) This matter, I begann to perceue more fully, in
that disputation, which I wrote unto the holy father Symplicia^ of most godly
memory, bishop of the church of Myla^, what time I was first made bishop. In
the which disputation I both knolegid yea and defendid that the beginning of
faith is the gift of god. Which of al mi books does make oftener mention of
this matter, than those books, which I vrot, intitulid, (of my confessio^s)
which I wrote before pelagians heresy, was spoken of. In those books, did and
often times make mi petition to our lord god, sayi^g: Give to me, that which
thou do command, and command what thou will. Which my words, Pelagia^ being
at Rome upon a certain tym, hearing a bishop which was there rehersing in his
presence, cold not bear nor abyed to here them, and chaffyd so against them,
that almost he had fallen out, He prouethe the words which he wrote in his
book of confessions to be true and catholic.
with the bishop that spoke them.

What thing does god first, and cheffly command us to do, but y^ we should
believe in him. Then, if yt be well spoken of me (give that thou command) it
does follow, that he does give, that we should believe.

And in those same boks also, as to thing that, which I spoke of my conversion,
(the lord being the co^uertor of me unto the faith (which faith with out
ragios madness, and made babeling I did before al yt I might impong) do ye not
remember that I did openly knowledge and testifi, that by the faithful, and
dayle tears of my mother. I was converted to the faith? There also I did say,
that god by his grace did convert, and torn, the wyls of men unto the same
grace which me^ had not only not receuid yt, which were out of the faith,
but the hearts also of those men, which are enemies unto it, he does torn. God
makes his enemies to be his fr^ndes when and as often as it pleases him


And as tochinge perseverance, which is to continue still in that faith til the
end, how I have made my petition to the lord for to have it granted and given
to me (if ye be disposed) ye can both tell and rehers the words also. All the
gyfts therefore of god, which either I desired and praid for to have, or which I
I comendyd and praised in the same book what man is so bold I will not say to
deny, but ones to doubt that god knew not before* that he would give them, yea,
and that he could not be ignorante to whom he would give them.

This is the plain, New heresies, do bring new questions and new questions
new solutions, and new solutio^s do ask new labors and more diligent
serching of the scriptures.
and manifest predestination of saints, which predestination necessite
constrained us at the last, with greater diligence, and more earnest labor to
d^^^nd, when we dysputed against the Pelagians. For we do sai that every heri^e
does bring with it, his own and proper questions newly inuentid. Against y^
which the holy scripture requires, more diligent, and ernest defense, and
greatar labor, than if no sych necessyte had constreined us thereunto. For what
thing caused the places of y^ scripture (which do commend, and set forth
predestination to be so diligently serchyd out, and by these our labors
defendid, but because the Pelagians, do hold, and defend, that the grace of god
is given after our merytts. Which what other thing is it, but a plain denial of
grace?

Chap.xxi.
TO confound therefore that opinion, which is un ^^in^, and unthankful to god:
yea and also, an enemy to the fre, and liberal benefits of god, whereby we are
sauyd, we do defend, acording to the scripturs, that both the beginning of
faith, and perseverance therein to y^ end, whereof we have spoken so^ many
words at the gifts of god. For if we do say, that the beginning of faith is
of our self, that, by and for the same beginning, we may deserve to receue
againg other rewards and gifts of god, then do the pelagians conclud without
any more words, that the grace of god is given after our meryts. This opinion
the catholic faith has so abhorred, that pelagia^ being in fear lest he
should be condemnyd therefore, did first condeme yt his own self.

And again if we would say that perseverance to the end, is of our self and
not of god, then do theye answer that the beginning is as well of our self as
the end thereof, making this reason saying: If we have the pour in our self
that we may continewe to the end, miche more have we the beginning in our
own power for to believe, forsomich as it is a more great and busiar matter to
make an end tha^ to begin. And so after this fashion they do conclude, that the
grace of god is given after our deserving. But if both to gither, as well to
begin, as to make an end, ar the gifts of god, and also if he knowethe before,
that he will give those gyfts (which, of no man cann be denied): the^ must
predestination be prechid, that the right, and true grace of god (that is to
say) which is not given after any humain meritts, may with all power and
strength be defendid. And as tochinge my self, in the book which I wrotte,
entitled (of correction and of grace) which work could not satisfy and
please all my friends I think that I did so set forth perseverance, which
is to the end, for to be the gift of god, that, (if I do remember my self well)
I never before did wright thereof, nether more weightly, nor more plainly. And
yet in that place, I did not speak of it, after that fashion as though I had
bin the first, which had spoken thereof, and that non had meddled therewith before
me. For the holy father Cyprian (as I have told you before) has so expounded
our petitions contained in the lords prayer, that he says, we do pray for
perseueraunce in the first petition, affirminge, that we then do desire that
same of god, when we do say (Let thy name be hallowed) which is, that, for
so much as we are sanctefied in baptyme, we desire, that we may continue in that
same still, which we have begone. But I would y^ all these (to whom, for the love
they do bear unto me, I should not again be unkind which men, as you do writ do
embrase and commend al my writings, this only excepted, which we have now in
question) I would (Isey) that they should look and se whither in y^ latter part
of y^ first book, of those twain, which I wrote to Simplician, the bishop of
Mylan before Pelagians heresye did spring up, any thing does rem^^n doubtful,
wherein I should sem^ to doubt, that y^ grace of god is not given after our
merits. And also I would they should se, whether I have not don sufficiently
concerning the beginning of faith, declaringe that it is the gift of god. And
also whither it may not appear of the words, which I did speak there
(although I spoke the^ not so openly) that the perseverance to the end, as well
as the beginning of faith is noone otherwise ours than by the gift of him,
which has predestened us to his kingdom and heavenly glory.

Forthermore, as toching that epistel, which I wrote against y^ Pelagia^s, unto
the holy father Paulinus bishop of Nolan (against the which epistel, now of
late they have begone to contend) did I not write it a good mani of yers before?
Let the^ also read that epistel, which I wrote to Sixtus the eldar of thee
church of Rome, what time we contended most vehemently against the Pelagians,
and they shall find it siche an other, as that was, which we sent to Paulinus.
Hereby they may call to remembrans, that diverse yers past, these things, were
both spoken of, and also put in writi^g, which I do meruayl mich now to
discontent there minds. S. Augustine would have no man bound to his works,
(...) all things
And yet I would not, that any man should so mich regard, and make of my works,
that they should follow me in any thing, but wherein they do perceue and se, if
he does appear to err in any point but wherein he errethe to forsake him.
that I do not err, but where as I am in the right way.

For, for that cause do, I now wryght certain books, wherein I go about to
retract my work as that I may testefye, and show, how, that in all things, I
did not follow min own self: But yet I trust that by the helping mercy of god,
I did good with my wrytings although at the beginning. I was not perfect in all
things. For even now I should both lie, and speak arrogantly, if I should say,
that I am com to sich a perfection (yea being so old as I am) that I am with
out al error in writing. But there is a great difference bitwene how mich and in
what things a man does err and how quickly he will amend it: and that man, which
stobernly, will stand in the defense of his error. For that man truly is happy,
which has learned, and profited so well, that at the last day of his life,
has that thing given to him, which he wanted al his life before, and therefore
may be then judged rather worthy of perfection, which has so proffited, tha^
of punishment for ye contrary. Wherefore, if I ought not to be unthankful to
the^ which did favor and love me, God makes men, of his enemies his lovers
because they had some profit by my woorks, yea before they did love me: how
much more ar we bound to be tha^kful to god, who^ we could not love, except he
had loved us first, and made us to be his lovers? For love and charity does
come of him, as those godly men do bear witness, whom he has made great
orators, and mighty preachers of his name. What thing ca^ be more
unthankful, than to deny, ye grace of god, which is in that we say, it is
given after our merits? This saying did the catholyque, and universal faith,
abhor in the Pelagians, as a crime, of most heinous wickedness. This error
Pelagian him self did condemn not for any love he did bear to the veritye, but
for fear lest he him self should have been condemned. Whosoever ever will sey, But
that it is given by the grace of god
that the grace of god is given after our meryts, agenst the belief of al
faithful men, and does not deny yt faith is of the grace of god by the which
grace he has obtained to be faithful, by that same reason, let him also give to
the grace of god, the gift of perseueraunce to thend, as well as the other (by the
which grace he obteyneth mercy) which perseverance he prays for daily, Bring
us no^ into temptation.
in yt he desires, yt he might not be brought into tentacion. In the myds
between the beginning of faith, and thend: which is perseverance to the end,
are al those vertuse, wherewith our life appears good and godly, which vertuse,
they them self do grant to be the gyfts of god, at the respect of faith. But
God knew that he would give to them, whom he has called al those things, that
is to sai, both ye beginning of faith and al other his gifts, even to the
end. It were therefore a matter of to mich contention, other to spek against
predestination, or else to doubt any thing thereof. A warnyng how predestination
should be taught.
Yet men must take heed, and be ware now and after what manner they do prech yt
to the people. And that they do not so preche it, that by there rude preching
among the unlearned people it should be sclanderyd and spoken evil of, as
apereth they have done by the prescience, and foreknoledge of god, which trueli
they can not deneye. As if theye would say unto the people, whither you do
sleep or wake, An example of unlearned and unaduised doctrine.
as god, who can not be deceuid, has you in his foreknoledg, that same shall
you be. For crafty, and unlearned phisicions, do often tims ley, and bind a
good plaster unto a man after that fashion, that it does not only, not profet
the part which is syk, but makes him often times worse. But they should rather
have said to the people. This is his counsel how they should teach this
doctrine.
So roon, that ye may come, to that you do roon after. And in your ronning ye
shall perceue and know, that ye ar so for known of god, that ye should run well.
And if they can deuyse any other way to preach and teach the prescience of
god, by the which their teaching, man might be driven from his sloggishnes. I
wuld they should use it.

Cap. xxii.
ALthough, this be the certain, and determinid will of god, concerning
predestination y^ some have receuid the will of obedience, and ar tornid from
there infydelyte, unto faith in Christ, and so have the gift to continue in
the same, and some other which do lie still in the delyghte, and pleasur of there
damnable sin, if they be also predeste^yd, therefore, ar they not yet risen up
from there sin bycaus the help of grace, which is pyttyful and take the mercy
has not lift them up. For if there be some which are not yet called, whom
thoroughe his grace, he has predestyned to be his elect and chosen, theye
shall also receue that same grace, whereby they may have the will and desire
thereof, and be also elected in deed. And again if there be any which do obey,
that are not predestined to his kyngedome and glory, those are but tymlyngs, and
shall not continue still in that same obedience to thend. Although therefore (I
say) these things are true, yet they must not be spoken of, after so plain a
fashion, to a multitude of herers, as though the words were spoken unto the^,
which are the hearars, or after sych a fasshion, as ye do wryght me of in your
lettres as (if a man should say). This is the will of god in his predestination
yt some of you shall receive y^ will to be obedient, and torn from your
infydelite, to faith. What need is it here to say (some of you? For if we do
speak to the church of god, if we do speak unto none other but such as do
believe, wherefore do we say, somof you are com to ye faith? For in so saying,
we do apper to do wrong unto the rest, when we might spek more comely, and aptli
if we should say: This is the very will of god in his predestination, that ye
should receue the will of obedience, and torn from your unfaithfulness to belefe,
and to receue the gift of perseverance, that ye may continue therein. The rest
of the words should in nowys be spoken that a man should say: those (which are
of you, that do abide and continue still in the pleasure of sin, do not
forsake your noughti lusts and pleasurs, because the help of the merciful
grace of god has not lift you up etc. Where as it had bin better spoken and as
it ought to have bin, if ye words had bu^ thus set as: If there be any of you,
which do continue in the delight and pleasure of syn which brings damnation,
receue most holsom doctrine. And when ye do as ye ar taught, be not puffed up
then with pride, as though your works were your own of your self, and had not
receuid them. For god is he which works in us both y^ will and ye work after
his good will. And let your stepps and goings be made right and straight of the
lord, that ye may will to walk in his way. Let your walking be so upright and
good, that as you do se your self walk, you may lern that ye do pertein to
the predestination of the grace of god. Also, those words, which do follow (but
if any of you are not yet called, who^ the grace of god has predestenid to be
electid, ye doutles shall receue that same grace, both that ye may have the
will to desire it, and also to be electid in ded) these words I say are not so
well spoken as they might have bin, if we would think and perswad our self,
that we do speak to those which are of the church of Christ, and not to the^
which are not of it. Why should we not rather say (if there be any which are
not yet called, let us pray for them, that they may be called. For
(peradventure) they are so predestenid, that it should be grauntid to our
prayars, that they shall receue that same grace, by the which they may have the
will to desire it of god and be also electid in deed. For god, which has
fulfilled and performyd al things, that he has predestenid, will have us, y^
we should pray for them, which are enemis unto the faith, yt thereby we may
perceue and understand, that he does give and grant, yea to the unfaithful,
that they may believe, yea and make also those which not willing for to be
willing and desyrers thereof. But those words, which do hereafter follow (as ye
do wryght) I merual if any man, among the christian people, which is yet but
weak, and feable, can be able to here them patiently, as if a man would say:
(and if there be any among you which ar now obedient, which is predestenid to
be reiectyd, and forsaken, the power which ye have now to do well, shall be taken
from you, that ye shall be no more obedient To speak after this manner, what
other thing else does it seem, and apere for to be but to curs^e, and to speak
evil, or else to proph^cy before of evil to com to the^? But if ye would spek
any thing of them which do not persevere and continue i^ ye faith, or if there be
some sich matter, y^ constreineth you to speak some thing thereof, whi should ye
not rather spek your words so, that they should not apere to be spoken to the
hearers (as perteyninge unto them) but as though they were spoken of some other,
not there present unto them: that is, that it should not be said to the
hearers, (if any of you be now obedient, which are predestined to be
forsaken, and such other words) let them I say be spoken in ye therd person
of y^ verb not in the second. For it is to odios and hatful a word to be
spoken, as though it were into there face, to the rebuke, and shamful reprofe of
the hearers, when a man does sai unto them (: If there be any of you which now
do obey and are predestined to be forsaken, the power of obedience shall be
taken away from you that ye shall obey no more). Should there be any less thing
in effect spoken, and said (I pray you) if a man would speak after this fashion
and say. If they do obey and be now good* which are not predestenid to his
kingedom and glory, they are but tymlyngs, and do continewe but for a whyel,
they shall not abid to the end in that same obedience. Is not this now spoken,
both better and more fetly than if we should in our words apere to wysh and
desire so great an evil unto the^ which are our hearers, but rather now do
apere to tell, and show them that thing of other men which thing the hearars
do hate and abhore, and that they should not take those words spoken to them
self, as of the^ self, but be in hope, and prayar, of that thing which is
better. After yt manner, and to the self same effect in sentence, as it is
spoken of predestination, it may be spoken, and said of the prescience of god,
which prescience they can not deny, but is true, as syf ye do obey, which
are foreknowen of god to be refused, He shows that the teaching of the
prescience of god after the same ways that predestination was taught, is both
unfruytfull and hurt full.
ye shall cease, and obey no more. There is no doubt, but this is as true as
may be spoken. But yet it is most wykedly, most uncomely, and out of order
spoken, not that it is not truly spoken, but because it is not spoken as it
ought to be, to the health and comfort of man's infyrmite, and weakness.

We do think also, that to speak unto the people, as I have said, and wylled
the^ here to fore to do, is suffycie^t, except, they will add these words more,
unto that, which I have said and say (Ye therefore must be in good hope and
trust, and ask in your daly prayers of the father of lights, that ye may
persevere, and contynew to the end in obedience, from whom al good gyfts, and al
perfect gyfts do com down* and when ye do so, being in that godly obedience,
then to believe steadfastly that, ye are of those, which are predestenyd to be his
people, because, he does grant, and give unto you that ye may pray and
desire it of him) God forbid, y^ ye should despeir in your self, because ye ar
commanded to put your hope in him and not in your self. For corsyd are al
they which do put there trust in man. Also it is better to trust in god than to
trust in man. For according to the scripture, which is the most true and
lyuelye word of god, all those men are blessed, which do put their trust in
him. And when ye have this hope, serve the lord in fear: and rejoice toward
him, with trembeling.

For of the life eteinal, which life god has promised to the chyldern of
promission, All man's life even to the end is in hope then to be out of hoope
and into certain securite when he shall depart from this life.
before the beginning, no man can be certain and sure, but when this life shall
be endid, which life is tentation upon the yerthe. But he shall make you
persevere and contynew in him, to y^ end of that same life, to whom ye make
your petition, saying: led us not into tentatio^. When we do speak these
words, and such like, whyther it be to a few in number or to a multitude of
the church, wherefore dowe fear to preche predestination, and the true grace
of god, according as the holy scripture does preche it unto us, (that is to
say) which is not given after our merytts. Or should we fear lest then, a man
should fall in despeyre, when he is taught to put his hope in god: and that he
should not despeire if he should proudly, and wrechedly trust in him self? And I
would to god, that they, which are slow in heart, and weak persons, and yet have
not the understanding of the scripturs, that theye should so here these our
dysputations (or else not here them) that they would give more head, and look
better upon those prayars, which the church, has used from the beginning of
the world, and will still even to the end.

The.xxiii. Chapter.
OF this matter of predestination, which we are now feign, not only to speak
of, but also strongly to menteyn, and defend, against a sort of new
heretics: the church of god makes often mention, in there prayars, and in
there sermons, ye though there were non adversary which would give occasion to
treat thereof. Was there ever any time, when the church has not prayed for
the infidels, and those which are enemies to the faith of Christ, that they
might be made faithful, and believe? Is there any faithful man, which having a
friend, or neighbor being an in fidel, or his wife out of the true faith, but
has prayed to the lord for to give an obedient mind unto them, that they
might be tornid, and believe? What man has not prayed to god for him self,
that he might be permanent, and steadfast in the lord? Or what man, was ever so
boulde, yt would either by word or thought speak euel of a minister when he
makes his prayer over the faithful unto the lord, saying (Eyue to them lord,
thy grace to persevere and to abied still in the, to the end, but rather, at that
his blessing would make answer, with a beleuyng heart, confessing that same with
his mouth, and say: So be it: forsomyche as those, which at the faithful and
believing sort of men do desire and pray, for non other thing, in that they do
say (bring us not into temptation) but that they may continue, The faith
which the church of christ has held from the beginning as touching the
grace of god.
and persevere in holy obedience. Likewise then as ye church did first begin,
with these petitions and prayers, so was it first in this faith and does grow,
and has grown from the beginning by the which faith, we do believe yt the
grace of god is not given after the merits of them, which do receue it. For ye
church would not prai to god yt faith might be given to ye unfaithful except it
believed y^ god does convert, and turn to him the wylles of men which are not
only out of the faith, but of those also, which are aduersaris, and enemies to
the faith. Nor yet would the church pray, For all these things doothe the
church of christ pray whereby he proves that all, and eueri part of these
things, are the gifts of god
that it self might persevere, and continue strong in the faith of Christ, and
that it might not be deceuyd, and over com, with the tentations of the world,
except it believed, that god had our hearts so in his power, that the goodness
which we have with our will, we could nether have, nor keep it except he
wroughte, that same will also in us. For if the church does ask these things
of him, and yet does think that god is not the gyuer thereof, but that it has
it of it self without his gift, then truly has it no perfect and true
prayars, but sych, as are like unto the wynd, which thing god keep us from. For
what man can sygh* and sorrow with his heart, deliring to receue that thing,
which he asks of god: if he does think that he may have it of hi^ self, and
not of god? And that specially, since we know not what to ask, as we ought but
the spirit does make intercession for us, with unspeakable gronings. For he that
sercheth the heart, knows, what the mind of the spirit is. For he does pray
for the seincts acording to the pleasure of god.

What is meant by these words, the spirit does pray, but that the spirit does
make him pray with unspeakable gronyngs, with such (I say) as ar true, and
unfeigned. For the spirit is, veryte. That same spirit is it, whereof ye Apostel
speaks in an other place saying, God sent ye spirit of his son into our
hearts crieng, Abba dear father. What is meant by this word (crieng), but that
the spirit did make him cry (in whom he is) after that manner of speking, as
when we do say, a glad day, because the day makes men glade. This manner of
speking the Apostel makes plain, and open, where he says* For ye have not
receuid. the spirit of bondage in feate, but ye have receued the spirit of
adoption of children, in whom we do cry Abba dear ^ather. In the text before,
he said (He sent the spirit crieng) and here in this part he says (In y^
which spirit we do cry) expou^dyng this word, crieng, which he spoke before with
this interpretacion making us to cry. By that, we do understand that our
crieng to him is the gift of god, that we may with a true heart and
spiritually cry unto the lord.

Let the^ now mark well how foul they are deceuid, which do think that it is
of our self, and not given to us of god, that we should ask that we should
seek, This is a great bul^ wark of fre will masters
and knok. And thus they do speak, because theye would have the grace of god
preched and taught to be given after our merytts, that, the same grace, should
be then thought to be given when we do receue that thing which we do ask and
desire, and not before, when we do find that thing which we do seek and not
before and when the doare is made open after we have knokte, and not before.
Nether will they understand and believe, that that is the gift of god that we
should pray which is as much to say as that we might ask of god, seek and
also knock.

For we have receuyd the spirit of the adoption of chyldern in whom we do cry
(Abba dear father.

This thing the holy father Ambrose perceuyd well. For he said these words,
(and to pray unto god, is a spiritual grace, For as it is written, no man does
say, lord Jesus, but in the holy ghost. These things therefore, which the
church does pray for, and desire of god, and always has done even from the
beginning, that it was first a church, god knew before that he would give to
them, which are called of him, even so, as he did give them at the first in his
predestination as the apostel did openly manifest and declare, writing to
Timothy, saying: labor with us in the ghospel according to the pour of god,
which saves us and callethe us with his holy calling* not after our works but
according to his own purpose and grace, which is given to us, in Christ Jesus
before al tim^s, but now is declared by the coming of our savior Jesus Christ.
Let him now go, what soever he be, and say that the church of christ did not
believe this verite of predestination, and of grace, which now with somewhat
more dyligence we have defended. Let him (that dare) speak, and say that the
church of christ does not, or at any time has not prayed according to the
veryte, and truth, that they which do not believe may be conuertid to the
faith and they which do believe may persevere and continue still faithful. Which
gyfts, if the church has always desired and prayed for: there is no doubt,
but it always believed, that they are the gifts of god, and that no man could
at any time laufully deney but that they have been always in his preseyence, and
foreknoledge It follows then that the church of Christ did always believe
this predestination, which we now do defend more earnestly tha^ we have done
before, against a sort of new sprung up heretics.

The xxiiii chapter
BNt what should we need to speak any more? and do think y^ I have taught enough
or rather more tha^ enough al ready, and that I have sufficyently prouyd that
both the beginning of our belefe in the lord and also, the contynuance therein
to the end, at the gyfts of god. As for all other good things perteynynge to
good and godly living, whereof god is well worshipped, they them self, which
have been the causars, that we do take al this pain, do confess that they are
the gyfts of god. And beside that, they can not deney, but that god had in his
forknoledge all his gyfts, which he would give, and knew also before, to whom
he would give them. Likewise then, as al other of his gifts ought to be preached
and taught, that he which does preche them, may be herd, and obediently
followed even so, no less ought predestination to be preached, and taught, that
he which does here the other vertuse taught and does obediently follow them,
should not therefore rejoice and be proud in man and by that reason, not in him
self but in god. For it is the precept of god, to hear the prechar obediently
y^ he which does reioise may rejoice only in ye lord which is his as well as
the other, which gift whosoever has not, I doubt not to say, that what
soever he has, is in vain and nothing worth. I would to god the Pelagians
had this gift, and that these our brethren had it more fullye, and more
perfectli tha^ they have it.

Let us not therefore be busy and quick in resoning, and slow in prayer Let us
pray (derly beloved) let us pray that god would give his grace ye to our enmies.
but specially to our brethren, and friends: his grace (I say) that they may
understand, and knowledge that after the great and unspeakable fall, which we
fell al in one man, no man is or has been saved but by the grace of god, and not
after the merits of the^, which receuyd that sam grace (although it were given
again to us, as a reward dew for any thing of our well doing, but as grace in
deed ought to be given unto us, before we did, or could, work any good thing,
and that freely.

There is no goodlyar example of predestination, that Jesus him self, of the
which thing I dysputed in my first book: and now have chosen again to praise,
and commend it in thend of this my second book. There is no more goodly example
(I say) of predestination than is our mediator him self. What faithful man
therefore soever will understand it well, let him behold and look well upon him,
and in him he may espy and ^ynde him self (that faithful man I do mean,
which does believe yt there is in Christ a perfect, and an unfeigned nature,
that is to say our humayne nature which nature God the word took upon him
after sych a fashyon, as never was before nor shall be again, being so hyghly
exalted, for to be y^ only begotten son of god. And so I say, he took our
nature upon him, y^ both the receuer, and the humanite receuid, should be but
on person in trinite. For after he took our manhood upon him, there were not
then four persons, that theye should be called, a quaternite, but three persons,
which is the trinite, and so remains, that he taking our ma^hode upon him,
making and performing the verite of on person in god and man, became perfect
god and perfect man both to gyther in him self. For we do not believe you
Christ is only god, and not man as the heretics the Manaches do hold, nor
yet, that he was nothing else but man, as the Photynians heresy defendid, nor
yet that he was so man, that he had any thing less than he ought to have in
his humanity, concerning our humayn nature, whyther it be as toching the soul,
or the mind enduyd with reason, which is in the soul, or else concerning the
flesh, that he did not take it of the woman but that the flesh was made of the
word, that same word being conuertid, and tornid into flesh, as the
Apollonistes most peruicios and damnable heresy techeth which ar three several
and damnable heresis. But we do say that Christ is perfect god, born of god
the father before the beginning of any time, and that the same Christ being
perfect god was also perfect man borne of man his mother acordinge to the
natural corse and fulness of time, and yt his humanite wheri^ he is less than
his father, does not mi his divinity wherein he is equal with his father, and
that both these ar on christ which christ according to that he was god said and
that truly: (I and my father am al on) and as toching his manhod said also: (My
father is greter than I. He then which made him of the sede of david a just
man, which is never unjust and that without any merits of his own will
preceding that grace, he does make those which are unjust and vnryghtwis to be
just and rightwyse, without any meryt of there will precedinge that grace, that
Christ should be there head, and they his members. Again, he which made that
man Christ without any of his merits preceding, that he should have no spot of
original sin, nor yet commit in fact, any manner of synn wyllingly or
otherwise wherbi he should have need of remission and forgyuenes, he which
did all this in Christ, does also make men to believe in him, without any of
there deserving, that he might forgive unto them al there sin. Also he that
made Christ to be sich a man, as never should have will to do evil, that same,
in his members has made of an evil and a noughti will a good and a godly will.

It follows then, that god did perdestinate, both Christ and us, because he
knew before in Christ those works* which he would work him self not that he
knew any meryts of his which should precede ye heavenly grace and that because
Christ should be our head, and we his members,

Those which do red these things, if they do understand them, let the^ rendar
thanks unto god therefore, but they* which do not understand them, let them
pray that God may be their inward and spyritual teacher: from whose face
comes al knowledge and under stonding

But if there be any which do think that I do err, and that I am out of
the right way, let him look my sayings twyse over and weye them well,
least peradventure they be deceyuyd them self. And as for my self when I do
find that I am the better instructyd by other men's readyng of my works I
say both in lerninge and in lyuinge, I do thank god hartelye for it, and so
do knowledge that he is good and merciful* unto me, which thing I do not
doubt, but I shall be by the good judgment of the doctoures of the church
if my work does come into their hands, and they likewise do vouchsafe to
read this thing which I have written.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London in Aldersgate street by the wydowe of Ihon Herforde, for
Gwalter Lynne, and are to be soulde, at the sign of the spread Eagle in Poules
church yard by the schole.

Cum priuilegio regali ad impridum solum.


