A New Charge given by the Queens commandment, to all Justices of Peace, and
all Majors, Shiriffes, and all principal Officers of Cities, Boroughs, and
Towns corporate, for execution of sundry orders published the last year for
stay of dearth of Grain, With certain additions now this present year to
be well observed and executed.

Jmprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the
Queens most excellent Majesty. 1595.

royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

A new charge for execution of sundry Orders published the last year, for stay
of dearth of Grain; With certain additions now this present year to be well
observed and executed.
THat the Shiriffe and Justices of the Peace shall immediately upon the receipt
of these orders, That the Justices shall divide themselves into sundry parts to
execute these orders.
assemble them selves together with as much speed as they possible may: And
having conferred amongst themselves upon the contents hereof, shall first for
the better execution of the same, divide themselves into sundry companies, and
take amongst them into their charge by several divisions all the Hundreds,
Rapes, or Wapentakes of the said County.

Item, every company so allotted out, To appoint sundry Iuries to enquire of
things hereafter following.
shall forthwith direct their Precepts unto the high Constables, that the
under Constables, and other the most honest and substantial inhabitants
within the same Hundred, Rape, or Wapentake, to the number of xxxvi. persons,
more or fewer, as the quantity of the Hundred, Rape, or Wapentake shall
require, to appear before them at a certain place, and within as short time
after the receipt hereof as they conveniently may, and upon the appearance of
the said persons, they shall divide them into so many Numbers or companies, as
they shall think meet, giving instruction to the said high Constables to
return as few of such as be known great Farmours for Corn, or that have
store of grain to sell, as he can. And such of the persons so warned as shall
not appear, but make default being sommoned, and not having any just or
reasonable excuse alowable by the Justices, to be punished therefore at the
good discretions of the Justices, before whom they are to appear.

Item, they shall first declare to the parties appearing, the cause why they
are sent for, and therewith earnestly charge them in the fear of God, to apply
themselves to the service whereunto they shall be now called, with all
duetifulnesse and diligence, and without any partiality to any person, and
then they shall give them the charge following.

The charge.
The charge to enquire what number of persons be in the houses of them that
have store of Corn.
YOu shall diligently and carefully enquire, and make true and due search and
trial, what number of persons of every householder that has Corn in their
Barnes, Stackes or other where, as well Justices of the Peace as others
whatsoever, within the Parish of (...) have in their houses feeding, lying, and
vprising, or otherwise to be fed: what number of Acres they have certainly to
be sown this year with any manner of Grain: what bargains they have made with
any person for any kind of Grain to be sold, by, or to them: to whom and
by whom, and upon what prices they have made the same, and what quantity of
any manner of Grain they, or any other have in their Barnes, Grainers, Loftes,
Cellors, or Floores, or otherwise to be delivered unto them upon any Bargain.

Item, what number of Badgers, Kidders, For Badgers, Broggers, and Cariers of
Corn.
Broggers or Carriers of Corn inhabit within the said Parish, and whither
they do use to carry their Corn which they do buy, and where they do usually
buy the same, and what their names be, and how long they have used that
trade, and by whose License, and to see the same Licenses of what tenor they
are of.

Item, what number of Malt makers, Bakers, Malt makers, Bakers, and Brewers.
common Brewers or Tiplers dwell within the said Parish, and who they are by
name, and how long they have used that trade, and how much they bake or brew
in the week, and what other trade they have whereby otherwise to live.

Item, Buyers of Corn to sell again.
who within the said Parish be the buyers of Corn, or do use to buy, or have
bought any Corn or Grain to sell again, or have sold it again since
Midsommer last.

Item, Buyers of Corn upon the ground.
who within the same Parish buyeth or have bought or sold any Grain upon the
ground, of whom, and to whom has the same been bought or sold, and at what
price, and to certify unto us of the Premises, and of every part thereof, on
the (...) day of (...) now next coming: And to every part of these Articles
you shall bring answer from point to point.

And if any shall refuse to declare the truth, of, or, Against such as shall
refuse, to declare the truth of the matters inquirable.
concerning the premises, or of any part thereof, to any the Inquirors
aforesaid, requiring the same for their better information: the party so
required and refusing, shall be conuented before the Justices of the Peace of the
said Division, or any two of them, and sharply rebuked, or if need be,
punished for his contempt. And if the party so called in question, shall not
declare the full truth thereof to the said Justices, he shall be committed by
the said Justices to the common Gaile as a person bound for his good
behavior, and so to be continued, until he shall conform himself therein,
or otherwise at the discretions of the said Justices, he shall be bound in a
good sum of money to make appearance before the Lords of her Majesty's
privy Counsel to answer unto his contempt in that behalf, Parties offending
to appear before the Counsel.
for ensample of all such disobedient persons.

A consideration of all persons that have Corn, to determine how they shall
serve the markets with such portions as they may spare.
That the said Justices of the Peace having received into their hands the
presentment of the said Inquirors answering to every point of their charge,
shall call at certain days by them to be assigned, such persons before them
of every Parish, as upon the presentment so made shall appear to have Corn to
spare, and upon due consideration of the number of persons, which every person
has in his house, according to their qualities, and of the quantity of
Grain, that the party has toward the finding of the same, or otherwise to
be spent in his house and sowing of his grounds, allowing to every
Householder for his expenses in his house, for every person thereof according
to their quality, sufficient Corn for bread and drink between this and the
next Harvest, and for their seed after the rate of the sowing of that Country
upon an Acre. And then they shall charge all such as shall appear to have more
of any kind of Grain, then shall serve to the uses above mentioned, as well
Justices of the Peace as others, to observe the orders ensuing, viz.

The orders to be observed are these, viz.
YOU shall bring, Orders to be observed by such as shall be appointed to serve
the markets with Corn, for the relief of the poor people first.
or cause to be brought weekly so many quarters or bushels of corn, as
Wheat, Rye, Barley, Malt, Peazon, Beans, or other Grain, or so much thereof
as shall not be directly sold to the poor Artificers or day Laborers of the
Parish within which you dwell, by order of the Justices of the Peace of the
Division within which you dwell, or two of them to the Market of (...) there to
be by you, or at your assignement sold unto the Queens subjects in open Market
by half Quarters, two Bushels, one Bushel or less, as the buyer shall
require of you, and not in greater quantity, except it be to a Badger or
Carrier of Corn admitted according to the statute, or to a common known
Brewer or Baker, To whom Corn shall be sold after that the poor are served.
having testimony under the hand and seal of such two Justices of the Peace
at the least of the division, or of a Mayor or other head Officer of the City,
Town, or Borough corporate where he dwells, that he is common Brewer or
Baker within the same: or to such other person as shall make provision for any
Lord Spiritual or Temporal, Knight, or any other Gentleman that has no
sufficient provision of Corn, so as the same person have and show unto such
person as shall have the oversight of the Market in that behalf, testimony
under the hand and seal of the party for whom he comes to the Market to
make that provision, declaring that it is for the provision of his house, and
containing the quantities and kind of Grain to be provided: And you shall not
willingly leave any part of your Corn so brought to that Market unsold, if
money be offered to you for the same, by any that are permitted to buy the
same, after the usual price of the market there that day, as long as the Market
shall last.

No Corn brought to the Market unfold to be carried out of the town.
Neither shall you from the beginning of the Market, to the full end thereof,
keep or cause to be kept any of your said Corn out of the open sight of the
Market: neither shall you carry away from the Market Town any kind of Grain
that was brought thither which you have not there sold, but shall leave the
same there in the Market Town in some place known, so as it may be brought
into the open Market the next Market day at the first opening of the Market,
there to be sold as before was limited. And yet nevertheless, you shall bring
to the Market such other quantity of Grain as shall be limited, and so
continue at every Market day the bringing into the open Market, the quantity
of Corn that shall be limited.

None to buy such kind of Corn as they shall bring to sell, but by warrant
upon reasonable cause.
Also you shall not buy any manner of such Grain as the said Justices shall
appoint you to sell, from this day forwards, but upon very especial and
necessary cause to be allowed by them, until such time as all and every such
manner Grains as the said Justices at this time shall appoint you to sell, be
according to that appointment and order by you sold. And if you shall not sow
so much this year as has been presented that ye intend to sow, or if you now
have, or shall have knowledge, or shall guess hereafter at any time, either by
threshing of the Mow or Shocks or otherwise, that ye have more store of any
manner of Grain, then has been presented: that then ye shall forth with upon
such knowledge thereof had, make true relation thereof unto the said Justices,
or unto two of them, both what portion of your seed Corn shall be left vnsowen,
or what further quantity you shall perceive you have, then was at the first
presented.

That so soon as you perceive you spend not after the rate of so much Corn as
is limited unto you for the finding of your house, ye shall make true report
unto the Justices or two of the^, how much less ye spend.

Ye shall buy no Corn to sell it again, No corn to be bought for to sell
again.
neither shall you by any color directly or indirectly, appoint any your
servants, or any other person to be a Badger of your Corn, other then to carry
your Corn to the Market there to be sold as your own, without changing of any
property.

Ye shall neither buy nor sell any manner of Corn, No corn to be bought but in
open Market.
but in the open Market, unless the same be to some poor handicraftes men, or
day laborers within the Parish wherein you do dwell, that cannot conveniently
come to the market Towns, by reason of distance of place, according to such
direction as shall be given unto you in that behalf by the Justices of the Peace
of that Division, within which you do dwell, or two of them, and to none of
these above one bushel at a time, and thereof you shall keep or cause to be
kept a particular note in writing, to whom you shall so sell weekly, and at
what prices, so as the same may appear to the Justices to be done without
fraud or abuse.

That the Justices of the Peace within their several Divisions have special
regard yt Ingrossers of Corn be carefully seen unto, Inquiry to be made
against Engrossers.
and inquisitions to be made for knowledge of them, and that thereupon they may
be severely proceeded with and punished according to the law: and to see that
none be permitted to buy any Corn to sell again, but by special license.

That they take order with the common Bakers for the baking of Rye, Barley,
Pease, Regard to the Bakers for keeping of the sise of bread.
and Beans according to the manner of the country for the use of the poor and
that they appoint special and fit persons diligently to see the people well
dealt withal by the common Bakers and Brewers in all Towns and places in
their Weights and Assizes, having also regard, that the Deputies of the Clerk
of the Market do not abuse themselves in unlawful exactions for Weight and
Measure, and effectually to inquire for and search out the default therein, and
thereupon to give order for punishment of the offender severely, according to
the Law: Bread faulty in any excess to be sold toward the relief of the
poor.
and where any notable excessive offense shall be in the Bakers, to cause the
bread to be sold by them to the poorer sort under the ordinary prices, as in
part of punishment of the Baker.

No Badger to buy Corn but in open Market, and with sufficient license in
writing.
That no Badgers of corn, Bakers or Brewers buy any Grain, or commune or
bargain for the same, but in the time of open Markets, and that but by License
under the hands of the Justices of the Division where they do dwell, or three
of them, and that they weekly bring their License with them to the Market
where they do either buy or sell, or else not to be suffered to buy any: And
that the License contain how much Grain, of what kind, and for what place
they are licenced to buy and carry, that there be set down upon the License in
writing, the day, place, quantity, and price at which the Corn is bought,
that they take but measurably for the carriage, baking, and brewing thereof,
that they show their books weekly to such as the Justices of the Division
wherein they dwell, The Badgers to show weekly their books of buying.
shall appoint for that purpose being no Bakers or Badgers of Corn, and that
those within every xiiii. days make report to the Justices of the Division
wherein they dwell, how the people are dealt withal by the Badgers, Bakers,
and Brewers, and that such as have sufficient to live on, or that are known to
be of any common evil behavior, be not permitted to be Badgers of Corn, of
which sort commonly the report is that there are too many, No Justices servant
to be a Badger, nor none other, but such as shall be licensed in open Sessions.
and therefore the same would be remedied and foreseen: Also that no Badgers
be permitted but such as the Statute does limite, and that no servant of any
be licenced to be a Badger, except six of the Justices at the least shall in
open Sessions for some necessary cause allow any such, and that none at all be
allowed a Badger, except he be allowed in open sessions, and not to be, as it
is in many places, abused for gain of the Clerk of the Peace, or a Justices
Clerk granted without allowance of the rest of the Justices in their open
Sessions. And furthermore, No Badger, Baker, Brewer, or Purueyour to buy
Grain, until two hours after the full Market begin.
that none be permitted to buy or provide Corn in ye Market in gross, as a
Badger or Baker, Brewer, or Purueyour and such like, upon pain of
imprisonment, until two hours after the full Market be begun, that the
poor may be first served.

That the said Justices, or two, Some Justices to be present in the Market, to
see the poor relieved upon reasonable prices.
or one of them at the least in every Division, shall be personally present at
every market within their several Divisions, during the whole time of the
Market, to see the orders to be taken by the authority hereof to be well
observed, and the poor people provided of necessary Corn, and that with as
much favor in the prices, as by the earnest persuasion of the Justices can be
obtained. By this it is not meant to charge any Lord of Parliament being a
Justice of Peace, to attend upon any such service in any Market, otherwise
then it shall be with his own good will: but in all other causes tending to
the execution of these orders, it is hoped that every person of any estate,
will readily give advise and assistance.

If there shall be any Hundred, Rape, Where Justices are wanting in any
Hundred, for to appoint some rich persons to supply the want.
or Wapentake within the said County, within the which or near thereunto no
sufficient number of the said Justices of the Peace do dwell or inhabit, the
said Shirife and four Justices of the Peace of that County, shall in that
case appoint some other honest Gentleman, or the high Constables under
Constables, or such other, grave, honest, and substantial persons, not being
Corn masters, dwelling within the said Hundred, Rape or Wapentake, as they
shall by their discretions think convenient, to have the charge, in the
execution of these orders there: whom they shall also instruct how to execute
the same diligently and uprightly.

That all good means and persuasions be used by the Justices in their several
divisions, That ministers and preachers exhort the richer sort to be liberal
to help the poor with money or victual needful.
and by admonitions and exhortations in Sermons in the Churches, by the
Preachers and Ministers of the Word, that the poor may be served of Corn at
convenient and charitable prices. And to the furtherance thereof, that the
richer sort be earnestly moved by Christian charity, to cause their Grain to
be sold under the common prices of the Market to the poorer sort: A deed of
mercy, that will doubtless be rewarded of Almighty God.

That there be no buying or bargeining of any kind of Corn but in open
Market, but only to poor Artificers and day Laborers as aforesaid, and that
the Justices in their several Divisions, do in convenient sort restrain common
Maulsters of making Barlie Malt, To make Malt of otes in countries where
there has been use thereof.
in those countries and places where there be Oats sufficient to make Malt
of for the use of the people, and to restrain as well the brewing of Barley
Malt, by or for Alehouses or common Tiplers in those Countries and places, as
also the excess use of any kind of Malt, by all common Brewers, Maulsters,
and common Tiplers, according to the true meaning of this Article: And that the
oueraboundant converting of Barlie into Malt, more then may serve for
necessary use be restreined.

And where it is informed that sundry Maulsters and others have already
engrossed and taken into their hands great quantities of Barlie, either to be
converted into Malt or otherwise to make their profit of it by auauncing the
prises thereof: It is therefore ordered that the Justices of Peace in their
several Divisions, shall use all the care and diligence they may to find out
such Ingrossers, and to examine them exactly how much of such kind of Corn
they have already in their hands or have compounded for, and at what price,
and where it is. And thereupon the said Justices of the Peace to take order
that so much thereof in Barley as shall be thought fit in the discretion of
the same Justices, be brought to such of the next Markets thereunto, as the
same Justices shall assign there to be sold to the poor people of the Town
and the Country adjoining, by the sack or Coombe or lesser quantity, and by
no greater quantity to any one person at such reasonable price, and with such
reasonable gain as the same Justices shall think fit. And such as shall be
found obstinate to obey this order, to be bound with good suerties to answer
the matter before the Lords of her Majesty's Privy Counsel at some day to be
prefixed by the same Justices. And the great number of Maulsters to be reduced
to fewer persons, and such as have other trades to live by, not to be permitted
to use Maulting.

That the Justices use all other good means possible that are not mentioned in
these orders, No waste of bread Corn superfluously, nor any expense thereof
but for feeding of people.
that the Markets may be well served, and the poor relieved in their
provisions during this time of dearth. And that no expense of any Grain meet
for bread to feed men, be wasted upon feeding of dogs or other beasts,
neither that any be spent in making stuff called Starche, None suffered to
make Starch of any Grain.
as of late there has been discovered great quantity expended in that vain
matter, being in no sort to be suffered to continue, the rather also for that
there are other things not hurtful to the food of man, that may serve for such
purposes, if such purposes at least were requisite.

That the Justices be straightly commanded to see by all good means, Able
poor people to be set to work.
that the able people be set on work in houses of Correction provided and
furnished, and there idle vagabounds to be punished.

Stocks of money for provision of works for poor people.
That the Justices do their best to have convenient stocks of money or wares,
to be provided in every Division, or other places according to the Statute, for
setting the poor on work, and the Justices to use all other good and
politic means within their several Divisions, to continue and maintain the
poor people in work within the parish, or at the furthest within the Hundred,
or Division, and namely in clothing Countries to charge the Clothiers,
Clothiers to continue their worke-folkes.
that have in former times gained by that trade, not now in this time of dearth
to leave off his trade, whereby the poor may be set on work.

Soldiers hurt, and impotent people, to be relieved in their dwelling places.
That the maimed and hurt Soldier, and all other impotent persons, be
carefully seen unto to be relieved within their several Parishes, Hundreds or
Divisions, according to the Law therein provided: and that where the
provisions formerly made, and assessed upon the householders in every Parish be
not sufficient, it may be now for this time of dearth charitably increased. And
where any Parish is not able to give sufficient relief to such their poor,
that parish to have the supply of such other parishes near adjoining, as have
fewer poor, and are better able to give relief. And no vagabonde or sturdie
beggar, or any that may otherwise get their living by their labors, be
suffered to wander abroad under color of begging in any Town, field or high
way, and that the Justices do presently give order that there be able persons
appointed, and sufficiently weaponed, to assist the Constables of every Town
to attache such vagabondes, both in their Towns, Fields and high ways, and
to commit them to prison without bail of any such, but as two of the Justices
of the Peace within that Division shall order. And if any Towneship shall not
observe this order, for the attaching and punishing of the said vagabondes,
then the Justices shall set due punishment by fine upon the whole Towneship, or
upon such parties in the Town, as shall be found in fault.

Where in some parts of the Realm, That no Millers be suffered to be common
buyers of Corn, nor to sell meal, but to attend to the true grinding of the
corn brought, and to use measurable toll these dear seasons.
diverse Millers, who ought only to serve for grinding of Corn that shall be
brought to their milles, have begun lately a very corrupt trade, to be common
buyers of Corn, both in markets, and out of markets, and the same do grind
into meal, and do use as Badgers, or otherwise to sell the same at markets
and in other places, seeking thereby an inordinate gain, besides the misusing
of other men's Corn brought thither to be ground, by delay of grinding, or that
worse is, by changing and altering of their good Corn to ye worse: It is
thought very necessary, that the Justices of the Peace who are not owners by
any title of any Milles, nor masters or landlords to any Millers, shall first
inhibite al Millers upon pain both of imprisonment and fine, to use any such
trade of buying of any grain to be sold either in Corn or meal, but to
charge them to continue the orderly use of grinding of all manner of Corn that
shall be brought to them, in reasonable good sort, and upon reasonable Toll. And
for better performance hereof some of the Justices not affectionated to the
Millers, shall sometime personally themselves resort to the mills to ouersee
the doings of the said Millers, and compel them to do their duties. And
where none of the Justices can as need shall be, weekly look thereto
personally, they shall appoint certain honest persons weekly to attend
thereto, and to inform themselves of the poorer sort, how they are used in
this time of dearth, for their grinding and their Toll, and present the
defaults to the Justices, to be speedily reformed with all due severity.

Conferences to be had betwixt the Justices of peace in the Shires, and the
principal officers of Cities and towns corporate for provisions of Grain,
for the inhabitants in Cities and corporate Towns.
Item, where there are within the circuit of any Shire, or thereto adjoining
any Cities that are incorporated as Towns within them selves, or any other
Towns incorporat, that have by good authority Justices of Peace of their own
inhabitants, for that commonly such Cities and Towns have their greatest
number of householders that are no owners of grain, but have common Bakers, and
Brewers, that must of necessity buy and provide their Corn or Meal at the
Markets near thereto, to serve all other the inhabitants and resiants within
the said Cities and Towns: For the provision of all such Cities and Towns, it
shall be necessary that the Justices of the Peace of the Shires next to the
same Cities and Towns shall have a meeting and conference with the head
Officers of the said Cities and Towns, how and in what good manner the Bakers
and Brewers, and other householders that shall also have need to provide Corn
or Meal for the necessary use of the private housholdes, may be provided at
the Markets near to the same. And after due conference had hereof, there shall
be by the Justices of Peace, and the foresaid head Officers some good orders
set down, such as both may serve for the needful use of the same Towns and
Cities, and also may not by abuse give cause of raising of prices in the
Markets and Countries adjoining. And where there shall be adjoining to the same
Cities and Towns, or not far distant, diverse Shires (as in many places such
is the situation of them) there some of the Justices of every Shire so
adjoining, or not far distant, shall use such conference and take such orders
with the said Officers, as before is mentioned. And in such cases the Justices
of every such Shire shall be informed mutually from the one Shire unto the
other, of the needful provisions to be made from time to time for the said
Cities and Towns, so as every Shire may proportionably yield reasonable
succor and relief out of their Markets to the Purueyors, or to the Bakers,
and Brewers as shall be requisite without burthening of the one, more then the
other may reasonably bear. And if need shall require, the aforesaid
principal Officers shall not refuse to acquaint the Justices, from whence the
provision shall be bought and provided, how such provisions so had and bought
in Markets are spent, that by color of such provisions no abuse be committed
to increase the prices, and so to leave the poor unable to be relieved.

If there be any special part within any Shire, Order for places exempt^d
from the Jurisdiction of the Justices of peace in the bodies of the Shires.
that has as a liberty by special Commissions any Justices of the Peace
within the same, the Shirife of the Shire shall send unto the principal owner
or Officer of such Liberty, notice of these orders, and shall charge them that
the Justices of the Peace within such Liberty do their duties for execution
of al these orders, as far forth as shall be requisite, and therein also to
use by conference the advice of some other Justices next adjoining.

That no transportation of Corn or Victual be, Regard to stay all
transportation of Grain out of the Realm.
but from port to port within this Realm, and that but in cases needful, as
for the provisions of London, shipping, or such like. And that be done by the
view and ouerseeing of her Majesty's officers of ye Custom house of the port
where the same shall be laden, or of the most part of them, and of the chief
magistrates of the town in which that port is, and also of some of the
Commissioners of the county in which that port is, and for that purpose
assigned. And yt in such case good bonds with sufficient sureties be taken to
her Majesty's use for the delivery thereof at the port to which ye same shall be
assigned. And for bringing back in convenient time not only a true Certificate
of the vnlading thereof at the same port so assigned from her Majesty's
officers of the Custom house of that port to the Customer of the port where
the same was laden: But also one other Certificate from the chief magistrate
of the Town of that port where the same shall be assigned to be unladen: And
from some of the Commissioners of the County in which that Town is, for the
purpose assigned unto the Commissioners and chief magistrate of that port
where the same was laden, of the due and just vnlading thereof at the port
assigned. And transcripts of those Certificates to be made and certified into
the Eschequer in the beginning of every Term.

And if the Commissioners for that purpose assigned, shall not do their best
endeavors to make stay of the transporting of Corn, as by authority of their
commission they ought to do, then any other Justice by authority of these
orders shall make stay of al such transportation, and in his so doing, shall be
allowed and maintained. And this is thought meet to be in this sort directed,
for that it may be doubted, that amongst so many as are appointed in the
foresaid Commission against transportation, some may be mistaken, being
themselves either transporters, or friends or favorers to transporters, or
negligent in the execution of the charge committed to them.

Certificate to be made of the Execution of these Orders monthly to the
Sheriff, and he to certify the same to the privy Council within every forty
days.
That the Justices of the Peace do once every month certify their doings and
proceedings by force of these instructions unto the Sheriff of the said
County, in which certificate they shall also make certificate of such Justices
as shall be absent from any of these services, and the true cause of their
absence, and shall also certify the usual prices of all kinds of Grain in
their markets for that month past: Of all which the same Sheriff shall
certify to the Privy counsel without any delay, so as he do certify once
in every forty days at the furthest, and so as also the default in any
Justice that shall be absent without necessary cause, may be duly considered,
and reformed by authority of her Majesty's Counsel, as reason shall require:
whereby such persons as are placed as Justices, may not continue in those
rooms wherein they shall be found not disposed to attend such necessary and
godly services as this is, but that others of better disposition may supply
those rooms, if there shall be need of any such number.

Special Inquiry be made of those that are great hoorders up of Corn, and
bring little quantity to the Market, to the end from such persons provision
may be made for her Majesty's shipping, and other public services, as need
shall require.

And if any shall offend against the true meaning of these instructions, or of
any part thereof, or shall use any sinister mean to the defrauding thereof,
that such be severely punished according to the Laws: and for such obstinate
persons as shall not conform themselves, the Justices shall at their
discretion bind them to appear before the Queens Majesty's privy Counsel by
a day certain, there to be further dealt with by severe punishment, for the
better ensample of all others.

Additions to the former Orders.
FIrst to take order that the multitude of Badgers and buyers both of Butter and
Cheese, as also of Corn to sell again, may in every County upon conference
amongst the Justices be reduced to a competent number, and those of the
fittest persons for that purpose, and the residue to be removed.

That such of these Badgers and buyers as shall remain, be only permitted to
make provision to furnish the Markets of such Cities and other great towns and
places which otherwise are not able to be sufficiently provided for, of those
provisions in the countries near adjoining, for that they are only needful
for those places.

That the Farmer or Maulster be not permitted to sell to any such Badgers or
buyer, nor to any Baker or Brewer out of a market, nor that any Badgers or
buyers to sell again, be permitted to buy any Corn, Butter or Cheese but in
the Market: Neither any Baker, Brewer, Badger or such buyer as aforesaid to
sell again, be permitted to buy in any market but two hours at the least
after the full of the market, whereby others may be served of their particular
provisions, And then the Badger, Baker, and buyer to sell again, to take away
the surplusage of the Market only.

To foresee that no couenous practices be used between the Farmer or Maulster,
and the Badger, Broker, Brewer, or buyer to sell again, whereby the Farmer or
other should deteine his Corn or Malt to the end of the Market to the
hinderance of the market: But if any such be found then such offender to be
duly punished.

Hyglers and Purueiors for the City of London or any other City, not to be
permitted to buy Corn or other victual but in open market, and that two
hours after the full Market, whereby the poorer sort may be served of that
which they shall need at competent prises: Nevertheless, for the better
furnishing of your said Cities with necessary provisions and in convenient
manner, it is ordered that further provisions shall be from time to time made
for them in such sort as the Lords of her Majesty's Counsel shall further
direct in that behalf.

It is also ordered, that the feeding of sheep with Pease or Beans which is
used in some countries for food be specially forbidden, because in time of
dearth the same may serve the poorer sort to make bread of.

That there be monthly a view taken what Corn any Farmer or other person
using to sell Corn, has both thresshed, and by estimation in the stoage, and
to be enjoined to sell none but in open Market, except to poor artificers and
day laborers their neighbors, and to yield a due account to the Justices, of
the expense of his Corn, and how much he does sell weekly in any Market.

That inquisition be made in what places Malt is commonly made to be sold by
such as are called Maultsters, and who they be. And to take order that by
buying and engrossing of Barley to make Malt, they do not thereby store up
greater quantity of Malt then they usually bring into the Markets, thereby
toward the end of the year to increase the price thereof excessiuely. Of
which abuse the Justices are to take care to reform the same, and to take
order also that they shall buy their Barley in open Market, and not at the
Farmers houses thereby to forestall the Markets, and to enhaunce the prices.

To take strait order with the common Brewers, that they serve no Beer or Ale
to any Alehousekeeper, Victualler, or Tipler, but at such rate and price as by
the Justices of the Peace shall be set down and appointed by authority of the
Statute of 23. H. 8. Cap. 4. And yet the same to be well sodden and well brewed
of wholesome grain as it ought to be, upon pain of (...) to be imposed by the
Justices.

To take a view of the number of Alehouses, Victualling houses, and Tippling
houses in every Town, parish, village and Hamiet within their jurisdictions,
And upon view had, to consider what number of them is necessary and fit for
every Town, Parish, Village and Hamlet to continue. And thereupon to discharge
the superfluous number and such as are unmeet to keep the same, and to allow
a convenient number, and no more then shall be needful, and those but in places
necessary, and the same to be in the midst and heart of the said Towns and
Villages, and in no sort to allow any at the ends of the Town, Village, or
Hamlet, nor in out places or places distant from the rest of the Town or
Village. And hereafter no license to be granted for victualling or tippling but
in every open quarter Sessions, and that by the consent of the most part of the
Justices there present, whose names with the number of the houses licenced in
every Town or Village the Clerk of the Peace shall insert in a book, or
Roll to be kept for that purpose. And that no greater number be hereafter
admitted to keep Tippling houses in any Town or Village, but such as shall be
agreed at this first view, and order to be taken therein.

That they which shall be allowed to be Alehousekeepers and Victuallers, shall
be of honest conversation, and of reasonable value, and to enter Bonds to her
Majesty's use to perform the orders following, which Bonds shall be by the
Clerk of the peace presented to the Justices in their Sessions to be seen,
whether the Conditions are broken: And thereupon the Custos Rotulorum, or his
deputy, to certify the same into the Eschequer, and such of them as shall
refuse to be bound, not to be permitted to keep any Alehouse.

That no Victuallers, Tiplers, and Alehousekeepers have in their houses, or do
permit to be brought into their houses, any Cards, Dice, or Tables, nor to
suffer any to play in their houses, yardes, or backsides, at any Cards, Tables,
Dice, or other unlawful games.

That no Victualler, Tipler, or Alehousekeeper shall dress, or suffer to be
dressed or eaten, within his house any flesh upon any forbidden day, saving in
case of necessity of sickness, according to the Statute in that behalf
provided.

That the Alehousekeepers do not brewe in their houses, nor have any drink,
but such as shall be fit for the inferior sort of people, and that but of some
ordinary and reasonable size, and the drink to be uttered at such price and
rate as the Justices shall assesse and set down in their Articles, (and not to
maintain excess) whereby an exceeding great quantity of barley may be saved
for bread corn, for the inferior sort of people.

That they suffer none to eat and tiple, or vittaile in their houses, but such
as are wayfairing men, that shall take the same to refresh themselves in their
passage or journey, or such as shall be appointed to lodge or take diet in their
houses, but to deliver out of their houses that quantity of drink which their
neighbors of the poorer sort shall have need of, to be drunk in the houses of
those who fetch or send for the same, and not elsewhere.

To permit no tippling at all on the Sabbath day, or holy day in time of divine
service.

That no Victualler, Tippler, or Alehousekeeper, shall permit and suffer any
person or persons to lodge in his house above a day and a night, but such as
he will answer for, as the Statutes in that behalf made do require.

To give strait order and charge, to every Constable, or other inferior Officer
to whom it may appertain, that every of them shall once in every fifteen
days, search and enquire of the defaults and disorders aforesaid, and shall
inform the Justices of the peace of the same defaults and disorders if any
be, that the offenders therein, may thereupon be proceeded on and punished
according to the law. And if it shall seem to the Justice, that the petty
Constable be either a Victualler, or one that shall favor the Victuallers in
their faults, then some other meet person to be appointed to make the said
Inquisition and Certificate.

No Tipler to buy any goods of any waifaring man, or other that shall bring the
same to their houses to sell, but of such as shall be well known unto them to
be of honest conversation, and whom they shall be able always to produce, or
have to be forth coming.

All these with such other necessary Articles, as the Justices of the several
Counties (to whom the estate of the Shire is best known) shall think
necessary in the several Counties to be added, the Alehousekeepers and
Victuallers shall be bound to observe.

Lastly, whosoever shall use tippling, or victualling without license, or shall
break the Orders as aforesaid to be prescribed to them, to be proceeded
withal, and severely punished according to the Statute and law in that behalf.


