By the King.
James by the grace of God, etc.

The causes of the assembly of this Session of our Parliament have been made
so manifest to all our people, as we shall not need to use many words to
declare the same to be held for the supplying of our necessities, and of
convenient means to support the honor and dignity of our estate. And yet
because some present burden of expense falls upon us before those helps can
come which we expect from the grant of our Parliament, as well for some
extraordinary causes of charge upon foreign occasions, as for some necessary
expense concerning the honor and reputation of our estate, and especially in
the creation of our dearest son the Prince, wherein We would be loath to be
wanting of that which has been heretofore observed by our Royal Progenitors
in like occasions: We have thought fit to take that course which the former
Kings of this Realm have held heretofore in like sudden accidents: that is,
by borrowing of such of our people as are known to be of ability, some
reasonable sums of money to be lent only for a time, until that supply may
come in, by which it may be repaied. To the furnishing whereof, We assure our
Self We shall find every one (of whom We shall require it) ready and
willing, for the experience they have had of our just and full satisfaction
made of all sums hitherto by Us borrowed in this or any other kind. That
which We require therefore is, that within twelve days after the receipt
hereof, you will cause the sum of (...) pounds to be delivered to (...) whom
We have appointed to be our Collector in that our County of (...) The loan
whereof We do desire to be until the (...) day of (...) which shall be in the
year of our Lord one thousand six hundred and (...) For assurance whereof We
have directed these our Letters of Privy Seal unto you, which with the hand of
our said Collector testifying the receipt of the said sum of (...) pounds,
shall bind Us, our heirs and successors for the repaiment thereof, and shall be
an immediate warrant to one Exchequer to pay the same unto you or your assigns
upon the delivery of this our Privy Seal into our said receipt.

Given under our Privy Seal at (...) the (...) day of (...) in the eighth
year of our reign of England France, and Jreland, and of Scotland the three
and fortieth.

