The promise of matrimony
LOys by the grace of god king of France.
Unto all them that thies present lre^s shall see. gretyng.
Be it known that between the most xpe^n Prince the king of France aforeseyd.
and the most noble Prince the King of England his most dear cousyn true entier
and perfect amyte is couenaunted and concluded inuyolably tendure from the date
of thies presents during their both lives. So that as long as they live /
werre batailles and hostilitees betwixt them / their realms countreies and
subgettes alweye shall cease and with beniuolence and frendlihode they shall
receive and entrete them self and their subgettis Item to thynuyolable
obseruaunce of the said amyte betwyxt the said princes it is promised
couuenaunted accorded and concluded that their shall be contracted and had a
marriage between the right noble Prince Charles the sone of the seid most xp^en
king of France. and the most benyngne princess my lady Elizabeth daughter of
the seyde most victorious king of England when that they shall come to years
of marriage. And that the same most xp^en king of france shall conduyte and
conueye or do to be conveyed honorably the same Lady Elizabeth from the Realm
of England for the solempnizacion of the same marriage into the parties of
France at the costs and charges of the same king of france. and over that he
shall endowe her or do her to be endowed to the yearly rent of three score
thousand pound in Asshiete after the custume of the realm of France. And that
the same dower shall be assigned and yeuen to the same lady as soon as she shall
come to years of marriage And if it fortune the same lady Elysabeth before the
perfytyng of the said contract as it is before seid of the said matrymonye that
god defend to decese that than matrymonie shall be maad betwixt the said
Prince Cherls and the most noble Princess my lady Marye another of the said
King of England daughters Item the said king of france shall co^ueye her or do
her to be conveyed worshipfully from the realm of England into the parties of
France at his propre and oonly costs and charges. and in semblable wise
endowe her as it is before reherced. And to thentent that the said matrimonye
as it is before said without fail shall be done and aperfyted / the said most
mighty princes of France and England in the word of a prince and on their
feythes have promised and either of them has promised and bounden him self to
thaperfyting thereof and with all their powers to put thereunto their helpyng
hands and with effect to employe unto the same their continuell labors

In witness of all which and singular p^misses the said king of France has
put to this present wr^yng subscribed with his own hand his great seal Yeuen
in the City of Amyas the.xxix: day of August the year of our lord MCCCC.lxxv.
And the.xv. year of the said king of fraunces reign^. being present at the
sealyng there / the Duke of Bourbon. The Bishop of Euereux. Thadmyral of
France / the lord Lude governor of Dolphenale. the lord Sain pere / the lord
Argenton / the lord Bussage and many other
The lettre of annuelle port
Lowys by the grace of god king of France.
to all and euiche that thies presents lettres shall see gretyng.
we wull that all men know / that we have granted promised and obliged us
and alsoo by these presents we grant promitte and oblige us to pay and
really and with effect to delyuere in the City of London within England to the
most noble Prince Edward by the same grace King of England our derest Cosyn
every year during our both lives.l. thousand scutes of gold every scute being
of the valor of.xxxiii. great blankes under such manner and form as here
after follows. That is to say / we shall pay and delyuere or we shall do to
be paid and delivered to the same our Cousyn king of England in the City of
London.xxv. thousand scutes of gold of the foresaid valor and estymacion in the
feste of Ester next coming And.xxv. thousand scutes of gold of the same
estymacion and valor in the foresaid place in the Feste of saint Mighell
tharchaungell than next following And so we shall pay and delyuere or do to be
paid and delivered yearly and from year to year unto our said cousyn in the
place and times before said during our both lives.l. thousand scutes of gold
of the said valor at Ester and Mighelmas by equale portion as it is before
reherced: To the which payement truly fermely and contynuelly by us during
our both lives yearly as is beforesayd to be made we promytte bind and
oblige us by our faith and in the word of a king and by the holy Evangelists
by us touched we bind and oblige alsoo our heirs executours and successors
our Realm and contreies lordships and all our goods that we now have and
hereafter shall have eueriche of our subgettis and their goods wheresoever
they may be found And for the more sure obseruaunce and accomplysshyng of all
and eueriche of the premises we shall bind us under the peynes of the chamber
apostolyke and by the obligacion of Nisi And over this we promitte and bind us
by these presents that we shall procure and make the felisship and fellows of
the bank de Medicys dewly and laufully to be bounden for the said fyfty
thousand scutes / yearly and inuyolably to be paid to the same our Cousyn of
England under such manner and form as is before reherced The which their
obligacion theruppon dewly made in writing we shall delyuere or do to be
really delivered in England to the same most noble King of England before the
feste of the Purificacion of our Lady next coming. Or else we shall purchase
and obtain at our propre costs and charge of our holy father the Pope a bull
apostolyke sealed with led where in by auctorite of the Sea apostolyke all and
eueriche of thees premises shall be confermed under peynes of Interdytyng our
Realm countreies and lordshipes and of cursyng our own person if we observe
not and perform all and eueriche of thees premises under such form as is
before reherced / And that bull so by us purchaced we shall delyuere or do
to be delivered in England to our said most derest Cousyn King of England
before the said feste of the Purificacion of our Lady next coming

In witness and faith of all and eueriche of which p^misses we have done to
be set to thees our present lres patentz subscribed with our own hand our
great seal Yeuen in our City of Amyas the.xxix. day of the month of August
the year of our lord a thousand CCCC.lxxv. and of our Reign the.xv.
Subscribed thus Lowys

There were present at this sealyng and assentyng to the same The Duke of
Burbon The Bishop of Eueroce / Thadmyrall of france The lord Lude governor
of Dolphyne / the lord Sain pere / the lord Argenton / the lord Bossage and
many moo as appears in the said lettres patentz

The obligacion of Nisi
In the name of god Amen. By this present public and autentyke instrument. Be
it known to all men that on the year of our lord a thousand.CCCC.lxxv.
the.viii. Indiccion / the.xxx. day of the month of August the.v. year of our
holy father Syxt the.iiii. the Pope in the City of Amyas on an high chamber
within the Palas of the Bishop of Amyas the most noble and most Xp^ian
Prince / Lowys by the grace of god King of France being personelly of his
benyngnite and of his free will gave obedyence and submytted him in all these
things that folowen unto the spiritual Court of Amyas and unto us
thofficiall of the right Reverend father in God John Bishop of Amyas and unto
our Iurisdiccion And the same our iurisdiccion to be used and excercised upon
him concerning such thing as follows well lawfully and duly proroged and
before us the said official being so on this behalue his lawful and
competent Judge and syttyng in iuggement being also present with us a notary
apostolyke here subscribed the said most noble prince Lowys knowlaged and
confessed him self laufully to are and rightwysely to be obliged unto the most
noble prince Edward by the same grace king of England to pay to the same king
of England.l. thousand scutes in the City of loundon within England every year
at the terms of Ester and Michelmas by equale portion as long as both the
said princes of france and England shall live The same king loys promised also
to pay yearly the said.l. thousand scutes to the same king of England at the
said times and place as it is before reherced upon the pain of the chamber
apostolyke and of all the censures of the church Renuncyng all such
preuileges and benefices of the law as to him belo^ged and apperteyneth or may
apperteyne in that behalue And over that the same king lowys required us the
said official to give iuggement of exco^icacion against him and than and there
to acurs him now as then and then as now if he paid not yearly to the said
king of England the forsayde.l. thousand scutes at the said times and place
during their both lives as it is before reherced / we therefore the said
Official having god before our heyes and sitting as judge and in iuggement
seeing the forsayde knowlage and confession of the said King Lowys have
monisshed and enjoined and by these presents monisshe and inioyne the same
king lowis that he pay or do to be pai^ed yearly and every year during their
both lives.l. thousand scutes at the place and times before reherced and that
upon peine of excommunicacion and cursyng the which sentence and iuggeme^t of
excommunicacion and cursyng we the forsayde official give and adiuge in this
our writting upon and against the said most noble prince Lowys king of France
and him do a curs now as then and then as now if he pay not or do to be
paid every year to the said King of England.l. thousand scutes at the times
and place aforesaid and him so acursed denounce woll denonce and shull make
to be denounced

In witness and proeue of all and eueriche of thees premises we the forsayde
Official have set to this present publyke and autentyke Instrument the seal
of the spiritual court of Amyas and also our private signet And also have
caused the Notarye apostolyke here under written to sign and subscribe the
same. Yeuen the year Indiccion Month the day and place as it is here before
written And I Johan Fabri clerk of the Diocise of amyas public aswele by the
auctorite apostolyke as imperial Notarye And also notarye and Scribe sworn of
the spiritual and ordinary Court of Amyas have been present whiles that all
and eueriche of these premises were had seid and done. and theyme saw hurd
and knew so had said and done. And therefore to this present publyke and
auctentyke instrument sealed with the seal of the said court of Amyas and with
the signet of the said Official I the foresaid John Fabri required have set
mine used and accustumed apostolyke sign and subscribed me with mine own hand
in prove and witness of the truth of all and eueriche of thees premises.



Tharticles of the conuencion bitwene the frenssh King and de Duc of austrice
late called duc of burgoyne
In the name of god / and the glorious vyrgyn Marye and of all the court
celestial peace fynal vnyoun alyaunce and benyuolence for ever more is maad /
promised and sworn between the king my lord Daulphyn the roialme their lands
lordshippes and subgettis / on the one party and my lord Maximylyan Duc of
austriche my lord Duc Phelip and Damoysel margarete their children their lands
lordships and subgettis on the other / by the which al manner rancours
hatereddes and malyuolences of either of the parties against other ben put down
and set away and al manner iniuryes of deed and of words remytted and
foryeuen for gretter surtye of the said peace traytye and alyaunce of marriage is
maad promised consented and accorded between my lord the Daulphyn only sone of
the king and heir apparent to the Crown and my said damoysel of austrice
only daughter of the only daughter of the decessyd my lord Duc Charles whom
god assoyle. and the said marriage shall be ended and solempnysed the said
damoysel comen to age when the same marriage shall be required of right

Item that in the said traytye of pees the person of my said lady magaret
duchess of Bourgoygne wedowe / late wife of my lord the Duc Charles deceasid is
comprised and unto her shall be delyuerrd the hoole lands of chancuns and of the
perler in the land of Bourgoyne And there upon the king shall grant unto her
his lettres patentes according unto the contenne of the same that she had of
the said Duc and ducesse

Item in asmoche as the said ambassadors have maad request that for certain
consideracion that they have showed to the kyngys folk that his pleasure may be
to comprise in the same traytye of peace the king of England and the Duc of
Britaygne

It is answered that Englissh men been in the treues with the king and that this
trete touches them in no thing / and as for the Duc of Bretaigne the king has
no werre with him but peace fynal and oath solempnly has been made betwixt them
the which the king will keep in his party

And yet the king and my said lord the Daulphyn auctorised and dyspended for
his young age in the presence of thambassodours and commissioners from the king
shall swear solempnely upon the precious body of our lord upon the holy cross
and holy canon of the mess to keep and entreteygne this present traytye of
pees and of marriage in his points and articles and never do ne suffer to be
done in the contrary by any manner weye or mean that may be

And over this the king shall do be had the lettres and seals in particular of
my lords the Dukes of Orleaunce angenlesme Burboon Cardynal de Leon Earl of
neuers my lord of Beaugyen and of vendosme as nyghest to the blood subrogued
and substytute in the royalme of the perys tharchebysshoppys and Duc of Laon
and of Langres of the Bishops and earls of noyon chaloys Beauyuois pieres of
france the selles of the university of paris of the towns citees and
comynaltees of paris. Roen. Orleaunce. Tourney. Leon Troies Bordeaux Rochell
Angiers Poytiers Tolouse Rayns Amyens Babeuille Monstereull Therouaine Aier
Saint Ouyntyns Perone Prelates and nobles of the erldomes of Artoys and of
Bourgoygne to be delivered unto my said lord the Duc and to thestates of his
Countrees


