THE PRINcipal laws customs and estatutes of England which be at this present
day in ure, compendiously gathered together for ye weal and benefit of the
kings Majesty's most loving subjects, newely recognized and augmented.

LONDINI. M.D.XL.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

The prologe of Richard Tauerner to the reader.
DEmosthenes the renowned Orator defyneth law in this wise. The law (says he)
is y^ thing that all men ought to obey for many skylles, but in especial
because law is ye inue^tion and also the gift of god, the decree of prudent
men, ye chastisement of wilful and vnwilfull offenses, and finally the common
surety of a realm whereby it becomes al men to live which be conversant in
ye same. Chrysippus also an excellent philosopher thus begins his book of
laws. The law is king of all as well divine as humane affairs, the president
and comptroller of things honest and dishonest, the prince, captain and ruler
of the just and iniust, and it is of ciuile-creatures as well the commander,
what they ought to do, as the forbydder, what they ought not to do. These
auntike sayenges of wise me^ assuredly ought much to inflame us to the
knowledge of those things, without which we shall be esteemed no men but as brute
and savage beasts. Let us not commyt, that it be said of us English men, as it
was ones said of ye men of Athens, that is, that we make very goodly and
profitable laws, but we use the^ not. Certainly there can be no greater
reproach to a common weal then this. One lesson I would we learned of the
ancient lawyer Romain named Celsus, and that is this. The knowledge of laws
is not to bear awey ye words but the pyth and power of them. This he wrote
because there be many which when good and holsom laws be made, seek not to se
them executed, and observed, but rather how to defraude them and to have them
unexecuted, which kind of people after the sentence of most ancient lawmakers
be no less worthy of reprehensio^ tha^ they which do expressly against ye law.
Now, they do (say they) against the law which do the thing that ye law
forbyddeth. And they defraude a law or statute, which the words of the law
saved, do circu^uent the meaning and sentence of it. Let us tha^ so read the
laws, that we may bear awey the sentence and mind of them, and so fulfill and
observe the laws, that it may appear that they were not made in vayn. Thus
doing, we shall please god, we shall be obedient subjects to our prince, and
finally we shall seek our own weal and sauetye.

THE TABLE OF THIS BOOK.
WHat is law, justice, and the prudence of laws. fol. i. A division of estates
in lands or tenementes. fol. i. Of tenant for term of years. fol. i. Tenant
at will. fol. iii. Tenant by copy of court roll. fo. iiii A division of freholdes
fol. vii. Tenant for term of life. fol. viii. Tenant by the curtesy. fol. ix.
Of tenant in dower. fol. x. A division of inherita^ces. fol. xiiii. Fe simple.
fol. xv Fe tail fol. xx. Tenante after possibility of issue extincte. fol.
xxiii. Of parceners. fol. xxiiii. Of conditions. fol. xxvi. Of livery of seisin
and of atturnement, fol. xxix. Of services. fol. xxxii. Knights service. fol.
xxxiii. Of ward marriage and relief. fol. xxxvii. Service of castle garder
fol. xl. Of grande sergeantie fol. xli. Of petite sergeantie. fol. xliii. Of
homage ancestrel fol. xliii. Of socage. fol. xlv. Of frank almoyne. fol. xlvi.
Of burgage. fol. xlviii. Of villenage or bond service. fol. xlix. Of rentes
and of the diverse kinds of them. fol. liiii. what remedy a man has to
recover his rent wha^ it is behynd. fol. lx. How auowries ought to be made of
rentes and services. fol. xliii. An act for assigns or grantees of reuersions
to take auantage of co^dicions upon fermers. fol. xlv. A new art how tithes
and other profits ecclesiastical shall be recovered. fol. xl.vi. Of mortuaries.
fol. xl.ix. An new art made for thassura^ce of fermers to hold their fermes
against tena^tes in tail etc. fol. lxxi. That fermers shall take auantage of
condicio^s and couena^tes against grantees of reuersions. fol. lxxiii. That
fermers or tena^tes for term of years shall falsefye recoueries for their
term. fol. lxxiiij. An act for thaduoydinge of recoueries by collusion
against tenantes for term of life. fol. lxxv. Of discontinuance and of a new
act concerning y^ same. fol. lxxvi. That wrongful disseisin is no descent in
the law. fol. lxxviii. The limitatio^ of prescription newly inacted fol.
lxxix. Of times and how they shall conclude the issue in tail. fol. lxxxiii.
Of testamentes or last wills. fol. lxxxv. An act for probate of testame^tes.
fol. lxxxvii. Of disposing of lands by testament or otherwise, newly inacted.
fol. lxxxxi. Of mariagies and towching the degrees of consa^guinitie. fol.
xcvi.
An end of the table of this present volume.
What is law.
THe law is the direction and ministratio^ of justice, and justice is as
Justinian says in his institutions a constante and permanent mind and will to
render unto every person his right and duty. The prudencye of law is a
knowledge of divine and of humane things, a science and perfyte notice of
equite and iniquity, of righteousness and unrighteous. And forasmoche as a
great portion of the prudencie or science of the laws of this realm
consists in the perfyte knowledge of estates that men have in lands and
tenementes: we shall first as compendiously, and as simply and plainly as we
can, treat of estates.

A division of estates.
YE shall therefore vndersand, that who so ever has any estate in lands or
tenements, either he has in the same only a chatell, or a free hold, or an
inheritance. If he has an estate in any lands or tenementes but for term of
certain years, or at his landlordes will: so is it called a chatell, if for
term of his life or of an other man's life, it is called a free hold, or
frank tenement. And if he has it to him and to his heirs in fee simple, or
in tail: then we say he has an estate of inheritance.

Tenaunte for term of years.
TEnaunte for term of years, is he to whom lands or tenementes be dimised
and lessed for the term of certain years, as is agreed bitwene the landlorde
and the tenant. And when the lessee I mean him to whom such lease is made
does enter by force of the said lees, and is in actual possession of the same:
than he is called tenant for term of years.

And here ye shall note, that if the lessour that made the lees has reserved
unto him a yearly rent upon the said lees (as it is accustomably used to be
done) if the rent be behynd unpaid, it shall be in his free liberty and
election either to enter and distrayne for the rent, or to bring an action of
debt against him at the law for the arreragies of the same. But in this case
it is required, that the lessoure were seized of y^ lands or teneme^tes at the
time of the maki^g of the lease, for otherwise it shall be a good plee in the
action of debt for the tenant to say, that the lessour had nothing in the
land or tenement at the time of the lease made: except the leas^ were made by
deed inde^ted, for than the plee shall not lie in the mouth of the tenaunte or
lessee to plede.

And it is to be known that in a lease for term of years, by deed or without
deed, there need no lyuerye of seasone to be made to the less, but he may
enter when he will by virtue of his lease, without any further ceremonye of law.

Note also, that if a man lesseth lands for term of years, though the
lessoure chances to dye before the lessee does enter, yet the may enter well
enough. Otherwise it is where as lyuerye of seasone is to be made: as in free
holds, and in inheritaunces.

Also if the tenant for years does waste, the landlorde may bring an action
of waste against him, and shall recover the place wasted, and his treble
damages.

Tenaunte at will.
TEnaunte at will, is he to whom lands or tenementes be lessed to have and
hold the same at the will of the lessoure. And in this case the lessoure may
put out his tenaunte at what time him lysteth. But yet nevertheless, if the
tenaunte have sowed the grounds with corn, in this case if the lessoure will
enter and put out his tenaunte before harvest, the law will give him free
coming and going to repe and carry his corn away without any punishment or
damage to be sustained for his sodoynge because he knew not at what time the
lessoure would enter. But otherwise it is of the tenant for certain years,
for if he sows y^ ground and the term of his lease be come out and expired
before the corn be type, in this case that lessoure or he in the reuersion
may enter and take the corn, because it was the folly of the tenaunte to sow
the ground, knowing the end of his term.

In like wise tenaunte at will shall have free coming and going after the time
of the lessoures entree, to carye away his household stuff and goods for a
reasonable space.

Ye shall also understand, that he that makes a lease at will, may reserve an
annuell or yearly rent, in which case if the rent be behind, he may enter
very well and distreyn the goods and catells of the tenaunte, or at his
election bring an action of debt against him.

Also it is to be known that tenant at will of a mese or tenemente is not
bound by the order of law to sustain and repair the houses that be ruynouse,
as is the tenaunte for years, and therefore none action of waste lies against
him. Yet if he do wylful waste: as if he plucketh down the houses, or cuttethe
down the trees: it has been thought by the sages of the law that the
lessoure may bring an action of trespace against him and recover his losses
thereby sustained.

Tenant by copy of court roll.
THere is an other kind of tenant at will, which is called tenant by copy
of the court rolls. And this is when a man is ceased of a manner within
which, it has been used time out of mind, that the tenauntes within the
precinct of the said manner, have holden lands and tenementes to them and to
their heirs in fee simple, fee tail, or for term of life, at the will of the
lord according to the custom of the manner. And such a tenaunte can not aliene
or sell his land by his deed, for if he do, the land or tenemente that is so
aliened and sold, is forfayted into the lords hands, but if he wol alien his
copy hold land to an other, he must according to the custom, come into the
lords court, and there surrender it unto the lords hand, to the use of him
that shall have the state. The form^ of which surrender is co^monlye used to be
this.

Ad ha^c curiam uenit A. de A. and sursum reddit in eadem curia unum mesuagium.
etc. in manus domini ad usum C. de D. and heredum suor^ uel heredum de corpore.
etc. Et super hoc uenit praedictus C. de D. and coepit de domino in eade^ curia
mesuagium praedictum, habendum and tenendum sibi. etc. ad uoluntatem domini
secundum consuetudinem manerij, faciend. and reddend. inde redditus, seruitia,
and consuetudines inde prius debitas and consuetas. etc. Et dat domino pro
fine. etc. Et fecit domino fidelitatem.

These as I said be called tenauntes by copye of court roll, because they
have none other evidence to show concerning their lands, save only the
copies, of ye rolls of their lords court.

Neither can these tenauntes sue or be sued for such lands, in y^ kings
court by write or otherwise, but if they will implede or sue others for such
copye lands, they must do it by way of playnt in the lords court after this
sort.

A. de B. queritur uersus C. de D. de placito terrae, uidelicet de uno
mesuagio, xl. acris terrae.iiij. acris prati etc. cum pertinen^. Et facit
potestationem sequi quaerelam istam in natura breuis domini regis assise mortis
antecessoris ad co^em legem uel etc. plegii de proseque^do F. G. etc.

Now although some such tenauntes have an inheritance according to the
custom of the manner, yet in very deed they are but tenantes at the will of the
lord. For, as some men think, if the lord will expel them and put them
forth, they have no remedy at al, but to sue unto their lord by weye of
peticion, desiring him to be good unto the^. For if they might have any
remedy by the law then should they not be called (say they) tenauntes at the
will of the lord after the custom of the manner. But other men of no less
learning and prudency have been of contrary sentence: as lord Bryan chief
justice, in the time of king Ed. the iiij. whose opinion was always, that if
such tenant by the custom (payenge his services) be eiected and put forth
by his lord without cause reasonable, he may very well bring and maynteyne an
action of trespace against his lord at y^ common law: as appears termino
Hilarij anno. xxj. E. iij. Also lord Danby chief justice in likewise, was of
the same judgment: as appears Termino. Mich. anno. vii Ed. iiij. where he
says that the tenant by the custom is as well inheritable to have his land
after the custom, as is he that has a free hold at the common law, but the
determination of this question I remit to my great masters, which ca^ solue
the knottes and enigmaes of the law.

For asmoche as yet still of this matter, Causidici certant and adhuc subiudice
li^ est.

Also ye shall understand, that the usage of some Manor is, when the tenaunte
will surrender his land to the use of an other, that he shall take a wande in
his hand, and deliver it to the steward of the court, and the steward shall
deliver the same wand in name of seisin to him that shall take the land: and
such a tenaunte is called, tenaunte by the verge. Diverse other customs there
be of surrendryng of copy hold lands, which here for tediousnes I will omytte.
And forasmoch as tenauntes by custom of the Manoure, have by the course of the
common law no free hold: therefore they be called tenau^tes of base tenure.

Hitherto I have treated of the first membre of our division, that is to
wit, of chatelles, for as I said, all leases for term of years, and at will
be accounted in the law but as cateles and be comprysed under that name, save
that they be called cateles reals where as kyne, oxen, horses, money, plate,
corn, and such like be called chatell personalles. Now we will proceed to
thexplanicio^ of the second membre, that is to say, of free holds

A division of free holds.
FRee holds or frank teneme^tes a man may have in sundry wyses, for either he
is seized for term of his own life, or for term of an other man's life. If he
be sesed for term of his own life, either he have gotten such estate by way
of purchase, or else the law has entiteled him thereunto. I call it by purchase,
whether he comes unto it by his own barganing and procureme^t, or by the
gift of his friend, and I call it by the operation and intitelynge of the law,
when a man maryeth a woman that is an in heritres, and has issue by her, and
she dies, now shall he have the lands during his life by the course of the
law, and shall be called tenaunte by the curtesye of England.

In likewise, if a man be seized in fe^ simple: or fee tail of lands, and
takes a wife, and he dies, the law gives unto the wife the third part of
her husbands lands for term of her life, and she shall be called tenant in
dower.

Tenant for term of life.
TEnaunte for term of life, is he that holds lands or teneme^tes for term
of his own life, or for term of an others life. How be it the most frequent
and common manner of speaking is to call him that has estate for term of his
own life, tenaunte for life, and him that has estate for term of an others
life, tenant pour term dautre vie, that is to say, tenaunte for term of an
others life.

Ye shall note, that like as he that makes the lease is called the lessoure,
and he to whom the lease is made is called the lessee, so he that makes a
feffement is called the feffoure, and he to whom the feffement is made, the
feffee.

Also if tenaunte for term of life, or tenaunte for term of an other man's
life do wast, the lessour or he in the reuersion shall maynteyne very well an
action of waste against him, and shall by the same recover treble damages.

Finally, ye shall understand that by an act of parliament made in the xxvii.
year of our Sovereign lord that now is, king Henry the eight, it is enacted
that no free hold, nor estate of inheritance shall pass ne take effect but by
deed indented, sealed and enrolled in one of the kings courts at Westmynster,
or else within the same county where the land does lie: as by the said act
more at large appears.

Tenant by the curtesi.
Tenant by the curtesye of England, is he that has married a wife inherited,
and has had issue by her, and she is dead, in this case the law of England
permytteth and suffers the husband of such wife to reteyne all his wives
lands that she had either in fee simple, or fee tail so long as he lives:
And this is by the curtesye and vr^anitie of England, for this thing is used
in none other region.

But in this case it is required that the child ve vital, that is to say, be
borne and brought forth i^ to this world alive, and therefore the common
saying has been, that onles the child be hard cry, the father shall not be
tenaunte by the curtesye, for the only prove and argument of life in an
infaunt newborn is the vagite and cryenge.

Ye shall furthermore understand, that unless the husband be in actual and
real possession of his wives lands, and seized of them in her right, he shall
not be tenaunte by curtesye after her death. And therefore if lands descend to
a man's wife, so that she is tenant in the law, and to every man's accion, yet
if the husband have not made an actual entreedurynge the couerture and
matrimony between the^ he shall not be tenau^^ by the curtesye, for it shall be
reputed and iugged his folly and negligence that he would not enter in her life
time.

Otherwise it is of aduousons, ^^^tes, and such other things, which forthwyth
when they descend be in a man or woman without any enter or further ceremonye
of law.

Note, that if tenaunte by the curtesye of England will suffer or make any wast
in the lands or teneme^tes that he so holds, he is punyshable therefore by
action of wast.

Also it is to be known, that of things that be in suspense, a man shall not
be tenant by the cur^^sye, and therefore if a man be the tenant in fee simple
of certain land, and does entremary with a woman that is the seignoresse or
lady of the same and has issue by her, and she dies, yet he shall not be
tenant by the curtesye of the lordshyp of seignorye, because himself is
tenant of the land, and therefore the lordeship is suspended for the time, for
a man can not be both lord and tenant of one thing but if he had not been
tenant of the land, he should have had the lordeshyp after the death of his
wife by the courtesy of England very well.

Of tenant in dower.
TEnaunte in dower, is she that has been married to an husband that was during
the matrimony between them seized of lands* or (...) in fee simple or fee
tail* which is now deed and she seized of the thy^ depart of her husbands
said lands for term of her life. For by the common law of the land, if the
husband be at any time during the couerture seized lawfully, whether (...) be
by purchase or by descent, (...) the^ in fee or in tail, and dye, his (...) to
be endowed by the course of the common law of the third fo^e. And in some
places by an aunciente custom she shall be endowed of the (...)* yea and though
(...) seized actually durying the courture, yet if the lands be cast upon
(...) by the law, so that the law calls him tenant to every man's action, it
suffiseth for the woman to demand her dower, for it were unreasonable, that
the negligence (...) of entering of the husband should hurt the wives (...).

Otherwise it is, as I said before, of tenant by the curtesy, for if lands
descend to a woman covert and the husband for slouthfulnes or negligence does
not enter in his wives life he shall not be tenant by the curtesi^ (...) by all
laws the wife owes obedience and subjection to her husband and therefore she
can not compel him to enter, but when lands descend to the wife, the husband
only have power to enter at his pleasure.

And ye shall understand, that unless the wife be passed the age of ix. years
at the time of her husbands death, she shall not be endowed by the common
law.

But it is to be known that a woman may by diverse ways estoppe and preuidi^e
her self of her dower: as if she commyt any crime for which she is atteynted
of treasone, murdre or felonye, ^he gett^^no dower, not wythstandyng she has
obtained her pardone.

Also if after the death of her husband she takes a lease for term of life
of the same lands whereof she is indowable she losed her dower of the same.
Moreover if she departethe from her husband and lyuethe in aduoutrye with an
other man, and not reconcieled again to her husband without coercion of the
ecclesiastical power, she lesethe her dower after her husbands death.

She shall be also barred of dower if she will wythholde from the heir the
charters and evidence concerning that land whereof she asks dower: But none
other save the heir can wytholde her dower for this cause.

It may not be unknown also of what things she may demand dower, and of
what things not. Of lands messuagies, aduousons, rent charges, rent
seruyses, or signories in gross or otherwise, of villaynes, of commons
certain, of estouers, certain, she is dowable. But of commons, and estouers
sans nombre, also of annuities, of homage, of things of pleasure, as of
seruyces of paimet of roses, and semblable she shall not be endowed.

There be yet two other kinds of dower, the one is called dowment ex asse^su
patr^is, and the other is called dowment de la plus beale pertie. that is to
say, of the fairest part.

Dowment ex assensu patris, is when the father is seized of lands in fee, and
his son which is heir apparaunt endoweth his wife at the church door, when
he is espoused, of parcel of his fathers lands, with the assente of his
father in wrytinge testifienge the same assent, if in this case her husband
dye, she may forthwyth enter into the lauds so assigned unto her without further
app^yntynge or process of law, although the father of her husband be yet alive
and in actual possession of the land. But if she thus do, and take her to this
endowment at the church door she can not have her dower by the common law of
the third part of all her husbands lands, or any parcel of them how be it
if she will refuse this assignement made unto her at the church door, and
demand dower at the common law, she may very well.

A man may also endow his wife at the time of the spousailes of his own
lands, which he has in his own possession, and that dower is called dower
ad ostium ecclesiae

Dowment Dela plus beale, that is to say, dowmente of the fayreste part shall
be in this case. When a man is seized of lands which he holdethe of an other
man by knights service, and of other lands which be of socage tenure, and
has issue, which is within the age of.xiiij. years and dye, and the lord
of whom the land is holden by knights service entrethe in to the land holden
of him, and the mother of the child entrethe in to the socage tenure as
gardeyne in socage, if in this case the woman will bring a writ of dower
against the lord which is gardeyne in cheualrye, he may plede the special
matter and show, how she as gardeyne in socage has so much land and pray
the court that she may be suffered to endowe her self of so much land being
in her own custody, as amounts to the third part of the hole lands. And
than the judgment shall be, that the gardeyne in chyualrye shall reteyne the
land holden of him quyte from the woman duerynge the non age of the ward.
After which judgment she may go and in presence of her neighbors endowe her
self of the best part of that which is in her custodye, amountynge to the
third part of the hole, and than is she called tenaunte in dower de la plus
beale.

A division of inheritaunces.
HYtherunto I have spoken of free holds, now, it remains to treat of
inheritau^ces, not that inheritau^ces be no free holds, for they be free
holds also, but the other estates of which I have here tofore treated be
only free hold, and of no higher nature, where as a state of in heritance,
although it ^e a free hold, yet it is not to be called by yt name, sithe it is
a far more excellent and greater estate. But ye shall understand that of
inheritaunces some be of more amplitude and excellencye than other some be, as
that inheritance which is pure, simple, and without limitacion of what
heirs, is it called fee simple. But when I make a limitacio^ of what heirs,
tha^ is it called fee tail, of which also be two sorts, as herafter more at
large shall be declared. Now the nature of fee simple is to be setforth with
our accustomed compendiousnes.

Fee simple.
FEe simple is (as I said) the most ample and large inheritance that can be in
this realm divised or excogi^ate, as that which a man has to him and to his
heirs simply without any further limitacion, for whether they be of his own
body begot ten or not, so that they be the next of his kin, and within the
degrees it suffiseth.

So then tenaunte in fee simple is he that has lands or tenementes (whether
it be by purchase or by descent) to him and to his heirs for ever. For if a
man will purchase lands in fee simple, he must needs have these words, his
heirs, in his purchase, for these be the only words that make an estate of
inheritance. Therefore if lands be given to a man for ever and no mention be
made of his heirs: he has an estate but for term of his life, because these
words (his heirs) do lack.

Yet nevertheless, if a man by his testament does devise lands to an other in
such where the custom will serve so to do, though he makes no mention of
heirs, but says that he bequethethe to such a person such^ lands, to
have and to hold to him and to his assigns for evermore: here a state of
inheritance does pass, for in testamentes the will and intent of the testaour
is to be pondred, and not the formal and prescripte words of y^ law.

Also these terms in the law, frank marriage, and frank almo^e that is to
say, free marriage and free almose do include in them words of inheritance.
And therefore if I give lands to a man with my daughter in frank marriage
without further addicion or mention of heirs, this is an estate of
inheritance, as we shall hereafter declare more plentiouslye. In likewise it is
of lands given to an house ecclesiastical in pure and fra^k alms. Moreover if
lands be given to a man and to his blood, or to him and to his seed, he has
in both cases a state of inheritance for in y^ one he has a fee tail, and in
the other a fe simple. For this word seed, and blood, and such like do implye
words of inheritance.

But now it is to be seen who be said a man's heirs in the law. Ye shall
therefore know, that my brother or sister by the half blood, that is to
wit, by the fathers side, and not by the mothers, or contrary wise by the
mothers and not by the fathers, shall never be mine heir, nor none that come
of them.

Neither my bastard can be mine heir, nor mine own natural father ne
mother, nor grandefather ne grandmother can be mine heir.

For it is a principle and ground in the law, that inheritance may linially
descend, but ascend it may not. And therefore if I have lands in fee simple
and dye without issue of my body, my father can not be mine heir, but my
fathers brother or sister shall, and then if my uncle or aunt dye seized without
issue, my father shall have the lands as heir to mine uncle or to my aunte, but
heir to me he can not be. But it may go from me to mine uncle or aunte well
enough, for that is not called a linial ascension but a collatrall.

And ye shall note, that by the common law of this realm, my eldest son
shall have the hole inheritance, and after him if he has no issue, the
second son, and so forth. And if I have no sons but daughters, than shall
all the daughters together inherit, if I have no issue at all, neither son^es
ne daughters, than shall my eldest brother in heritage succeed me but if I have
no brother, than my systers if I have any, if not my uncle by my fathers side,
if the lands be of mine own purchase. And to be short if there be none in
life of my fathers side, it shall goo to my mothers side, and if there can be
found no heir neither by fathers side ne yet by mothers, then shall it reuerte
and eschete (as they call it) to the lord of whom it was holden, for every
land must needs be holden of some lord, as shall be here after showed. But if
lands descend unto me by my mothers side, than if I fail of issue, the
lands shall descend only to my heirs of my mothers side, and never to mine
heirs of my fathers side: as on the contrary side, if I have lands or any
hereditamentes by disce^t from my father or his blood, they shall never descend
to my heirs by my mothers side.

Thus ye se a great difference in this behalf, bitwene purchased lands and
lands which descend from my auncestoure.

If there be three sons, and the myddell son purchases lands and dye
without issue, the heldeste shall have the lands and not the youngest.

Also it is a principle in our law, that none can be mine heir of lands that
I hold in fee simple, onles he be mine heir by the hole blood that is to say,
both by father and mother, for if a man has issue two or three sons by
sundry wives, and the eldest purchases lands in fee and dies without issue,
his half brethren I mean those yt be not his brethren both by the fathers
side and mothers side shall not have the land, but it shall go to his uncle.
Likewise if a man has by his first wife a son and a daughter, and by his
second wife an other son, and the son by the first wife purchases lands
in fee, and dyethe without issue: the sister german shall have the lands by
disce^t as heir to her brother, and not to the yo^ger brother. Otherwise it is
of lands or other hereditame^tes entailed as shall be herafter specified.

Also if a man be seized of lands in fee simple, and has issue a son and
daughter by one wife, and afterward a son by an other, and dies, and the
eldest son enters in to the lands, and after dies without lawful issue of
his body, the daughter shall have the lands and not the youngest son, and yet
the youngest son is heir to his father, but he is not so to his brother. But
if in this case the eldeste son had not entered after the death of his father
but had died before any enter made by him, than shall not the sister german
enter but the younger brother is heir to his father, because the eldest brother
was never in actual possession, which is requisyte to yt person that
claymeth to be heir collaterallye. But to the lyniall heirs, it suffiseth
that the auncestour should have been heyr if he had lived, I mean as thus. A
man is seized of lands and has issue, a son and daughter by one wife, and
afterward a son by an other, he dyethe, the eldeste son entrethe not, but
dies without issue before he can make any actual entree, his sister shall not
have the lands as heir to her brother, because her brother was never actually
possessed, but y^ yo^ger brother shall have them as heir to his father. Yet if
theldest son in that case had left behind him issue of his body, whether it
had been son or daughter, this issue not wythstandyng that the father of the
issue was never possessed either actually, or in ye law, shall have the lands,
and shall convey his descent from his father, for the son or daughter is
linial heir, where as the brother, sister, uncle, aunt. etc. be heirs
collateral, and so observe a dyuersitie.

I call an actual possession, when a man enters in deed in to lands to him
descended, but a possession in law, is called when lands be descended to a
person, ann he has not yet real ly and actually e^tred in to them. For
notwythstandydge that he is not in actual possession yet he is possessed in
the law, that is to say, in the eye and consyderation of the law, for as much
as he is tenant to every man's action that will sue for the said lands, for
else there should ensue an intolerable inconvenience, as we shall more copyously
open in an other place.

Ye shall understand that this word inheritance is not only to be
accommodate and applied to that which comes by discente from a man's
ancestors: but also to every purchase in fee simple, or fee tail.

Fee tail.
Ye shall understand, that before a certain statute called the statute of
Westminster second, there was no state tail, but all was fee simple, either
purely that is to say, without condition or condicinallye: as appears by the
pretense of y^ said statute, but now sythens the promulgating of that statute
diverse forms of state tails have risen.

Fee tail is when it is prescribed and lymytted in the gift, what heirs and
by whom engendered shall inherit. As for exemple I give lands to a man and to
his heirs and go no further, this is fee simple: but if I make a limitation,
and add of his hody begotten, now is it fee tail that is to say, a fee or
inheritance limited, prescribed, determinate, or assigned. So that if I give
lands to a man and to his heirs, he has fee simple, but if I give lands to
him and to his heirs of his body lawfully begotten, he has but a fee tail,
for asmoche as I appoynte, lymytte, prescribe and determyne the heirs, and for
lack of such heirs the gift shall be expired and worn out, and the lands
shall reuerte again to the gyuer or his heirs.

But ye must observe that there bo two kinds of fee tail. There is a
general tail, and there is a special tail. Fee tail general is as where
lands be given to a man and to his heirs of his body begotten, without any
mencyonynge and expressing by what woman they are to be begotten. And
therefore yfa man be tenaunte in the general tail of lands, and takes a
wife and has issue by her, and she dies and afterward he takethe an other
wife, of whom he has also other issue, here either of these issue is
inheritable to this land entayled. But if I express in the gift by what woman
the heirs shall be procreate and inge^dred, then is it an especial tail, as
for exemple to make the thing plain, if lands be given to a man and to the
heirs of his body lawfully begotten by Katherin his wife, this is an especial
tail, for the issue of him begotten by an other woman, shall never inherit by
force and virtue of the tail. Likewise it is, if lands be given to a woman
and to y^ heirs of her body law fully begotten (and show not by what man)
this is a general tail, but if I add and say by such a man her husband,
than is it an especial taylle.

Also if I give lands to a man and to his wife, and to the heirs of there two
bodies lawfully begotten: this is an especyal tail, as well in the husband as
in the wife,

Semblably it is, if a man gives lands to an other man with his daughter or
kynswoman in francke marriage, this emplyeth a state tail especial, and in
this case as well the man as the woman has estate in in the special tail.

But if I give lands to a man and to such a woman, and to his heirs that he
shall begette of her: here the woman has estate but for term of her life,
and the husbands an estate in the especyall tail. In likewise it is on the
womans behalf, as if I give lands to a man and to his wife, and to her heirs
of the body of her said husband engendered, he has an estate but for term
of life, and she an estate in the special tail. But in both cases, if I
had said to the heirs and not his or her heirs, than should either of them
have had an estate in the special tail, because this word heytes is as
well referred to the one as to the other.

Ye shall also understand, that if lands be given to a man, and to the heirs
males of his body, this is a state tail, and in this case the heir femalle
shall never inherit.

Finally it is to be noted, that of lands which a man has in fee simple, the
possession of the brother shall cause the sister germayne that is to say, the
sister both by the fathers side and mothers, to inherit, and not the brother
by the half blod, as here tofore was said, but of lands which be entayled
otherwise it is. Therefore if a man be seysed of lands in the general tail,
and has issue by his furst wife, a son and a daughter, and also a son by
an other wife, and dies, and the eldest son enters in to the lands and
after dies, the suster germayne shall not have the lands but the younger
brother of the half blood, because whosoever shall inherit lands in tail,
must claym them as next and immediate heir, not to him that dies last seized
of ye lands; but to him unto whom the lands were first given, which in the
case before remembered, is the son and not the daughter.

Thus ye shall mark observe a great diversity between the form of succession
in lands of fee simple, and the form in fee tail.

Tenant after possibility of issue extincte.
When lands or tenementes be given to a man and to his wife, and to the heirs
of there two bodies lawfully begotten, if in this case either of them chance
to dye before they have issue between them, he or she that ouerlyueth his still
tenant in tail, but without all possibility of any issue that can be heir
to these lands entayled, and for this cause he or she thus ouerlyuynge is
called tenaunte after possibility of issue extincte, for in such a tenaunte
is all possibility of issue that may be inherytable to these lands by force
of the gift in tail utterly extincte and quenched, and by his or her death
the state tail shall expyre, cease, and be abolyshed for ever and shall
reuerte again to the gyuer or donoure from whence it came.

Yet forasmoche as this tenant after possibility of issue, had ones an
inheritance in him, he shall not be punyshede by an action of waste, though he
makethe never so much waste in the lands and tenementes, whereas yet in
effect he is but a tenaunte for term of life.

Of perceners.
Hitherunto I have made a compendious and short declaracyon of estates of al
sorts. But where I said that among susters there is no prerogatyue or
preminence concerning the inheriting of their auncestoures lands, but that
they shall be al together inheritours, and make as it were but one heir: it is
expedient to make a further process in this behalf, and to show how and in
what manner this partition shall be made.

But ye shall understand that there be beside parceners at the common law,
which be only susters, also parciners by custom, which is among brothers
contrary to the course of the common law, and this custom is in Kent, and in
other places where lands and teneme^tes be of the tenure of Gauel kind.

Ye shall thefore know y^ when a man is seized of lands in fee simple or see
tail, and has no issue but daughters, and die, and the daughters do enter in
to the lands thus descended unto them, now they be called parceners, or
coheyres, and by a wryt called, De pertitione facienda brought by on of them
against the others, they shall be constrained by the law to suffer an egall
particion to be made of the lands between them.

Now partycion may be made in sundry ways. One way is wha^ they them
selves do make particion between them of the hole heritage and do agree unto
the same and enter every one in to her part so allotted unto her.

An other is when by all their agremente an consent one common friend do make
the particion. In which case the eldest sister shall have the first election,
and after her the second suster, and so forth. But if they agree that theldest
suster shall make the particion, and she makes it, then theldest shall not
choose first, but shall suffer all her susters to chose before her, as it is
thought.

There is also an other form of particion, which is egally to divide the
lands into so many parts as there be coheires or parciners, and to write
every part so divided in a several scroule of paper, and to put the said
scroulles in to a bonette, or to enclose them severally in balls of wax, and
than the eldeste suster to choose which balle she wit, or to put her hand in
to the bonet and to take a scroule, and to hold her to her chance and
allotment, and so consequentlye every suster after other.

And ye shall note, that particion by agreement may as well be made by nude and
bare words without writing as by writing.

That if any of the parceners will not suffer any particion to be made than may
the other that would have partition, purchase a write called De partitione
facienda against them that refuse partition, to compel the same to suffer
partition to be made accordyngly, and than by the judgment of the court the
sheryfe by the seremente of twelve men shall make particion between them, and
shall assign to each suster her portion, as he shall think good, without
gyuyng any election to the eldeste.

And if two Manours of meeses descend to two susters, and the manners be not of
egall value, than may she, to whom the less manner is allotted, have assigned
unto her a rent proportionably out of the others manner.

Finally, ye shall understand, that if a man be seized of lands in fee
semple, and has issue two daughters, and gives with one of his daughters to
an other man that is to mary her the third or fourth part of his land in
frank marriage, and dies, if in this case the daughter that is in this wise
auaunced, will have her porcyon of her fathers heritage, she must put her
land given unto her in francke marriage in hochepot new again. I mean she
must be contented to suffer her said lands to be commixte and mengled with
the other lands of which her father dyed seized in fee simple, so that an
equal division may be made of the hole, or else she shall have no part of
those lands, of which her father died seized. But if her father had made unto
her but a common gift in tail, or a feffeme^t in fee, she should not need to
put her lands in hochepot, but may retain them still, and also have as good a
part of the rest of the lands of which her father dyed seized, as her other
sister or sisters. For a gift in francke marriage, is accounted the most free
or most liberal gift that can be, and that which the law iudgethe to be
only for the advancement and be stowynge of the daughter, where as
feffementes in fee and also common gifts in tail be accustomably for other
causes, and for the advantage rather of the gyuour, or feffour then of the
taker.

Of conditions.
FOrasmoche as every estate is either pure, or condicionall, it were not amysse
somewhat to make a declaration of the nature and efficacye of conditions.
Wherefore ye shall under stand that of conditions, some be actual conditions,
and be called express conditions or co^dicions in deed, and other some be
co^dicio^s in law which be called also in latin, Condiciones tacitae, sieve
condiciones implicitae, because they be secretly employed by the law and not
expressed.

Conditions in deed be such as be knyt and annexed by express words to the
feffemente lease or graunter either in writing or without, as for exe^ple if I
infeffe a man in certain lands reserving to me and to my heirs so much
rent yerlye to be paid at such a feast, and for defaute of payment, that it
shall be lawful for me to reentre, this is a feffement upon condition of
paymente. For the not payment of the rent shall dissolve the fefment. Semblably
it is of gifts in tail, leases. etc.

But if the condition be, that for defaulte of paymente of the rent, it shall be
lawful for the feffoure to enter again in to the lands, and to hold them
till he be satisfied of the rent, this condition not performed does not
dissolve the feffement, but only gives to ye feffour an authorytie to retain
the lands (as it were by way of distress) till he has leuyed the arr^ragyes
of the rent.

And ye shall observe, that conditions be sometime made to be performed on the
feffees behalf, and sometime on the feffours behalf.

On the feffees behalf, as when I infeffe you of lands upon condition that ye
shall do such an act, as to pay unto me or to mine heirs such annual rent.

On the feffours behalf, as wha^ I make a feffement unto you upon condition
that if I pay or cause to be paid unto you before such a day such a sum
of money, than it shall be lawful for me to enter again and retein my lands
in my former estate In this case ye that be the feffee, are called tenant in
morgage, which is as much to say as a deed gage, and it semethe that the cause
why it is so called, is for asmoche as it is doubtful whether the feffoure
will pay at the day prescribed such sum of monye for the redemption of his
lands or no, for if he do not, his title or intresse in the lands thus gaged,
and oppignorated is utterly extinct with out all hope of renuynge.

Ye shall note that if the morgageoure dies before the day of payment, his
heir may redeem the la^d very well even as well as his auncestoure that
morgaged the land might have done although there be no mention made of heirs
in the wrytinge.

And if when the monye is lawfully by the morgageour or his heir proffered, and
the feffee refuses to receive the same, the feffoure or his heir may enter,
and then has the feffee no remedy for his money at the common law.

Ye shall understand also that some conditions be utterly void in the law,
and of none efficacy or strength, as if a feffement be made of lands in fee
simple upon condition that the feffee shall not alien or put awey this same to
none other, this condition I say is void, because the feffee is restrained of
his hole pour that the law gives in such case unto him, and which power
and liberty, is in manner included in every feffement. Yet I may abbrydge him
of part of his power, as to condition with him that he shall not aliene the
lands to such a person or such. But of gifts in tail other wise it is,
for if I give lands to a man and to the heirs of his body lawfully begotten
upon condition that he nor his heirs shall aliene the lands to none other
person, this condition is good and effectual in the law, and if he or his
heirs contrary to the condition do aliene them, than the gyuer or his heirs
may very well enter and reteyne the lands for ever, because this condition
does stand with the forenamed statute of Westminster second which prohibiteth
such alienacio^s to be made.

Hitherunto I have spoken of conditions in deed, now will I show what be
conditions in law that be annexed to any estates.

Know ye therefore, that if the office of a parker, or steward, or such like
office be granted to a man for term of his life, though there be no condition
at al me^cioned in the grant, yet the law speaks a condition in this case,
which is that if the party to whom such office is given shall not execute
all points apperteynynge unto his office accordingly, it shall be lawful for
the grau^tour to enter and dyscharge him of his office and this condition is
called a condition in law.

Of lyuery of season, and of atturnement.
IN all feffeme^tes, gifts in tail leeses for term of life, or for term of
an others life of lands or tenementes, there can be no alteration or
transmutacion of possession by the aunciente laws of this realm, on less
there be a certain cerimonye adhibited and solempnised in the presence and
sight of neighbors or others, which ceremony is called liuerye of seasone.

And ye shall understand, that this ceremonye of lyuerye of seasone is done,
when the feffoure, donour, lessoure or their deputy come with the neighbors
solemply to the lands or tenementes, and there put the feffee donee or lessee
in possession of the said lands or tenementes by delivering unto him a clod of
earth, or the ring of the door, orsome other thing in the name of seasone, and
for this self cause this ceremonye of law is called lyuerye of seasone, that
is to wit a tradicion or gyuynge of seasone.

But this ceremony is not required in lessees for term of years, or in leeses
at will, in as much as the lessoure in such case remains still seized, and
the lessee has only the possession without the seasine and (...) the terms
of the law be, that such a man is possessed, where as in feffementes, gifts
in tail, and leeses for life, he is called seized.

Wherefore if a feffemente or lees for life be made of lands or teneme^ts and
before that the livery of seasine be made the feffoure dies, the heyr of the
feffoure shall have the lands per summum ius, yt is to lay by the rigor of
the law, notwithstanding that the feffee has paid to the feffour the price
of the land, and although the feffee be in possession. But otherwise it is of a
lose for term of years.

I like ceremonye is used when rent charges, when rent seruyces, and such
other things as pass by wey of grant, be granted, for it is no full and
perfyte grant till it be consygnate as it were with the ceremonye of
atturnement.

This atturnemente is nothing else, but when the tenaunte of the land of
which the reuersion is granted, or out of which a rent is granted, do make
some evident signification and token that he accepts the person to whom the
grant is made to be in the same respect unto him that the grauntoure was. As
for an exemple if the tenaunte of the land after he have herd of the grant
comes to the grauntee, that is to wit, to the person to whom the grant was
made, and say in this wise, or in like effect.

I agree me to the grant made unto you by such a man, or I am well a paid
and contented of the grant that such a man has made unto you. But the most
usual and frequent form of atturnement is to say: Sir I atturne unto you by
force of the said grant, or I become your tenant, or to deliver unto the
grauntee a penye or a half penye by way of atturnemente.

If a man makes first one grant to one person, and after an other to ane
other person, that grant shall stand to which the tenaunte will atturne,
although it be the latter.

And ye shall note, that if a man be seized of a Manoure which is percell in
demene, and percell in service, and does aliene the same Manoure to an other,
unless the tenauntes of the Manoure do atturne, the services shall not pass
only tenauntes at will excepted for it nedethe not to cause them to atturne.

Note furthermore that there is a great difference between giuynge a penye in
name of seasin, and gyuyng it by way of atturnement, for when it is given of
the tenant to y^ grau^tee in name of seasin, it does not only implye an
atturnement, but also it gives him such a seasin, that if the rent
afterward be behind and not paid, he may now upon y^ seasin of the penye,
after a lawful distres and after rescus made, bring an assyce of nouel
disseasin, where as if it were given only by way of atturnement he could not
bring the assyse, but his wryt of rescus only.

Also ye shall understand, that where lands be deuisable by testamente by the
custom of any ancient boroughe or cyty, if there the reuersion of any lands
be by testament bequethed to a man in fee, and testatour which we call the
dyuysour dies y^ deuisee, that is to wit, he to whom the devise was made
has forthwt y^ reuersion in him without further ceremonye of atturnement.
Likewise it is if a man by testament does bequeth a rent charge that he is
seized of, or a re^t service, there nedethe none atturnement at all.

If two ioyntenauntes be of land and the lord grants the seruyces to an
other, if one of y^ ioynte^au^^e^s atturneth it is enough. Finally, if a lease
be made for term of life, the remayndre to an other in tail, the remayndre
over to the right heirs of the tenant for term of life, if in this case the
tenant for term of life will grant his remayndre in fee to an other by his
deed, this remayndre passes forthwyth without any atturnement, for if any
atturnement were requisite, it should be made of the tenant for term of life,
which in this case is the grauntour him self. And in vain it is that the
grauntoure should be enforced to atturne, since an atturnement is adhibited to
none other purpose than to have the consent and agremente of the particular
tenaunte, to the intent that it may appear, that he has notice or knowledge of
this grant, but here where as the particular tenaunte himself is the
grauntour, an atturnement were superfluous, and more than neded.

Of services.
HYtherunto I have brefely touched and ouerrun the sundry kinds and forms of
estates. Now forasmoch as there is no tenure, but has unto it some service
knyt and annexed, it were very necessary to declare how many kinds of
services there be, and what service is due to every tenure. For the knowledge
her of ye shall understand, that the principal and most common kind of
service that the tenant owes to his lord, is called knights service.

Knights service.
Knights service includes homage, fealeie and for most perte escuage, and
whosoever holds his lands by knights service, is bound by the law of this
realm to do unto his lord homage and fealty, and to pay for most part
escuage, when it shall be assesed by authority of parliamente as hereafter more
plainly shall be declared unto you.

Homage is the most humble and reverent service that a man of free condition
can do, for when the tenaunte shall do homage to his lord, the lord shall sytte,
and the tenant shall knele before him upon both knees, and shall hold his
hands bitwene his lords hands, and say in this wise, I become your man from
this day forthward of life and of membre and of earthly honor, and to you
shall be faithful and loyal, and faith to you shall bear for the lands
that I claim to hold of you, saving the faith that I bear unto our
sovereign lord the king, and than the lord so sitting shall kiss him. But
if an ecclesiastical person which by his order and profession has addicted
himself to the service of god in especial shall do homage to his lord he
shall not say: I become your man because he has professed himself to be the
only man of god: but shall say I do to you homage, and shall be to you
faithful and true, and faith to you shall bear for the tenementes y^ I hold
of you, saving the faith which I do owe to our soueraygne lord the king.

Ye shall note also, that when a woman not married does homage to her lord, she
shall not say: I become your woman, for it is not convenient that a woman should
be the woman of any other than of her husband that she shall mary, but she
shall say even as the ecclesiastical person says: I do unto you homage. etc.

That if perchance a man holds sundry lands and tenementes of sundry
lords, and every of them by knights service, than in the end of his homage
making, he shall say, saving the faith that I owe to our soueraygne lord the
king, and to mine other lords.

And it is to be knoewn, that none is bound to do homage to the lord, onles it
be such a tenaunte as has in the tenauncye an estate of fee simple, or fee
tail, either in his own right, or in the right of an other.

For if a woman have lands or tenementes in fee simple or fee tail, which
she holdethe of her lord by knights service, and takes an husband and have
issue, in this case the husband in the life of his wife shall do the homage,
because he has a title to have the lands by the curtesy of England if he
ouerlyueth her, and also he holds them now in his wives right, yet before
issue had between them, y^ homage shall be made in their both names. But if the
woman dies before any homage made by her husband in her life, and the
husband keeps still the lands as tenant by the curtesye, now he shall not
do homage to his lord because he has now an estate but for term of life.

Fealty is as much to say as a fidelity or faythefulnes, in doing whereof
the tenaunte shall hold his hand upon a book, and say thus, Hear you this my
lord, I to you shall be faithful and true, and faith to you shall bear for
the lands and tenementes which I claim to hold of you, and duelye shall do
you the customs and services which I owe to do you at the terms assigned, as
me helpethe god and his saints. And than he shall kiss the book, but he shall
not knele as he ye does homage.

And ye shall observe that homage can not be done but to the lord him self,
where as ye steward of the lords court or the bailife may take fealty for
the lord. Also tenaunte for term of life shall do fealte, but homage (as is
said) he can not do.

Now as concerning escuage that is to say, the service of the shild ye shall
understand, that he that holds his lands by escuage, when the king makethe
a viage royal in to Scotland for the subduynge of the Scotts, is bound to
be with the Kings Majesty by the space of.xl. days well and conuenientlye
arrayed and appointed for the war. And he that holds his land but by the
moitie of the fee of knights service, is bound by the force of his tenure to
be with the king by the space of xx. days, and so proporcionably according to
the rate and quantitte of his tenure.

But now to our institute and purpose, after this viage royal in to Scotland
(in which the king goes in person) and after the retire in to England
again, a parliamente is wont to be sommoned, in which shall be prescribed and
asseised what every person that held his land by homage and went not with
the king neither by himself, nor by his deputye, shall pay to his lord in
satisfaction of his not serving, and according to the taxacion hereof, every
tenaunte shall pay to his immediate lord, whether it be the king or other
after the rate and portion of his tenure, if he holds by an hoole fee, he
shall pay the hoole escuage, if by a moitie, the half, if by the fourth perte
of a fee, the fourth part. etc. and this money thus asseysed, is called
scurage or escuage, for which the lord to whom it is due, may very well
for the non payment thereof distreyne.

But here it is to be noted, yt some tenau^tes by custom used time out of mind
are bound to pay but the moitie, or the third part of that which shall be
asseised and limited by act of parliament.

Yea, and the custom is in some place, that to what sum of money so ever
escuage is asseised, y^ tenau^tes shall pay never but such a certain sum of
money, and this escuage is called escuage certain, where as the other is called
escuage uncertain.

Finally ye shall understand, that escuage uncertain is always adiuged to be
knights service, and draws unto it ward, marriage, and relief, but escuage
certain is no knights service but is of the tenure of socage as shall be
herafter more amplye showed.

Of ward marriage and relief.
Every knights service draws unto it, ward, marriage, and releife. Wherefore
it is now right expedient somewhat to entrete of them.

Ye shall therefore be admonished, that when the tenaunte which holds his
land by knights service dies, his heir male being at that time wtin thage
of.xxj. years, the lord shall have the ward, that is to say, the custodye
or keeping of the lands so holden of him to his own use and profit, till the
heir comes to the full age of.xxj. years. For the law here presumes that
till he come to this age, he is not able to do such service, as is of this
tenure required Furthermore if such heir be unmarried at the time of the death
of the tenaunte, than the lord shall have also the ward and bestowynge of the
marriage of him.

But if tenant by knights service dies, his heir female being of thage
of.xiiii. years or above, tha^ the lord shall have the ward neither of ye land
ne yet of the body of such an heir, and the reason hereof is because a woman
of that age may have a husband hable to do knights service, that is to say,
to wait upon the kings majesty's person when he auaunceth into Scotland
with his army royal.

But if such an heir femalle be within the age of.xiiii. years and not married
at the time of the death of her auncestoure, than the lord shall have the
ward of the land holden of him, till such heir female comes to the age
of.xvi. years, by force of an act of parliament in the statute of Westminster the
first.

Note that there is a great diversity in the law between the ages of females
and of males, for the female has these many ages appointed by the law.
First, at.vii. years of age the lored her father may distreyne his tenauntes
for aid to mary her. Second, at.ix. years of age, she is dowable. Thyrdlye,
at.xii. yers she is hable to assent to matrymonye.

Fourthly, at.xiiii. years she is able to have her land, and shall be out of
ward if she be of this age at the geantye, but of the king only.

Homage auncestrell.
Tenant by homage auncestrel is he which holds his land of his lord by
homage, and both he and his ancestors whose heir he is have holden the same
land of the said lord and of his ancestors time out of mind by homage, and
have done unto them homage, and this is called homage auncestrell, by reason of
the long continuance which has been by title of prescription as well
concerning the tenauncye in the blood of the tenaunte, as concerning the
lordeshyp in the blood of the lord. And this service of homage auncestrell
drawethe unto it warrantye (that is to say) if the lord which is now in life
has ones received the homage of his tenant, he ought to warrant the same
tenaunte, what time so ever he shall be impleaded or sued for such land so
holden of him by homage auncestrell.

Moreover such service of homage auncestrell draws to it acquitall (that is
to say) the lord ought to acquyte the tenant against all other lords yt
can demand any manner of service out of the tenauncye.

Wherefore if in this case the tenaunte which holdethe by homage auncestrell be
impleaded of his lands, and voucheth his lord to warrauntye, who comes in
by process and demaundethe of the tenaunte what he has to bind him to the
warrantye, and the tenant shows how he and his ancestors, whose heir he
is, have holden his land of him and of his auncestoures time ease or
continual infirmity. All these and such like be dispargementes. But here
also ye shall understand, that it shall be said no dispargement, unless the
heir be so married when he is within the age of discretion, that is to say,
within the age of.xiiii. years. For if he be of that age or above and
consents to such marriage, it is no dispargement, neither shall the lord for
such marriage lose his ward, because it shall be reputed and assigned to the
folly of the heir being of age of discretion to consent to such marriage.

Now, if the gardeyne offer to the heir being in his ward a convenient
marriage without dispargement, and the heir refuses it, as he may very well
do, than ye lord shall have ye value of the marriage of such heir, when he
commethe to his full age. But yet if he marye himself being so in ward
against the will of his gardeyne, than he shall pay the double value by force
of the statute of Merton before remembered.

And ye shall note that if lands holden by knights service descend to an
infaunte from his mother, or from any of his ancestors, his father being yet
alive, in this case the lord shall not have the marriage of this heir, for
during the life of the father, the son shall be in ward to no man.

Finally, it is to be known, that he which is gardeyne in cheualrye in right,
may after he has seized the ward, grant the same either by deed or
without deed to an other man and than he to whom such grant is made is called
gardeyne in fayte.

Now as touching relief, ye shall know, that if a man holdethe his land by
knights service and dies his heir being of full age (the full age of ye
male is.xxi. years, of the female.xiiii.) then y^ lord of whom the land is
holden shall have of the heyr relief.

Relief of a hole knights fee is.C s. and of half a knights fee fyftye.s.

Also a man may hold lands of a lord by two knights fees, and tha^ the
heir being of full age at the death of his auncestoure, shall pay to his
lord for relief.x. pounds.

Service of castle garder.
YE shall understand that a man may hold by knights service and yet not hold
by escuage, nor shall pay no escuage, for he may hold by castle garder, that
is to say, by service to keep a tower of his lords castle, or some other
place, upon a reasonable warning, when his lord hears that enemies will
come or be already come into England.

This service is also knights service, and drawethe to it ward marriage and
relief, as the common knights service does.

Of graunde sergeauntie.
THere is also an other kind of knights service, called grande sergeantye,
which is where a man holds is lands or tenementes of the king by such
service as he owes in proper person to do, as to bear the baner of our
sovereign lord the king, or his spear, or to conduct his host, or to be his
marshall, or to be the sewar, caruar, or butler at the feast of the
coronation, or to be one of the chamberlaynes of the receypt of his eschequere,
or to do like services to ye king in propre person, such manner of service I
say, is called grande sergeantye, that is to say a great or high service,
and the cause why it is so called, is because it is the most honorable and
most worthy service that is, for he that holds by escuage is not appointed
by his tenure to do any other more special service than an other is bound
that holdethe by escuage, but he that holds by grande sergeantye, is bound to
do some special service to ye king.

Also if he that holds of the king by grante sergeanty dies, his heir being
of full age, than the heir shall pay to the king for relief, not only.C.S.
as he that holdethe by escuage shall do, but moreover the clear yearly value of
those lands and tenementes which he so holds of the king by grande
sergeantye.

Furthermore ye shall observe that in the marches of Scotland some men hold of
the king by coruage, that is to say, by blowing of an horn to the intent to
warn the men of the country when they hear that the Scotts or other their
enemies be coming, or be already entered in to England, which service is
also a kind of grande sergeantie.

Grande sergeantie therefore is as much to say in latin, as magnum seruitium,
that is to say, a great or high service, like as petite sergeantye is called
paruum seruitium, yt is to say, a little or small service.

But to reuerte again to the mamatier ye shall note if any tenaunte holds of
any other lord than of the king by such service of cornage, then it is no
graunde sergeantye, but yet nevertheless it is knights service, and draws to
it ward marriage and relief, for this is a rule infallible that none can hold
by grande sergeanty but of the kings own majesty.

Finallye ye shall understand, that al they which hold of the king by this
service called graunde sergeauntye do hold of the king by knights service,
and by virtue of this tenure the king shall have of them ward marriage and
relief, but escuage yet he shall not have of them oneles they hold by escuage
of him by express and special words.

Petite sergeantie.
TEnaunte by petite sergeantye is he yt holds his land immediately of our
soueraygne lord the king by this manner of service, to pay to the king
yearelye either a vow, a spear, a dagger, a sword, a pair of gantlettes, a
pair of spores of gold, a shafte or such other small things apperteynyng to
the war, and this service is in effect but socage, because that such a
tenaunte is not bound by his tenure to go ne do any thing in his own propre
person touching the war, but only to render and pay yearly certain things
to the king, as a man ought to pay a rent wherefore this service of petite
sergeantye is no knights service, but yet ye shall note, that a man can not
hold neither by petite sergeauntye neither by graunde sergeantye, out of
mind, surely the lord if he can not deny this, and if he has received the
homage of such a tenant, is bound by the law to warrante him his land, so
that if the tenant lose his land in defaute of the lord thus vouched (that
is to say) called to warranty, he shall recover against him so much in value
of those lands and tenementes which the lord had at the time of calling to
warrantye or at any time after. But if the lord never received the homage of
his tenante, than he may very well when he is thus vouched disclaim in the
lordeshyp or seignorye, and so put out the tenaunte of his warrantye. Where ye
shall note, that in every case where the lord disclaim in his seignorye in
court of record, his seignorye or lordeshyp is extinct, and the tenaunte
shall hold from thensforthe of the next lord to him that thus disclaymed.

Thus ye perceive that homage auncestrell is not but where as is a long
co^tinuau^ce, as well in the blood of the tenaunte in respect of his
tenauncye, as in the blood of the lord in respect of his seignorye. Wherefore
if the tenaunte does ones aliene his lands to an other, although he
purchasethe the same again, yet he shall not hold any longer by homage
auncestrell because of this discontinuaunce, but shall hold it now by the
vulgar and accustomed homage.

Of socage.
SOcage is properly, where the tenant is bound to come with his soke (that is
to say) with his plough to ear and sow parcel of the demene lands of his
lord, which service in ancient time was very commen and freque^te but now by
the mutual consent both of the lord and of the tenant yt is converted for
the most part in to a yearly rent. How be it the name of socage abides
still wherefore now al yt is not knights service is caled by y^ name of socage.

So y^ if a man holds by fealtye only, or by fealtye and homage for all
manner of service, it is but socage tenure for homage alone makith not knights
service, yea if a man holds by escuage certain, as I have said here tofore,
he holds in effect but by socage.

Now where a man holdethe his lands by socage and dies, his heir being
wythyn thage of.xiiii. years the lord shall not have y^ ward but the next of
kynne to the heir to whom the heritage can not descend shall have the
wardeshyp as well of the land as of the heir, till the heir come to the age
of.xiiij. years, and such gardeine is called gardeine in socage, and shall
render accomptes to the heir for the issues and profytes that he has
received of the lands during such time, his reasonable costs and expe^ses
deducted, so that he shall not have the wardeshyp to his own use and profit
as gardeine in cheualrye has.

Finally ye shall understand that when tenaunte in socage dyethe, the lord
shall have relief, that is to say the value of the rent that is yearlye due
unto him of the tenauncye beside the yerly rent: so that in effect after the
death of his tenante he shall have of the heir.ii. rentes, save that for the
relief, he may distreyne forth with, but for the accustomed rent he can not
distreyne till the usual day of payment be come.

Francke almoyne.
TEnaunte in francke almoygne, that is to say in free alms is where a
bishop, deane, or any other ecclesiastical person holds of his lord in
pure and perpetual alms, and such tenure began first in old time after
this manner. When a man was seized in ancient time of certain lands or
tenementes in his demene as of fee, and of the same tenementes enfeoffed an
abbot and his covent or a priour and his covent, or any other person
ecclesiastical, as a deane of a colege master of an hospital, or such like
to have and to hold the same lands to them and to their successoures for ever
in pure and perpetual alms, or in francke alms, in these two cases the
tenementes should be holden in frank almoyne.

By force of which tenure they that hold in francke almoyne after this sort
be bound of right before god to make orisones and prayers, to celebrate masses
and to do other divine services for y^ souls of their graunters and feffers,
and for the souls of their heirs which be dead and for y^ prosperous estate
of their heirs that be now alive. And because of right they be bound to
this divine service, they be discharged by the law to do any other profane or
corporal service, as fealtye or such other like.

But nevertheless if such as hold their tenementes in frank almoyne do omyt
and leave undone these divine services wheru^to they be bound before god, the
lord can not distrein them, ne yet compel them by any other means by the
course of the common law, but the only remedy is to complain of them to
their ordinarye, who of right ought to compel such ecclesiastical persons to
do the deuyne service due as before said.

But here ye shall note that if a person of a church or any other
ecclesiastical person holdethe of his lord by certain divine service to be
done, as to sing mass every frydaye in the weke, or placebo and ^irige, or to
find a priest to sing mass or to distribute in alms.C. pence to a hundred
men at such day: in all these cases, if such divine service be undone, the
lord main very well distrayn, because the service is put here in certayntye.

Now I said, that if in old time a man did infeoffe such ecclesiastical
person after such sort, he should hold his land in frank almoyne, but at
this day it is otherwise, for by the reasone of a statute called, Quia emptores
terrarum, no man can aliene ne grant lands or tenementes in fee simple to
hold of him self, so that now if a man being seized of lands in fee simple
grants the same by license to an ecclesiastical person in frank almoyne
these words frank almoyne be void, and the ecclesiastical person shall hold
them immediatlye of y^, lord of the feoffer by the same seruyces y^ the
feoffer held, so that no man can hold in frank almoyne, but by force of a
grante made before the said statute, only the kings majesty excepted, for he
is out of the compass of the-statute.

Finally, ye shall note that where as a man holds in frank almoyne, his lord
is bound by the law to acquit him of al manner of service that any other
lord can have or demand out of the said lands.

That if he does not acquyte him but suffer him to be distreyned, than he
shall have against his lord a certain wryt, called a wryt of mean, and shall
recover against him his damages and costs of his suite.

Of burgage.
A Tenure in burgage, is where an au^cie^t broughe is, of which the king is
lord, and they which have teneme^tes wtin y^ same brough hold the same of
the king, payenge a certain yearly rent, which tenure in effect is but socage
tenure. Likewise it is, where as any other lord spiritual or temporal is lord
of such broughe.

Here ye shall note that for the most part such ancient burghes have diverse
customs and vsages which other towns have not. For some burghes have a
custom, that ye youngest son shall inherit before the eldeste, which custom
is called commonly broughe English.

Also in some burghes by the custom the woman shall have for her dower all the
lands and tenementes whereof her husband was seized at any time during the
couerture.

Moreover in some burghes a man may devise his lands or teneme^tes by
testament at the time of his death, and by force of such deuyse or legacye, he
to whom the bequeste was made, after the death of the testatour may by force
of this ancient custom enter in to the lands so to him bequethed or devised
without any lyuery of seasone to him made or further ceremonye of law.

Diverse other customs in England there be contrary to the course of the
common law, which if they be any thing probable and may stand with reason
are good and effectual, not withstanding they be against the common law.

Of villenage or bond service.
A Tenant in villenage is proper lie when a villayne, that is to say, a
bondsman holds of his lord, whose bondsman he is, certain lands or
tenementes, according to the custom of the Manoure or otherwise at the will
of his lord, and to do his lord villayne service, as to bear and to carye y^
donge of his lord out of ye city or out of his lords Manoure, and to lay it
upon the demean lands of his lord, or to do such like seruyle and villayne
service. How be it fre men in some places hold their tenementes and lands of
their lords by custom, by such sort of service, and their tenure is called
tenure in villenage, and yet they themselves be no villains ne of servile
condition but fre me^. For the land holden in villenage makes not the tenant a
villayn, but contrary wise a villayne may make fre land to be villayne land
unto his lord. As if a villayn purchases la^d in fee simple or in fee tail,
the lord of the villayne may enter into the land so purchased by his bondsman
and put him and his heirs out for ever, and this done, the lord if he will may
lease the same land to his villayne to hold of him in villenage.

And here ye shall understand, that seruitute or villenage, is the ordinance,
not of the law of nature but of that law, which is called Ius gentium, by
which a man is made subject (contrary to nature) unto an other man's
dominion. For he that is a villayne or bondsman, either he is so by title of
prescription (that is to say) he and his auncestoures have been villaynes time
out of mind, or else he is a villayne by his own confession in court of
record, so that all villaynes either they be borne villaynes, or else they be
made so. They be borne villains when their father being a bond man himself
begets them in lawful wedlock, either of a fre woman or of a bond woman
for so that the father be bond, the issue of him lawfully begotten must needs
be bond by the laws of England, having no regard to the condition of the
mother, where as in the civil law it is clean contrary. For there partus
sequitur ventrem (that is to say) the seruitute or bondage of the mother makes
the child bond and not of the father. How be it the bastard son of a
bondeman shall not be bond, because a bastard is, nullius filius in the law,
that is to say nomans son.

They be made vyllaynes two ways, either by their own propre act, as when a
free man being of full age will come into a court of record, and there
confess himself bon^e to an other man.

Or else by the laws of arms, called, Ius gentium: as when a man is taken
prisoner in wars, and is compelled to serve and become the thrall and
bondeman of him that took him: the law calls such person a villayne.

And ye shall note that vyllaynes be properly called in latin serui, because
that wha^ they be taken in war, the captains be wont not to kill them, but to
sell them, and so to save their lyfes, so yt they be called serui a seruando,
that is to say of saving. They be also called Mancipia, a manu capiendo,
because that they be taken by hand and pour of the enemies.

Now as I said by the law o^ nature we are al borne free, but after that by
the law of Gentilitie seruit^te invaded the world, than ensued the benefyte
of manumission. Manumission is de manu datio, that is to say a gyuynge out of
the hand or power. For so long as a man is in bondage and seruitute, he is
subject to the hand and power of an other, and when he is manumissed he is
made free and delivered from the said power, so that a manumission is nothing
else than an enfranchiseme^t that is to say, a writing testifieng that the
lord has enfranchised his villayn and al his offpring and sequel.

Also if the Lord makes to his villayne an obligacion of a certain sum of
money, or grauntethe to him by his deed an annuitie or yearly pension, or
leaseth to him by deed lands or tenementes for term of years, any of these
acts do imply an enfranchisement.

Likewise if the Lord makes a feoffement to his villayne, and makes unto him
lyuery of seys^, this also is an enfranchisment and secret manumissio^. Brefely
to speak, where so ever the lord compels his vyllaine by the course of the
law to do that thing that he might otherwise e^force him to do or to suffer
without the authority and compulsion of the law, he does by implication
enfranchise his villayne, as if the lord will bring against his villayne an
action of det, an action of account, of covenant or of trespace, these and such
like be in the eye of the law enfranchisementes and manumissions, because that
the lord in all these cases may have the effect and purpose of his suite
(that is to say) the goods, catels, and correction of his bondsman without the
compulsion of the law even by his own propre power and authority which he
has upon his villayne. But if the lord does sue his vilayne by an appeal of
felonye, the villayne being lawfully endyted of the same before, this is no
tacit manumission or infranchiseme^te, for the lord though he have power to
beat his villain and to spoil him of his goods, yet he can not by the law
of this Realm put him to death.

Ye shall also understand, that if a man's villayne purchases lands or
acquyre and get unto him any other thing, the lord may by and by enter,
and sease the same in to his own hands. Wherefore if the lord will bring
against his villayne a praecipe quod reddat, by which he demands against
his villayne any lands or tenementes, this implies an enfranchisemente, for
asmoche as he byndeth himself to the prescripte and authority of the law,
where as he might use his own authority, by entering and seasing the said
lands.

Finally ye shall mark that some villaynes be called villaynes in gross, and
other some be called villaynes regarda^t. In gross be they of which the lord
is severally seized, and not by reasone of any lordeshyp or manner, but they be
called regardaunte which do belong to a Manoure, of which the lord is
seized, and the said villaynes have been regardant (that is to say) expectant
and attendante time out of mind to the lord of the said Manor, in doing
unto him such services as to a villayne appertain.

Of rentes.
FOr asmoch as upon every tenure there is commonly reserved one rent or other:
therefore I think it good sumwhat to treat of rentes. But ye must understand
that there be sundry sorts of rentes. There is one kind of rent which is
called rent service. ^n other which is called rent charge, and the third
which is named in french rent secke, that is to say in latyne redditus
siccus, a dry rent. Now rent service is so called, because it is knyt to ye
tenure, and is as it were a service, whereby a man holds his lands or
teneme^tes, or at lest way when the rent is vnseuerably coupled and knyt with
the service, as for an exemple, where the tenant holds his land of the king
or of any other lord by fealty and by certain rent, or by homage, fealty
and certain rent, or by any other sorts of services and by certain rent,
this rent is called rent service. And here ye shall note, that if this rent
service, be at any time when it ought to be paid, behind and unpaid, the
lord of whom the land or tenement is so holden, whether it be in fee simple,
fe tail, for term of life for years or at will, may of common right enter and
distraine for the rent, though there be no mention at all, ne clause of
distress put in the deed or lease. I said before, that y^ nature of this rent
service is to be coupled and knyt to the tenure. For where no tenure is, there
can be no rent service. And therefore, if at this day I be seized of lands in
fee simple, and make a deed of feffement of the same to an other in fe simple,
reserving by the same deed a rent, this can be called no rent service,
because there can be now no tenure between the feffoure and the feffee.
Otherwise it is of feffementes in fee simple, made before the statute of
Westmester the third called Quia emptores terraru^. For before the making of
y^ statute, if a man had made a feoffement in fe simple, reserving to him a
certain rent, yea though it had been without deed, here had been created a new
tenure between the feffoure and the feffee, and the feffee should have holde^ of
the feffoure, who by virtue of the same might of common right have distreyned
for such rent. But at this day, by force of the said act, there can be no
such holdyng or tenure created nor begone, and consequently no rent service
can be at this day reserved upon any gift in fee simple, except it be in the
kings case, who being chief lord of all ever might and may give lands to be
holden of him. Thus ye se, that at this day, no subject can reserve any rent
service unto him, onles the reuersio^ of the lands or tenementes that he shall
grant, be still in him, as where he grauntethe them in fe^ tail, or makes
but a lease for term of life or for certain years or else at will. For in all
these cases the reuersion of the fee simple remains still in him, and
therefore if here be any rent reserved, it is to be called a rent service, and
is of common right distreynable, though there be no clause of distress in the
deed of feffemente or lease.

But here ye will ask me, when in the case before remembered, a man at this day
gyuethe clean aweye the land or tenement from himself in fee simple, so that
there is no manner of reuersion of the same remaynyng in him at all, and yet
nevertheless reserueth unto him by his deed a certain rent: what manner rent
this shall be called? I answer, if there be in the deed indented any clause of
distress put, that is, that if the rent be behind unpaid, it shall be lawful
for the feffoure to enter and to distreyne, it is called a rent charge,
forasmoche as the land is charged therwyth, but how? of common right? no, but
only by virtue and force of the writing.

But on the other side, if there be no such clause of distress put in the
indenture, tha^ the rent so reserved shall be called a rent secke.

Likewise, if a man that is seized of certain lands, will grant either by
inde^ture or by his deed polle that is to say single and not indented, a
yearly rent out of the same lands to an other, whether it be in fe simple, fe
tail, for term of life, for years, or at will, with clause of distress,
then this rent is called a rent charge and he to whom such rent is granted
may for defaulte of payment thereof, enter and distreine. But contrarely, if the
grant be made without any such clause of distress, it is called re^t secke
that is to say a dry rent, because he can not come to it in case it be denied,
by way of distress in so much that if he were never seysed of it, he is by the
course of the common law without remedy. Otherwise it is of a rent charge,
for here he to who^ the grant is made, wha^ the rent is behind may chose
whether he will sue a writ of annuitie against the grauntoure, or distreyne
for the rent behind, and retain the distress till time he be paid
accordingly. But he ca^ not have both remedies to gither, but must take him to
the one, for if he ones recover by a writ of annuitie, then is the land
discharged. And if he sewe not his writ of annuitie, but distrayne for the
arreragies, and the tenau^te seweth a ^epleuin, whereupon y^ other auoweth the
taking of the distress in court of record: then is the land charged and the
person of the grauntour discharged of the action of annuitie. Ye shall also
understand, that if a man will, that an other shall have a rent charge coming
out of his land, and yet will not that his person should be by any means
charged by writ of a^nuitie, he may tha^ have such clause in ye end of his
deed. Prouiso quod praesens scriptum, nec quicquam in eo conte^tum ullo pacto
se extendat ad onera^dam personam meam per breue seu actionem de annuitate, sed
tantu^ modo ualeat ad onerandum, terras, fu^dos, and tenementa mea de annuo
redditu praedicto, If this or such like clause be added, then the land is
charged and the person of the grauntour is discharged.

Also if a man will make a deed of grant in this wise, that if John at Style
be not yearly paid at the feast of Christms for term of his life.xx.
shillinges sterlyng, that then it shall be lawful for the said Iho^ at Style
to distreyne for it in the Manoure of Dale: this is a good rent charge, because
the Manoure is charged with the rent by wey of distress, and yet nevertheless
in this case the person of him that made such deed is discharged of any action
of annuitie, forasmoch as he granted not by his deed any a^nuitie to ye said
Ihon at Style but only granted, that he might distreyne for such yearly rent.

Furthermore ye shall note, that if a man has a rent charge to him and to his
heirs coming out of certain lands, and does purchase any parcel of this
land to him and to his heirs, in this case the hole rent charge is qwenched
and gone, and the annuite also, the cause is this, ye a rent charge can not be
in such case apporcioned. Otherwise it is of a rent service, for if one which
has a rent service as for exemple, xx d. by year does purchase parcel of the
land out of which this yearly rent of, xx d. is coming, this shall not
extinguish ne drown y^ hole rent, but for that parcel only. For re^t service
in such case may very well be apporcionate and rated according to the value of
the land. Yet there be some sorts of rentes services which in no wise can be
apporcioned. As where a tenant holds his land of his lord by the service
to re^dre to his lord yearly at such a feast, an horse, a ring of gold, a red rose, a gylouer (...) such like, if in this case the lord does purchase
parcel of y^ land thus of him holden, this service is gone, because such
service can not be severed ne apporcioned. Also escuage is a service that may
very well be apporcioned according to the afferaunce and rate of the land.

But where any land is holden by homage and fealty, if the lord purchases
parcel of the land, yet he shall have his homage and fealty still of his
tenaunte.

Ye shall mark also, that if a man makes a lease of lands to an other for
term of life, reserving to him certain rent: if in this case he grau^teth the
rent to John at Style saving to himself the reuersion of the said la^d, this
rent is but rent secke because John at Style y^ has the rent, has nothing
in the reuersion of the land. But if he grants the reuersion of the land to
John at Noke for term of life and the tenant atturneth accordingly, then has
John at Noke the rent as rent service because he has y^ reuersion for term
of his life.

Likewise it is, if a man gives lands or tenementes in tail, reserving to
him and to his heirs certain rent, or makes a lease of ye land for term of
life, reseruinge certain rent, if he grants the reuersion to an other and
the tenant atturneth accordingly, the hole rent and service shall pass by this
word reuersion, because the rent and service in such case be incident to the
reuersion and do pass by the grant of the reuersion. But if he had granted
the rent only: the reuersion had not passed.

What remedy a man has to recover his rent when it is behind.
I Showed you before, that for a re^t service if it be behind, ye may
distrayne in the ground even of common right though there be no such clause
of distress me^cioned in y^ deed of feoffement, grant or lease. Also for a
rent charge ye may distreyne or bring your wryt of annuitie at your choice
and election, as before is declared. But of a rent secke if ye were never
seized of it nor of any parcel thereof, ye be without remedy by course of the
common law, for ye can not distreyne for it, nor yet bring your writ of an
nuitie, but if ye were ones seized of it or of parcel thereof and it is estsones
behind, then your remedy shall be this. Ye must go either by your self or
by your deputye to the land or tenement out of which the rent is coming, and
there demand the arreragies of the rent, which if the tenant deny to pay,
this denial is a disseisin of the rent. Also if the tenant be not then ready
to pay it, this counter uayleth a denial which is a disseisin. Moreover if
neither the tenant nor none other man be remaining upon the ground to pay the
rent, when ye demand the arreragies, this also is a denial in the law, and is
in very deed a disseisin. And of these disseisines ye may have an assise of
novel disseisin against the tenant, and shall recover seisin of the rent and
the arreragies and your damagies and costs of your writ and of your plee.
And if after such recovery and execution had, the rent be again at an other
time denied you, then ye may have a redisseisin and shall recover your double
dammagies. etc.

It shall be therefore good wisdom for a man when a rent is granted by any
person unto him, to take of the tenant of the land a penny or an halfepeny in
name of seisin of the rent, and then if at the next day of payment the rent be
denied him, he may have an Assise of nouel disseisin.

And ye shall note, y^ there be three causes of disseisin of rent service, that
is to wete, rescouse, repleuin and incloser. Rescouse is, when the lord upon
the land holden of him, distreyneth for his rent behind, and the distress is
rescued from him, or if y^ lord come upon the land and will distreine, and the
tenant or any other man for him will not suffer him, this is called Rescouse.

Repleuin is, when the lord has distreyned and repleuin is made of the
distress by wryt or by playnt. Encloser is when lands or tenementes be so
enclosed that the lord can not come within the lands or tenementes for to
distreyne. And the chief cause why such things so made be disseisins to the
lord is for asmoch as the lord is by this wey disturbed of the mean and remedy
whereby he ought to com and have his rent, that is to wete, by distress.

And there be iiiij. causes of disseisin of a rent charge, ye is to wete,
rescous, repleuin, encloser, and denyer. For denyer or denial is as well a
disseisine of a rent charge, as it is of a rent secke.

Finally ye shall understand, that there be two causes of disseisin of a rent
secke, that is, denial and en^loset.

And is seems that there is yet an other cause of disseisin of all the three
rentes aforesaid, that is to wete this, when the lord comes to the land
holden of him, or when he that has a rent charge or a rent seck comes to the
land to distreyne for the rent behynd, and the tenant hearing this,
encountreth him, and forstalleth him the weye with force and arms, and
manaceth him in such sort as he dare not come to y^ ground for to distreine for
his rent behynd for fear of death or of mutilatio^ of his members: this is a
disseisin because the party is disturbed of his mean and lawful remedy whereby
he ought to come to his rent.

Finally ye shall observe and mark, that by an act of parliament made in the
xxxij. year of our soueraygne lord king Henry the eight, it is lawful for
the executours and administratoures of tenantes in fe simple, tenantes in fee
tail and tenantes for term of life of rent services, re^t charges, rent
seckes and of fee fermes, for the arreragies of such re^tes as were due unto
their testatoures in their lives, either to distrayne for the same or at their
election to bring an action of debt, saving in such lordshipes in Wales or in
the marches thereof, where the tenauntes have used time out of mind to pay unto
every lord at his first entry into the lordshyp any sumine of money for the
redemption of all manner duties and penalties incurred at any tune before their
lords entry.

Also by force of the said art the husband which was seysed in the right of
his wife may after the death of his wife either distrayne or bring an action of
debt for the arrerages of such rentes as were due and unpaid in her life.

Likewise it is of him that has a rent for term of an other man's life, if he
for term of whose life he has the rent dies, yet by virtue of y^ said act
he or his executoures and administratoures may either distrayne or bring an
action of debte for the arreragies due before the death of him for term of
whose life he had y^ rent

How Auowries ought to be made of rentes and services, inacted.a^. 21. Hen. 8.
WHere any lands be holden of any person by rentes, customs, or services, if
the lord distrayne upon the same lands for any such rentes, customs, and
services, and repleuin thereof be sued, the lord may auowe or his baylyffe or
seruante may make conisance or justify the taking upon the same lands, as
within his fee and scignorye, aledging in the said auowry conysance or
justification the same lands to be holden of him, without namyng any person
certain to be tenante of the same, and without making any auowrye,
justification, or conisaunce upon any person certain. And likewise upon every
writ sued of second delyuerance. And they that make any such auowrye,
justification, or conisaunce, if y^ same avowrye conysaunce or justification be
found for them, or the playntyffe be non^u^^ or otherwise barred, then they
shall recover their damagies and costs. Also the said playntyffes and
defendauntes shall have like plees and like aid prayers (plees of disclaymer
only except) as they might have had before the making of this act. Also
such persons as by the cominen law may join to the playntyffe or defendant
in the said wryttes of replegiare or second delyueraunce, as well without
process, as by process; shall from henseforth also in this case join unto
them as well without process as by process, and have like plees and like
advantages in all things (disclaymer only except) as they might have by the
comen law before this act.

An act for assignees or grauntees of reuersions to take auantage of the
conditions to be performed by the fermours. made.a^. 32. Hen. 8.
IT is inacted that as well al persons which have or shall have any gift or
grant of the king by his letters patentes of any lordshyps lands tenementes
rentes personages tithes portions or other hereditamentes or of any reuersion
of the same, which did belong to any monastery or other ecclesiastical house
dissolved or by any other means come to the kings hands since the.iiij.
day of February in the xxvii. year of King Henry the eight, or which at any
time hertofore did belong to any other person and after came to the kings
hands, As also al other persons being grauntees or assigns to the king or to
any other person and their heirs executours successors and assigns shall
have like advantage against the fermours their executours administratoures and
assigns by entry for not payment of the rent, or for doing of waste or other
forfeture, and also shall have the same auantage by action only for not
performynge of other conditions couena^tes or agrementes contained in the
indentures of their leases or grauntes against the said fermoures and
grauntees their executours administratours and assigns, as the said lessoures
or grauntoures themselves might have had at any time.

Provided, that this act shall not extend to hindre or charge any person for
the breche of any couenante or condition comprysed in any such writings as is
aforsayd, but for such couena^tes and conditions as shall be broken or not
performed after ye first day of Septembre in the xxxij. year of king Henry
the viii, and not before.

How tithes and other profytes ecclesiastical shall be recovered, inacted.a^. 32.
Hen. 8.
AL persons shall truly pay their tithes and offerings according to the lawful
customs and vsages of parishes and places where such tithes or duties be due.
And in case they wol wilfully wthold them or any parcel of them: the party
whether he be ecclesiastical or lay that should have y^ said tithes or
offeringes, may convent the persons so offending before the ordinary his
commissarie or other competente ministre or leaful judge of the place where
such wrong shall be done according to the ecclesiastical laws. And in every
such cause of suite the same ordinary or leful judge having the parties or
their lawful procuratours before him, shall by virtue of this act proceed to
the determination thereof ordinarily or summarily according to the course of the
said laws, and thereupon shall give sentence accordingly. And in case any of the
parties for any matter concerning that suite, do appeal from the sentence and
diffinitiue judgment of yesaid judge, then the same judge forthwith upon such
appellation made, shall adiudge to the other party ye reasonable costs of his
suite, and shall compel the same party appellant to pay the same by compulsary
process and censures of the said laws ecclesiastical, taking surety of the
other party to whom such costs shall be adjudged and paid, to restore the
same to the party appellant, if afterward, the principal cause of that suite
of appeal shall be adjudged against him. And so every judge ecclesiastical by
virtue of this act shall adiudge costs to the other party upon every appeal
to be made in any suit or cause of subtraction or detention of any tithes or
offeringes or in any other suite to be made concerning the duitie of such
tithes or offerings. That if any persons after such sentence diffinitiue given
against them, shall obstinatly refuse to pay their tithes or duties or such
somes of monye so adjudged wherein they be condemned, then two Justices of yt
peace of the same shyre, whereof one to be of the quorum, shall upon certificat
or complaynt to them made in writing by the ecclesiastical judge that gave the
sentence, cause them to be attached and committed to the next Iayle, there to
remain without bail or mainprise, till they shall have found sufficient
sureties to be bound by recognisa^ce or otherwise before ye same justices to
the kings use for the performance of the said judgment.

Provided, that no person shall be sued or otherwise compelled to pay any
tithes for any lands tenementes or hereditame^tes which by the laws of this
realm are discharged or not chargeable with the payment of any such tithes.

Provided also that this act shall in no wise bind the inhabitants of the
city of London and suburbs of the same, for to pay their tithes and
offeringes within the same city and suburbs otherwise then they should have
done before ye maki^g of this act.

And it is further enacted yt where any yt has an inheritance frehold term or
interest in any personage vicarage portion pension tithes oblations or other
ecclesiastical profit which is or shall be made temporal or admitted to be in
temporal hands by the laws or statutes of this realm, shall fortune to be
disseased or otherwise put from his lawful inheritance possession occupation
term or interest in ye same by any other person claming to have interest
therein: the person so disseised or wrongfully put from his said right or
possession his heirs, wife, and other to whom such wrong shall be done, may have
his remedy in the kings temporal courts, as the case shall require for the
recovery of ye same by writtes original of prec. quod reddat, ass. of nouel
disseison, mortdanc, Quod ^i deforciat, writtes of dower, or other writtes
original to be granted in y^ cha^cery of every such personage vicarage porcio^
pension or other profyt eccesiastical according to ye nature of y^ suit thereof.
And yt writtes of covenant and other writtes for fines to be levied and al
other assura^cies to be made of any such personage or profyt ecclesiastical
shall be hereafter devised and granted there, like as has been used for fynes
to be levied and assurance to be had of lands or other hereditame^tes, and yt
al iugeme^tes to be given upon any of ye said writtes original so to be
granted for any y^ premises, and al fines to be levied and knowleged in any
of y^ kings said courts thereof, shall be of like force in ye law as iugeme^tes
given and fines levied of lands tenementes and here ditame^ts in ye same
courts upon writtes original therefore duly pursued.

Provided always, that this last act shall not extend to give any remedy or
suite in the courts temporal against any person which shall refuse to set out
his tithes, or which shall wtholde or refuse to pay his tithes or of feringes,
but that in all such cases the party as well lay as ecclesiastical having cause
to demand the same, shall take and have his remedy for the said tithes or
offeringes in every such case in the spiritual courts according to the
ordinance in the first part of this act mentioned and not otherwise.

of mortuaries, inacted a^. 21. Hen. 8.
NO person spiritual nor their fermers nor baylyffes shall call any person before
any judge spiritual for y^ recovery of any Mortuaries more then is hereafter
mentioned upon pain to forfet for every time so much in value as they shall
take above the sum limited in this act and over that xl.s^. to ye party
grieved, for which he shall have an action of det by wryt byl or information;
wherein no wager of law effoin nor protection shall be allowed, First no Mortuarie
shall be taken of any which at his death has in mouable goods under the value
of x. mark. Also no Mortuarie shall be taken but only where Mortuaries have
been used to be paid, and there after the form hereafter mentioned. Nor in no
mo places but one, that is to were, there where his most abiding is and there
but one. Nor no person shall take for a Mortuarie of any person being at his
death of the value of x. marks above his dettes paid and under xxxli.
above.iij s iiij. d. And of the value of xxx li. and under lx lj. not above vi
s viii d. And of the value of lx. li. or above to any sum what so ever it be,
not above x. s. Provided that no Mortuarie shall be asked nor paid for any woman
covert baron or child or any person not keeping house or for any wayfaring man,
but ye mortuaries of such wayfaring men be an swe^able in that place where they
had their most dwelling at y^ time of their death.

Provided that any such spiritual person may take any thing which shall be
disposed or bequethed to him or to the high altar of the church. Also no thing
shall be taken for Mortuaries in wales nor the marches of y^ same nor in Calys
or Berwyke or the marches of the same, but only in such places of y^ same where
mortuaries have been accustomed to be paid and there but only after the form
above specified. Provided that the bishops of Bangour, Landaffe, saint Dauies
and saint Ass and the archdeken of Chester may take such mortuaries of y^
prestus^ within their diosices and jurisdictions, as heretofore have been
accustomed. Provided also, that in such places where mortuaries have been
accustomed to be taken of less value, none shall be compelled to pay any other
mortuarie or more for any mortuarie then has been accustomed, nor no mortuarie
there shall be demanded of any person exempt by this act upon pain before
lymyted.

An act for the assurance of fermoures, made.a^. 32. Hen. 8.
AL leases hereafter to be made of any manours lands tenementes or other
hereditamentes by writing in^cted under seal for term of years or for term
of life by any persons being of full age of one and twenty yers having any state
of inheritance either in (...) simple or in fee tail in their own right or in
the right of their churches or wy^es or jointly with their wives of any estate of
inheritance made before y^ c^uerture or after, shall be good and effectual in
the law against y^ lessours their wives h^yres and successors according to
such estate as is comprised in every such inden^i^ee of lease.

Provided, that this act shall not extend to any leases to be made of any
lands teneme^tes or hereditame^tes being in the hands of any fermo^t by
virtue of any old lease, onles the same old lease be expired futrend^ed or:
ended within one year next after the making of the said new lease, nor yet
shall extend to any grant to be made of any reuertion of any lands tenementes
or hereditamentes, nor to any lease of any such lands tenementes or
hereditamentes as have not most commonly been letten to ferme or occupied by
the fermours thereof by the space of.xx. years next before such lease thereof
made, nor to any lose to be made without impeachment of waste, nor to any lease
to be made above the number of xxi. years or three lives at the most from the
day of making thereof. And yt upon every such lease there be reserved yearly
during the same lease dew and payable to the lessours their heirs and
successors to whom the same lands should have come after the dethes of the
lessours if no such lease had been thereof made and to whom ye reuersion thereof
shall perteine according to their estates and interestes, so much yerly rent or
more, as has been most accustomably yelden for the same within.xx. years next
before such leases thereof made, and that every person to whom the reuersion
thereof shall perteine after the deaths of such lessours or their heirs: shall
have such like remedy and auantage to al ententes and purposes against the
fermours thereof their executours and assigns, as ye same lessour should or
might have had.

Provided also that y^ wife be made party to every such lease as shall be made
by her husband of any lands being the inheritance of the wife, and that every
such lease be made by indenture in the name of the husband and his wife, and
she to seal y^ to same. And that the rent be reserved to the husband and to
the wife and to the heirs of y^ wife according to her estat^ of inheritance in
the same. And that the husband shall in no wise aliene discharge grant or
give awey y^ same re^t reserved nor any part thereof longer then during the
couerture, without it be by fine leuyed by the said husband and wife.

Provided furthermore that this act extend not to give any liberty or power
to any persons to take any mo fermes leases or takings of any manours lands
tenementes or other hereditamentes, than they might lawfully have done before
y^ making of this act, nor yet extend to give any liberty or power to any
person or vicar of any church or vicarage for to make any lease or grant of
any their messuages lands tenementes tithes profytes or hereditame^tes
belonging to their churches or vicaragies otherwise than they might have done
before the making of this act.

An act that fermoures shall take auantage of conditions and couenantes,
against grau^tees of reuersions.a^. 32. Hen 8.
AL fermours and grauntees of lordships lands rentes personages tithes
portio^s or any other hereditamentes for term of years life or lives their
executours administratours and assigns shall have like action and remedy
against all persons and bodies polytike their heirs successors and assigns
which have or shall have any gift or grant of the king or of any other
person of the reuersion of the same lordships lands tenementes and other
hereditame^tes so letten or any parcel thereof for any condition covenant or
agreement contained in the indentures of their lease as they might have had
against their said lessours and grauntours their heirs or successors, al
benefytes and aduantagies of recouries in value by reason of any warranty in
deed or in law by voucher or otherwise only excepted.

Provided that this act shall not extend to hinder or charge any person for
the breche of any covenant or condition comprised in any such writing as is
aforesaid, but for such couenantes and conditions as shall be broken or not
performed after the first day of Septembre in the.xxxii. year of this king
and not before.

Of falsifieng of recoueries by fermers, inacted.a^. 21. Hen. 8.
All fermers or lessees for term of years may herafter falsefie for their
term only, recouerees had by feigned titles as well as a tenant of frehold
might at the comen law, And the same fermers or termers their executours and
assigns shall enjoy their said terms according to their leases against such
recoueries even as if none such had be suffered. In which case nevertheless the
recouerer, after such recovery had, shall have like remedy against the termers
by auowry or action of debt for rentes and services reserved upon the same
lesses, being dew before the same recoueries, and like actions for waste done
after the same recoueries, as the lessours might have had if no such recovery
had be had. Furthermore no statute staple, statute merchant, nor execution by
elegit shall be herafter avoided by any such feigned recovery, but like remedy
shall be had to avoid and falsefie the said recoueries, as by the premises is
ordained for the fermour or lessee for term of years.

An act for avoiding of recoueries by collusion against tena^tes for term of
life.a^. 32. He^. 8.
WHere diverse persons being seized of lands tenementes and hereditame^tes, as
tena^tes by y^ courtesy of England, or otherwise only for term of life or
lives, have heretofore suffered other persons by agreement or couin between them
had, to recover the same against them in the kings court, by reason whereof,
those persons to whom the reuersion or remainder thereof has belonged, have
after the dethes of ye same particular tenantes been driven to their actions
for the recontinuance and obteyning of ye said lands and tenementes so
recovered, to their great and importable charges and expenses, and sometime
have been clearly disherited of y^ same: it is therefore inacted, that all such
recoueries herafter to be had or prosecuted by agreement of the parties or by
couin, against any such particular tenant of any lands or hereditamentes,
whereof ye same particular tenant is or herafter shall be seized, as tenant by ye
curtasie of England, tenant in tail after possibility of issue extincte, or
otherwise for term of life, shall from hensforth, as against such persons to
who^ the reuersio^ or remainder thereof shall then appertayn and against their
heirs and successors, be clearly void and of none effect.

Provided always, that this act shall not extend to any person yt shall hereafter
by good title recover any hereditamentes without frawde or couin against any
such partituclar tenant by reasone of any former right or title, nor to avoid
any recovery hereafter to be had against any such particular tenant by
thassent and agreement of those in the reuersion or remaynder, so that the same
assent and agreement do appear of record in ye kings court.

Of discontinuance
IT is called a discontinua^ce by the laws of England, when he that has the
possession of lands or tenementes for the time present and yet not having the
fe simple in himself nor in his own right only makes an alt^enation of the
same lands to an other person, by reason whereof, he that should have them after
him, and which then has right unto them, can not enter into them, but is
driven to his remedy by wey of action, in such wise that the said lands be not
utterly shifted and gone tro^ such person of persons as have right unto them,
but be alo^ly discontinued for a time, til the person which after the death of
such discontinuer has right unto them, do reco^tinew and bring them home
again not by entrye but by suit and wey of action. As for exemple, if tenant
in tail of certain lands does infeffe an other in the same, in se simple or
fe tail and has issue and ^peth, his issue can not enter into the lands,
though he has title and right unto them, but is put to his action, which is
called ^ formedone in the descendre. And if such tenant in tail which makes
such a feoffement, has no issue at time of his death, it is yet nevertheless
a discontinuance to him which is either in the reuersion or in the remaindre,
so that neither the one nor the other can enter, but they be driven to their action
he in the reuersion to his formedone in the reuertir, and he in the remaindre
to his formdone in the remaindre.

In like manner if a bishop does aliene lands which be parcel of his
bishoprich, and dies: this is a discontinuance to his successor, forasmoch as
he can not enter, but is driven to his writ of enter sine asse^su capituli.

Semblably, if a Deane be sole seized of lands as in y^ right of his deanrye
and makes such an alienation, this is a discontinuance to his successor.
Also if the maistre of an hospital alieneth certain la^d^s of his hospital,
this is a discontinua^ce and his successor can not enter, but is put to his
writ de ingressu sine assensu co^fratrum and sororum.

But if a person or vicare of a church will alien any lands or tenementes,
which be parcel of his glebe lands to an other in fe simple or in fe tail,
and dies or resigneth his benefice: this is no discontinuance to his
successor, but that he may very well enter, not wtstandinge such alienation
made by his predecessor. The cause of this difference Master Litletonne does
largely declare in his book of Tenures, which to avoid prolixitie I here omit
and remitte you to him.

Only of this one thing I will admonish you, that in the.xxxij. year of this
kings most noble reign, it is inacted, that no fine feffement or other act
to be made or suffered by the husband only, of any lands or teneme^tes being
the inheritance or frehold of his wife, duringe the couerture between them,
shall be any disco^tinua^ce thereof, or be prejudicial or hurtful to the said wife
or to her heirs, or to such as shall have right title or interest to the same
by the death of such wife, but that the same wife and her heirs, and such
other to whom such right shall apperteine after her decesse, shall and may tha^
lawfully enter into all such lands and teneme^tes according to their rightes
and titles therein.

That wrongful disseisin is no descent in the law, inacted.a^. of wrongful
disseisin. 32. Hen. 8.
WHere diverse persons before this time have by strength and without title entered
into lands teneme^tes and other hereditamentes and wrongfully disseased and
dispossessed y^ rightful owners and possessours thereof. and so being seized by
disseisin have thereof died seized by reason of which dieng sesed, the parties
y^ were so disseised and dispossessed or such other persons as before such
descent might have laufully entered into y^ said lands and tenementes be thereby
clearly excluded of their enter into y^ said lands and tenementes and put to
their action for their remedy and recovery therein: it is inacted, that the di^g
seized herafter of any such disseisour of any lands teneme^tes or other
hereditame^ts having no right or title therein shall not be taken or demed any
such descent in the law for to take away the entry of any such persons or
their heirs which at the time of the same descent had good and lawful title
of enter into the said lands teneme^tes or hereditamendtes, Except that such
disseasour has had the peasible possession of the lands tenementes or
hereditame^tes whereof he shall so die seized by the space of five years next
after the disse^sin by him committed without enter or continual claim by such
as have lawful title thereunto.

The limitation of prescriptio^ inacted anno. xxxii. Hen. viij.
NO person shall sue or maynteine any writ of right, or make any title or
claym to any lands teneme^tes rentes annuities commons pensions porcions
corrovies, or other herevitamentes of ye possession of his ancestor or
predecessor, and declare any further season or possession of his auncestour or
predecessor, but only of the season or possession of his ancestor or
predecessor, which has been seized of the same within.lx. years next before
y^ test of the same writ, or next before the said title or claim, so to be
sued.

Also no person shall sue or maintain any assise of Mortancestor, Cosinage,
Ayle, writ of entree upon disseason done to any of his ancestors or
predecessors, or any other action possessary, upon the possession of any of his
ancestors or predecessors, for any lands or other hereditamentes of any
further season or possession of his ancestor or predecessor, but only of the
season or possession of his ancestour or predecessor, which was seized of y^
same within fifty years next before the test of the oryginall of y^ same writ.
And no person shall maynteyne any action for any lands or other hereditamentes
upon his own seasone or possession therein, above.xxx. years next before the
test of the original of the same writ. Item no person shall make any auowry
or cognisaunce for any rent suite or service, and allege any season of the
same in his auowry or cognizance in the possession of his ancestors or
predecessors, or in his own possession, or in y^ possession of any other
whose estate he shall claym to have, above fifty years next before the making of
the said auowry or conysaunce. Moreover al formdownes in reuerter, formedownes
in remainder, and scire facias upon fy^es of lands or other hereditame^tes at
any time to be sued, shall be taken within fifty years next after the title of
action fallen. And if any person do sue any of the said actions or writtes for
any lands or other hereditame^tes, or make any auowry conysance prescription
or claim for any rent suite service or other hereditamentes, and can not
prove y^ he or his ancestors or predecessors were in actual possession or
season therein at any time wtin y^ years before lymited, if the same be
trauersed or denied by y^ party plaintiff demandant or auouant or by the
party tenant or defenda^t, he and his heirs shall from henseforth be utterly
barred for ever of every the said wryttes actions auowries conisance
prescription title and claim hereafter to be sued or made for y^ same lands
tenementes or other the premises, for which the same action written auowry
conysa^ce title or claim hereafter shall be at any time sewed or made.

Provided, that al persons which now have any of y^ said actions writtes
auowries scire facias conisance prescription title or claim depending, or that
hereafter shall sewe or bring any of the said writtes or actions, or make any of
the said auowries cognisances prescription titles or claim at any time before
the feast of the ascension of our Lord which shall be in the year of our lord a
thousand five hundredth forty and six, shall allege the season of their
ancestors or predecessors, or their own possession and season, and also have
al other like advantage in the same writtes actions auowries conisances
prescriptions and claymes: as they might have had before y^ making of this
statute. Provided also, that if any persons, being now within the age
of.xxi. years, or covert baron, or in prison, or out of this realm of England,
now having cause to have or bring any of y^ said writtes or actions, or to
make any auowries cognisances prescription or claymes, it shall be lauful to
such persons, to sue or bring any of the said actions, or to make any of the
said auowries cognisances titles or claims at any time wtin six years next
after such persons now being within age, shall accomplish the age of.xxi.
years, or now being covert baron, shall be sole, or now being in prison, shall be
at their liberty, or now being out of this realm, shall come and be within
this realm. And that every such persons in their said actions auowries
conisa^ces titles or claims to be made sued or commenced wtin the said six
years, shall allege the season of their ancestors or predecessors, or of
their own possession, or of the possession of those whose estate they shall tha^
claim: And also within the same six years shall have like advantages in y^
same, as they might have had before y^ maki^g of this act.

Provided also, that if the said persons now being within age, or covert baron,
in prison or out of this realm, do dye within age, or being covert, or while
they shall be in prison, or out of this realm, or decease wtin.vi. years next
after they shall accomplysh their full age, or shall be at large, within this
realm, or shall become sole, and no determination or judgment had of such
titles actions or rightes so to them a^rewed, then the next heir of such
persons so dying shall enjoy like advantage to sue demand aduow declare or make
their said tytles claymes or prescriptions within.vi. years next after the
death of such persons, as y^ same infant after his full age, or the said
woman covert after ye death of her husband, or ye same person being out of
this realm after his repair or coming in to ye (...) or the said person
imprisoned after his enlargeme^t and coming out off prison, might have had
within.vi. years then next ensewyng by force of ye provision last before
rehearsed*

Provided also, that if any persons before the said feast of the ascension sue
any of the said actions or make any auowry title or claim, and the same happen
by ye death of any the parties thereunto, to be abated before judgment or
determination thereof had, then the said persons being demau^dantes or
auowantes, or making any such cognisaunce prescription title or claim being
than on live, and if not, than their next heirs, may commence their action and
make their auowry conisaunce or claim upon y^ same matter within one year
next after such suite abated, and shall have like adua^ttage to sue demand
auow declare or make their said titles claymes or prescriptions within the said
one year, as the demaundantes in such writ or suite abated, or as such as
did auowe or make conisance title claim or prescription, might have enjoyed in
the said former action or suite.

Provided furthermore, that if any false verdit happen herafter to be given in
any of the said actions suits auowres prescriptio^s tytles or claims than the
party grieved may have his attaint upon every such verdit so given, and the
plaintiff in the same attaint upon judgment for him given shall have his
recovery execution and other advantage in like manner as heretofore has been
used.

Of fines.
FInes have their name, because they make a final end and determination of
all suites strifes and debates between men. For the due leuieng whereof, it was
inacted in the.iiii. year of King Henry the seventh, that they must be
solemnly before y^ justices of the common place red and proclaimed the same
term and three terms next following y^ ingrosme^t, at which times al y^ plees
must cease. And such fines shall be a sufficient bar and discharge against al
persons, saving against women that be covert baron if such women be not privy
to the same fine, or such as be within age, in prison, out of the realm, or
out of their right minds. But these fines shall not conclude ne bar all
strangers which have right to enter or to have any action, if they come
within.v. years astre such proclamations made or (in case the cause of action
falls unto them after the fine so duly levied) if they come and commence
their action and suite within.v. years next after such cause of action to
them accrued. And they may sue against the takers of the profittes. But if they
that have right to the same be within age, in prison, covert baron, out of the
realm or not in their right memory: then their title or entry shall be saved
unto them till they be of full age, out of (...), discovered and sole, within the
real^e or of ^ight mind, and then within five years after, their action or
entry must be sued or made with effect

Also ye shall understand, that by the said stature of Henry the.vii. it shall be
a good plee for all strangers to say, that they that were parties to the fine
nor none other to their use, had any thing in the tenementes or lands at the
time of the leuying of the fine.

Furthermore ye shall note that in the.xxxii. year of this king, for
thaduoyding of certain doubts and ambiguities, it was inacted, that al fines
as well hertofore levied, as hereafter to be levied according to the said statute
of Henry the.vii. by any person of the full age of.xxi. years, of any lands or
other hereditamentes being before y^ fine levied in any wise intayled unto him
or to any of his ancestors in possession reuersion remaindre or in use: shall be
immediately after the same fine levied engrossed and proclamations made, a
sufficient bar and discharge for ever as well against him and his heirs
clayming the same only by force of any such entaile, as against al other to
their use, so that the same fines be not levied by any woman after the death of
her husband, contrary to the statute made the.xi. year of Henry ye seventh, of
lands and tenementes of thinheritance or purchase of her husband or of any
his ancestors given to her in dower for term of life or in tail in use or in
possession. Excepted also al fines levied or to be levied of any such lands or
other hereditamentes as the owners thereof by any special act of parliament
made since the said fourth year of Henry the.vij. be restreined from making any
alyenations discontinuancies or other alterations of the same. Also of such
lands as be now in suit and varia^ce in any of the kings courts, or whereof
any evidences be now in demand in the Chancery, or which be already covered.
Excepted also fines levied or to be levied by any person, of lands or
tenementes granted to him or to his ancestors in tail either by the kings
letters patentes, or by virtue of any act of parliament, whereof the reuersion
is in the king.

Of testamentes or last wills.
TEstamentu^ in latin is as much to say as mentis testatio, that is a
declaration or witnessinge of a man's mind. And there be two sorts of
testamentes. The one is called testamentum scriptum, that is, a written
testament, or a last will by writing, and the other is called testamentum
nuncupatu^ a testament nuncupatiue, which is when a man will express by mouth
his last will and testament without writing, only by calling before him certain
of his neighbors in whose presence he does signify by words his last mind
and will. And this for most part men use to do when for fear of sodennes of
death, they dare not abide the writing of their will. And this will (unless it be
in certain cases) is as strong and as sure, as is a testament or last will
put in writing and sealed with the seal of the testatour.

Also ye shall understand that though a testament by writing be not sealed with
the seal of the testatoure, yet is the testament good and effectual in the
law.

And ye shall also mark, that where a man makes ones his testament and will,
and afterward makes an other will by words: if his last will be proved
before the Ordinary, and by him put in writing and insealed with his seal,
such last will shall avoid the first will, onles it be in special cases, and so
alweyes the latter will and testament shall avoid the former.

Finally ye shall observe, that by an act of Parliament made in the.xxi. year
of our sovereign lord King Henry theight, it was ordained that where part of
therecutours named in the testament of their testator wherein any lands or
tenementes be willed to be sold by them: refuses to take upon them the
administration, and the residue do take the charge and administration thereof
upon them: in this case al bargains and sales of the said lands made only by
those executors that took the administration of y^ testament upon them, shall be
as good and as effectual in the law, as if as the residue of y^ same executors
so refusing had joined with them or him, if it be but one person, in the
making of the bargain and sole.

An act for probate of testamentes made.a^. xxi He^. viii.
NOthing shall be taken by any person that has authority to take probation
insinuation or approbation of any testament for the probation of the same,
where the goods of the testatour do not amounte above the value of.C.
shillinges. Except to the scribe for writing thereof.vi d. And for the
commission of ministration of the goods of any dieng intestate not being
likewise above.C. shilli^ges, vi d. Also none having power to take probation of
testamentes shall refuse to approve such testamentes being lawfully offered unto
them in writing with wax thereto affixed ready to be sealed, so that the same be
lawfully proved before y^ same ordinary to be true. And when the goods of the
testatour do amount above the value of.C. shillinges and not excede the sum
of xl.li, none shall take for the probation regestring sealing and writing of
any such testament above the sum of iii s.vi d. whereof to be to them y^ have
authority to take the probation.ii s. vi d, and the other.xii d. to the scribe
for regestring of the same.

And where the goods amou^t above xl.li. than only.v. shyllynges to be taken,
whereof to be to them that have auctorite to take the probation.ii s. and.vi d.
and the other.ii s. vi d. to be to the scribe for y^ regestring or else if he will
refuse that.ii s. vi d, then he to have for every.x. lines of the same
testament every line containing in length.x. inches, i d.

And they that have authority as is above said shall approve insinuate seal
and regester the said testamentes and deliver the same sealed with the seal
of their office to thexecutours for the sommes abouesaid and that with
convenient speed without any frustratorie delay.

And if any person dye intestate or thexecutours refuse to prove the said
testament: than they having authority as is abouesaid, shall
grauntthadministration of y^ testatours goods or person disceased to the
widow of the same person deceased or to ye next of kin or to both after
their discretion, taking surety of them for ye true administration of the
goods and dettes which they shall be so authorized to minister. And where one
or diverse claim thadministration as next of kin which be egal in degree of
kindred, or where any one person desires the administration as next of kin
where in deed diverse persons be in equality of kindred: then in any such case
the ordinary shall be at liberty to take one or mo making request. And where
diverse do require the administration, or where but one or mo of them and not al
being in like degree, make request: than the ordinary shall admit the widow and
him or them only making request or any of them, taking nothing for the same
where the person deceased died not worth C.s. And if he died worth C.s. and
not above xl.li: than ijs. vi d. only to be taken. And thexecutor or
administratour calling to him the dettors two at ye least or such persons to
whom any legacy was made and if they refuse than.ii. next of kin to the
person deceased and in their defaute.ii. other honest persons shall by their
discretions make a true inuentory indented of all the goods, which persons
sweringe before the bishop or his officers to be true: shall deliver the one
part thereof unto them, and the other keep with himself. And none having
authority to take probate of testamentes upon pain contained in this statute
shall refuse to take any such inuentory presented or tended to them.

Provided, if any person shall dispose or will by his testament any lands or
hereditamentes to be sold, that the money or profits of ye same be accounted
for goods or catels. And they having the auctorite abouesaid upon the
delivery of the seal and sign of the testatour shall cause y^ same to be
defaced and incontinent shall redeliuer it to y^ executor without any claim. And
if any require a copy of the testament and inuentory: than they having
authority or their ministers, shall without frustratorie delay, deliver them a
copy taking therefore and for the regestring of the same (or else for every ten
lines. i d) as before is specified.

Provided, that where they having authority as is abouesaid have used to take
less for the probate of testamentes or other things concerning the same than
is here specified: they shall take as they did before this act.

Now if any that have authority to take probate of testamentes or their
ministers do attempt against this act: they shall forfete for every time to
the party grieved as much money as they shall take contrary to this act. And
over that.x.li, the one half to the king, the other to the party grieved, yt
will sue by action of debt bil information or otherwise in any of the kings
courts, wherein no essoine protection nor wager of law shall be allowed, And every
of them shall be charged for him self and for none other.

Provided, that every having authority abouesaid, may call before them every
person named executour, to the intent to prove and refuse the testament and to
bring in inuentaries and to do every other thing concerning the same, as they
might before this act, so that neither they nor their ministers shall take
above the fees limited by this act.

How lands and tenementes may be by testament or otherwise disposed,
inacted.a^. xxxii. He^. viii.
Every person having lands or other hereditame^tes holden in socage, or of ye
nature of socage tenure, and not having any lands or hereditame^tes holden of
ye king by knights service, or by socage tenure in chief or of ye nature of
socage tenure in chief, nor yet of any other person by knights service: shall
from y^.xx. day of July in the year of our lord.M.D.Xl. have full liberty
and power to give dispose and devise as well by testament in writing, as
otherwise by any act laufully executed in his life, al his said lands or
hereditamentes or any of them.

And every person having lands or other hereditame^tes holde^ of y^ king in
socage or of the nature of socage tenure in chief, and having also any other
lands or hereditamentes holden of any other person in socage or of the nature
of socage tenure, and not having any hereditamentes holden of y^ king or of any
other by knights service: may from the said time give and devise as well by
testament in writing, as otherwise by any act laufully executed in his life:
al his said lands and hereditamentes or any of them at his pleasure. Saving to
the king all his right of primer season and reliefes, and also all other
rightes and duties for tenures in socage or of the nature of socage tenure in
chief, as hertofore has been accustomed, the same lands or hereditamentes to
be taken and sued out of the kings hands by the person to whom any such
lands shall be disposed willed or devised in like manner as has been used by any
heir or heirs before the making of this statute. And saving and reseruinge
also fines for alienations of such lands tenementes or hereditamentes holde^
of the king in socage or of the nature of socage tenure in chief whereof shall
be any alteration of frehold or inheritance made by will or otherwise as is
aforesaid.

Item al persons having lands or other hereditame^tes of estate of
inheritance holden of the king in chief by knights service or of ye nature of
knights service in chief: shall in like manner have power to give will or
as^signe two parties of the same in three parts to be divided or else as much
of the same as shall amount to the yer^y value of two parts of the same in
three parts to be divided in certainty and by special divisions as it may be
known in seueraltie for ye adua^cement of his wife preferme^t of his children
and payment of his dettes or otherwise at his pleasure. Saving to the King
as well the wardship and primer season of as much as shall amou^t to the clear
yearly value of the third part thereof without diminution dower fraud couein
charge or abridgement thereof: as also al fines for alienations of al such
lands and tenementes so holden of him by knights service in chief, whereof
there shall be any alteration of frehold or of inheritance made by will or
otherwise.

And every person having lands or truementes of estate of inheritance holden
of the king in chief by knights service, and other lands holden of him or of
any other by knights service or otherwise, shall from the said.xx. day of
July have pour to give or assign by his testament or otherwise as is
aforesaid two parts of ye same in three parts to be divided or else as much
thereof as shall extend to y^ yearly value of two parts of the same in three
parts to be divided in certainty. Saving to the king y^ wardship and primer
season of as much thereof, as shall amounte to the yearly value of ye third
part, without diminution dower couein charge or subtractio^ of the same or of the
full profittes thereof. Saving also al fines for alienations as is abouesayde.

Item every person holding lands or other hereditamentes only of any other
than of y^ King by knights service and other lands and teneme^tes in socage
or of ye nature of socage tenure may give dispose or assure by testament or
otherwise as is aforesaid two parts thereof holden by knights service or as
much as shall amount to the full yearly value of two parts in manner above
declared: And also all the lands and tenementes holden by socage or of the
nature of socage tenure at his pleasure. Saving to the lord of the lands and
tenementes holden by knights service for his wardship as much thereof as shall
amount to the clear yearly value of the third part without any diminutio^ dower
fraud. etc

And every person holdinge only of ye King by knights service but not in
chief, or holdi^g of y^ king by knights service and not in chief, and also
other hereditamentes of others by knights service and holding also other
hereditamentes of any other person in socage or of y^ nature of socage tenure:
may give devise and assure by his last will or otherwise two parts of the
hereditamentes holden of the king by knights service and two parts of the
hereditamentes holden of any other person by knights service, or as much of
either of them as shall amou^t to the full yearly value of two parts and also al
his lands and teneme^tes so holde^ in socage or of ye nature of socage tenure.
Saving as well to ye king the wardship of as much as shall extend to the clear
yearly value of the third part of the same so holden of him by knights
service without diminution etc. As also to the lords of whom any of the said
lands or other hereditame^tes been holden by knights service for wardshyp as
much of the same so holde^ of them by that service, as shall amount to the
clear yerly value of the third part in manner above declared.

Provided, that if that third part which in any of the cases abouesayd shall
come to the king do not amount to the clear yearly value of the full.iii, part
of all the said hereditamentes whereof ye king shall be entitled to have the
custody or primer season: than the king may take into his hands as much of
the other two parts of ye said hereditame^tes as with that of ye same
hereditame^tes remaining in his hands shall make up the clear yearly value of
the third part of ye said lands and tenementes so to be had to him in title
of wardship and primer season. And like benefyte to be given to every lord of
whom any such hereditamentes shall be holden by knights service concerni^g
only his third part for title of wardship.

Also al persons shall sue their liveries for possessions reuersions or
remaynders, and also pay reliefes and heriettes like as they should have done
before y^ making hereof. And fines for alienatio^s shall be paid in the Chancery
upon writtes of enter in the post to be obtained there after the said.xx. day
of July for common recoueries to be suffered of any lands holden of the king
in chief in like manner as is used upon alienations of lands so holden in
chief by fi^e or feoffement.

Provided that in such cases where fines for alienations shall be paid in the
Chancery for writtes of enter in the post as is aforesaid, none other fine
shall be paid in the same court for any such writtes.

Item where two or more persons hold of the king by knights service jointly
to them and to the heirs of one of them, and he that has the inheritance
thereof dies, his heir being wtin age: the king shall have y^ ward and
marriage of the body of such heir the life of the freholder or freholders of
the lands so holden by knights service notwithstanding.

Saving to al women such right and title of dower as they owe to have of any
lands or tenementes by the laws of this realm to be assigned unto them out
of y^ two parts of the said lands or tenementes severed from the third part
as is abouesaide and not otherwise. And saving also to the king the reuersions
of al such tena^tes in ioyntenure and dower immediately after ye death of such
tenantes, if they shall happen to die, during y^ none age of the kings wards.

Of mariagies, inacted.a^. 32. Hen. 8.
IT is inacted, that from ye first day of July, in the year of our Lord
a.M.D. and.XL. al marriages within this church of England contracted between
lawful persons, as by this act we declare al persons to be lauful that be not
prohibited by gods law to mary, such marriages being contract and solemnised in
the face of the church and consummate with bodily knowledge or fruit of
children or child being had therein between y^ parties so married, shall be
demed and taken to be laufull good and indissoluble, not withsta^dyng any
precontract of matrimony not co^su^mate with bodily knowledge which either of
y^ persons so married or both shall have made with any other before the time of
contracting that marriage which is solemnised and consu^mate, or whereof such
fruit is ensued or may ensue as before: and not withstanding any dispensation
prescription law or other thing granted or confirmed by act or otherwise:
And that no reservation or prohibition, gods law except, shall trouble or
impeache any marriage without leuiticall degrees. And that no person shall after
the said first day of July aforesaid, be admitted in any of the spiritual
courts with in this the kings realm, or any his other lands and dominions, to
any process plee or allegation contrary to this act.

FINIS.
EX AEDIBVS RICHARDI TAVERNERI, PER RICHARDVM BANKS TYPOGRAPHVM.

Cu^ priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


