INSTRVCTIONS directed from the KINGS most Excellent Majesty, Unto all the
BISHOPS of this Kingdom, and fit to be put in execution, agreeable to the
necessity of the Time.

C R
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon surmounted by a
crown, flanked by the English lion and Scottish unicorn, and embellished with a
Tudor rose and a Scottish thistle

LONDON, Printed by Bonham Norton and John Bill, Printers to the KINGS most
Excellent Majesty. 1626.

MY very good L.
I have received from the Kings MAJESTY, both pious and prudent instructions
necessary for this time: the particulars whereof do here follow.

MOst Reverend Father in God, right Trusty, and right Well-beloved Counselor,
We greet you well.
We have observed, that the Church and the State are so nearly united and knit
together, that though they may seem two Bodies, yet indeed in some relation
they may be accounted but as one, in as much as they both are made up of the
same men, which are differenced only in relations to Spiritual or Civil
ends. This neerenesse makes the Church call in the help of the State, to
succor and support her, whenever she is pressed beyond her strength. And
the same neerenesse makes the State call in for the service of the Church, both
to teach that duty which her members know not, and to exhort them to, and
encourage them, in that duty which they know. It is not long since We
ordered the State to serve the Church, and by a timely Proclamation settled the
peace of it. And now the State looks for the like assistance from the Church,
that She, and all her Ministers, may serve God and Us, by preaching peace and
unity at home, that it may be the better able to resist foreign force uniting
and multiplying against it. And to the end that they, to whom We have
committed the government of the Church under Us, may be the better able to
dispose of the present occasions, We have, with the advice of Our Counsel,
thought fit to send unto you these instructions following, to be sent by you to
the Bishops of your Province, and such other, Whom it may concern, and by them
and their Officers directed to all the Ministers throughout the several
Diocesses, that according to these punctually they may instruct and exhort the
people to serve God and Us, and labor by their prayers to divert the dangers
which hang over Us. The danger in which We are at this time is great. It is
increased by the late blow given Our good Uncle, the King of Denmark, who is
the chief person in those parts, that opposed the spreading forces of Spain.
If he cannot subsist, there is little or nothing left to hinder the House of
Austria from being Lord and Master of Germany: And that is a large and mighty
Teritorie, and such, as should it be gotten, would make an open way for
Spain, to do what they pleased in all the West part of Christendom. For
besides the great strength which Germany once possessed would bring to them,
which are too strong already, you are to consider, first, how it will enable
them by Land, in that it will join all, or the most part of the Spaniards now
distracted Territories, and be a means for him safely and speedily to draw
down forces against any other Kingdom that shall stand in his way. Nor can it
be thought the Low Countries can hold out longer against him, if he once
become Lord of the upper parts. And secondly, you are to weigh, how it will
advantage him by Sea, and make him strong against Us in Our particular, which
is of easy apprehension to all men. And besides, if he once get Germany, he
will be able, though he had no gold from India, to supply the necessity of
those wars, and to hinder all Trade and Traffic, of the greatest Staple
Commodities of this Kingdom, Cloth and Wool, and so make them of little or no
value. You are to know therefore, that to prevent this, is the present care of
the King and State, and there is no probable way left, but by sending forces
and other supplies, to the said King of Denmark, Our dear Uncle, to enable
him to keep the Field, that Our enemies be not Masters of all on the
sudden. You are further to take notice, how both We, and this whole State,
stand bound in honor and conscience, to supply the present necessity of the
King of Denmark. For this quarrel is more nearly Ours, the recovery of the
ancient inheritance of Our dear Sister, and her Children. The King of Denmark
stands not so near in blood unto her as We do. Yet for her and Our sakes,
that brave and valiant King has adventured into the field, and in that
engagement has not only hazarded his Person; but, as things go now, it may
turn to some danger to his own Kingdom and Posterity, should he not
receive aid and succor from Us without delay: Which, should it happen (as God
forbid) will be one of the greatest dishonours that ever this kingdom was
stained withal. Nor is danger and dishonor all the mischief that is like to
follow this disaster: For if he be not presently relieved, the cause of
Religion is not only likely to suffer by it in some one part, (as it has
already in a fearful manner in the Palatinate) but in all places, where it
has gotten any footing: So that if we supply not presently Our Allies and
Confederates in this case, it is like to prove the extirpation of true
Religion, and the replanting of Romish Superstition in all the neighboring
parts of Christendom. And the coldness of this State shall suffer in all
places, as the betrayer of that Religion elsewhere, which it professes and
honors at home, which will be an imputation never to be washed off. And God
forbid this State should suffer under it. Neither may you forget rightly to
inform the people committed to your charge, that this War, which now grows
full of danger, was not entered upon rashly, and without advise; but you are to
acquaint them, that all former Treaties by a peaceable way, were in the latter
end of our dear Father of ever blessed memory, dissolved as fruitless, and
unfit to be longer held on foot. And this by the Counsel of both Houses of
Parliament then sitting; so those two great and honorable Bodies of the Peers
and People, represented in Parliament, led on this Counsel and course to a
war with Spain. To effect this, they desired our aid and assistance, and
used us to work our said dear Father to entertain this course. This upon
their persuasions, and promises of all assistance and supply, we readily
undertook, and effected, and cannot now be left in that business but with the
sin and shame of all men. Sin, because aid and supply for the defense of
the Kingdom, and the like affairs of State, especially such as are advised
and assumed by Parliamentary Counsel, are due to the King from his People, by
all Law both of God and men: And shame, if they forsake the King, while he
pursues their own counsel, just and honorable and which could not under God
but have been successful, if it had been followed and supplied in time, as
We desired and labored for. One thing there is which proves a great
hinderance of this State, and not continued amongst the people without great
offense against God, detriment both to Church and State, and our great
disseruice in this and all other business, It is the breach of Unity, which
is grown too great and common among all sorts of men. The danger of this goes
far: for in all States it has made way for enemies to enter. We have by all
means endeauored Union, and require of you to preach it and Charity, the
mother of it, frequently in the ears of the people. We know their loyal
hearts, and therefore wonder the more what should cause distracted affections.
If you call upon them (which is your duty) we doubt not but that God will
bless them with that love to himself, to his Church, and their own
preservation, which alone will be able to bind up the scatterings of divided
affections into strength. To this end, you are to lay before them, what
miseries home-diuisions have brought upon this and many other Kingdoms, and to
exhort all men to embrace it in time. The danger it self, besides all other
Christian and prudent motives, is of force enough (where it is duly
considered) to make men join in all amity against a common, a great, and a
growing Enemy. And to do it in time, before any secret and cunning working of
his, may use one part in a division to weaken the other. And in the last place
(but first and last and all times to be insisted upon) you are to call upon God
your selves, and to incite the people to join with you in humble and hearty
prayers unto God, that he will be pleased now, after long affliction of his
dear People and Children, to look in mercy both upon them and us, And in
particular, for the safety of the King of Denmark and that Army which is
left him, that God would bless and prosper him against his and our enemies.
Thus you are to strengthen the hearts and the hopes of Our loyal Subjects and
People in and upon God. And whereas the greatest confidence men have in God,
arises not only from his promises, but from their experience likewise of his
goodness, you must not fail often to recall to the memory of the People with
thankfulness, the late great experience we have had of his goodness toward
us; For the three great and usual Judgments, which he darts down upon
disobedient and unthankful people, are Pestilence, Famine, and the Sword. The
Pestilence did never rage more in this Kingdom then of late, and God was
graciously pleased in Mercy to hear the prayers which were made unto him, and
the ceasing of the Judgment was little less then a Miracle. The Famine
threatened us this present year, and it must have followed, had God rained
down his anger a little longer upon the fruits of the earth. But upon our
prayers he stayed that Judgment, and sent us a blessed season, and a most
plentiful harvest. The Sword is the thing which we are now to look to, and
you must call the People to their prayers again against the Enemy, that God
will be pleased to send the like deliverance from this Judgment also, that in
the same Mercy, he will vouchsafe to strengthen the hands of his People, that
he will sharpen their sword; but dull and turn the edge of that which is in
our enemies hands, that so while some fight, others may pray for the blessing.
And you are to be careful that you fail not to direct and hearten Our loving
People in this and all other necessary services both of God, his Church, and
Us, that We may have the comfort of Our peoples service; the State, safety; the
Church, Religion; and the people, the inioying of all such Blessings as follow
these. And We end with doubling of this care upon you, and all under you in
their several places.

Given at Our Palace at Westminster, in the second year of Our Reign, the
twenty one of September. 1626.

THe care which your Lordship is to use in this behalf, is to see them made
known to the worthy Preachers and Ministers in your Diocese, and so far as
your Lordship may, in your own person to put these things in execution, and to
call upon the Clergy which is under you, in their Preachings and private
conferences, to stir up all sorts of people to express their zeal to God,
their duty to the King, and their love unto their Country, and one to
another, that all good and Christian courses may be taken, for the preservation
of the true Religion, both in this Land, and throughout all Christendom: Which
not doubting, but your Lordship with all diligence and speed will see effected,
J leave you to the Almighty, and remain

Your Lordships loving brother, G. Cant.
Croydon. September. 26. 1626.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and John Bill, Printers to the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty. 1626.


