Twelve Sermons of Saint Augustine, now lately Translated into English by Tho.
Paynel.

AT LONDON.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum

To the most virtuous Mighty and most gracious Queen Marye, daughter unto
the most victorious and most noble prince, king Henry the viii. king of
England, France and Ireland Thomas Paynell wysheth most prosperous health and
felicity.
ALthough our savior christ Jesus doothe affirm yt the yoke and cares of
man and saints to be sweet, and easy to be observed and borne: yet how many
(most excellent Lady) do at this present allow, or admit yt saying? ye, how
many do admyt and affirm ye contrary and yet say they not that it is for any
man or woman impossible to live chaste? to love their enemies, to live soberlye
and Christianlye? O God, how is usury and Symony cloked? how is intemperate
living used and esteemed? How do men keep the chastity of Matrimonye? How do
men pay unto God and his ministers their tithes? what charitable deeds, what
doleful penance, yea, what murder, adultery, and fornicacion, what bybbynge,
and wandering, clean contrary to doing yt commandments yt we re used: For now
to Lynke sunder snoeuen is a virtue, to keep a concubyne, is not much blamed,
to seek upon ^aulkers and diuiners is comenly used, to be proud, is accepted
for clenlynes, to be auaritious, for providence, to be crafty and deceytful,
for policye, to spend and waste, for good fellowship, to skoffe and ieste, for
a point of civility, to flatter, is taken for intier love and amity. O lord
shall these men come to the everlasting beatitude? shall they se the king in
his estate and majesty? no verily. Who then? He that lives iustlye, and
speaks the truth: he Esai.
that abhors to do injuries couetously, and remoueth away his hands from
gifts, he y^ stops his ears, least he hear the deceytefull oppression of
the innocente blood, and that shuts his eyes, lest he se evil: this man
shall inhabit places, and se the king in his glorious estate. Why do not men
follow the sayings and words of the prophet? Why do they not ensue the
doctrine of famous doctors and preachers?

There was never more sincere and true preaching, than is now of late, nor
the word of God more spoken of, the^ is in these our days. But so much
preaching, and so little following, so much exhortation to charity, and so
feable and weak love, so much persuasion to succoure and aid the poor, and
so great poverty, so much good counsel given to ensue virtue, and so little
apprehended and used, was never seen. Why so? For every man (as now ye world
is fashioned) be he never so rude and unlearned, will be his own doctor, his
own interpreter of scripture, and follow his own sense and opinion, his own
manner of living and pleasure, clean contrary to all wisdom, reason, and good
learning. The old aunciente fathers, and true interpreters of Gods holy word,
the masters of virtuous and godly conversation, are among many little or no
thing regarded. What were they (say they) but men as we be? Truth it is: but
yet far more excellent both in learning and virtuous operations tha^ we be:
blessed martyrs, holy confessors, the chosen servants and vessels of God, the
ensuers of his steps and statutes, the reprouers of vice, men of most perfect
life, and the sincere preachers and expounders of the word of God. For who is
he living that (as for an ensample) in subtilite of wit, in profounde learning,
in clear declaration of scripture, or in godly example, that may be compared
unto S. Augustine? Whose works are incomparable, and singular in all kinds of
good learning: and to reduce man from vice to virtue, from the active, to the
contemplatyue life most excellent. Out of whose sermons, to admonish and
revoke the people from their dissolute and vicious lyuinge, and to put them in
remembrance of their duetye, and unthankfulness toward god: I have selected
and translated these twelve sermones, the which in mine opinion and mind, are
most worthy, and most necessary to be known and had in memory, but to be
followed, much more necessary. Desirynge your hyghnes thankfully to accept
this my rude translation. Rude it is (I confess) and barbarous, because I
would be plain unto the plain and simple people, the which thing (as I
conjecture) is not far amiss, nor yet greatly to be blamed.

Of a Christen name. And what he ought to do and observe Ser 215
that bears a christen name. i. Ser.
I Pray you my most dearly and well-beloved brethren, that with all our study
and diligence, we call to our remembrance, why and where fore we be named and
called Christians, and why we bear the cross of Christ in our forheades. For
truly we ought to know, that it is not sufficient to receive the name of
Christen men, except we do the works of Christians.

For what does it auayl (says the lord) to call me lord, lord if ye fulfill
not my commandments? if thou name thy Luke. 6.
self a Christen souldear, and continuallye doste bless thy self with the
cross of Christ, and after thine ability and substance, doeste no alms
deeds, nor regardest not charity, justice, nor chastity, thy christen name
shall nothing avail the. The sign and cross of Christ, is a thing most
excellent, and therefore with this most precious signacle and seal, that
thing which is most precious, ought to be sealed. For what does it avail
or profit the, to make a seal of a ring of gold, if thou close putrified
and rotten straw therein.

Or what does it advantage us to wear, or to have the cross of Christ in
our foreheades and mouths, and in wardly in our souls to have and hyde
sin? he that thin keth euel, speaks euel, and if he that blesses him
self, (...) amend, his sins (...) not, but rather augment and increace.
There be that when they goo about theft, or adustery, if they stu^ ble never
so little, they do bless the^ selves, but yet they stay not them selves from
their euel works and purposes. Nor the wretches per ceaue not yt in so doing,
they do rather include the devil then that they exclude him. But he which
through the aid of God does reiecte and repel all vicious and sinful
living: and strives does to think upon that is good, and to do good, he
does well and iustelye bless his mouth with the sign and token of the cross,
and endeuereth him self to do such works, as shall deserve and merit to
have, and to receive ye sign and token of the cross. For it is written. The
kingedome 1. Cor. 4
of heaven is not in words, but in power, and good works. And again, faith
with Jam, 2,
out good works is dead in itself. Therefore least that paraduenture we have
not this Christen name to our aid and amendment, but to our utter damnation
and destruction: let us (whiles that we have remedy, and help in our own
hands) return unto good works. And to the intent ye may (through the help
of God) accomplish and do those things, look that there be peace and concord
among you: and that ye reduce and bring those that are at strife and debate,
to peace and unity. Avoid and fly all lesynges. Exchue perjury as perpetual
and mortal death. And above al things look that after your ability (as is
aforesaid) ye exhibit and give your charity to the poor and nedy: and that ye
offer up your oblations to be consecrated upon the altar. Look that ye can
say your belief, and the lords prayer, and that ye teach your children the
same. For I marvel very much, how they dare be so bold, as once to name
them selves christians, that do dissemble to say a few verses only of their
creed, or of the lords prayer. Likewise ye shall understand, that for those
children the which ye do Christen, ye are as suerties unto God: and therefore
be cyrcumspecte to correct and chasten as well those which ye do Christen, as
your own natural children, that they may live chastely, sobe rly, and iu^tly.
And be ware that your life be such that your children (if they will follow
you) burn not in the eternal fire, but that they may approach and comewith you
to the perpetual bliss of heaven. Take you heed that do here, and judge
men's causes, that ye judge righteously, and that ye take no gifts of the
poor. For gifts Psa. 14 Exodus 23
do blind wise men's hearts, and do change and alter Eccl. 20.
the words of the prudent and wise, lest peradventure, whiles ye get and heap
up monye, ye lose your souls. For no man can get unlawful gain without
lawful pain and damage, for where is luker, there is loss, luker in the
cheste, and damage in conscience. Let no man drink to be droncken, nor
compel any other at his table to drink more than needs, lest that through
ebriette and dro^kennes, he lose both his own soul, and theyrs also. Look that
ye come together to the church upon the sunday, for if the wretched Jews do
keep and sanctifye their sabbath day, with such devotion as on that day, they
will do no earthly work at all: how much more should we christen men on the
sunday, give and apply our minds to Gods service, and to come to ye church for
the salute and salvation of our own souls. And when ye come together, pray
for the remission of your sins. Make no strife there, nor no debate, for who
so coming to the church, does so, he through debate, does wound and hurt him
self there, where he might have healed, and helped him self by prayer. And
being in the church, beware and look that ye braule not, but that ye patiently
do liste^ and take good head to your divine service. For he yt does iangle or
babble in the church, shall give an acountes and reckoning, as well for other, as
for him self, because he would nether here Gods word, nor yet suffer other
men to here the same. Look that ye truly pay your tithes to the church. And
let him that was proud, wax humble, that was lecherous, wax chaste, that was
wont to stele, or to invade other men's goods, give his charity to the poor.
Let him that has been envious, be beneuolent and gentle, and that has done
injury, be ready and quycke to ask for geuenes: and that he to who^ iniurye
was done unto, be priest and ready to forgive, As often as any infirmity or
sickness does chance among you, let him that is diseased receive the holy
communion of the very body and blood of Christ, and afterward be aneled,
that scripture may be fulfilled in in him, saying: if any man be sick, let
the priest be sent Jam. 5.
for to anoint him, and to pray over him, and the prayer of faith shall save the
sick, and God shall raise him up, and if he be in sin, they shall be
forgeuen him. Take heed, and mark now good brethren, that he, the which in
his sycknes will resort unto the church, may obtayn bodily health, and receive
the forgeuenes of sins. Seeing then that double goodness and benefit may be
found and obtained in the church, why do these wretches labor Deu. 18,
by inchaunters, by fountaynes, by trees, by diuilish philaters, be caracters,
by dyuiners, and sothsayers, to induce much mischeife among the people? But as
I have said unto you before, look that ye do admonysh and warn your children,
and all your household to live chastely, and ryghteously, provoking and
sturrynge them to good works, not only by words, but by your godly and good
example. But principally whersoeuer ye be, whether ye be at home, or in your
iourneye, or at the table, or among company, take heed ye speak no filthy,
no luxurious, nor no light words: but that ye admonysh your neighbors, and
kynsfolke, continually to end ever the^ selves to speak the thing that is
good and honest, lest that through detraction, or daunsynge upon the holy
days, or by babbling and recitinge of luxurious and filthy communication, they
with their tounges (wherewith they should laud and honor God) do wound and
hurt the^ selves. For if these wretched and miserable persons, which are not
ashamed to dance before ye churches of holy saints, come thither good
christians, they depart from thence as infideles, for this use and custom of
daunsynge does yet remain of the obseruaunces, and infide litie of the
gentyles. And po^der with your selves what manner a christian that he is, the
which coming to the church to pray, and forgetting the same, is not
ashamed to speak the sacrilegius words of paganes. Consider my dearly
beloved brethren, whether it be semynge or convenient, that such luxurious and
light words, y^ very poysen of y^ devil, should proceed or come forth of
christen men's mouths, into the which the sacrament of the very body and
blood of christ does enter and is received. And above all things, take Tobi. 4.
head that ye do unto other, as ye would be done unto: and math. 7.
that ye would other men should not do unto you, that ye do it not unto
them, the which thing if ye would truly and faythfullye observe and
fulfill: ye should easelye deliver your souls from all sin: for he that has
no learning at all, and has these two sentences in mind and memory, may by
Gods help and grace, in deed fulfill them. And notwithstanding, I do
believe that the aforesaid evil and noughty custom, procedyng of the
obseruaunces of paganes, be through my words, and gods inspiration, clean
avoided: yet if ye know any that observe and keep that most abominable
fylthynes of the fawn, and ye heart, look that ye so chasten, and so correct
them, that they may repent them that ever they commit ted such a
sacrilegius, and so abominable a deed. And if ye know any such as do cry
out, if the moon at any season, through any eclypse does wax obscure and
dark: warn them thereof, and show them, that they sin and offend grievously,
if they do trust, that through their clamours and sacrilegius boldness, they
may defend them selves from the Moon (the which by Gods commandment and
ordinance at certain and appointed times does wax dark) or fromany other
sorcerye or wytchecrafte. And if ye see or perceive any that offer up their
vows unto trees, or unto any fou^taynes, or that hang about them or any of
theyrs any diabolical philaters, or caracters, herbs or the ioyse of any
herb, or that (as I have said) do seek upon sothsayers, diuiners: or
inchaunters: correct them sharpelye, and say unto them that all that so do, do
lose the sacrament of baptysme. And inasmuche as we have hard say, that Satan
has so deceived both men and women, that they will not work upon the
thursdaye: I protest both before God, and his holy angels, that except they
which observe those things amend and redeem such sacrilege with long and
sharp pennaunce, that they shall be dampened for ever. Nor I doubt not but yt
such wretches, the which as in the honor of Jupiter, will not work upon the
thursdayes, will not be ashamed at al, nor yet fear to work and labor upon the
sunday. And there fore take heed, that ye earnestly do chasten as many as ye
know that do so. And if they will not amend, suffer them another to speak,
nor to eat, nor yet once to drink in your company. And if they be belonging
unto you, or of your family, skorge them that they at the least, which
remember not their souls health, may fear the punyshme^t of their bodies. I
(my dear brethren) remembering your manifold perilles and dangers, do thus
tenderly warn and admonish you, if ye then wyllyngelye do harken unto me, ye
shall come to perpetual joy and life ever lastyng, the which he vouchsafe to
grant you, that with the father and the holy ghost does live eternally. Sobeit.

Of a Christen name, and Ser ^1^
that a Christian should often times think, why he is named a Christen man,
and why he bears the cross of Christ in his forehead. Ser. ii.
I Do rejoice mi most derelye beloved brethren, and do thank God, that I have
deserved to find you in good health. And truly my brethren, a father does
ryghteously, and not without a great cause rejoice, as often as he does find his
children healthful in body, and devout in the fear of God. And inasmuche as
the goodness of God has granted me double gladness, as well of youres, as of
mine own health: I must now open and declare unto you the thing which
pertayneth, and is for the utility and health of your souls. It is very
necessary dear brethren, that with all our intention and mind, we should study
to inquire and understand, why and wherefore we be Christians, and why we
bear the cross of Christ in our foreheaddes. Ye must understand and
perceive good brethren, that we are not made Christians to be careful for this
life. For (as says ye apostle) 1. cor. 15
if we in this life only do believe and trust in god, then are we of all
other the most wretched and miserable. For he that does think only upon
this life, is compared and likened unto a beast. For what other thing do
beasts care for, but only to eat, to drink, to sleep, and to live
voluptuouslye? And even such are all they that think moore upon their
bodies, then upon their souls: that love glottouye and lecherye, more then
justice or chastity. Therefore my dearelye beloved, ye must understand, and
know that we are made christians, to think continually upon the eternal
world, and reward that is to come: and to labor more for the soul, then for ye
body. Our flesh shall continue but for a few years in this world: but our
souls (if we live and do well) shall inherit heaven without end. But if we do
evil works, (that God forbid) and labor more for bodily pleasure, then for
the health or salvation of our souls, I fear me that when good men shall be
received with the aungelles unto eternal life, that we (that god forbid)
shall be cast headling into helfyer. Good brethren, it is not enough that we
have received a christen name, except that therewith, we do good christe^me^s
works. To him it is right profitable to be called a christian, that loves
chastity, that exchueth ebriete, that abhors pride, and that as very poison
does reject enui. He is a right good Christen man, that steals not, that
bears no false witness, that lies not, that uses no perjury, that commits
no adultery, that does frequente the church, that does not taste of his
fruytes, until he first have offered part of the^ unto God, that does pay his
tithes yearelye, to be distributed among the nedy, that does love his curate,
and honors preistes, that loves every man as him self, and hates no man.
Uerelye he is not only a christen man that does fear and exchewe as the
swearde of Satan deceit full weyghtes and double measures, but christ him self
does also dwell in him. He is a good christian, that coming to the church,
does exhibit and offers up his offering and that after his possibility and
substance, does give a penny, or a morsel of bread to some poor man: that
receives the pore into his house: that wassheth the pore men's fete: that does
not only make no debate, but reduces such as are at discord and strife, to
unity and concord: that does show reverence, and the love of unfeigned
charity unto his friends and elders: that does live chaste, and admoninisheth
his children, and his neighbors with word and deed, in sobriety and chastity.
He is a good Christen man, that as often as the holy and solemn feasts draw
nere, does certain days before, abstain and keep chastity with his wife,
that the more conveniently, and with a more sincere and sure conscience, a
chaste body, and a clean heart, he may come unto the Lords board and table. And
he likewise that can the lords prayer, and his creed by rote, and that
faithfully does teach his children the same. Now good brethren ye have herd
who be good christians, and therefore let us with Gods aid and help, do the
best we can or may, that this christen name be not wrongfully and vaynelye in
us, and that Christ's sacraments suffer no injury in us: but in heart let us
continually think upon good Christen works, and in deed fulfill them. For I
pray you, what manner a Christian call ye him, yt scarcely comes once to the
church, and yet when he comes, does not stand up to pray for his sins and
misdedes, but to prate and babble, to cause strife and debate, or else to
drink (if he may find a convenient place) till he vomit again? and after that
he has well droncken, ryseth up like a mad man, to leap and dance, and to
sing luxurious and filthy songs of love. Such a one does not fear another
to steal, nor yet to commit adulterye, to give false wytnes, to curse, nor yet
to commit perjury. But whether they be men or women that exercise and do such
ungodly works, they nether receive the name of a Christian, nor yet the
sacrament of baptysme, to their aid and consolation, but to their judgment
and damnation. And without they repent them and do penance, they shall
peryshe for ever. Now good brethren I have opened unto you, who be good, and
who be evil Christians. And therefore follow those that ye se and perceive to be
good: and chasten, chyde, and correct those ye know to be naught, yt through
your own vtilite, and their amendment, ye may have and obtain doble
reward. For they that are good, chaste, sober, humble, and gentle, will by the
grace of God, continue in their good and godly works: and the myslyuers,
quickelye or ever they depart from hense, amend them selves: for if they die
without repentance, they shall not come to joy, but to perpetual and
everlasting death, from the which God vouchesafe to deliver us. So be it.

Of the mystery, fruit, and manner of fasting in Ser. 46.
Lent. iii. Ser.
WE ought to esteem and suppose ye whole time of our life, to be a place to
exercise virtue in, and with all virtue to strive to come to the celestial
reward. But that must and ought most specially to be done and fulfilled in
this holy time and days of Lent, the which days being hallowed with
abstine^ce and fasting, do add so much to the virtue of ye soul, how much
they diminishe of the voluptuous pleasure of the body. This is alawfull number
of fasting days, the which are celebrated in holy examples. Moses when he
should receive the law of God did fast forty days and forty nights without
other meat or drink: by such abstinence and fasting, he was prepared and
ordained to receive the will and the commandments of God. Helias after he
had fasted fortye days, was translated and carried out of the world in a charet
of fire to the hiest place of heaven. Our lord and savior through fasting of.
xl. days did triumph, and overcame the temptations of the devil and as
victorious came to ye predication and declaration of the gospel. And we in
like manner ought to fast, and to obsrrue these days* the which we do read
to be consecrated and hallowed by such examples. Let us therefore consecrate
and honor these days with all alacrite and ioyfulnes of heart and mind, and
prefer them above al wordly bankets, and bodily debate. For in these days we
are most kindled and inflamed to fulfill the will and the co^maun dements of god,
for through abstinence the pleasure of the body is much swaged and debated.
Truly the pure mind does then make most haste to God, and to do and fulfill his
commandments, when it is not mistempered with surfettynge, nor with the
sacietie of meats and drynkes. Where of our Savior in his Gospel does
say. Take heed to your selves, lest your hearts be ouercomme with surfets,
with dronckennes, and with worldelye cares and cogitations: Luke 21.
lest that sudden day come on you unawares: for it shall come as a snare upon
y^ universal world, and no man shall escape it. Also this great utility and
profyt is in these hungery and fasting days, for through such abstinence,
and abstayninge from lawful things, we are monished and much exhorted to
abstain from that, which is unlawful. We abstain from flesh, the which
upon other days we may use lawfully. We abstain from wine, the which we may
use moderatelye. Let us therefore which do exchue and avoid the thing that is
lawful, fly and above all things avoid sin, that can never be well and
lawfullye used. And if we intend and purpose to fast from meat, let us above
all things fast and abstain from sin. For what does it avail us to
abstayn, or to void the body of meat, if we replenish the soul with vice and
sin? What does it profytte the to be pale and wanne with fasting, if thou
be blown and pufte up with hatred and envy? What does it avail us to abstain
from wine, if we be droncken and full of the poysen of anger? What auauntageth
it the to abstain from flesh ordained to be eaten, if thou backbyte and speak
maliciously of thy neighbor? What does it avail us to abstain from those
things which are at sometimes lawefull, if we do those things, which are
never lawful? Therefore let us (as I have said) fast and abstain from meat,
but much more from vice, that we may be replenished with the abundance of
good and holy conversation, and in time to come deserve and merit through gods
grace and favor, to be satisfied with the reward of good works. For they (as
we do read in the gospel) are blessed that hunger and thirst justice, for they
shall be satisfied. In truth we ought to choose this co^pensation, that is to
give and to distribute such meats as we do abstain fro, to the poor and
neadye. For it is written: Blessed be they that are content to suffer, that in
another place they may be refreshed. For that gift is acceptable unto God, when
the neadye is fed and refreshed, when the bare is clothed, when anger is not
performed nor finished, when ye time of anger is not kept, and when evil is
not done for evil. Our fastinges are then thankeful and acceptable unto God,
when we do refreshe and comfort those that fast for very need and necessite:
for then we shall hear this sentence: Uerely I say unto you, inasmuche as ye
have done it unto one of ye least of these, ye have done it to me. O the great
be nignitie and goodness of god, the which to repress and assuage the
covetousness of man, says, yt whatsoever is given to the least poor man that
is, is given unto himself. The goodness of God grant you my brethren, that ye
may so serve and please him with your abstinence, alms deeds, and good works,
that he, the which does live eternallye, may bring you to the eternal and
true life. So be it.

Of fasting in Lent, and alms deeds. Ser. 62.
iiii. Ser.
I Pray you, and in like manner I admonyshe you my derely beloved brethren, ye
none of you do presume to dyne in this lawful and most holy time of Lent,
except it be upon the sundaye, or that paraduenture ye be in such care and
weakness, that your in firm tie and sickness does not suffer you to fast. For
why, to fast upon other days, is other a remedy, or else a reward: but not
to abstain in dent, is sin. He that at any other time does fast, shall
have pardon and remission, but he that does not fast and abstain in Lent,
shall feel pain. And yet let him, that through feebleness cannot fast prepare
somewhat as secretlye as may be, for him self and other (if there be any
modiseased than him self) that they may eat it together. But he shall inuit
nor call none such to his repast and dinner, that may fast: For if he do both
god and man shall easily perceive, that his infirmity is not the cause that he
fasteth not, but that through gluttony he will not fast. Let him yt can not
fast, be content, and eat his meat with sorowfulnes, that he when other men
do absteyne and fast, abstayneth not. Let him cause the thing that shall be
necessary for the sick, to be secretly prepared for him self and some other.
For it besemeth him not to call any whole man unto his table, lest that he,
through otherine^s gluttony, increase and augmente his own sin. And yet for
as much as he fasteth not, his charity and almose ought to be the more larger
to the poor, so to redeem those sins by almose deeds, the which he could
not cure nor heal, by abstinence and fasting. It is my good brethren a very
good and a profitable thing to fast, but yet much better to give almose. If a
man may or can do both, they are two good things: but if he can not, better it
is to give almose. If thou be not able to fast, almose deeds without fasting
shall be sufficient: but to fast without doing of charitable and almose deeds, is
not sufficient.

Therefore if a man can not fast, almose without fasting is good: but if a man may fast, and also do his almose, they are two good things, but to
fast without doing of alms, is another good, nor profitable, except a man be
so very nedy and poor, that he have nothing at all to give, and then the good
will of him that has nothing to give, is sufficient. For it is written,
Glory to God an high, and peace be on the Luke. 2.
earth to those that be well willing. But who can excuse him, when the lord
has promised to give us a reward Mat. 10
for a cup of cold water? And why does he say of cold water? least
paraduenture some poor man would excuse him self by penury and lack of wood,
and say that he has another pot nor pan to warm any water withal. Finally
my dearelye beloved brethren, the lord does so exhort, and so admonish us by
the holy prophet to do alms deeds, that there is in a manner no man so pore and
nedy, that can excuse him self. He says thus, This is the fast (says the
Lord) that I have Esaias. 58
chosen, break thy bread to him that is an hungered. He says not, give him a
whole loaf, for perchance the poor man has it not to give, but he says,
break it, that is to say, if thou be so nedye and pore, yt thou have but one
lofe of bread, yet break of a piece thereof, and give it to the poor. Also he
says, lead the pore man that is without lodging, Esaias. 58
home to thy house. Now if a man be so poor and nedye, that he have not where
with all to feed the poor, yet at lest wise, let him prepare him a bed in
some corner of his house. O my dear brethren, what shall we say to these
things, or what excuse shall we make, that have great and wide houses? and yet
scarcely vouchesafe at any time to receive the poor pilgrim, being ignorant,
yea not beleuyng that christ (as he does say) is received in his pilgrims, I
was astraunger, and ye received me, and inasmuche as math. 25,
ye have done it unto one of the lest of these, ye have done it unto me. It is
tedious and laboriouse unto us, to receive Christ in poor and neadye men,
into our countreye, but I fear me he will requite us, and not receive us into
his heavenly kingdom. We despise him here in this world, I fear me he will
despise us in heaven. As he hi self does say, I was a hungered, and ye gave me
no meat, I Esaias. 58
was a stranger, and ye did not receive me. Inasmuche then as ye did it not to
one of Ezec. 18
the least of these, ye did it not to me. But I beseech GOD mi good brethren,
that he may remove from us, the thing that does ensue and follow: for
afterward he says: Get ye from me ye wicked and damned persons into ye
eternal matthew, 25
and everlasting fire, ye which is prepared for satan and his angels. Therefore
my brethren let us not hear these things slightly, or with our bodily ears only,
but faithfully hearing it let us so teach it with word and deed, that other
men may understand it, and accomplysh the same. Our Lord Christ Jesu
grauntinge it, the which lives and reigns with the father and the holy
ghost. So be it.

Of confession and penance. v. Ser. Ser. 66.

HOly scripture does often times exhort us to fly to the remedy, and
medecin of confession: not that because that God has any need of our
confession, unto whom all that we think, speak, or do, is clear and at
hand: but because we can not be otherwise saved, except yt we being penitent,
do penitentlye confess, that we negligentlye have committed. Satan shall not
accuse him again at domes day, that does hear of his sinful deeds, and
ungodly life, accuse him self: so that he be confessed, and penitentlye does
leave and forsake them, and renueth them not again. Confess your sins
(says S. James) one to another, Jacob. 5
and pray one for another, yt ye may be saved. And the Apostle Romans 10
Paul says, Confession with the mouth is to our salvation. And Solomon
says thus of the confession of sins: he that does hyde and cloak his sins
shall sorrow: but he that does confess Prou. ^^
his fautes, and forsakes them, shall obtain mercy. It is a right good
medecin of salvation, not to renew our old misdedes, nor to refresh the
skarres of our old wounds. For S. John says: if we confess our sins, God
^, Jo. 1,
is faithful and just to forgive us, and to cleanse us from all iniquity. David
says likewise, I said that I would confess mine iniquity and
vnrightewesnesse Psalm, 31
against my self, and thou didste remitte the wickedness of my sin. Let
the sinner confess his sins whileste he lives, for hereafter is no
fruyteful confession, Eccle. 17
nor no penance that shall profit to salvation. Se now is the time of
health, now is the acceptable time, ^, cor. 6,
now is the time of remission, for those that are penitente. For why? after
death shall be the time of punysshemente for those that were negligente to
confess them of their iniquities. All wicked and sinful persons have
bitter penance in pain and tormente: but yet it does profit them nothing
unto remission, for their conscience does wrynge them to the increase and
augmentation of the pain that they do suffer. They might by confession have
escaped the bitterness of their torments and pain, but they did not regard
it. And therefore as they are out wardly troubled with fire, so they are
inwardly vexed with ye remorse of conscience. How ca^ surgion heal the wound,
the which the pacient is ashamed to show? God does desire our confession, that
there by he might have a full and a perfect knowledge of our misdedes. He that
is ashamed to disclose and to confess his sins, shall have God both his
judge, and his punisher. A man shall do best to judge him self in this world,
lest that God here after judge him to 1. cor. 11
perpetual pain and torment. Every sinful man ought to have double sorrow in
penance: first, that through his negligence he did no good, and again, that
through a certain boldness he committed y^ thing which was evil. That he
should not have done he did, and yt he should have done he did not. Confession
does iustitie, confession does give Confession.
remission of sin. Al hope of forgeuenes does rest in confession, confession
is a work of mercy, the very health of those that be sick, and with penance
our only help and comfort, whose laud and praise the Lord does declare in the
matt. 4.
gospel, saying: Do penannce, for why? the kingdom of god does draw nyghe. And
S. matthew. 3.
John the baptiste does say: Do ye worthy works of penance. Worthy works
of penance are, to bewail the sins that are past, and to renew them no
more. As it is Eccle. 5.
written, look thou add, nor heap not sin to sin. And our Lord by the
Prophet Esaias does say: Wash ye Esaias. 1.
and be clean. He is washed and clean, that does bewail yt is past, and
approaches no more unto them. He is washed and not clean, that does lamente
his misdedes, and afterward renueth that he lamented. Of these men S. Peter
does speak most terribly saying: ^, Pet, 2,
A dog returning to his vomit. O my child (says holy Eccl. 21,
scripture) have thou committed sin? do no more so, but pray that the old
may be forgiven thee. True penance is not judged by the number of years, but
by the bitterness and heaviness of the mind. S. Peter matthew. 26
by and by obtained of God the forgeuenes of his sins, because he lamented
most bitterlye that he had thryse denied him. And notwithstanding a man's
penance be but short, yet if it be done with y^ inward bitterness of ye mind,
God the righteous judge, considering the secretnes of ma^s heart, will not
despise it. For god does not so much require the continuance of time, as he
does ponder the will and the sincere mind of him that repents and does
penance. For he that with all his heart and mind does trust in Christ,
although he depart and dye with much sin yet his faith shall live for ever,
as GOD in his holy Gospel does say, I am the resurrection Joau, 11
and life, whosoever believes on me, though he were dead, yet shall he ^yue,
and whosoever lives and believes on me, shall never dye. He does speak of ye
death of the soul, the which shall happen and chance unto man, through the
infirmities and fraylenes of sin. God of his nature is merciful, and ready to
save al those by mercy, the which he can not find to save by justice. He
would that every man 1. Ti. 2.
should be saved, and that no man should perish, saying by the Prophet that
whansoeuer a sinner does convert him self, that he shall live, and Ezec. 33
not dye. And not withstanding we are all wicked sinners, yet if we turn to
penance, let us not dowte, but that through the mercy of God, we shall
obtain the remission of all our iniquities and sins, The mercy of God does
help and succor those that in this world be penitent and do penance. For
penance in the world that is to come, (where every man shall give an accou^tes
of his own works) does not prevail. Penance must be done in this world,
for after our death is none amendment.

Of auriculare confession. Ser, 3^
vi. Ser.
MEn are wont to say most dearlye beloved brethren, that God knows al
things, and that with god there is nether time past, nor time Heb 13.
to come, for he seyth al thin^ and pondereth all thing, a^^ Heb. 4,
things are bare and open unto god: why will God the^ (say they) that we
should confess our sins to man? we^^ it not better not to manifest and
disclose such evil deeds then to open them abroad* for who is he that would
gladlye say, I have trespassed above all other* And if I shul^ show al thing
unto manne I should be esteemed the wors^ of al other, and many through^ mine
example would do much evil. Why should a man the^ confess him self to any
other? O thou man, doeste thou no^ know that we are al sinners? for if we say,
that we be with out sin, we deceive our^ 1. Joa. 1,
selves, and the truth is not in us. We do all sin, we are all borne in
sin, we are all drowned in sin, yea and the child to, which is but one
Job, 15
day old. Wherefore then do we fear to be confessed? And yet we must needs
be confessed unto God, for he is good Psalm, 99,
and gracious, and his mercy endures for ever. God would that we should be
confessed, nor that neither, because he knows not our miseddes and fawtes, but
because the devil should hear and know, that we are confessed, and sorye for
our iniquities. For after that we have once wept, and be truly confessed: he
has not where withal, he may any more accuse us. Marcke and see then good
brethren, Satan would that we should keep scilence and hold our peace. And
God would we should be confessed, unto whom should we soneste obey? Uerelye
unto God, the which does evermore command that good is. Nor it is not
sufficient, ye we abstain from evil, except we do sorowfully confess the
evil that we have done. Nor it is not enough to be confessed to God only, but in
like manner we must confess our sins and trespasses to man, Therefore thou
shall not linger to confess thy self, and return unto GOD. Nor thou shalt
not differ it from time to time. For why? the anger of God shall come suddenly
and destroy thee. O my brethren that have slepte hither to, awake and return
unto your Lord GOD with all Ecele, 5.
your hearts, with fasting, weeping, and waylyng. And inasmuch as he seyth
within all your hearts, the Prophet does teach us, that the fontayne Johel, 2,
of penance is in the heart, and that weeping is referde unto the eye,
sobbing unto the mouth, and fasting unto the whole body. O man linger not to
return again unto the Lord thy God, examen thy conscience. Look upon the
secrets of thy heart, and consider or ever thou go to confession, that thy
heart has sinned, desiring and coveting the thing that was naughtes, thy
eyes in beholdynge of vanities, thy mouth by speaking the thing that was
false, thy ears through hearing of lies, thy hands with smiting and
co^mittinge of murder, if not in very deed yet peradventure in will. Who can
excuse him self? our fete also are very quick and spedye to evil. Therefore
as ye have given your members servants to uncleanness and iniquity, from
iniquity to iniquity, even so now give your members Roma. 6
servants unto right wesnes, that ye may be sanctified. And first let the
heart be penitente and sorrowful for all such ungodly things, as it has at
any time thought upon or desired, let the eye weep, let the mouth pray
continuailye, let the ear hear the word of God, let the hands give and be
doing of charitable and almose deeds, receive the poor pilgrim, feed the
sick and hongry, and cloth the naked, let your fete be going to the
church, and your knees labor to bow down unto God, for as there was no
member, but that through sin has displeased God, so let there be no member
without sufferaunce of semblable and like pain, for God has given us our
members to serve him withal and not to serve the world. But alas my brethren,
the citezens of heaven, and Gods familiare friends, are made the servants of
the world, embrasyng and leaning a great deal more to earthly things then to
eternal, to their own substance, then to themselves. But good brethren, ye
should not do so, for why? the time is at hand, and it does threten us. Rise
ye up therefore that do eat the bread of psalm, 126
heaviness. Let us haste us to the church, and with sorrowful tears confess
our sins. But first this order must be taken and kept. We (or ever we go to
confession) must think upon our sins and trespasses, and in opening of them,
so confess to god and to his minister the priest the manner and circumstaunces
of them, that we may depart from their fete not burdened, but exone rated and
lightened. And good brethren, look ye prolong not the time, to confess your
sins, for he that does prolong or procrastinate the time unto the last day
of lent, or of his life to confess his misdedes, he gives good evidence, that
he does it not willynglye, nor gratiouslye, nor with a pure heart, but against
his will. Mark and consider how such constrained and vnwyllynge service does
please either god or man. And therefore let us not delay from day to day to
confess and to open the secrets of our hearts: for God has promised
forgeuenes to those that are penitent, and not to those that delay their
confession or penance until to morrow: therefore let us not prolonge nor delay
our confession. But yet when thou man or woman goeste to confession, look thou
laughe not, nor that thou be gorgeouslye nor well apparelled, nor that thou
begin not to utter and show fables, but that with all humilitye and tokens of
repentance, ye do confess Jaco. 5.
your sins one to another. And I pray thee not to fear to be confessed. But
how shall I confess this and that? O thou man, as often as thou do feel
and perceive that, doubt not but that it is the very temptation of the devil,
the which desires so to inwrappe and entangle thee, that thou, being already
in sin, might do without any great temptation, that should please him. And
therefore my brethren, fear ye not to confess your sins, for I know that
thing less, the which I know by confession, then that, which I know not.
Why do ye then fear to confess your sins? he is a wretched sinner as ye
are, and perchance a more wretched sinner then ye are, that does hear your
confession. He is a man, he differs nothing from you, he is but as ye are.
Why do thou then thou sinful man fear thee to confess to a sinner? Choose
what ye will, but if ye lurk unconfessed, ye shall be condemned without
confession. GOD does require confession too acquit and deliver him that is
humble, and to condemn him eternallye, that is proud. Be confeste my brethren
and delay it not, haste you to come to the holy harvest of confession, for
confession is the health of the soul, the destroier Confession.
of vice, the restorer of virtue, the victor and ouercomer of friends, the
fear of hell, the obstacke of satan, the cote and garment of angels, the hope
of the church, the health, the gyde, the light, the esperaunce and hope of all
faithful people. O wonderful and holy confession, thou do close up the mouth
of hell, and openest heaven gates. O confession, without thee, the just man is
esteemed unthankful, and the sinner shall be reputed as dead. O the life of all
just men, the glory of al sinners. Thou art only necessary for sinners, and
yet he that will be esteemed just, must oftentimes visit the. Finally there shall
nothing remain in judgment that was avoided and disclosed by confession.
Clean and pure confession is so pondered and wayde, and God does set so much
and such store there by, that the thieves confession hanginge upon the cross,
was as well accepted, as though he had died for gods cause: behold how much
y^ sinners short confession did advantage him? But we priests (would to god
we were good priest* should so diligently, and with such moderation watch
to fasten ye word of fear, and of contrition in the hearts of sinners, that
we fear them not from confession, and so to open their hearts, that they
another shut up, nor cloose their mouths from the same. Nor we should not
absolve the penitent except we saw and perceived that he were confeste. For
the belief of the heart justifies and the confession of the mouth Romans 10
makes a man safe. And therefore he that has the word of confession in
his mouth, and not in his heart is other crafty, or else false. And he that
has it in his heart, and not in his mouth is other proud or fearful.
Therefore it behooves priests to be such as do know what manner of medecin
and how much thereof they should minister to every sick manne. The Lord
which lives and reygneth for ever, being his aid and comfort.

Amen.
Of Penance. Ser. 57.
Ser. vij.
I Pray you my dearelye beloved brethren, that if any of you after ye course
and frailenesse of man, be overthrown through the subtle craftines of satan,
or inwrapped in deadlye sin, and has (as says the Apostle) destroyed in
him self the temple of god. I pray him that he despere not of the 2. cor. 3.
mercy of God, but that he arise up quicklye from his iniquity and sin,
lest y^ by the co^tinuaunce and custom thereof, he drown him self in his own
ruin, for he shall not be odious nor abominable unto god, that has done and
committed sin, but he that does rest and continue in sin. And because no
man should mistrust the mercy of god, the Lord by his prophet does comfort
us saying: I desire not the death of any sinner, but that he should return
from sin and live. And again: Ezec, 33
Whenever the wicked sinner, shall return from his wickedness, yt shall not
hinder Ezec, 18,
nor hurt him. But this his great mercy does then profit us, when we slack
not to return unto him, nor join nor accumulate sin upon sin. Furthermore
we may know the wounds and fractures of ye body, by the wounds and
fractures of the soul For if a man's leg, or hand be once broken, it is
wont to be hardely brought and restored to his old use again: but yet if
they break twice or thryse: or oftener in one place, your charity may easily
understand and perceive, with what dolor and pain such wounds and fractures
are healed again: and yet after long pain and tormente, scarcely they can be
restored and brought to their former and old estate. And like reason is
thought to be in the fractures and wondes of the soul: for if a man do commit
sin once or twyse, and without any dissimulation does fly unto the remedy of
penance, he shall without any let, and peraduentur without any shame recover
his health again. But if sin begin to be joined to sin, and that the
wounds of the soul, through the clokyng and defending of iniquity do rather
putrify, the^ by confession and penance do heal and amend, it is to be
fearde, lest the saying of the Apostle be verified in him. Do thou not
know, that ye kindness of God does lead the Romans 2,
to repentance: but thou after thine hard heart that can not repent, doste
hepe together the treasure of wrath against the day of vengeance and
revelation of the true judgment of GOD. But perchance some one man may
think, that he has so greuouslye offended, that now he ca^ not merit to have
and to obtain the mercy of God. But God forbid that any sinner should think
so. O thou man that doste consider and way the multitude of thy sins, why in
like manner do thou not consider the great power of the celestial physician?
And considering that God of his mere goodness will have mercy upon us, and that
by his mighty power, he may be merciful unto us. He does cloose up the gate
of his divine mercy against him self, that does believe that GOD will not, or
that he can not be merciful unto him, or that mistrusteth him to be good and om
nipotent. And therefore let no man another after a hundred, yet a thousand sins
and crimes committed, despere of Gods mercy, but make all the haste he can, that
God without any stop or let may be merciful unto him, lest that he
perchance do so accustom him self to sin, that though he would, he can
not be delivered from the snares and craftye deceytes of the devil David (the
which was both by the aid and gift of God) a 2. Regu^, 11. 12.
king and a Prophet was so prevented, that he committed not only adultery,
but also murder, and yet he reserved not him self, nor protracted nor tarried
not to do penance in his old age, but by and by, lyinge in a shurte of hear,
and ouersprinckled with ashes, did sorrowful and great penance, and fulfilled
that he said in his Psalms: I Psalm, 6
will wasshe and water my couche every night with my tears. And again: I did
Psa, 101
eat ashes as bread, and watered my drinck with tears. And because that with
mortiferous vncarefulnes, he did not delay to do fruitful penance, he
immediately so stird up and revoked the mercy of God, that alonely he lost not
his kingdom, but also deserved to receive and to have ye gift of the holy
co^forter. But peradventure there be yet yt will say, I am occupied in warfare,
or I have a wife, how can I then do penance? As though that I (when I
counsel you to do penannce) would say, that ye should rather go about to
pluck out the hears of your heads, then that ye should leave your sins
and wretchedness: or vnthrede your gowns, then to refuse your evil
conversation and manners. But let him which goes about by such dissimulation
more to deceive, then to excuse him self, take heed, and mark, that nether
the honor of his kingdom, nor yet the dignity of his apparel, could refrain
or let king David from doing of penance. Also the sacrilegius king Achab (of
whom Scripture 3. reg, 21
says, that there was never none such sold to do evil against God) after
y^ Jezabel his wife ha^ depraved him, and had made him abominable in the sight
of God: Naboth being stoned to death, because he would not yield up his vine
yard, yet after yt the Prophet Heli had spoken unto him, he put on a shyrt of
hear, and bowed down his head unto god, and did penance. Whereupon God said
unto Heli, haste thou not seen, how y^ Achab has humiliated him self unto
me? Forasmuch as he (says the lord) has buxomed and bowde him self unto me
for my sake, I will not (as long as he shall live) punish nor trouble the
people. Now consider good brethren, that although this Achab was sacrilegius
and naughtes, yet he prolonged not the time to do penance, but incontinently
offerde unto GOD the sacrifice of an humble and of a contrite heart. And if
afterward he had continued in his humylitye, the mercy of GOD had never
forsaken him. Also king Manasses was so wicked. 4. re. 21.
(as it is written of him) that he replenished the whole city of Jerusalem
with all iniquity. yet after yt he was taken and put in prison, he through
great penance and much humility, did so obtain the grace and favor of
god, that he merited to be numbered and accepted among the friends and good
lovers of god. And after yt the sinful Magdalene (the which washed Christ's
Luc. 7.
fete with her tears, and wypte them with her hear) knew that the heavenly
Physician was come, she went into Symons house undesired: and she that before
was bold, prompt and shameless unto all unthriftiness, was now more bold to be
saved, and therefore she deserved to hear, that all her sins were forgeuen
her. Nor this woman prolonged not to do penance, but whylest she might sin,
she did so leave of to sin, that no necessity, but her own voluntary will
withdrue her from her misliuyng. We might find many mo in holy scripture, the
which through doing of penance after their infinite and innumerable crimes
provoked and caused god to be merciful and gracious Lord unto them, the which
did not only return to their first estate and condition, but to a much
better. But forasmuch as it were a very long thing to speak of al, these
four which we have recited and spoken of, are sufficient to know, that the
lord (the which forgave David after so great a sin, and the sacrilegius
king Achab, and that after so innumerable iniquities reputed penitent Manasses
to be his friend, and forgave the sinful Magdalene (which did wassh his fete
with her tears, and did wipe the^ with her hear) al her sins) is ready not
only to forgive us our misdedes and trespasses, if we return unto him, but
also to give us eternal beatitude, and rest everlasting. Therefore my good
brethren, let us (thynkyng upon those things) labor with Gods help as
much as we may possible, that no deadly sin crepe in among us, but if so be
there be any, yt through ye deceytfulnes of the devil are overthrown or cast
into this evil, let him or ever any such crimes by a continual custom, do
increase, seek for remedy, and labor with great sorowefulnes of heart, to
be reconciled, and to win the favor of almighty God again. Nor let him not
be ashamed to do penance, yt was not ashamed to sin, but strive
incontinently thorough godly operation to amend him self, that he may be
known, and accepted of the father among his children, lest that he exclude
him from the eternal bless and eiecte him from the heavenly banquet, and bound
both hand and foot, cast him into the exterioure darkness, where is
waylyng and gnasshyng of teeth: and that he revoked, math, 22,
and through the medecines of penance, humility, and compunction, restored
to his old estate and health again, and adourned with the peryls of good
works, may merit to hear these words. O my good and faithful servant,
enter and come into the joy of thy lord

Amen.
Of almose deeds, Ser. viii. Ser 127

I My most dearly beloved brethren have monished you and presumed too give you
counfell to do and to give almose. And although my admoniti on has (God
wyllyng) profyted many a one, yet I fear me, lest there be, that do less
then they may, or else nothing at all. But some will say unto me, I am a poor
man, and not able to do any almose deeds. But because yt no poor man should
excuse him self from doing of almose deeds, our Savior has promised to
reward us for a cup of matt. 10,
could water. Seyst thou the^, that thou art poor? If thou have in substance
no more then will reasonably find thee, then thy only good will is sufficient.
But I pray the exactly to examine thy conscience, whether that at times
peradventure thou haste not lost through super fluous drin king, that thou
might have given in almose, or lest that in earth thou haste consumed
through gluttony, yt thou should with almose and charitable deeds have laid
and treasured up in heaven: or lest by preparynge of delicate welfare, and
byinge of superfluous array and apparel, thou have not now the thing that
thou should have to give un to the poor for the salvation and redemption of
thy soul. And notwythstandynge our galaunte and precious array is wont to be
consumed and mothe eaten, yet the neadye can not obtain nor get the thing
that is most vileste. If all these impediments the^, do not aggrauate nor
burden our souls, or if we have the thing, which only suffiseth us and
ours, we shall not then appear to be in faut and giltye, although we give
nothing to the poor, but if luxuriousness and super fluitye (as I have
said) do devour and consume, that charity and mercy might have treasured up
in heaven, let us then while time is, amend oureselues, and study to
recompense, and with all our might to fulfill that we have not done, or
perchance that we have done, but far other wise and less then we should have
done. And therefore help thy self (O thou christen man) that doeste read and
hear these things, with Daniels Dani. 4.
most holy counsel. Accept my counsel (says he) and redeem thy soul with
almose and charitable deeds. The which counsel, if thou will not listen to
and hear, thou shalt call upon God, but in vain. O thou soul that doste
inhabit and dwell within these carnal and frail walls, watch matthew. 7.
pray, ask, seek, and knock. I say watch askinge, pray se king, and
knock workyng. The Lord shall answer thee, that doeste watch and ask,
saying, behold here I am. If thou will pearce and go through the fire, thy
Lord Esaias. 43
God is with thee, and the flame shall not burn the. For why? as water does
quench fire, eue^ so does almose deed quench sin. Therefore if thou will
open thy hand to the poor, Christ shall open his gates unto thee, that as a
possessioner of heaven thou may enter and come in. And if thou think that
the end of the world be long a coming, look only upon thine own end, and
behold how the world by a little and a little does consume and vanysh. Al
things which were good, are gone and taken away, and such evil as never
was, does approach. The thing that the word of God did pronosticate, is daily
accomplyshed and fulfilled, and yet that notwith standing, man does another
change nor amend. Therefore take counsel whilst that thou have thy redemption
in thine own hand, give and distribute unto thy self that is thine, whyleste
it is thine. For the thing that thou do possess and hold is but frail
and bryttle, and other men's that thou doeste look for. Consider what manner of
price the Lord paid for thee, he shed his precious blood for thee, he
loved thee intierlye, that so dearly bought thee. O good brother avoid and
fly the example of the rich man, whose dogs the poor man Lazarus Luc. 19.
did feed and nurish with his wounds, and yet they gave him not so much, as
the crummes which fell from the rich ma^s table: but this thing not long after
was clean altered for the pore bought his salvation with poverty, and the
rich man his pain and tormente with y^ abundance of riches. The poor man
was exalted up with angels into Abraham's bosom, and the rich man thruste
down into the profounde depenesse of hell, from whence he saw the pore manne,
yea the poor manne the rich man, he that denied a crome of bread, desired a
drop of water. Let them therefore that be rich and aboundaunte (the which
will not help nor redeem them selves with their own goods and substance)
think upon these things, lest they suffer and come to like punishmente. He was
rich that we do speak of, and likewise there be rich men here, unto whom we
do speak, they are all after a name, but let them beware, that they be not
of one condition, but these things were changed between the rich man,
clothed in purple, and the poor man full of byles and botches. For the rich
man lost that he had, and pore Lazarus began to be that he was not. Tht rich
man left in this world his warehouses and shoppes full of goods and great
substance, and in hell, he desired but a drop of water, and could not
obtain it. Take heed good brethren, the whole body of the rich man is
troubled with the flames and fire of hell, and yet his tongue, (because with
proud words he despised the poor man) is most vehemently tormented. The tongue
which would not counsel him to give the poor manne his almose, is most
greuouslye burnte and punyshed with the fire and flames of hell. He cryde out
and said: Father Abraham, send Lazarus that he may dip his finger in
water, and cole my tongue. O thou rich man, with what audacitie and boldness
dareste thou require a drop of water, that wouldeste profer a crome of bread?
Thou should now even of right have demanded and asked it, if thou had
given it. O these worldly goods, the which in hell are grievous and evil. To
this rich man's service came fire and torment. He does suffer the cruel and
hard torments of hell. He is wrong, and cries out, and says: O most pure
and ryghteous judge, other let my pains be recompensed, according to mine
iniquities, or else let me receive condign punyshmente and pain for the
time, that I was in welthe, or double pain, or four times more pain. Why
do thou command me to be kept these many. M. years in this flaming fire?
I am so bound with the bowndes of my sins, yt I can not escape. I am every
momente of an hour, paynefullye tormented and punished. The fire does cruellye
vex me, nor it does not spare me, it both tormenteth me, and reserueth me. To
these lamentable and dolorous complayntes, he might thus without boubt have
answered him: What shall I do unto thee? Thou dyddest no almose deeds, the
which might have quinched the torments Eccle, 3.
and pains, that thou do now abide and suffer for thy sins and
iniquities. Scripture did call upon the, but thou would not hear. The
prophets hold not their peace. The apostles preached The gospel gave out his
sound The torments and pains prepared for the synneful were declared unto
thee. And the reward of the righteouse was promised thee, but thou trustinge
and having affiaunce in these world lie goods and possessions, dyddest reject
and contemn Gods precepts and statutes as tryflynge and vain fables. Let the
poor pray for the, and whatsoever thou doeste ask, I do grant it thee. But
yet I do handle and use thee but iustlye: for there shall be judgment merciles
Jaco. 2.
to him, that shows no mercy. My justice can give thee nothing else, but that
thy works do deserve and merit. And therefore thou, being now dead, and in
another man's power and dominion, doeste call upon me but in vain. For when
thou might and did see me in the poor, then thou wast blind and
would not see me. O my brethren made by ye hand of God, and boughte as I was
full dearly, harken unto the Lords counsel. Obey and fulfill the desire of
your bishop, that with him ye may take and receive your inheritance in your
fathers kingdom, Of a bond man thou art made a friend. Despise that thou art
borne, and do unto Christ, as he does unto thee. Why should he not take part
of thy substance that has prepared for thee rewards everlasting? Why should
he not have the tenth of thy goods, that has given the all? for this earthlye
patrimony, God does offer us heaven, he says thus: Come ye blessed children,
and inherit the kingdom, for I matt. 25,
was an hungered, and ye gave me meat. Then may ye say luckely, (if so be ye
were large and faithful in doing of your almose) when saw we the an hungered,
and did feed thee? what a thing is this my brethren. The true and faithful
detter confesses his debt, and the creditours excuse it. Then shall your
sather, your LORD, and your friend, with whom ye have made a celestial
conuention and bargene, answer you thus. In as much as ye have done it un to
one of these least of my brethren, ye have done it to me. I shall therefore give
you celestial and eternal rewards and a kingedome upon my right hand. Nor
that, because ye have not trespassed, but because ye have redeemed and raunsomed
your sins, with almose and charitable deeds. I pray you good brethren to
remember these things, and that it may so profit the poor and neady, that I
for my gentle admonition may obtain forgiveness before the seat of the
eternal judge: and ye for your liberal contribulation and almose de des,
eternal glory, our Saui our Jesus Christ, granting the same, to whom with
the father and the holy gooste be honor for ever and ever.

Amen.
Of the chastity that Ser 243
ought and should be between man and wife. Ser. ix.
WHEN soever my well-beloved brethren we do commend chastitye as it ought and is
expedient it should be commended: young men and such as are in the flower of
their age do say thus. We are young men, we can not live chaste. To whom we
may and ought to give this answer, that they can not live chaste and
undefiled, be cause they eat more then is expedient, and drink more wine then
neadeth, nor will not fly nor exchue the familiaritye of women, nor yet fear,
nor be ashamed to hont and to have their suspect company: but let al such
lysten to the Apostle, saying: fly fornicacion. And this: be not 1. cor. 9,
droncken with wine, wherein Ephe. 5,
is excess. And Solomon says: wine and women do reprove and cause wise men
to do amysse. Let those that say that they can not keep chastity, answer
me, whether they have wives or no: if they have wives, why do they not take heed to Gods saying in his Gospel, What matthew. 7.
soever ye will that men do unto you, do likewise unto them. And why do they
not keep their fidelitye and promise made unto their wives, the which they
would, yea and desire that their wives should keep with them? And seeing that a
man called uir, does take his name of this word, uirtus: and a woman called
muliser, of this word mollities, that is, of softness and frayltye, why would
manne, that his wife should overcome this most cruel letcherye, when that he
him self at the first stroke and motion thereof does yield and fall. But here
perchance all such as be vnma ried shall say unto me, that they may be well
excused, because they have no wines to keep promise withal, and therefore they
can not live pure and chaste. To these that pretend this false and wretched
excuse, a man may and ought to make this just answer: No man ought more
to avoid unlawful things, then they that do reiecte the things, which are
lawful. Considering then, that it is lawful for manne to take and to marye a
wife, and that it is against the aucthoritye of all Scripture, nor never
lawful to commit adulterye: why doeste thou not then with Gods favor
mary a wife, the which is lawful, but do presume with Gods displeasure to
do the thing, that is not lawful. Yet I would feign know, whether yt they,
the which have no wives, nor were not ashamed, nor in fear to commit adultry,
or ever they were married, that they^ spowses should be defiled or corrupted, or
they were married unto the^? but seeing that there is no man y^ with patience
could abide or suffer yt, why do not they the^ keep ye self promise with their
wives, y^ which they do desir yt their wives should keep the^? And why does he
desire to be married unto a virgin that is none him self? Why does he desire to
be coupled with her that is alive, when that he him self, through adultery is
dead in soul, for it is written, The soul that does sin, shall dye. And
the Apostle Ezec. 18
says full terriblye. God will judge adulterers. Heb. 13,
And again: Adulterers shall not possess the kingdom of 1, cor, 6,
heaven. But peradventure there are that think it lawful for men or ever they
be married to commit fornication, but not for women. Many there are, the
which not fearing God, do commit these crimes, most grievous and most worthy
to be punisshed, because they are common, and eustomablye used, and so little
esteemed, that men now a days do not reken them to be enorme and wicked
trespasses. But yet in the catholyke faith, whatsoever is unlawful for women,
is utterly unlawful for men. For why? both men and women are redeemed with one
price, that is, with the precious blood of Christ. They are called to one
faith, and are gathered together in one mistical body of the church, they
receive the sacrament of baptime together, they come to gether unto the altar
to receive the holy communion of the body and blood of Christ, and the
commandments are given equally unto them both. Seeing then that it is so,
with what boldenes, or co^ science do men believe, yt they only may do that
thing unpunished, the which is nether lawful for man to do, nor yet for woman.
But I would that al such as presume to do such detestable things, should well
and perfectly know, that if they do not forthwith amend them selves, and do
the fruytefull works of penance, but dye suddenly, that without doubt or
remedy, they shall be troubled with perpetual fire. But what a thing is this,
for many there be, which are not ashamed, or ever they be married too keep
concubynes, the which they forsake within feawe years after, and be married.
First they do muse and cast with themselves, how that through
deceytfulnesse and theft, they may come to riches and unlawful gain, and
afterward against all reason, they do marye women of more nobility and
substance, the^ they themselves be. Mark with now many euyls they that not
only vnluckedlye do desire to do service unto letcherye, but also to
covetousness do entangle the^ selves wtal. Therefore I do co^test and de here
before God and his angels, yt he has always forboden these crimes, and that
they never pleased him. For sense ye time of Christ's law, it was never lawful
for man to keep a concubine, nor never shall be. But yet there be that do it by
the law of man, but not by Gods law, nor yet by justice commanding, but by
the only pleasure of ye body rulynge them. When the Apostle says to those
that be married, that the time which remains is but short and that they which
have 1, cor, 7,
wives, should be asthoughe they had none. And again, wythdrawe your selfs
for a while, that ye may give your selves to prayer. How does he suffer men to
have concubines that does command them to keep chastity that are married? And
therefore I again and again do say unto you, that he, the which before he be
lawfully married does presume to keep a concubine, does greatly sin and
trespass, and more greater sin then he, which commits adultery, for the
adulterer does it secretly, and fears, and is ashamed to do it openly: but he
that keeps a concubyne openly, does think that without shame he may do in
the presence of all the world, such an execrable thing most lawfully. But
they peradventure which are not defiled nor bespotted with this sin, do
say, why be not they that commit and do such enormities removed then from
Gods boorde: Priests verily punyshe not such enorme and great crimes, because
that many men do use them: but if a feawe in number would presume to do such
evil, they might and ought not only to be removed from Gods board, but also
from the speech and familiarity of al christen people, as says the Apostle:
With such a man thou shall 1, cor, 5,
another eat nor drink. But yet (as I have said) the multitude of misdoers
does let ye priest to punyshe them: although good priests do what they may
or can, and with continual and perfect charity do both syghe and pray, that
at the left ways, they might by their admonitions and prayers provoke and
induce them to penance, the which (because of the infinite multitude of them)
they could another correct nor punyshe. And therefore I pray you again and
again, yea and likewise I desire you, that as he which would be married, does
covet and desire to find his spowse a virgin, so in like manner, let him (until
he be married) keep his virginitye, for if he do not, he shall not accept nor
receive the benediction with his spouse. And so the scripture shall be fulfilled
in him, which Psa, 107
says, he would have no benediction, and it shall be far from him. Now then
if penance do not help, what shall become of this manne? Or what shall be his
judgment in time to come, that in this world was not worthy to receive the
benediction, and to be blessed with his spouse? And note this my brethren, if
they which have no wives, through keeping of concubines, or meddling with other
men's wives be in so great danger, what shall they most vnfortunates think
of them selves, that perchance have wives, and yet commit adultery, and
through a certain madness do despere of the judgment of GOD, nor fear not the
pains of hell, nor desire not the eternal reward. Uerely if they were in true
and perfect faith, they would believe in God, and fear the judgment that is to
come. And this may well be proved, that all such do believe and trust more in
man, then they do in God: for where they do see and perceive that men be, there
they do fear to commit adultery, but to do it secretlye (where God does see
it) they fear not. But if they had never so little a spark of true faith, as
they suffer not their servants to trespass in their own syghte and presence:
so would they not presume to do and commit adulterye in the presence and
sight of the Lord their God. But of these speaks the holy ghost by the
Prophet, The unwise man said in his heart and psalm, 13, and, 52,
mind, there is no God. For this is without peradventure, that he believes
not, ye there is a God, which secret lie does those things in gods sight and
presence, the which he fears to do in the presence and sight of man. But ye
wretch knows not that the face and anger of God is upon al those that do
Psalm, 33,
evil, to destroy them for evermore. But perchance some do say thus, how
can I, that through my great business, or by the kings commandment am
absent from my wife so many months or years keep chasti tie? Unto this I
may give this answer, that he return home unto his wife. But when I
answer the merchaunt so, he says, that if he leave of the feate of
merchaundise, he shall not be able to live. The man of war does say, if I
depart from the hooste, the kings majesty will be discontente with me. But
unto these a man may say, that if he fear the king and upon that occasion
retourneth not home to his own wife, he ought so to fear God, that he teach
nor company with none other man's: for as the king may put him to death that
returns home from the host to his wife, without license, so may God punyshe
him perpetuallye, that being far from his wife, commits adulterye. I
pray you good brethren, if so be that any of you through your necessary
busynes, or by the kings commandment be at some times far from your wives,
why should ye not live so long in chastitye for the love of God, and ye wealth
and salvation of your souls. Do thy business, and the Kings commandment,
enforce the for so many days not once to touch thy wife, and the love and
precepte of God shall not persuade thee to touch none other man's? but I would
that all they, y^ which for lucre sake only and riches, and at the kings
commandment do observe and keep these things and dissemble to keep them for
Gods sake, should know, yt if penance do not aid and help them, that, they
(when they shall stand in judgment before GOD) can not escape from hearing of
heavy and dolorous words, for these words shall be said unto them: Get you
hence from me ye wicked and cursed people matt. 25,
into eternal fire. And what a thing is this, that a bold champion going to
battle shall at some times peradue^ ture sleye no less then ten of his
enemies, and commit tynge of adultery with some maid taken in warfare, does
murder his own soul with the sword of sin? Consider how great an evil it
is that man should be more cruel to himself, murdering his own soul
through letcherye, then to the bodies of his enmyes by victory. Forsothe, it is
a dolorous and alamentable thing, that he (as I have said) who has
victoriouslye overthrown ten of his enemies, should be overcome by a woman,
or that he, which has overthrown so many of his enemies bodies, should in
heart and soul be overcome by a woman. Surely it is to grievous a thing, that
he which can not be overcome with no weapon, should be subdued through bodily
lust and pleasure, or that sweet and pleasant words should ouerturne him,
whom no hardness could ouerturne, or that he which disdayned to be the bondsman
of man, should me rite to be the bondemanne of sin, when that it is a more
unworthy thing, to serve in mind, then in body, as it is written. For of
whomesoeuer a man be overcome, unto 2, Pet, 1,
the same is he in bondage. Good brethren, if I should not show you these
things I should answer for your souls at the day of judgment. But
whosoever he be, that is more desirous to be grieved or angrye with me then to
amend himself, he can not now through ignorance excuse him, saying: that
he was not monished of these things, nor forbidden to do evil, nor provoked
by often castigation and admonition unto all such things as should please God.
But I believe, that the mercy of god shall so inspire every negligente person,
that they shall be much more wroth and angrye with them selves, then with the
priests good medecines and admonitions And as the sick and weak persons do
require bodily health of the carnal physician, so shall they require and
demand soul health of the spiritual and goostlye Physician. But I do hope
and trust that through the mercy of God, they shall so study to comfort and
chere us by their good amendment, that they shall come most prospe rouslye,
God willing, to the eternal reward, and life everlasting.

Amen.
Of the true paymente of Ser 219
tithes. Ser. x.
GOd my dearly beloved brethren, being merciful unto us, ye time approaches
and draws on together in our harueste. And therefore with thanks unto God
that has given us all, let us think upon our offeringes, and true payment of
our tithes. For ca. decimae. 16. quest. 2.
God which has vouchesafed to give us all, does also vouchesafe to reap, and
to ask us tithes, nor that for his own gain and use, but for our gain and
profit. For he does promise us by the Prophet, saying: Bring in (says Mala, 3
he) all your tithes into my barnes, that there may be meat in my house, and
prove me (says the Lord) in these things, whether I shall not open unto you,
the caractes and the clouds of the sky, and give you fruit aboundantlye. See
now, I have proved how that tithes do profit us more, then they do profit
the Lord. O ye imprudente and unwise people, what evil thing does God
command, that he should not be worthy to be heard? he says thus: Thou
shalt not delay to offer up unto me the tithes of Exo, 22, ca. deci. 16. que.
1
thy barn, and of thy winepresse. Y fit be sin to be tardius and slow in
offering up, and paying thy tithes, how great a trespass is it, to offer none
at all? He says again, Honor and worship thy lord God, with the fruit and
gain of thy true and just labor. Do sacrifice and offer unto him of the
first and chiefest of al thine increase, that thy barnes may be replenished
with corn, and that thy winepresses may redounde and flow over with wine.
Thou doste not give that thing freely, nor yet without gain, that sone after
thou shalt receive again with great lucre. Per adventure thou do demand to
whom shall that thing be profitable, that God does receive to restore again?
And again thou do ask me, to whose profit it redoundeth, that is given
unto the pore. If thou believe well, it is thine own utility and profit, but
if thou waver and be in doubt, thou have lost it. Tithes good brethren are the
tribute of ye judgment and pore people: ca decim. 16. que, 1.
therefore give the poor their tribute, and the priests their offeringes. And
if perchance thou have no tithe corn, as has the husbandman, then thy wit
and thy ha^dy craft wherewith thou do sustain thy self, is Gods, and of that
thing thou do gain and get thy living withal, he does ask and require
tithes. Give him the tithes of thy wages, and lucre, which thou doeste gain in
warfare, the tithes of thy merchaundise, and of thy handy craft. For why? it is
a diverse thing yt we give and pay for the earth, then that we give for the
use of our life. Therefore o thou man, give it, because thou do possess it,
give it, because thou have deserved to be borne, for the Lord says thus: Every
man shall redeem his soul, and there shall be no sickness, nor no misaduenture
among the^. Thus thou have in holy scripture, Gods own writynge, wherewith he
does promise ye, yt if you pay thy thites, you shall not only have abundance of
fruit and corn, but also ye health of body. Thy barnes (says he) shall be full
of corn, and thy Pro, 33
winepresses shall redounde with wine, and there shall be no sickness among you.
Saying then, that by the true payinge of tithes thou may merit both the
earthlye and the heavenly reward: why do thou through covetousness defraude
thy self of such double benediction? Harken therefore unto me thou undevout
man. Thou knoweste well, that all that thou doste receive, is Gods, and will
thou then not lend the maker and geuer of all things part of his own? The
Lord has no neade, he does ask no reward, but honor vnlye, nor he does not
require, yt thou ^eue him any thing, that is thine. He vouchesafe to ask the
tithes of all things, and do thou o thou covetous man, say him nay? What
wouldeste thou do, if he had kept nine parts unto him self, and had left the
only the tenth part? the which thing verily is so chaunsed now, when that
thy corn for lack of rain is thin, and naughtes, thy vines, beaten with
hayle, and destroyed with froste and cold. O thou covetous man, what do thou
reken upon? nine parts are taken from thee, because thou would not pay the
tenthe. It is clear that thou never payest it, and yet God does demand it
and require it. This is gods most righteous custom and use, yt if thou do not
pay him his tenthe, thou shall be revoked and reduced to the tenthe. For it is
written: The Lord says, I ca. deci. 16. que, ^
saweit, and ye thought to begile me, but your treasure and your houses
shall be spoiled, thou shalt give the wicked soldier, that thou would not
give the priest. Return unto me (says the Lord om nipotente, yt I may open
the clouds for you, and sprede my benediction upon you, I will mala. 3,
not destroy ye fruits of your possessions, nor your wines shall not widder,
nor consume away, and al nations shall say, that ye are blessed. God is
always ready to do well, but the malitiousnes of man will not suffer him. For
man takes, that god should give him al thing, and yet he offreth not those
things unto him, the which he seems to possess. But what and God should
say, man whom I created and made, is mine, the earth yt thou do inhabit,
is mine, the seed that thou do sow is mine, the beasts which thou do
weary, are mine, ye dewes, and the rain are mine, and the heat of the same is
mine. Considering then that all the elements, whereby man does live, are mine,
thou that do only bestow thy labor do deserve the tenthe only. But
inasmuch as ye lord omnipotent does mekely nourysh us and feed us, he has
given a right great reward to ye laborer. For he, reserving only unto him
self ye tenthe, has given us ye rest. O thou unkind deceauer, and unfaithful
man, I speak unto the with the words of god. Behold and see, the year is gone
and paste, give the lord, that does send rain, his reward. O man redeem thy
self whileste thou have thy redemption in thy hand whilst thou art alive, and
whilst thou may. Redeem thy self, ye covetous death do not so prevent thee,
yt thou leave does life and reward. Thou do commit that thing unto thy
wife but in vain, yt which perchance will have another husband. Nor thou
woman do leave it but in vain unto thy husband, for he coueteth to have
another wife. Nor thou do commit ye care of thy soul but in vayn unto thy
kinsfolk, for there shall no man faithfully redeem nor aid the, after thou
be departed, because that thou being in prosperity, would not redeem nor
help thy self. Cast now o thou covetous manne this burden of auaritiousnes
from thy shoulders, despise this most cruel mistres, that does thus hardlye
yoke thee, nor will not suffer thee to accept and take the yoke of Christ
upon thee. For as the yoke of avarice is wont to thruste and to lead men to
the pains of hell: so the yoke of Christ is wo^t to lift men up, and to bring
the^ to ye joys of heaven. Tithes are required of duty, and he that denies
to pay the^, does invade and occupy other men's goods. And look how many
poor men die and perish there for hunger, where he yt will not pay his tithes
does dwell, he before the seat of the eternal judge, shall appear gyltye of
all their deaths, for as much as he kept that to his own use and store,
which God had prepared for ye pore. Therefore who so coueceth to obtain a re
or the forgeuenes of his sins, let him pay his tithes, and give of the other
nine parts his charity to the poor: and beware, yt whatsoever remains
above a mean and a reasonable living be not hurded up to luxurious and volup
tuous uses, but yt it by doing of good and charitable deeds, be laid up in the
celestial treasure. For whatsoever God does give us more then neadeth, he
gives it not specially unto us, but wills us to distribute and to give the
same unto other: for if we give it not, we invade and occupy other men's goods.

Of sorcery and witchecrafte Ser. xi. Ser 231

IT is not unknown unto you good brethren, that I have oftentimes prayed you,
and with all fatherly solicitude admonished you, yt in no manner of wise ye
should observe and keep these sacrilegius customer of paganes. But yet as
farforth as I do hear, my admonition has profited some of you but very
slenderly and little. But yet if I should not show you these things, at ye day
of judgment I should give but a slender and an heavy rekening, both for my
self and you. But I excuse and clear my self before God, when yt oftentimes
I do admonish and warn you, that ye should not seek upon these diuiners and
calkers, nor questen with the^ of any cause, or of any disease. Ye shall meddle with
no inchau^ters, Deuteronomy. 18
for whosoever does that evil, loses his christianite, and becomes a pagane,
and without he succur and aid him self with almose deeds, and with hard and
long penance, he shall be lost for ever. In like manner, look that ye take no
head to witch craft, And when ye be in your iorneye, regard not the singing
and chatterynge of birds, nor presume not upon their songs, to denunce or
show any deuillishe inchauntment or sorcery. Ye shall not observe nor mark
upon what day ye go for the of your house, nor when ye shall return home
again. For (as scripture does say) God made all the days. The first day is
made, and the second and the third, likewise the fourth, the fifth, the sixte,
and the Sabbath. And god made all things very good. Take Gene. 1.
head also, that ye observe not those sacrilegius and folishe nesinges. But as
often as ye must needs goo any where, bless your self in ye name of Christ
Jesus, and saying your creed, or else the lords prayer with good belefe take your
journey, being well assured, yt god shall help and prospere you. And when yt ye
shall begin (god willing) to contemn and despise al these foresaid sorceries
and sacrilegius 2, Pr, 2^
fashions, with such other wicked things, as Satan has deceived you withal.
then shall he take it grievously perceauing yt ye depart from his familiarytye
and feloushyppe, and shall work you some dyspleasure. For other he shall vex
you with infirmities and sickness, or else cause you by some diseases, or through
wandering and straing abroad, to lose part of your goods and cattle. And god
to prove you and to know, whether ye come faithfullye unto him or no, or
whether yt ye with al your hearts do despise the craftines of the devil, or set
more by his love, or by ye loss of your cattle, does suffer all this to chance
and happen. But if ye would with heart and perfect faith, once or twyse
despise such wickedness and misfortunes as satan does trouble you withal: god
would vouchesafe so to repel and withdraw him from troubling and vexing of you,
yt he with al his craft and subteltie, should never deceive you, if negligent and
lite persons of weak desires, and of slothful and cold faith begin
perchance to do well, they do not yet long continue therein. For after that they
have abstained from ye fore said inchauntme^ts, and witchecraftes, by and by
they repent the^ selves, ye ever they returned to god, and that they at any
time forsook the crafty suttelnes of the devil: and so return again to their
sorceres and witchecraftes, as a dog unto his vomit. But despise 2, Pe, 2^
you, unto whom god has given wisdom and faith, al his deceytfulnes, and
return faith fully again unto the Lord your god, and whatsoever satan does
send you, bear it pacie^tly and strongly, yt ye may say with the blessed man
Job: god gave it, and took it, as it pleased the Joh. 1.
lord, so it is. And yt in like manner ye may say with a ferme and a whole
heart with the Apostle: Who shall separate or divide us from the charity and
love of god? shall tribulation or anguishe, or persecution, or hunger, Romans 1.
other nakedness, or peril, or sweard? Good christen me^ can not be separated by
no torment from god. But such as be negligent, are now and then thoroughe idle
fables and words only separated and divided from god. And if they only suffer
never so little damage or loss, inco^tine^t they are slau^dred, and presume to
murmur against god, returning again to their wicked and detestable
witchecraft. But perchance some of you will say, what shall we do, co^sideri^g yt
such calkers through their knowledge, do oftentimes tell and show us ye truth?
Of this thing Deuteronomy 13
script ur does monish and warn us saying: Yea notwithstanding yt they do
show you the truth, yet believe the^ not. For ye Lord does prove you, whether
ye fear him or no. But a gain you do say: If there were not inchaunters, nor
no south sayers many a man, yt is bytte^ with serpents, or troubled with some
other sore disease, should otherwhyles dye and perysh. Truth it is dear
brethren, for god (as I have said before) does suffer the devil to do such
things, to prove good christian men withal, yt if at any time or season they do
by such sorcerye and wytchecrafte amend of their infyrmityes and diseases, or
come to ye know of any truth, they may thereby ye sooner give credence, and
believe the devil. But he yt does desire to observe and keep christ's religion,
must needs with his whole heart and mind depise al those things, fearing the
saying of the Apostle chiding us: ye observe (says he) Gala, 4
ye days, months, times, and years. I fear me, lest I have bestowed on you
labor in vain. See now, the Apostle says, yt who so has used witchecraft,
shall receive his doctrine in vain. And therefore fly and avoid as much as ye
ca^ or may, ye circu^uentions and the deceitfulnes of ye devil. And a boue al
things I would ye should know, that Satan can another hurt you, none of
youres, your cattle, nor yet the least part of your substance, but as
farforth as he has power and license of God. Nor he durst not destroy Jobs
substance, nor yet once Job. 1.
touch it, but that God did license and suffer him. And we read, that when
the euel spirits and deuilles were expulste math, 8.
and cast out of men, that they besought christ that he would suffer them to
enter into the heard of swyne, if the company of deuilles durst not enter into
the swyne without ye leave and sufferaunce of God, who will be so unfaithful to
believe that they can or may hurt good Christians, with out his dispensation
and sufferaunce. God both suffer it for two diverse causes, other to prove
whether we be good, or else to amend us, if we be synful. But he that will
patiently suffer gods dispensation, and say when he has lost any thing (as
I have told you) God gave it, and god has taken it, as it has pleased him,
so it is, blessed be Job. 1,
the name of God. He for this his patience most pleasant and acceptable unto
the lord, shall receive (if he be a good man) the crown of glory, or if he be
sinful indulgence and pardon of his sins. Take heed of this good brethren,
that wha^ Satan had destroted al Jobs substance, he said not God gave it, and
the devil has taken it. For the blessed man would not ascribe ne give no such
glory nor power to Satan, that he could take any thing from man, that God
suffered him not to take. Considering than that Satan could not hurt Jobs
children, his camels nor yet his asses, until it pleased god to suffer him:
why do we christians believe that he may do any more unto us, than that the
divine power by his godly and secret judgment does suffer him to do? And
therefore let us surly believe, that we can lose no more than God does suffer
to be taken from us. Let us with all our hearts there fore go unto his mercy,
and forsakinge these sacrilegius observations, let us trust continually upon
his aid and comfort, for he that believes in these foresaid euylles, that is,
in diuinations, sorsaries, philaters, or in any other manner of wytchecrafte,
notwithstanding he fast, pray go continually to the church, give large almose,
and punish his body with all affliction and pain, yet so long as he leueth
not these sorceries, it shall nothing avail him, for such wicked and sacrile
gius observations, do ouerturne and destroy all these good and virtuous
operations. Nor it can not avail them, that with these euylles, do that good
is. For it is true that ye Apostle says: a little leven 1. cor. 5,
sowreth the whole lompe of dowe. And this: ye can not drink of the cup of
God, 1, cor, 10,
and of the cup of the deuilles, ye can not be partakers of Gods table, and of
the table of deuilles. And he says. No man can serve two masters. math, 6,
Therefore if christen men do look thoroughe the grace of God to be saved, they
must make no vows to no trees, nor pray to no fountaynes, if any man
therefore have in his feildes, in his house, or ny unto his house, trees,
alters, or any other vain thing, where the poor, wretched, and simple people
are wont to make their vows, and does not hew them down, and destroy them,
he is and shall be partaker of al such witchcraftes and sorcery as is and shall be
committed there. And what a thing is this, that when any such tree, unto ye
which they were wont and accustomed to do sacrifice, do fall, that no man dare
gether it, to make them fire withal. I pray you to behold and mark the
wretchedness, and the folyshnes of man, the which doing honor to deed trees,
despise gods commandments. They dare not burn ye branches of trees, and yet
through inchauntmentes they cast themselves hedlyng into hell fire. And
therefore let him which hitherto has not don this evil, rejoice, be glad,
thank god therefore, and strive to continu faithfully in good works. But let
him that hitherto has delivered him self up to be entangled and taken with
such deuelyshe and enorme fashions, let him (I say) do penance, fly, and
withal fear despise those foresaid wytchcraftes, that god may forgive him,
and for the glory of his name, cause him to come to the everlasting bless of
heaven. And forasmuch as it is come to my knowledge, that as yet there are
some, ye which through simplicity and ignorance, or else thoroughe glutteny
(the which thing is most to be believed) fear not, nor are not ashamed to
eat of such sacrilegius meats as are yet after the use and custom of Paganes
offered up and bewitched: I denunce and straightly command you before god and
his angels, yt ye haunt nor com no more to no such diabolical dinners made in
any temple, or at any fountain, or tree. And likewise if any thing be sent you
from thens, fear it, and as though you saw the devil, refuse it, and so
refuse it, that ye suffer no manner of part of such sacrilegius banke^s to be
exhibited or brought into your houses, and that because of this saying of the
Apostle: ye cannot (says he) drink of the cup of God, and of the cup of
deuylles: ye 1, cor, 10,
can not be partakers of gods table, and of the table of Deuylles. And because
some are way, or ever I eat thereof, I do bless me. Let no man presume to do
so, for how does he that eats of such sacrilegius and wicked meats bless
his mouth, that puts a swearde to his own heart? For as the body is
slain with the sweard, so is the soul slain with such deuelyshe and wicked
meats. But we trust in the mercy and goodness of God, that he will vouchesafe
so to inspyre and inflame you to goodness, that the wickedness of the devil,
nether in other things, nor yet in these sacrilegius observations and
sorceries shall not come among you, but that ye shall fasten and fet all your
hope in God, nor never return again to their wicked abominations, our lord
Jesus Christ, whose empire and honor is infinite, grau^tynge the same. So be
it.

Of exchuynge and auoydyng of ebrietie and dronkennes. ^^^ 23^,
Ser. xii.
Although dear brethren, I do believe ye thorough ye mercy of God, ye do fear
the vice of drunkenness, even as ye do fear the deep pytte of hell: and that ye
your selves will not drink intemperatly nor over much: nor compel no another
man to drink more than needs: yet it can not be but that there be some
negligent persons, which will not be sober. But yet I pray you that do live
soberly not to be miscontent, nor yet to blame us, for needs we must blame and
accuse all such drunkardes. For notwithstanding my well beloved brethren that
drunkenness be a greauous vice, and much odious before God, yet among many it
is throughout all the world so customably and commenly used, that they which will
not know gods commandments, think and believe it to be no sin. Insomuche
that at all their bankettes, they do laugh them to skorne, that cannot drink
and quaft al out. And thoroughe an envious love and amity, they are not
ashamed to adjure and enforce men to drinck more then suffiseth. Truly it were
a less faut for him that makes a man drunken, to wound him, and to cut his
flesh with a sword, than to kyl and murder his soul with superfluity of
drink. And forasmuch as our bodies are made of earth, and that the earth, by
long and to much continuance of rain, is made moist, and so resolved into
mire and durte, that it can not be tylde nor sown: so in likewise, when our
flesh is to much moysted with drink, it cannot receive spiritual culture
nor tyllage, nor bring forth the necessary fruits of the soul. And therefore
as all men do desire sufficient rain for their feildes, to exercise tyllage
withal, and to rejoice in the abundance of fruit and corn, so in the field
of the body, men ought to drink that behooves only, lest that by the
superfluity and abou^daunce of drink, the earth of the body being reduced
and brought as into a plashe of mire, be more apt to bring forth the worms
and serpe^tes of vice, than the fruytes of good works. All drunkardes are
lykened unto fennes and plasshes, for your charity does know, that al such
things as grow in maras grounds, do bring forth no fruit, nor nothing else
but serpents, todes, and other diverse kinds of worms, more apt to fear man
withal, than to bring forth anyethyng that should profit him or his living.
For all such herbs and trees as do grow in fennes and plashes, or about the
banks of such places, seem to have no manner of utility or profyt in them,
insomuche that every year once men do burn them. Take good head, for the
thing which comes of drunkenness is prepared for the fire. And even such (as I
have said) be al drunkardes, whose diners endure and continue all the day
long, and their suppers until the morning. The which when they seem to be
most sober, can scasely stand, whose senses are slow, ponderous, dull, and in
a manner buried. Finally in their usual and customable drunkenness, they another
know them selves, nor yet no another man, they can another walk nor stand nor
hear, nor say any thing that does pertayne or stand with reason Nor they are
not ashamed to drink, and to fyl the^ selves till they vomit again, and to
drink by measure, without measure. They provide for great goddardes, and
strive, as by a certain law, how they should drink, and he that can out
drink, or overcome his fellow, shall be for his euel doing greatly exalted and
praised. Of this thing does grow and ensue strife and debate, and diverse
horible lepes, whereby the body is much troubled. Of this does chance and
follow adultery and somtymes murder. And as often as they do take excess of
drink, their stinking and filthy bodies (as though they were smytten with
the paiseye, having not the use of their feet) are feign to be borne, and
carried to bed, with other men's hands, their syghte waxethe dim, they are
pained with the swimming of the head, and with the head ache, their
countenance is drousy, their members quake and tremble, they are astonnied and
duly, both in soul and body. In these men is fulfilled that is written.
Where is woe? where is strife and debate? where ^ro, 31,
are snares and deceitfulnes? Where are wounds without cause? where be these
blouddy eyes? Are not these among those yt be cuppy, and that study to drink
all out? But yet they that will be such, go about to excuse them selves full
wretchedly, saying: Iloue not my friend (says he) if I as often as I do call
him to dynner, do not give him as much as he lusts to drink. Let him not be
thy friend, that will make the gods enemy, for he is an ennemie to the, and also
unto him self if thou make thy self and thy friend drunken, he shall be thy
friend, and God thine enemy. Therefore take good head whether it be well done or
no, to leave God, and to apply, and join thy self to a drunkard. But yet cause
him not to ^weare, nor compel him not, but leave it to his own free will, to
drink as much as it shall please him, and if he will over drink him self,
that he perysh alone, rather than ye should perysh together. O the infelicitie
of mankind, how many are there found that in force these drunkardes, and
luxurious persons to drink more than ^e adeth? and yet before their doors
they do dissemble to give the poor man any thing at al, asking him only a
cup of cold water. Nor they take no head that Christ should have that for
the nedye and poor, that they give to the luxurious, saying: That ye have
done math. 25
to the least of mine, ye have done it unto me. But al such when they drown
other me^ with drink, do say to the poor man asking his alms, go hense go,
god shall send you. And truly, as long as men walk. God will send them.
Then what other thig is it, that he says, get you hense, god shall send you,
but go to him that has God, for God will give him. And so he confesses with
his own mouth, that God is not with him, by whose inspiration he should give
somewhat to the pore and nedye. I pray you derely beloved brethren, diligently
to take heed and mark, that after that the brute beasts, being led and
brought to the water, have once satisfied and quenched their thyrste, stand
they never so long in the water, yet theiwil drink no more, no nor they can
drink no more. Let now these drunkardes consider, wether they be not to be
judged worse than beasts? The beast will drink no more tha^ needs, but these
bibbers take double and trible more tha^ ever shall do them good. And the thing
which might have served the^ well, three or four days, for very envy, or else
for very dronkennes they with great sin go about rather to lose and consume it
all upon one day, then liberallye and virtuously to spend it. And would to
god that they lost their drynk only, so that they lost not them selves
withal. O what evil is in ebriete and drunkenness? King Pharao other upon envy,
or else through Gen, 40,
ebrietie, caused his master baker to be trust up, and hanged. The Jews (of
who^ it is written) sat down to eat and to drink, and stood up again to
play: after they had drunken more the^ neded they caused idols to be made, and
in the worship of them, Exd. 32,
they daunsed, and like mad men troubled them selves with diverse sorts of
gamboldes. And Herod after yt he was welheted with wine, for the plesaunt
daunsynge of a maid, commanded John Baptyst math, 14
to be siayne. What other vicious things do rise and spring of drunkenness, the
holy ghost does witness by Solomon, saying: Wine and women Eccl, 19.
reprove wise men, and cause them to leave, and to forsake God. And again:
Behold not wine when it sparckleth Pro, 23,
and shyneth through ye glass, for it goes down very gentely, but at the last
it shall bite the like a serpent, and stinge yt like an adder. Thine eyes shall
behold other men's wives, and thy heart shall think wyckedly. And the Apostle s.
Paul does likewise monysh and warn us of the evil of drunkenness, saying: Be
not drunken with wine, wherein Ephe. 5.
is excess. We do show you even euidentlye by scripture, that love to be
dru^ken, what euel is co^prysed therein. Who so deliteth in wine and fat Prou. 21
morselles, shall not be rich. And again. Neither give thou to much wine to
kings, for there is no secretnes Prou. 31
where drunkenness does reygn, lest that they through drunkenes forget
judgment, executyng the law unjustly upon the pore. Also he says. That a
drunken workman shall never be rich. And again: Eccle. 19
if ye drink wine mesurably, thou shalt be sober. Item, wine at the beginning
was created in ioyfulnes, and not in drunkenness. Wine so verly received and
taken, is the pleasure both of body and Eecl. 31.
foul, but wine immeasurably used and taken, is the setting forth of
drunkenness, the offention and hurt of wise men, and the feeble shynge of man's
force and strength. But when we motion and make mention of these things, these
bybbers and drunkardes paraduenture are angery withal, and do murmur against
us. But although there be which are moved, and angrye withal, yet good
willing, there be that hear and receive this good counsel, and yt shall
through gods mercy, be delivered from this horrible and wicked sin of
ebrietie. Yet such as be moved with us, speakinge against their familiar
friend drunkenness, shall hear this one thing of us, that whosoever he be that
penitentlye does not bewail his ebrietie, but continues therein until he
die, without doubt he shall be lost for ever. For ye holy ghost seeing this by
the holy Apostle, cannot lie. Nether drunkardes shall inherit the kingdom 1,
Cor, 6,
of god. And therefore it were better for them to be angry and woued with them
selves, then with us, and so be yng, they shall through the grace of God,
soon deliver them selves from the filthy and dyrty cannell of drunkenness. And
therefore whiles they have time, let them through the help and aid of God,
arise with all have, and besechynge God with their hole hearts, say thus with
the Prophet: Pluck me out Psalm, 6^
of this dyrt, that I stycke not fast in it. And thus: And that the tempest of
the water do not drown me, nor the depenes swalow me. For whosoever that
drunkenness, the very pytte of hell, does once receive and embrace, does so
challenge them, that without penance and good amendment do ensue and follow,
it shall never suffer them to return from the obscurite and darkness thereof,
unto the light of charity and sobernes. But above all other things we must
understand and know that it is not one day alone that makes drunkards, but
the daily renuynge and multipliynge of cups, our most enemies, rather than
our fre^des, adiurynge and compelling us unto the same, but after they have
once put it in use and custom, the heat of drunkenness does so kidle, and
invade them that it inforsythe the^ to be always thristye. But he that does
desire to be delivered from this vice, even as he aproched and came to ye
darckenes, and vice thereof through the encrecement of drink: so by the
diminition of the same, he may by little and little return to the light, and
virtue of sobernes. For if he should with draw at once his excess of drinking
he eue^with heuines when he is most feruentlye athriste, would cry out and
say, that he had rather be dead, tha^ to forsake his customable drinking, and
dronkennes, no thing considering, that it were far more tolerable, that the
body should die, than that the soul through ebriete, and excess of drink
should peryshe for ever. And therefore to avoid the sufferaunce and pain of
such hete, and to be delivered from such torments, as he suffers: let him
(as I have said) daily diminishe somewhat of that excess, and superfluity,
until he become to a reasonable ways and custom of drinckynge. For he that
will (as I have said) diminyshe and debate this thing, shall be delivered of
his darkness, nor shall no more suffer such intolerable pain. Now good
brethren I declaring and she wyng you these things, do quite and unburden my
self before God. And whosoever he be, that is inclined to ye exces of drink,
and despises to here me, or that his table will adjure and compel men to
drink, he shall at the day of judgment give a rekeninge both for him self
and them. And because there be certain preistes (the which should prohibit and
forbydde such things) that enforce and compel men to drink more than needs,
let them from henseforth begin to correct and to amend them selves, and so to
chaste^ other, that they when they shall appear before god, suffer not for
their own drunkenness, and other men's to: but that through their own
amendment, and the correction of other, they may merit to come to the eternal
and ever lasting reward. And of this I do desire you above al things, yea and
adjure you by the fearful day of judgment, yt ye, (as often as ye do bankette
one another) avoid and fly as poysen, that heinous and fylthy custom, by the
which ye other willingly, or against your wills, are wont to drink by great
mesure with out mesure. For this unhappy custom does yet continu and remayn of
the custom and usage of Paganes. And who soever he be that consents that
this custom of drinking and quafcing, other at his own table, or at any other
man's, be used, let him not doubt but that he does sacrifice to ye devil. By
the which bybbing and quafting, the soul of man does not only peryshe, but
also the body is greatly and much fe blished with all. But I hope that God of
his tender mercy, shall vouchesafe so to inspire you with grace, yt this most
shameful and lamentable vice shall so abhor you that you shall never suffer it
to be used more: but that all such things as should be spent in such drunken
superfluite, shall be spente and go to the releife and refresshynge of the pore,
our Lord Christ Jesu grauntingthe same, the which does live and reign with
the father and the holy ghost for evermore.

Amen.
Imprinted at London in Powles church yard at the sign of the holy ghost by
Ihon Cawood, Prynter to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


