Certain Sermons of saint Augustines translated out of latin, into English,
by Thomas Paynell.

Anno domini 1, 5, 5, 7.

The Table.
1 WHy the ^estes of Saints are celebrated, and with what priueleges the
So^day above al other is honored. 2 Of a christen nam^ and what (...) aught to
do and ^^se^ue that bears a christen name. 3 Of a christen name, and that a
christian shu^d often t^nes ^h^^ke, why ^e is named a christen man and why ^e
bears the ^rosse of Christ in his forethe^^. 4 Of the m^sterit, f^ute and
^a^er of ^asting in lent. 5 Of fasting in lent, and al^es* dtdes. 6 Of
con^ession and penance. 7 Of faur^en^er ronfession. 8 Of Penance. 9 Of afmose
deeds. 10 Of the chastity that oug^^ and should be between man and wife. 11 Of
the fire of purg^tory* and how it purgyth not m^rtall but he^^ll synn^^. 12 Of
chastity and clean (...). 13 Of peace and unity. 14 Of archuinge and auoydinge
of (...) and dronkennes. 15 Of sorte^ye and wytch^ra^e. 19 Of the true p^yui^n
^of (...). 17 (...) su^^^nd of ^^ynt ^erna^^e, o^ the s^pper of our ^o^he.
To the most virtuous Lady and most gratyous Queen Marie, daughter un to the
most victorious and most noble prince king Henry the.viii. king of England,
france and Ireland, Thomas Paynyll wysheth most prosperous health and
felicity.
Although our savior christ Ihesus does affirm his yoke and command Mat,
1^
me^ts, to be sweet, and easy to be observed and borne: yet how many (most
excellent Lady do at this present allow, or admit y^ saying? ye how many do
admyt and affirm y^ contrary: For say they not that it is for any man or
woman impossible to live chaste? to love their enemies, to live soberlye or
Christianlye? O God, how is Usury and Symony cloked? how is intemperate living
used and esteemed? How do men keep the chastity of Matrimonye: How do men pay
unto God and his mynisters their tithes? what charitable deeds, what fruitful
penance, yea, what murder, adultery, and fornicacion, what bybbynge, and
bancketynge, clean contrary to Gods commandments is there used? For now to
drink sunder snoeuen is a virtue, to keep a concubyne, is not much blamed, to
seek upon caulkers and diuiners is comenly used, to be proud, is accepted for
clenlynes, to be auaricious, for proulde^ee, to be crafty and deceytful, for
polycie, to spend and waste, for good fellowship, to skoffe and ieste, for a
point of civility, to flatter, is taken for intier love and amity. O Lord
shall these men come to thee everlasting be atitude? shall they se the King in
his estate and majesty? no verily. Who then? He that lives iustlye, Esaias, 33
and speaks thee truth: he that abhors to do injuries couetously, and
remoueth away his hands from gifts, he y^ stops his ears, least he
here the deceytefull oppressyon of the innocents blood, and that shuts his
eyes, lest he se evil: this man shall inhabit places, and se the king in his
glorious estate. Why do not men follow the sayings and words of the prophet?
Why do they not ensue the doctrine of famous doctors and preachers? There was
never more sincere and true preaching, than is now of late, nor the word of
God more spoken of, then is in these our days. But so much preaching, and so
little following, so much exhortacion to charity, and so feable and weak love,
so much persuasion to souccoure and aid the poor, and so great pouettie, so
much good counsel given to ense we virtue, and so little apprehended and used,
was never seen. Why so? For every man (as now y^ world is fashioned) be he
never so rude and unlearned, will be his own doctor, his own interpreter of
scriprure, and follow his own sense and opinion, his own manner of living and
pleasure, clean contrary to al wisdom, reason, and good learning. The old
ancient fathers, and true interpreters of Gods holy word, the masters of
virtuous and godly conversation, are among many little or no thing regarded.
What were they (say they) but men as we be? Truth it is: but yet far more
excellent both in learning and virtuous operations tha^ we be: blyssed
martyrs, holy confessors, the chosen servants and vessels of God, the
ensuers of his steps and statutes, the reprouers of vice, men of most perfect
life, and the sincere preachers and expounders of the word of God. For who is
he living that (as for an ensample) in subtilite of wit, in profounde learning,
in clear declaration of scripture, or in godly example, that may becompared
unto S. Augustine? Whose warkes are incomparable, and singular in all kinds of
good iearnynge: and to reduce man from vice to virtue, from the active, to the
contemplatyue life most excellent. Out of whose sermons, to admonish and
revoke the people from their dyssolute and vicious lyuinge, and to put them
in remembrance of their duetye and unthankfulness toward god: I have
selected and translated these certain sermones, the which in mine opinion and
mind, are most worthy, and most necessary to be known and had in memory,
but to be followed, much more necessary. Desiring your hyghnes thankfully to
accept this my rude translation. Rude it is (I confess) and barbarous,
because I would be plain unto the plain and simple people, the which thing
(as I conjecture) is not far amiss nor yet greatly to be blamyd.

(...), 252*
Why the feasts of saints, are celebrated, and with what priueleges the
Sunday above all other is honored (...). Ser.
YE must understand and know, my dereli belouid brethren, that for this cause
our holy fathers appointed, and commanded all christen men upon the solempe
festes of Saints, and specyallye upon the Sonnedayes, to be at rest, and
void, from all earthly besynesses: to thinte^t they might be the redier, and
more prompte to serve and honor God, having no impediment or let to withdraw
them from the same, and that for that time, they should leave and avoid al
earthly solicitude and care, that yt more easily they might inte^d to do the
will of god. And therefore our Lord says by his prophet, be at rest, and
behold for I am the lord. But they which are let tid with diverse cares and
businesses, do despise this sentence, nor will not give them selves to godly
contemplacyon: and I fear me that at domes day, when they shall knock at our
Lords door, and desire it to be opened unto them, he shall answer, Uerely I
say unto Luce, 13
you, I know you not, anoid from me ye workers of Iniquity. And they that
now neglecte to seek for god* shall then be refus^d. And therefore my brethren
let it not be molestyus nor grieve you, upon the sondayes, and the natyuities of
Saints, to honor God. For the Apostyles and men Apostolical did therefore
apoynte the Sunday to be religiouslye obseruyd, Mat. 28
because our redemer as upon that day, did rise from death to life, the
which is therefore called the Sunday or the day of our lord, that absteining
as upon that day from earthelye works, and worldelye inticementes, we may
only serve and honor God, geuyng unto this day for the hope of
oureresurrection, the which we have in it, all honor and reverence for as
our lord Jesus Christ and Savior has rysyn from death* so we do hope that
at the latter day we shall rise. It aperyth like wise in holy scripture, that
this day is solemn. For it is the first day of the world. For upon this day
the elements of the (...), (...)*
world were formid and made, and in it the Aungells were ^^^atyd, and the self
same Mat, (...)
day* Christ rose from death, and in it the holy spirit of God, dyscended
from heaven (...), (...)
upon the dyscypies, and even upon this day, manna was geuyn from heaven in
wilderness, with these documents and such other tokens, yt Sunday is very
excellent and noble, and therefore the holy doctors of the church have
decrede, that all the glory of the Jews sabote, should be translate into the
So^day that we in verity and truth, may celebrate that they celebratyd in
figure: for then shall be our true rest, when the resurrection shall be fully
endyd and our remuneration and reward both in body and soul made perfytte.
Let us therefore observe the Sunday my brethren, and sanctifye it, as it was
commanded to our elders of ye sabbot day, the geuer and maker of the law
saying unto them. From the euyntyde until y^ Leui, 23
nyxte even, ye shall celebrate your Sabbotes. Let us therefore take heed, that
our rest be not in vain, but that we from Saturday at even until Sunday at
even, being sequestrated from all rusticail and other busynesses, give our
selves oneli to the service and honor of God, for so doing we do justly
sanctify the Sabbot day of our lord, sayng. He shall do no manner Exo, 20*
of work upon the Sabbote day. Therefore let every man if it be possible come
unto Euynsonge, and Mattyns, and pray there in the assemble and congregation
of the church unto god for his sins, And if he cannot so do, let him pray
at home, not neglecting to pay his vow unto GOD, and to render the task or
pensy^n of his service. Let no man upon the Sunday separate himself from
the holy celebration of masses, nor no man all other coming to the church,
shall tarry idle at home: nor occupye him self in huntinge, nor give him self
to de ue^^she occupatio^s and works, wandringe about the teldes and wods:
laughing and halowing, never sorowing nor praying from the botome of his heart
unto God, yea and yet further, the whithe thing is most detestable. Some there
be that coming do not enter into the church, they ge^^ not them selves to
prayer, they tarry not in silence the holy celebratio^ of masses, but when the
holy lessous ar a readyng within, they with out are pleadyng their matters, or
study to defend them selfs, with diverse false accusations or else they give
them selfs to dyce, or to other unprofitable pastimes and sports. Some times
truly (which is worse) they are so kyndlyd and chafyd with excessive anger,
that they braule most bit terlye, and run upon each other with swords and
gleues, and often times commit murder. And this principallye is done by those,
the which being full of envy, and hatred, the Devil being their gide, go unto
the Church, not to help the^ selves, but to hurt other. And if such me^ be
murdered there, or preuentyd by soden death, whether go they else but with him
into eternal torment, whose fotesteps they ensude and followed. O my brethren
do not these things, do not deceive your selves, give no place to the Devil,
in your assebles, but rather prepare and make your selves, a dwelling place
for Christ, Therefore give not your selfs without to fables, but within the
Church to psalmodi and prayers, braul not one with a another in the church but
be quiet. There are many, and specially women, the which do so chatter, and in
such wise do braule in the church that they nether here the divine lessons
them sefes, neither suffer other to hear them. Should there be such meting with
such an order in gods house? or is it decent or comelye so to assyste and stand
in the sight of god, and of his holy angels? And yet I will further complain
me with you, y^ which thing is generallye to be seruid and morenyd. For why
there are certain, and specyallye the great estates of this world, the which
coming unto the church, are not devout and ready to laud and praise God,
but to constrayne the priest to abreuiat his mass, and to sing as it shall
please them: nor it is not lewefull for him thrughe their glotonye and
couitusnes to follow the ecclesiastical fashyon and manner: so that one little
moment of the day, should be deputed and suffyse to the service of God, and
the rest of the day and the night to their voluptuousnes plesurs. Do not
these things my well belouid brethren nor consent not to those that so do. For
they peryshe not only that do these things, but they also that consent
unto the doers of the same. Therefore beware before all thing, that ye nether
plead nor judge no matters upon the festiual and holy days: but at other
times and with justice. And that ye through receuing and taking of gifts,
subuerte not just indgement, for according to y^ sentence and mind Mat. 7,
of our lord, with what judgment ye judge other, ye shall be judged. Let no man
drink him self dronken, for a dronkerd is most like unto a mad man. drink so
among men, that ye blurre not your names out of heaven. There are many (the
which thing is very evil) that not only inebriate and mystemper them selves,
but also compel and adjure other, to drink more then is expediente, where of
there arises very often among them braulyng and murder. Do ye not way my
brethren, whose will and mind these men do ensue and follow? Drunkerds, says
the apostle 1, Cori, 9
and murderers shall not possess the kingdom of GOD. I beseech you
miwelbeloued fathers, mothers, brethren and systers, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and by his kingdom and judgment that is to come, that ye with
draw your selves from all me^ that walk and live inordinately, and that ye
walk worthily in the vocation ye are called unto, nor that ye neglecte not
your honor, nor little esteem your redemption which is in Jesu Christ. Year
called the sons of god because the very son of god delivered you, give
your stodye and dyligence with good manersto please so great a parent, that he
deliver you not as most wicked servants to perpetual pain: but led and
conducte you as most de rest children unto the supernall cuntrye, to be the
heirs of Jesu christ his son, with whom he lives and and reigns god in
the unity of the holy ghost, world without ^n^e.

Amen.
Ser, 215
Of a Christen name: And what he ought to do and observe that bears a christen
name. ii. Ser.
I Pray you my most dearly and well-beloved brethren that with all our study
and diligence: we call to our remembrance, whi and where fore we be named and
called Christians, and whi we bear the cross of Christ in our fore heads. For
truly we ought to know, that it is not suffici ente to receive the name of
Christen men, except we do the works of Christians. For what does it avail
says our lord, to call me lord, lord if ye fulfill not my commandments? if
thou name thy ^oke, 6,
self a Christen souldear, and contynuallye doste bless thy self with the
cross of Christ, and after thine habylitie and substannce, doeste no alms
deeds, nor regardest not charity, justice, nor chastity, thy christen name
shall nothing avail the. The sign and cross of Christ, is a thing most
excellent, and therefore with this most precious signacle and seal, that
thing which is most precious, ought to be sealed. For what does it avail
or profit the, to make a seal of a ring of gold, if thou close putrified
and rotten straw therein? Or what does it advantage us to wear, or to have
the cross of Christ in our foreheades and mouths, and in wardly in our
souls to have and hyde sin: he that thinks euel, speaks evil and if he
that blesses him self? will not amend, his sins decreace not, but rather
augment and increace. There be that when they goo about theft, or adultery, if
they stu^ble never so little, they do bliss the^ selves, but yet they stay
not them selves from their evil works and purposes. Nor the wretches
perceive not yt in so doing, they do rather include the devil then that they
exclude him. But he which through the aid of god does reiecte and repel all
vicious and sinful lyuinge: and stryuethe both to think upon that is good,
and to do good, he does well and iustlye bliss his mouth with the sign and
token of the cross, and endeuer him self to do such works, as shall
deserve and merit to have, and to receive yt sign and token of the cross.
For it is written. The kyngedome 1, Cor^, 4
of heaven is not in words, but in power, and good works. And again, faith
with out good works is dead in it self. Therefore least that Jam, 2,
peradventure we have not this Christen name to our aid and amendment, but to
our utter damnation and de struction (let us, whiles that we have remedy, and
help in our own hands) return unto good works. And to the eutent ye may
(through the help of God) accomplysh and do those things, look that there
be peace and concord among you: and that ye reduce and bring those that are
at strife and debate, to peace and vnyti^. Avoid and fly allesyngs. Excheue
perjury as perpetual and mortal death. And above al things look that after
your ability as is aforesaid, ye ex hibite and give your charity to the
poor and nedy, and that ye offer up your oblations to be consecrated upon the
altar. Look that ye can say pour belief, and the lords prayer, and that
ye teach your children the same. For I marvel very much, how they dare be
so hold, as once to name them selves christians, that do dissimble to say a
few verses only of their creed, or of the lords prayer. Like wise ye shall
understand, that for those children the which ye do Christen, ye are as
suerties unto God: and therefore be circumspecte to correct and chasten as well
those which ye do Christen, as your own natural children, that they may
live chastely, soberly, and justly. And beware that your life be such that
your children, if they will follow you, burn not in the eternal fire, but
that they may approach and come with you to the perpetual bliss of heaven.
Take you heed, that do here, and judge men's causes, that ye judge ryghteously,
and that ye take no gif Psa, 14, Exed, 23
tes of the poor. For gifts do blind wise men's hearts, and doo^ change and
alter Eccl, 20,
the words of the prudent and wise, lest peradventure, whiles ye get and heap
up monye, ye lose your souls. For no man can get unlawful gain without
laweful pain and damage, for where is luker, there is loss, luker in the
cheste, and damage in conscience. Let no man drink to be dronken, nor compel
any other at his table to drink more than needs, lest that through ebrietie
and dro^kennes, he lose both his own soul, and theyrs also. Look that ye come
together to the church upon the sunday, for if the wretched Jews do keep and
sanctifye their sabbath day, with such devotion as one that day, they will do
no earthly work at all: how much more should we christen men on the sundaye,
give and apply our minds to gods service and to come to yt church for the
salute and saluatyon of our own souls. And when ye come together, pray for
the remission of your sins, Make no strife there, nor no debate, for who so
coming to the church, does so, he tho row debate, does wound and hurt him
self there, where he might have healed, and helped him self by prayer. And
being in the church, beware and look that ye braule not, but that ye patiently
do liste^ and take good head to your divine service. For he yt does iangle or
babble in the church, shall give an acountes and rekenyng, as well for other, as
for him self, because he would neither here GODS sword, nor yet suffer other
men to here the same. Look that ye truly pay your tithes to the church. And
let him that was proud, wax humble, that was lecherous, wax chaste, that was
wont to siele or to invade other men's goods, give his charity to the poor.
Let him that has been envious, be beneuolent and gentle, and that has done
iniurye, be ready and quick to ask forgeuenes, and that he to who^ iniurye
was done unto, be priest and ready to forgive. As often as any infit mitie or
sickness does chance among you, let him that is diseased receive the holy
communion of the very body and blood of Christ, and afterward be aneled,
that scripture may be fulfilled in hymsayinge: if any man be sick, let the
priest be sent Jam, 5,
for to anointe him, and to pray over him, and the prayer of faith shall save
the sick, and God shall raise him up, and if he be in sin, they shall be
forgeuen him. Take heed, and mark now good brethren, that he, the which in
his syckenes will resort unto the church, may obtayn bodily health, and receive
the forgeuenes of sins. Seeing then that double goodness and benefit may be
found and obtained in the church whi do these wretches labor Deu. 18,
by inchaunters, by fountaynes, by trees, by diuilysh philaters, be caracters,
by dyuiners, and sothesayres, to induce much mischeife among the people? But as
I have said unto you before, look that ye do admonish and warn your
children, and all your household to live chastely, and ryghteously, prouokyng
and sturringe them to good works, not only by words, but by your godly and
good example. But principally whersoeuer ye be, whether ye be at home, or in
your iourneye, or at the table, or among company, take heed ye speak no
fylthy, no luxurious, nor no light words: but that ye admonysh your
neighbors and kynsfolk, continually to endeuer the^ selves, to speak the
thing that is good and honest, lest that through detraction, or daunsynge
upon the holy days, or by babbling and recitinge of luxurious and filthy
communication, they with their tounges (wherewith they should laud and honor
God) do wound and hurt themselves. For if these wretched and miserable
persons, which are not ashamed to dance before y^ churches of holy saints,
come thither good christians, they depart from thence as infidels, for this use
and custume of daun sing does yet remain of the obseruaunces, and infide
litie of the gentyles. And po^der with your selves what manner a christian
that he is the which coming to the church to pray, and forgettinge the
same, is not ashamed to speak the sacrilegius words of paganes. Consider my
dearly beloved brethren, whether it be semynge or couenient: that such
luxurious and light words, ye very poison of ye devil, should proceed or come
forth of christen men's mouths, into the which the sacrament of the very body
and blood of christ does enter and is received. And above all things, take heed that ye do unto other, Tobi, 4,
as ye would be done unto, and Mat. 7,
that ye would other men should not do unto you, that ye do it not unto
them, the which thing if ye would truly and faythfullye observe and
fulfill: ye should easelye deliver your souls from all sin for he that has
no learning at all, and has these two sentences in mind and memory, may by
Gods help and grace, in deed fulfill them. And notwithstanding, I do
believe that the aforesaid evil and noughty custom, proceeding of the
obseruances of paganes, be through my words, and gods inspiration, clean
avoided, yet if ye know any that abserue and keep that most abominable
fylthynes of the fawn, and y^ heart, look that ye so chasten, and so correct
them, that they may repent them that ever they committed such a
sacrilegious, and so abominable a deed. And if ye know any such as do cry
out, if the moon at any season, through any eclipse does wax obscure and
dark, warn the^therof, and show them, that thy sin and offend greuouslye,
if they do trust, that through their clamours and sacrilegius boldness, they
may defend themselfes from the Moon (the which by Gods commandment and
ordinance at certain and appointed times does wax dark) or from any other
sorcerye or wytchecrafte. And if ye see or perceive any that offer up their
vows unto trees, or unto any fountains, or that hang about them or any of
theyrs any diabolical philaters, or caracters, herbs or the ioyse of any
herb, or that (as I have said) do seek upon sothsayres, diuiners, or
inchaunters: correct them sharpelye, and say unto them that all that so do, do
lose the sacrament of baptysme. And in as much as we have hard say, that Satan
has so deceived both men and women, that they will not work upon the
thursday. I proteste both before God, and his holy angels: that except they
which observe those things amend and redeem such sacrilege with long and
sharp penance, that they shall be dampened for ever. Nor I doubt not but y^
such wretches, the which as in the honor of Jupiter, will not work upon
the thursedayes will not be ashamed at al, nor yet fear to work and labor upon
the sundaye. And therefore take heed, that ye earnestly do chaste^ as many as
ye know that do so. And if they will not amend, suffer them another to
speak, nor to eat, nor yet once to drink in your company. And if they be
belonging unto you, or of your familye, scourge them that they at the least,
which remember not their souls health, may fear the punishment of their
bodies. I my dear brethren, remembering your manifold perils and dangers,
do thus tenderlye warn and admonish you, if ye then willingelye do harken
unto me, ye shall come to perpetual joy and life ever lasting, the which he
vouchsafe to grant you, that with the father and the holy ghost does live
eternally. So be it.

Se^^ 216
Of a Christen name, and that a Christian should often times think, why he is
named a Christen man, and why he bears the cross of christ in his forehead.
Ser. iii.
I Do rejoice mi most derelye beloved brethren, and do thank God, that I have
deserved to find you in good health. And truly my brethren a father does
ryghteouslye, and not without a great cause rejoice, as often as he does find
his children healthful in body, and devout in the fear of God. And in as much
as the goodness of God has granted me double gladenes, as well of youres. as of
mine own health, I must now open and declare unto you the thing which
pertayneth, and is for the utility and health of your souls. It is very
necessary dear brethren, that with all our intention and mind we should study
to inquire and understand, why and wherefore we be Christians, and why we
bear the cross of Christ in our foreheaddes. He must understand and
perceive good brethren, that we are not made Christians to be careful for this
life. For (as says y^ Apostle) (...), Co, 25,
if we in this life only do believe and trust in god, then are we of all
other the most wretched and miserable. For he that does think only upon
this life, is compared and likened unto a beast. For what other thing do
beasts care for, but only to eat and drink, to sleep, and to live
voluptuouslye? And even such as are all they that think moore upon their
bodies, then upon their souls, that love gluttony and lecherye. more then
justice or chastity. Therefore my dearly beloved yemust understand, and
know that we are made christians to think continually upon the eternal
world, and reward that is to come, and to labor more for the soul, then for y^
body. Our flesh shall continue but for a few years in this would, but our
souls (if we live and do well) shall inherit heaven wtoute end. But if we do
evil works, (that God forbid) and labor more for bodily pleasure, then for
the health or salvation of our souls, I fear me that when good men shall be
received with the aungelles unto eternal life, that we (that god forbid)
shall be cast headlyng into hell fire. Good brethren: it is not enough that we
have received a christen name, except that therewith, we do good christian men's
works. To him it is right profitable to be called a christian, that loves
chastity, that exchueth ebrietie, that abhors pride, and that as very
poison does reject envy. He is a right good Christen man, that stealethe not,
that bears no false witness, that lies not, that uses no perjury, that
commits no adultery, that does frequente the church, that does not taste
of his fruytes, until he first have offered part of the^ unto God, that does
pay his tithes yearelye, to be distributed among the nedy, that does love his
curate, and honors preistes, that loves every man as him self, and hates
no man. Uerelye he is not only a christen man that does fear and exchewe as
the sword of Satan, deceitful weyghtes, and double measures, but christ him
self does also dwele in him. He is a good christian, that coming to the
church, does exhibit and offers up his offeringe and that after his
possibility and substance, does give a penny, or a morsel of bread to some
poor man, that receyuyth the pore into his house: that wassheth the pore men's
fete, that does not only make no debate, but reduces such as are at discord
and strife, to unity and concord, that does show reverence, and y^ love of
unfeigned charity un to his friends and elders, that does live chaste, and
admonynysheth his children, and his neighbors with word and deed, in sobriety
and chastity. He is a good Christen man, that as often as the holy and solemn
feasts draw nere, does certain days before, abstain and keep chastity
with his wife, that the more conveniently, and with a more sincere and sure
conscience, a chaste body, and a clean heart he may come unto the Lords board
and table. And he likewise that can the lords prayer, and his creed by rote,
and that faithfully does teach his children the same. Now good brethren ye
have herd who be good christians, and therefore let us with Gods aid and
help, do the best we can or may, that this christen name be not wrongfully
and vaynely in us, and that Christ's sacraments suffer no injury in us, but in
heart let us continually think up pon good Christen works, and in deed
fulfill them. For I pray you, what manner a Christian call ye him, y^ scarcely
comes once to the church, and yet when he comes does not stand up to
pray for his sins and misdedes, but to prate and babble, to cause strife and
debate, or else to drink, if he may find a convenient place, till he vomit
again? and after that he has well dronken, ryseth up like a mad man, to
leap and dance, and to sing luxurious and filthy songs of love. Such a
one does not fear another to steal, nor yet to commyt adultery, to give false
wytnes, to curse, nor yet to commit perjury. But whether they be men or women
that exercise and do such ungodly works, they nether receive the name of a
christian, nor yet the sacrament of baptysme, to their aid and consolation,
but to their judgment and damnation, And without they repent them and do
penance, they shall peryshe for ever: Now good brethren I have opened unto
you, whoo be good, and who be evil chrystians. And therefore follow those that
ye se and perceive to be good: and chasten, chyde, and correct those ye know
to be naught yt through your own utility and their amendment, ye may have
and obtain doble reward. For they that are good chaste, sober, humble, and
gentle, will by the grace of God, continue iu their good and godly works, and
the myslyuers, quyckelye or ever they depart from hence, a mend them selves,
for if they die without repentance, they shall not come to joy, but to
perpetual and everlasting death, from the which God vouchsafeto deliver us.
So be it.

Ser, 46.
Of the misterye, fruit, and manner of fasting in Lent. iiii. Ser.
WE ought to esteem and suppose ye whole time of our life, to be a place to
exercise virtue in, and with all virtue to strive to come to the celestial
reward, But that must and ought most specially to be done and fulfiled in
this holy time and days of Lent: the which days being hallowed with
abstine^ce and fasting, do add so much to the virtue of yt soul, how much
they diminishe of the voluptuous pleasure of the body. This a is lawful number
of fasting days, the which are celebrated in holy examples. Moses when he
should receive the law of God did fast forty days and forty nights without
either Exo, 44.
meat or drink, by such abstinence and fasting, he was prepared and ordained
to receive the will and the commandments of god. He 3, Re, 19.
lias after he had fasted fortye days, was translated and carried out of the
world in a charet of fire to the hiest place of heaven. Our lord and savior
Mat. 4.
through fasting of, xl, days did triumph, and overcame the temptacions of
the devil, and as victorius came to the predication and declaration of the
gospel. And we in like manner ought to fast, and to observe these days, the
which we do read to be consecrated and hallowed by such examples. Let us
therefore consecrate and honor these days with all alacrite and ioyfulnes of
heart and mind, and prefer them above al wordly banketes, and bodily delight.
For in these days we are most kindled and inflamed to fulfill the will and ye
commandments of god, for through abstinence the pleasure of the body is much
swaged and debated. Truly the pure mind does then make most have to God, and
to do and fulfill his commandments, when it is not mistempered with
surfeytynge, nor with the sacietie of meats and drynkes. Where of our
Sauyoure in his Gospel does say. Take heed to your selves, lest your
hearts be ouercomme with surfeits with dronkennes, and with worldely cares and
Luke, 21.
cogitations, lest that sudden day come on you unawares, for it shall come as
a snare upon ye universal world, and no man shall escape it: Also this great
utility and profit is in these hungery and fasting days: for through such
abstinence and abstayning from lawful things, we are monished and much
exhorted to abstain from that, which is unlawful. We abstain from flesh,
the which upon other days we may use lawfully. We abstain from wine, the
which we may use moderatelye. Let us therefore which do exchue and avoid the
thing that is lawful, fly and above all things avoid sin, that can never
be well and lawfully used. And if we intend and purpose to fast from meat, let
us above al things fast and abstain from sin. For what does it avail us to
abstain or to void the body of meat if we replenish the soul with vice and
sin? What do the it profitte the to be pale and wanne with fasting, if thou
be blown and puffed up with hatred and envy? What does it avail us to abstain
from wine, if we be dronken and full of the poison of anger? What auauntageth
it the to abstain from flesh ordained to be eaten, if thou backbyte and speak
maliciously of the neighbor? What does it a uayle us to abstain from those
things which are at sometimes lawful, if we do those things, which are
never laweful? Therefore let us (as I have said) fast and abstain from meat,
but much more from vice, that we may be replenished with the abun dance of
good and holy conversation, and in time to com deserve and merit through gods
grace and favor, to be satisfied with the reward of good works. For they (as
we do read in the gosplel) are blissed Mat, 5.
that hunger and thirst, justice, for they shall be satisfied, In truth we
ought to choose this co^pensation, that is to give and to distribute such
meats as we do absteyne fro, to the poor and neadye. For it is written.
Blessed be they that are content to suffer, that in another place they may be
refresshed. For that gift is acceptable unto God, when the neadye is fed and
refreshed, when the bare is clothed, when anger is not performed nor finished,
when yt time of anger is not kept, and when evil is not done for evil. Our
fastinges are then thankful Aom 12*
and acceptable unto GOD, when we do refreshe and comfort those that fast for
veryenede and necessity, for then we shall hear this sentence, Uerely Mat, 25.
I say unto you, inasmuche as ye have done it unto on of the lest of these, ye
have done it to me. O the great be nignitie and goodness of god the which to
repress and assuage the covetousness of man says that whatsoever is given to
the least poor man that is, is given unto him self. The goodness of God
grant you my brethren yt ye may so serve and please him with your
abstinence, alms deeds, and good works: that he the which does live
eternallye, may bring you to the eternal and true life. So be it.

Ser, 62,
Of fasting in Lent, and alms deeds. v. Ser.
I Pray you, and in like manner I admonish you my derely beloved brethren, yt
none of you do presume to dyne in this lawful and most holy time of Lent,
except it be upon the sundaye, or that paraduenture ye be in such care and
weakness, that your in firmitie and sickness do the not suffer you to fast.
For why, to fast upon other days, is either a remedy, or else a reward,
but not to abstain in lent, is sin. He that at any other time does fast,
shall have pardon and remission, but he that does not fast and abstain in
Lent, shall feel pain. And yet let him, that through feebleness cannot fast
prepare somewhat as secretlye as may be, for him self and other (if there be
any modiseased than him self) that they may eat it together. But he shall
inuyte nor call none such to his repast and dinner, that may fast: Forif he do
both god and man shall easily perceive, that his infirmity is not the cause
that he fasteth not, but that through glutteny he will not fast. Let him y^ can
not fast, be content and eat his meat withsorowfulnes, that he when other men
do absteyne and fast, abstayneth not. Let him cause the thing that shall be
necessary for the sick, to be secretly prepared for him self and some other.
For it besemeth him not to call any whole man unto his table, lest that he,
through other men's gluttony increase and augmente his own sin. And yet
forasmuch as he fasteth not, his charity and almose oughe to be the more
large to the pore, so to redeem those sins by almose deeds, the which he
could not cure nor heal, by abstinence and fasting. It is my good brethren a
very good and a profitable thing to fast, but yet much better to give almose.
If a man may or cando both they are two good things but if he cannot, better
it is to give almose. If thou be not able to fast, almose deeds without fasting
shall be sufficient, but to fast without doing of charitable and almose deeds, is
not sufficient.

Therefore if a man can not fast, almose without fasting is good, but if a man may fast, and also do his almose they are two good things, but to fast
without doing of alms, is another good, nor profitable, except a man be so
very nedy and poor, that he have nothing at all to give, and then the good
will of him that has nothing to give, is sufficient. For it is written,
Glory to God an high, and peace be on the earth to those that be well willinge.
Luke, 2,
But who can excuse him, when the lord has promised to give us a reward Mat,
10,
for a cup of cold water?

And why does he say of cold water? least peradventure some poor man would
excuse him self by penury and lack of wood, and say that he has another
pot nor pan to warm any water withal Finally my derelye beloved brethren,
the lord does so exhort, and so admonish us by the holy prophet to do alms
deeds, that there is in a manner no man so pore and nedy, that can excuse him
self: He says thus. This is the fast, (says the Lord) that I have Esaias, 58,
chosen, break thy bread to him that is an hungered. He says not, give him a
whole loaf, for perchance the poor man has it not to give, but he says,
break it, that is to say, if thou be so nedye and pore, yt thou have but one
lofe of bread, yet break of a piece thereof, and give it to the pore. Also he
says, lead the poor ^^ay, 58,
man that is without lodging, home to thy house. Now if a man be so poor and
neady that he have not where withal to feed the poor, yet at lest wise, let
him prepare him a bed in some corner of his house. O my dear brethren, what
shall we sai to these things, or what excuse shall we make, that have great and
wide houses? and yet scarely vouchesafe at any time to receive the poor
pilgrim, being ignorant, yea not beleuyng that christ (as he does say) is
received in his pilgrims I was a stranger, and ye received Mat, 25,
me, and inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the lest of these, ye have
done it unto me. It is tedious and laboriouse unto us, to receive Christ in
pore and neadye men, into our countreye, but I fear me he will requite us,
and not receive us into this heavenly kingdom. We despise him here in this
world, I fear me he will despise us in heaven. As he hi^ self does say, I
was a hungered and ye gave me no meat, I was a stranger, and ye did Esaias, 58,
not receive me. Inasmuche then as ye did it not to one of the least of these,
ye did it not Ezec, 18,
to me. But I beseech GOD my good brethren, that he may remove from us, the
thing that does ensue and follow: for afterward he says: Get ye from me
ye wicked and damned persons into yt eternal Mat. 25,
and everlasting fire, y^ which is prepared for sara^ and his angels. Therefore
my brethren let us not hear these things slightly, or with our bodily ears
only, but faithfully hering it let us so teach it with word and deed, that
other men may understand it, and accomplish the same. Our Lord Christ Jesu
grauntinge it, the which lives and reygneth with the father and the holy
ghost. So be it.

Ser, 66,
Of confession and penance. vi. Ser.
HOly scripture does often times exhort us to fiye to the remedy, and medecin
of confession, not that because that God has any need of our confession, unto
whom all that we think, speak, or do, is clear and at hand, but because we
can not be otherwise saved, except yt we being penitente, do penitently
confess, that we negligentelye have committed. Satan shall not accuse him
again at domes day, that does here of his sinful deeds, and ungodly life,
accuse him self, so that he be confessed, and penitently does leave and forsake
them, and renueth them not again. Confess your sins (say the S. James) one
to another, Ja^ab, 5,
and pray one for another, y^ ye may be saved. And the Apostle Paul says,
Confession Rom, 50
with the mouth is to our salvation. And Solomon says thus of the confession
of sins: he that does hyde and cloak his sins shall so row: but he that
does confess Pro, 28,
his faults, and forsakes them, shall obtain mercy. It is a right good
medecyne of salvation, not to renew our old m^dedes, nor to refresh the
skarres of our old wounds. For S. Ihon says: if 1, Jo, 1,
we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us, and to cleanse
us from all iniquity. David says like. wise, I said that I would confess
Psalm, 31,
mine iniquity and vnrighte wisenesse against myself, and thou did
remitte the wickedness of my sin. Let the sinner confess his sins whilst
he lives, for hereafter is no fruitful confession, nor no penance that
Eccle, 1^
shall profit to salvation. Se, now is the time of health, 2, Cor, (...),
now is the acceptable time, now is the time of remission, for those that are
penytente. For why? after death shall be the time of punysshement for those that
were negligente to confess them of their iniquities. All wicked and sinful
persons have bitter penance in pain and torment, but yet it does profit
them nothing unto remission, for their conscience does wring them to the
increase and augmentation of the pain that they do suffer: They might by
coni^ession have escaped the bitterness of their torments and pain, but they
did not regard it. And therefore as they are outwardly troubled with fire, so
they are inwardly vexed with ye remorse of conscience. How ca^surgion heal the
would, the which the pacie^t is ashamed to show? God does desire our
confession, that there by he might have a full and a perfect knowledge of our
misde des, He that is ashamed to di close and to confess his sins, shall
have God both his judge, and his punysher. A man shall do best to judge him
self in this world, lest that God here after judge him to 1, Cor, 11
perpetual pain and torment Every sinful man ought to have double sorrow in
penance, first, that through his negligence he did no good and again that
through a certain boldness he committed yt thing which was evil That he should
not have done he did, and yt he should have done he did not. Confession does
justify, confession does give Confession,
remission of sin. Al hope of forgeuenes does rest in confession, confession
is a work of mercy, the very health of those that be sick, and with penance
our only help and comfort, whose land and praise the Lord does declare in the
gospel, saying: Do penance, Math, 4,
for why, the kingdom of god does draw ^yghe. And S. Ihon the ba^tiste does
say Do ye worthy works of penance. Math, 3,
Worthy works of penance are, to be wayle the sins that are past, and to
renew them no more. As it is written, l^ke thou add, nor Eccle, 5,
heap not sin to sin. And our Lord by the Prophet Esaias, 1,
Esaias does say: Wash ye and be clean. He is washed and clean, that does
bewail yt is past, and approaches no more unto them. He is washed and not
clean, that does lament his misdedes and afterward renueth that he lamented.
Of these men. S Peter does speak most terribly saying: 2, Pet, ^2
A dog returning to his vomit. O my child (says holy Eccle,: ^^
scripture) have thou committed sin? do no more so, but pray that the old
may be forgiven thee. True penance is not judged by the number of years but
by the bitterness and heuines of the mind. S Peter by and by obtained of God
Mat, 26.
the forgeuenes of his sins, because he lamented most bitterlye that he had
thryse denied him. And notwithstanding a man's penance be but short, yet if it
be done with ye inward bitterness of ye mind God the righteous judge, considering
the secretnes of ma^s heart, will not despise it. For god does not so much
require the continuance of time, as he does ponder the will and the sincere
mind of him that repents and does penance. For he that with all his heart
and mind does trust in Christ, although he depart and dye with much sin,
yet his faith shall live for ever, as GOD in his holy Gospel doethe ^oan, 11,
say, I am the ressurection and life, whosoever believes on me, though he
were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever lyuethe and believes on me, shall
never dye. He does speak of y^ death of the soul, the which shall happen and
chance unto man, through the infirmities and fraylnes of sin. God of his
nature is mercyful, and ready to save al those by mercy, the which he can not
find to save by justice. He would that every man (...), Ti, 2.
should be saved, and that no man should peryshe, saying by the Prophere, that
whansoeuer a sinner does convert him self, that he shall live and not dye.
And notwithstanding Ezec, 33,
we are all wicked sinners, yet if we turn to penance, let us not doubt, but
that through the mercy of God, we shall obtain the remission of al out
iniquities and sins. The mercy of GOD does help and succor those that in
this world be penitent and do penance. For penance in the world that is to
come (where every man shall give an accou^ts of his own works) does not
prevail. Penance must be done in this world, for after our death is none
amendment.

Of auriculare confession. vii. Ser.
MEn are wont Ser, 30,
to say most dearly beloved brethren, that God knows al things, and that
with god there is nether time past, nor time (...), 13,
to come, for he sees al thing and pondereth all thing, all things are bare
and open unto Heb, 4,
God. Why will God then (say they) that we should confess our sins to man?
were it not better not to manifest and disclose such evil deeds, then to open
them abroad? for who is he that would glad lie say, I have trespassed above al
other. And if I should show all thing unto manne I should be esteemed the worst
of all other, and many through mine example wuld do much evil. Why should a
man then confess himself to any other? O thou man, docite thou not know that
we are al sinuers? for if we say: that we be with (...), Joa, 1,
out sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. We do al
sin, we are all borne in sin, we are all drowned in sin, yea and the
child to which is but one Job, 15,
day old. Wherefore then do we fear to be confessed? And yet we must needs
be confessed unto God, for he is good and gracious, and his mercy Psalm, 99
endures forever. God would that we should be confessed, nor that neither, because
he knows not our misdedes and fautes, but because the devil should hear and
know, that we are confessed, and sorye for our iniquities. For after that we
have once wept, and be truly confessed, he has not where withal, he may
any more accuse us.

Marcke and see then good brethren, Satan would that we should keep scylence
and hold our peace. And God would we should be co^fest unto whom should
we sonest obey? Uerelye unto God, the which does evermore command that
good is. Nor it is not sufficient, ye we abstain from evil, except we do
sorowfully confess the evil that we have done. Nor it is not enough to be
confessed to god only, but in like manner we must confess our sins and
tresspaces to man. Therefore thou shall not linger to confess thy self, and
return unto GOD. Nor thou shalt not differ it from time to time. For why?
the anger of God shall come suddenly and destroy the. O my brethren that have
slepte hitherto, awake and return unto your Lord GOD with all your hearts
with fastyng^ Eccle, 5,
wepinge, and waylyng. And inasmuche as he seyth with all your hearts, the
propher does teach us, that the foutayne of penance is in the Johel, 2,
heart, and that wepinge is referde unto the eye, sobbing unto the mouth, and
fasting^ unto the whole body. O ma linger not to return again unto the Lord
thy God, examen thy conseience. Lok^ upon the secrets of thy heart, and
consider or ever thou go to confession, that thy heart has sinned, desiring
and couetinge the thing that was naughtes, thy eyes in beholding of vanyties,
thy mouth by speaking the thing that was false, thy ears through hearing of
lies, thy hands with smiting and committing of murder, if not in very deed yet
peradventure in will. Who can excuse him selse? our fete also are very quycke
and spedye to evil. Therefore as ye have given your membe^rs servants to
uncleanness and iniquity, from iniquity to iniquite, even so now give your mem
Roma, 6,
bers servants unto ryghttuousnes, that ye may be sa^ctifyed. And first let
the heart be penitente and sorrowful for all such ungodly things as it has
at any time thought upon or desired: let the eye weep, let the mouth pray
coutinuallye, let the ear hear the word of god, let the hands give and be
doing of charitable and almose deeds: receive the poor pylgrime, feed the
sick and hongri, and cloth the naked, let your fete be goinge to the
church, and your knees labor to bow down unto god, for as there was no
member but that through sin has displeased god, so let there be no membre
without sufferau^ce of semblabe and like pain, for god has given us our
members to serve him withal and not to serve the world. But alas my brethren,
the citezens of heaven, and gods familiare friends, are made the servants of
the world, embrasyng and leanyng a great deal more to earthly things then to
eternal, to their own substance, then to them selves. But good brethren, ye
should not do so, for why, the time is at hand, and it does threten us, Rise
ye up therefore Psalm 126
that do eat the bread of heaviness. Let us haste us to the church, and with
sorrowful tears confess our sins. But first this order must be taken and
kept. We (or ever we go to confession) must think upon our sins and
trespasses, and in opening of the^, so confess to god, and to his minister the
priest the manner and circumstaunces of them, that we may depart from their
fete not burdened, but exone rated and lightened. And good brethren, look ye
prolong not the time, to confess your sins, for he that does prolongne or
procrastinate the time unto the last day of lent, or of his life to confess
his misdedes* he gives good euydence, that he does it not willyngly, nor
gratiouslye, nor with a pure heart, but against his will. Mark and consider
how such constrained and unwilling service does please either god or man. And
therefore let us not delay from day to day to confess and to open the secrets
of our hearts, for God has promised forgeuenes to those that are penitent,
and not to those that delay their confession or penance until to morrow:
therefore let us not prolonge nor delay our confession. But yet when thou man
or woman go to confession, look thou laughe not, nor that thou be
gorgeouslye nor well apparelled, nor that thou begin not to utter and show
fables, but that with all humility and to kens of repentance, ye do confess
your sins one to another. Jac, 5,
And I pray the not to leare to be confessed. But how shall I confess this and
that? O thou man, as often as thou do feel and perceive that, doubt not but
that it is the very temptation of the devil, the which desires so to inwrape
and entangle thee, that thou being already in sin, mighste do without any
great temptation, that should please him. And therefore my brethren, fear ye not
to confess your sins, for I know that thing less, the which I know by
confession, then that, which I know not. Why do ye then fear to confess your
sins? he is a wretched sinner as ye are, and perchance a more wretched
sinner then ye are, that does here your confession. He is a man: he
differs nothing from you, he is but as ye are. Why do thou then thou
sinful man fear to confess the to a sinner? Choose what ye will but if ye
lurk unconfessed, ye shall be condemned without confession. GOD does require
confession, to acquit and deliver him that is humble, and to condemn him
eternallye, that is proud. Be confeste my brethren and delay it not, haste
you to come to the holy harvest of confession, for confession is the Confession,
health of the soul, the destroier of vice, the restorer of virtue, the victor
and ouercomer of fendes* the fear of hell: the obstacle of satan, the cote and
garment of angels, the hope of the church, the health the gyde, the light, the
esperaunce and hope of al faithful people; O wonderful and holy confession,
thou do close up the mouth of hell, and openest heaven gates. O confession,
without the, the just man is esteemed unthankful, and the sinner shall be reputed
as dead. O the life of al just men, the glory of all sinners, Thou art only
necessary for sinners, and yet he that will be esteemed just, must oftentimes
visit the. Finally there shall nothing remain in judgment that was avoided and
disclosed by confession. Clean and pure confession is so pondered and wayde,
and God does set so much and such store thereby, that the thieves confession
hanging upon the cross, was as well accepted as though he had died for gods
cause: be hold how much ye sinners short confession did advantage him? But
we pristes (would to god we were good preistes) should so diligently, and with
such mode ratio^ watch to fasten y^ word of fear, and of contrition in the
hearts of sinners, that we fear them not from confession and so to open
their hearts, that they not her shut up, nor cloose their mouths from the
same. Nor we should not absolve the penitent except we saw and perceived that
he were confeste. For the belief of the heart iustyfyeth and the confession
of the mouth Roma, 10
makes a man saufe. And therefore he that has the word of confession in
his mouth, and not in his heart, is other craftye, or else false. And he that
has it in his heart, and not in his mouth, is other proud or fearful.
Therefore it behouethe preistes to be such as do know what manner of
medycine and how much thereof they should minister to every sick manne, The
Lord which lives and reygnethe for ever, being his aid and comfort.

Amen.
Ser, 57,
Of Penance. Ser. viii.
I Pray you my dearly beloved brethren, that if any of you after ye course
and frailenesse of man, be overthrown through the subtle craftines of Satan,
or inwrappedi^ dedelye sin* and has (as says the Apostle) destroyed in him
self the temple of god. I pray 2, Cor, 3
him that he despere not of the mercy of God, but that he arise up quicklye
from his iniquity and sin, lest yt by the co^tinuaunce and custom thereof he
drown him self in his own ruin, for he shall not be odious nor abominable
unto god, that has done and committed sin, but he that does rest and
continue in sin. And because no man should mistrust the mercy of god, the
Lord by his prophet does comfort us saying, I desire Ezec, 33,
not the death of any sinner but that he should return from sin and live.
And again Ezec, 18,
Whenever the wicked sinner shall return from his wickedness, yt shall not
hinder nor hurt him. But this his great mercy does then profit us, when we
slack not to return unto him: nor join nor accumulate sin upon sin.
Furthermore we may know the wounds and fractures of y^ body, by the wou^des
and fracturs of the soul. For if a man's leg, or hand be once broken, it is
wont to be hardely brought and restored to his old use again, but yet if they
break twice or thrice, or oftener in one place, your charity may easily
understand and perceive with what dolor and pain such wounds and fractures
are healed again: and yet after long pain and torment: scarcely they can be
restored and brought to their former and old estate. And like reason is
thought to be in the fractures and wondes of the soul* for if a man do commit
sin once or twyse, and without any dissimulation does fly unto the remedy of
penance, he shall without any let, and per adventure without any sha^e recover
his health again. But if sin begin to be joined to sin, and that the woun:
des of the soul, through the clokyng and defending of iniquity do rather
putrify the^ by confession and penance do heal and amend, it is to be fearde,
lest the saying of the Apostle be verified in him. Do thou not know, that
ye kindness of god does lead the Roma, 2,
to repentance, but thou after thine hard heart that cannot re^pente, do
hepe together the treasure of wrath against the day of vengeance and
revelation of the true judgment of GOD. But perchance some one man may think,
that he has so greuouslye offended, that now he cannot merit to have and to
obtain the mercy of God. But God forbid that any sinner should think so. O
thou man that does consider and way the multitude of thy sins, why in like
manner doste thou not consider the great power of the celestial physician? And
considering that God of his mere goodness will have mercy upon us, and that by
his mighty power, he may be merciful unto us. He do the cloose up the gate
of his dyuyne mercy against him self that does believe that GOD will not, or
that he can not be merciful unto him, or that mistrusteth him to be good and
omnipotent. And therefore let no man another after a hundred yet a thousand
sins and crimes committed, despere of Gods mercy, but make all the haste he
can, that God with out any stop or let may be merciful unto him lest that*
he perchance do so accustom him self to sin, that though he would, he can
not be delivered from the snares and craftye deceytes of the devil. David (the
which was both by the aid and gift of God) a 2, Regu^, 11, 12,
king and a Prophet was so prevented, that he committed not only adultery,
but also murder, and yet he reserved not him self, nor protracted nor tarried
not to do penance in his old age* but by and by, lyinge in a shurte of hear,
and over sprinkled with ashes did sorrowful and great penance, and fulfilled
that he said in his Psalms: I will wasshe and water my Psalm, 6,
couche every night with my tears. And again, I did eat ashes as bread, and
watered my brinke with tears. And because that with mortiferous Psa, 101
vncarefulnes he did not delay to do fruitful penance, he immediately so
stird up and revoked the mercy of God, that alonely he lost not his kingdom,
but also deserved to receive and to have y^ gift of the holy co^t^orter. But
peradventure there be yet ye will say, I am ocupied in warfare, or I have a
wife, how can I then do penance? As though that I (when I counsel you to do
penance) would say, that ye should rather go about to pluck out the hears of
your heads, then that ye should leave your sins and wretchedness, or
vnthrede your gowns, then to refuse your evil conversation and manners. But
let him which goes about by such dissimulation more to deceive then to excuse
him self, take heed, and mark, that nether the honor of his kingdom, nor yet
the dignity of his apparel, could refrain or let king Dauyd from doing of
penance. Also the sacrilegius king Achab 3, Regu^, 21,
(of whom Scripture says) that there was never none such sold to do eutil
against God) after yt Jezebell his wife had depraved him and had made him
abominable in the sight of God, Naboth being stoned to death, because he would
not yield up his vine yard, yet after yt the Prophet Heli had spoken unto him,
he put on a shyrte of hear, and bowed down his head unto god, and did
penance. Where upon god said unto Heli, have thou not seen, how yt Achab has
humiliated him self un to me? Forasmuch as he (says the lord) has buxomed
and bowde him self unto me for my sake (I will not as long as he shall live)
punyshe nor trouble the people Now consider good brethren, that although this
Achab was sacrilegius and naughtes, yet he prolonged not the time to do
penance, but incontynently offered unto GOO the sacryfice of an humble and of a
co^trite heart, And if afterward he had continued in his humylytye, the
mercy of GOD, had never forsaken him. Also king Manasses was so wicked, 4, re,
21,
as it is written of him: that he replenished the whole city of Jerusalem
with all in iquitie, yet after yt he was taken and put in prison, he through
great penance and much humility, did so obtain the grace and favor of
god, that he merited to be numbered and accepted among the friends and good
lovers of god, And after yt thesinneful Magdalene Luc, 7,
(the which washed Christ's fete with her tears, and wype them with her hear
knew that the heavenly Physician was come, she went into Simons house
undesired, and she that before was bold, prompt and shameless unto all
unthriftiness, was now more bold to be saved, and therefore she deserved to
hear, that all her sins were forgeuen her.

Nor this woman prolonged not to d^ penance, but why lest she might sin, she
did so leave of to sin, that no necessirie, but her own voluntary will
withdrue her from her misliuing. We might find many mo in holy scripture, the
which through doing of penance after their infinite and innumerable crimes,
provoked and caused god to be merciful and gracious Lord unto them, the which
did not only return to their first estate and condition, but to a much better.
But forasmuch as it were a very long thing to speak of al, these four
which we have recited and spoken of, al sufficient to know that the lord (the
which forgave David after so great a sin, and the sacrilegius King Achab)
and that after so innumerable iniquities reputed penitent Manasses to be his
friend, and forgave the sinful Magdalen, which did wash his fete with her
tears, and did wipe the^ with her hear al her sins is ready not only to
forgive us our misdeeds and trespasses, if we return unto him, but also to
give us eternal beatitude, and rest everlasting. Therefore mi good brethren,
let us (thynkyng upon those things) la boure with Gods help, as much as we
may possible, yt no deadly sin crepe in among us, but if so be there be any,
yt througe yt deceytfulnes of the devil are overthrown or east into this
evil, let him or ever any such crimes by a co^tynual custom do increase, seek
for remedy, and labor with great sorowfulnes of heart, to be reconsiled,
and to win the favor of almightye God again. Nor let him not be ashamed to do
penance, yt was not ashamed to sin, but strive incontinently thorough godly
operation to a mende him self, that he may be known, and accepted of the
father among his children, lest that he exclude him from the eternal bliss
and eiecte him from the heavenly banquet, and bound both hand and foot, cast
him into the exterioure darkness, where is waylyng and gnasshyng Mat, 2^,
of teth, and that he revoked, and through the medecines of penance,
humilytie, and co^punction, restored to his old estate and health again, and
adourned with the perylls of good works, may merit to hear these words. O
my good and faithful servant, enter and come into the joy of thy lord

Amen.
(...)
Of almose deeds, Ser. ix.
_(...) My most derly beloved brethren have monished you and presumed too give
you counsel to do and to give almose And although my admonition has (God
willing) profyted many a one, yet I fear me, lest there be, that do less
then they may, or else nothing at all. But some will say unto me. I am a poor
man, and not able to do any almose deeds. But because yt no poor man should
excuse himself from doing of almose deeds, our Savior has promised to
reward us for a cup of cold water. Say thou the^ Math, 10
that thou art poor? If thou have in substance no more then will resonably
find thee, then thy only good will is sufficient. But I pray the exactly to
examen thy conscience, whether that at times peradventure thou haste not lost
through superfluous drinking, thatthou might have given in almose, or lest
that in earth thou haste consumed through gluttony, yt thou should with
almose and charitable deeds have laid and treasured up in heaven, or lest by
preparynge of delycate welfare, and byinge of superfluous array and apparel,
thou have not now the thing that thou sholdest have to give un to the poor
for the salvation and redemptyon of thy soul. And notwithstanding our
galaunte and precious array is wont to be consumed and mothe eaten, yet the
neadye can not obtain nor get the thing that is most vyleste. If all these
impediments the^ do not aggrauat nor burden our souls, or if we have the
thing, which only suffysethe us and ours, we shall not then appear to be
in faut and guty, although we give nothing to the poorer but if luxuriousnes
and super fluitie (as I have said) do devour and consume, that charity and
mercy myghe have treasured up in heaven, let us then while time is amend our
selves, and ^^udye to recompense and with all our might to fulfill that we have
not done, or perchance that we have done, but far other wise and less then we
should have done. And therefore help thy self (O thou christen man) that doeste
read and hear these things, with Daniels Daiu, 4,
most holy counsel. Accept my counsel (says he) and redeem thy soul with
almose and charytable deeds. The which counsel, if thou wylt not lysten to
and hear, thou shalt call upon God, but in vain. O thou soul that doste
inhabit and dwell within these carnal and frail wales, watch pray, ask,
seek, and knock. Math, 7.
I say watch asking, pray sekyng, and knock workyng, The Lord shall answer
thee, that doeste watch and ask, saying, behold here I am. If thou wylt
pearce and go through the fire, thy lord God is with thee, and the flame Esaias,
43,
shall not burn the. For why, as water does quench fire, eue^ so does almose
deed quench sin. Therefore if thou Eccle, 3,
will open thy hand to the poor, Christ shall open his gates unto the, that
as a possessioner of heaven thou may enter and come in. And if thou think
that the end of the world be long a coming, look only upon thine own
end, and behold how the world by a little and a little does consume and
vanish. Al things which were good, are gone and taken away, and such evil as
never was does approach. The thing that the word of God did pronostycate, is
daily accomplished and fulfilled, and yet that notwithstanding, man does
another change nor amend. Therefore take counsel whilst that thou have thy
redemption in thine own hand, give and distribute unto thy self that is
thine, whyleste it is thine. For the thing that thou do possess and hold,
is but frail and bryttle* and other men's that thou doeste look for. Consider
what manner of price the Lord paid for thee, he shed his pretyous blood for
thee, he loved thee intierly, that so dearelye bought the. O good brother
avoid and fly the example of the rich man, whose dogs Luc, 19,
the poor man Lazarus did feed and nurish with his wounds, and yet they gave
him not so much, as the crummes which fell from the rich ma^s table, but this
thing not long after was clean altered, for the pore bought his salvation with
poverty, and the rich man his pain and torment^ with y^ abundance of riches
The poor man was exalted up with angels into Abraham's bosom, and the rych^
man thruste down into the profounde depenes of hell from whence he saw the
por^ manne, yea the poor mann^ the rich man, he that denied a crome of
bread, desyred^ drop of water. Let the^ therefore that be rich and
aboundannte, (the whych^ will not help nor redem^ them selves with their ow^^
goods and substau^te) think upon these things, lest they suffer and cometo
like punishmente. He was rych rhat we do speak of, and likewise there be rych
men here, unto who^ we do speak, they are all after a name, but let them
beware, that they be not of one condition, but these things were changed
between the rich man clothed in purple, and the poor man full of byles and
botches. For the rych man lost that he had, and poor Lazarus began to be that
he was not. The rych man left in this world his ware houses and shoppes full
of goods and great substance, and in hell, he desired but a drope of water,
and could not obtain it. Take heed good brethren, the whole body of this rych
man is troubled with the flames and fire of hell, and yet his tongue (because
with proud words he despised the poor man) is most vehemently tormented. The
tongue which would not counsel him to give the poor manne his almose, is most
greuouslye burnte and punyshed with the fire and flames of hell* He cryde out
and said: Father Abraham, send Lazarus that he may dip his finger in
water, and cole my tongue. O thou rich man, with what audacitie and boldness
dareste thou require a drop of water, that wouldeste not profer a crome of
bread? Thou should now even of right have demanded and asked it, if thou
had given it. O these worldely goods, the which in hell are grievous and
evil. To this rich man service came fire and torment. He does suffer the
cruel and hard torments of hell. He is wrong, and cries out, and says. O
most pure and ryghteous judge, other let my pains be recompensyd, according
to mine iniquities, or else let me receive condinge punishment and pain for
the time, that I was in wealth, or double pain, or four times more pain. Why
do thou command me to be kept these many. M. years in this flaming fire?
I am so bound with the bowndes of my sins, yt I can not escape. I am every
moment of an hour, pain fullye tormented and punyshed. The fire does
cruellye vex me, nor it does not spare me, it both tormenteth me, and
reseruethe. To these lamentable and dolorous com playntes, he might thus
without doubt have answered him: What shall I do un to the? Thou dyddest no
almose deeds, the which might have quenched the torments Eccle, 3,
and pains, that thou do now abide and suffer for thy sins and
iniquytyes. Scripture did call upon the but thou would not here. The
propheres hold not there peace. The apostles preched, The gospel gave out his
softd The torments and pains prepared for the synnefull were declared unto
thee. And the reward of the righteouse was promised thee, but thou trusting
and having affiaunce in these world lie goods and possessions, dyddest reject
and contemn Gods precepts and statutes as tryfling and vain fables

Let the poor pray for the, and whatsoever thou doeste ask, I do grant it
thee. But yet I do handle and use thee, but iustlye, for there shall be
judgment mercyles Ja, 2,
to him, that shows no mercy. My justice can give thee nothing else, but that
thy works do deserve and merit. And therefore thou being now dead, and in
another man's power and dominion, doeste call upon me but in vain. For when
thou might test and did see me in the poor, then thou wast blind and
would not see me. O my brethren made by ye hand of God, and boughte as I was
full dearly, harken unto the Lords counsel. Obey and fulfill the desire of
your bishop, that with him ye may take and receive your inheritance in your
fathers kingdom. Of a bond man thou art made a friend. Despise that thou art
borne, and do unto Christ, as he does unto thee. Why should he not take
part of thy substance that has prepared for thee rewards everlasting? Why
should he not have the tenth of thy goods, that has given the all, for this
earthelye patrimony God does offer us heaven, he says thus. Come ye blessed
children, and Math, 2^
inherit the kingdom, for I was an hungered, an ye gave me meat. Then may ye
say luckely, if so be ye were large and faithful in doing of your almose, when
saw we the an hungered, and did feed thee? what a thing is this my brethren. The
true and fairhful detter confessethe his debt, and the creditours excuse it.
Then shall your father, your LORD, and your friend with whom ye have made a
celestial conuention and bar gene, answer you thus. In as much as ye have done
it un to one of these least of my brethren, ye have done it to me. I shall
therefore give you celestial and eternal rewards and a kyngedome upon my
right hand. Nor that, because ye have not trespassed: but because ye have
redeemed and raunsomed your sins with almose and charitable deeds. I pray
you good brethren to remember these things, and that it may so profit the
poor and neady, that I for my gentle admonition may obtain forgiveness
before the seat of the eternal judge, and ye for your liberal contribution and
almose deeds, eternal glory, our Savior Jesus Christ, granting the same, to
who me with the father and the holy gooste be honor for ever and ever.

Amen.
Of the chastity that ought and should be Ser, 293
between man and wife. Ser. x.
Whenever my well-beloved brethren we do commend chastity as it ought and is
expedient it should be commended, young men and such as are in the flower of
their age do say thus. We are young men, we can not live chaste. To whom we
may and ought to give this answer, that they can not like chaste and
undefiled, because they eat more then is expedient, and drink moore wine then
neadeth, nor will not fly nor exchue the familiarity of women, nor yet fere,
nor be ashamed to hou^t and to have their suspecte company, but let all such
lysten to the Apostle saying. Fly fornication. And this* be not droncken with
wine, wherein 1, Cor, 9,
is excess. And Solomon Ephe, 5,
says, wine and women do reprove and cause wise men Ezec, 19,
to do amysse. Let those that say that they can not keep chastity, answer
me, whether they have wives* or no: if they have wives, why do they not take heed to Gods saying in his Gospel, What soever ye will that men do unto you,
do likewise unto Math, 7,
them. And why do they not keep their fidelitye and promise made unto their
wives, the which, they would, yea and desire that their wives should keep
with the^? And seeing that a man called uir, does take his name of this word
uirtus, and a woman called muli cr, of this word mollities, that is, of
softness and frayltye, why would manne, that his wife should overcome this
most cruel letchery, when that he himself at the first stroke and motion
thereof, does yield and fall? But here perchance al such as be unmarried shall
say unto me, that they may be well excused, because they have no wives to
keep promise wythal, and therefore they can not live pure and chaste. To
these that pretend this false and wretched excuse, a man may and ought to
make this just answer* No manne ought more to avoid unlawful things,
then they that do reiecte the things, which are lawefull. Considering then
that it is lawefull for manne to take and to marye a wife, and that it is
against the authority of all Scripture, nor never lawefull to commit
adulterye. why doeste thou not then with Gods favor marye a wife* the
which is lawful, but do presume with Gods displeasure to do the thing, that
is not lawefull? Yet I would feign know whether ye they, the which have no
wives, nor were not ashamed, nor in fear to commit adultry or ever they were
married, that their souls should be defiled or corrupted, or they were married
unto them? but seeing that there is no man ye with patience could abide or
suffer ye, why do not they the^ keep ye self promise with their wives, y^ which
they do desir y^ their wives should keep with the^. And why does he desire to be
married unto a virgin yt is none himself? Why does he desire to be coupled with
her that is alive, when that he him self, through adultery is dead in soul?
for it is E^^^
written, The soul that does sin, shall dye. And the Apostle says full
terryblye. God will judge adulterers. He^, 13,
And again, Adulterers shall not possess the kingdom of heaven. But
peradventure, 2, Cor, 6,
there are that think it law full for men or ever they be married to commit
fornication, but not for women. Many there are, the which not fearing God, do
commytte these crimes, most grievous and most worthy to be punisshed, because
they are common, and customablye used, and so little esteemed, that men now a
days do not reken them to be enorme and wicked trespasses. But yet in the
catholyke faith, whatsoever is unlawful for women, is utterly unlawful for
men. For why, both men and women are redeemed with one price, that is* with the
precious blood of Christ. They are called to one faith, and are gathered
together in one mistical body of the church, they receive the sacrament of
baptime together, they come together unto the altar to receive the holy
communion of the body and blood of christ, and the commandments are given
equally unto them both. Saying then that it is so, with what boldness, or
conscience do men believe yt they only may do that thing unpunished, the which
is nether lawful for man to do, nor yet for woman. But I would that al such as
presume to do such detestable things, should well and perfectly know, that if
they do not for the with amend themselves, and do the fruytefull works of
penance, but dye suddenly, that without doubt or remedy, they shall be
troubled with perpetual fire. But what a thing is this, for many therbe,
which are not ashamed, or ever they be married too keep concubynes, the which
they forsake within feawe years after and be married First they do muse and
cast with them selves, how that through deceytfulnesse and theft, they may
come to riches and unlawful again, and afterward against all reason, they do
marye women of more nobility and substance the^ they the^ selves be. Mark with
how many euyls they that not only vnluckedly do desire to do service unto
letchery, but also to covetousness do entangle themselves with al. Therefore I do
co^test and de here before God and his angels, yt he has always forboden
these crimes, and that they never pleasyd him. For sense ye time of Christ's
law it was never lawefull for man to keep aconcubyne, nor never shall be. But yet
there be that do it by the law of man, but not by Gods law, nor yet by justice
commanding, but by the only pleasure of ye body rulynge them, When the
Apostle says to those that be married, that the time which remains is but
short 1, Cor, 7,
and that they which have wives, should be although they had none. And
again, wythdrowe your selfs for a while, that ye may give yourselues to
prayer. How does he suffer men to have concubines that does command them to
keep chastitye that are married: And therefore I again and again do say unto
you, that he, the which before he be lawfully married does presume to keep a
concubyne, does gretely sin and trespass, and more greater sin then he,
which commits adulterye, for the adulterer does it secretlye, and fereth,
and is ashamed to do it openly, but he that keeps a concubyne openly, does
think that without shame he may do in the presence of all the world, such
an execrable thing most lawfully But they peradventure which are not defiled
nor be spotted with this sin, do say, why be not they that committee and do
such enormyties removed then from Gods boorde? Preistes verelye punyshe not
such enorme and great crimes, because that many men do use them, but if a
feawe in number would presume to do such evil they might and ought not only
to be remoned from Gods boorde, but also from the spech and familiarity of al
christen people, as says the Apostle With such a man thou shall 1, Cor, 5,
another eat nor drink. But yet (as I have said) the multitude of misdoers
does let y^ preiste to punyshe them, although good preystes do what they may
or can, and with continual and perfect charity do both syghe and pray, that
at the least ways, they might by their admonicions and prayers provoke and
induce them to penance, the which, because of the infynite multitude of them,
they could another correct nor punyshe. And therefore I pray you again and
again, yea and likewise I desire you, that as he which would be married, does
covet and desire to find his spouse a vyrgine, so in like manner, let him
until he be married, keep his virginity, for if he do not he shall not
accept nor receive the benediction with his spouse. And so the scripture
shall be fulfilled in him, which Psa, 10
says, he would have no benediction, and it shall be far from him. Now then
if penance do not help, what shall become of this manne? Or what shall be his
judgment in time to come, that in this world was not worthy to receive the
benediction, and to be blessed with his spouse? And note this my brethren, if
they which have no wives, through keeping of concubines, or meddling with other
men's wives be in so great danger, what shall they most vnfortunates think
of them selves, that perchance have wives, and yet commytte adulterye and
through a certain madness do despere of the judgment of GOD, nor fear not
the pains of hell, nor drsire not the eternal reward? Uerely if they were in
true and perfect faith, they would believe in God, and fear the judgment that
is to come. And this may well be proved, that all such do believe and trust
more in man, then they do in God, for where they do see, and perceive that men
be, there they do fear to commit adultery, but to do it secretlye (where God
does see it) they fear not. But if they had never so little a spark of true
faith, as they suffer not their servants to trespass in their own sight and
presence, so would they not presume to do and commit adulterye in the
presence and syghte of the Lord their God. But of these speaks the holy
ghost by the Prophet. The unwise psa, 13, and, 52,
man said in his heart and mind, there is no God: For this is without
peradventure, that he beleuethe not, y^ there is a God, which secretlye does
those things in gods syghte and presence, the which he fears to do in the
presence and sight of man. But yt wrtche knowethe not that the face and anger
of Psa, 3^,
God is upon al those that do evil, to destroy them for evermore. But
perchance some do say thus, how can I that through my great business, or
by the kings commandment am absent from my wife so many months or years
keep chastity? Unto this I may give this answer, that he return home unto
his wife. But when I answer the merchaunt so, he says, that if he leave of
the feate of merchaundise, he shall not be able to live. The man of war does
say, if I depart from the hooste: the kings majesty will be discontente
with me. But unto these a man may say, that if he fear the king and upon
that occasyon retournethe not home to his own wife, he ought so to fear
God, that he touch nor company with none other man's, for as the king may put
him to death* that returns home from the host to his wife. without license,
so may god punyshe him perpetuallye, that being far from his wife,
commytteth adulterye. I pray you good brethren, if so be that any of you
through your necessary busynes, or by the kings commandment be at some
times far from your wives, why should ye not live so long in chastity for
the love of God, and y^ wealth and salvation of your souls. Does thy business,
and the kings commandment, enforce the for so many days not once to
touch thy wife, and the love and precepte of God shall not persuade thee to
touch none other man's? but I would that all they, yt which for lucre sake
only and riches, and at the kings commandment do observe and keep these
things, and dyssemble to keep them for Gods sake, should know yt if penance
do not aid and help them, that they (when they shall stand in judgment
before GOD) can not escape from hearing of heavy and dolorous words, for
these words shall be said unto them, Get you hence from me ye Math, 25
wicked and cursed people into eternal fire. And what a thing is this, that a
^olde champion going to battle shall at some times peradventure sleye no
less then ten of his enemies, and committynge of adultery with some maid
taken in warfare, does murder his own soul with the sword of sin? Consider
how great an evil it is that man should be more cruel to him self,
murdering his own soul through letcherye, then to the bodies of his enemies
by byctory. Forsothe, it is a dolorous and a lamentable thing, that he (as I
have said) who has victoriouslye overthrown ten of his enemies, should be
overcome by a woman: or that he, which has overthrown so many of his enemies
bodies, should in heart and soul be overcome by a woman. Surely it is to
grievous a thing, that he which can not be overcome with no weapon, should be
subdued through bodily lust and pleasure, or that sweet and pleasant words
should ouerturne him, whom no hardness could ouerturne, or that he which
disdayned to be the bondsman of man, should me rite to be the bondemanne of
sin, when that it is a more unworthy thing, to serve in mind, then in
body, as it is written, for of whom soever a man be overcome, unto the same is
he in bondage. 2, Pe, 2,
Good brethren, if I should not show you these things I should answer for
your selves at the day of judgment. But whosoever he be that is more
desirous to be grieved or angrye with me, then to amend him self, he can not
now through ignorance excuse him, sayiuge* that he was not monished of these
things, nor forbidden to do evil, nor provoked by often castigation and
admoniti on unto all such things as should please God. But I believe, that the
mercy of god shall so inspire every neglygente person, that they shall be
much more worth and angrye with them selves, the^ with the preistes good
medeeynes and admonytyons And as the sick and weak persons do require
bodily health of the carnal physician so shall they require and demand soul
health of the spy: rituall and goostlye Phisityon. But I do hope and trust that
through the mercy of God, they shall so study to comfort and chere us by
their good amendment, that they shall come most prosperouslye, God willinge,
to the eternal reward, and life everlasting.

Amen.
Ser, 47,
Of the fire of purgatory, and how it purges not mortal but venial sins.
WE have herd my derely be loved brothre^ the Apostle, saying in the
apostolicaliesson, that no man ca^ lay any other fundatio^ then yt which is
laid, which is Jesus christ, if any man bild on this fundatio^, 1, Cor, 3,
gold, silver, preciusstones timber, hay, or stoble, every ma^s work shall
apere. For the day of our lord, shall declare it, and it shall be reveled, and
showed in fire. And the fire shall prove and try every ma^s work, what it is,
if any manes work yt he has bylde up on, bide, he shyll receive are ward, if
any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss, but he shall be safe him self,
nevertheless yet as it were through fire. There ar many that miss understanding
this lesson, are through a certain false security deceuyd* beleuinge yt if they
bild upon the fundatio^ of christ criminal and mortal sins: that these sins
may be purgyd by this tra^sitory fire and that afterward they shall come to
perpetual and eternal life. But this understanding dexely belouid brethren, is
to be corrected, for they that so flatter the^ selfs, deceive them selfs. For
criminal sins are not purgid by that tra^sitorye fire where of the Apostle
does speak, he shall be safe him self, nevertheless yet as it were through
fire, but only small and venyal sins, althoug y^ not only criminal, yt which
thing is worse, but also venial, if they be to many do drown, and vtterli
destroy me^. And yet some as well of the criminal as of the venial, are to be
rehersyd and spoken of lest that any man should vaniely go about to excuse him
self, and say, that he knowethe not which are criminal and which are
venial. And not withstanding the Apostle has rehearsed many of the capital
and criminal sins, yet lest we should be seemed to cause desperation, we shall
truly and shortly declare and show you what they are.

Sacrilege, murder, adultery, false witness, theft, rape, pride, envy, avarice,
anger, if it continue in man, and ebrietie if it be continuallye used, is
counted and numbered among them. And whosoever does feel and perceue that any of
these do reign or have any dominion in him, except he worthily amend him
self, and having time and space, do long and continual penance and
distribute large almous and abstain from those sins, he cannot be pourgyd
with that transitorye fire where of the Apostle speaks but the eternal flame of
fire, shall torment him without remedy. And although small and venial sins
are known unto all men, yet because it were long to rehearse al, needful it is
to name certain of them: As often as any man in meat or drink receueth more
then need is, he shall understand that it pertains ta veniali sins. As often
as he speaks more than behooves, or does hold his peace more tha^ is
expedient. As often as he exasperath the poor asking his alms inportunatlye.
As often as he being hole of body, al other given to abstinence and fasting,
will dine and given to sleep and sluggishnes, does slothfullye arise to come
unto the church. As often as he knows and medleth with his wife, except he
desire to have children. As often as he slofully does seek and visit the
imprisoned and bound with ba^ds. As often as he slothfully does visit y^ feeble
and sick, if he neglect to revoke and call the disturled to unity and
concord, if he exasperate his neighbor, his wife, his child, or his serua^te
more tha^ behooves, if he flatter them more then is expedyent. If he flatter
any great or noble man other willinglye or of necessity, if he feed not the
poor hungrye man, or if unto him self he prepare to delitious and sumptuus
fare, if he occupy him self in the church, or out of ye church with void and
idle fables, where of a count Math, 1^
must be given at the day of Judgment, if we swear unawares, nor cannot
through sum necessytye fulfill the same we fall into periurye, when we of
lyghtenes and 1, Cor, 9
temerariously do curse, seeing it is written neither they that curse, shall
possess the kyngedome of GOD. And when we temeraryusly do sus the thing, which
often times does not prove as we believed, without doubt we do amysse. It is
not to be doubtyd but that these things and the like, do pertain unto the
small and venial sins, the which (as I have said already) can scarcely be
numbered, and of the which not only christen people, but also no saint at
any time could or can be unguilty: And although we believe not that these sins
can kill the sole, yet they in such wise do deforme and diffigure it as it
were with certain blaines. and an horible stabb^ that it suffers not the soul
to be embrasid of the celestial spouse, nor scarselye or else with great
confusion, to com unto him, where of it is written, he has prepared and made
the church unto him Ephe, 5,
self, with out spot, or wrincle And therefore they must be continually with
co^tinuali prayers, with many fastinges and large almesredemed, least ye they
perchance gethered together in a hepe, drown the soul. For whatsoever of all
those sins we redeem not, shall be purgyd with that fire of yt which ye apostle
has said It shall be reuelid and showed in 1, Cor, 3,
fire, and if any ma^s work burn he shall suffer loss. Or if we whilst we
live in this world, do fatigate and trouble our selves with penance, or
afflictid by god do willinglye suffer ye same with manifold other tribulatious
for these sins, we if we give god thanks, shall be delivered. The which does
so chance and happen, if as often as our husband, or wife, or our child, does
dye, or if our substance (the which we love more the^ it behooves vsto do)
be taken from us. And although we love christ more then our substance, and had
rather if necessity should so require, lose our substance, then to deny
Christ, yet because (as I have said) we love our goods more the^ needs,
weca^n^t leave nor lose them, another living nor dying, with out great heuines
and sorrow, and yet if we as good children give thanks unto god, the which as a
good father does permit and suffer those things to be taken from us. and with
true humiliteprofes our selves to suffer less then we have merited and
deserved. These fin^es ar so punished in this world, that y^ fire of purgatory
in the world yt is to come, shall not find or truly very little, that it shall
consume and burn. But if in our tribulation we give god no thanks, nor redeem
not our sins with good works, we shall so long continue in yt fire of
purgatory, until y^ foresaid sins as timber, hay, or stoble, be co^sumid. But
love man does say I care not how long I continue there, so yt I may come to
eternal life. Let no man sai so my derely beloved brethren, for y^ fire of
purgatory, shall be more painful the^ anypaine y^ in this world may be seen
thought, or felt. And seeing it is written of the day of Judgmente y^ one day
shall be as a thousand years, and a thousand years as Psalm, 89,
one day, how can any man know, whether he shall pass through yt fire, by
dais, mo^ths or parauenture by yers? And he yt will not now put one of his
fyngers into ye fire, should even the^ of necessytye fere, to be tormented
there, for a while both in bodi and soul. And therefore let every man labor and
travel with all his force and might to escape those capital and mortal crimes,
and so to redeem with good works, those small and venial sins* that nothing do
remain to be co^sumid with that fire. But if they which commit these capital
and mortal crimes, redeem the^ not whylest they live* with the medycynes of
penance, they cannot come (as it is al ready told you) to that fire, that ye
apostle speakethe of, he shall be saved 1, Cor, ^^
yet as it were through fire, but shall here yt hard and irreuocable se^te^ce.
Get ye hence ye cursed Math, 25
into eternal fire. And therefore they y^ desire to be delivered from this
perpetual pain and from yt fire of purgatori, should not commit these criminal
and mortal sin^es, but if they have already committed the^, let the^ do
fruitful penance, nor cese to redeem those small and daily sins with good
works; And with what works these smalesinnes may be redeemed I desire fullye
and perfectlye to show you. As often as we vysyt the sick, and seek for those
which are in prison and tide fast in ba^des, and revoke those yt be at discord
to unity and concord As often as we observe and keep the fasting days
commanded by the church, and wash ye fete of strangers, and come often
together vntovigilles, and give our charity and alms before our doors unto the
pore, and forgive our enemies, as oftas they shall require: and ask
forgeuenes. With these works and other like unto these, those small and
venyalsin^es are daily redeemed, but this only for capital and mortal sin^es
does not suffice, but teres must be addyd thereunto, and sorrow, continual
fasting, leberal and large alms, remouyng our self from the communion of ye
church, co^tinuyng for a long time in heuines and sorrow, and doing open
penance: For it is just, yt he which lost and destroid him self with the
destruction and loss of many, should redeem himself with the edyfication and
amendment of many. Nor fynallye it is not impossyble, nor vnconuenie^t another
yt I persuade and counsel, that we should so lament our dead souls, as we
bewail and lament other men's dead bodies. For if other my wife, my son, or
my husband be departed and dead, men fall down upon the earth, they tear
and pluck themselfes by the hear, they knock the^ selfs upon the breast,
and continue no small time in mourning, penance and we pyng. We beseech you
brethren to exhibit unto your souls that they exhibit unto other men's
bodies. And consider this my brethren, how evil a thing it is, to bewale yt we
cannot revive. We lament the flesh, the which we cannot call to life again,
but our deed souls we be wayle not, yt which by penance we may revoke to
their old state again. But that that is worse we do, we bewail the deed body
which we love, but we sorrow nor la me^t not our dead souls, the which we love
not. And there fore let us begin clean contrary to love ye lord more the^ the
servant, that is the creator and maker of the body, more then the body, more
the lady the^ yt maid, that is more the soul made like unto the image of
god, than the flesh formyd and and made of the slyme of the earth, that when
ourflesh at the later dai shall begin to putrify and be devoured by worms in
the grave, yt soul by y^ hands of the angels may be lifted up into Abraham's
bosom, and that it at the day of judgment, receauyng the body by the virtue of
the resurrection, may merit to here, well good faithful servant, enter into
thy masters joy. And Math, 25
that these things the which we have spoken of before may adhere and cleave
more surely in your hearts, and that the apostolical lesson may be more fully
understood, I shall repete them unto your charities. Al saints and good men
that serve god faithfully do contend to give them selves to read or to prayer,
and to persevere in good works. Nor they which bild not upon the fu^datio^ of
christ capytal and mortal sins, nor yet venial, that is, timber hai, and
stoble, but good works, yt is, gold, silver, and pretyous stones, shall pass
through the fire of the which ye apostie does say. It shall be reveled and
showed in fire without any violatio^ or hurt. And although yt they which commit
no mortal sins are promyte and ready to do venial sin^s and negligent to
redeem them, shall come to eternal life, because they believed in christ and
committed no criminal sins yet they must first (as I have said) by the
justice or mercy of god through bitter tribulations be troubled and scourgid or
else through the mercy of God be delivered by great and manifold alms and
specially when they mekely perdon and forgive their enemies, or else they shall be
long troubled and tormentid in that fire where of the apostle does speak, that
so they may come without spot or wryncle to eternal life. But they truly which
have committed murder sacrilege, adulterye, or other like unto these, if worthy
penance (as it is said) do not help them, shall notmerite to pass unto life
by the fire of purgatory, but byeternal fire shall be cast hedlynge unto
death. And therefore as often as ye shall here in the apostolical lesson, if any
man bild upon the fu^dation of christ gold silver, precious stons, understand
that of saints and perfect christian me^, the which shall merit as it were
purgyd and pure gold, to come to the eternal reward. But they which bylde upon
ye fu^datio^ of christ, timber hay, and stoble, understand that (as it is often
times said) of good christians, but yet negligente to purge those small and
venial sin^es ye which if they nether be purgid through the divine justice with
many tribulatio^s, nor noman read meth the^ with liberal alms, deeds, the
thing yt the apostle does say, shall not be fulfilled, in the^, without great
doloure and heuines, if any ma^s work (...), Cor, 3,
burn, he shall suffer loss, but he shall be safe him self, never thelesse yet
as it were through fire. Let no man yet, (as I have said before) deceue him
self, that this may be done or understood of capital and deadly sins, if
they remain vncuryd. And therefore as I have often said, let us labor with the
aid and help of god, to escape the greater sins, and continually redeem the
less without the which we cannot be, with the love of our enemies, and large
and lyberall alms: our lord Jesu christ grau^ting the same: the which with ye
father and the holy ghost does live and reygne god, world without end.

Amen.
Ser, 24*
Of chastity and clean living. Ser. xii.
CHastitye and clean living my most dear brethren, does hold and obtain a
glorious and an excellent place among other virtues: for it is she alone that
causes ye clean mynds of men to see god, for the truth it self does say.
Blessed be the pure and clean of heart, for they shall se god. Although Math, 5,
he should say on the other side. They truly ar misers, and wretches, whose
hearts are polutyd with carnal concupyscence, for they are drownyd in eternal
pains. Chastity is a life angely call* chastity with humylytye shall merit
and deserve the habytacyon of the holy Ghost, the which the immundicitie and
uncleanness of filthy lusts does expel: scripture saying The holy spirit
shall fly from Sapie, 1,
the body subject unto sin. Our members should be dedicate and given unto
god, and not to fornication. Let man set the flames of eternal torments
against the desires of his flesh. Let a young man use chastity, that he may
be worthy and merit the wisdom of god. For where is uncleanness of body, there
is the habytation of the spyryt of yt devil, the which reioysethe most in the
inquination and fylthynes of our flesh. All uncleanness does dysplese god, but
those specyallye, the which are not natural and there holy write does monishe us
saying. Thou shall not go after nor follow thy own concupice^ces, Eccle, 18
but turn ye from thy own will. If thou grant thy soul her co^cupisce^ces
and lusts, it shall make thine enemies to rejoice and laughe the to scorn. And
Solomon y^ most wisest of al other, did speak forth like sentences to beware
of uncleanness of living, saying. The lips of an harlot ar a Prou, 5,
dropping honye comb, and her throt is softer the^ o^le. But at ye last she is
as bitter as worm wod, and as sharp as a two edged sword, her fete go down
unto death, and her steps perse through unto hell. She regards not the pathe
of life, so unsteadfast are her ways, that thou canste not know them. Hear me
therefore (o my son) and depart not from the words of my mouth, keep thy way
far from her, and come not nyghe the doors of her house. Uerely Salomo^ saeth
not these things only of the uncleanness of harlottes, but also of all
concupiscences and lusts of the flesh. But the reason of the mind should
forbid the invasions and hastyenes of the flesh, and bridle the wicked
voluptuousnes there of. Furthermore he that before did forbid the cohabitacion
and dwelling with women, does say unto young me^, may a man take fire in his
bosom and his clothes not be burnte. Or can one go upon Prove, 6,
whote coals and his fete not be hurt? even so whosoeeuer goethe into his
neighbors wife, and touches her can not be vngyltye. And in like manner, the
blyssed apostle does monyshe us saying. It is good not to touch a woman, as
though there were 1, Cor, 7,
even by and by peril and danger in the touching of her, Chaste pureness of
young men is fair, and louid of god, and to al goodness profitable, who so has
spiritual or carnal children, let him noryshe and bring them up to GOD in
chastity, and not to the devil, in fornication. What does it profit a man to
have children, to nouryshe the^ and to love them, if he nouryshe them to
eternal torments. They that line in chastytye do lead and have upon earth an
angelical conversation, Chastity does iowne a man to heaven and makes him a
citezens with aungells, he that has a laweful wife let him lawfully use her
at times conuenlent yt she may after the mind 1, Cor, 7,
of the Apostle give her self to prayer, and deserve to be blyssed of god with
children. Let no man say he cannot refrain nor keep him self from
fornication. God (says the apostle) is faithful which shall not suffer you
to be temptyd above your 1, Cor, 1^
strength, but shall in the mids of the temptatyon make away to escape out.
For such temptation is given to every man whether it be in the desire of the
flesh, or in y^ ambition of the world, or in y^ molest^ou^nes of any other
temptation, as he may overcome with laud, or with shame, be ouercommid. Chastity
is very necessary for all men, but most chesely for the ministers of Christ's
altar, whose life should be the eruditio^ of other men, and a continual
predication of salvation, for semelye and decent it is that our Lord should
have such mynysters, that are not corruptid with no co^tagiusnes of ye flesh,
but rather should glyster in contine^cye of chastytye, and shine among the
people in all honest examples, unto whom our lord does say, be ye holy, for
Luce: 19,
I your lord god am holy, for God is light and in him is no darkness at all,
nor no fyl 1, (...), (...)
thynes can be associated unto him. And therefore my most dear brethren, whether
we be men or women, preistes, or lay men, let us after the apostles admonition:
cleanse our selves from all fylthynes of the flesh and spirit, and grow up to
the full holiness in the fear of god. And let us stodye to please him that
has called us to his eternal glory, to the intent we may hapely reign with
him for ever, our lord Jesu Christ granting the same, that lives and reyneth
with the father and the holy Ghost.

Amen
Ser, 166
Of peace and unity. Ser. xiii.
WE read in the Gospel most dear brethren, that when our sa uioure and
lord should draw nyghe unto his passion, and show unto his dyscyples, his
departure out of this world unto his father, among other words which he for
the comemoration and remembrance of him self, spoke unto his welbe loved
company, he chefelye commendyd unto them, as a special gift, the goodness of
peace and unity, saying. My peace I give unto you, my peace I Joan, 14
leave with you, as though he should say. In peace I have left you, in peace
I shall find you. He departing would give them, that he retournyng again,
desired to find in them. This inherytaunce he gave unto his, and promised all
the gifts and rewards of his polycy tations and promyses, in the conuersatyon
of peace. And therefore my brethren, if we will and intend to be christ's
heirs, we must be and continue in his peace, Christ (as ye have heard) has
given us his peace, and has commanded us to be in concord and of one mind,
and has commanded the bands of dilection and charytye, to be incorrupt and
inuyolable. And in another place he does maruelously (...), 24.
set forth the ornaornamentes of this peace, sayng blyssyd be the pesable for
they shall be called the children of god: And yfhe y^ which has begoune now to
be Math, 5,
peasable, does begin to be called the son of God, he will not be said nor
called the son of god that will not embrace peace and vnitte, he de nieth god
to be his father, y^ conte^neth to be pesable, then it be^ouethe the children
of GOD, to be peasable, meke of heart, of words simple of one acord in
affection and cleuing faithfulli together with the bonds of vnanimite, but
this peace must be kept with and among good men, and the kepers of gods
commandments, and not with and among the celerate and wicked, the which in
their sins agree and have peace among the^ selves. The peace of Christ does
profit unto eternal salvation, but a deuely she peace comes to eternal
perdition. Peace ought continuallye to be had with the good, and warry with
vice for the evil of wicked men. oght to be hatid. For me^ the^ selves
notwtsta^ding yt they be evil yet they are to be beloved because theiar gods
creaturs. The peace which is in good me^, does claspe and cople brethren in
concord, and neighbors in charity. Peace does specially merit the spirit of
god peace is the mother of d^lection and love. Peace is a sign of holiness,
where of our lord does say by his prophette. Love ye peace and verity.
zacha, 8,
Peace is the health of the people the glory of the preyste the myrthe and
gladness of the country, and the fear of enemies, whether they be visyble or
inuysyble. Peace my brethren is to be kept, with al force and might, for
continually he continues in God, that does ab^de and continu in holy peace,
and has fociete and fellowship with the saints of god. Yt is the pryestes
part and deuty in peace to monyshe and warn the people what they ought to
do. And it is the peoples duty, in humility to hear that the preyst does
monyshe them. The priest whatsoever is unlawful must forbid that it be not
done, and the people must harken and beware they do it not, and all prelates
and like wise al sub iectes must at all times and every where observe and keep
the bond of unity in faith and dilectyo^. For why without peace the prayer
of the preiste is not received, nor the oblation of the people. If we will then
that god shall quyckely hear us, and that thankefully he may receive our
gifts, we must be conuersaunt and live in peace, of the which the truth it
self has vouchsaued to in structe us, For he sayethe, if thou offreste thy
gift at the altar, and there remembreste Math, 5,
that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thine offering before
the altar, and goo thy way first, and be reconcyled to to thy brother, and
the^ come and offer thy gift. Forasmuch then as god desires our unity and
concord, our savior him self does show it in the gospel, speking thus unto his
father. O holy father, keep the^ in thine own name, which thou have given me,
that they may be one as Joan, 17
we are. And the Apostle exhorts the faithful saying I beseech you brethren,
that 1, Cor, 1
ye all speak one thing. And again he says, let there be 1, Cor, 3,
no enui nor no dissension among you, let all bitterness, a^ger, indingnation,
roaring. blasphemi be put away from you, withal malitiousnes. And in a another
place he say eth. For bearing one a another through love, and diligent Ephe, 4,
to keep the unite of the spirit in the bond of peace, Ephe, 4.
being one body and one spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your
calling. This unanimity was in times past under and among the apostles. Thus
the new people of our belife, observing the commandments of god, kept their
charity, and the scripture does prove it saying. All they that believed were
of one will and mind Acta, 2,
And again they all continued with one accord in pra Acta, 1,
er with the women and marye the mother of Jesu, and with his brethren: And
therefore they prayed with effectuous prayers, and with hope obtained whatsoever
they demanded of the mercy of god. But unanimity is in us so diminishyd, that
the libera litie of works is clean broken In those days they sold their
howsys, and laid up their tree sures in heuyn, and gave the price of them to the
apostles for to be dystrybutyd to the use of the poor. But now we give
nothing of our patrymonye, nor yet our tithes. And when god ddthe command us
to sell, we bye rather and encreace. This the vigur and force of our fay the in
us does wax dry, thus the strength of the faythefull waxith feable. And
therefore our lord considering our time, does say in the gospel when the
son of man shall come, thynkste thou that he Luce, 18
shall find faith upon the earth? we see it done that he fore told. Faith is
and consists in the fear of god, in the law of justice, in bilectyon, and
in works. No man does think upon the fear of the things, that be to come No
man considers the day and wrath of our lord, nor the pains that shall come
upon the unfaithful, nor the eternal torments appointed for mysbeleuers, the
which things our conscience would fear if it believed them, but because yt
believes not it fears not at al. But if it believed I would take heed and
beware, if it would beware, it should avoid and skape them, let us as much as
we may stir up our selves well beloved brethren, and brekyng the sleep of our
old slothfulnes, watch to observe and fulfill gods commaundeme^ts. And let us
be such, as he has commanded us to be, saying. Let your loins be Luce, 12
gyrte about, and your lyghtes brennyng, and ye your selueslyke unto men
that wait for their master, when he will return from a wedding, that as soon
as he comes and knocks, they may open unto him, happy are those servants
which our lord when he comes shalfynd watchyng, we must be ready therefore,
lest that when the day of expedition shall come, he find us intricate and
vuredye. Let our light give light Math, 5,
and shine in good works, that ye light it self may bring us from the
obscurity and darkness of this world, to the light of eternal clerenes, that
we may have the fruition of the eternal peace, and perpetual felicity with
christ which is ye auctor of the true peace, and with his holy angels, our
Lord Jesu Christ grauntyng the same, which with the father, and the holy
ghost, does live and reign world without end:

Amen
Ser, 23.
Of exchuynge and anoydyng of ebrietie and dronkennes. Ser. xiiii.
ALthongh dear brethren, I do believe y^ thorough y^ mercy of GOD, y^ do fear
the vice of drunkenness, even as ye do fear the de pe pytte of hell: and that
ye your selves will not drink intemperatly nor overmuch, nor compel no another
man to drynk more than needs, yet it can not be but that there be some
neglygent persons, which will not be sober. But yet I pray yo^ that do live
soberly, not to be miscontent, nor yet to blame us, for needs we must blame and
accuse al such drunkardes. For notwythstandinge my well-beloved brethren that
drunkenness be a greauous vice, and much odious before God, yet among many it
is throughout all the world so customably and comme^ly used that they which will
not know gods commandments think and believe it to be no sin. Insomuch
that at all their bankettes they do laugh them to scorn, that ca^ not drink
and quafe al out. And through an enuyous love and amity, they are not ashamed
to adjure and enforce men to drink more then suffiseth. Truly it were a
less fault for him that makes a man drunken, to wound him and to cut his
flesh with a sword, than to kill and murder his soul with superflutie of
drink. And forasmuch as our bodies are made of earth, and that the earth, by
long and to much continuannce of raygne, is made moist, and so resolved into
mire and durte, that it cannot be tylde nor so wen, so in like wise, when our
flesh is to much moysted with drink, it cannot receive spyrytuall culture nor
tyllage, nor bring forth the necessary fruits of the soul. And therefore as
al men do desire sufficient rain for their feildes, to execeyse tyllage
withal, and to rejoice in the abundance of fruit^ and corn, so in thefeild
of the body, men ought to drink that behooves only, lest that by the
superfluity and abou^daunce of drink, the earth of the body being reduced
and brought as into a plashe of mire, be more apt to bring forth the worms
and serpe^tes of vice, than the fruytes of good works, Aldrunkardes are
lykened unto fennes and plashes, for your charytie does know, that all such
things as grow in maras grounds, do bring forth no fruit, nor nothing else
but serpents, todes, and other diverse kinds of worms, more apt to fear man
with al, than to bring forth any thing that should profit him or his living.
For all such her bes and crees as do grow in fennes and plashes, or about the
banks of such places, seem to have no manner of utility or profyt in them,
insomuche that every year once men do burn them. Take good head, for the
thing which comes of drunkenness is prepared for the fire, And even such (as I
have said) be al drunkardes, whose diners endure and continue all the day
long, and their suppers until the morning. The which when they seem to be
most sober, can scasely stand, whose senses are slow, ponderous, dull and in
manner buried. Finally in their usual and cu stomable drunkenness, they another
know them selves, nor yet no another man, they can another walk nor stand, nor
hear, nor say any thing that does pertayne or stand with reason. Nor they are
not ashamed to drink, and to fyl the selves till they vomit again, and to
drink by measure, without measure. They provide for great goddardes. and
stryne, as by a certain law, how they should drink, and he that can out
drink, or over come his fellow, shall be for his euel doing greatly exalted and
praised. Of this thing does grow and ensue strife and debate, and diverse
horreble lepes, whereby the body is much troubled. Of this does chance and
follow adultery and sometimes murder. And as often as they do take excess of
drink, their stinking and filthy bodies, as though they were smytten with
the palseye, having not the use of their feet, are feign to be borne, and
carried to bed with other men's hands; their syghte waxethe dim, they are
pained with the swimming of the head and with the head ach, their
countenance is drousye, their members quake and tremble, they are astonished and
dulle, both in soul and body. In these men is fulfilled that is written.
Where is woe? where (...), 31
is strife and debate? where are snares and deceitfulnes? Where are wou^des
without cause? where be these blouddye eyes? Are not these among those y^ be
cuppy, and that study to drink all out? But yet they that will be such, go
about to excuse them selves full wretchedly saying, I love not my friend
(says he) if I as often as I do call him to dynner do not give him as much as
he lusle^h to drink. Let him not be thy friend, that will make the gods
enemy, for he is an enemy to the, and also unto him self, if thou make thy
self and thy friend drunken, he shall be thy friend, and God thine enemy Therefore
take good head whether it be well done or no, to leave God, and to apply, and
join thy self to a drunkard But yet cause him not to swear, nor compel him
not, but leave it to his own free will, to drink as much as it shall please
him, and if he will over drink him self, that he perish yet alone, rather the^
ye should perish together. O the infelicitie of mankind, how many are there
found that in force these drunkardes, and luxurious persons to drink more
than neadeth: and yet before their doors they do dissemble to give the poor
man any thing at al asking him only a cup of cold water. Nor they take no
head that Christ should have that for the nedye and poor, that they give to
the luxuryous, saying. That ye have done to the least of mine, ye have Math,
25
done it unto me. But al such when they drown other me^ with drink, do say
to the poor man asking his alms, go hense go, god shall send you. And
truly, as long as men walk, God will send them. The^ what other thing it
is, that he says, get you hense, god shall send you, but go to him that has
God, for God will give him. And so he confessethe with his own mouth, that God
is not with him, by whose inspiration he should give some what to the pore and
nedye. I pray you derely beloved brethren diligently to take heed and mark
that after that the brute beasts, being led and brought to the water, have
once satisfied and quenched their thyrste, stand they never so long in the
water, yet they will, drink no more no nor they can drink no more. Let now
these drunkardes consider, whether they be not to be judged worse than beasts?
The beast will drink no more tha^ needs, but these bibbers take double and
trible more tha^ ever shall do them good. And the thing which might have served
the^ well three or four days, for very envy, or else for very dronkennes
they with great sin go about rather to lose and consume it all upon one day,
then liberallye and vertuouslye to spend it. And would to god that they lost
their drink only, so that they lost not them selves wythal. O what evil is in
ebrietie and drunkenness? King Pharao other upon envy, or else through
ebrietie, caused his master Gene, 40
baker to be trust up, and hanged. The Jews of who^ it is written, sat down to
eat and to drink, and stood by again to play: after they had drunken more
the^ neded they caused Idols to be made and in the worship of them, Exo, 3^,
they daunsed, and like mad men troubled them selves wc diverse sorts of
gamboldes. And Herod after y^ he was well heated with wine, for y^ plesaunt
daunsynge of a maid Math, 14
commanded Ihon Baptist to be slain. What other vicious things do rise and
spring of drunkenness, the Holy ghost does witness by Solomon, saying. Wine and
women E^cle, 19
reprove wise men, and cause them to leave, and to forsake God. And again,
Behold not wine when it sparkeleth Pro, 23,
and shyneth through ye glass, for it goes down very gentely, but at the last
it shall bite the like a serpent, and stinge y^ like an adder. Thine eyes shall
behold other men's wives, and thy heart shall thnike wyckedly. And the apostle.
s. Paul does like wife monish and warn us of the evil of drunkenness,
saying. Be not drunken with wine, wherein Ephe, 5,
is excess. We do show you even euedently by scripture. that love to be
dru^ken, what evil is co^prysed therein. Who so deliteth in wine and fat Pro,
21
morselles, shall not be rich. And again. Neither give thou to much wine to
kings, for there is no secretnes where drounkennes doethe Prou, 31
reygne, lest that they through drunkenness forget judgment executyng the law
unjustly upon the pore. Also he says, Eccle, 19
That a drunken workman shall never be rich. And again. If you drink wine
mesurably, thou shalt be sober* Item, wine at the beginning was created in
joyfulness, and not in drunkenness. Wine so berly received and taken, is the
pleasure both of body and soul, but wine immeasurably Eccle, 31
used and taken, is the setting forth of drunkenness the offentyon and hurt of
wise men, and the febleshynge of man's force and strength. But when we motion
and make mention of these things, these bybbers and drunkardes paraduentute
are angerye with all, and do murmur against us, But although there be which
are moved, and angrye wythall, yet God willing, there be that here and receive
this good counsel, and yt shall through gods mercy, be delivered from this
horible and wicked sin of ebryetye. Yet such as be moved with us speaking
against their familiare friend drunkenness, shall hear this one thing of us,
that whosoever he be that penitentlye does not be wayle his ebrietie, but
continues therein until he die, without doubt he shall be lost for ever. For
y^ holy ghost seeing this by the holy Apostle cannot lie. Nether drunkardes
shall inherit the king 1, Cor, 6,
dome of God. And therefore it were better for them to be angrye and moved with
themselves, the^ with us, and so being, they shall through the grace of God,
soon deliver themselves from the filthy and dyrty cannell of drunkenness. And
therefore whiles they have time, let them through the help and aid of God,
arise with all have, and besechyng GOD with their hole hearts, say thus with
the Prophet, Pluck me out of this dyrt, that I stycke not Psalm, 6^,
fast in it. And thus. And that the tempeste of the water do not drown me,
nor the depenes swalowe me. For whosoever that drunkenness, the very pytte of
hell* does once receive and embrace, does so challenge them, that without
penance and good amendment do ensue and follow, it shall never suffer them to
return from the obscurite and darkness thereof, unto the light of charity and
sobernes. But above all other things we must understand and know that it is
not one day alone that makes drunkards, but the daily renuinge and
multiplying of cups, our most enemies, rather than our fre^des* adiurynge
and compelling us unto the same, but after they have once put it in use and
custom, the heat of drunkenness does so kyndle, and invade them, that it
inforsyth the^ to be always thrystye. But he that does desire to be delivered
from this vice, even as he aproched and came to ye darkness, and vice thereof
through the encrecement of drink, so by the diminition of the same he may by
little and little return to the light, and virtue of sobernes. For if he should
with draw at once his excess of drinki^g, he eue^ with heuines when he is
most fervently athrist, would cry out and say that he had rather be dead,
tha^ to forsake his customable drinking, and dro^kennes, nothing considering,
that it were far more tolerable, that the body should die, than that the
soul through ebrietie, and excess of drink should peryshe for ever. And
therefore to avoid the sufferaunce and pain of such hete, and to be delivered
from such torments, as he suffers let him (as I have said) daily diminish
somewhat of that excess and superfluitye, until he become to a reasonable ways
and custom of drinking. For he that will (as I have said) diminyshe and debate
this thing, shall be delivered of his dro^kennes, nor shall no more suffer such
intolerable pain. Now good brethren I declaring and she wyng you these
things, do quite and unburden my self before God. And whosoever he be that
is inclyned to ye exces of drink, and despises to hear me, or yt at his
table will adjure and compel men to drink, he shall at the day of judgment
give a rekenyng both for him self and them. And because there be certain
preistes (the, which should prohibit and forbydde such things) that enforce
and compel men to drink more than needs, let them from henceforth begin to
correct and to amend themselves, and so to chaste^ other, that they, when they
shall appear before god, suffer not for their own drunkenness, and other menns
to, but that through their own amendment, and the correction of other, they
may merit to come to the eternal and ever lastyng reward. And of this I do
desire you above al things, yea and adjure you by the fearful day of
judgment, yt ye as often as ye do bankette one another, avoid and fly as
poison that heinous and fylthy custom, by the which ye other willingly, or
against your wylles are wont to drink by great mesure with out mesure. For
this unhappy custom does yet continu: and remain of the custom and usage of
Paganes. And who soever he be that consents that this custom of drinking and
quafting, other at his own table, or at any other man's (...), (...)
be used, let him not doubt but that he does sacrifice to y^ devil. By the
which bibbing and quafting, the soul of man does not only peryshe, but also
the body is gretelye and much feblished with al. But I hope that God of his
tender mercy shall voucesafe so to inspire you with grace: yt this most
shameful and lame^ table vice shall so abhor you that you shall never suffer
it to be used more, but that all such things as should be spente in such
drunken superfluity, shall be spent and go to the releyfe and refreshynge of the
pore, our Lord Christ Jesu granting the same the which does live and reign
with the father and the holy ghost for evermore.

Amen.
Ser, 24^
Of sorcery and witchcrafte. Ser. xv.
IT is not known unto you good brethren, that I have oftentimes prayed you,
and with all fatherlye solicitude admonyshe you, y^ in no manner of wise ye
should observe and keep these sacrylegious customs of paganes. But yet as
farforthe as I do hear, my admonition has profited some of you but very
slenderly and little. But yet if I should not show you these things, at y^ day
of iudgme^te I should give but a slender and an heuye rekenyng, both for my
self and you. But I excuse and clear my self before God, when yt oftentimes
I do admonysh and warn you that ye should not seek upon these diuiners and
calkers, nor question with the^ of any cause, or of any disease. Ye shall medie
with no inchaunters, for whosoever Deuteronomy, 18
does yt evil, loses his christianity and becu^meth a pagane, and without he
succur and aid him self, with almose deeds, and with hard and long penance he
shall be lost for ever. In like manner, look that ye take no head to witchcraft,
And when ye be in your journey, regard not the singing and chatte ring of
birds, nor presume not upon their songs, to de nunce or show any deuelishe
inchauntment or sorcery. Yt shall not observe nor mark upon what day ye go
forth of your house, nor when yt shall return home again. For (as scripture
does say) God made all the days. The first day is made, and the second and
the third, likewise the Gene, 1.
fourth, the fifte, the sixth, and the Sabbath. And god made al things very
good. Take heed also, that ye observe not those sacrilegius and folyshe ne
singes. But as often as ye must needs goo any where, bless your self in y^ name
of christ Jesus, and saying your cred, or else the lords prayer with good
belefe, take your iornei, being well assured, y^ god shall help and prosper
you. And when y^ ye shall begin (god wyllyng) to contemn and despise al these
foresaid sorceries and sacrile (...)
gius fashio^s, with such other wicked things, as Satan has deceived you
wythall, then shall he take it grievously perceauing y^ ye depart from his
familiarytye and felowshyppe and shall work you some dyspleasure. For other he
shall vex you with infirmyties and sickness, or else cause you by some diseases,
or through wandering and straing abroad to lose part of your goods and
cattle. And god to prove you and to know, whether ye come faithfullye unto him
or no, or whether y^ ye with al your hearts do despise the craftines of the
devil, or set more by his love, or by y^ loss of your cattle, does suffer
all this to chau^ ce and happen. But if ye would with heart and perfect faith,
once or twyse despise such wickedness and misfortunes as Satan does trouble you
with all, god would vouchsafe so to repel and withdraw him from troubling and
vexing of you, yt he with al his craft and subtilite should never deceive you. But
if negligent and lite persons of weak desires, and of slothful and cold
faith begin perchance to do well, they do not yet long continue therein. For
after that they have abstained from y^ fore said inchauntme^ts, and
witchcraftes, by and by they repent the^ selves, y^ ever they returned to god,
and that they at any time forsook the crafty suttel nes of the devil, and so
return again to their sorceres and witchcraftes, as a dog unto his vomit.
But despise 2, (...),
you (unto whom god has given wisdom and faith) al his deceytefulnes, and
return faith fully again unto the Lord your god, and whatsoever satan does
send you, bear it pacie^tly and stro^ly, y^ ye may say with the blessed man
Job, god gave it, and took it, as it pleased the Job, (...),
lord, so it is. And yt in like manner ye may say with a ferme and a whole heart
with the apostle. Who shall separate or deuyde us from the charity and love of
god? shall tribulation or an guyshe, or persecution, or hunger, Roma, 8
other nakedness, or peril, or sword? Good christen me^ ca^ not be separated by
no torment from god. But such as be negligent, are now and then thoroughe idle
fables and words only separated and divided from god: And if they only suffer
never so little damage or loss, in co^tine^t they ar slau^dred, and presume to
murmur against god returning again to their wicked and destestable witchcraft.
But perchance so^e if you will sai, what shall we do, co^sideri^g y^ such
calkers through their knowledge, do often times tell and show us y^ truth? Of
this thing Dete, 13,
scripture does monishe and warn us sayng, Yea notwtsta^ding yt they do show
you y^ truth, yet believe the^ not. For y^ lord does prove you, whether ye fear
him or no. But a gain y^ do say. If there were not inchau^ters, nor no southe
says, many man, yt is bytte^ with serpents, or troubled with some other sore
disease, should other whiles dye and perysh Truth it is dear brethren, for god
as I have said before does suffer the Devil to do such things, to prove good
christian men withal, yt if at any time or season they do by such sorcerye and
witchecrafte a mende of their infirmities and diseses or come to the knowledge
of anitruth, theimai there by ye sooner give crede^ce, and be leave the devil. But
he yt does desire to observe and keep christ's religion, must needs with his
whole heart and mind despise al those things, fearyng the saying of the
Apostle chiding us: Ye observe (says ^ala, 4,
he) y^ days months, times, and years, I fere me lest I have bestowed on you
labor in vain, Se now, the apostle says y^ whosoever has used witch craft,
shall receive his doctrine in vain. And therefore fly and avoid as much as ye
can or may y^ circu^uentions and the deceitfulnes of y^ devil. And above al
things I would ye should know, that Satan can another hurt you, none of
youres, your cattle, nor yet the least part of your substance, but as
farforth as he has power and license of god. Nor he durst not destroy Jobs
substance, nor yet once Job, 1,
touch it. but that God did license and suffer him. And we read, that when
the evil spirits and deuylles were expulst Math 8,
and cast out of men, that they besought Christ that he would suffer them to
enter into the heard of swyne. If the company of deuylls durst not enter into
the swyne without y^ leave and sufferaunce of God, who will be so unfaithful to
believe that they can or may hurt good Christians, with out his dispensation
and sufferaunce. God does suffer it for two diverse causes, other to prove
whether we be good or else to amend us, if we be synnefull. But he that will
patiently suffer gods dyspensation, and say when he has lost any thing (as
I have Job, 1,
told you) God gave it, and god has taken it, as it has pleasyd him, so it
is, blessed be ye name of God. He for this his patience most pleasant and
acceptable unto the lord, shall receive (if he be a good man) the crown of
glory, or if he be synfuil, indulgence and pardon of his sins. Take heed of
this good brethren, that wha^ Satan had destroyed al Jobs substance, he said
not god gave it, and the dyuyll has taken it. For the blessed man wuld not
ascribe ne give no such glory nor power to Satan, that he could take any
thing from man, that God suffered him not to take. Considering than that
Satan could not hurt Jobs children, his camels nor yet his asses, until it
pleased god to suffer him* why do we chrystians believe that he may do any more
unto us, then that the deuyne power by his godly and secret judgment does
suffer him to do? And therefore let us surely believe, that we ca^ lose no more
then god does suffer to be taken from us. Let us with all our hearts therefore
go unto his mercy, and forsakinge these sacrile gious observations, let us
trust continually upon his aid and comfort, for he that believes in these
foresaid euylles, that is in diuinations, sorsaries, philaters, or in any
other manner of wytchecrafte, notwithstanding he falt, pray go continually to
the church, give large almose, and punish his body with all affliction and
pain, yet so long as he leuethe not these sorceryes, it shall nothing avail
him: for such wicked and sacrilegius observations, do ouerrourne and destroy
all these good and virtuous operations. Nor it can not avail them, that with
these euylles, do that good is. For it is true that yt Apostle says, a little
leven 1, Cor, 5,
so wreth the whole lompe of dowe. And this. Ye can not 1, Co, 10
drink of the cup of God, and of the cup of the deuyles, ye can not be
pertakers of Gods table, and of the table of deuylles. And he says. No Math, 6,
man can serve two masters Therefore if christen men do look thoroughe the
grace of God to be saved, they must make no vows to no trees, nor pray to no
fountaynes, if any man therefore have in his feildes, in his house, or ny unto
his house, trees, alters, or any other vain thing, where the poor wretched,
and simple people are wont to make their vows, and does not hew them down,
and destroy them, he is and shall be partaker of al such witchcraftes and
sorcery as is and shall be committed there. And what a thing is this, that when
any such tree, unto y^ which they were wont and accustomed to do sacrifice,
do fall, that no man dare gether it, to make them fire wythal? I pray you to
behold and mark the wretchedness, and the folyshnes of man, the which doing
honor to deed trees, despise gods commaundeme^ts. They dare not burn yt
branches of trees, and yet through inchauntmentes they cast them selves
hedlyng into hell fire. And therefore let him which hitherto has not don this
evil, rejoice, be glad, thank god therefore and strive to continue
faithfully in good works. But let him that hitherto has delivered him self
up to be entangled and taken with such deuelyshe and enorme fashions, let him
(I say) do penance, fly, and withal fear despise those foresaid
witchcraftes, that god may forgive him, and for the glory of his name, cause
him to come to the everlasting bless of heaven. And forasmuch as it is come to
my knowledge that as yet there are some, yt which through symplycytye and
ignorance, or else thoroughe glutteny (the which thing is most to be
believed) fear not, nor are not ashamed to eat of such sacrilegius meats as
are yet after the use and custom of Paganes offered up and bewitched, I denunce
and straightly command you before god and his angels, y^ ye haunt nor com no
more to no such diabolical dinners made in any temple, or at any fountain, or
tree. And like wise if any thing be sent you from thens, fear it and as
though you saw the devil, refuse it, and so refuse it, that ye suffer no
manner of part of such sacrilegius bankets to be exhibited or brought into
your houses, and that because of this saying of the Apostle ye cannot, (says
he) drink of the cup of god, and of the cup of deuylles, ye (...) Co, 10
can not be pertakers of gods table, and of the table of Deuylles. And because
some are wont to say, or ever I eat thereof, I dooblesse me, let no man
presume to do so. For how does he that eats of such sacrilegius and wicked
meats bless his mouth, that put teth a sword to his own heart? For as the
body is slain with the sword, so is the soul slain with such deuelyshe
and wicked meats. But we trust in the mercy and goodness of God, that he will
vouchesafe so to inspire and inflame you to goodness, that the wickedness of the
devil, nether in other things, nor yet in these sacrilegyus observations and
sorceryes, shall not come among you but that ye shall fasten and set all your
hope in God, nor never return again to these wicked abominations, our lord
Jesus Christ, whose empire and honor is infinyte, granting the same. So be it.

Ser, 219
Of the true paymente of tithes. Ser. xvi.
GOd my derely be loved brethren, being merciful unto us, the time aprocheth
and draws on, to gather in our harvest. And therefore with thanks unto god ye
has given us al, let us think upon our offringes, and true payment of our
tithes. For God which has vouchsafed Ca, decima, 16, quest, 2,
to give us all, does also vouchesafe to repeat, and to ask us tithes, nor y^
for his own gain and use, but for our gain and profit. For he does promise
us by the Prophet saying. Bring in says Mala, 3,
he, all your tithes into my barnes, that there may be meat in my house, and
prove me says the Lord in these things, whether I shall not open unto you,
the caractes and the clouds of the sky, and give you fruit aboundantlye. See
now, I have proved how that tithes do profytte us more, then they do profit
the Lord. O ye imprudente and unwise people, what evil thing does God
command that he should not be worthy to be heard? he says thus Exo, 22,
ca, deci, 16, que, 1
Thou shalt not delay to offer up unto me the tithes of thy barn, and of thy
wynepresse. If it be sin to be tar dius and slow in offering up and paying
thy tithes, how great a trespass is it, to offer none at all? He says again
Honor and worship thy lord God, with the fruit and gain Prou, (...)
of thy true and just labor. Do sacrifice and offer unto him of the first
and chefest of al thine encrese, that thy barnes may be replenished with corn,
and that thy winepresses may redounde and flow over with wine. Thou doste not
give that thing freely, nor yet without gain, that sone after thou shalt
receive a gain with great lucre. Per adventure thou do demand. To whom shall
that thing be profitable, that God does rereaue to restore again? And again
thou do ask me. To whose profit it redoundeth, that is given unto the pore?
If thou believe well, it is thine own utility and profit: but if thou waver
and be in doubt, thou have lost it. Tithes good brethre^ar the tribute of the
ca, dec^m^ 16, que, 1
indigente and poor people, therefore give the poor their tribute, and the
preistes their offeringes. And if perchance thou have no tithe corn, as has
the husbandman, then thy wit and thy ha^dy craft wherewith thou do sustain
thy self, is Gods, and of that thing thou do gain and get thy living
withal, he doethe ask and require tithes. Give him the tithes of thy wages,
and lucre, which thou doeste gain in warfare, the tithes of thy merchaundise,
and of thy handy craft. For why, it is a diverse thing, yt we give and pay
for the earth, than that we give for the use of our life. Therefore o thou man,
give it, because thou do possess it, give it, because thou have deserved to
be borne, for the Lord says thus. Every man shall redeem his soul, and there
shall be no sycknes, nor no misaduenture among the^. Thus thou have in holy
scripture, Gods own wrytinge, wherewith he does promise y^ y^ if y^ pay thy
tithes, you shalt not only have abounda^ce of fruit and corn, but also yt
health of body. Thy barnes (says he) shall be full of corn, and thy wine
presses shall redounde Pro, 3,
with wine, and there shall be no sickness among you. Saying then, that by the
true paynge of tithes thou mayeste merit both the earthlye and the heuenlye
reward, why do thou through covetousness defraud ethy self of such double
benediction? Harken therefore unto me thou vnde uoute man. Thou knoweste well,
that all that thou doeste receive, is Gods, and will thou then not lend the
maker and geuer of all things part of his own? The Lord has no neade, he
does ask no reward, but honor on lie, nor he does not require, y^ thou
give him any thing, that is thine. He vouchesafe to ask the tithes of al
things, and do thou O thou covetous man, say him nay? What would thou
do, if he had kept nine parts unto him self, and had left the only the tenth
part? the which thing verelye is so chaunsid, now when that thy corn for
lack of reign is thin and naughtes, thy vines, beaten with hayle, and
destroyed with froste and cold. O thou covetous man, what doste thou reken
upon? nine parts are taken from the, because thou would not pay the tenthe.
It is clear that thou never paydst it, and yet God does demand it and
require it. This is gods most right ous custom and use, y^ if thou do not
pay him his tenthe, thou shall be revoked and reduced to the tenthe. For it is
written: The Lord says, I (...) deci^a 16, que, 1
saw it, and ye thought to be gile me, but your treasure and your houses
shall be spoiled thou shalt give the wicked soldier, that thou wouldeste not
give the preiste. Return unto me (says the Lord omnipotent) y^ I may open
the clouds for you, and sprede my benediction upon you, I will not destroy y^
fruits of your M ala, 3,
possessions, nor your vynes shall not widder, nor consume away: and al
nations shall say that ye are blessed. God is always ready to do well, but the
maliciousnes of man will not suffer him. For man looks, that god should give him
al thing, and yet he offrethe not those things unto him. the which he seems
to possess. But what and God should say. Man whom I created and made is mine,
the earth y^ thou do inhabit, is mine, the seed that thou do sow is
mine, the beasts which thou do weary, are mine, y^ dewes, and the rain are
mine, and the heat of the same is mine. Considering then that all the
elements, whereby man does live, are mine, thou that does only bestow thy
labor, do deserve the tenth only. But inasmuch as y^ lord omnipotent does
mekely nourishe us and feed us, he has given a right great reward to y^
laborer. For he reserving only unto him self yt tenth, has given us y^ rest:
O thou unkind deceauer, and unfaithful man. I speak unto the with the words of
god. Behold and see, the year is gone and paste, give the lord, that does
send rain, his reward. O man re deem thy self whylest thou have thy
redemption in thy hand whilst thou art alive, and whi lest thou may. Redeem
thy self, y^ cauetous death do not so prevent thee, y^ thou leave both life
and reward. Thou do commit yt thing unto thy wife but in vain, y^ which
perchanuce, will have another husband. Nor thou woman does leave it but in
vain unto thy husband, for he coue teth to have another wife. Nor thou do
commit the care of thy soul but invaine unto thy kins^olke, for there shall no man faithfully redeem nor aid the, after thou be departed, because that thou
being in prosperity, wuldest not re deem uor help thy self. Cast now O thou
covetous man this burden of auaritiousnes from thy shonlders, despise this most
cruel misters, that does thus hardlye yoke thee, nor will not suffer the to
accept and take the yoke of Christ upon thee. For as the yoke of avarice is
wont to thruste and to lead men to the pains of hell, so the yoke of Christ
is wont to lift me^ up and to bring the^ to y^ ioies of heaven. Tithes ar
required of duty, and he that denies to pay the^, does invade and occupy
other men's goods. And look how many pooremen die and perish there for hunger,
where he y^ will not pay his tithes does dwell, he before the seat of the
eternal judge, shall appear gyltye of all their deaths, forasmuch as he
kept that to his own use and store which GOD had prepared for the poor.
Therefore who so coueteth to obtain a reward or the forgeuenes of his sins,
let him pay his tithes and give of the other nine parts his charity to the
poor, and beware, yt whatsoever remains above a mean and a reasonable
living be not hurded up to luxurious and voluptuous uses, but y^ it by doing of
good and charitable deades, be laid up in the celestial treasure. For
whatsoever GOD does give us more then neadeth, he gives it not specially unto
us, but wills us to distribute and to give the same unto other, for if we
give it not, we invade and occupye other men's goods.

Saint bernard sermond of the supper of our Lord.
Man has eaten the bread Psalm, 77.
and fode of angels.

YE shall understand, o ye reverend preistes this order recited unto you in
words, to be succent and short, but in the majesty of the spiritual se^ces
to be very secundius, and plentiful. And principallye it is your part above
other, to here that we propound unto you, and not only to here it, but most
faithfully to lay it up, and as the clean bestes do Le^i, 11,
diligently to chawe it. Blessed Dauyd the most excellent of all the Prophets,
and very dear unto the living god, rauyshed in spirit before him that does
sit in the trone, had red in a certain promptuary of mysteries, what and how
great things our lord wuld mekely exhibit by your misterye unto the world y^
perishes, y^ which being made an enterpreter of the celestial counsel, sung
ioifully. Man has eten Psalm, 77,
the bread and fode of angels where out to express the certent of so fruteful
a thing, he clearly assignid the preterte^ce for the further, saying. Man
Psalm, 77,
has eten the bread and fode, of angels. O the marvelous mercy of God, the
son has put on flesh, god ashes, the potter clay, and life, death, y^
beasts might eat, the bread of angeles, Men were bestes Psalm. 8,
for man being in honor, has no understanding, but is compared unto the
unreasonable bestes, and is made like unto them. It is not an unworthy but a
joyful thing to remember, in what subiymytye and honor man was created and
made, but co^sequentlye it is very profitable to understand how greuouslye he
fell, not waying nor considering what he was of him self, nor what he was of
God. Our first parent was appointed an inhabiter of paradise, unto whom
whatsoever he desired was redi and at hand* he was made the lord of the
world, and appointed a cetezen of the supernal Iherusale^, and was made one of
the household of God by whose love and knoledge he is enryched and made the
companion of angels and brother and cohayre of heavenly virtues. He felt no
seacitie nor no molestiousnes, for he had al things ready yt he desired, no
necessity I say: but a meke will: for there was no thing in his soul that
might offend nor nothing in his flesh where of he should be ashamed. This
was the honor and dignitye of man to prosper and to floryshe in the premysses.
And al these things were of God. But set in honor: he understood not what he
was of him self, that Note what (...) is
is slyme and dust, a widdered lefe, a dry stauke, an erthely and a frail
vessel, a deed skin but he waxid proud and folish taking delight and
pleasure, in the heith of honor. And by and by experimentinge in him self that
he after so long a time was but a man of ye children of captivity he both
wyselye considered it, and truly pronounced it saing, he that estemeth him
self* to be s^mwhat when he is nothing deceueth him self. Woe be unto the a
wretch, that even tha^ Gals, 6,
there was not yt should have said unto him. Why art thou proud one earth and
ashes Therefore with a soden conuertion and turn, man through his infirmity
and wekenes, found him self lieng in a stable. What is this stable? the
world. And that he for his bestely similitude had need of hay. For this cause
the heavenly food man being changed into a best, changed him self into
beastly food, for why y^ bread of aungelles, is made hay, the only son of
his father, the son of man. For whithe son of god is made Joan, 1,
flesh. And after the mind of the prophet, al flesh is hay. Therefore the
angels do eat Esaias, (...)
the son borne of God, and men do eat the son made hay. The aungells do
live in heaven with their bread, and are blessed, and me^ do live in earth with
their hay, and are holy. This hay certenlye gathered out of the pasture of yt
virgyns women, is made the refection of bestes and cattle. The son of GOD that
he might be made hay, was hydden in the virgin, the son in the star, the
workman in the work, the holy incarnation of the son of God, has first of
a liberal excellencye delivered unto us this gift, and ye secundarely do
daily minister yt, exhibiting it unto us by the power of y^ office given unto
you. O this your power is most excellent and reverent. Truly there is no power
under god, like unto your power. Peradue^tureye would know and it deliteth you
to here more manifestly what manner a thing this great power is. Where unto I
answer. To consecrate yt body and blood of our Lord. Heaven, over this your
power, over so noble a spectakle over so solemn a priuelege of your dignite,
is astonid, the earth does marvel, man does quake and tremble, and y^ angelycal
highness does greatly reverence it. But o most mekest Jesu, how and where of
chau^seth this unto us, yt we worms creping upon the face of the earth, yt we (I
say) which are but (...), 18,
dust and ashes, deserve and merit to have the present before our hands,
before our eyes, the which does sit entire and whole on the right hand of the
father The which also in a moment of an hour from the rysinge of the son to
the setting thereof, and from the north to y^ southe, are pressed and ready unto al
men, one among many, and the selfein diverse places. How is this I say? Certes
of no debt, nor of any merit of ours, but of y^ swetenes of thy good will,
for you of thy goodness have prepared Psalm, 67*
for ye pore. Man, living, is pore, unto who^ this goodness is given from heaven.
Truly this is a celestial indulge^ce, this is a hepid up grace, this is truly
a glory most excellent a priest to hold his lord god and delyuerynge him to
reche him to other. O new and divine power, by whose mystery the bread of
angels and life, is daily prepared for mortal men. This bread by a certain
excellency, is called Eucharistia, yt is, good grace. For why in this sacrament
is not only receuyd all kind of grace, but he is receuyd of whom is all
grace. For Christ for the salvation of the world was made once a salutiferus
host, a general reconcil^ation, he gave to all sacrifices as well to those that
were before, as to those that came after, virtue and efficacy, yt by so great
and so excellent an host, all that should be delivered by it, should be
sacrifised, whereof it is ^ed For whi y^ lamb is slain from the beginning of
the world, Ap^, 13
that is to those that were from the beginning, so that by that that is said
from the beginning you shall not determyne the time of occysion, but the time
of salvation, for his death was profitable or ever it was First was the promise,
and afterward the exhibition. So then he was slain from the beginning of ye
world. O most beninge Jesu, thou have granted unto thy most noble spouse a
dowry that thy dove at the lest should hold and have a most sweet remembrance
of her well-beloved, Christ the dai before he should suffer, prestrybid the form
of this sacrament vuto hig discyples, and exhibited the efficaci thereof, yt
is, he commanded it to be done. The prescriptio^ and order of the form was in
bred and wine Note ye the order, wha^ they were yet at supper, he rose up the
lord of al things wasshid his disciples feet, the^ returninge again unto the
table, he ordened ye sacrifice of his body and blood, deliueringe the bread
apart, and y^ wine aparte, Saying thus of the bread. Receive and eat this is
my body. And thus also of the wine. Drink ye all of this. Math, 26
This is my blood the which in remission of sins, shall be shed for many. It
is said it shall be shede, for why every where it was shed and vyly, the which
y^ sharp thorns, the diggyng of his hands, and fete with nails, and the
opening of his side with a warlye spear thrustyng it out strongly, they vnwordly
poured it out in a manner, of a running water, And that blood was more precious
and rare the^ bawme, by y^ which our filthynesses ar clensid. And note ye
Christ at that supper was y^ geuer and the gift, the feder and the fode, the
gest, and the maker of the fest the offerer and the oblatio^. Ye have hard y^
form of the sacrament, harken now to the efficacy and the communion of the
body and blood of our lord. We are co^federate to Jesus Christ, and Jesus christ
unto us in an unity inenarrable, he yt ereth miflesh, and drinks my blood,
remains in me, and I in him. This is to be taken and understood of those yt
Ihou, 6,
be good and ye receive it worthily and not of the evil and flagitius at one
table, and at our lords supper Peter, and Judas received of one bread
consecrated, the good vntolife, the evil unto pain, The good as abenefit, the
evil unto witness, The good unto salvation, the evil unto death. All the
which is hitherto fulfilled in yt church, and in the sacrame^te of the altar,
the good receiving it unto goodness, and dogs and the unclean not so. They
are dogs that receue it irreverently, and therefore they depart judged, for
they that live after the flesh, and fettered with the cheine of vices do
wander after carnalitie do receue poison with, Judas the traitor and run to
the cord of ispiritual suspection grievously to be da^med, as well for diverse
crimes, as for the contempt of the sacrament, the which truly they do receive
in essence, but without hole some efficacy. And shall not he descerne between
corn, that does descerne between steres? Certes he shall try silver, that
has also prouid gold, and reproved it. Loye have hard the vtilitye and fruit
of the good, and also ye have hard, and (as I believe) ye were aferd at the
loss and perdition of the evil: here now and as astonid, wonder thereat. The
celebration of so great a thing upon the altar, was comittyd to no angel, nor
to no supernal fprites, but to me^, nor yet to al me^, but only to your order,
the which Christ did with his own hands at the pascall supper. Now that the
form and the efficacy of the sacrament is declared, there remains to be
rehearsed with what words christ commanded it to be celebratyd. Do this
says he, in the remembrau^re (...). 22
of me. O very effectuous words, O pricking and penetratiue words eue^ unto
yt sole. Do this in y^ remembrance of me. Also the Prophet does Psa, 144
say. The memorial of thine 1, Cor, 11
abundant kyndnes or swetenes, shall be showed, O high meke, and sweet memoryall
truly, to show forth the death of our Lord, until he come. The death of christ
is a work without ensample, humylyte without mesure, a gift with out price,
grace without merit. For us he would take this death upon him, that bare our
sins upon wodde that is the pain of our tresspaces upon his cross, 1
Peter, 2
by whose strypes we are helyd. What do you, O unworthy man? what do thou,
O unkind man? Adore it more devoutly, remember more oftener yt in the sacrament
of the altar the salnation of y^ world has suffered for the, that life did
for the, and that fortytnde and strength is wekened for the. If thou be a
member of Christ, have compassion of thy head, if thou be the brother of
Christ, continue with thy brother, wayle, be heuye with gronynges and teeres,
upon the pretyous death of the only son of GOD. For if thou be not heavy,
if thou weep not, if thou have not, compassycompassion upon him you do err,
thou ghost out of kind, thou art bestly furyus, and denyest him to be mau. But
because you should be more moved, yea and more fervent in the love of thy
redemer, Christ would yt he shnlde be continually worshyped in ministry, which
was once offered up (...) hebre, 9. 10,
in price. And that that perpetual facrifice should live in memory, and be
continuallye present in grace. The which thing is so, for notwtsta^dyng that
sin in many does renew, again yet the generality of origiual fine, is
utterly so taken away, the poisoned worm. Leuiathan being through smitte^ in
the virtue of ye glittering spear of Christ's death, that it shall not need, yt
Christ for the purgatyon of sins as daily ar committed be crncified again*
but ye it is a sufficient medecin of al, if by faith and imitation the former
death, be had in memory. O Christ Jesu yt remembrance of thy death is as yt
were the work of a potic arye, as it were sweet redolent, frankencence
inso^mer, as it were a region aromatike, ye which Eccle, 50
the hete of y^ son does purge as the flowers of roses, in the time of vere,
and as lilis, the which are by the rivers of waters. Be glad o spouse, reioise
inco^perable, you have a preside^c, a ruler, and a bryde grome, in y^ warfare of
this present exile, Thou have a pledge and do hold an ernest penny, where with
thou shall be happelye joined to thy brydegrome in heaven. O glorious and loving
spouse, upon earth, thou have a bride grome in the sacrament, in heaven thou
shall have one vncouerid. And both here and there is the truth. But here
coueryd, and there manifest and open. The church has here her bridegroom in
her order. But yet not in majesty of purity, nor insecuryte of eternity. It
is here verily as a sweet preamble, and a joyful desponsation and promise but
there it shall be a matrimo niall feast, and a blessed con iunctio^ wha^ we shall
go from feyth, to form from month to month, from sabbot to sabbot, from the
he ate of bred, to the hete of the eternal fest and banquet. So yt the spouse
does sus pyre and says with Moses, show me thy self. And not with out a cause.
For Jesus ye which is sweet in voice, sweet in face, sweet in name, sweet in
operation and work, shall apeare sweter in ye vision of his diete and godhed.
Truly he is sweet in voice, from whosemouth pro cedeth both milk and honey,
for full of grace ar his lipes. Truly he is sweet in face, for he is fair, not
only above ye children of me^, but also above thou sa^ds of angels. Truly he
is sweet in name, for ye name of Jesus is co^secrat from ye beginning, showed
forth by the Angel, prophetised by yt oracle of Luce, 1.
Solomon, the which says. This name is a sweet smelli^g Canti, 1.
ointme^t, for there is no other Actu, 4.
name wherein is any sal uatio^ for he is yt help yt shall Math, 1^
save and deiiuer his people from their sins. He is sweet in ye celebration of
his miracles, in the tonuersyon of sinners, in the sacrament of his precious
death, the which does fawn upon the infirmity of mankind. In him charity
did shine, Piete did apeare more glittering, and grace most of al cast forth
her beams. But he shalbemuchmore swe ter in the vision and sight of his
godhed, when that he sitting upon an high seat, far above al other, shall
manifestly show him self. The^ shall our desire be satisfied, the which thing
ye prophet desiryd and said. My heart said unto yt, my face has Psa, 26,
sought the, thy face Lord will I seek. For what have I in heaven, and what should
I desire of Psa, 15,
yt in earth. And in another place In thy presence is ye fulness of joy. So that
the vysyon and sight of the face, is much more precious, the^ the often
imagynation of the glass. For why the bark of the sacrament and Exodus, 12
the mary of ye corn are not receuid at al with like iocundite feyth. and form
remembrance and presence, eternity and ye time of this world, the contenau^ce
and Image of god, and the shape of a servant. Hear we wauke by faith, and
not by syte. In the mean while we oghte to delight and rejoice in the sacrament
of the altar, in the confession and confection there of, a faithful ministre,
does find him felfe in the midst of the father, and the son, and the holy
ghost, the supreme order standing on every side about him The sacrament a most
noble mystery of ye high excellent glory, does greatly affectate and de sire,
the festiual celebrite of fo noble persons. Whatsoever may be thought or said
of the priests asce^ding in yt vowre, or profit is far under ye dignite of ye
truth. The mind of the good pressed deliting there and made morehigher,
dothlabor and makes have, he asce^dith, his desire groeth, and the higher he
is lifted up, so much ye more he is extenuatid so that this man being al
spiritual avoiding al ye clondes of erthly co^cupisce^ce, consumes man in
man, and glorifieth in ye secret hiding of ye face of our lord, Nor a meke mind
se^sing, and devotion doing sacrfice, is not i nhibytid to look in to yt
propitiatory and holy place, but yet they are very rare who^ pureness of life
does admit to the heythen of this profu^dite, or whom inte grite does eue^
suddenly lift up to such a heythe of holiness. Therefore the holy minister does
se, and sele god spiritually, the which by rreatio^ is father of al me^ but
most specyallye his father by dignation and favor: For why by grace he is ye
father of al pupyls, unto whom ye il father is deed, yt is ye world, and the
evil mother, y^ is carnal co^cupisce^ce. Blessed is he yt dare say, and may
say, my father and my mother have forsaken me, butour lord has Psa: 26
receyned me. Also he says and felyth that the soune of god, is his
well-beloved brother, yt which being made a little one for us, is verily made the
brother of little once, that is of the meke and humble. He says I will declare
thy name un to my brethren in the mids of the congregation will I praise the.
He says and felythe the holy ghost, proceeding from Psa: 21:
the father and ye son, to be his household fautur, and his defender. For he
is the co^ferter of those that truly repent and the advocate of those yt
trust in him. Again he says and feleth that the angelical spirits do
rejoice and fauer his profits, and fermely to desire that he may deferue to be
written and appointed as one of their cytezens, verily this church is a prom
tuary of these which are written in heaven. That church whose organs being
suspended, does as yet upon the flud des of babylon breath toward god, is
joined and vnityd, by oryginal cognation, and natural affinity, manners and
voues unto this church. Of such a mynister the fat calfe being hole and
perfect, the lamb of a year old, full and vnbespot tyd, is with all swetenes
sweet taste and most joyful iocunditie received, and receuyd, is not consumed.
For why it is the food of life, that came from heaven. Canste you esteem what
manner a thing, or how great this holy thing of al holy thin ges is, and
sacrament of sacra mentes, love of al loves, and swetenes of all swetenes?

Truly these be the pascall feasts these be the joys and the lively meats
of the just, these be the spiritual delytes of the just and of Saints: Here
in a plentiful plaee are drunken the ryuers of milk the floudes of honey, the
lykers of balm celestial. Here the bryde with the bridgrom are made one flesh,
the holy and devout soul with christ. The experience of these things is
spiryt, and life, nor the carnal man has not y^ feling of these things, nor
the access unto them. The brydgromes friends, that is good, byshopes, good
abbotes, and other fere full and religyous men have tasted, and have fully
prouyd that we say. And therefore they come oftentimes to the table of the
altar, at al times making their garments white, that is, there bodies as well
as they can or may. For they shall touch with their hand and mouth their God,
and here him spekyng unto them For there is celebratid a familyar communication
between god, and Moses, his friend, that is a good and a faithful minyster.
But yet that communication is not soundyng nor peresyng, nor full of words but
effections, not soundyng about a ma^s ears, but with affections pleasant, and
reioysyng. This communicaty on is not populer and vulger, but secret and
pryuate. It soundes not in the market, it is not herd openly, secret counsel
does seek for a secret fre^d. But without doubt it shall give joy and gladness
to the heringe, if it be perceuid with the sober ear of y^ heart, Our lord says
here Israel and be still, A faithful friend and a faithefull struau^t with the
boldenes of (...) meke familiarity does answer, and not with a vocal and a
loud voyse, but with a sweet mourning, saing with Samuel, Speak lord, for thy
servant does here. And with the Prophet, I will harken (...), Reg^ 3
what the lord god will say, in me. Truly Christ does Psa, 84,
there speak with his minysters he says, ponder it co^tynually, lay it up
faithfullye embrase it swetelye that thou dooest see, that thou dooest that
thou hold, embrace it I say with the affectyon of pitefull remembrance with
y^ effect of meke imitation, knoing y^ such things thou must prepare. The
preparation of this table is not of man but of feyth, not of mischyfe, but of
mystery not of te^porall food, but of eternal. I that am the author of the
gift, am witness of the truth. The Altar that thou do stand at, Altar,
does represent the cross and passion that I suffered for the and the chalice,
the sepulcher in Chalyc^,
the which being deed I rested. The patten, the stone y^ Patten,
was laid upon it, the corporas, Corpari^
the sundary, the altar cloth, the winding shete The Altar clothe
host which y^ do se, is no we Host.
no bred, but my flesh y^ which did hang upon the cross, for the life of the
world. Truly this change is a work of be nediction, and not of a beginning
virtue does this, and not use, it is an effect of power, and not the use of
nature, It is a favor, and not reason. It is mercy and not miserye. It is no
common thing, but a divine thing, and not a humain^ thing. It is a sacrament
of piete, and not a detriment and a loss of y^ deite. In this al physical
noryshment does perysh. This mete is not of y^ belly, but of the mind. For why
it is not Jacob, 4,
given to the ruin of this life which is but a vapur co^tinuinge for a while,
but to give life unto y^ soul, this is y^ bred of angels, the which cannot
putrify, it goes not into the secret, but te^deth upward. It brigeth
ma^thether again from hence he took his Image. Truly my flesh is mete. Like
Ihon, 6,
wise this lyquor y^ which you se is it is now no wine, but my blud, y^ which I
have shed for y^ in price reserving a cup of drink for y^, in the altar, a
help in thy perigrination in thy going out of Egypt a gide and iu heaven a
prouisityon, I a cluster of flesh am brought for thy salvation to the press,
of the cross, where out is pressed the ioist of thy redemtion. My blood is
verily drink, Ihon, 6,
There are wonderful things brethren y^ are spoken of this sacrament, Faith is
necessary, the knowledge of reason is clean void. Knoledge is gathered by
reason and understanding, faith is inducid by authority only. S. Auste^
against Felician. Faith believes this intelligence, requires it not, lest that
either it should think that, that is not invented and found incredible, or not
believe that to be singular y^ is found. Thsee be the things my brethren that
necessarelye do require ^ayth, and utterly admit no reason. They require a
simple beleuer, and reprove a wick^d examiner. And therefore that must simply be
believed, that ca^ not profitably be south ought. This is the river that
Helesius could not wade over. Therefore seek not 4, reg^r 2
seek not how it may be done, nor doubt not whether it be done. Come not
vnrenerently unto it lest it be death unto you. For why it is God, and
although yt have and contains the mystery of bread, yet it is conuertyd into
flesh, he is both god and man, that does testify that y^ bread is truly
Ihon, 6,
turned into his flesh. He is a chosen vessel, y^ does threten 1, Co, 10
judgment to those that do not judge so holy flesh. And thou o y^ chrystian
shall think and judge the same, of y^ wine 1, Cor, 11
and honor the same in the wine He is the creator and the maker of the wine, y^
does bring and alter the wine into Christ's blood, It is the doctor of the
gentyls, that assuryth him to drink his death, y^ unworthily drinks the
blood of christ. And ye must know y^ water,
the water mixed with the wine death sygnifye the union of y^ members, with his
head. For many waters ar much people the third portion of the host,
The three portio^s which are made of christ's body upon the alter, have a
mistycal signyficatio^. The body of christ is the universal church, y^ is the
head with theme^bers, and there are found in this bodias it* were three parts,
of the which the whole body does confess. One part is y^ head it self. The
head is the head, and likewise apart of the body, therefore the head it
self is one part of the body.

I say the head that now has rysyn immortal and impassyble, shall die nor
suffer no Roma, 6
more. The other part of the body is in these members the which do now rest in
y^ soul with the head as it were in the sabbote, possessynge one stole of
immortalytye as concerning the souls in heaven. Of the which it is said. The
souls of saints rejoice in heanen. Therefore these two parts are together,
the head that is christ, and the otherpart of the bodi, y^ is y^ good which are
dead and buried, whose bodies do rest in their grave and theyrsoules with
christ, And therefore two parts are reseruyd without the chalice upon the
altar, as it were without the passion, For why goodmen now do feel Apo, 12,
no doloure nor pain, for all these things are paste. The third part which we
do put into the blood does sygnyfye that part of the church which does drink
our lords chalyce, that is which does en^ue and follow the passion of christ,
unto whom our lord among his apostles said. In me ye have peace, in the world
ye shall have tribulation. Sauer, Ihon 1^
form, taste and wait do remain and coutinue to the rite of the mystery, and to
y^ suffrage and help of y^ taste, that y^ abhorring of y^ thing might utterly
be taken away and y^ merit might take place. For lest human infyrmitie should
abhore the eating of the fieshe, and drinkyng of the blood in the taking
thereof, Christ would y^ those things should be coueryd and hydde^ under the
forms of bread and wine, the which among al other fode of mankind Psalm, 10,
are pryncipall and chefest. For certe^ly as concerning y^ letter bread, above
al other food does stre^gthe^ the heart of man, and wine does most co^forth the
same: Therefore he purposyd and appointed his body and his blood so to be
receuyd, y^ in the one the senses of man, should be nouryshed, and that faith in
the other should be edyfied. For why the sensys in the one, whilst they behold
wontly and customably things are noryshed, and faith in the other whilst y^ the
fleshly eye does out wardly see onthing and the, eye of the heart does inwardly
feel, and reverence a another is edified. For one thing is hydde^ and a another
apereth. Psalm, 17
For he made darkness his secret place. And as y^ forms are seen there, and
the things and the substance of the^, not credydyd to be there, so the thing
is truly and substa^cially believed, whose form and shape is not seen. The
form of bred and wine is seen, and yet the substance of bread and wine is
not believed. But the substance of the body and blood (although the form is
not seen) is believed, and the form of bread and wine, is set before us to
teach us y^ there is a full and a perfect refectyon. There is in the receipt of
y^ body and blood of christ a full refection mete and drink is bread and wine.
And being but one sacrament, yet three diverse things are set before us, that
is, a bysyble form, the unity of the body, and the virtue of spiritual
grace. The vysyble form is one thing, the which is seen vysibly, and the
verite of the body which is believed vnuysyble, under a vysyble form is a
another, and the spyrytuall grace, the which is a visybly and spiritually
reeeyued, with the bopye and blood only of those, that ^^orthely receue it.
For ye must mark three things in the sacrament of the altar, y^ form of
bred, the verytye of the flesh, and the virtue of the spiritual grace. The
vtward sense does exted and rech unto the form of bred, the inward faith unto
y^ veritye of the flesh, and the superior charity unto the virtue of the
spiritual grace. The little mouse does at su^times gnaw y^ form, and an (...)
dog does also receue it but y^ only predestinate does receue ye virtue of y^
spiritual grace. That we do se, is ye form of bred and wine. But y^ that we
believe to be under ye form of bred and wine is the very body, and the very
blood, yt hung, and that ran out of his side upon ye cross. Therefore the
sacrame^tal, eating and receuyng, as concerning the vysyble form and the
verite of the body of christ is comenly convenient, both unto the good and
evil. But there is (as I already have said) a another eting of good me^ only, y^
which ye merit of life does cause ye grace of god and faith working affectyon
of the mind in the hearts of the receuers or of y^ minysters a certain spiritual
and subtle union of the head and the members coming between where upon is
this. That it may be unto us, the bodi and blood of thy son. It may be unto
us, says he. No doubt the body of our lord is always made upon the table of
the alter, when that solemn mystery is duly celebratyd. But yet it is not
always made unto those, by whom it is made. Where upon is that also in the
canon. That as many as shall receive of this partycypatyo^ of y^ alter, the
sacrament of thy son, may be replenyshed with all beue^lye grace and
benediction, For why all that receue the body of our lord, by this
pertytypation of the alter, are not spiritualy replenished with y^ heavenly grace
and benediction. Whereof is this, that we for that y^ we do te^porally, may
obtain eternal joy. And also. That we may obtain the things with an inuisyble
effect, which we perceive to be received with vysible mysteries. And many other
saiengs after this sort and manner. This sacrament therefore the which is
reposyd eue^ from the beginning eternallye, hydde^ from the devil, reuelid unto
the prophets, and co^mited to yoursolicitude, is to be folowyd with dew thanks.
O your holy and celestial mystery, O laudable desire, O noble spectakle, O
solemn miraclc: God which in all things is wu^derful is showed as co^cerni^g
you more marvelous tha^ hun self, whilst yt by you he workethe things of more
marnel, what shall I sai sore. O ye preistes of God bless ye the Lord, doing
the things that may plese god, lest that be to your rain, that is provided
to the worthy receuer for health and salvation, I shall not call your gods
preistes, without a cause, if in the house of god ye do live preistly. For why
yt dignity comes not in this name because he is a priest. I say not of ye
name, but of virtue, of conversation and not of ye office, of meritte, and not
of the word, of holiness, and not of the mystery. For scripture says we yt
have many prestes, seek for preistly men, many I say in number, and not in
merit, in dissimulatio^ and not in faith, in form and not in virtue, in corral
co^mixtion, and not in spirytuall band, in the co^nuiction of the flesh, and
not in ye unity of heart. Their hands be washed, but their works be
vnwasshed. They come unto the divine sacrifices with blody conciences. They eat
without fear and reverence, the flesh of the Babe, the which sits in
heaven, as the flesh is sold in ye market. They do not assist and stand at ye
alter as prests, but as butchers in yt sha^bles. This degree certainly is a
casual degree, it is a judicial degree this anointid dignite, is not clarifide
but by merits, by no bilife of manners, exercise of virtue, and by ye instau^ce
of good works. Therefore my derelye belouid, dig up your housold walls, yt is,
set your herts upon your wais, go about as much ye may quickly to redeem the
things wherein ye have offended for the dai of our lord shall come even like a
thief, And as there is no thing more cer 1 Peter, 3
ten, than death, so there is nothing more uncertain tha^ the hour of death,
upon the which thynk ye as it is worthy to be thought upon, and watch ye
circumspecly to think up on it. The which thing shall be to the honor of god, to
the joy of angels, a sauer unto life, to your subjects, and to you a crown
of eternal life. In the which thing Christ mynystryng the help of his grace
vouchsafe to here his anoi^ted the which lives and raygneth world without end.

Amen.
Imprinted at London in Poules Churchyard, at the sign of the holy ghost by
John Cawoode. Printer to the King and Queen's majesty's.

A declaracion of the Almanacke.
The golden number. xix. The Cycle of the Sun. xxvi. The Sunday letter.
Between Christmas and shrouetide. ix. wekes and two days. Ashewednesday the
third day of March. Easter day the. xviii. of Apriell. The Ascension day,
the. xxvii. of May. Whitsonday the. vi. of June. Good to take purgations all
the day, in this sign. In the morning, in this. In the evening, in this.
Good to let blood all the day, in this In the morning, in this. At after none,
in this. Good to sow, in this sign. S. To set, plant, and graffe, in this. P.
The days dangerous to begin any thing * The new moon in this sign ^ The
first quarter in this The full moan, in this. The last quarter, in this. Ye
shall find in what day the son enters in any of the. xii. signs. Also in
what sign, and in what degree the moon is every day at noone. Also when the
Term begins, and ends. To confort the virtue natural attractife, Aries,
Leo, Sagittarius. To comfort the virtue natural retentise, Taurus, Uirgo,
Capricornus. To confort the digestife, Gemini, Libra, Aquarius. To confort the
expulsyue, Cancer, Scorpio, Pieces. Also the change and disposition of the
wether be marked upon every quarter of the moon.
In this year we shall have no Eclipse of the Sun, nor of the Moon.

18 g simion episcopi (...) 19 a Sabini et Juli. man 18 pt 20 b Mildrede virgin
0 sa 21 C Lx. x. martirs 13 git The last quarter ye.xxi. day at.x. of the
clock before noone cold rain, wind East. 22 d Cathedra petri 25 ta 23 e
Locus bisexti Fast. 8 ca 24 f Mathee apo. Term en 20 pri^ * 25 g Inuen off.
Paul 2 aqua p * 26 a 15 ra ^ 27 b augustine 28 us ^ 28 C oswalde inar 11 Pis ^

March.
1 d David bishop 25 ces ^ ^Newe moon the first day at three a clock. (...)
min. morninge cold, wind somewhat thoist 2 e chad bishop A^ ^ 3 f martine
Ascewenisday es ^^ 4 g adriani mar. e Tau ^^ 5 a focas eusebii. ^ rus (...) 6 b
victer pope 6 Ge ^ 7 C perpetue et soci (...) First quarter the seventh day
at.x. ^clok after noone, wind somewhat moiste. 8 d depo. felix 4 (...) 9 e
agapite vir. 8 cer 10 f ymber day le p * 11 g Son in Aries 10 o p 12 a
gregori pape 9 vic S 13 b theodore matr 13 go s ^ 14 C leo bishop 25 go. 15 d
longine mar (...) Full moon the.xv. day at.iii. a clok.xlii. ins. before noone
rain change dry. 16 e Hilary 20 bra 17 f patricii bishop 2 scor * 18 g Edw.
king 14 pi 19 a Josephsponsus 26 us 20 b cutbert abbot 8 sa 21 C benedicti
abba. 20 git 22 d aphrodesii bishop 2 ta S * 23 e theodori priest 15 pri s The
last quarter the.xxiii. day, at three a clock before noone fair, after moiste.
24 f agapite Fast. 28 cor. s 25 g Annun. or our lady 10 aqua p 26 a Castor
martyr 23 ^ p 27 b 6 pis p 28 C Dorothe virgin 20 ces 29 d Uictorine 4 art 30 e
quirine 18 es ^ The new moon the.xxx. day at one a cloak xlix min. after
noone, fair. 31 f Aldelme bishop 2 tau p *

April.
1 g Theodore virgin 16 tau p 2 a Mary egiptian 1 ge 3 b Richard bishop 16 mi
4 C ambrose bishop 2 can 5 d Martin and Mart 16 cer 6 e Sixtus pope 29 cer The
first quarter the.vi. day at five a clock before noone temperate. 7 f euphemie
13 le p 8 g 26 o p 9 a perpetuus bishop 9 bir 10 b Sun in ^auto 22 go 11 C s.
Guthalke 5 li 12 d simon martyr 17 bra 13 e Julius pope 29 bra The full moon
the.xiii. day at vi. a clo^^^ min. after noone moiste. 14 f tiburtie 11 scor 15
g Oswalde arche. 23 pi 16 a Isidori bishop 5 sa ^ 17 b Anicete pope 17 git ^ 18
C Easter day. 28 ta ^ 19 d victor bishop 10 ca ^ 20 e alphege bishop 22 pri ^
21 f simeon bishop 5 aqua * The last quarter the.xxi. day at.ix. at after
noone fair. 22 g sother 18 rius ^ 23 a s. Georgi martyr 2 pi ^ 24 b wilfride
martyr 15 sces ^ 25 C Mark Evangelist 28 sces ^ 26 d clete pope 12 ari ^ 27 e
anastasi pope 26 es^ 28 f vital. 11 tau ^ ^ The new moon the.xxviii. day
at.xi. a^ xi. min. after noone temperate. 29 g s. peter of mil 25 rus ^ 30 a
depos. s. erken 10 ge ^

May.
1 b Philip and Jacob 25 mi ^ 2 C athanasi bishop 10 ca ^ 3 d 25 cer ^ 4 e 9 le
^ 5 f Term begin 23 ^ ^ The first quarter the.v. day at one a cloak after
noo^ne fair, after moiste. (...) John port latin 6 vir p s a John of beuerl.
19 go s b appering of s. mich. 2 li c Nicholas 14 bra * d gordian and Epsm 26
bra e Anthoni martyr 8 sror * f Son in Gemini. 20 pi g seruacius con 2 sa
^Full moon the.xiii. day.x. a cloak two min. before noone fair. a 14 git b
boniface mar. 26 ta (...) qsid o^i mar. 7 ca s (...) trans. s. benardi 19 pri *
s (...) diosco mar. 1 aqua p * (...) Dunstan^ bishop 13 ri p (...) saint
varnarde 26 us p (...) Helene quene^ 9 pis p ^ast quarter the.xxi. day at.xi. a
cloak before noone wind. b augustini 23 ces C desiderii Rogation. 6 ari s d
trans. franc. 20 es * s e Urbani mar. 5 tan * p f augustini anglo. 20 rus p g
bid ^scencion day. 4 ge a nicodeme mar 10 mi (...) move the.xxviii. day at.v.
a cloak. xiii. min. before noone, wind, a litel moist. b. corone mar. 4 can c
felix bishop 19 cer s * 19 d Ruffini et instrini 8 tau The last quarter
the.xix. day at.vii. a clock before noone fair, after a little moist. 20 e
Margaret virgin 23 rus 21 f Praxede virgin 7 ge 22 g Mary Magdalene 22 mi 23 a
Appoline bishop 7 can 24 b Fast. 22 cer 25 James apostle. 6 le ^ The new moon
the.xxv. day at.vii. a clock xxxii. minutes after noone hot and windy. 26 d S.
Anne 20 le 27 e Seven slepers 4 vir s * 28 f sampson bishop 18 go p 29 g 1 li
30 a Abdon and sen. 14 bra 31 b Germani 27 bra

August.
1 c Petri ad vincula 9 scor * 2 d Stephane pope 22 pi The first quarter
the.ii. day at.iiii. of ye clock before noone somewhat moist. 3 e Inuentio
stephani 5 sa 4 f Justine priest 17 git 5 g 29 ca 6 a Trans. of our lord. 11 ca
(...) 7 b Feast of Jesu 22 pri (...) 8 c ciriari socio 4 aqua 9 d Fast. 17 ri p
* 10 e S. Laurence 29 us p ^ full moon the.x. day at.v. of the clock (...)
before noone fair. ^iburti martyr 12 pi p ^aynct ^^are 25 sces ^o. and his ^e
8 ari s Dol in vi^ Fast. 20 es s Assu^ Ma. 5 tau p * Roche 19 rus p * Octa. of
saint Lau. 3 ge (...) quarter the.xvii. day at.xi. a cloak before (...) dry
wind. ^agapte martyr 17 mi s. magnus martyr 2 can s saint jews bishop 17 cer
s barnarde 1 le p octo assumpti mar. 16 o p fast. 29 le p * Ba^^^olomew 13 vir
p (...) moon the.xxiiii. day at.v. a clock.iiii. (...) before noone fair
wind. Rudouici 26 go p s souerine bishop. 9 li Dogs days end 22 bra
augustini 5 scor decola. s. John 17 pi felicis ^audi. 29 us ^ paullnus 12 sa
(...) quarter the last day at viii. a cloak after (...) fair.

September.
(...) 24 gic(...)


