ORDERS, thought meet by his Majesty, and his Privy Counsel, to be executed
throughout the Counties of this Realm, in such Towns, Villages, and other
places, as are, or may be hereafter infected with the Plague, for the stay of
further increase of the same. Also, an Advise set down by the best learned in
Physic within this Realm, containing sundry good Rules and easy Medicines,
without charge to the meaner sort of people, as well for the preservation of his
good Subjects from the plague before Infection, as for the curing and ordering
of them after they shall be infected.

Jmprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1603.



Orders, thought meet by his Majesty and his Privy Counsel, to be executed
throughout the Counties of this Realm, in such Towns, Villages, and other
places as are, or may be hereafter infected with the plague, for the stay of
further increase of the same.
AS the most loving and gracious care of his MAJESTY for the preservation of
his people, has already been earnestly showed and declared by such means and
ways as were thought expedient to suppress the grievous Infection of the
Plague, and to prevent the increase thereof, within the City of London, and
parts about it; so whatsoever other good means may be yet remaining which may
extend and prove behouefull to the Country abroad (where his MAJESTY is sorry
to understand that the Contagion is also in many places dispersed) it is
likewise his gracious pleasure that the same be carefully provided and put in
practice. And therefore having taken knowledge of certain good Orders that
were upon like occasion published in times past; together with certain rules
and Medicines prescribed by the best and most learned Physicians; and finding
both of them, to serve well for the present time, his Majesty is pleased that
the same shall be renewed and published: And withal straightly commands all
Justices of the Peace and others to whom it may appertain, to see the said
Orders duly executed.

At the Court at Hampton Court this 30. of July. 1603.
IN primis, All the Justices in every County, as well within the Liberties as
without, immediately upon knowledge to them given, shall assemble themselves
together at some one general place accustomed, being clear from Infection of
the Plague, to consult how these Orders following may be duly put in
execution, not meaning that any Justices dwelling in or near places infected,
shall come thither, whiles their coming may be doubtful. And after their
first general assembly, they shall make a distribution of themselves to sundry
limits and divisions, as in other common services of the County they are
accustomed to do, for the prosecution thereof.

2 First they shall inquire, and presently inform themselves by all good
means, what Towns and Villages are at the time of such assembly infected
within every their Counties, and in what Hundred or other division, the said
Towns and Villages are, and how many of the same places so Infected are
corporate Towns, market Towns and Villages, and shall consider of what wealth
the inhabitants of the same Towns and Parishes are, to be able to relieve the
poor that are or shall be infected, and to be restrained in their houses.

3 Item, thereupon after conference used according to the necessity of the
cause, they shall devise and make a general taxation, either by charging the
Town infected with one sum in gross, or by charging the special persons of
wealth within the same, to be forthwith collected for the rate of one month at
the first, and so if the sickness shall continue, the collection of ye like
sum, or of more or of less, as time and cause shall require, and the same to
be every first, second, third, or fourth week employed to and for the
execution of the said orders. And in case some of the said Towns infected
shall manifestly appear not to be of sufficient ability to contribute
sufficient for the charges requisite, then the taxation or collection shall be
made or further extended to other parts, or in any other further limits, as by
them shall be thought requisite where there shall be any such Towns or
villages so infected, and unable to relieve themselves. And if the said Towns
be situated in the borders and confines of any other shire, then as the
Justices shall see cause and need for the greatness of the charge requisite,
that the parts of the shire joining to the Towns infected be not able, they
shall write their letters to the next Justices of the other Shire so confining,
to procure by collection some relief, as in like cases they are to relieve
them, in respect of near neighborhood of the place, and for that the same
infection may be the better stayed from the said adjoining places, though they
be separated by name of the County.

4 Item, they shall cause to be appointed in every Parish as well infected as
not infected, certain persons to view the bodies of all such as shall die,
before they be suffered to be buried, and to certify the minister of the
Church and Churchwarden, or other principal officers, or their substitutes of
what probable disease the said persons died: and the said viewers, to have
weekly some allowance, and the more large allowance where the Towns or
Parishes be infected, during the infection, toward their maintenance, to the
end they which shall be in places infected, may forbear to resort into the
company of others that are sound: and those persons to be sworn to make true
report according to their knowledge, and the choice of them to be made by
direction of the Curate of the Church, with three or four substantial men of
the parish. And in case the said viewers either through favor or corruption,
shall give wrong certificate, or shall refuse to serve being thereunto
appointed, then to cause them to be punished by imprisonment, in such sort as
may serve for a terror to others.

5 Item, the houses of such persons out of the which there shall die any of the
plague, being so certified by the viewers, or otherwise known, or where it
shall be understood, that any person remains sick of the plague, to be
closed up on all parts during the time of restraint, viz. six weeks, after the
sickness be ceased in the same house, in case the said houses so infected
shall be within any Town having houses near adjoining to the same. And if the
infection happen in houses dispersed in Villages, and separated from other
houses, and that of necessity, for the serving of their cattle, and manuring
of their ground, the said persons cannot continue in their houses, then they
to be nevertheless restrained from resorting into company of others, either
publicly or privately during the said time of restraint, and to wear some
mark in their uppermost garments, or bear white rods in their hands at such
time as they shall go abroad, and if there be any doubt that the masters and
owners of the houses infected, will not duly observe the directions of
shutting up their doors, specially in the night, then shall there be appointed
two or three watchmen by turns, which shall be sworn to attend and watch the
house, and to apprehend any person that shall come out of the house contrary to
the order, and the same persons by order of the Justices, shall be a competent
time imprisoned in the stocks in the high way next to the house infected: and
furthermore, some special mark shall be made and fixed to the doors of every
of the infected houses, and where any such houses shall be Iunes or Alehouses,
the signs shall be taken down for the time of the restraint, and some cross
or other mark set upon the place thereof to be a token of the sickness.

6 Item, they shall have good regard to choose honest persons that either shall
collect the sums assessed, or shall have the custody thereof, and out of the
said collection to allot a weekly proportion for the finding of victual, or
fire, or medicines for the poorer sort, during the time of their restraint. And
whereas some persons being well disposed to yield alms and relief, will be
more willing to give some portions of victual, as corn, bread, or other meat,
the same shall be committed to the charge of some special persons, that will
honestly and truly preserve the same, to be distributed as they shall be
appointed for the poor that are infected.

7 Item, to appoint certain persons dwelling within the towns infected, to
provide and deliver all necessaries of victuals, or any matter of watching or
other attendance, to keep such as are of good wealth being restrained, at
their own proper costs and charges, and the poor at the common charges: and
the said persons so appointed to be ordered, not to resort to any public
assembly during the time of such their atte^dance, as also to wear some mark
on their upper garment, or to bear a white rod in their hand, to the end
others may avoid their company.

8 Item, that in the Shire town in every County, and in other great towns
meet for that purpose, there may be provision bespoken and made, of such
preservatives and other remedies, which otherwise in meaner towns cannot be
readily had, as by the Physicians shall be prescribed, and is at this present
reduced into an Advise made by the Physicians, and now printed and sent with
the said Orders, which may be fixed in market places, upon places usual for
such public matters, and in other towns in the bodies of the parish
Churches, and Chapels, in which advise only such things are prescribed, as
usually are to be had and found in all Countries without great charge or cost.

9 Item, the Ministers and Curates, and the Churchwardens in every Parish,
shall in writing certify weekly to some of the Justices, residing within the
Hundred or other limit where they serve, the number of such persons as are
infected and do not die, and also of all such as shall die within their
Parishes, and their diseases probable whereof they died, and the same to be
certified to the rest of the Justices at their assemblies, which during some
convenient time would be every one and twenty days, and thereof a particular
book kept by the Clerk of the Peace or some such like.

10 Item, to appoint some place apart in each Parish for the burial of such
persons as shall die of the plague, as also to give order that they be buried
after Sun setting, and yet nevertheless by day light, so as the Curate be
present for the observation of the Rites and Ceremonies prescribed by the Law,
foreseeing as much as conveniently he may, to be distant from the danger of
infection of the person dead, or of the company that shall bring the corpse to
the grave.

11 Item, the Justices of the whole County to assemble once in one and twenty
days, to examine whether those orders be duly executed, and to certify to
the Lords of the privy Council their proceedings in that behalf, what Towns
and Villages be infected, as also the numbers of the dead, and the diseases
whereof they died, and what sums of money are taxed and collected to this
purpose, and how the same are distributed.

12 Item, the Justices of the hundred, where any such infection is, or the
Justices next adjoining thereunto, to assemble once a week, to take account of
the execution of the said Orders, and as they find any lack or disorder,
either to reform it themselves, or to report it at the general assembly
there, to be by a more common consent reformed.

13 Item, for that the contagion of the plague grows and increases no way
more, then by the use and handling of such clothes, bedding and other stuff as
has been worn and occupied by the infected of this disease, during the time
of their disease: the said Justices shall in the places infected take such
order, that all the said clothes and other stuff, so occupied by the diseased,
so soon as the parties diseased of the plague are all of them either well
recovered or dead, be either burnt and clean consumed with fire, or else ayred
in such sort as is prescribed in an especial article contained in the Advice
set down by the Phisicians. And for that peradventure the loss of such
apparel, bedding and other stuff to be burnt, may be greater then the poor
estate of the owners of the same may well bear: it is thought very good and
expedient, if it be thought meet it shall be burnt, that then the said
Justices, out of such collections as are to be made within their Counties for
the relief of the poorer sort that be infected, allow also to them such sum
or sums as to them shall be thought reasonable, in recompense of the loss of
their said stuff.

14 Item, the said Justices may put in execution any other Orders that by them
at their general assembly shall be devised and thought meet, tending to the
preservation of his Majesty's subjects from the infection: and to the end their
care and diligence may the better appear, they shall certify in writing the
said Orders newly devised: and if any shall wilfully break and contemn the
same or any of the orders herein specified, they shall either presently punish
them by imprisonment, or if the persons so contemning them, shall be of such
countenance as the Justices shall think meet to have their faults known to
his Majesty, or to the Council, they shall charge and bind them to appear
before us, and the contempt duly certified, that there may be a more notorious
sharp example* made by punishment of the same by order of his Majesty.

15 Item, if there be lack of Justices in some parts of the Shire, or if they
which are Justices there shall be for the time absent, in that case the more
number of the Justices at their assembly shall make choice of some convenient
persons to supply those places for the better execution hereof.

16 Item, if there be any person Ecclesiastical or Lay, that shall hold and
publish any opinions (as in some places report is made) that it is a vain thing
to forbear to resort to the Infected, or that it is not charitable to forbid
the same, pretending that no person shall die but at their time prefixed, such
persons shall be not only reprehended, but by order of the Bishop, if they be
Ecclesiastical, shall be forbidden to preach, and being Lay, shall be also
enjoined to forbear to utter such dangerous opinions upon pain of
imprisonment, which shall be executed, if they shall persevere in that error.
And yet it shall appear manifestly by these Orders, that according to
Christian charity, no persons of the meanest degree shall be left without
succor and relief.

17 And of these things above mentioned, the Justices shall take great care, as
of a matter specially directed and commanded by his Majesty upon the princely
and natural care he has conceived toward the preservation of his subjects,
who by very disorder, and for lack of direction do in many parts wilfully
procure the increase of this general contagion.

An advise set down by the best learned in Physic within this Realm:
Containing sundry good Rules and easy Medicines, without charge to the meaner
sort of people, as well for the preservation of his good Subjects from the
Plague before infection, as for the curing and ordering of them after they
shall be infected.
Preservative by correcting the air in houses.
TAke Rosemarie dried, or Juniper, Bay-leaues, or Frankincense, cast the same
on a Chafendish, and receive the fume or smoke thereof: some advise to be added
Lauander, or Sage.

Also to make fires rather in Pannes, to remove about the Chamber, then in
Chimneys, shall better correct the air of the Houses.

Take a quantity of Vinegar very strong, and put to it some small quantity of
Rosewater, ten branches of Rosemarie, put them all into a Basen, then take
five or six Flintstones, heated in the fire till they be burning hot, cast
them into the same Vinegar, and so let the fumes be received from place to
place of your house.

Perfuming of Apparel.
SUch apparel as you shall commonly wear, let it be very clean, and perfume
it ofen either with some read Saunders burned, or with Juniper. And if any
shall happen to be with them that are visited, let such persons as soon as
they shall come home, shift themselves, and air their clothes, in open air for
a time.

Preservation by way of defense in open air, and common assemblies to be used
outwardly.
IT is good in going abroad into the open air in the streets, to hold some
things of sweet savor in their hands, or in the corner of an handkerchife, as
a sponge dipped in Vinegar and Rosewater mixed, or in Vinegar, wherein
Wormwood, or Rue called also Herbegrace, has been boiled.

Preservative by way of inward medicine.
TAke a quantity of Rue, or Wormwood, or of both, and put it into a pot of
usual drink, close stopped, let it lie so in steep a whole night, and drink
thereof in the morning fasting.

In all Summer plagues, it shall be good to use Sorrel sauce to be eaten in the
morning with bread. And in the fall of the leaf to use the juice of Barberies
with bread also.

Men's bodies are apt to take infection, either By the constitution of the
heart, the vital spirits being weak, and the natural heat feeble, in which
case things Cordial are to be used. By repletion, the body being filled with
humors, either Good, and then is the party to be let blood. Evil, and then is
he to be cured with medicine purgative.



Preservatives Cordials.
Mithridates Medicine.
TAke of good Figs not wormeaten, clean washed, of Walnuts the kernels
clean picked, of either of them an hundred, of the leaves of green Rue,
otherwise called Herbegrace, the weight of ii. s. of common Salt the weight of
iii. d. cut the Figs in pieces, and stamp them and the Walnut kernels together
in a mortar of marble or wood a good space, until they be very small, and then
put the Rue leaves unto them, stamp and stir them well together with the
rest, last put in the Salt and stamp and stir these things together, until
they be incorporated and made of one substance. Of the which take the quantity
of ii. or iii. Figs every morning fasting, to children the half will serve,
and he that lists to increase or diminish the substance of this medicine,
shall easily do it, by taking of a greater or less quantity of the simples
according to a due proportion.

A well approved Medicine to preserve.
TAke of the finest clear Aloes you can buy, in color like to a Liver, and
therefore called Hepatica, of Cinnamon, of Myrrh, of each of these the weight of
iii. French crowns, or of xxii. d. of our money, of Cloves, Maces, Lignum
Aloes, of Mastick, of Bole Oriental, of each of these half an ounce: mingle
them together and beat them into a very fine powder. Of the which take every
morning fasting the weight of a groate of this in white wine delayed with
water, and by the grace of God you shall be safe from the Plague. No man which
is learned, if he examine the simples of this medicine whereof it consists,
and the nature and power of them, can deny but that it is a medicine of great
efficacy against the Plague, and the simples whereof it is made, are easily to
be had in any good Apothecaries shop, except Bole Oriental, which is used in
the stead of true Bolus Armenus.

Take a dry Fig and open it, and put the kernel of a Walnut into the same
being cut very small, three or four leaves of Rue commonly called Herbegrace,
a corn of Salt, then roast the Fig and eat it warm, fast iii. or iiii.
hours after it, and use this twice in the week.

Take the powder of Turmentil, the weight of vipence with Sorrel or Scabious
water in Summer, and in Winter with the water of Valerian or common drink.

Or else in one day they may take a little Wormwood, and Valerian with a grain
of Salt. In another day they may take vii. or viii. berries of Juniper, dried
and put in powder, and taking the same with common drink, or with drink in
which Wormwood and Rue has been steeped all the night.

Also the triacle called Dietessearoum, which is made but of 4. things of light
price easy to be had.

Also the root of Enula Campana, either taken in powder with drink, or hanged
about the breast.

Likewise a piece of Arras root kept in the mouth as men pass in the streets,
is very good Cordial.

Take six leaves of Sorrel, wash them with water and Vinegar, let them lie to
steep in the said water and Vinegar a while, then eat them fasting, and keep
in your mouth and chewe now or then either Stewall, or the root of Angelica,
or a little Cinnamon.

Take the root of Enula Campana being laid and steeped in Vinegar, and gross
beaten, put a little of it in a handkerchiefe, and smell to it if you resort to
any that is infected.

For women with child, or such as be delicate and tender, and cannot away with
taking of Medicines.
MAke a tossed of white or of the second bread as you think good, and sprinkle
on it being hot a little good wine Vinegar, made with Rose leaves, and for
want of it, any good common or used Vinegar, and spread on the tossed a little
butter, and cast thereon a little powder of Cinnamon, and eat it in the morning
fasting. The poor which cannot get Vinegar nor buy Cinnamon, may eat bread and
butter alone: for butter is not only a preservative against the Plague, but
against all manner of poisons.

When one must come into the place where infectious persons are, it is good to
smell to the root of Angelica, Gentian, or Valerian, and to chew any of these
in his mouth.

Another preservative for the poor.
IT shall be good to take an handful of Rue, and as much common Wormwood, and
bruise them a little: and put them into a pot of earth or tin, with so much
Vinegar as shall cover the herdes: keep this pot close covered or stopped, and
when you fear any infection, dippe into this Vinegar a piece of a sponge, and
carry it in your hand and smell to it, or else put it into a round ball of
Yuorie or Juniper made full of holes of the one side, carrying it in your hand
use to smell thereunto, renewing it once in a day.

To be used after Infection taken.
FOr as much as the cause of the Plague stands rather in poison, then in any
putrefaction of humors as other agues do, the chiefest way is to move
sweatings, and to defend the heart by some cordial thing.

Suppositarie.
IF the patient be costiue and bound in his body, let him take a Suppositarie
made with a little boiled Honey, and a little fine powder of Salt, and so taken
in at the Fundament, and kept till it move a stool.

An excellent Medicine made without charges.
TAke of the powder of good Bayberies, the husk taken away from them, before
they be dried, a spoonefull: Let the Patient drink this, well mingled in a
draught of good stale Ale or Beer, which is neither sour nor dead, or with a
draught of white Wine, and go to bed and cast himself into a sweat, and
forbear sleep as is aforesaid.

An other sovereign remedy, that is a stilled water.
TAke the inward bark of the Ash tree, a pound, of Walnuts with the green
outward shelles, to the number of fifty, cut these small, of Scabious, of
Veruen, of Petimorel, of Housleeke, of every one a handful, of Saffron half
an ounce, power upon these the strongest Vinegar you can get four pintes, let
them a little boil together upon a very soft fire, and then stand in a very
close pot well stopped all a night upon the embers, afterward distill them with a
soft fire, and receive the water close kept. Give unto the Patient laid in bed
and well covered with clothes, two ounces of this water to drink, and let him
be provoked to sweat, and every six hours, during the space of twenty four
hours, give him the same quantity to drink. This Medicine for the
worthiness thereof, and because it will stand the maker thereof in little
charge, it shall be very well done to distill it in Summer when the Walnuts
hang green on the tree, that it may be ready against the time that occasion
serves to use it.

1. Bloodletting.
IF the Patient be full of humors which be good, let him immediately be let
blood upon the Liver vein in the right arm, or in the Median vein of the
same arm (if no sore appear) in the first day.

2. Medicine purgative.
FOr the Poor take Aloes the weight of six pence, put in the pappe of an
Apple: and for the richer Pills of Rufus to be had in every good Apothecaries
shop. After letting of blood and purging (as shall be needful) some of the
forenamed Cordials are to be used.

These preparations thus used the first day that the Patient shall fall sick,
as cause shall be to use the one or the other (no sore appearing) in which case
if the sore shall appear, they are both to be forborne, the next is to use
all means to expel the poison, and to defend the heart by Cordials.

3. Medicament expulsive.
THe poison is expelled best by sweatings provoked by posset Ale, made with
Fenel and Marigolds in Winter, and with Sorrel, Buglosse and Borage in Summer,
with the which in both times they must mix the Triacle of Diatessaroum, the
weight of ix. d. and so to lay themselves with all quietness to sweat one
half hour, or an hour if they he strong. For they that be neither full of
humors nor corrupt in humors, need neither purging nor letting of blood, but
at the first plunge may move themselves to sweat with Cordial things mixed
with such things as move sweat, and are before declared.

What is to be done when there is any rising or swelling in any part.
THen if by these three means the poison be expelled outward by botches,
carbuncles or marks, called Gods marks, according as nature does expel, so
must the further proceedings be, providing still, that they continue still in
the use of the cordial and moderate sweating now and then, all the time that
the sores be in healing, which must by the Surgion be handled with great
discretion.

Medicines to be used in ordinary diet.
IT is thought that the powder of Hearts horn has a special prerogative, to
be used all the time of their sickness in their broths, and supping, which in
Summer must ever have Sorrel, Borage, Buglasse, and in winter, Betony, and
Scabious, or Morsus Diaboli, and if their habilities do not serve, let them use
it with Aleburies made with a little Nutmegge, or one Cloue, or with Cawdels in
like manner made with Cloves, Maces, Nutmegs, Sanders or such like.

Both to preserve and cure the sickness.
TAke an egg and make a hole in the top of it, take out the white and yelke,
fill the shell with the weight of two french crowns of Saffron, roast the said
egg thus filled with Saffron under the embres, until the shell begin to wax
yellow, then take it from the fire, and beat the shell and Saffron in a mortar
together, with half a spoonefull of Mustard seed, take of this powder a french
crown weight, and as soon as you suspect your self infected, dissolve it into
ten spoonefuls of posset ale, and drink it luke warm, then go to bed and
provoke your self to sweating.

To be used in the first time of the sickness.
ANother is to take five or six handful of Sorell, that grows in the field,
or a greater quantity according as you will distill more or less of the water
thereof, and let it lie infrised or steeped in good Vinegar the space of four
and twenty hours, then take it off and dry it with a linen cloth put into a
Limbecke, and distill the water thereof: And as soon as you find your self
touched with the sickness, drink four spoonefuls of the said water with a
little sugar, and if you be able, walk upon it until you do sweat, if not,
keep your bed, and being well covered, provoke your self to sweating, and the
next day to take as much again of it a little before supper.

Item, to provoke vomit with two ounces of rank oil, or walnut oil, a
spoonefull of the juice of Celendine and half a spoonefull of the juice of
radice root, so that the party Infected do walk and not sleep, is better then
any letting of blood, or any purging. For the disease neither can suffer
agitation of humors, nor when one is infected, has no time to bleed or to
purge.

Outwrrd Medicines for to be applied to the sore.
The first*
TAke of Scabious two handfuls, stamp it in a stone mortar with a pestell of
stone if you can get any such, then put unto it of old swines grease salted,
two ounces, and the yelke of an egg, stamp them well together, and lay part
of this warm to the sore.

The second.
TAke of the leaves of Mallows, of Camomill flowers, of either of them an
handful, of Linseede beaten into powder two ounces, boil the Mallow leaves
first cut, and the flowers of the Camomill in fair water, standing above a
fingers breadth, boil all them together, until all the water almost be spent:
then put thereunto the Linseede, of Wheat flower half an handful, of swines
grease the skins taken away three ounces, of oil of Roses two ounces, stir
them still with a stick, and let them all boil together on a soft fire
without smoke, until the water be utterly spent, beat them all together in a
mortar, until they be well encorporated together, and in feeling smooth, and
not rough: then make part thereof hot in a dish set upon a chafindish of
coals, and lay it thick upon a linen cloth applying it to the sore.

Another excellent Medicine to ripen and bring out the sore.
TAke a white Onion cut in pieces, of fresh butter iii. ounces, of Leven the
weight of xii. d. of Mallows one handful, of Scabious if it may be had one
handful, of Cloves of Garlic the weight of xx. d. boil them on the fire in
sufficient water, and make a pultesse of it, and lay it warm to the sore.

Another.
TO the sore it self do thus. Take two handful of Valerian, three roots of
Danewort, a handful of Smalledge, or Louage, if you can get it, seethe them
all in butter and water, and a few crummes of bread, and make a pultesse
thereof, and lay it warm to the sore until it break.

Another for the same.
IF you cannot have these herbs, it is good to lay a loaf of bread to it hot
as it comes out of the oven (which afterward shall be burnt or buried in the
earth) or the leaves of Scabious or Sorrel roasted, or two or three Lilly
roots roasted under embers, beaten and applied.

A general m^dicine for all sorts of people taken with the plague to be had
without cost.
TAke of the root of butter burre, otherwise called p^^^^^ent wort, one ounce,
of the root of great Valerian a ^^arter of an ounce, of Sorrel an handful,
boil all these in a quart of water to a pint, then strain it and put there to
two spoonefuls of Vinegar two ounces of good Sugar, boil all these together
until they be well mingled, let the infected drink of this so hot as he may
suffer it a good draught, and if he chance to cast it up again, let him take
the same quantity straightway upon it, and provoke himself to sweat, and he
shall find great help.

Time of continuance apart from common assemblies.
SUch as have been infected, should keep their house without being conversant
with ye whole, until the sores (...) have (...) and be perfectly whole and
sound, which in sanguine and choleric persons will be healed sooner, then in
melancho^^ke and flegmatike complexions.

SUch persons may not well be conversant with them which are not infected, for
the space of one mo^^th.

Infected clothes.
THe Contagion suspected to remain in cloths, either woollen or linen, cannot
well be avoided by (...) means, then by fire and water, by often ^^^^ing and
ai^ing the same in frostes, and son shine, with good discretion, and b^^ning
the clothes o^ small val^^.

FINIS.

