THE ARTICLES OF PEACE AGREED UPON, betwixt the two Crowns of Great BRITAIN
and of FRANCE.

And the publication of the Peace, made at ROVEN, on Sunday, the 20. of May,
last past, by the commandment of the French King, and the Queen his Mother.
Translated out of the French copy.

LES ARTICLES DE LA PAIX, accordee enter le Roy de France and le Roy de la
Grand' Bretagne.

Ensemble la publication faite a Rouen, le Dimanche Yingtiesme de ce present
mois, par le commandment du Roy and de la Reyne sa mere.

A Rouen de l'imprimerie de David du Petit val, Imprimeur ordinaire du Roy.
M.DC.XXIX. Auec privilege dudict Seigneur.

Together with two other Relations. The one concerning the siege and taking of
the town of Priuas by the French King, with the loss of many men of note, and
of the extremity used to the defendants upon the taking thereof. The others
from the sieges of the Prince of Orange, before the town of Balduck, or the
Bush.

LONDON, Printed for NICHOLAS BOVRNE, dwelling at the South entrance of the
Royal Exchange. 1629.

DE PARLE ROY, ET La Reyne samere, ayant le Gouuernement des Provinces de deca
le Loyre, pendant l'absence de sa Majeste.
ON fait scauoir, que Paix, Alliance and bonne Confederation a este conclue
enter Tres-haut, Tres-puissant, and Tres-excellent Prince LOVIS parlagrace de
Dieu Roy de France and de Navarre, nostre Souuerain Seigneur: Et Tres-haut,
Tres-tuissant, and Tres-excellent Prince CHARLES par la mesme grace de Dieu Roy
de la Grand' Bretagne, and leurs subjects desdits Royaumes, selon leurs
anciennes Alliances and Confederations, demeurant les anciens Traicteztant de
Paix, Alliance, and Ligue defensive, que ceux faits sur le subject du Commerce,
en leur pleine and entiere force, sans que par les acts d'hostilite commises
ils puissent estre dits auoir este enfraints pour l'aduenir: Et d'autant qu'il
a este expedie de part and d'autre plusieurs Commissions pour fair la guerre
sur mer, and qu'auiour du Traicte arreste, ny a celuy de la Publication, les
Capitaines qui sont en mer n'en peuuent anoir cognoissance, il leur est done
deux mois de tomps du iour de la signature desdits Articles pour reuenir,
pendant lesquels ce qu'ils pourront fair ne sera interpret a rupture ou
contrauention a la present Paix, mais tout ce qui aura este pris par eux sera
restitue a la premiere demand, si les Equipages n'ont este relaschez des
l'instant qu'ils sont arriuez au port.

Fait a Paris le dixneufiesme iour de May, 1629. Sign Et plus bas, MARIE.
DELOMENIE.

The French Proclamation Englished. BY THE KING, AND The Queen his mother,
having the government of the Provinces on this side of the river of Loyre,
during the absence of his Majesty.
BE it known, that there has been concluded a peace, alliance and good
confederation betwixt the most excellent, high and mighty Prince LEWIS, by the
grace of God, King of France and Navarre, our Sovereign Lord: And the most
excellent, high and mighty Prince CHARLES, by the same grace of God, King of
Great Britain, and their subjects of the said Kingdoms, according to the
ancient and former alliances and confederations thereof, the ancient Treaties
both of peace, alliance and of a defensive league, and also those that have
been made concerning the Commerce and trading, remaining in their full and
perfect strength, so that they may not be said to have been infringed for the
time to come, by the acts of hostily lately committed: And whereas many
Commissions on both parts have been granted to make war upon the sea; and
forasmuch as upon the day prefixed in the Treaty, nor upon the day of the
publication thereof, the Captains that are at sea cannot have knowledge
thereof, there is granted unto them the space of two months from the day of
the signature of the said Articles, to return home; during which time what may
be done by them, shall not be taken for a rupture or contrauention to this
present peace: But whatsoever shall have been taken by them, shall be
restituted upon the first asking, if so be that present restitution and
relaxation has not been made thereof, as soon as they came into the Port or
Haven.

Given at Paris the nineteenth of May, 1629. Signed And beath, MARIE. DELOMENIE.

ARTICLES DE PAIX ENTER LES DEVX COVRONNES.
1.
PRemierement, les deux Roys demeureront d'accord de renouueller les anciennes
alliances enter les deux Couronnes, and les garder inuiolablement, auec
ouuerture du Commerce seur and libre. Et pour le regard dudit Commerce, s'il y
a quelque chose a adjouster ou diminuer, se fera de part and d'autre de gre a
gre, ainfi qu'il sera juge a propos.

2.
Et d'autant qu'il seroit difficile de fair les restitutions de part and
d'autre des diuerses prises, qui ont este faites durant la guerre, les deux
Couronnes sont demeurees d'accord, qu'il ne s'en fera aucune: Et ne s'accordera
aucune represaille par mer ou autre facon quelconque, pource qui s'est pass
enter les deux Roys and leurs subjects durant cette derniere guerre.

3.
Quant a ce qui regard les Articles and Contract du Marriage de la Reyne de la
Grand' Bretagne, Ils seront confermez de bonne foy: Et sur ce qui concern la
Maison de la Reyne, s'il ya quelque chose a adjouster ou diminuer, se fera de
part and d'autre, de gre a gre, ainsi que sera juge a propos pour le service de
ladite Reyne.

4.
Toutes les anciennes Alliances, tant de l'vne que de l'autre Couronne
demeureront en leur vigueur, sans que pour ce present Traicte il y ait aucune
alteration.

5.
Les deux Roys par ce present Traite estant reunis en l'affection and
intelligence, en laquelle ils estoient auparauant; s'employeront respectiuement
a donner assistance a leurs Alliez and amiss, selon que la constiturion des
affairs and l'aduantage du bien publicq le requerront and le pourront
permettre: Le tout a dessein, de procurer un entier repos a la Chrestiente,
pour le bien de lalaquelle les Ambassadeurs des deux Couronnes seront chargez
de Propositions and d'ouuertures.

Toutes lesdites chooses estant restablies and acceptees de cost and d'autre:
Ambassadeurs Extraordinaires,

6.
persons de qualite, seront enuoyez reciproquement auec ratification de ce
present Accord: lesquels porteront aussi la denomination des Ambassadeurs
Ordinaires, pour resider a l'vne and a l'autte Cour, afin de rafermir ceste
bonne union, and empescher toutes les occasions qui la pourront troubler.

7
Et d'autant qu'il y a beaucoup de vaisseaux encores en mer auec lettres de
marque and pouuoir de combattre les ennemis, qui ne pourront pas si tossed
entendre ceste Paix, ny receuoir order de s'abstenir de toute hostilite, Il
sera accord par cest Article que tout ce qui sera pris dans l'espace de deux
mois, depuis la signature du Traite, sera restitue de part and d'autre.

8
Les deux Rois signeront les presents Articles dans le 24. du mois d'Auril,
lesquels seront consignez au mesme temps par leur commandment es mains des
sieurs Ambassadeurs de Venice, residens pres de leur persons, pour les
deliurer reciproquement ausdits deux Roys a iour prefix incontinent que chacun
d'eux aura sceu l'vn de l'autre qu'ils ont lesdits Articles enter les mains, Et
du iour de la signature tous acts d'hostilite tant par mer que par terre
cesseront, Et les Proclamations necessaires a cet effect seront faites en mesme
iour dans les deux Royaumes.

THE TRANSLATION OF THE ARTICLES OF PEACE BETWIXT THE TWO CROWNS.
1.
FIrst, the two Kings shall remain agreed, to renew the ancient alliances
betwixt the two Crowns, and to keep the same inuiolably, opening again the
Commerce sure and free. And concerning the said Commerce, if there is any thing
to be added or diminished about the same, It shall be done on both parts freely
and willingly, as it shall be thought convenient.

2.
And for as much as it should be difficult to make the restitutions on the one
and the other part of the diverse prizes, which during this war have been
taken: The two Crowns are agreed, that there shall be made no restitution; And
there shall also not be granted any reprizal by Sea, nor by any other ways
whatsoever, for what is past betwixt the two Kings and their Subjects, during
this last war.

3.
Concerning the Articles and contract of the marriage of the Queen of Great
Britain, the same are to be confirmed faithfully: And as for the said Queens
Household. If there is any thing to be added or diminished, it shall be done by
a mutual consentment freely and willingly, as it shall be judged fit and
convenient for the service of the said Queen.

4.
All former and ancient alliances, both of the one and of the other Crown,
shall remain in their full force, they receiving no alteration by this present
Treaty.

5.
The two Kings being by this present Treaty reunited in the same good
affection and intelligence, where they were formerly in, shall employ
themselves, and endeavor mutually to give aid and assistance unto their
allies and friends, according as by the constitution of affairs, and by the
advantage of the Common good shall be required, and suffered: And all this to
the end, thereby to procure an entire quietness for Christendom: For the good
whereof, the Ambassadors of the two Crowns shall receive propositions and
ouertures.

6.
All these said things being reestablished and accepted on the one and the
other part, there shall be sent reciprocally Extraordinary Amdassadours,
Persons of quality, with the ratification of the present agreement; The which
shall bring with them the domination of ordinary Ambassadors, that are to
reside in the one and the other Royal Court, thereby to confirm again the
good union, and to hinder all occasions that might trouble the same.

7.
And whereas there are yet many Ships abroad in the sea with Letters of Mart,
and commission to fight against their enemies, which cannot so soon have
knowledge of this peace, nor receive order to abstain from all hostility:
therefore it shall be agreed upon by this Article, that whatsoever shall be
taken, during the space of two Months after the signature of this present
Treaty, shall be restored on the one and the other side.

8.
The two Kings shall sign these present Articles on the 24. day of the month
of April, the which shall afterward be consigned and delivered at the very
same time by their commandments, into the hands of the Lords Ambassadors of
Venice, residing near their royal persons, to be mutually delivered unto the
said two Kings at the prefixed day, as soon as each of them shall have
knowledge of the other, that they have the said Articles in their hands: And
from the day of the signature, all acts of hostility both by Sea and by Land
shall cease: And Proclamations needful to this effect, shall be published upon
one day, within the two Kingdoms. Given, etc.

From the Camp before Priuas, the 28. of May.
WE gave yesterday a surious assault in two places, viz. at one corner and
against a little Fort called Tournon, into which our men entered and remain
there: but we received a great loss of brave men, as you shall see by the
following list. The fight began at 8. of the clock at the evening, and lasted
till 10. We have to deal with most courageous men, who do defend themselves
most valiantly, knowing perhaps there is no grace for them to be obtained: We
only fear they save themselves once in a night, stealing away into the hills.
There are hereabouts certain men which are called Bandits, and are men who
being driven out of their Towns and from their houses, do much trouble all
such as come or go to and from our Camp, killing and taking some prisoners,
and rob every where. They took yesterday a Barge upon the Rhosne, wherein
there were a great many persons, and amongst them Messieurs de Nauailles.

Priuas is but a small Town between two hills, which compass it, but do not
command it, it is but meanly fortified. There is but one house not far from
it, where the King is lodged in, and all the Army is camped in the field.

The list of those that were slain.
The Marquis Des Ports. The Cheualier or Knight de la Fertay. The Count de
Ferrieres, brother to the Lady Constable, The Count de St. Germain. Monsieur de
Talanque Captain of the Regiment of Normandy. Both the Lieutenants of the
Marquis de Canillac and du Potel, Captains of the Cauallerie. All the
Sergeants that conducted the Enfans perdus. 35. Light-horse-men. 70.
Voluntaries, Gentlemen of quality. Twelve other Gentlemen of note, whose names
I cannot now remember. And four hundred Soldiers at least.
These were hurt.
The Count de la Noy. The Baron de Valensay, Master of the Camp. The said
Barons brother. Monsieur de Piolin, Captain of a Regiment in Normandy. Both
the brothers de Seneterres. Monsieur Desquilly. Monsieur de Maniquan. Monsieur
de Corigni, Governor of Beaune.
By other letters written the 4. of June stilo nouo, we receive assured news,
that one of the Soldiers of the Garrison of Priuas betrayed the said Town,
and caused it to be surprised on the 20. of May, whereby the French Army
revenged the foresaid loss, the King causing 45. Soldiers to be hanged, that
were taken in the Town, the rest saved themselves by flight into the hills:
And some others having withdrawn themselves into a little Fort, yielded the
same also, and they all (being 25. in number) were also hanged, only Monsieur
de Montbrun and four other principal Officers, were sent prisoners to
Valensay: The Town of Priuas has been pillaged and after burnt. There were
found 8. or 9. women, whom the Cardinal saved from hanging. The wars do in
those parts daily increase with greater resolution on both sides, the Kings
Forces endeavoring to spoil all the corn, which the Protestant Towns might
look for to reap. And it seems that the peace, continuing in Italy, as it is
from thence confirmed, will be the occasion of the continuance of the
lamentable troubles in those parts of France.

From the States Camp before Bolduc or the Bush, the 25. of May.
Our Camp is divided into 5. several Quarters, his Excellence lies on the
South side of the Town, at a village called Vught. Count Ernest on the East:
The Lord Bredewde South-east near the Cloister Eykendonck. Count William on
the North side, and Pinsen on the West side. The Camp is now clozed in by
joining lines twelve foot high, and 12. foot broad, or thick at the bottom,
and four at the top: and the ditch before it is of 6. foot deep, and 12.
broad; and without it there is another ditch of the same breadth and depth as
the former for the shooting of the water. Upon some other auenues there are
made Forts or Horn-workes or Redoubts, the whole ground of the circumuallation
is of about 6. hours going. Toward the Town we have as yet done little, but
raised on the East and North sides a Battery as near to the Town, as we can
come for water. We are also drayning the water from the Town, by the help of a
certain number of hand-mils of excellent invention. If this project of
draining can take effect, we believe we shall make our passage to the Town,
with more speed then is imagined. Some say the Town wants victual, and that
they within will be starued out within less then five months: Others say,
that their provision of powder is so skant, that they can make no real
defense. The truth of these assertions are only known to our General, but I
believe in want of powder more then want of victual, and in the way of
approach then the way of staruing. Thus the Dye is cast, and whatsoever the
means, wit and courage of either side can invent or act, I make no question
will be put in execution, etc.

Concerning the enemy without us, I cannot tell you much. It is constantly
reported, that there is great disorder in their affairs through want of money.
There is also another let by a dissension betwixt Count Henry Vandenberg and
Don Carlo de Colomna, about the Command in the Marquis absence. Count Henry
having obtained the command by the Infanta's favor, has gotten three months
pay, but the Soldiers are not content withal, whatsoever the matter is: we
have by this gotten so much time as has served us to dig our selves into
safety, and to block up all access, which was our principal desire: and so
building upon no report, we expect the utmost of what they dare or can, rather
then they will suffer this jewel to be pulled out of their Coronet. The issue
is in the hand of the God of Battails.

FINIS.

