Institutions in the laws of England.

Cum priuilegio.

THe law is the ministracion of justice / and justice is a constante and
apermanent mind and will to render unto every person his right and duty. The
prudencye of law is a knowledge of divine and humane things / a science and
perfyte notice of equite and iniquite / of ryghtuousnes and unrighteousness.

And forasmoch as a great portion of the prudencye of ye laws of this realm
consists in the perfyte knowledge of estates, in lands and tenementes: we
shall first as compendiously, and as simply and plainly as we can treat of
estates.

A division of estates.
Ye shall understand, that who so ever has any estate in lands or
teneme^tes, either he has i^ ye same only a chatell / a free hold / or an
inheritance. If he has an estate in the land but for term of certain
years, or at will: so is it called a chatell / if for term of his life or of an
others life, it is called a free hold, or frank tenement / if he has it to
him and to his heirs in see simple, or in tail: so he has an estate of
inheritance.

Tenant for term of years.
Tenant for term of years, is he to whom lands or tenementes be lessed for
the term of certain years, as is agreed bitwene ye land lord and the
tenant. And when the lessee does enter by force of the said lees, and is an
actual possession of the same: than he is called tenant for term of years.

And here ye shall note, that if the lessour that made the lees has reserved
unto him a yearly rent upon the said lees (as it is accustomably used to be
done) if ye rent be behynd it shall be in his election either to enter and
distrayne for the rent, or to bring an action of debt against him at the
law, for the arreragies of the same. But in this case it is required that the
lessour be seized of the lands or tenementes at the time of the making of the
lees, for otherwise it shall be a good plee in the action of debt for the
tenaunte to say that the lessour had nothing in the land or tenement at ye
time of the lees made: except the lees were made by deed indented / for than
the plee shall not lie in the mouth of the tenaunte or lessee to plede.

And it is to be known that in a lees for term of years, by deed or without
deed, there need no lyuery of season to be made to ye lessee, but he may enter
when he will by virtue of his lees, without any further ceremonye of law.

Note also, that if a man lesseth lands for term of years, though the
lessour chances to dye before the lessee does enter, yet he may enter well
enough. Otherwise it is where as lyuery of season is to be made: as in free
holds, and in inherytaunces.

Also if ye tenant for years does waste, the landlord may bring an action of
waste against him, and shall recover the place wasted, and his treble damages.

Tenant at will.
Tenant at will, is he to whom lands or tenementes be lessed to have and hold
the same at ye will of the lessour. And in this case the lessour may put out
his tenant at what time him lysteth. But yet nevertheless, if the tenant have
sowed the grounds with corn, if the lessour will enter and put out his
tenant before harvest, the law will give him free coming and going to repe
and carye his corn away without any punishment because he knew not at what
time the lessour would enter. But otherwise it is of ye tenant for certain
years / for if he sows the ground and his term be expired before the corn
be ripe, in this case yt lessouror he i^ the reuersion may enter and take the
corn, because it was the folly of the tenant to sow ye ground knowing the
end of his term.

In likewise tenant at will shall have free coming and going after the time
of ye lessours entree to carry away his household stuff and goods for a
reasonable space.

Ye shall also understand that he that makes a lees at will may reserve an
annuel rent, in which case if the rent be behind, he may enter and distreyne
the goods and catelles of the tenant, or at his election bring an action of
debt against him.

Also it is to be known that tenant at will of a mese or tenement is not
bound by thorder of law to sustain and repair the houses that be ruynous as
is the tenant for years / and therefore none action of waste lies against him.
Yet if he do voluntary waste: as if he plucketh down the houses, or cutteth
down ye trees: it has been thought that the lessour may bring an action of
trespace against him.

Tenant by copy of court roll.
There is an other kind of tenant at will, which is by copye of the court
rolls. And this is when a man is seized of a manner wtin which it has been
used time out of mind, that the tenauntes within the precinet of the said
manner, have holden lands and tenementes to them and their heirs in fee
simple, fee tail, or for term of life, at the will of the lord according to
the custom of the manner. And such can not aliene or sell his land by his
deed / for if he do, the land so aliened and sold, is forfayted i^ to the
lords hands / but if he will alieue his copy hold laud to another, he must
according to the custom, come into the court, and there surrender it in to
the lords hand, to the use of him that shall have the state. The form of
which surrender is this.

Ad hanc curiam venit A. de B. and sursu^reddit i^ eade^ curia vnu^ messuagiu^.
etc. in manus domini ad vsum C. de D. and heredum suorum vel heredum de
corpore. etc. Et super hoc venit predictus C. de D. and cepit domino in eadem
curia messuagium predictum habend and tenend sibi. etc. ad voluntatem domini
secundum consuetudinem manerii, faciend and reddend inde redditus seruicia, and
consuetudines inde Prius debitas and consuetas. etc. Et dat dn^o pro fine. etc.
Et fecit dn^o fidelitatem.

These as I said be called tenau^tes by copye of court roll / because they
have none other evidence concerning their lands, save only the copyes of the
rolls of their lords court.

Neither can these tenauntes sue or be sued for such lands in the kings
court by write or otherwise / but if they will implede or sue others for such
lands, they must do it by way of playnt in the lords court after this sort.

A. de B. querir^ versus C. de D. de placito terre videlicet de vno messuagio
xl. acris terre. iiii. acris prati. etc. cum pertinen^ Et facit protestationem
sequi querela^ istam in natura breuis domini regis assise mortis a^tecessoris
ad co^em legem vel etc. plegii de prosequendo F. G. etc.

Now although some such tenauntes have an inheritance according to the
custom of the manner, yet in very deed they are but tenauntes at the will of
the lord.

For as some men think if ye lord will expel them and put them forth they
have no remedy at all, but to sue unto their lord by peticion, desiring him
to be good unto them. For if they might have any remedy by the law, than
should they not be called (say they) tenau^tes at the will of the lord, after
the custom of the manner. But other men of no less learning and prudencye have been of contrary sentence: as lord Bryan chife justice, in the time of king
Ed. the. iiii. whose opinion was always that if such tenant by ye custom
(payeng his services) be eiected and put forth by his lord without cause
reasonable he may very well bring and maynteyne an action of trespace against
his lord at the common law: as appears. H. xxj. Ed. iiij. Also lord Danby
chyefe justice in likewise, was of the same judgment: as appears. M. vij. Ed.
iiij. where he says that the tenant by the custom is as well i^heritable to
have his land after ye custom, as is he that has a free hold at the common
law / but the determinacion of this question I remytte to my great masters,

Qui iuris no dos and legum enygmata soluunt,

Forasomoche as yet still of this matter, Certant cuasidici and adhuc sub
iudicelis est.

Also ye shall understand, that thusage of some manner is, when the tenaunte
will surrender his land to thuse of an other, that he shall take a wande in
his hand, and deliver it to ye steward of the court, and the steward shall
deliver the same wande in name of seisin to him that shall take the land: and
such a tenant is called, tenaunte by the verge. Diverse other customs there
be of surre^dring of copy hold lands, which here for prolixitie I will
p^termit. And forasmoche as tenau^tes by custom of ye manner, have by ye course
of ye common law no free hold, therefore they be called tenau^tes of base
tenure,

Hitherto I have treated of the first membre of division / that is to wit of
chatelles / for as I said, al leeses for term of years, and at will be
accounted in the law but as catelles, and be comprised under that name / save
that they be called catelles reals / where as kyne, oxen, horses, money, plate,
corn, and such like be called chatell personalles. Now we will prosede to
thexplanicion of the second membre / that is to say, of free holds,

A division of free holds.
Free holds or frank teneme^tes a man may have in sundry wyses, for either he
is seized for term of his own life, or for term of an other ma^s life. if
for term of his own life, either he have gote^ such estate by way of
purchase, or else the law has en^^ed him thereunto. I call it by purchase,
whether he comes unto it by his own bargayning and procurement, or by ye
gift of his friend, and I call it by thoperacion and intytlynge of the law, when
a man maryeth a woman that is an inherures, and has issue by her, and she
dies / now shall he have ye lands during his life by the course of the law,
and shall be called tenant by the curteysye of England.

In like wise, if a man be scased in fee simple, or fee tail of lands, and
takes a wife, and he dies / the law gives unto the wise, the third part of
her husbands lands for term of her life / and she shall be called tenant in
dower.

Tenant for term of life.
Tenant for term of life, is he that holds lands or tenementes for term
of their own life / or for term of an others life. How be it the most
frequent manner of speaking, is to call him that has estate for term of his
own life, tenant for life / and him that has estate for term of an others
life, tenant pour term dautre vie / that is to say, tenaunte for term of an
oters life.

Ye shall note, that he that makes the lees is called the lessour, and he to
whom the lees is made the lessee / so he that makes a feffeme^t is called the
feffour / and he to whom the feffement is made, the feffee.

Also if tenant for term of life, or tenant pour term dautre vie do waste,
the lessour or he in the reuersion shall maynteyne an action of waste against
him, and recover treble damages.

Finally ye shall understand that by an act of parlyament made in the. xxvii,
year of Henry the eight, it is enacted that no free hold, nor estate of
inheritance shall pass ne take effect but by deed indented, sealed and
enrolled in one of the kings courts at Westminster, or else within the same
county where the land lie: as by the said act more at large appears.

Tenaunte by the curtesye.
Tenant by the curtesye of England, is he yt has married a wife ^herited, and
has had issue by her, and she deed / in this case the law of England
permytteth him to reteyne al his wives lands that she had, either i^ fee
simple, or fee tail so long as he lives: And this is by the curteysye of
England / for this thing is used in none other. region.

But in this case it is required that the child ve vital / that is to say, be
borne and brought forth in to this world alive / and therefore the common
saying has been, that unless the child be herd cry, the father shall not
be tenaunte by the curtesye / for thonely prove and argument of life in an
infaunt new borne, is the vagite and cryenge.

Ye shall understand that unless the husband be in actual possession of his
wives lands, and seized of them in her right, he shall not be tenant by
curtesye after her death. And therefore if lands descend to a man's wife, so
that she is tenant in the law, and to every man's accion, yet if the husband
have not made an actual entree during the couerture, he shall not be tenaunte
by the curtesye, for it shall be reputed his folly and negligence, that he would
not enter in her life.

Otherwise it is of aduousons rentes, and such other things, which forthwith
when they discende be in a man without any enter or further ceremonye

Note that if tenant by the curtesye will suffer or make any wast in the lands
or teneme^tes that he so holds / he is punyshable therefore by action of waste.

Also it is to be known, that of things that be in suspense, a man shall not
be tenant by the curtesye / and therefore if a man be the tenant in fee simple
of certain land, and does entremary with a woman yt is ye seignoresse or lady
of the same, and has issue by her, and she dies yet he shall not be tenant
by ye curtesye of the lordshyp or seignory, because him self is tenant of the
land, and therefore the lordeshyp is suspended for the time / for a man can not
be both lord and tenaunte of one thing / but if he had not ben tenant of the
land, he should have had ye lordshyp after the death of his wife by ye curtesye
of England very well.

Of tenant in dower.
Tenaunte in dower, is she that has been married to an husband that was dutynge
the couerture seized of lands or tenementes in fee simple, or fee tail,
which is now deed and she seized of the third part of her husbands said
lands for term of her life. For by the common law of the land, if the
husband be at any time during the couerture seized laufully, whether it be by
purchase or by descent, either in fee or in tail and dye, his wife ought to be
endowed by the course of the common law, of the third foot. And in some
places by an ancient custom of the moitie / yea and though the husband were
never seized actually during the couerture: yet if the lands be cast upon him
by the law, so that the law calls him tenant to every man's action, it
suffiseth for the woman to demand her dower / for it were unreasonable that
the negligence of entering of the husband should hurt the wives title.

Otherwise it is as I said before of tenaunte by the curtesye / for if lands
descend to a woman covert and the husband for slouthfulnes does not enter in
his wives life, he shall not be tenaunte by the curtesye / for by all laws the
wife owes obedience and subjection to her husband / and therefore she can not
compel him to enter / but when lands descend to the wife, the husband only
have power to enter at his pleasure.

And ye shall understand, that unless the wife be passed thage of ix. years
at the time of her husbands death, she shall not be endowed by the common law.

But it is to be known that a woman may by diverse ways preuidice her self of
her dower: as if she be attaynte of treason, murdre or felonye, she get no
dower / notwithstanding she has obtained her pardone.

Also if after the death of her husband she takes a lees for term of life of
the same lands whereof she is endowable. Moreover if she departs from her
husband and lives in aduoutry with another man / and not reconciled again to
her husband without coercion of the ecclesiastical power, she leseth dower.
She shall be also barred of dower if she will witholde from ye heir the
charters and euydence concerning that land whereof she asks dower: But none
other save the heir can deteyne her dower for this cause.

It may not be unknown also of what things she may demand dower, and of
what things not.

Of lands messuagies / aduousons / rent charges / rent seruyses / or
seignoryes / in gross or otherwise / of villaynes / of commons certain / of
estouers certain / she is dowable. But of commons, and estouers sans nombre /
also of annuities / of homage / of things of pleasure: as of seruyces of
payment of roses / and semblable she shall not be endowed.

There be yet two other kinds of dower / the one is called dowme^t ex assensu
patris, and the other dowment de la plus beale pertie.

Dowment ex assensu patris, is wha^ the father is seized of lands in fee / and
his sone heir apparent endoweth his spouse at the church door when he is
espoused of parcel of his fathers lands, with thasse^t of his father in
writing testifieng the same assent / if in this case her husband dye, she may
forthwith enter into the lands so assigned unto her without further appoynting
or process of law, although the father of her husband be yet alive, and in
actual possession of ye land. But if she thus do, and take her to this
endowment at ye church door she can not have her dower by the common law of
the third part of all her husbands lands, or any percell of them, but if
she will refuse this assignement made unto her at the church door, and
demand dower at the common law she may very well.

A man may also endowe his wife at the time of the spousayles of his own
lands, which he has in his own possession / and that dower is called dower
ad ostium ecclesie.

Dowment dela plus beale / that is to say, dowment of the fairest part, shall
be in this case.. When a man is seized of lands wiche he holds of an other
man by knights service / and of other lands which be of socage tenure, and
has issue, which is wtin thage of.xiii. years and dye / and the lord of whom
the land is holden by knights service enters in to the land holden of him /
and the mother of ye child enters in to the socage tenure: as gardeyne in
socage / if in this case the woman will bring a wryt of dower against the lord
gardeyne in cheualrye / he may plede the special matter, and show how she as
gardeyne in socage, has so much land / and pray the court that she may be
permytted to endowe her self of so much land being in her own custody, as
amounts to y^ third part of those lands. And than the judgment shall be,
that the gaerdeyne in chyualry shall reteyn the land holden of him quyte from
the woman during the non age of ye ward. After which judgment she may go and
in presence of her neighbors endowe her self of the best part of that which
is in her custodye, amountynge to the third part of thole / and than is she
called tenaunte in dower de la plus beale.

A diuisyon of inheritaunces.
Nyther unto I have spoken of free holds / now it remains to treat of
inheritau^ces / not that inheritaunces be no free holds, for they be free
holds also / but the other estates of which I have here tofore treated be
only free holds, and of no higher nature / where as a state of inheritance,
although it be a free hold, yet it is not to be called by that name, sithe it
is a far more excellent and greater estate, But ye shall understand that of
inheritaunces some be of more amplitude and excellenct ye than other some be:
as yt inheritance which is pure, simple, and without limitacion of what
heirs, which is called fee si^ple. But when I make a limitacion of what
heirs, than is it called fee tail / of which also be two sorts, as
hereafter more at large shall be reveled. Now the nature of fee simple is to
be declared with our accustomed compendiousnes,

Fee simple.
Fee simple is (as I said) the most ample and large inheritance that can be
excogitate: as yt which a man has to him and to his heirs simply without any
further limitacio^ / whether they be of his own body begoten or not, so that
they be the next of his kynne, and within the degrees it suffiseth.

So that tenaunte in fee simple is he that has lands or tenementes (whether
it be by purchase or by discente) to him and to his heirs for ever. For if a
man will purchase lands in fee simple, he must needs have these words, his
heirs in his purchase, for these only words to make an estate of
inheritance. Therefore if lands be given to a man for ever, and no mencyon be
made of his heirs: he has an estate but for term of his life, because these
words, his heirs do lack.

Yet nevertheless, if a man by his testamente does deuyse lands to an other in
such place where the custom will serve so to do, though he makes no mencyon
of heirs, but says yt he bequetheth to such a parsone such lands, to have
and to hold to him and to his assigns for evermore: here a state of
inheritance does pass / for i^ testamentes the will and intent of ye testatour
is to be pondred, and not ye prescripte words of the law.

Also these terms in the law, frank marriage, and frank almoyne do include
in them words of inherytaunce. And therefore if I give lands to a man with my
daughter in frank marriage without further addicyon of heirs, this is an
estate of inheritance, as we shall hereafter declare more copyously. In
likewise it is of lands given to an house of religion in pure and frank
alms. Moreover if lands be given to a man and to his blodeor to him and to
his seed, he hathin both cases a state of inheritance in the one a fee tail,
and in the other a fee simple. For this word seed, and blood, and such like do
imply words of inheritance,

But now it is to be seen who be said and man's he yres in the law. Ye shall
therefore know, that my brother or sister by the half blood that is to wit,
by the fathers side and not by the mothers / or contrary wise by ye mothers and
not by the fathers, shall never be mine heir / nor none that come of them.

Neither my bastard can be mine heir / nor mine own natural father ne
mother / nor grandfather ne grandmother can be mine heir.

For it is a princyple and ground in the law, that inheritance may linially
descend, but ascend it may not. And therefore if I have lands in fee simple
and dye without issue of my body, my father can not be mine heir: but my
fathers brother or sister shall / and than if my uncle or aunte dye seized
without issue, my father shall have the lands as heir to mine uncle or to mine
aunt, but heir to me he can not be. But it may go from me to mine uncle or
aunte well enough / for that is not called a lyniall ascensyon, but a
collateral,

And ye shall note that by the common law of this realm, my eldest sone shall
have thole inheritance / and after him if he has no issue the second sone
and so forth. And if I have no sons but daughters than shall all the
daughters together inherit / if I have no issue at all, neither sons ne
daughters, than shall my eldest brother succeed me, but if I have no brother,
than my systers if I have any / if not, my uncle by my fathers side, if ye
lands be of mine own purchase And to be short if there be none alive of my
fathers side, it shall go to my mothers side / and if there can be found no
heir neither by fathers side ne yet by mothers, so shall it reuerte and eschere
(as they call it) to ye lord of whom it was holden / for every land must
needs be holden of some lord, as shall be here after showed. But if lands
descend unto me by my mothers side, than if I fail of issue, the lands shall
descend only to my heirs of my mothers side, and never to mine heirs of my
fathers side: As on the contrary side, if I have lands by descent from my
father or his blood, they shall never descend to my heirs by my mothers side.

Thus ye se a great difference in this behalf, between purchased lands and
lands which descend from my anucestour.

If there be three sons, and the myddell sone purchases lands, and dye without
issue, theldest shall have the lands, and not the youngest.

Also it is a principle in our law, that none can be mine heir of lands that
I hold in fee simple, onles he be mine heir by ye hole blood / for if a man
has issue, two or three sons by sundry wives, and theldest purchase the lands
in fee and dies without issue, his half brethren shall not have the land,
but it shall go to his uncle. Likewise if a man has by his first wife a sone
and a daughter, and by his second wife an other sone, and the sone by the
first wife purchases lands in fee, and dies without issue: the sister shall
have the lands by descent, as heir to her brother, and not to the younger
brother. Otherwise it is of lands entayled as shall be hereafter specifyed.

Also if a man be seized of lands in fee simple, and has issue a sone and
daughter by one wife, and a sone by another, and dies, and theldest sone
enters i^ to the lands, and after dies without issue, the daughter shall
have ye lands and not the youngest sone, and yet ye youngest sone is heir to
his father, but he is not so to his brother. But if in this case theldest sone
had not entered after the death of his father but had died before any enter made
by him, tha^ shall not the sister germayne enter but the younger brother as
heir to his father, because theldest brother was never in actual possessyon,
which is requisyte to that person that claymeth to be heir collaterally. But
to the lyniall heirs, it suffyseth that the auncestout should have been heir if
he had lived / I mean as thus. A man is seized of lands, and has issue, a
sone and daughter by one wife, and a sone by another / he dies / theldest sone
enters not, but dies without issue before he can make any actual entree /
his sister shall not have ye lands as heir to her brother, because her
brother was never actually possessed / but ye younger brother shall have them as
heir to his father. Yet if theldest sone in that case had left behynd him
issue of his body, whether it had been sone or daughter, this issue
notwithstanding yt the father was never possessed either actualy or in ye
law, shall have the lands, and shall convey his descent from his father, for
the sone or daughter is linial heir, where as the brother, sister, uncle,
aunte. etc. be heirs collateral, and so observe a dyuersitie.

I call an actual possessyon, when a man enters in deed in to lands to him
descended, but a possessyon in law, is called when lands be descended to a
person, and he has not yet really and actually entered into them. For
notwithstanding that he is not in actual possessyon yet he is possessed in
the law / that is to say, in the eye and consyderacyon of the law /
forasmuch as he is tenant to every man's action that wylsue for the said
lands / for else there should ensue an intolerable inconvenience, as we shall
more copiously open in an other place.

Ye shall understand that this word inheritance is not only to be
acco^modate and applied to that which comes by discente from a man's
ancestors: but also to every purchase in fee simple, or fee tail.

Fee tryle.
Ye shall understand, that before the statute of Westminster second there was
no state tail, but al was fee simple, either purely or condicionally: as
appears by the p^tence of the said statute / but now since the promulgatynge
of that statute diverse forms of state tails have risen.

Fee tail is when it is lymytted in the gift what heirs, and by whom
engendered shall inheryte. As I give lands to a man and to his heirs and go no
further, this is fee simple: but if I make a lymitacion, and add of his body
begoten, now is it fee tail / that is to say, a fee or inheritance lymtted,
determinate, or assigned. So that if I give lands to a man and to his heirs,
he has fee simple / but if I give lands to him and to his heirs of his body
lawfully begoten, he has but a fee tail / forasmoche as I appoynte, lymite,
prescrybe and determyne the heirs* and for lack of such heirs ye gift shall
be expired and worn out / and the lands shall reuerte again to the gyuer or
his heirs.

But ye must observe that there be two kinds of fee tail. There is a
general tail, and a special tail. Fee tail gn^rall is as where lands be
given to a man and to his heirs of his body begoten without expressing by
what woman they are to be begote^. And therefore If a man be tenau^te in the
general tail of lands, and takes a wife and has issue by her, and she
dies and he takes an other wife, of who^ he has also other issue / here
either of these issues is inheritable to this land entayled: But if I express
in the gift by what woman the heirs shall be procreate, than is it an
especyall tail: as if lands be given to a man and to the heirs of his body
lawfully begoten by Katherin his wife, this is an especial tail / for ye
issue of him by an other woman, shall never i^heryte by force of the tail.
Likewise it is if lands be given to a woman and to the heirs of her body
lawfully begote^ (and she we not by what man) this is a general tail / but if
I add and say by such a man her husband, than is it an especyall tail.

Also if I give lands to a man and to his wife, and to the (...) of their two
bodies lawfully begoten: this is an especyall tail / as well in the husband
as my wife.

Semblably it is, if a man gives lands to an other man with his daughter or
kynswoman in frank marriage, this i^plyeth a state tail especial / and as
well the man as the woman has estate in the special tail.

But if I give lands to a man and to a woman, and to his heirs that he shall
begete of her / here the woman has estate but for term of her life, and the
husband an estate in the especial tail. In likewise it is on the woman's
behalf: as if I give lands to a man and his wife, and to her heirs of the
body of her said husband engendered / he has an estate but for term of life,
and she an estate in the special tail. But in both cases, if I had said to
the heirs and not his or her heirs, than should either of them have had an
estate in the special tail, because this word heirs is as well referred to
the one as to the other.

Ye shall also understand, that if lands be given to a man, and to the heirs
males of his body, this is a state tail, and in this case ye heir female
shall never inheryte.

Finally it is to be noted, that of lands wiche a man has in fee simple, the
possession of the brother shall cause the sister germayne to inherit / and not
the brother by the half blood, as here to fore was said but of lands entayled
otherwise it is. Therefore if a man be seized of lands in the general tail,
and has issue by his first wife a sone and a daughter, and a sone by an
otherwise, and dies / and theldest sone enters i^ to ye lands and dies the
sister germayne shall not have the lands, but ye younger brother of the half
blood / because who so ever shall inheryte lands in tail, must claim them
as next and immediate heir, not to him that dies last seized of the lands,
but to him unto whom the lands were first given, which in the case before
remembered, is the sone and not the daughter.

Thus ye shall observe a great dyuersitie between the fassion of succession in
lands of fee simple and of fee tail.

Tenant after possibility of issue extincte.
When lands or tenementes be given to a man and to his wife, and to the heirs
of their two bodies lawfully begoten, if in this case either of them chance to
dye before they have issue between the^, he or she that ouerlyueth is still
tenant in tail / but without al possybylitie of any issue ye can be heir to
these lands entayled / and for this cause he or she thus ouerlyuynge is called
tenaunte after possibility of issue extinct / for in such a tenant is all
possibility of issue that may be inherytable to these lands by force of the
gift in tail utterly extincte and quenched / and by his or her death the state
tail shall expyre, cease, and be abolysshed for ever / and shall reuerte again
to the gyuer or donour from whens it came.

Yet forasmoche as this tenaunte after possibilytie of issue, had ones an
inheritance in him, he shall not be punysshed by an action of waste though he
makes never so much wast in the lands and tenementes / yet in effect he is
but a tenant for term of life.

Of perceners.
Hitherunto I have made a compendious declaracyon of estates of all sorts: but
where as I said yt among systers there is no pretogatyue or preeminence
concerning thenherityng of their ancestors lands, but that they shall be al
together inheritours, and make as it were but one heir: it is expedient to
make a further process in this behalf, and to show how and in what manner
particion shall be made.

But ye shall understand yt there be beside perceners at the common law,
which be only systers / also perceners by custom, which is among brothers
contrary to the course of the common law / and this custom is in Kent, and
i^ other places where lands and tenementes be of the tenure of Gauel kind.

Ye shall therefore know, yt when a man is seized of lands in fee or fetayle,
and has no issue but daughters, and die / and the daughters do enter in to the
lands thus descended unto them, now they be called perceners, or coheyres /
and by a wryt called, Dep perticione facienda brought by one of them against
the others, they shall be constrained by ye law to suffer an egall perticion
to be made of the lands between them.

Now particion may be made in sundry ways. One way is wha^ they them selue
do make perticio^ bitwene the^ of those heritage and do agree unto the same,
and enter every one in to her part so allotted unto her.

An other is, when by all their agreement and consent one common friend do make
the particion. In which case the eldest sister shall have the first election,
and after her the second sister, and so forth / but if they agree yt the
eldest sister shall make the particion, and she makes it, than ye eldest shall
not choose first, but shall suffer all her other sisters to chose before, as it
is thought.

There is also an other form of perticion, which is egally to deuyde the
lands in to so many parts as there be coheyres or perceners / and to write
every part so divided in a several scroull of paper, and to put the said
scroulles in to a bonet / or to enclose them severally in balls of wax / and
than th eldest sister to choose which ball she will, or to put her hand in to the
bonet and to take a scroull, and to hold her to her chance and allotment, and
so consequently every sister after other.

And ye shall note, that particion by agreement may as well be made by nude and
bare words without writing as by writing.

That if any of ye perceners will not suffer any particion to be made than may
the other that would have peaticyon, purchase a wryt called De particione
facienda against the^ that refuse particion, to compel the same to suffer
particion to be made accordyngly / and tha^ by the judgment of the court the
sheryfe by the serement of twelve men shall make particion between them, and
shall assign to each sister her portion, as he shall think good, without gyuyng
any election to theldest.

And if two manners or meeses descend to two systers, and the manners be not of
egal value, than may she to whom ye less manner is allotted have assigned unto
her a rent proporcyonably out of the others manner.

Finally ye shall understand, that if a man be seized of lands in fee simple,
and has issue two daughters / and gives with one of his daughters to an other
men ye third or fourth part of his land i^ frank marriage, and dies / if in
this case the daughter that is in this wise auaunced will have her portion of
her fathers heritage, she must put her land given unto her i^ frank marriage
in hochepot new again. I mean she must be contented to suffer her said
lands to be co^mixt and me^gled with the other lands of which her father
dyed seized in fee, so that an equal division may be made of the hole / or
else she shall have no perte of those lands, of which her father dyed seized:
but if her father had made unto her but a common gift in tail, or a feffement
in fee, she should not need to put her lands in hochepot, but may retain them
still, and also have as good a perte of the rest of ye lands of which her
father dyed seized, as her other sister or sisters. For a gift i^ frank
marriage, is acompted the most free or most liberal gift that can be, and
that which the law iudggeth to be only for the aduau^cement and bestowyng of
the daughter, where as feffementes in fee and also common gifts in tail be
acustomably for other causes, and for the advantage rather of the gyuour, or
seffour.

Of conditions.
Forasmoche as every estate is either pure, or condcional / it were not amysse
somewhat to make a declaracyon of the nature and efficacye of conditions.
Wherefore ye shall understand that of co^dicions, some be actual conditions,
called conditions in deed / and other some be co^dicyons in law.

Condicyons in deed be such as by annexed by express words to ye feffement
lees or grant, either in writing or without: as if I infeffe a man in
certain lands reseruinge to me and to mine heirs so much rent yearly to be
paid at such a feast / and for defaute of payment, that it shall be lawful
for me to reentre this is a feffement upon condicyon of payment. For the not
payment of the rent shall dissolve the feffement. Semblably it is of gifts in
tail leeses. etc.

But if the condition be, that for defaulte of payment of the rent, it shall be
lawful for the feffour to enter again in to the lands, and to hold them till
he be satisfied of the rent / this condicyon not performed does not dissolve
the feffement, but oneli gives to the feffour an authority to retain the
lands (as it were by way of distress) till he has leuyed the arreragyes of
the rent.

And ye shall observe, that condicyons be sometime made to be performed on the
feffees behalf, and sometime on the feffours behalf. On the feffees behalf,
as when I infeffe you of lands upon condition that ye shall do such an act,
as to pay unto me or to mine heirs such annual rent.

On the feffours behalf, as wha^ I make a fessement unto you upon condition,
that if I pay or cause to be paid unto you before such a day, such a sum
of money, than it shall be lawful for me to enter again and reteyn my lands
in my former estate. In this case ye that be the feffee, are called tenaunte in
morgage, which is as much to say as a deed gage / and it seems that the cause
why it is so called, is forasmoche as it is doubtful whether the feffour will
pay at the day prescrybed such sum of money for the redemption of his lands
or no / for if he do not, his title or interesse in the lands thus gaged is
utterly extincte without all hope of reuyuynge.

Ye shall note that if the morgageour dies before the day of payment, his
heir may redeem ye land very well even as well as his au^cestour yt morgaged the
land might have done, although there be no mention made of heirs in ye
writing.

And if when the money is lawfully by ye morgageour or his heir proffered, and
the feffee refuses to receive the same, the feffour or his heir may enter,
and than has the feffee no remedy for his monye at the common law.

Ye shall understand also yt some co^dicyons be utterly void in the law, and
of none effycacye: as if a feffement be made of lands in fee upon condition
that the feffee shall not aliene this same to none other this condition I say
is void, because the feffee is restrained of his hole power that the law
gives in such case unto him, and which power and liberty, is in manner
included in every feffemente: yet I may abbrydge him of part of his power, as
to condycyon with him that he shall not aliene the lands to such a person or
such. But of gifts in tail other wise it is, for if I give lands to a man
and to the heirs of his body lawfully begoten upon condition that he nor his
heirs shall aliene ye lands to none other person / this condition is good and
effectual in the law / and if he or his heirs contrary to che condition do
aliene them, than ye donour or his heirs may very well enter and reteyne the
lands for ever / because this condicyon does stand with the statute of
Westminster second which prohybiteth such alienacions to be made.

Hither unto I have spoken of co^dicions in deed, now will I show what be
conditions in law that be annexed to any estates.

Know ye therefore, that if thoffyce of a perker, or steward, or such like
office, be granted to a man for term of his life, though there be no
condition at al mentioned in the grant, yet the law speaks a condition in
this case, which is that if the party to whom such office is given shall not
execute al points apperteynynge unto his office accordyngly, it shall be
lawful for the grauntour to enter and discharge him of his office / and this
condition is called a condition in law.

Of lyuery of season, and of atturnement.
In all feffementes, gifts in tail, leeses for term of life, or for term of
another life of lands or tenementes, there can be no alteracion or
transmutacion of possession, unless there be a certain ceremonye of law
adhibited and solempnised in the presence and sight of neighbors or others,
which ceremony is called lyuery of season.

And ye shall understand, yt this ceremonye of lyuerye of season is done, when
the feffour, donour, lessour or their deputy come with the neighbors solemplye
to ye lands or tenementes / and there put ye feffee donee or lessee in
possession of ye said lands or tenementes by deliueryng unto him a clod of
earth, or the ring of the door, or some other thing in ye name of season / and
for this self cause this ceremony of law is called lyuery of season, that is
to wit a tradicion or gyuynge of season.

But this ceremony is not required in leeses for term of years, or in leeses
at will, in as much as the lessour in such case remains still seized / and
the lessee has only the possessyon without the season / and therefore the
terms of the law be, that such a man is possessed / where as in feffementes
/ gifts in tail, and leeses for life, he is called seized.

Wherefore if a feffement or lees for life be made of lands or tenementes, and
before livery of season be made the feffour dies, the heyr of the feffour
shall have the lands by the regour of the law, notwithstanding that ye
feffee has paid to the feffour the price of the land, and although the feffee
be in possessyon. But other wise it is of alees for term of years.

A like ceremonye is used when rent charges, when rent seruyees, and such
other things as pass bygraunt, be granted / for it is no full and perfyte
grant till it be consignyte as it were with the ceremony of atturnement.

This atturnement is nothing else, but when the tenant of the land of
which the reuersyon is granted, or out of which a rent is granted, do make
some euydent signification and token that he accepts the person to whom the
grant is made to be in the same respect unto him that the grauntour was: As
if the tenant of the land after he have herd of ye grant comes to the
grauntee / that is to wit, to the person to whom the grant was made, and
say in this wise, or in like effect.

I agree me to the grant made unto you by such a man / or I am well apayde
and contented of the grant that such a man has made unto you. But the most
usual and frequent form of atturnement is to say: Sir I atturne unto you by
force of ye said grant, or I become your tenant / or to deliver unto the
grau^tee a penny or halfpeny by way of atturnement.

If a man makes first one grant to one person, and after another to an other
person / that grant shall stand to which the tenant will atturne, although
it be the latter.

And ye shall note, that if a man be seized of a manner (which is percell in
demene, and percell in service) and does altene the same manner to an other,
unless the tenauntes of ye manner do atturne, the services shall not pass,
only tenauntes at will excepted, for it needs not to cause them to atturne.

Note that there is a great difference between gyuynge a penye in name of
season, and gyuynge it by way of atturnement, for when it is given of ye
tenant to the grauntee in name of season, it does not only implye an
atturnement, but also it gives him such a season, that if the rent
afterward be behind and not paid, he may now upon the season of the penny,
after a lawful distres and rescus made, bring an assyse of nouel disseason,
where as if it were given only by way of atturnement, he could not bring the
assyse, but his wryt of rescus only.

Also ye shall understand, that where as lands be deuisable by ye custom of
any ancient boroughe or city, if there be reuersion of any lands be by
testamente bequethed to a man i^ fee, and the diuysour dies / the deuisee,
that is to wit, he to whom the deuyse was made has forth with the reuersion
i^ him without further ceremonye of atturnement. Likewise it is if a man(...)
of service that the tenaunte owes to his lord, is called knights service.

Knights service.
Knights service is homage, fealty and escuage / and who so ever holds his
lands by knights service, is bound by the law to do his lord homage and
fealty, and to pay escuage when it shall be assesed by parliament.

Homage is the most reverent service yt is / for when the tenant shall do
sytte, and the tenant shall knele before him upon both knees / and shall hold
his hands bit wene his lords hands, and say in this wise. I become your man
from this day, forth ward of life and of membre and of terrene honor, and to
you shall be faithful and loyal, and faith to you shall bear for yt lands
that I claim to hold of you: saving the faith that I bear unto our
sovereign lord the king / and tha^ the lord so syttyng shall kiss him. But
if an abbot or pryour, or any other person of religion shall do homage to his
lord, he shall not say: I become your man, because he has professed him self
to be the only man of god: but shall say, I do to you homage, and shall be to
you faithful and true, and faith to you shall bear for the tenementes yt I
hold of you: saving the faith which I do owe to our soueraygne lord the
king.

Ye shall note also, that when a woman sole both homage to her lord, she
shall not say: I become your woman for it is not conuentent that a woman should
be the woman or any other than of her husband that she shall marye / but she
shall say even as the relygyous person says: I do unto you homage. etc.

That if perchance a man holds sundry lands and teneme^tes of sundry
lords, and every of them by knights service, than i^ the end of his homage, he
shall say saving the faith that I owe to our sovereign lord the king, and
to mine other lords.

And it is to be known, that none is bound to do homage to ye lord, onles it
be such a tenant as has in the tenauncy an estate of fee simple, or fee
tail, either i^ his own right, or in the right of another.

For if a woman have lands or tenementes in fee simple or fee tail, which
she holds of her lord by knights service / and takes an husband and have
issue / i^ this case the husband i^ the life of his wife shall do ye homage,
because he has a title to have the lands by the curtesye if he ouerlyueth her
/ and also he holds them now in his wyfes right. yet before issue had bitwene
them, the homage shall be made in their both names. But if the woman dies
before homage made by her husband in her life, and the husband keeps still
the lands as tenant by the curtesye / now he shall not do homage to his lord
because he has now an estate but for term of life.

Fealty is as much to say as a fidelity or faythfulnes, in doing whereof
the tenant shall hold his hand upon a book, and say thus: Hear you this my
lord: I to you shall be faithful and true, and faith to you shall bear for
the lands and tenementes which I claim to hold of you / and duly shall do
you the customs and services which I owe to do you at the terms assigned, as
me helps god and his saints. And than he shall kiss the book / but he shall
not knele as he that does homage.

And ye shall observe that homage can not be done but to the lord him self,
where as the steward of the lords court or the baily may take fealty for
the lord. Also tenaunte for term of life shall do fealty, but homage (as is
said) he cannot do.

Now as concerning escuage ye shall understand, that he yt holds his lands
by escuage, when the king makes a vyage royal in to Scotland for the
subduyng of the Scotts, is bound to be with the king by the space of.xl.
days well and conveniently arrayed for ye war. And he that holds his land
but by the moite of fee of knights service, is bound by the force of his
tenure to be with the king by the space of.xx. days / and so proporcionably
according to the rate and quantity of his tenure.

But now to the purpose, after this viage royal in to Scotland (in which the
king goes in person) and after the retire in to England again a parliament
is wont to be so^moned, in which shall be asseised what every person that held
his land by homage and went not with the king, neither by him self, nor by
his deputye, shall pay to his lord in satisfaction of his, not seruyng / and
according to the taxacion hereof, every tenant shall pay to his immediate
lord (whether it be the king or other) after the rate of his tenure / if he
holds by an hoole fee, the hoole escuage / if by a moitie the half / if be
the fourth part of a fee, the fourth part. etc. and this money thus
asseysed, is called escuage / for which the lord to whom it is due, may very
well distreyne.

But here it is to be noted, yt some tenauntes by custom are bound to pay but
the moite, or the third part of that which shall be asseised by act of
parliament.

Yea, and the custom is i^ some place that to what so^me so ever escuage is
asseised, the tenauntes shall pay never but such acerteyne so^me of money: and
this esuage is called escuage certain, where as the other is called escuage
uncertain,

Finally ye shall understand, that escuage uncertain is always a knights
service, and draws unto it ward marriage and relief / but escuage certain is
no knights service, but of the tenure of socage, as shall be herafter showed.

Of ward marriage and relief.
Every knights service draws unto it ward marriage and relife / wherefore it
is expedient somewhat to entreat of them.

Ye shall therefore be admonisshed that when the tenant by knights service
dyeih, his heir male being within thage of.xxi. years, the lord shall have
the ward, that is to say, the custodye or keeping of the lands so holden of
him to his own use and profit, till the heir comes to the full age of.xxi.
years* For the law presumes that till he comes to this age he is not able to
do such service as is of this tenure required. Furthermore if such heir be
unmarried at the time of the death of the tenant, than ye lord shall have also
the ward and the marriage of him.

But if tenant by knights service dies, his heir female being of thage
of.xiiij. years or above, the^ the lord shall not have the ward, neither of
the land ne yet of the body of such an heir / and ye reason is because a
woman of yt age may have a^ hushande able to do knights service / that is to
say, to wait upon the kings person when he auaunceyth in to Scotland with
his army royal.

But if such an heir female be within thage of.xiiij. years and not married at
the time of the death of her auncestour, than the lord shall have the ward of
the land holden of him, till such heir female comes to ye age of.xvj.
years. by force of an act of perliament in the statute of Westminster, the first.

Note that there is a great diversity in the law, bitwene thages of females
and of males / for the female has thus many ages appointed by the law. First,
at.vij. years of age, the lord her father may distreyne his tenauntes for
aid to mary her. Second, at.ix. years of age, she is dowable. Thyrdly, at
xij. years she is able to assent to matrimonye. Fourthly, at.xiiij. years she
is able to have her land, and shall be out of ward if she be of this age at
the death of her auncestour.

Fyfthly, at.xvj. years she shall be out of ward, though at the death of her
auncestour she was within thage of.xiiij. years. Sixthly, at xxi. years she is
able to make alienacions of her lands or tenementes. Where as the man has but
two ages / the one at.xiiij. years to have his land holden i^ socage, and to
assent to matrimonye / the other at.xxi. to make alienacions.

Ye shall understand that by the statute of Merton, the sixth chapitre, it is
enacted that if in case the lords do mary their ward to vylaynes or others,
wheare is a dispargement / if such heir so married be within thage of: xiiij.
years or of such age that the said ward can not consent to the marriage: Than
if the friends of this heir complain or feel them selves grieved with this
unmeet marriage, ye next of kyn to the heir unto whom the heritage can not
descend may enter in to the lands, and put out the gardeyne in cheualrye /
and if the next kyndesman will not thus do, another kyndesman of the infant
may do it, and shall take the issues and profits to the use of the heir, and
shall yield accomptes thereof unto him when he comes to his full age.

But there be diverse other dispargementes which be not expressed in the said
estatute, as if ye heir being within age of consent and in ward be married
to a creple: as to one that has but one foot or one hand, or that is a
defforme creature, or having any horrible disease or contynuall infyrmitye.
All these and such like be dispargementes. But here ye shall understand that
it shall be said no dispargemente unless the heir be so married, being within
the age of discrecyon / that is to say, of.xiiij. years. For if he be of that
age or above and consents to such marriage, it is no dispargement / neither
shall the lord for such marriage lose his ward, because it shall be reputed
to the folly of the heir being of age of discrecyon to consent to such
marriage.

Now if the gardeyn offer to the heir being in his ward a convenient marriage
without dispargement, and the heir refuses it as he may very well do, than the
lord shall have the value of the marriage of such heir when he comes to his
full age. But if he mary him self being in ward against the will of his
gardeyne, than he shall pay ye double value by force of the estatute of Merton
before remembered.

And ye shall note that if lands holden by knyghts service descend to an
infant from his mother, or from any of his au^cestours, his father being
eytalyue, in this case the lord shall not have the marriage of this heir / for
during the life of ye father, the sone shall be in ward to no man.

Finally, it is to be known, that he which is gardeyne in cheualry in right
may after he has seized the ward grant the same, yet her by deed or without
deed to another and than he to whom such grant is made is called gerdeyn in
fayte.

Now as touching relief, ye shall know that if a man holds his land by
knights service and dies, his heir being of full age (the full age of the
male is.xxj. years, of the female.xiiij.) than y^ lord of whom the land is
holden shall have of the heir relief.

Relief of a hole knights fee is C.s^. and of half a knights fee fyftye.
s^. etc.

Also a man may hold lands of a lord by two knights fees, and than the
heir being of full age at the death of his au^cestour, shall pay to his lord
for relief.xl. li.

Service of castle guard.
Ye shall understand that a man may hold by knights service and yet not hold
by escuage, nor shall pay no escuage / for he may hold by castle guard,
that is to say, by service to keep a tower of his lords castle or some other
place, upon a reasonable warning, when his lord hears that enemies will
come or be come in to England. This service is also knights service, and
draws to it ward marriage and relief as other knights service does.

Of graunde sergeauntye.
There is also an other kind of knights service, called graunde sergeaunty,
which is where a man holds his lands or tenementes of the king, by such
service as he owes in proper person to do: as to bear ye banet of our
soueraygne lord the king, or his spear / or to conduct his host / or to be
his marshall / or to be the sewar, caruer, or butler, at the feast of the
coronacion / or to be one of ye cha^brelaynes of the receypte of his
eschequere, or to do semblable seruyces to ye king in proper person, such
manner of service I say, is called graund sergeauntye / and the cause why it is
so called, is because it is the most honorable and most worthy service that
is / for he that holds by escuage is not appointed by his tenure to do any
other more special service tha^ an other is bound that holds by escuage /
but he that holds by graunde sergeauntye, is bound to do some special
service to the king.

Also if he that holds of ye king by graunde sergeauntye dies his heir
being of full age, than the heir shall pay to the king for relief, not
only. C.s^. as he that holds by escuage shall do, but ye clear annual value
of those lands and tenementes which he holds of the king by graund
sergeanty.

Furthermore ye shall note that in the marches of Scotland, some hold of the
king by cornage / that is to say, by blowynge of an horn to warn the men of
the country when they here that the Scotts or their enimyes be coming, or
be alredye entered in to England, which service is also graunde sergeauntye.

Graunde sergaunty is as much to say in latin as magnum seruiciu^ / that is
to say, a great or high service, like as petite sergeauntye is called peruu^
seruitium / that is to say, a little service.

But to reuert again to ye thing. if any tenant holds of any other lord
than of the king by such service of cornage, than it is no grau^d
sergeauntye, but yet it is knights service, and draws to it ward marriage
and relief / for none can hold by graunde sergeauntye but of the king.

Finally ye shall understand, that all they which hold of the king by this
service called graunde sergeauntye do hold of the king by knyghtese service,
and the king shall have of them ward marriage and relief, but escuage he shall
not have of them, onelesse they hold by escuage of him by express words.

Petite sergeaunty.
Tenant by petite sergeauntye is he that holds his land immediately of our
soueraygne lord the king by this service, to pay to the king yearly a bow,
or a spear, a dagger, a sword, a pair of gauntlettes, a pair of spores of
gold, and shafte or such other small things apperteynyng to ye war / and
this service is in effect but socage, because that such a tenant is not
bound by his tenure to go ne do any thing in his own propre person touching
the war, but only to render and pay yearly certain things to the king, as
a man ought to pay a rent / wherefore this service of petite sergeaunty is no
knights service but yet ye shall note, yt a man can not hold neither by
petite sergeauntye neither by graunde sergeaunty, but of the king only.

Homage auncestrell.
Tenant by homage auncestrel is he which holds his land of his lord by
homage, and both he and his ancestors whose heir he is have holden the same
land of the said lord and of his ancestors time out of mind by homage / and
have done unto them homage, and this is called homage auncestrell, by reason of
the long continuau^ce which has been by title of prescription as well
concerning the tenauncy in the blood of the tenant, as concerning the
segnorye in the blood of the lord. And this service of homage auncestrell
draws unto it warrantye (that is to say) if the lord which is now in life
has ones received ye homage of his tenant, he ought to warrant ye same
tenant, what time so ever he shall be impleaded or sued for such land so
holden of him by homage auncestrell.

Moreover such service of homage auncestrell draws to it acquitale (y^ is to
say) the lord ought to acquit the tenure against all other lords that can
demand any manner of service out of the tenauncye.

Wherefore if in this case the tenant which holds by homage auncestrell be
impleaded of his lands, and voucheth is lord to warraunty, who comes in by
process and demands of the tenaunte what he has to bind him to the
warrante, and the tenure shows how he and his aucestours (whose heir he is)
have holden his land of him and of his au^cestours time out of mind / the
lord if he can not deny this, and if he have received the homage of such a
tenaunte, is bound by ye law to warrant him his land / so that if ye tenant
lose his land in defaute of ye lord thus vouched (that is to say) called to
warranty, he shall recover against him so much in value of those lands and
tenementes which ye lord had at the time of calling to warrantye or at any
time after. But if the lord never received thomage of his tenauut / than he
may very well when he is thus vouche^ disclayme in the segnorye / and so put
out the tenant of his warrantye. Where ye shall note, that in every case that
the lord disclayme in his segnory in court of record, his segnory is
extincte, and the tenaunte shall hold from thensforthe of the next lord to
him that thus disclaymed.

Thus ye perceive that homage auncestrell is not but where as is alonge
continuau^ce, as well in the blood of the tenant in respect of his
tenauncye, as of the lord in respect of his segnorye. Wherefore if the tenant
does ones aliene his lands to an other, although he purchases ye same
again, yet he shall not hold any longer by homage au^cestrell by cause of this
discontinuaunce, but shall hold it now by the usual homage.

Of socage.
Socage is properly where the tenant is bound to come with his soke (that is
to say) with his plough to earye and sow percell of the demene lands of his
lord, which service in auncyente time was very frequent / but now by the
mutual consent both of the lord and of the tenant, it is converted for ye
most part in to a yearly rent. How be it the name of socage abides still.
Wherefore now all yt is not knights service is called by the name of of socage.

So that if a man holds by fealtye only, or by fealtye and homage for all
manner of service, it is but socage tenure / for homage alone makes not
knights service / yea if a man holds by escuage certain as I have said here
tofore he holds in effect but by socage.

Now where a man holds his lands by socage and dies, his heir being
within thage of.xiiij. years the lord shall not have the ward, but the next
of kynne to the heir to whom the heritage can not descend shall have the
wardeshyp as well of the land as of the heir, till the heir come to the age
of.xiiij. years / and such gardeine is called gardeyn in socage / and shall
render accomptes to the heir for ye issues and profits that he has received
of the lands during such time, his reasonable costs and expenses deducted, so
that he shall not have the wardshyp to his own use and profit as gardeyne in
cheualry has.

Finally ye shall understand that when tenant in socage dies the lord shall
have relief / that is to say, the value of the rent that is yearly due unto
him of the tenauncye beside the yerelye rent: so that in effect after the
death of his tenaunte he shall have of the heir.ij. rentes, save that for the
relife / he may distrayne forthwith, but for thaccustomed rent he can not
distrayne till the usual day of payment be come.

Frank almoyne.
Tenant in frank almoyne, is where an abbot or pryour or any other man of
religyon, or ecclesiastical person holds of his lord in pure and perpetual
alms / and such tenure began first in old time in this manner. When a man
was seized in old time of certain lands or tenementes in his demene, as of
fee, and of the same tenementes enfeoffed an about and his covent or a pryour
and his couente, or any other person ecclesiastycall: as a deane of a colege /
master of an hospital / or such like / to have and to hold the same lands
to them and to their successors for ever in pure and perpetual alms, or in
frank alms, in these two cases the tenementes should be holden in frank
almoyne.

By force of which tenure they that hold in frank almoyne after this sort
be bound of right before god to make orisons, prayers to celebrate masses and
other divine services for the souls of their graunters and feffars / and for
the souls of their heirs which be deed / and for the prosperous estate of
their heirs that be now alive. And because of right they be bound to this
divine service, they be discharged by the law to do any other profane or
corporal service: as fealtye or such other like.

But nevertheless if such as hold their tenementes in frank almoyne do omit
these divine services whereunto they be bound before god, the lord can not
distrayne them, ne yet compel them by any other means by the course of law /
but the only remedy is to complain of them to their ordinary, who of right
ought to compel such ecclesiastical persons to do the divine service due
as aforesaid.

But here ye shall note that if an abbotte, or pryour, or parsone of a church
or such like holds of his lord by certain divine service to be done, as to
sing mass every frydaye in the weke / or placebo and dirige / or to find a
preeste to sing mass or to distribute in alms.C. pence to a ho^dred men at
such day. In all these cases if such divine service be undone, the lord may
very well distrayne, because the service is put in certayntye.

Now I said that if in old time a man did infeoffe such spiritual person
after such sort, he should hold his land in frank almoyne / but now at this
day it is otherwise / for by the reason of a statute called, Quia emtoris
terratum, no man can aliene ne grant lands or tenementes in fee simple to
hold of him self, so that now if a man seized of lands in fee and grants
the same by license to an abbot i^ frank almoyne / these words frank almoyne
be void, and the abbot shall hold them immediately of the lord of the feoffer
by the same seruyces that the feofer held / so that no man can hold in frank
almoyne, but by force of a grant made before ye said estatute only the king
excepted / for he is out of the compass of the statute.

Finally, ye shall note that where as a man holds in frank almoyne his lord
is bound by the law to acqnyte him of al manner of service that any other
lord can have or demand out of the said lands.

That if he does not acquyte him but suffer him to be distreyned, tha^ he shall
have against his lord a certain wryt, called a wryt of mean and shall
recover against him his damages and costs of his suite.

Of burgage.
A tenure in burgage, is where an ancient burgh is of which the king is lord
/ and they which have teneme^tes within the same burgh hold the same of the
king, paying a certain annual rent, which tenure in effect is but socage
tenure. Semblably it is where as any other lord spiritual or temperall is
lord of such burgh.

Here ye shall note that for yt most part such ancient burghes have diverse
customs and vsages which other towns have not. For some burghes have a
custom, that the youngest son shall inheryte before theldest, which custom
is called commonly burgh English.

Also in some burghes by the custom the woman shall have for her dower all the
lands and tenementes whereof her husband was seized at any time duringe the
couerture.

Moreover in some burghes a man may deuyse his lands or tenementes by
testament at the time of his death / and by force of such deuyse or legacye, he
to whom the bequest was made, after the death of the testatour may by force of
this ancient custom enter i^ to the lands so to him bequethed or devised
without any lyuerye of season to him made or further ceremony of law.

Diverse other customs in England there be contrary to ye course of the common
law, which if they be any thing probable and may stand with reason are
good and effectual / notwithstanding they be against the common law.

Of villenage.
A tenaunte in vyllenage is properly when a vilayne / that is to say / a
bondsman holds of his lord (whose bondsman he is) certain lands or
tenementes, according to the custom of ye manner or otherwise at the will of
his lord / and to do his lord villayne service: as to bear and to carye the
donge of his lord out of the city, or out of his lords manner, and to lay it
upon the demene lands of his lord / or to do such like seruyle or villayne
service. How be it fre men in some places hold their tenementes and lands of
their lords by custom, by such manner of service / and their tenure, is
called tenure i^ villenage / and yet they them selves be no villaynes. For the
land holden in villenage makes not the tenaunte a villayne, but contrary
wise a villayne may make free land to be villayne land unto his lord. As if
a villayne purchases land in fee simple or in fee tail, the lord of the
villayne may enter in to the land so purcased by his bondsman, and put him and
his heirs out for ever / and this done, the lord if he will may lease the
same land to his villayne to hold of him in villenage.

And here ye shall understand, that seruitute or villenage, is thordinaunce,
not of the law of nature but of that law, which is called Ius gentium, by
which a man is made subject (contrary to nature) unto an other man's
dominion. For he that is a vyllayne or bondsman, either he is so by title of
prescription (that is to say) he and his ancestors have been vyllaynes time
out of mind / or else he is a villayne by his own confession in court of
record / so that all villaynes either they be borne villaynes, or else they
be made so. They be borne villaynes when their father bernge a bond man him
self begets them in lawful wedlock, either of a fre woman or of a bond
woman, for so that the father be bond, the issue of him lawfully begoten must
needs be bond by the laws of England, having no regard to the condition of
ye mother / whereas in ye civil law it is clean contrary. For there partus
sequitur ventrem (that is to say) the seruitute or bondage of ye mother makes
the child bound and not of the father. How be it the bastard sone of a
bondsman shall not be bond, because a bastard is Nullius filius in the law.

They be made vyllaynes two ways, either by their own act, as when a free
man being of full age will come in to a court of record, and there confess
him self bond to an other man.

Or else by the laws of arms called Ius gentium: as when a man is taken
prisoner in wars, and is compelled to serve, and become the thrall and
bondsman of him that took him, the law calls such person a vulayne.

And ye shall note that vyllaynes he properly called in latin Serui, because
that when they be taken in war, the captains be wont not to kill them, but
to sell them / and so to save their lyfes / so that they be called Serui a
serua^do, that is to say of saving. They be also called Mancipia a manu
capiendo, because that they be taken by hand of the enaemyes.

Now as I said by the law of nature we are all borne free: but after that by
the law of gentillite seruitute invaded the world, than ensued ye benefit of
manumission, Manumission is De manu da^^o, that is to say a gyuynge out of the
hand or power. For so long as a man is in seruitute, he is subject to the
hand and power of an other / and when he is manumissed he is made free, and
delivered from the said power / so that a manumission is nothing else than an
enfranchisement / that is to say, a writing, testifieng that the lord has
enfranchisede his villayne and all his sequel.

Also if the lord makes to his villayne an obligacion of a certain sum of
money, or grants to him by his deed an annuitie, or leaseth to him by deed
lands or tenementes for term of years, any of these acts do imply an
enfra^chisement.

Likewise if the lord makes a feoffement to his villayne, and makes unto him
liueri of season, this also is an enfranchiseme^t. Brefely to speak, where so
ever the lord co^pelleth his villain by the course of the law to do that
thing that he might enforce him to do or to suffer without thauctorite of ye
law, he does by implicacion enfranchise his villayn: as if ye lord will bring
against his villayne an action of det, an action of account of covenant or of
trespace: these and such like be in the eye of the law manumissions, because
that the lord in all these cases may have theffecte of his suite (that is to
say) the goods, catels, and correction of his villayne without the compulsion of
the law by his own propre power and authorite, which he has upon his
villayne. But if the lord sue his villayne by an appeal of felonye, the
villayne being lawfully indyted of ye same before, this is no infranchisement
/ for the lord though he have power to beat his vilayne and to spoil him of
his goods, yet he can not put him to death /

Ye shall also understand, that if a man's villayne purchases lands, or
acquire unto him any other thing / the lord may by and by en (...) sease the
same in to his own hands. Wherefore if the lord will bring against his
vyllayne a Precipe quod reddat, by which he demau^deth against his vyllayne
any lands or tenementes, this implies an enfrancheseme^t / forasmoche as he
byndeth him self to the prescripte and authority of the law / where as he
might use his own authority, by entryng and seasyng the said lands

Finally ye shall mark that some vyllaynes be called vyllaynes in gross, and
some be called villains regardaunt. In gross be they of which the lord is
severally seized, and not by reason of any lordeshyp or manner: but they be
called regardaunt which do belong to a manner, of which the lord is seized,
and the said vilaynes have been regardaunt (that is to say) expectaunt and
attendaunt time out of mind to the lord of the said manner, in doing unto him
such seruyces as to a villayne appertain.

The peroracion of the work.
IN this present treatise (gentle reader) I hane after my rude and gross
fassyon brefely touched and treated of the most princypall matters concerning
the laws of this realm, that is to wit of estates in lands and tenementes
with all the circu^staunces there unto apperteynynge / and of the seruyces due
of the same. I was in purpose further to have proceeded in thexplanyng of these
and semblable matters, (...) in good worth / (...) (as the thing is in very
deed) (...) I have taken the same rather of others, than for the vain
ostentacion of my self.

FINIS.
The table.
The preface of the book. Adiuision of estates. Tenant for term of years.
Tenant at will. Tenant by copy of court roll. Adiuision of free holds.
Tenant for term of life. Tenant by curtesye. Tenannt in dower. Adiuision of
inheritaunces. Fee simple. Fee tail. Tenant after possibilite of issue
extincte. Of perceners. Of conditions. Of lyuerye of season, and of
atturnement. Of seruyces. Knights service. (...) marriage and relief. (...) of
castle guard. Of graunde sergeauntye Of petite sergeauntie. Homage
auncestrell. Of socage. Frank almoyne. Of burgage. Of villenage. The
peroracion of the work.
The end of the table.

