ARTICLES OF PEACE, ENTERCOVRSE, AND Commerce, Concluded in the names of the
most high and mighty Kings, CHARLES by the grace of God King of Great Britain,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.

And PHILIP the fourth King of Spain, etc.

In a Treaty at Madrit, the fifth day of November after the old Style, in the
year of our Lord God M.DC.XXX.

Translated out of Latin into English.

Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of John Bill. 1630.

By the King.
WHereas it is found meet and expedient, upon weighty considerations moved to
His Majesty, by the intervention of some of His friends, to lay aside
Hostility with the King of Spain, and so to remove by fair and peaceable
means the cause of the War, which has bred interruption to the Amity betwixt
the two Crowns, upon assurance given His Majesty hereof by that King, His
most Excellent Majesty has condescended to renew the ancient Amity, and good
intelligence betwixt ye two Crowns, their Realms, Countries, Dominions,
Vassals and Subjects, And does accordingly make known to all His loving
people, that the said Peace and Friendship being so established, not only all
Hostility and War is to cease on both sides from henceforward, But also the
former Trade and Commerce, as it stood in the use and observance of the
Treaty, made by His Majesty's blessed Father, is restored and confirmed
between the said Kings, their Kingdoms, Territories, and Subjects as well by
Land as Sea and Fresh Waters.

Which His Majesty has thought fit to declare unto all manner of His
Subjects, of whatsoever estate they be, strictly charging and commanding them
to observe and accomplish all that hereunto belongs, As it is certainly
promised to be published on the side of the King of Spain, the Date of these
Presents.

Given at His Majesty's Palace of Westminster, the fifth day of December, in the
sixth year of His Majesty's Reign.
God save the King.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE

DIEV ^ ET ^ MON ^ DROIT



The Preface or Introduction to the Treaty with Spain.
BEcause the present effect and benefit of the reconciliatio^ lately concluded
betwixt the Kings most Excellent Majesty, and the King of Spain, will consist
in the renewing and frequenting of a free and open Trade by the Subjects of
both Crowns, His Majesty has thought it expedient for the better
encouragement of the Merchants, and their direction in the said Commerce, to
publish the Articles of the said Treaty and Peace, being in substance the same
with the former Treaty made by his blessed Father of glorious memory, Saving
that (besides what is privately agreed concerning Foreign parts) it is
provided both by public and private stipulation, that Commissioners shall be
appointed on either side to redress and settle all defects and controversies
in matter of Trade, betwixt the subjects of the two Crowns, which is agreed
shall be done with all convenient expedition.

Articles of the Treaty.
FIrst, it is concluded, and accorded, that from this day forward there shall
be a good, sincere, true, firm, and perfect Amity, League, and Peace to
endure for ever, and inuiolably to be observed and kept, as well by Land as Sea
and Freshwater, betwixt the most renowned King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland; etc. And the most renowned King of Spain, and their Heirs and
Successors whomsoever, their Kingdoms, Countries, Dominions, Lands, Peoples,
Liege men, and Subjects, now being, or which hereafter shall be, of
whatsoever condition, state, or degree they are or may be, so as the said
Vassals, and Subjects from henceforth are each of them to favor other, and to
use one another with all kind and friendly Offices.

II.
AND that from henceforth all Hostility and Enmity shall cease, and all
Offenses, Jniuries and Damages which either part in time of the troubles has
sustained by the other, shall be taken away and forgotten in such sort, as
that hereafter neither party against the other for and upon occasion of any
Damages, Offenses, Depredations or Spoils past may pretend any matter, but
that there shall be a perfect Abolition of all and every of them until this
present day; And that all actions for the same shall be held and reputed to
be extinguished, excepting all such Depredations which shall be committed,
within the Narrow Seas after the space of fifteen days; and betwixt the
Narrow Seas and the Jslands after the space of three Months; and beyond the
Line after the space of Nine Months fully ended, to be reckoned from the
Publication of the Peace: Or immediately after the notice of the Peace
sufficiently given in the said places, by Authentical Acts or Leters
respectively to be shown, Because of these an account and full restitution is
to be made. And each party shall hereafter abstain from all Depredations,
Offenses and Spoils as well by Sea as Land and fresh Waters, in whatsoever the
Kingdoms, Dominions, Places or Governments of the other: Neither shall the
aforesaid Kings consent, that any of the Grieuances before mentioned, be done
by any of their Vassals, Inhabitants or Subjects: And they shall also cause
Restitution to be made of all Depredations and Spoils, which hereafter shall
be committed, and of the Damages growing by means thereof.

III.
ITem, That none of the forenamed most Renowned Kings, their heirs, or
Successors whosoever, by himself, or by any others, shall Do, Treat or
Attempt any thing against the other, or against their Kingdoms, Lands or
Dominions, whatsoever in any place, on Land or Sea, or in the Ports or Fresh
Waters, by pretense of any cause or upon any occasion; neither any of them
shall give Assistance or Consent unto any War, Counsel, Attempt, or
Treaties, had, made, or to be made in the prejudice of either or against the
other.

IV.
ITem, That neither of the former parties, shall themselves give or shall
consent to be given by any of their Vassals, Subjects, or Jnhabitants, Aid,
Favor, or Counsel, directly or indirectly, on Land, Sea, or Fresh Waters: Nor
shall supply and minister, nor consent to be supplied and ministered, by their
said Vassals, Inhabitants and Subjects, unto the Enemies or Rebels of either
part, of what nature or condition soever they be, Whether they shall invade the
Countries and Dominions of either of them, or withdraw themselves from their
Obedience and Subjection, any Soldiers, provision of Victuals, Moneys,
instruments of War, Munitions, or whatsoever other aid else to maintain
War.

V.
ANd furthermore, the foresaid Kings shall renounce, as by the Tenor of these
Presents every of them has and does renounce, Whatsoever League,
Confederation, Capitulation and Jntelligence, made by what manner soever, in
the prejudice of the One or the Other, which does or may repugne against this
Peace, or Concord, and all and singular the Contents thereof: All which and
every of them, so far as they do concern the effect aforesaid, they shall
annull and make void, and declare to be of no force or moment.

VI.
ITem, It is agreed and accorded, that the said most renowned Kings shall take
care, that their Subjects shall from henceforth abstain from all force and
wrong doing, And that they likewise shall revoke all Commissions, and Letters
of Reprisall and Mart, or otherwise containing License to take Prizes, of what
condition or kind soever they are, being to the prejudice of the one or other
of the said Kings, or of their Subjects, whether the same have been given or
granted by them unto Subjects or Inhabitants, or unto Strangers, and shall
declare the same to be void and of no force, as by this Treaty or Peace they
are declared so to be; And whosoever shall do any thing to the contrary, he
shall be punished not only criminally according to the merit of his Offense,
but shall also be compelled to make Restitution and Satisfaction for the
losses to the parties damnified, requiring the same.

VII.
ITem, It is agreed and accorded, that between the most renowned King of Great
Britain etc. and the most renowned King of Spain etc. and every of their
Vassals, Inhabitants and Subjects, as well by Land as Sea and Fresh Waters, in
all and singular their Kingdoms, Dominions, Islands, and other Lands, Cities,
Towns, Villages, Havens and Streights of the said Kingdoms and Dominions,
there be or may be free Commerce: In which before the war between Philip the
second King of Spain, and Elizabeth Queen of England, there has been
Commerce betwixt the said Kingdoms, according as it was agreed on in the
Treaty of peace made in the year a thousand six hundred and four, in the
ninth Article, like and according to the use and observance of the ancient
Leagues and Treaties made before the said time, in such sort and manner, as
that without any safe conduct or other license general or special, the
Subjects of the One or other King, may freely, as well by Land as by Sea and
fresh waters, go, enter, and sail, in and to the said Kingdoms and
Dominions, and all the Cities, Havens, Shores, Sea-rodes and Streights thereof,
and put themselves into whatsoever Havens of the same, Where before the above
said time, there has been a mutual Commerce, and like and according to the
use and observance of the ancient Leagues, and Treaties aforesaid, with
Carriages, Horses, Burdens, Ships as well laden, as to be laden, to bring in
Merchandises, and there to buy or sell as much as they will, and in the same
places upon just prices to procure and have provision of victuals for their
Sustenance and Voyages; And likewise as occasion shall require, to repair such
shipping and carriages, as either appertain unto them in property, or else
they have hired or borrowed, and from thence also with their Merchandises,
Goods, and other Commodities whatsoever, the Customs and Tolles, as they are
presently rated according to the Ordinances of the places, being paid, they
may with like freedom depart and go to their own Countries, or any other
places at their pleasure, without let or impediment.

VIII.
ITem, It is likewise agreed and accorded, that it may be lawful to have
access unto the Ports of the said Kings, and there to make stay, and from
thence with the same liberty to depart, not only with their Ships of
Merchandises and burden, but also with other shipping furnished for war, and
prepared to withstand the force of enemies: Whether they shall arrive there
either by force of tempest, or for repairing their ships, or for provision of
victuals, so as they exceed not the number of six or eight ships, when they
come in of their own accord, nor that they continue nor make stay in the
havens, or about the Ports longer then they shall have just cause for the
repair of the same shipping, or for provision of other necessaries, lest they
should be any occasion of interruption unto the free Commerce and Intercourse
of other friends and Nations in Amity: And whenever any greater number of
Ships of war then is before specified, shall have occasion of access into
those Ports, then shall it not be lawful for them to make any entrance
without the priuitie and consent of the King. Provided also, that they do no
hostile Act within the said Ports, to the prejudice of the Kings; but demean
themselves there quietly, as Friends and Confederates, with special caution
ever to be had, that under the color and pretext of Commerce, no warlike
aid, provision of victuals, or of Arms, or of Munition, or other such like
materials for the wars be carried by the Subjects, Vassals, or inhabitants
of those Kingdoms, to the commodity or benefit of the enemies of the one or
other King. And whosoever shall attempt to the contrary, shall be punished with
those sharp pains and punishments, used to be inflicted upon seditious
persons and breakers of faith and peace. Provided also, that the Subjects of
the one in the Dominions and Territories of the other, be not worse handled,
then the natural Subjects in their sales and contracts for their Merchandises,
as well in respect of the prices, as otherwise, but that the condition of
forreiners be equal and like herein unto natural Subjects. Notwithstanding
any Statutes or Customs to the contrary.

IX.
ITem, It is agreed and accorded, that the said most renowned King of Great
Britain, etc. shall prohibit, and after the confirming of these present
Articles, by Proclamation forthwith provide, that no one of his subjects,
inhabitants, or vassalls, shall Lade, or carry over by any means, directly, or
indirectly, in his own name, or in the name of any others; neither shall lend
his Ship or other Vessel for carriage, or use his name for the transporting or
conueying of any Ships, Merchandises, Manufactures, or any other thing, out of
Holland and Zeland into Spain, or other the Kingdoms and Dominions of the
King of Spain; neither shall carry in his Ships any Holland or Zeland Merchant
unto the said Ports, upon peril of his Majesty's indignation, and other
punishments usually inflicted on the contemners of Royal Commandments. And to
the effect, that fraud, which through the likeness of Merchandise might
happen, be the better avoided; It is also provided in this present Article,
that the Merchandises to be carried and conveyed out of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, to the Kingdoms and Dominions of the King of Spain, shall be
registered and sealed with the Seal of the Town or City from whence they
shall be Laden, and that they being so registered and sealed, shall without any
difficulty or question whatsoever, be reputed and held for English, Scottish,
and Irish Merchandises, and so respectively, according to the Seal or mark,
be allowed and admitted. Always excepted, that in case of fraud, proof shall
be admitted, without stay notwithstanding or let of the course or venting of
the Merchandises in the mean time. And touching such Merchandises, as shall
not be registered nor sealed, the same are to be confiscated and taken for
good Prize. And likewise all Hollanders and Zelanders, which shall be found in
the same Ships, may also be tken and detained.

X.
ITem, It is also agreed, that English, Scottish, and Jrish Merchandises may
freely be conveyed and transported out of the said Kingdoms, into Spain, and
other Dominions of the said most renowned King, paying only the Customs and
Tolles usually required.

XI.
ITem, It is likewise agreed, that for the Merchandises, which English,
Scottish, and Irish Merchants shall buy in Spain, or other the Kingdoms of
the said King of Spain, and shall carry in their own Ships, or in Ships hired
or lent unto them (except, as before has been said, the ships of Hollanders
and Zelanders) no new Customs or Toll shall be increased: yet so as they
convey and carry the same goods and Merchandises to the Kingdoms of the said
most renowned King of Great Britain, etc. or to the Ports of the Provinces
being in obedience to the King of Spain. And for the more surety that fraud be
not committed herein, and that the said Merchandises be not transported to
other places and Kingdoms, and especially into Holland or Zeland, It is
concluded, that the said Merchants shall bind themselves, at the time that
they do Lade their Ships in Spain, or in the other Kingdoms and Dominions of
the said King of Spain above declared, before the Magistrate of the place in
which they shall Lade, to pay the Imposition of thirty in the hundred, in case
they carry the same goods and Merchandises to other Dominions and Countries:
And to obtain also within the space of twelve months following a Certificate
from the Magistrates of the places where they shall discharge or unlade the
same goods, testifying their discharge to have been either in the Kingdoms
and Dominions of the King of Great Britain, etc. or in the Ports of the
Provinces under the obedience of the said King of Spain: Upon the exhibiting
whereof, the Obligations concerning those matters shall be delivered up, unto
the bringers of the same Certificates.

XII.
ANd also that the said most renowned King of Great Britain, etc. shall
prohibit soon after the confirming of this accord, that none shall export any
Merchandises out of Spain, or other Kingdoms of the King of Spain, to be
carried to other places, then to His Majesty's Kingdoms, and the said Ports of
the Provinces in obedience, upon penalty of confiscation of all their
Merchandises to the use of the said King of Great Britain, etc. to be paid
into His Majesty's Exchequer: Of which Merchandises, or the value thereof, one
half is to be given to the Jnformer, the imposition of thirty in the hundred
being first deducted, to be paid to the Ministers and Deputies of the King of
Spain, and the proofs lawfully received in Spain, and transmitted into
England in authentical form, are to be credited. And it is also declared,
that the said prohibition of goods to be carried out of Spain, unto other
places, then the Kingdoms of Britain, and the obedient Provinces of Flanders,
does no way comprehend those Kingdoms and Dominions which enjoy a free trade
with the Kingdom of Spain: For the Subjects of his Majesty of Great
Britain, may lawfully transport the goods of the Kingdoms of Spain, unto
those that have a mutual trade with Spain; the aforementioned Cautions,
Conditions, and Penalties rehearsed in the precedent Articles against the
offenders, remaining still in force and strength.

XIII.
ITem, That the Magistrates of the said Towns, or Cities of his Majesty's
Kingdoms, which shall make Certificates of the vnlading of Ships, and are to
give testimony of the Registring of the Merchandises, shall not commit any
fraud therein, under peril of indignation of the Kings Majesty, and pain of
loss of their offices, and other more grievous punishments at the Kings
pleasure.

XIV.
THat which has before been expressed concerning the free Commerce, granted
unto the Subjects of the said most Renowned Kings, is to be understood to be
likewise, and in the same manner agreed on for the Subjects of the most
Renowned King of Great Britain, etc. and of the obedient Provinces of
Flanders; To wit, that in all places whatsoever, their Subjects are bound
reciprocally, to respect, and to favor each other, and by mutual kind
offices, friendly to entertain the one the other, and that by Land, Sea, and
Freshwaters, without any safe conduct or other license, general or special,
they may unto the said Kingdoms, Dominions, Lands, Villages, Towns, Cities,
Sea-shores, Havens, Sea-rodes whatsoever, freely, safely, securely, come,
enter, sail, carry, and recarry their Merchandises, buy and sell, remain,
abide and converse in the same so long as it shall please them; take up any
kind of provision for victual, and things necessary for sustenance, and for
Voyages, at just and reasonable prices, and there repair also (as occasion
shall require) their Shipping and Carriages, whether the same be their own, or
whether they be hired, or borrowed: As also to depart from thence with like
liberty, with Merchandises, Goods, and other things whatsoever, (the Customs
and Tolles, according to the Statutes of those places being paid) and to
dispose, and follow their businesses freely, and to return at their own
pleasure, either into their own Countries, or to any other place, without any
impediment or let, so as the Subjects of the most Renowned King of Great
Britain, etc. use not the Shipping of the Hollanders, or the united Provinces,
and bring not into the obedient Provinces any of the Manufactures of Holland,
or of the united Provinces, bought wheresoever; neither any other thing, for
which there was paid in Holland any tribute, nor that they transport anything
from the obedient Provinces, unto them of those Provinces, until a
pacification be confirmed: nor that they receive any the Goods of Hollanders,
or of those other places united, into their Ships, nor trust any of their own
Goods in the Ships of Hollanders, nor fraudulently by lending their names,
color the Goods of any Hollander, or other of the united Provinces: For that
if any thing be committed to the contrary, and the same be found, it shall be
held for just and lawful Prize.

XV.
AND the aforesaid prouisoes are not only to be understood of Ships laden, or
to be laden, in cause of Commerce, but also of Ships of War, which the said
Kings have, or shall have armed to repress the attempts of their enemies:
Insomuch as that it may be lawful for such Ships of War, not exceeding the
number before mentioned, if they happen to be constrained, either by force of
tempest, or for buying of victuals, or other things, or for repair of
Shipping, to use the same liberty in arriving, staying, and departing; so that
they do no bostile act in the said Ports, but demean themselves honestly, and
quietly, as it becomes confederates and friends: And so that they stay and
remain not in, or about the same Ports, any longer then shall be need full
for reparation and provision of necessaries, that thereby they be not a
hinderance, or interruption to the free Commerce and Intercourse with other
Nations, that are in Amity and Friendship: But where occasion shall fall out
of arrival of any greater number of Shipping then before specified, it shall
not be lawful for them to enter, but with the knowledge and allowance of the
King.

XVI.
AND as the said Kings do religiously promise, that they will not at any time
yield any warlike succor to any of the others enemies, So it is provided,
that their Subjects, or the inhabitants in their Realms, of what nation or
quality soever they be, may not under color of Intercourse and Commerce, nor
upon any other color or pretense give any aid or help to the enemies of the
said Kings, or of either of them, or confer or supply them with money,
provisions of Victuals for War, Armor, Munition, Ordinance, Artillery or
other warlike provision, and those which shall do the contrary, are to take
knowledge, that they shall be punished with the severe punishments accustomed
to be inflicted upon breakers of League, and seditious persons.

XVII.
AND that also greater benefit may through this Concord come unto the Subjects
of the most renowned King of Great Britain, and of the most renowned King of
Spain, in their obedient Provinces, It is accorded and concluded, that the
said most renowned Kings jointly and severally will do their endeauours, that
their Subjects have not the passages stopped or let unto any of their Ports,
Kingdoms and Dominions, that thereby they be not hindered, freely and without
impediment to come and go with their Shipping, Merchandise and Carriages (the
ordinary Customs and Tolles being paid) to all the said Ports, Kingdoms and
Dominions: And with the like liberty (when it shall seem so good unto them)
with other Merchandises from hence to depart.

XVIII.
But as concerning the ancient Treatises of Intercourse and Commerce, whereof
diverse are extant, betwixt the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and
the Dominions of the Dukes of Burgundy and Princes of the Low Countries, which
notwithstanding during the late troubles have been intermitted, and
peradventure in some parts impaired; It is agreed by way of provision. That
they shall retain and have their ancient Force and Authority; And that they
shall be used on both parts as they were before the War between Elizabeth
Queen of England, and Philip the second, according as it was agreed on in the
Treaty of Peace made in the year a thousand, six hundred and four, in the
two and twentieth Article. And if it happen that either by both parts, or any
one part, any breach thereof be alleged, or that the Subjects shall
complain, that the Conuentions are not observed, or that more grievous burdens
then were accustomed, are imposed on them, there shall be Deputies appointed
on either part, which may meet, and calling unto them (if need be) Merchants
experienced in such matters, may friendly Treat, and equally renew and restore
such things, as shall be found either to have slipped out of course, or to
have been changed by the injury of time, or by corrupt custom and use.

XIX.
AND for that the rights of Commerce which do ensue by Peace, ought not to be
made unfruitful, as they would be, if the Subjects of the most renowned King
of Great Britain, etc whilst they have recourse to and from the Kingdoms and
Dominions of the said King of Spain, and do remain there for Commerce,
should be molested in the cause of Conscience: Therefore to the intent their
Traffic may be safe and without danger, as well on Land as on Sea, the said
most renowned King of Spain shall take care, and provide, that for the said
cause of Conscience they shall not be molested nor inquieted in using their
Trade and Commerce, so as they give not scandal unto others.

XX.
ITem, That if it happen any Goods or Merchandises prohibited to be carried or
conveyed out of the Kingdoms and Dominions of the said most renowned Kings, by
the Subjects of the One or of the Other; That in such case, the person only
offending shall incur punishment, and the Goods only prohibited shall be
Confiscated.

XXI.
ITem, That the Goods of the Subjects, dying within the kingdoms or Dominions
of either, shall be conserved to the right heirs and successors of the
deceased; the right of a third person always reserved.

XXII.
ITem, That the Graunts and Privileges given by the Kings to Merchants of
either of the Kingdoms, coming to their said Kingdoms, and which Privileges
through the Wars have ceased, shall from henceforth wholly be revived, and
have their full force and strength.

XXIII.
ITem, If it shall happen hereafter (which God forbid!) that any displeasure
do arise, betwixt the said Most renowned Kings, the King of Great Britain,
and the King of Spain, whereby danger might grow of the interruption of
Intercourse and Commerce, then the Subjects of either King are thereof so to
be admonished, as that they may have fix months from the time of the
monition, to transport their Merchandises, without any Arrest, Disturbance, or
Hurt in the mean season, to be done or given unto them, either in their
persons or Merchandises.

XXIV.
ITem, That none of the foresaid Kings shall imbarge or stay for their
provision in War, or for any other service, to the prejudice of the owners,
the ships of the Subjects of any of the others, being in their Ports, or
waters, unless the King of those parties to whom the Ships do appertain,
shall first be admonished thereof, and shall also yield his consent thereunto.

XXV.
ITem, It is accorded, that if during this Peace and Amity, any thing happen to
be attempted, committed or done against the force and effect thereof by Land,
Sea or Fresh Waters, either by any of the said Kings, their Heirs, and
Successors, their Vassals, Subjects or Allies comprehended in this League, or
of any the Heirs or Successors, of those Allies, their Subjects or Vassals;
Yet notwithstanding this Peace and Amity shall remain in strength and virtue,
and the attempters and such as do offend therein only, and no other, shall be
punished for their attempts.

XXVI.
ITem, That such as have been taken in War, and are Captives on either part,
although they be condemned to the Galleys, shall be released and dismissed,
the charges of the diet of such as are not in the Galleys being first
discharged, and the ransomes of such as have before agreed for the same, being
by them paid.

XXVII.
ITem, It is concluded, that all civil actions, which at the time when the
last wars began, were of Validity and of Force, may yet be exercised and
pursued, notwithstanding any lapse of time during the same War, so as no
prejudice shall be understood to have grown unto them, during the continuance
of the War, those only excepted, which are already come to the Exchequer or
Princes Treasury.

XXVIII.
ITem, Jf any controversy happen to be moved in the Kingdoms and Dominions,
of the One or other of these Kings, by any person not being Subject to the same
King, for or upon occasion of any depredations or spoils committed; The cause
is to be remitted to the Judge of the Jurisdiction under that King, against
whose Subject or Subjects the suit is commenced.

XXIX.
ITem, That if the Hollanders, and other Confederate States will propose
conditions of pacification with the most renowned King of Spain and his
Successors through the means of the most renowned King of Great Britain: The
said most renowned King of Spain and his Successors, will always willingly
hearken unto that which shall be proposed just and reasonable therein; And
will desire that by the help of the said most renowned King of Great Britain:
they may be brought to propose equal conditions, wherein they shall well
understand, how much the said King of Spain does attribute unto the authority
of the said King of Great Britain, his loving brother.

XXX.
ITem, It is concluded and accorded, That in this present Treaty of Peace,
there be comprehended, the Adherents, Friends, and Confederates of the
forenamed Kings:

That is to say; On the part of the most renowned King of Great Britain, etc.
Ferdinand, Roman Emperor, with the Archdukes of Austria, and the Electors of
the Empire, together with the States and Cities of the Empire. The Duke of
Lorraine. The Duke of Sauoy. The Dukes of Brunswick, Lunenburg, Meckelburg,
VVirtemberg. The Landgraue of Hessen. The Marquis of Baden. The Dukes of
Pomerania. The Prince of Anhalt. The Earl of East-Friesland. The Cantons of
Heluetia, and the Grisons. The Hauns Cities. The French King. The Kings of
Denmark, and of Poland, and of Swedland. The Duke and State of Venice. The
Duke of Holstein, and the Duke of Florence.
On the part of the most renowned King of Spain.
Ferdinand, Roman Emperor, and his brethren, and other Princes, Archdukes of
Austria, Princes of the Empire. The Electors, Cities, and States, subject to
the Empire. The French King. The King of Poland and Swedland. The King of
Denmark. The Duke and State of Venice. The Duke of Sauoy. The Duke of Baueere.
The Duke of Cleue. The Duke of Holstein. The Duke of Lorraine. The Duke of
Parma and Placentia. The Bishop and Province of Liege. The Duke of Florence.
The Duke of Mutine and Regium. The Duke of Vrbine. The Confederates and Cantons
of the Heluetians and Grisons. The Cities of the Haunse. The Earl of
East-Friesland (without notwithstanding any prejudice of the right by the King
of Spain and Archdukes, pretended for their States) The Duke and Commonwealth
of Genua. The Principal of the House of Columna. The Prince of Oria. The
Principal of the house of Vrsine. The Duke of Sermoneta. The Lord of Monacho.
The Earl of Mirandula. The Prince of Massia. The Earl of Sala, and the Earl
of Colorno.
XXXI.
ITem, It is likewise accorded and concluded, that the said most renowned
Kings, Charles by the grace of God, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, etc. and Philip King of Spain, etc. shall sincerely, and faithfully
observe and keep, and procure to be observed and kept by their Subjects and
Jnhabitants all and singular the Capitulations in this present Treaty accorded
and concluded: Neither shall they directly, or indirectly infringe the same, or
consent that the same shall be infringed directly, or indirectly by any of
their Subjects or Inhabitants: And they shall ratify, authorize, and confirm
all and singular the Conuentions before accorded, and concluded by Letters
Patents, subscribed with their own hands, and sealed with their great Seals,
in sufficient, available, and effectual form, and the same so formed and
made, shall upon the first occasion deliver, or cause to be delivered
faithfully, really, and effectually, whereby they may mutually bind themselves
in, the Word of a King, and by oath to be solemnly taken upon the holy
Evangelists, to observe and perform all and singular the premises, whenever
they shall be by either part thereunto required. And furthermore they shall
cause this present Treaty of Peace to be published in the manner and places
accustomed, so soon as conveniently the same may be.

Imprinted at London by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the KINGS most Excellent
MAJESTY: and by the Assigns of JOHN BILL.

M.DC.XXX.


