SAINT AUGUSTINE his Enchiridion to LAVRENCE: OR, THE CHIEF AND principal
heads of all Christian religion.

A most profitable book to all those which desire to have a most compendious
brief of Augustines doctrine, out of Augustine himself, when he was old;
being repurged, by the old manuscript, of many faults and unusual words,
wherewith it formerly flowed.

AT LONDON, Printed by Humfrey Lownes, for Thomas Clarke. 1607.

EGREGIO viro, D. Doctori MOVNTAGVE, Regiae Capellae Decano dignissimo,
Antonius Alcock omnem optat sanitatem and felicitatem.
CVm primum (erudite vir) opusculum hoc diui Augustini in sermonem vulgarem
vertere susceperim, illud quidem transtuli, aulici cuiusdam amici rogatu; qui,
operis encomio, illud intelligendi, magno animi desiderio inflammatus, nec ad
id Latinis literis satis imbutus, mecum egit facilemque inuenit, lumen
intellectus sui de meo lumine accendere. In amicitia enim non minor est
charitas (mea certe opinione) illiterati, quam indigentis amici supplere
inopiam. Temere tamen and inconsulto hoc onus primitus subiui, grauitate
eiusdem non prius tentata: in quo ferendo, pondere eiusdem vehementer pressus,
in medio itinere pene defecisse^; nisi me, locis aliquot intricatis, quasi
nocte tenebrarum inuolutum, egregius ille theologus, D. Doctor Field, e
tenebris illis, face ingenij sui edux isset. Quod quide^ fateri non erubesco:
quantu^ enim merito meo detrahit illa agnitio, ta^tu^ addit operis opinioni,
tanti viri auxiliu^, sieve concurrens iudiciu^. Tra^slationis vero susceptae
licet primo mepoenituit, aifficultate eiusde^ stupefactu^; ca tame^ peracta,
labor meus in illo colendo agro multiplice^ reportauit sacrae scientiae
fructum. Quem denuo, bono publico proferre, preloque committere satius esse
putaui, quam priuato meo commodo clausum tenere. Non enim nobis, parentibus,
and amicis, verum etiam patris, communi omnium parenti, nati sumus. Vt igitur
aliorum mentes, ad amandum and legendum enchiridium hoc a me conuersum,
incitarem, operaepretium esse duxi, obseruationes meas in vniuersu^ hunc
tractatu^ breuiter enarrare. Corpus autem istius operis, doctrinae christianae,
fundamenta praecipua complectitur: in quo perlegendo, tria obseruatione digna,
notaui; Doctrinarum, nimirum, and questionum theologicarum, varietatem, and
veritatem inconcussam: In distributione earundem, methodum singularem:
Omniumque narratione, breuitatem quandam, pugno dialectico consimilem. Primo
enim, praecipua quaedam capita discutienda subijcit, eaque maximi momenti,
quoad Dei cultum, fidem and spem, Errorem and mendacium, Causas boni and mali,
Adami peccatum, Angelorum ruinam and transgressionem, Hominis liberum
arbitrium, Christum mediatorem, Eius incarnationem, Regenerationem and eiusdem
parts, originale and actuale peccatum, Mortem, passionem, resurrectionem, and
ascensionem Christi, fructumque eorum omnium, Spiritum sanctum and Ecclesiam,
Bonos angelos and eum illis reconciliationem, and pacem nostram, Remissionem
peccatorum, and iustificationem, Peccatorum varietatem, Peccatu^ inspiritum
sanctum, Mortuorum resurrectionem, Vitam aeternam, Dei omnipotentiam, Sanctorum
gratiam and praedestinationem, Voluntatem Dei, Eius praescientiam, Humanam
voluntatem, Animaelocum and statu^ post mortem, etc. Vnumquodque caput ita
depositum, suum habet corpus and membra been cohaerentia, tota fabricaistius
operis, humano corpori, eiusque partibus, sieve arborifacundae eiusque ramis
germinantibus, rite assimilanda. Rerum denique omnium medulla (manu gerenda)
compe^diose comprehenditur: Vnde, Enchiridian sieve manuale, proprie nuncupatur.
Sivero finem ipsius operis respicias, illud praecipue, ad instructionem
Laurentij discipuli sui, compositum fuit, haereticorum impugnationibus
conflictati, grassanti vndique prauitate haeretica, numeroque and viribus
indies crescenti: quae, tanquam pestis, late dispersa, vniuersam perniciem
minabatur, si primitiuae Ecclesiae patres, quasi medici vigilantes, morbidae
Ecclesiae sanitatem, lucubrationibus suis pijsque laboribus, non curassent, and
contagionem illam auertissent Militabant etia^ reuerendi illi patres aduersus
hostilitate^ tyrannorum, fidem Catholicam radicitus euellere conantium; seseque
non solum periculis exposueru^t, sacrifoeder is ductri nam propagantes,
Eua^gelijque professores lucra^tes, veru^entia^ Ecclesiaemilita^tos martyrs,
vigilijs suis, in fide confirmarunt. Quorum egregia merita, si nostrae aetatis
homines oculis suis praeponerent, tum, maiori animorum studio volumina sua
legerent, tum etia^ memoriam tantorum viroru^ reuerentia condigniori colerent.
Inter huiusmodi catholicae fidei propugnatores, divum Augustinum nemini
postponendum esse puto, qui in mess illa dominica operarius extitit, omnium
illustrissimus, and in hoc Enchiridij sui libro, verbum vexitatis, omni fere
lolio impurae doctrinae perpurgatu^, priori illi seculo, and posteritati etiam
tradidit. Prodeatigitur libellus iste in lucem, qui non nisi Latinis prius
notus, nunc Anglis anglice loquens, possit proficere, si tuo etiam saniori
iudicio visus fuerit vtilis; tibique placuerit patrocinium praebere homini
humanioribus literis tantum versato, nec in retheologica prius exercitato. In
hoc opere publicando, illud tibi dedicandu^ esse destinaui, quem inter
Ecclesiae nostrae praelatos, non solum diuinis, sed generosis etiam animi
virtutibus ornatum esse video, generosae prosapiae tuae congruentibus. Speroque
Deum opt. max. vitaemeae filum protracturum, donecte aspiciam (quod maxim
intueri cupio) celsiori loco positum, adclaue^ scilicet nauis, aliquo nostrae
Ecclesiae pelago, sedentem: In te enim, and promotione tua, spes maxima mea.
Nunc vero in tenebris vitae priuatae neglect us iaceo, donec in apricum vitae
emine^tior is, melior protulerit occasio. Praebeo interim demonstrationem hanc
obseruantiae, in te, meae; cupioque in catalogo eorum inscribi, quos favor is
tui patrocinio, fouere dignaris. Sed ne tibi fastidium pariat epistolae meae
prolixitas, verte (quaeso) oculos ad libri a me conuersi, lectionem: quem, si
prelo dignum fore dijudices, sententia tua in ea part lata, animabit ad omnem
alieni iudicij euentum, fortiori animo fere^dum. Sin minus, sententia tua
tra^sibit in rem vtcunque a te iudicatam, nec alium patronum appellabo. Sic
vale, vir ornatissime, te que longaevum, felicem, and incolumen faciat
omnipotentia diuina.

FEBRVARII PENVLTIMO. 1606.
TOUCHING Christian Divinity, to which kind of Wisdom it may be directed unto.
CHAP. 1.
The Proeme: wherein is contained both a commendation of the work, and
declaration also, that no wisdom is perfect, but that only which is given by
God, the light thereof, and derived also from his word.

IT cannot be expressed, my best beloved son Laurence, what singular comfort I
take in thy knowledge, and how earnestly I desire to have thee wise; howbeit,
not in the number of them, of whom it is said, Where is the wise man, where is
the scribe, and where the searcher or disputer of this world? For, did not God
make the wisdom of the world mere foolishnes? But of the number of those, of
whom it is said, The number of the wise is the worlds health and preservation:
and also of that quality which the Apostle desires to be in men, to whom he
says, Verily, I would have you wise in that which is good and simple in that
which is evil. For, as no man can be his own maker; so can he not be wise
of himself, but by the illumination of him, of whom it is written, A^ wisdom
is from God.

CHAP. 2.
Piety to be true wisdom, which is more aptly called in Greek (...), than
(...).

Piety therefore, or religion, is the wisdom of man. Which thing is verified
in the book of holy Job: for there is read, that Wisdom her self says to
man, Behold, Piety is wisdom. Now, if you ask what Piety he means in that
place, you shall find it more distinctly in the Greek word (...), which is
the worship or service of God. For in Greek it is called Piety: and otherwise
also in the same tongue, (...), by which name is meant true worship; albeit
also, that worship is chiefly referred to the service of God. But there is no
name more significant than that whereby the (...) of God is (...) pressed; as
namely, when it is signified thereby what should be the wisdom of man. Seek
thou to have anything more briefly delivered, who requirest at my ba^ds a
compendious narration of weighty matters? Or do thou (perhapps) desire that
this one point may be briefly laid open, and gathered into a short speech,
declaring in what manner God is to be worshipped.

CHAP. 3.
Of the worship of God and the parts thereof, and what the matter and object of
true Piety.

That the worship of God is comprehended in these three things; namely, Faith,
Hope, and Charity.

HEre if I should answer, that God is to be worshipped by Faith, Hope, and
Charity; no doubt you would say, That the answer were shorter than you would
have it: And then again, you would press me farther, with a brief
explication of all things which pertained to the sense and understanding of
every of these three words; namely, what that is which is to be believed, to be
hoped for, and to be loved. Which, when I have performed, then are you
answered to all the questions proposed in your Letter. The copy whereof, if
you have lying by you, it is an easy matter to reuolue and read it again.
And, if you have it not, you may reduce it to memory by the help of this my
remembrance.

CHAP. 4.
By the explication or definition of Faith, Hope, and Charity, we learn what
is to be followed in Christian religion, and what is to be eschewed. The
understanding whereof, is partly to be apprehended by humane reason, and partly
by faith alone.

WIll you therefore that I make a Book for you, as you write, which may be an
Enchiridion unto you, as it is called; and never be out of your hands,
containing in it your desires; that ^s to say, What is chiefly to be followed,
and what again in respect of diverse heresies retained, is principally to be
shunned: How farre-forth reason fights for religion, or wherein reason and
faith be repugnant: What first, and what last to be embraced and held: that
is the sum of the total definition: and what the sum and proper foundation
of Catholic faith. All these things which you require, you shall undoubtedly
know, by learning diligently what is to be believed, hoped for, and loved. For
all these be chiefly, nay solely, to be sought (...) (...)ed in the course of
religion. Which things, whosoever does contradict or deny, is either not to be
called by the name of a Christian, or else is a flat Heretic. And these
things be also to be maintained by reason, as being either derived from the
senses of the body, or else found out and conceived by the light of the mind.
And those things which we neither can perceive by the sense of the body, nor
yet understand by the light of the mind, then are they without all doubt to be
be^leeued, in respect of those witnesses, by whom that which deserves to be
called holy scripture, is written; who were able either to see, or foresee
those mysteries, either corporally, or spiritually, being therein assisted by
the spirit or revelation of God.

Of Faith and Hope what they are, and what difference and agreement there is
between them.
CHAP. 5.
The first thing in Christian religion is Faith: and the last is the full sight
of Gods presence, Jesus Christ being the end of Faith.

WHen the mind is first of al seasoned with faith, which works by charity,
it proceeds by good life at length to come to a visible knowledge and sight
of God; in which place, to the godly and pure in heart, there is a known and
unspeakable beauty; the full sight and contemplation whereof, is accounted the
highest happiness. And this is that indeed which may satisfy you in your
desire to know, What is the first, and what the last in religion, which has
his beginning in faith, and consummation in Christ. This is also the sum and
effect of the general definition of religion. And to know Christ, is the true
and proper foundation of Catholic faith. For an other foundation, says the
Apostle, No man can lay, other then that which is already laid, which is Christ
Jesus. Neither is this therefore to be denied to be the proper and only
foundation of Catholic faith, because some heretics are deemed to hold upon
the same ground that we do. For, if those things which pertain to Christ, be
diligently considered, Christ is to be found in all Heretics but only in
name, who would be called Christians, though Christ indeed dwells not in
them. Which to demonstrate, is too long a work, because all kinds of heresies
were then to be specified; either those that were, they which now be, or else
might be under the title of a christian: And so should it be also tedious to
discourse of the truth it self particularly, and in all points thereof. Which
disputation, would make so many volumes, as it would seem infinite and
endless.

CHAP. 6.
Sound doctrine may with more facility and breuity be delivered, than heresies
confuted.

THou therefore desire at my hands an Enchiridion, that is to say, a thing
which may be comprehended in your hands, and not load a Library. To return
therefore to these three things; namely, Faith, Hope, and Charity, by which we
affirmed that God was to be worshipped; it is easily declared, what it is we
must believe, what we must hope for, and what we are to affect or love. But
how it may be defended against the detractions and slanders of those which
hold variety of opinions, that is a doctrine of greater labor and
circumstance. For the accomplishment whereof, the hand must be filled, not with
a short Enchiridion, but the breast inflamed with a vehement affection.

CHAP. 7.
In the Apostles Creed and the Lords Prayer, those three principal positions
touching the service of God; namely, Faith, Hope, and Charity, be contained,
and most briefly delivered.

FOr this matter look upon the Creed, and the Lords prayer: Then the which,
what is there to be heard or read, of greater brevity, or what more easily
committed to memory? Because therefore, mankind in respect of sin, was
pressed down with the heavy burden of misery, and stood in need of Gods
mercy; and that the Prophet foreseeing the time of Gods favor, says, And
every one which calls upon the name of God, shall besaued: for this cause was
the Lords prayer used. Howbeit, the Apostle after he had cited that
Prophetical testimony, to set forth the mercy of God; he forthwith lays
down this also, saying, How can they call upon him, of whom they have not
believed? For which cause the Creed was devised. In which two words, look
upon these three things: Faith believes, and Hope and Charity be our
Orators. But, without faith, these two cannot be; by which reason faith also is
a party in our petitions. Whereupon it is said, How shall they call upon him,
of whom they have not believed?

CHAP. 8.
What difference there is between Hope and Faith: of what things Faith does
consist, and of what also Hope: Also what Christian Faith did properly
apprehe^d. Finally, that the knot and bond of these three virtues, namely.
Faith, Hope, and Charity, was not to be severed or divided amongst themselves.

NOw what can be hoped for, which is not believed? But yet on the contrary,
something may be believed, which is not hoped for. For which of the faithful
do not believe that there be punishments ordained for the wicked? yet does he
not hope to taste thereof. Which punishments who so believes may fall upon
himself, and is inwardly troubled with the horror thereof, in the vanishing
conceit of his own mind; that man is more rightly said to fear, in this case,
then to hope. Which two words, Lucan distinguishing, does thus describe them;
The fearful man may yet have hope.

Howbeit, on the other side, it is not so properly spoken by an other Poet,
though he be the better in reputation: If I could hope for no more grief but
this.

Finally, diverse in the rules of Grammar do borrow this word for an example,
to show how improperly it is used; who say, he used that word sperare (which
is to hope) for, or in stead of timere, which is to fear. There is a faith
therefore, both of evil things and of good; because both good and bad be
believed, and that with a cheerful, and not a fearful faith. There is a
faith also of things past, things present, and things to come. For, we believe
that Christ died, which is already past. We believe that he sits at the
right hand of his father, which is at this instant. We believe that he shall
come to judge; a thing that shall be. A. faith, likewise, of things
appertaining to our selves, and also of things concerning other men. For every
man believes that he had a beginning, and therefore that he was not from
everlasting; whereof there be many semblable instances. Neither do we only
believe many, things! touching other men in matter of religion, but likewise
also of Angels. Hope also is not but of good events; and not also, but of
things to come: properly likewise concerning him, who is thought to put a trust
and confidence in the same. Which being so, Faith is to be distinguished from
Hope, as well by a difference agreeing with reason, as with the sense of the
word. For, as touching those words, non videre, that is to say, not to see; in
that sense, Faith and Hope be all one. For in the epistle to the Hebrews,
which testimony the famous defenders of the Catholic doctrine have used,
Faith is said to be a knowledge of things which be not seen. Although on the
other side, when any man shall say, that he believed not, either words,
witnesses, or any reasons; but things present, which he plainly saw (that is
to say, grounded his faith thereupon) seems not to be so absurd, ^s that he
may be rightly reprehe^ded in the sense of the Word; out of the which, it may
be said unto him, Thou did see, therefore thou did not believe. Whereupon
may be gathered, that it is no consequence, that the thing is not to be seen,
which is to be believed. But indeed, we do more properly call that faith,
which, as the sacred scriptures have taught us, is of things invisible.
Touching Hope also, the Apostle says, that that hope is no hope at all, which
is of things visible. For to what end does a man hope in those things which he
sees? But, if we hope for those things which we see not, we patiently tarry
in expectance thereof. Whereas the godly do believe, that good things shall
fall unto their portion: it is as much to say, as they be hoped for of the
good. But now, what shall I say of Love, without which, Faith is of no force?
for indeed, Hope cannot be without Love. Finally, as the Apostle James says,
The very Devils do believe, and tremble: howebe it, they neither hope, nor yet
love; but rather fear, in believing that the same shall come to pass
hereafter, which we do hope for, and affect. For which cause, the Apostle
Paul does allow of that faith, which works by love, and which also cannot be
without hope. To conclude therefore, neither love can be without hope, nor
hope without love; nor either of them without faith.

CHAP. 9.
For the understanding of Christian Faith, the tedious and dark knowledge of
natural causes is not needful; but only the knowledge of that cause, which is
the efficient of all things, the same being God, that trinity; that is to
say, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

WHen the question is therefore, What we ought to believe in matter of
religion; in this case, the nature of things is not so curiously to be looked
into, as it is of them, whom the Greeks call Natural Philosophers. Neither
let it be fearful to any Christian, if he be ignorant in some thing,
touching the force and number of the elements, the motion, order, and effects
of the planets, the celestial globe, the kinds and natures of living
creatures, herbs, stones, springs, rivers, mountains; as also of the
distances betvveene places and times, the signs of imminent storms, and six
hundred the like matters, which they have found out, or else do impute to
their own invention: Because they have not been the Authors of these things,
albeit they were inducd with excellent wits, fervent in desire, full of
leisure, discovering some things by humane conjecture, and other things again,
by historical observation; and in those things also, which they do appropriate
to their own invention, they do in most matters rather guess at them, then
know them certainly. It is enough for a Christian to believe, that the cause
of all things which be created, either in heaven, or upon earth, visible or
invisible, is not otherwise then of the goodness of the Creator, which is the
only and true God: and that there is no nature, which either he himself is
not, or else is not derived from him: himself being the Trinity; that is to
say, the father, and the son begotten of the father; and the Holy Ghost
proceeding from the same father; hovvebeit one and the self same spirit, as
well of the father, as of the son.

CHAP. 10.
All things were created good of God, howbeit not without their mutation or
change, ne yet absolute, nor of one correspondencie amongst themselves.

OF this absolute, correspondent, and unchangeable good Trinity, all things
were created, being yet in themselves, neither absolutely, semblably, or
unchangeably good; howbeit, every one of them particularly good, and being
also united, they are likewise in that universal body, or mass of
all-together, exceeding good: Because of this generality and all-together,
that vvonderfull beauty of the world is composed.

CHAP. 11.
The reason why God does suffer evils to reign in the world. That evil is
none other thing then a privation of natural goodness, which privation is not
a thing of it self.

IN which matter, that also which is called evil, being well marshalled, and
rightly placed, does more visibly commend those things which be called good, to
the end they might be more plausible and commendable, being compared with
those things which be evil. For neither would the omnipotent God (which the
infidels also do confess) in as much as himself is universally good, by any
means suffer any evil to be in his own works; but that also his
omnipotency and goodness is such, as that he makes that eeuill to be
beneficial unto us. For God, either in reforming, or in punishing of the
integrity of nature, being corrupted and vicious, does turn it to the good
of man. By which means consequently that which is evil, shall not be a
perpetual blemish; because it is not any thing when it is purged and removed.
For, what other thing is that which is called evil, than a priuacion of that
which is termed good? For it fares, as it is in the bodies of living
creatures, wherein to be infected with diseases, and hurtes, is nothing else,
but to vva^t health: Neither does it fall out, when there is a remedy
applied, that those evils which had gotten possession of the body (that is to
say, diseases and hurts) should remove from thence, and remain or be
elsewhere; but rather that they should have no being at all. For, that which
is called a disease or hurt, is not any substance or matter of it self, but
rather a corruption or infection of a carnal substance. Seeing therefore flesh
is only that which is called substance, certainly there is some good
whereunto those evils be accidental; that is to say, priuations of that good,
which is called health. Even so, whatsoever faults be in the mind, they be
the priuations of natural goodnesses. Which, when they be cured, they be not
translated to any other place: but they which had a local being, have now no
being at all, seeing they shall not have any place or abode in that which is
cured and made whole.

CHAP. 12.
Albeit all creatures, as they be natures, be made good by God; yet, because
they be not immutably good, certain of them may be corrupted. And that their
corruption or vice, is nothing else, but a loss, or deprivation of that good
which God did graft in them: insomuch, is wheresoever there is left no spark
of natural goodness, there likewise is there abiding no corruption, neither
is sin or vice predominant and solely remaining.

ALl natures therefore, because God their creator is absolutely good and
perfect, be also good. Howbeit, because they be not like as their maker is,
absolutely and unchangeably good; therefore may that good which is in them, be
both decreased and increased. But that diminution of good, is that which is
called evil: although notwithstanding, howsoever it be diminished, something
consequently remains and is abiding still, if nature be not utterly
extinguished, whereof it has a being, and is nature still. For howsoever, and
in what quantity or measure soever nature is yet living, that good which is
called nature, cannot be utterly consumed, unless nature her self be utterly
extinguished and consumed: and therefore is nature worthily commended. Further,
if that be incorruptible, then without all question, is she much more
praiseworthy. Now, when it is corrupted, that corruption thereof makes it
therefore evil, because it depriueth and spoileth it of all goodness
whatsoever. For, if it bereave it not of any good, it is not consequently
obnoxious or hurtful: but it is hurtful in depriving it of that which is good.
As long therefore, as nature is corrupted, so long is it possessed of a good,
whereof it is again dispossessed. By which reason, if there be a dram of
good remaining, which cannot be clean put out; then without all doubt is
nature also incorruptible. And again, if it be subject to continual
corruption, there is also a permanent good, whereof that corruption has a
power to deprive it. Which natural faculty, if that which is called evil,
shall utterly and wholly consume; by that reason, there shall be no good at all
abiding, because nature also is dead and extinguished. Corruption therefore
cannot utterly abolishe and consume that which is good, but by the consumption
also of nature. All that which is called nature therefore, is good; being
great and divine, if it cannot be polluted: and on the other side, little and
weak, if it be subject to infection: and yet can it not be absolutely denied
to be good without note of folly and ignorance. Which thing, called nature,
i^ut be utterly extinguished by corruption, neither can that corruption also
have any continuance, as having no being where no nature is left to harbor or
entertain the same.

CHAP. 13.
Two strange positions maintained contrary to the vulgar opinion: the one, that
there can be no evil said to be there, where there is not any good: and the
other, that good is called evil; that is to say, one and the self same thing
is both good and bad.

BY this agument, there is not any evil, if there be not any good. But good
which is void of evil, is absolutely good. On the other side, in whom evil
has gotten a possession, in that person, good is either more or less
polluted: neither can there be by any means, any evil, where there is no good
at all. There is a great mystery therefore herein: as wherein, because all
nature, in as much as it is nature, is of it self good, it can have none other
meaning or construction, being said to be a nature that is polluted and evil,
but that which is good, is also evil: and that co^uertibly it cannot be evil,
which is not likewise good. Because all which is called by the name of nature,
is good: neither should any thing become evil, if the thing it self which is
evil, had not an essence, nature, or being. There can therefore be none
evil, if there be no good. Which assertion, though it may seem absurd, yet
the coherence of this argument, does as it were without evasion, drive us to
this conclusion. And we must take heed, lest we stumble upon that saying of the
Prophet, where we read, Woe be unto them which say that good is evil, and
that evil is good: who say that sweet is sower, and sower sweet: who call
darkness light, and light darkness. But yet God does say, that an evil man
out of the treasure of his own heart, does bring forth evils. Now what is an
evil man, but an evil nature, because man is that which we call nature? And
if man be in some measure good, or a kind of good, because he is nature; what
other thing is an evil man, but an evil good? Howbeit, when we separate and
distinguish these two properties, we do also find, that he is not therefore
evil, because he is a man: nor therefore good, because he is sinful: but
good, in as much as he is a man and evil because he is a sinner. Whosoever
therefore affirms, that man, as he is man is evil, or says that that which
is called good, is evil, he incurreth the se^tece of the Prophet saying, Woe
unto the^ which say that good is evil. For he does deprave the work of God,
which is man; and commends the fault of man, which is sin. For all nature,
although it is vicious, is good, in as much as it is nature: and evil, in as
much as it is polluted and corrupted.

CHAP. 14.
Good and evil, which be in themselves repugnant, may (contrary to the rules
of Logic) stand together, and be in one and the self same thing; yea and
evil may spring out of that which is good.

WHerefore in these contraries which be called good and evil, that rule of
Logic fails; affirming, that two cotraries cannot stand together in any one
thing. For there is no firmament clowdy and clear at one instant: no meat or
drink sweet and sower together: no man's body white and black in one and the
self same place: no beauty and deformity in one face at once. Which thing is
observed in many and almost in all contraries, that they cannot be in any one
thing together. Now, seeing no man doubts that good and evil be contraries,
so may they not only be together; but also evils cannot simply be without good
things, or but in things which be good: although on the contrary, things which
be good may be without evils. For a man, or an angel, may be not unrighteous,
because unrighteousness cannot be in any but either in a man, or in an angel.
And these two contraries be so combined, as if there were not good, wherein
evil might dwell, evil should have no being at all. Because corruption
should not have any subject, not only where to abide, but also from whence it
may spring, and have a beginning, except there were something that might be
corrupted. For, if good were not, neither should there be corruption, which is
none other thing than a banishment of that which is good. Evils therefore take
their root from goodnesses, and be not at all but in things that be good;
neither has any nature of evil any other foudatio^ For, if it should consist
of it self, no doubt it should be good, as it is a nature; and being an
uncorrupted nature, should become either a notable good, or else could not
possibly be a nature subject to corruption, except it were also good in some
measure, and that good in like sort blemished with corruption.

CHAP. 15.
He does meet with a double objection: the one drawn from the words of
Christ, the other from the observation of nature it self.

NOw, when we say, that evils do spring originally from things that be good,
let it not be taken to be repugnant to the saying of Christ, affirming, that a
good tree cannot bring forth evil fruits: for, as it is truly said, a Grape
cannot be gathered from thorns, because a grape cannot spring out of them; And
so by the self same reason, as an evil tree cannot yield good fruits: no more
can an evil will or disposition, yield good works. Howbeit, good ground may,
as we see, bear both grapes, and also thorns. In like manner, from the nature
of man which is good, may spring both a will that is good, and a will that is
badde. Neither has that will, which is evil and vicious, any other root
originally, but from the good nature of an angel, or of a man. Which thing,
Christ himself, in that place where he speaks of a tree and fruits, most
plainly shows. For, he says, Either make the tree good, and the fruit
thereof good; or make the tree had and the fruit bad. Giving us thereby a
sufficient caveat, or example, that evil fruits grow not of a good tree, nor
good of an evil: and yet both these trees may grow in that ground, to which ^e
directed his speech.

CHAP. 16.
How far forth the knowledge of natural things is necessary for us, to the
obtaining of true felicity.

WHich matters standing thus as they do although that verse of Vi^gill does
like us very well, saying:

Right happy do I, co^nt that man,
Of things the reasons give that can;
Yet do we not, think it enough and sufficient for the attainment of
felicity, to know the causes of the wonderful corporal motions of the world
(namely, the motions of the planets, and the reuolutions of the celestial
globes and spheres) which causes lie hidden in the inscrutable bowels of nature
namely,

What makes the earth to quake,
What swells the Ocean maine,
Where of the bowels being broke,
Do fall into their joints again:
With many other things of like nature; but rather we ought to search out the
causes of good and evil: and that also, so farre-forth as it is in man's power
and faculty in this life, being full of errors and miseries. For, we are to
direct our course to that mark of felicity, where no misery shall afflict us,
nor any error intrappe us. For, if the causes of corporal motions were so
needful for our instruction, then ought there none to be preferred before the
reasons of the health of our own bodies. Wherein being ignorant our selves,
seeing we seek unto Physicians to know the same, who then does not see a
reason, how patiently to content himself with his own blindness and
ignorance in that, which to mortal creatures is unseen, as touching the
secrets of heaven and earth?

TOUCHING ERROR and lying. CHAP. 17.
Here he meets with with an objection, teaching us, that neither every one
which is ignorant in something, does therefore err: nor yet that every error is
damnable.

ALbeit, error therefore is with all diligence to be eschewed, not only in
greater, but also in lesser matters; and that error also cannot be without
ignorance: yet does it not follow^, that he should evermore err, who is
ignorant in some particular thing; but rather he which thinks he
understands that, which (indeed) he knows not. For, such a kind of person
allows that for verity, which is false, being always the property of
error. Howbeit, the matter wherein every one erreth, makes all the difference.
For, in one and the self same matter, both the man that understands, is to
be preferred before the ignorant person; and he that erreth not, before him
that erreth, and that by the rule of reason. Again, in diverse things (that is
to say) whereas this man knows these things, another other things; and this
man is seen in matters of greater utility, and another in things of less
utility, or rather which be hurtful; who will not in these differences,
account him in better case, that knows the^ not, than him that is skillful
therein? For there be some things, which were better unknown then known. Also
to many it has been sometimes good to have erred, and gone astray; howbeit in
the way of their worldly iourneys, and not in the course of their life and
conversation. For, it happened unto ^^r selves, that we were deceived by a
double way, whereby we went not that way, where the armed forces of the
Donatists lay in wait for us to shut up the passages. By which accident it fell
out, that we came to the place whither we travailed, though we went about out
of the way: having cause to be glad, and thank full unto God, in that we
erred and went out of the right way, knowing the trains which were laid for
us. Who therefore will be afraid, to prefer such a wandering trauailer, before a
thief that never goes out of his courses? For confirmation whereof, that
forlorn lover is fained by that excellent Poet, to say, How was her sight my
bane, how did blind error me mis-lead?



Because that error is good, which not only hurts not at all, but also is in
some sort profitable. To set down the truth therefore herein, for as much as
error is nothing else, but to think that to be true, which is false; and that
again to be false, which is true; or to hold that for certain, which is
uncertain: or on the contrary, to take that for uncertain, which is certain,
whether it be false, or whether it be true: Which mistaking, being a great
deformity and blemish to the mind, how beautiful then and seemly may we
account it to be, when either in our assertion we deal plainly and say,
either yea, yea, or no, no, to any question propounded. In respect whereof,
truly our life in this world wherein we live, is most wretched, because error
is oftentimes needful in the course thereof, for the preservation of the same.
God forbid the^, that such should be the estate of that life to come, where
only truth is the life of the soul, and where neither any man does deceive,
nor is deceived. But, in this world, men both deceive, and be deceived; being
the more ^amentable, when as they rather beguile by lying, than be beguiled
themselves by believing liars. Howbeit, our nature being endued with reason,
does by all means so eschew the snare of deceit, and as much as it may, shun
error; that even they which love to deceive others, will not themselves
willingly be deceived. For, he which lies, will not persuade himself that
he erreth therein, but rather that he seduceth him thereby who does believe
him. Neither does that man err in that matter, which he cloaketh with a lie,
in case himself did understand the truth: But he is deceived in this, that he
thinks that he wounds not himself by lying; whereas every sin in it
self is more hurtful to the agent, than to the patient.

CHAP. 18.
Albeit it is not the part of an honest and godly man to lie; yet in lies, one
is greater than another in respect of the mind and intention: and so also in
respect of the matters about which we do lie, one is more dangerous and
pernicious than another.

But now out of this matter there rises a most intricate and dark question,
whereof we did write a great book, at such time as we were necessarily
enforced to answer, Whether (...) were the part of a just man, to lie or
dissemble at any time. Truly, I am of opinion, that any kind of lie is a
sin. Wherein, notwithstanding there is a great alteration of the case, in
respect of the quality of the mind, and also of the causes moving any man to
lie. For, he does not commit so great a sin, which lies in aduising or
directing another man, as he which lies with an intent to do hurt thereby. As
for example, that man does not so much hurt, which sets a trauailer into a
wrong way by lying, as he which corrupts the way of man's life, by deceiving
him with untruths. And again, no man is to be held a liar, who affirms a
falsehood, taking it for a truth; because, in as much as in him is, he has no
meaning to deceive, but is rather deceived himself. He is not therefore to
be condemned for a liar, but to be censured either for temerity and rashness,
who inconsiderately believing untruths, entertaineth the^ for truths: But
rather on the contrary, that man, as much as in him is, does he indeed, who
affirms that to be true, which he thinks in his conscience to be false.
For, as touching his mind and inward motion; because his tongue declares not
that which his heart thinks, he says not the truth, although in
examination, it fall out to be true which he affirms. Neither is he by any
means to be freed from the guilt of a lie, which with his mouth ignorantly
utters a truth, and yet wittingly lies in his heart. Setting apart therefore
things themselves, by occasion whereof, any thing is avouched, and only
setting before our eyes the intention of the speaker, that man is better of the
two, which through want of knowledge and capacity, affirms an untruth,
because he takes it for a verity; than he which contrary to his conscience,
carries a mind to lie and deceive, although indeed he cannot truly judge
of that to be truth which he affirms. For, the first of these 2. has not
one thing in his heart, and another in his mouth: But the second (no doubt)
howsoever it be false or true which he says, yet has he, notwithstanding,
one thing shut up in his breast, and another thing in his tongue, which evil
is a property incident to the liar. And now to come to the consideration of
things which be held and maintained, there is as great a difference in the
matter wherein any man is deceived, or does lie: albeit, that to be deceived
is a less evil than to lie, weighing therein, the intention of the inward
man, yet is it much more tolerable, in matters out of the compass of religion,
to lie and dissemble, than to be deceived and misled in those things, without
the belief and knowledge whereof, God cannot be worshipped: as in many
particularities it may more clearly be found out by him that will seek after
the truth. Which to demonstrate by some examples, let us see what difference
there is between him, who in lying, reports that a man is living, who is
dead; and another, who being deceived, believes that Christ after many ages
to come, shall suffer a second death. In which two things, is it not without
all comparison, a lesser matter in that sort to be a liar, than in this sort to
be deceived? and it is a less evil, to induce any man to that error, than by
any man to be induced into this.

CHAP. 19.
Although we are diversely deceived and misled, in respect of the event; yet is
it always an evil in it self, to be deceived and misledd.

IN some particular matters therefore, we are seduced to our great hurt; in
certain again, to our less hurt; in some also without any hurt at all; and in
some again, to our great good. As for example, that man is deceived to his
great hurt, which believes not that which brings him to his salvation. He
again is seduced with little hu^t to himself, who entertaining error for
truth, falls thereby into some worldly troubles; and yet bearing the same
with faithful patience, makes good use thereof: As for example, if any man by
holding another man to be honest and just, who indeed is a bad man, does
sustain some hurt by him. Thirdly, he which so farre-forth believes an evil
man to be good, as that he suffers no hurt by him at all, is not thereby
seduced to any hurt to himself, neither does that detestation of the Prophet
fall upon him, pronouncing a woe unto those who affirm, that evil is good.
For that saying is to be understood of the things wherein men do offend, or
commit evil, and not of the persons themselves. And therefore, he which says
that adultery is good, is rightly taxed by that saying of the Prophet: but he
who pronounces that man to be honest, whom he takes to be chaste, not knowing
him to be an adulterer, that man is deceived, not in the true sense of that
doctrine of things that be good and evil, but is deceived by the close
carriage of men in their manners; calling him a good man, whom he thinks to
be endued with that which he knows to be good, and yet affirming still, that
an adulterous person is evil, and a continent person good: howbeit, saying
that this man is good, not knowing that he is an adulterer, and that man to be
evil, not knowing that he is an honest liver. Furthermore, if any man do
escape mischief by error, as it happened to us in our journey which we formerly
remembered, by that it may appear, that some good comes unto a man by error.
But when I say that any man is deceived, either without any hurt to himself,
or else to his particular good, I do not therein affirm, that error is no
evil, or that it is a good after a sort: but I speak of that evil, whereinto
a man falls not; or of that good whereunto a man attaineth by erring,
expressing what does fall out, or not fall out upon precedent error. For error,
simply by it self, being either a great evil in a great matter, or a little
evil in a little matter, is always notwithstanding an evil. For, who but a
man that is ignorant, will deny that it is an evil, to allow of untruths for
truths, or adiudge truths to be untruths, embracing incertainties for
certainties, and certainties for incertainties? But, it is one thing to think
a man to be good that is bad, whereof error is the occasion; and another thing,
by this evil not to be endammaged, or not to incur another evil, although
we receive no detriment by an evil man, who is deemed good. Also, it is one
thing to think that to be the way, which is not the way: and another thing by
this evil of ignorance, to get some good; as namely, to escape the
conspiracies of evil persons.

CHAP. 20.
That every kind of error is not sin: neither because we often err in some
things, all assent in matters is to be abrogated and taken away, as the
Academical Philosophers would have it.

YEt can I not certainly set down, whether it may be called an error, when a
man holds a good opinion of an evil man, not knowing what he is in manners
and conversation: or else when, in stead of those things which we discern by
our corporal senses, the like are presented unto us, being either spiritually
perceived, as it were, with the body; or bodily perceived, as it were in the
spirit. Much like unto that which the Apostle Peter believed to be sor indeed,
when he thought he saw a sight, being suddenly delivered out of prison and
fetters by the angel: or in corporal things, when that which is hard, is
accounted easic; or that sweet, which is sower: or that which is unsavory, to
be pleasant in smell: or else that it thundreth, when a chariot runs: or when
one man is taken for another, two being alike; which oftentimes happens in
twins; whereupon the Poet affirms, that mistaking in such cases, is an
acceptable error in Parents. And so whether many other things of like
condition, be to be pronounced sins. This question, though it be most knottie
and entangled, having troubled the heads of the subt(...)t Academiees, yet have
I undertaken to unfold it; that is to say, Whether a wife man ought to give
his approbatio^ of any thing to (...), (...) he should allow of falsehood for
truth; seeing all things, as they do affirm, lie either hidden in the secrets
of nature, or else be ambiguous and uncertain. Whereupon I composed three
Books, when I was first converted, to take away those stu^bling blocks, which
stood in the door (as it were) to withstand me. Also the despair of finding
out the truth, was to be removed, the same being fortified by their reasons
and arguments. With the^ therefore, all error is accounted sin: which they
defend to be inevitable, ^nles every man's particular approbation in any thing,
be utterly suspe^ded. For, they do hold that man to be in error, whosoever
assenteth unto things uncertain, affirming that nothing subject unto the eye
of ma^^s certain and infallible; because there is no sensible difference
between falshoode and truth in outward appearance; although sometimes, that
falls out to be truth, which seems to be the same, a positio^ maintained
with most impudent, though ingenious arguments. Howbeit, with us in divinity,
it is said, that the righteous man lives by faith. But, if assent and
approbation be taken away, faith also is destroyed. Because, without
approbation or allowance, we believe in nothing. And those invisible things
concerning our salvation, be most true and certain, though they be unseen;
which, if they be not believed, it is impossible to come to everlasting life,
which is not otherwise but eternal. I know not therefore, whether we may say
as they say, who be so far from thinking that they shall live for ever, as
they know not whether they do live while they be in this world: wherein they
do plead ignorance, although it be a thing which they cannot but know. For,
there is no man admitted in reason to say, that he knows not whether he
lives or not; because, if he be not a living creature, he has no sense or
understanding at all: because, not only to know, but also not to know, be
properties incident only to the living. Howebeit, in denying that they do
live, they would seem to prevent error: when as in very deed, by that matter
of error, they are co^uinced as by a consequence, that they believe he cannot
err which lives not. As therefore, it is not only true, but also very
certain, that we live; so likewise be many things true and very certain,
whereof for us to give allowance and approbation, God forbid but that it should
be rather accounted wisdom, than madness in us.

CHAP. 21.
Although to err, is not always a sin, yet is it a perpetual effect and
note of man's infirmity and wretchedness.

IN certain things therefore, it is not material to salvation, whether they
be believed, or not; as whether they be believed indeed, or reputed ^o to be,
or else be deemed false. In which things to be deceived, that is to say, to
mistake, or take one for another, is not to be adjudged a sin: or if it be, it
is the least and lightest sin. Finally, let it be of what quality soever, it is
no part of that way which brings us to God: which way is faith in Christ,
working by love and charity. Out of this way were not those parents misled in
that acceptable error, and mistaking of their twins. Neither did the Apostle
Peter wander out of this path, when as, supposing he saw a vision, he took
one thing for another in such sort, as through the shadow of those bodies
wherein he thought he was, he did not know the true bodies wherein he walked,
until such time as the angel parted from him, by whom he was se^ at liberty,
being a prisoner: Neither did Jacob the Patriarch wa^der out of this way, in
supposing that his son was s^aine by a wild beast, when as he was yet living.
In these and such like falsities we be deceived, without shipwreck of our ^aith
in God; and go also amiss, although we leave not the way which leads us unto
him. Which errors, or mistakings, although they be no sins, yet are they to
be accounted in the number of the evils of this life, which is so prone to
vanity, as in this world untruths be entertained for trueths, trueths
discarded for lies, and things uncertain retained for certain. For, although
these things be set apart from that faith which brings us to the true,
undoubted, and eternal felilicitie; yet be they not separated from that
misery wherein we live, being in the flesh. For, we shall in no sort be
deceived, either in any sense of the mind or body, if we were once invested in
that perfect state of felicity.

CHAP. 22.
That every lie is a sin, yea even that which is called an officious lie;
that is to say, a lie made for, the safety of another, albeit it is not so
heinous as that lie which is made with an intent to do hurt.

Moreover, every lie is therefore said to be a sin, because every man, not
only when himself knows what is true; but also, if at any time he err,
and is deceived as a man, ought to speak as he thinks in his heart, whether
it be the truth indeed, or a reputed verity, and yet not the same. For, every
one that lies in any thing which his conscience tells him to be otherwise,
that man speaks with (a will to deceive. Words therefore were devised, not as
means for men to beguile one another, but whereby they might open their
thoughts each to other. To make therefore words the instruments of deceit,
being not ordained to that end, is a sin. Neither is any kind of lie not
to be deemed a sin, for that we may thereby perhaps pleasure one another.
For we may happily do good to some, by stealing from others: as in case the
poor man, to whom that is openly given, which we have stolen, ^eele benefit
thereby; and the rich man whom we have privily robbed, feels not the loss
he has sustained. Let therefore no man hold, that such a theft is not a
sin. We may in like manner; by committing adultery, make show of a good
turn done unto her, who being in case to die for love, if a man do not
consent to her desire, howsoever she may be purged by repentance, if she
happen afterward to recover and live. Neither by that reason, shall any such
sin be denied to be adultery. For, if chastity does please us in the
strict observation thereof, what does then that word truth, I pray you imply,
that chastity should not be broken by fornication being done for the good of
another; and that truth on the contrary, should be violated by lying, in
respect of any like sequel of profit to others? A lie therefore, cannot at any
time deserve praise or allowance, although we lie sometimes for other men's
safety. It is therefore a sin, although a venial sin, being on the one
side excusable by reason of our affection to do good, and condemned on the
other side, because it is fraudulent. For, it cannot be denied, but that men
do greatly further other men's profit and good who do not lie but for the
preservation of some other body. Howbeit, in that their actio^, their kindness
and affection, and not the fraud or deceit used therein, is unworthily
commended in respect of the fact, or else is recompensed in this world: which,
to be remitted and pardoned, is sufficient and enough, although also it be
not made common, especially to the heirs of the new Testament; to whom it is
said, Let yea, yea, and no, no, be in your mouths. For, whatsoever is beyond
the limitation thereof, proceeds from the motion of evil. In respect of which
evil, never ceasing to undermine us while we live in the flesh, the co-heires
of Christ do therefore use this saying, Forgive us our trespasses.

OF THE CAUSES OF good and evil.
CHAP. 23.
The chief and only cause of good is Gods goodness; defection or falling
from God, being also the original cause of evil.

THese matters therefore being thus handled, according to that brru^tie
whereunto I am tied; for so much also, as the causes of good and evil are to be
understood and learned, as also our selves so far forth instructed touching
the way it self, as may suffice to lead us to that kingdom (where there is
life without death, truth without error, and felicity without interruption) we
ought not to doubt, that the cause of good effects or things pertaining unto
us, does grow out of any other ground, than of the goodness of God; and that
the reuolting will, first of angels, and afterward of men, rejecting an
immortal good, and embracing the contrary, was the original cause of evil
or sin.

CHAP. 24.
There be four secondarie causes of evil, namely, Ignorance, Concupiscence,
Sorrow, and Pleasure.

THe first and original evil which happens unto man, being a reasonable
creature, is, his privation of good: Afterward also, ignorance in the actions
of this life did creep in, whether man would or no; as also a concupiscence,
or fervent desire of things hurtful and pernicious, with whom as companions,
be brought in privily, error, and grief or sorrow. Which two evils, after they
be sensibly perceived to hang over our heads, that motion of the mind which
moves us to shun the^ is called fear. Moreover, the mind after it has
obtained the things it earnestly desires, although they be hurtful and
frivolous; yet the same being void of sense and understanding thereof, by
reason of error wherewith it is blinded; or else being bewitched with a
contagious delight and pleasure therein, it is carried as it were, this way,
and that way, with a false conceit of joy. From which fountains (as it were)
of corruption, not of fullness, but of enptinesse, all man's misery and
wretchedness does spring.

OF THE SIN OF Adam.
CHAP. 25.
That the damnation, both of angels and men, because they sinned, was just;
howbeit their punishment not alike, or the self same. Also, what was the
condition or state of man before he fell into sin.

WHich nature notwithstanding, amidst his miseries, could not leese his desire
to obtain eternal life: Howbeit, these evils were general, both to me^ and
angels, who were damned in respect of their malice, by the justice of God. But
man has his peculiar punishment in the death of his body. For the Lord did
threaten death unto him, in case he sinned. And God so induing him with
free will, as that yet he would have him subject to his will, and kept in awe
to fall for fear of destruction, did also place him in the bliss of Paradise,
as it were in the shadow of life; from which he should have been advanced to
greater felicities, if he had kept himself righteous.

CHAP. 26.
The sin of the first man, and his punishment, fell not only upon Adam; but
flowed also to all his posterity. And so by one man, sin came into the world.

HEreupon Adam, after he had sinned, being a banished man, did bind over unto
death and destruction, his whole posterity and offspring; whom by sinning he
did pollute in himself, as in the root: insomuch, as whatsoever issue was
begotten in the concupiscence of the flesh, (in which, a punishment of quality
like to disobedience was inflicted) by Adam and his wife, who was the cause of
his transgression, being jointly damned, should draw original sin from them;
by which also, they should be drawn by errors and many agonies, into those
endless punishments, with the reuolting Angels, the corrupters of mankind, the
possessors of that infernal place, and with their consorts and companions.
Thus came sin into the world by one man, and death by sin; and so it is
conuaied into all mankind, all having sinned in, and through one. For, the
Apostle in that place, calls the world, All mankind.

CHAP. 27.
It was wrought by the only and great mercy of God, that only men, of
sinful nature, should hope for reformation; that is to say, redemption:
which hope is not, either in the angels that sinned, or in the devils.

IT follows therefore, that the whole mass and lump of mankind, lay damned
in sins, or rather wallowed therein, and ran head long from vices to vices:
and being combined with the angels that sinned, received most condign
punishment for their wicked reuolting. Whatsoever therefore, the wicked do
wittingly commit in their blind and unbridled concupiscence, and whatsoever
punishments they do outwardly suffer in the face of the world, against their
wills, is to be imputed to the justice of Gods wrath; neither does the justice
of God cease to give life and strong co^stitution to the wicked angels, who die
if his divine help be withdrawn: And likewise, to give form and life unto
the ^eedes of men, in what progeny or stock soever, being either defiled or
damned, fashioning the limbs and parts of the body between times, quickening
the senses by degrees, and in their places, as they lie in the body, and giving
them inward nutriment. For, he thought it better to draw goodness out of
evils, rather than not to tolerate any evils to be at all. And in case it had
been his will, not to have had any reformation in man, to make him better (as
it was in wicked angels, in whom there is no amendment) might it not very
condignely have comne to pass, that that nature which he has spurned under
his feet by abusing the power or will he had given him, the commandment of
his Creator, and transgressed the same, (which he might very easily have
observed) which has blemished the image of his Creator, being in him, by a
contemptuous turning away from the light thereof, which wickedly violated by
the power of free will, the wholesome servitude that he should have performed to
his laws, should universally therefore be forsaken of him, and sustain an
everlasting punishment by due desert? Truly thus he should have done, if he
had been only just, and not merciful also, and had not given more evident
demonstration of his mercy, which he was no ways bound by promise, or duty to
have performed; especially, in the redemption of such as were unworthy thereof.

OF THE FALL AND sin of the Angels.
CHAP. 28.
The reuolting and wicked angels, did all of them sin together and dwell
together perpetually damned. But the good angels, and such as cleaned unto God,
do enjoy eternal felicity.

Certain therefore of the angels, which left God by their sinful pride, were
thrown down from the high habitation of heaven, to the uttermost darkness of
the air or element below; and the number of angels which remained, had their
dwelling with God in everlasting happiness and holiness. For, neither were
the rest of the angels begotten of that one angel which fell and was damned,
whereby original sin did bind them, as it did mortal creatures in the
chains of guilty posterity, drawing the whole multitude into the punishments
due to the offenders, But that one Angel who exalted himself with his
associates impitie, and is therefore made a devil, by that his pride and
exaltation is cast down with them; the rest which cleaued unto God in godly
obedience, receiving a certain light and knowledge, which the others had not,
whereby they rested assured of their eternal and permanent estate.

CHAP. 29.
To supply the places of the Angels that fell, certain are chosen by God, out
of the number of mortal sinners upon earth, to enjoy everlasting life and
heaven.

IT pleased therefore the Creator of the whole world, and moderator thereof,
Almighty God; that, because the whole company of the angels did not sin by
forsaking God, that the number of them which perished, should remain in
everlasting destruction: And that the number of them which stood firmly unto
God, should dwell in security of their most certain, known, and everlasting
felicity: and that the other reasonable creature, which was man, because he
was generally in the state of perdition by reason of sins and punishments, as
well original, as personal, by that part of mankind which was restored, that
which the fall of the devil had diminished from the society of angels, might
be supplied again. For, so it was promised to the Saints at their
resurrection, that they should be equals with the angels of God. That heavenly
Jerusalem therefore, being our mother, and Gods city, shall not be destitute
of the full number of (...) citizens, but rather shall be more populous in her
kingdom. For, we know not either the number of holy men, or of these foul
fiendes that fell; in whose places, the succeeding sone of the Church, that
holy mother, who seemed to be barren upon carth, shall have their perpetual
habitations, in that peace and tranquillity, from whence they fell; and that
without either term, or limitation of time. But the number of those citizens,
which either now is, or hereafter shall be, is inwardly seen to their maker
and workman; who calls those which yet are not, as well as those which now
be: disposing of all things in measure, number, and weight.

OF MAN'S Free Will.
CHAP. 30.
That sinful men cannot be redeemed nor saved, other by the (...) of their
own works, or on the free-with of their own mind.

But may that part of mankind to whom God has promised freedom and fruition
of his kingdom, be redeemed by the merits of their own works. God forbid. For
what good can a reprobate work unto himself, except he be delivered from the
state of perdition? Can his free will perform that work? God also forbid
that. For, man abusing the liberty of his free will, lost both himself, and
the benefit of his free will. For, even as he which kills himself, does that
fact while he is in life, but is no more a living creature after he has
murdered himself, wanting power to revive himself after he is slain, even
so, when man did sin in his free will, he lost the same after sin had got
the victory. For, if any man be subdued, he is a vassaile and slave to him
that vanquisheth him. This saying is out of Peter the Apostle: which, seeing it
is true, what other liberty (I pray you) has such a bondslaue, except it be
to take his pleasure in sinning? For, he is a dutiful servant, which
willingly does his masters will. By which reason, he has free liberty and
scope to sin, that is the servant of sin. Whereupon also it follows, that
no man shall have freedom to do well, except he be freed from sin, and
become the servant of righteousness. For, to rejoice in well doing is true
freedom; as also to obey the commandment of God, is godly ^eruitude. Which
liberty to do well, how can it be in man, that is a slave, and sold to
(...)? except he be redeemed by him, whose saying i^ is; If the son shall
make you free, then shall ye be free indeed. Which thing, before it begin to
be in man, how may any creature boast of free will in any good action, (...)ch
has not ye^ a liberty given him to do well? except a man, being puffed up
with vain pride, will arrogate that unto himself, which the Apostle
forbids; saying, By grace are ye saved through faith.

CHAP. 31.
That we ^e not s^ued by the merit or worthiness of our own faith.

ANd (...) not men so farre-forth arrogate this faith unto themselves, as they
will not know that it is given of God: according to the saying of the same
Apostle in another place, who confesses that himself obtained the mercy of
God to make him believe: who adds further in that place, saying, And that
also, not of your selves, but it is the gift of God; not of works, lest any man
should boast of himself. And lest there should be deemed any defect of good
works in the faithful, he says again; For we are his workmanship created
in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has ordained that we should walk
in. Then are we therefore truly made free, when as God has made us anewe;
that is to say, does fashion, or alter, and create us again, not as we are
men, which is already done; but that we may become good men, which now he
accomplisheth by his grace: that we may be made a new creature in Christ
Jesus, according as it is said by David, Create in me, O Lord, a new heart.
For, God had already created his heart, as much as pertains to the natural
perfection of the heart of man.

CHAP. 32.
That we are not in any part or sort, the cause of our own salvation, and of
that will which is in us to do well; but that the same only and solely
consists of the mercy of God.

NOw, lest any man should boast of that liberty or freedom of his own will,
albeit he will not brag of works, as though merit were derived from free will,
and that the liberty or faculty to do well were to be ascribed thereunto, as
a reward due unto the same: Let him liste^ unto the same Preacher of grace,
saying, For it is God which works in you both the will and the deed, even of
his good pleasure. And in another place, So then it is not in him that wills,
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy. Whereby it appears
without all doubt, that although a man be of that ripeness of years, as his
own reason may direct him; yet can he not believe, hope, or love, except he
will himself: nor yet come to the crown of that high calling of God, except
he run by his own will. How is it therefore said, Not in him that wills,
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy; but because that the
will it self, as it is formerly written, is prepared by God or else perhaps
that this saying, Not in him that will(...), nor in him that runs, is so
written, because it consists of both; that is to say, of the will of man, and
of the mercy of God: to the end, that we may so understand that saying of Not
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but in God that shows mercy; as
though he said, The will of man is not sufficient of it self, and alone, if
also Gods mercy do not accompany it, and that therefore the mercy of God by it
self, and alone, does not suffice, if also man's will go not with it. By which
reason, if it be truly said, that it is not in him that wills, but in God
that shows mercy, because the will of man does not simply and alone accomplish
that work; why is it not of the contrary truly inferred, that it is not in
God that shows mercy, but in man that wills; because Gods mercy does not
solely perform that action? Furthermore, if no Christian dare affirm, that it
is not in God that shows mercy, but in man that wills, lest he should most
plainly gainesay the Apostle; it follows the^, that we take this his saying,
(Viz. That it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
that shows mercy) to be true, in as much as the whole work is to be
attributed unto God, who both prepares that good will which is in man, as
standing in need of his assistance; and afterward also helps the same,
being so prepared. For, the good will, or will to do good in man, goes
before many of Gods gifts, but it is not precedent to all. And when it
follows and comes after Gods gifts, yet is it a companion amongst them. For
it is both ways read in holy scripture; viz. Both his mercy shall go before
me, and also his mercy shall follow me. It preuenteth or goes before him that
is backward, to make him willing; and follows him that is forward and
willing, lest his will become frustrate. For why are we admonished to pray for
our enemies, being of themselves unwilling to live virtuously, but only that
God would work a will in the^ to do well? Wherefore also, are we willed to
ask at Gods hands, to the end we may obtain, but that our petition may be
performed by him, to whom we are petitioners? By whom also it is wrought, that
we will or desire that which we pray for. We pray therefore for our enemies,
that Gods mercy may prevent and go before them, as it has done before us. We
pray also for our selves, that his mercy may attend upon us.

OF CHRIST THE MEdiator.
CHAP. 33.
That Christ is our Mediator and peacemaker with God, because he makes him
our friend by the oblation of that sole sacrifice, which is himself.

Mankind therefore was detained in the state of just damnation, and all were
the children of wrath; of which wrath it is written, Because all our days are
in declination, and we our selves are fallen into thy displeasure, our years
are folded up as a Spiders web. Of which wrath, Io^ also says, For man which
is borne of woman, is short of life, and his days full of sorrow. Of which
wrath also, our Lord Jesus says, He that believes in the son, he shall
enjoy everlasting life, but he which does not believe in him, is not in the
state of salvation, but Gods wrath and indignation abides upon him. He says
not, It shall come upon him; but, it abides upon him. With this every mortal
creature is borne. Whereupon the Apostle says, For we were also by nature the
children of Gods wrath, even as others were. Seeing therefore, all mortal
creatures were by original sin in this displeasure of God, the same lying so
much the more heavily upon us, by how much our own sins, added thereunto, did
also aggrauate the same by their greatness and abundance; a mediator in this
case was behoouefull and necessary, that is to say, a reconciler, who pacified
Gods wrath, by the oblation of that sole sacrifice, whereof all the sacrifices
of the Law and Prophets were but shadows. Whereupon the Apostle says; For, if
when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his son, much
more now being reconciled, shall himself by his bloodshedding be a protection
unto us against his wrath and indignation. For, when God is angry, the
perturbation which is in him, is not such as is in the mind of a man when he
is offended; But the word being borrowed from the passion which is in mortal
creatures, Gods revenge which of it self is never but just, puts on the
appellatio^ of anger or wrath. Inasmuch therefore, as we are reconciled unto
God by a Mediator, receiving the holy Ghost, whereby we are made friends of
foEs (for that how many soever be sanctified by the spirit of God, become the
sonns of God) this reco^ciliatio^ comes of the mere mercy of God, thorough
Jesus Christ our Lord.

CHAP. 34.
That Christ (who is the word of God) to the end he might be our mediator and
peacemaker with God, did take flesh and was incarnate of the virgin, Marie.

OF which Mediator, to speak in that ample manner, as the matter it self does
deserve, would ask a long discourse, and yet could not worthily be expressed
by the pen of any man. For, who could with fit words set forth this only
thing, namely, that the word was made flesh and dwelled in us, to the end we
should believe in the only son of God the father, being omnipotent, borne
of the holy Ghost, and the virgin Marie? and that the word was so made flesh,
as, although the flesh was begotten by his divinity or deity, yet was there
not any mutation or change of his divinity or deity into the flesh. Moreover,
in this place we are to take this word Caro, which is flesh, to be homo, that
is, man; the speech figuratively signifying the whole, by the part: which, for
example, this saying does demonstrate; namely, Because by the works of the
law, all flesh, that is to say, every man, shall not be saved. For, we may
lawfully say, that in this susception, or incarnation, there was no defect in
the humane nature: the same nature being yet void of all sinful
copulation, and not such as is begotten between man and woman in carnal
concupiscence, wrapping us in the bond of sin, the stain of which original
guilt is washed away by regeneration; but such as was fit to be borne of a
virgin, being a thing conceived in the faith, and not in the lust or sinful
appetite of the mother. For, if in the birth of him that was borne, her
integrity had been blemished, then should he not have been borne of a pure
virgin: and the whole Church should also untruly confess (which God forbid)
that he was borne of a virgin: which Church, following the example of Christ's
mother, does daiely bring forth members of that mystical body, and yet
notwithstanding is a virgin still. Read (if you list) my Letters touching the
virginity of Saint Mary, written to that renowned man Volusianus, of whom I
do here make mention with all reverence and love.

CHAP. 35.
That Christ, who consists of two natures, namely divine and humane, is
notwithstanding but one in subsistence.

CHrist Jesus therefore, the son of God, is both God and man. God before all
worlds, and man in this age or world wherein we live. God, because he is the
word, (for God was the word) and man; because, to make an unity of the person,
a reasonable soul and the flesh were adjoined to the word. Wherefore, as he is
God, he and the father be one: and, as he is man, the father greater than he.
For, being the only son of God, and that not of grace, but by nature, to
the end therefore, that he might be replete with grace, he is also made the
son of man; and the self same he, being both of both, is yet but one
Christ, because, when he was in the figure of his deity, he thought it to be
no robbery unto God, for that it was his natural essence, which was to be
equal with God the father. But he afterward debased himself, taking upon
him the habit of a servant, and yet not leesing or diminishing the habit of
his godhead. By reason whereof, both he became an inferior, and remained also
an equal with God the father; being yet but one, though, as is before
affirmed, of two natures. Howbeit, one in respect of the word, whereby is
meant his godhead, and another in respect of his manhood. For, in respect of
the word, or his deity, he is equal with his father; and in respect of his
manhood, inferior to the father. The only son of God, and yet also the son
of man: the only son of man, and yet the same also the son of God: being
not two sons unto God, as he is God and man, but the sole etc only son of
God, our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, being God without all beginning, and
man with a beginning.

CHAP. 36.
It was not upon any merit of man, no not of the manhood which was in Christ
himself, that he was made man.

THe mercy of God, in this Chapter, is by it self most highly and evidently
extolled. For, what deserved the humane nature which was in the man Christ,
that it should be specially chosen to be united in the person of the only
begotten son of God? What will to do well, what devotion or zeal to any
good intent, or what precedencie of good works whereby this man deserved to be
united to the person of God? And, was he first a man, and this singular benefit
ordained for him, that he should of himself tie God unto him by some special
desert? For, from the time that he was made man by the assumption of the
flesh, he began to be none other thing, than the only son of God; and that
also in respect of the Godhead, which was the word, by the assumption whereof
he was made flesh; that is to say, man as well as he was God: that even as
every man is but one in person, though he consist of two parts, that is to
say, the reasonable soul, and the flesh: so was Christ but one person, being
both the word, and also man. To what other end then was this so great glory,
freely (no doubt) bestowed upon mankind, without any merits precedent* but
only to give evident demonstration and testimony of Gods great and only mercy
in this union, to such as look into the same truly, and with good
consideration: that all mortal creatures may understand, they be justified
from their sins, by the same mercy and favor, by which it was wrought and came
to pass, that the man Christ could not be polluted with sin. In which
manner, the angel saluted his mother, when he brought her tidings of this
birth which followed; saying. Hail, full of grace. And a little after he
says, Thou have found favor in Gods sight. Which two sayings, of being
filled with grace, and finding favor in Gods sight, do import, that she
should not only become the mother of him that was her Lord and Savior, but
also of the Lord and Savior of all mankind. And of Christ himself, John the
Evangelist says, And the word was made flesh, and dwelled in us: and we saw,
said he, his glory, being the glory of the only begotten of his father, full
of grace and verity. Wherein it is to be observed, that where he says, that
the word was made flesh, that was to say, full of grace. And where he says, the
glory of the only begotten of the Father; that is to say, fullness of verity
or truth. For truth it was, that he was the only son of God, not by grace,
but by nature. And, of mere favor and grace he took upon him the manhood,
and that in such an unity or conjunction of the person, as he himself also
became the son of man.

TOUCHING CHRIST'S Incarnation. CHAP. 37.
CHAP. 37.
Now, by the manner of his conception, we are to understand, that the word did
through grace only, and not through any merit of his humanity, assume and put
upon him the body of man, uniting the same unto him.

NOw therefore, the self same Jesus Christ, the only begotten son of God,
that is to say, our only Lord, was borne of the holy Ghost, and the virgin
Marie. And on the other side, the holy Ghost is of the gift of God; which gift
also, is equal with the giver. By which reason, the holy Ghost is God, not
inferior either to the father, or to the son. Whereupon it is to be inferred,
that seeing the birth of Christ touching his mankind, is to be imputed to the
influence of the holy ghost, what other thing is demonstrated therein, than the
mere grace of God? For, when the virgin demanded of the Angel, how it should
come to pass which he told her, because she did not carnally know any man?
the Angel answered, The holy ghost shall replenish thee, and the power of the
highest shall ouershadowe thee: and therefore that holy one which shall be
borne of thee, shall be called the son of God. And, whereas Joseph would have
put her away, accounting her to be an adulteress, because he knew she was
not with child by him, he received this answer from the angel, Be not afraid
to retain Marie as thy wife still: for, that which is borne or conceived in
her (that is to say, that which thou suspectest to be begotten by another
body) is of the holy Ghost.

CHAP. 38.
That Christ is neither the son of the holy Ghost, no yet begotten or
conceived by him, as by a natural father.

ARe we yet therefore to affirm, that the holy Ghost is father unto Christ,
as he is man, as namely, that God the father begot the word, and the holy Ghost
his humanity; of which substances, Christ being united and made one, is by
that reason on the one side, the son of the father, in that he is the word, and
on the other side, the son of the holy Ghost, as he is man; as though the
holy Ghost, as it were his father, did beget him of the virgin his mother? Who
dare be so bold, as to avouch this? neither is it needful by argument or
disputation to declare, what other absurdities do follow hereof; seeing this
one assertion is so absurd in it self, as the ears of the faithful cannot
endure to hear it. Therefore, as it is in the Creed, our Lord Jesus Christ
being God of God, and man begotten of Mary the virgin and the holy Ghost,
consisting of either substance, that is to say, both divine and humane, is
notwithstanding, the only begotten son of God the father, from whom the holy.
Ghost does proceed. How then do we say that Christ was borne of the H. ghost,
if the holy Ghost did not beget him? or is it so said, because he made him? The
reason is, because as Jesus Christ is God, all things were of his creation;
but, as he was man, he himself was created and made, according to the saying
of the Apostle, For, he was made of the seed of David according to the flesh.
But, seeing the whole Trinity did create and make that creature, which the
virgin did conceive and bring forth, tho appertaining and adjoined to the
person of the son (for the works of the Trinity be inseparable) why is the
holy ghost only named in the making of this creature? Is it because, when one
of these three be named in any one work, that the whole Trinity is assistant
in that work? It is even so, and may be made plain unto us by example or
demonstration. Howbeit, we must no^ any longer stand upon this point. For, it
remains, that we declare how it is said, that he was borne of the holy
Ghost, being no way the son of one same holy Ghost. For, no more may the
world, without impiety, be called the son of God, because God made the same;
neither else, that it was borne of him: but rather, we may rightly say, that
it was made, or created, or builded, or ordained by him; or use words of the
like sense. Seeing therefore we do confess, that he was borne of the holy
Ghost, and the virgin Marie, it is a matter of great difficulty to discuss,
how he should not be the son of the holy Ghost, but the son of the virgin
Mary; notwithstanding, that he was begotten both of the one, and of the other.
Without all doubt he was not borne of him, as of a father, though he were so
of her, as of a mother.

CHAP. 39.
Not every thing that is said to be borne of any thing, may properly be called
the son of that it is said to be borne of.

IT is not therefore to be granted, that whatsoever is borne of any thing, it
should straightway be called the son of the self same thing. For, to omit
other instances, the begetting of a son by a man, is after one manner, and
the growing of the hair of a man's head, the breeding of a lowse, and of a
worm in man's body, is after another sort; not any of which kinds is to be
termed a son. Therefore, to speak no more of these (because it is unseemly to
compare them with a thing of so divine a nature) they verily, which be born of
water, and the holy Ghost, no man can properly call them the sons of the
water, but be truly called the sonns of God, and of the Church their mother.
In like manner therefore is Christ, being begotten of the holy Ghost, the
son of God the father, and not of the holy Ghost. For that also, which we
have spoken touching the hair of the head, and the rest, makes only for this
purpose, to let us to understand, that not every thing begotten of any ma^s
body, may consequently be called the son of him, of whom he is so borne, no
more than it follows, that all they which be called the sons of any person,
must therefore of necessity be begotten of the same person, whose sonns they
be called; such as be they which be adopted sons. Again, some be called the
sons of Gehenna, or hell, not because hell was their father, or begot them; but
because they be prepared for that place: Much like to them which be called the
sons of Gods kingdom, because they are prepared for the same.

CHAP. 40.
In that Christ is said to be borne of the holy Ghost, is meant, that man in
like manner, by the mere grace of God (which is called the holy Ghost) and the
word of God, is partaker of the divine nature, and united or ingrafted into the
person of Christ.

Seeing therefore, something may be borne of any creature, and yet not so, as
it needs must be his son: Neither on the other side, every one which is
called a son, must necessarily be the natural child of that person, whose
son he is called; Then, without all doubt, this manner of generation, whereby
Christ was borne of the holy Ghost, not as it were his son, and yet as it
were the son of the virgin Mary, does covertly conuaie into us the grace of
God, whereby man, without any works or merits precedent, in his first
conception or generation, whereby he had his being, is so united to the word,
and the divine nature, in the unity of the person of Christ, as that
consequently one and the same creature should be the son of God, which was
the son of man; and likewise the son of man, being Gods child. By which
incarnation or assumption of humane nature in Christ, the grace of God should
be after a sort natural to that man which was the child of God, the same
being incapable of sin: which grace, was in that regard to be expressed
under the name or title of the holy Ghost; Because he is so properly God, that
also he may be called the gift of God. Whereof to speak sufficiently, were
too tedious in discourse.

TOUCHING REGEneration, and the parts thereof.
CHAP. 41.
That Christ was without original sin, and that he was that sacrifice for our
sins, by the which we were reconciled to God.

He therefore, being not engendered or conceived by any pleasure of carnal
concupiscence, (and therefore not infected with any original sin) and also
by the grace of God being, in respect of the unity of his person, by a
wonderful and unspeakable means annexed and conjoined to the word, which was
the only begotten son of God, not by grace, but by nature (and therefore no
actual sinner himself) yet was he notwithstanding, in respect of the
similitude of sinful flesh wherein he came, called a sinner, or sin, being to
become a sacrifice for satisfaction of sins: Which sacrifice or oblation he
truly became, whereof other sacrifices, performed in the old law, were but
shadows. Hereupon, after the Apostle had said, Let us beg reconciliation or
atonement with God, for his Christ's sake; he forthwith adds this,
affirming, That God, for our sakes, made him to become sin, who was of
himself blameless, and without sin, that through him we should be righteous
in Gods sight. He says not, as it is read in certain vicious books, He that
knew no sin, becam sinful for our sakes; as though Christ in regard of us,
should commit sin: But he says, That man which knew no sin, which was
Christ, was made sin by God, to whom we were to be reconciled: that is to
say, was made an oblation or sacrifice for sins, whereby that atonement
should be wrought. He therefore was made a sinner, that we might be righteous.
Yet is he not our righteousness, but Gods: neither yet righteousness in regard
of us, but in respect of himself: like as he gave demonstration that he was
sin, not of his own nature, but of ours: not in himself, but in respect of
us, put upon him in the similitude of sinful flesh, wherein he suffered, and
was crucified. That although there dwell no sin in him, yet should he after
a sort die unto sin, in that death which he suffered of the flesh, wherein
there was a resembla^ce of sin. And, for that he was not an ancient
transgressor with Adam, he does by his new resurrection, declare or prefigure
our restitution to life, from that old death, wherein we were dead through
sin.

CHAP. 42.
That our death and resurrection by Christ, is sealed in the sacrament of
Baptism.

THis is that great sacrament of Baptism, which is celebrated in us, to the
end that all they which be capable of grace, are made dead unto sin; because
his flesh being the similitude of sin, suffered the death: and so shall they
also be renewed in their lives by baptism, even as Christ was raised from
death to life, out of the sepulcher, of whatsoever age they shall happen to be
at the time of their baptism.

CHAP. 43.
That all sins, as well of infants as old men, which be baptized, be washed
away in baptism.

AS no man therefore, from the newborn babe, to the most aged creature, is to
be excluded from baptism; so is none again which dies not unto sin through
baptism. Howbeit, infants do only die unto original sin; and they which
be old, do die unto all such sins as by evil life they have added to
original sin, derived from Adam in their nativity.

TOUCHING Original and actual sin.
CHAP. 44.
Under the name of that word Sin in the singular number, many sins be many
times included: and so again, under the appellation of many sins, one
particular sin is comprehended.

THey be therefore most commonly said to be dead unto sin, when as yet
without all question, they be dead to many, nay to all manner of sins which
they have particularly committed, either in thought, word, or deed: Because the
singular number does most commonly imply the plural; As for example, it is
said of that verse of Virgil touching the horse of wood brought into Troy;

Vterumque armato milite complent,
With Soldier armed they filled his belly full;
Albeit the same was repleate with many soldiers. And in the Book of Numbers
it is written, Beseech therefore the Lord that he will take from us the
Serpent, he says not the Serpents, wherewith the people were afflicted;
meaning by one, infinite serpents like unto that one. And so on the other side,
is that one original sin included in the plural number (when we say that
infants be baptized to the remission of sins, and not to the remission of
sin) wherein the speech is inuerted or contrarily used; as whereby the
singular number is signified by the plural: Like as it is spoken at Herod in
the Gospel, when he was dead, they are dead which sought the life of the
child; It was not said, he is dead. So likewise in Exodus, they made (said he)
unto themselves golden gods: whereas indeed they made but one calfe alone,
whereof it is spoken, O Israel these be thy gods, which brought thee out of
the land of Egypt. In which place the plural is put for the singular.

CHAP. 45.
That in the first sin of man, which is called Original, there be diverse
kinds of sin included, and not one alone.

HOwbeit, in that one sin, which by one man entered into the world, and passed
thorough all mankind, and for which also infants be baptized, many sins may
be understood, if the same were severed and divided (as it were) into his
members. For pride is there also to be found; because man loved rather to be
subject to himself, than to the will of God. Sacrilege also, is to be
ascribed unto man because he believed not. And homicide also, because he threw
humselfe down unto death. As also spiritual fornication, because the
integrity of man's will was corrupted by the persuasion of the serpent. And
likewise theft, because he did eat of the forbidden meat. Avarice also,
because he desired more tha^ might have contented him. And so of any sin
besides: which, upon more diligent examination, may be found or gathered out of
this actual or committed sin.

CHAP. 46.
That infants be not only guilty of the sins of their gift father's, that
is to say, Adam and Eve; but of their own, and the sins of their immediate
parents added to original sin. That therefore regeneration is necessary for
them, because that generation or of(...) is (...).

IT is also not impropably said, that ininfants stand-found for their fathers
faults, not only of the first parents Adam and Eve, but also of their own
fathers, from whom they did naturally descend. For, that text of holy
scripture, where it is said, I will lay the sins of the fathers upon the
children, does make them liable to that (...) always, before such time as by
regeneration they begin to have a^ nearest in the new Testament: which
Testament was prophesied in the saying of Ezechiel, that children should not
bear the burden of their fathers iniquities, Neither yet, that that Proverb
should be more used in Israel affirming, the fathers have eaten sower grapes,
and the childrens ^ecth were set on edge. Every one therefore is to be borne
anew, whether he may be freed from that sin, wherein he was borne. For, the
sins which he afterward committed by evil life, may be salued by
repentance, whereof we have visible examples after baptism. By which reason
recreation was ordained for none other counsel, but because our generation is
vicious; insomuch as the man which is borne in pure wedlooke may say, I am
conceived in iniquities, and my mother has borne (...) with my sin while I
was (...) womb. In which place he has not say, I was conceived in iniquity
and sin, which he might very well have said: but he had rather say, in
iniquities and sins; because, both in that one sin, which has infected all
mankind (and is so great, as thereby the whole nature of man was consequently
changed, and made subject unto death, as I have formerly maintained by reason)
Many other be included, and other also committed by parents: which albeit they
cannot alter or confound nature, as original (sin does; yet do they by
imputation make the children answerable for the same, except the free mercy and
grace of God do help to make satisfaction.

CHAP. 47.
It is a matter left uncertain, whether all the sins of forefathers, as well
actual as original, be extended to posterity, and to how many descents they
be conuaied.

But now as touching the sins of the Parents, wherein (from Adam, to every man's
own father, being their progenetors) every child does succeed his father: It
is a disputable question, and that not without cause, whether the child that
is borne, shall be guilty both of actual and original sins of all his
ancestors, whereby every one, the later he is borne, the greater sinner he
shall be borne? or, whether God does therefore threaten posterity with revenge
for the sins of their parents, unto the third and fourth generation, because
he does not extend his wrath any further upon the children for their fathers
faults), staying his proceedings therein by his own mercy lost they upon whom
the benefit or grace of regeneration is not bestowed, should be pressed down
with too heavy a burden in their everlasting damnation, if or necessity they
should be capable, even from their cradle, or their forefathers sins
originally, and punishable also for the same: or whether any other conclusion
(...) so great controversy, upon ^ector (...) and conference of holy
scriptures, may be found out, or not found out, (...) not rashly give my
definitive sentence, or resolute opinion therein.

CHAP. 48.
Original sin is by Christ only abolished.

HOwbeit that one sin, which being (...)ainous in respect of the place and
state of so great felicity wherein it was committed, as that in offense of one
man originally; and (as I may say radically, all mankind was in the state of
damnation, is not satisfied nor (...), but only by the mediator of God and
man, Christ Jesus, who only was o(...) to be borne, as that he had an need of
regeneration or new birth.

TOUCHING THE baptizing of John Baptist.
CHAP. 49.
That John's baptism did not wash away sins, but was only a preparatiue to
Christ's baptism: and why Christ would be baptized by John.

THey were not therefore regenerate, who were baptized by John's baptism,
wherein ^e himself was also baptized: But, they which received baptism at his
hands, were prepared by his fore-running ministry, it were, who said, Prepare
the way of the Lord, to him only, by whom only they be regenerate. For, his
baptism was not in water only, as John's was, but also in the holy Ghost; that
by the same holy Ghost, every one might be regenerated which believed in
Christ; of which holy Ghost, Christ being borne, needed no regeneration.
Whereupon, the speech of God the Father used unto him that was baptized, thou
art my son, this day have I begotten thee, does not only point at that
particular day wherein he was baptized, but has relation also to the time of
his immutable eternity, thereby to give demonstration that the man Christ
appertained to the person of the only begotten son. For, whereas that day,
neither takes his beginning from the end of yesterday, nor ends at the
beginning of to morrow, it is therefore always to day. He would therefore be
baptized by John in the water, not because any iniquity that was in him should
be thereby washed away; but that his humility might (...). So therefore (...) to
pass, that baptism^ (...) him that needed washing, no more then death found
any cause in him worthy punishment: that the devil being oppressed etc.
vanquished by the verity of his righteousness, and not by the force of his
power (because he had most unjustly slain him, without any desert of sin)
he might justly lose the interest and possession, which he had of those which
he held as prisoners, for the debt of sin. He therefore was partaker of
both, (that is to say, of baptism and of death) and that cruely, in regard of
Gods favorable decree, or disposition, it should be so, and not upon any
urgent cause to be pittl^d; but other upon his pitiful will and disposition
to undergo the same, that que man might free the world of sin, even as one
man brought sin into the world; that is to say, upon all mankind.

TOUCHING THE death, crucifying, resurrection, and ascension of Christ: is also
of the fruit following all these. CHAP. 50.
By Christ, not only original sin is abolished, but also all other sins
forgiven.

Only this being the difference, that one man had brought one sin upon the
(...), and this one man has taken away, not only that one sin, but also all
other sins which he found added thereunto. Whereupon the Apostle faith, The
hurt done by one having sins, is not comparable with the benefit(...) (...)
which came by one. For, one sin pulled upon us the justice of God to our
condemnation; but his grace or favor Justifies us from many sins; Because,
verily, that one sin wherewith we be originally stained, although, it be
(...) and but one, makes every one subject to damnation; and the grace or
mercy of God, on the other side, justifies a man from many sins, who besides
that one, whereof generally and originally he is Partaker with all mankind,
has manifoldly sinned by his own transgression.

CHAP. 51.
All in Adam were damned: but all (...) Christ, be fraud from this damnation.

HOwbeit, inasmuch as a little after he says, As (...) man's transgression
(...) the condem^ (...) of all (...) the righteousness of one man was wrought
the ^^stificatione of all, It does plainly declare, that there were none of
Adam (...), but sons of damnation: and none on the other side delivered from
damnation except he were borne again with Christ.

CHAP. 52.
That baptism being in or the similitude both of Christ death, and his
resurrection, does evidently declare, that all which be baptized, as well
infants, as they which be at man's esate, do die to sin in Christ, and in
him also do rise again to newness and holiness of life.

AFter he had said as much as he thought sufficient for his Epistle, touching
the punishment brought upon us by one man, and the favor by another, he does
consequently command unto us the wonderful mystery or holy baptism thereby to
make us kn^w, that baptism in Christ is none other thing, than a similitude of
Christ's death, and on the other side, that the death of Christ, is nothing else
but a resemblance of the remission of sin, that, as he died indeed, so are
our sins truly forgiven: and as his resurrection was certain, so is our
justification. For he says, What therefore shall we say? shall we remain in
sin that grace may abound? For he had said before, where sin did abound grace
did super abound. Whereupon he propounded unto himself this question, Whether
in respect of the abundance of grace to be expected; we are to abide in sin
Whereunto he answers, God forbid. And he lays down a reason, saying, If
we be dead to sin, how shall we live therein? Afterward, to show that we
were dead to sin, he says, Do ye not know the same, in as much as: all
we which be baptized in Christ Jesus, (...) baptized in his death? One of
which text, if we be taught, that we are dead unto sin, because we are
baptized in Christ's death; then undoubtedly be infants dead unto sin, which
be baptized in Christ, because they be baptized in his death. For, it is spoken
without exception of any, Whosoever therefore we be which be baptized in
Christ, we are baptized in his death. For, to what sin do infants die by
regeneration, but to that which they conceived in their birth and generation?
By which reason, that which follows does belong also unto infants, where it
is said, We are buried with him by baptism, into his death, that (...) Christ
chose from the dead by the glory of the f(...)n, so we should walk in
newness of (...). For, if we be fellow plants in the resemblance of his death,
even so should we be in the like cale of his resurrection; being assured
thereof, because the old man in(...) with Christ, that the bo(...) sin might
be extinguished, whereby we might be no longer the set^^ts of sin. For, he
that dead, is justified from sin, or (...) no sin. And, in case we (...)
with Christ, we believe we (...) also live with him; being assulred thereof,
because, Christ, rising from death, does not now die for ever, and that death
also had no further power over him. For, in that he died to sin, he died but
once; and in that he lives, he lives unto God. In like manner, think you
that you are dead to sin, and yet living to God in Christ Jesus. Out of this
doctrine he began to prove that we ought not to persist in sin, that grace
might abound, saying, If we be dead to sin, how shall we live in it? And to
show that we are dead to sin, he adds, saying, Do ye not know, that
whosoever we be which be baptized in Christ Jesus, we be baptized in his death?
He therefore concluded that place as he began: for in such sord he specifieth
the death of Christ, that he pronounces Christ died unto sin. And to what
other sin did he (...), but to sin of the flesh, wherein (...) as no sin,
but a similitude only or (...) and therefore he calls it by the name of
sin? He says therefore unto those which be baptized in Christ death
(wherein not only men, but also infants me baptized) for also we you that is
to son, (...), Christ; so (...) also to think, than ye art dead unto sin,
living also unto God in Christ Jesus.

CHAP. 53.
That the crucifying of Christ, his burial, resurrection, ascension into
heaven, and sitting at the right hand of his father, do demonstrate what the
life of a Christian ought to be in this world.

WHat soever therefore was actually performed in the crucifying of Christ, in
his burial, resurrection the third day, ascension into heaven, and sitting at
the right hand of his father, was done to that end, that the life of a
Christian, acted upon this terrestrial stage, should resemble these actions of
Christ, which were not mystically performed, only by relation, but actually
indeed suffered. For, as touching his cross, it is said to those which will
follow him therein, They which be Christ's, have crucified their flesh with
their sins and concupiscences. And, as touching his burial it is said, We are
also buried with Christ, by Baptism, into his death. Also, concerning his
resurrection, That, as Christ did rise again from the dead by the glory of his
father, even so we should live in newenesse of life. And, as touching his
ascension into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of his father, If ye be
risen again with Christ, seek those things which be above, where Christ is
sitting on the right hand of God. Seek after celestial things, and not
terrestrial. For, ye are already dead, and your life laid up with Christ in
God.

TOUCHING THE last day of Judgment.
CHAP. 54.
That article touching the second coming of Christ, and the day of judgment,
concerns everlasting life and salvation.

NOw, as touching that part of our Creed, which concerns Christ, inasmuch as
he is to come down from heaven, to judge both the quick and the dead, that
matter is not pertinent to our life in this world, because it was no part of
his actions formerly done, but of things to be performed in the end of the
world. For, it does concern us so ^arre, as it agrees with that saying used
by the Apostle afterward, When Christ your life shall appear, then shall ye
also appear with him in glory.

CHAP. 55.
The signification of these words, Living, and Dead.

Christ's Coming, to judge the quick and dead, may be taken two ways; as
namely, whether we will understand the living to be those, whom his second
coming shall find in this world, not then dead, but still living in the flesh:
As also, that the dead signify those which either are dead, or shall die
before his coming* or else, that the righteous are those living, and the
unrighteous those dead; because the unrighteous shall also be judged. For,
sometimes Gods judgments are taken in y^ worst sense. Whereupon it is said,
Because they have lived wickedly, they shall rise to their condemnation. And
sometimes again, it is taken in good part, according to that saying, Save me,
O God, for thy names sake, and judge me in thy strength. For, through that
judgment of God, there is a separation of the good from the evil; that the
good, being to be divided from the evil and the destruction incident to the^,
may be selected to sit at the right hand of God. For which cause David cried
out, Give sentence with me O God: and in the same verse. to expound himself he
says, and defend my cause against the ungodly people.

TOUCHING THE Holy Ghost and the Church.
CHAP. 56.
That the Trinity might be complete, that article in the Creed is added,
touching the H. ghost: after which consequently and in a most conuen^ent order,
is remembered the Church: because, that is the Temple and house of the Trinity,
that is to say of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

NOw that we have spoken of Jesus Christ, the only son of God, our Lord and
Savior, as it is briefly laid down in our Creed; We are consequently so to
believe in the holy Ghost, that thereby the Trinity may be complete, which is
God. Afterward, the holy Church is to be spoken of. Whereby we are to
understand, that the reasonable Creature, being a Citizen of that free City
Jerusalem, after commemoration of the Creator, which is the eternal Trinity,
should be put down. Because, whatsoever has been said of the man^ Christ
does appertain to the unity of the person of the only begotten. Therefore,
to follow the direct rule of the Creed, it requires, that the Trinity may
have a Church, as an inhabitant his house, God his Temple, and the builder his
own City. All which laid together, is in this place to be understood, not
only of that part which wandreth in this world, from the Sun rising, till
the setting of the same, praising the name of the Lord, as also after this
worldly peregrination is finished, which sings that new song mentioned in
the Apocalips: But also is meant of that Church, which, sithence the
fabrication thereof, cleaued always unto God, and never felt the punishment of
her falling from God. This part, consisting of the holy Angels, remains
happy, and is assistant to that part, which is militant upon earth, as it
ought to do: Because both parts, shall be one in that eternal conjunction: and
is now one in the Bond of charity; All being ordained to worship God. And
therefore, neither this universal Church, not any part thereof, will generally
or particularly be worshipped for, or as a God; neither yet be a God unto any
person which is a member of Gods Church: the same being composed of the Gods,
which the God (not made) does make. By which reason the holy Ghost, if it were
a Creature, and not a Creator; should, no doubt, have been a Creature endued
with reason. For, he should have been the chiefest Creature; and by that
reason he should not have been preferred before the Church in that Article of
our faith: Because he should have been a branch of that Church, in respect of
that part thereof, which inhabiteth the heavens. Neither should he be provided
of a Temple or Church, but rather should have been a Church himself. But he
has a Church; whereof the Apostle made mention: saying, Are ye ignorant, that
your bodies be the Temple of ^^e holy Ghost which is in you, being given unto
you by God? Of whom he spoke in another place: saying, Know ye not, that
your bodies are the members of Christ? How then comes it to pass, that he
should not be a God, or inferior to Christ, whose members that Church
contains, who in this sort has his Temple? For, neither is his Church one
thing, and Gods Church another; when as the self same Apostle says, Know ye
not that ye are the Temple of the Lord? For confirmation whereof he further
affirms; and the spirit of God dwells in us. God therefore dwells in his
Church: and not the holy Ghost alone, but the father also, and the Son, who
says of his body (by which he is made the head of the church instituted
amongst men upon earth, whereby he houldeth the pri(...)acie over all) Destroy
this temple, and I will build it up again in three days. Gods Temple
therefore, is none other than the holy Church ordained for the whole and
highest Trinity, being that universal Church which is both in heaven and on
earth.

TOUCHING GOOD ANGELS.
CHAP. 57.
That the state of the Church in Heaven is permanent and certain.

But as touching that Church which is in heaven, what may we say of it?
otherwise, then that there is not any one bad member therein: and that, there
neither has been any that ^ell, or was like to fall from the same sithence
that time that God spared not the Angels that trespassed, as Peter, the
Apostle writes; but casting the^ into chains of infernal darkness,
delivered them to be kept to receive punishment in the day of Judgment.

CHAP. 58.
It is uncertain whether there be be any superiority or differences amongst
the Angels. Also, some things there be which may breed argument and question
concerning the Stars and Planets.

HOw it is in that blessed and heavenly society, and what differences of
persons there be there, as wherein albeit all of that number are called as it
were by that general name of Angels (according as we read in the Epistle to
the Hebrews, For to whom of the Angels has God at any time said, Sit on my
right hand? whereby, he comprehended all under that universal name of Angels)
yet notwithstanding that there should be some in that place that were called
Archangels: and whether those Archangels were called powers, whereupon that
saying was grounded where it is said, Praise him all his Angels, praise him all
his Powers: as though he should have said, Praise him all his Angels, praise
him all his Archangels: As also what difference there is amongst those four
appellatio^s, under which the Apostle seems to comprehend that universal
society in heaven (saying, Whether the Thrones, whether the Kingdoms, whether
the principalities, whether the Powers) Let them say that can, if yet they
prove that which they say: yet will I acknowledge mine ignorance in all these
things. Neither can I certainly say, whether the Sun, the Moon, and all the
Planets may be said to be of that heavenly society, albeit they seem unto
some to be only lightsome bodies, void of sense and understanding.

CHAP. 59.
It is a matter without peril, to be ignorant how, and in what manner the
blessed Angels do speak unto us, or appear unto us, either in our sleep, or
waking.

Again, who can express in what shapes or forms of bodies, Angels do appear
unto mortal Creatures; whereby they are not only seen, but touched and felt:
and likewise how, not by any solid Corpulencie or firm substance, but rather
spiritual power, they do present, not to our bodily eyes, but to our spirits
and minds, certain visions and apparitions: or whether they speak any thing,
not to the outward ear, but rather inwardly; themselves having inward
possession in the mind of man: as it is written in the book of the Prophets;
And the Angel told me, which spoke in me: he does not say, that spoke unto
me, but in me; Or whether they do appear in dreams, and speak unto us, (for
we have in the Gospel, this text; Behold, the Angel of the Lord appeared
unto him in his dream, saying): By these means, Angels, do as it were,
themselves declare, that they have no bodies that are to be felt: Making
thereby a very doubtful question, how the fathers of old time washed their
feet, and in what manner Jacob wrestled with the Angel, grappling with him so
hard as he did. When these last and first questions be propounded, every one
coniecturing thereof according to his reach and capacity; men's wits be
therein not unprofitably exercised, if these questions be soberly disputed, and
the erroneous judgments of such suspended, which suppose they know that which
they understand not. For, what necessity is there, that these, and such like
things should either be affirmed or denied, or yet discussed with danger?
seeing, without peril, they may be unknown.

CHAP. 60.
We are chiefly to take heed, least Satan deceive us, who puts on the
similitude of an Angel of light.

WE have more need, to judge and discern when Satan does transform himself
into an Angel of light: least, by deceiving us, he seduce us to some
pernicious errors. For, when he deceives the bodily senses, and does not
pervert the mind in matter of truth, and verity, the^ is there no danger for
matter of religion. Or when, in the cou^terfeit show of goodness, he does, or
speaks those things, which are correspondent with good Angels, although in
this case he is believed to be good: yet is this error nothing pernicious to
Christian faith. But, when by these shows of good borrowed from others, he
begins to draw us to those evils, which are his own; then, and in such
case to descry him, and not to follow him, is a matter greatly, and needfully,
to be looked unto. But, how is every man apt of himself, to eschew all his
deadly eleceipts, except God be his guide, and protector? The difficulty
whereof is profitable to this end, lest any man presume too much of himself,
or one man depend too much upon another; but that every one should repose his
hope and help in God. Which to do, none of the godly, certainly, make any
doubt, but that it is our better course by much.

CHAP. 61.
That the Church militant upon the earth, consists of the faithful living in
this world: which also is redeemed by Christ's blood, and under his protection.

THis part of the Church therefore, consisting of the Angels, and powers of God,
shall then, as it is, be known unto us when we are united thereunto, in the
laten day, to dwell together in eternal felicity. Wherefore, this Church,
which is far distant from that by reason of her peregrmation upon earth, is
the better known unto us, in that we be in the same; and because also, it
consists of mortal Creatures, which we are. And this Church is freed from
al sin, by the blood of the Mediator, who was without sin; and therefore
she uses this confident speech; If God be with us, who can be against us?
Which God, spared not his only son, but gave him for us generally. For,
Christ suffered not for Angels: Howbeit, whatsoever freedom, and delivery
from destruction mankind received by his death, is therefore available for
Angels also; because he is likewise after a sort reconciled unto them after
those differences, whereof sin was the cause, between men and holy Angels: as
also, for that the number that was impaired by the fall of the Angels, was
repaired by the redemption of mankind.

TOUCHING OUR Reconciliation and Peace with the holy Angels.
CHAP. 62.
That all things be restored by the blood and death of Christ: and that
thereby, the blessed Angels, and faithful amongst men, be reconciled.

IN like manner, the holy Angels do know, being taught by God (through the
eternal contemplation of whose truth, they are made happy) what an infinite
supply the sanctity of that City exspecteth from mankind. Whereupon, the
Apostle says, All things are repaired in Christ, which were decayed, either in
heaven, or in earth. For, as touching the ruin in heavenly things, all was
made whole again by Christ: in as much, as whatsoever member was wanting in
heaven, by the fall of the Angels, was restored out of the inhabitants upon
earth. And, on the other side, they which live upon the earth, are restored to
integrity: whereas mortal creatures, predestinate to eternal salvation, be
renewed, having put off their ancient corruption. And so, by that sole
sacrifice, wherein the Mediator was offered up, (whereof, the manifold
sacrifices used in the old law were but figures) there was an atonement made
between celestial and terrestiall; earthly and heavenly things, or creatures;
Because, as the same Apostle says, In him it pleased the fullness of the
Trinity to dwell, and through him to reconcile all things to himself, by his
bloodshed uniting whatsoever either in heaven, or upon earth, in the bond of
peace.

CHAP. 63.
That peace, is the fruit of this reconciliation; which peace with God, is
always above our understanding: and that also which we have with the good
Angels, is a thing whereof we are not capable in this life; although in that
to come, we shall understand the same.

THis peace passes (as it is written) all understanding: neither can it be
known of us until we come where it is. For, peace is always in that place
and jointly amongst all intellectual Creatures, as also with the Creator
thereof. Which peace passes (as is said) all understanding, particularly ours,
not theirs which always see the face of the Father. For, we mortal
Creatures, notwithstanding we have all the understanding that man can have, yet
do we know but in part: our sight in this world being obscurely by a glass.
But, when we shall be associates to the Angels of God; Then, even as they,
shall we also behold those things face to face, and bear as charitable an
affection toward them as they do to us, because we shall love them as much as
they do us. And so shall their love toward us be made known unto us, because
ours shall be such, and as great toward them: Neither, shall it then pass
our understanding. But the peace, or love of God which is in heaven toward
the^, shall, without all doubt, exceed both theirs, and our understanding.
For, by God, the reasonable Creature which is blessed, is made happy: and not
God by the Creature. Which being so, it follows upon that which has been
said, that that saying, The peace of God, which passes all understanding, is
taken in the better sense; when, in that he says, all, no, not the
understanding of the holy Angels, may be exempted, but only Gods. For, his
own peace, or love passes not his own understanding.

TOUCHING REMISsion of sins and Justification.
CHAP. 64.
That remission of sins is necessary to all the godly: because, although
many of them live without fault in action, yet not without sin.

NOw, when as our sins be pardoned, then be the holy Angels reconciled unto
us, and at peace with us. Therefore, after memory made of the Church,
forgiveness of sins follows the same, as it is set down in the order of
the Creed. For, upon this foundation stands the Church, which is upon earth.
By this also that is not lost, which was lost and found again. For, set apart
the gift of Baptism; which was bestowed to redeem original sin (whereby,
that which was vicious in our first birth, might be taken away by our second
birth or regeneration, freeing us also from al offenses committed in thought,
word, or deed, which it meets with) This great indulgencie therefore, I say,
excepted (from whence man's renouation has his beginning) and by which
indulgencie^al guiltiness or imputation of sin, as well original as
actual, is satisfied: yet the rest of man's life, after such time as he has
use or reason, howsoever it excel in fruitfulness of good works, cannot run
on his course in this world, without remission of sins; because the children
of GOD, so long as theyliue in the flesh, have conflict with death. And,
albeit, it is truly said of them, that as many as be led by the spirit of God,
be the sons of God: yet, are they so provoked by the spirit of God, and as
the children of God learn to become his, as that also, (chiefly through the
burden of the body, being corrupted) even by the weakness of their own
spirit, and as they are the children of men, are they imperfect in themselves
and sinful, by reason of certain humane motions: wherein there is a
difference, as has been sufficiently said thereof. For, it follows not,
that because every crime is a sin; therefore every sin should be a crime.
Wherefore we say, that the life of godly men in this world, wherein they live,
may be found to be without crime; but, if we should say, without sin, we
deceive our selves, and there is no truth in us, as the holy Apostle says.

CHAP. 65.
We are not to despair of any sinner in the Church, in respect of the
benefitte of penance left thereunto: Howbeit, the solemn and set times,
appointed for those which are to do open penance in the Church, were ordained
to a good end.

NEither are they to despair of the mercy of God in the remission of their
sins, be they never so great, in his holy Church, which perform penance
according to the quality of the sin, which every one particularly commits.
And, in the doing of penance, when the fact committed, is of that quality as
the offender is cut off from the body of Christ; in such a case, the measure or
limitation of time is not so much to be respected, as the sorrow and grief of
the offender. For, God does notdespise an heart that is contrite and humbled.
But because, for the most part, one man does not know the sorrow of another
man's heart, the same not being made apparent to other men, either by words or
other kind of demonstration, because it is only known to him to whom it is
said, My mourning is not hidden from thee; Times therefore of penance were well
appointed by those which bear authority in the Church, that the Church might
be satisfied, in the which such sins are committed. For, out of the Church
there is no remission of sins: Because the Church most properly retains the
holy Ghost for an earnest, without whom no sins be forgiven: in so much, as
whosoever be absolved thereby, such be made partakers of everlasting life.

CHAP. 66.
That the force and effect of remission of sins, as also the punishment of
our sins, is rather found and felt in the world to come, then in this world.

FOr, Remission of sins is ordained chiefly in respect of the day of
judgment which is to come. For, in this life that saying of Ecclesiasticus,
falls out to be true; That there is an heavy yoke upon the sons of Adam,
from the day of their coming out of their mothers woombe, until the day of
their burial into the earth, the mother of all mankind; insomuch, as we see
that infants, after their baptism, be tormented with the affliction of many
evils. Whereby we may learn, that whatsoever is accomplished by the
sacraments for our salvation, is rather to give us hope of future joys, then
hold or adeption of present felicities. For, in this life many sins seem to
be pardoned and not revenged by any correction, but their punishments reserved
till the later day (which is not vainly as it is properly called the day of
judgment, wherein the judge of the quick and the dead, shall appear): Even
as on the contrary, many sins be revenged in this world, and not withstanding
they be here not forgiven, shall not stand up against us in the world to come.
Wherefore touching certain of those temporal punishments which be inflicted
in this life upon sinners, to those whose faults are forgiven, the Apostle
says, For, if we would judge our selves, we should not be judged by God. But,
when we are indged, we are chastned of the Lord, because we should not be
condemned with the world.

TOUCHING PVRGArie Fire.
CHAP. 67.
To those that live wickedly in this world, neither faith does avail any
thing, neither does there remain for them any fire of purgatory to purify
them from their sins after this life.

Certain there be which believe, that they which renounce not the name of
Christ, and are baptized in his baptism in the Church, being not cut off from
the Church by any schism or heresy, shall be saved by fire, whatsoever sins
they commit in this life, although they neither put them away by repentance,
nor yet redeem them by alms deeds, but obstinately continue in them until
the last day of their life upon earth: Howbeit, that, in respect of the
greatness of such horrible and execrable sins they shall not be punished
with an everlasting fire, but with a fire that lasts long. But they which be
of this belief, and yet bear the name of Catholics, be deceived in mine
opinion, through a kind of humane charity or good will. For, if we ask
counsel of the holy scripture in that point, it gives an other resolution
thereof. And, for mine own part, I have written a book touching this
question, entitled, Of faith, and works: Wherein I did demonstrate, according
to the holy scriptures, so well as I could by Gods assistance, that that faith
did work salvation. Which Paul the Apostle most plainly expresses saying, For
in Jesus Christ, neither circumcision avails any thing neither
uncircumcision, but faith; which works by love. Again, in in case it work
wickedly and not well, truly according to James the Apostle, that faith is
dead in it self; who says again, If any says he has faith, when he has
no works, can the faith save him? Now, if a wicked man shall be saved by fire
through faith alone, and that it is to be taken on that sort which the blessed
Apostle Paul says, But he shall be safe himself; nevertheless yet as it
were by fire: then consequently may faith save without works, and that be
false which his fellow Apostle James formerly affirmed. And that also shall be
untrue which Paul also himself delivers in an other place, saying, Be not
deceived: neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor wantons, nor
buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous persons, nor railers, nor drunkards, nor
extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. For, in case they shall be
saved, by faith, notwithstanding their perseverance in these sins, how then
shall they not be partakers of the kingdom of God?

CHAP. 68.
What these words of Paul do signify, that the fire shall try the quality of
every man's work.

But forasmuch, as these most manifest and evident testimonies of the Apostle
cannot be false, that which is darkely spoken of them which build upon that
foundation (which is Christ) not goulde, nor silver, nor precious stones; but
wood, grass, and stubble (for of those it is said, that they shall be saved
by fire, because they shall not perish everlastingly by reason of the merit of
Christ their foundation) is so to be understood, as these things precedent,
being apparently so in the letter, there be not any thing contradictorie to
the same. For, wood, grass, and stubble may not absurdly be taken for such
love of worldly things, although lawfully given us to use, as that we cannot
yet lose the^ without anguish of mind. For, when as sorrow is a fire which
inwardely burns: if then Christ be laid as a foundation in our heart, that
is to say, that nothing be preferred by us, before the love of him, and that
the man burning inwardly with such sorrow, had rather want the things he so
much affects, than Christ, this man is saved by the fire. But on the
contrary, If he had rather houlde these temporal and earthly things in time
of temptation, then Christ, then had he not him for his foundation, in as much
as he preferred them before Christ; the foundation being the first thing that
is to be laid in any building. For, fire, whereof Paul the Apostle spoke in
that place, ought to be taken for such a thing, as through which, both these
parties which are to be tried, must pass: that is to say, as well as he which
builds gold, silver and precious stones upon this foundation, as he which
builds wood, grass, and stubble upon the same. For, after he had delivered
this doctrine, he adds thereunto this saying, The fire shall try every man's
work of what sort it is. If any man's work, that he has built upon, abide,
he shall receive wages. If any man's work burn, he shall lose, but he shall
be safe himself: nouerthelesse yet as it were by the fire. The fire therefore
shall try, not one, but both their works. For fire is the touchstone of
tribulation: whereof in another place it is plainly said, That the furnace
tries the potters vessel, and tribulation tries the righteous. This fire
while we are in the flesh, has this effect which the Apostle spoke of:
saying, If it happen unto two which be faithful, the one whereof has his
mind fixed upon celestial things, thinking how to please God, that is to say
building upon Christ his foundation, gold, silver, and precious stones: and
the other has his thoughts upon worldly things, studying how to please his
wife, that is to say building upon the same foundation wodde, grass, and
stubble; The first man's labor burns not, because he set not his fancy upon
those things, the loss whereof might grieve him. But the other man's labor
burns, because the loss of those things is grievous, which are possessed
with pleasure and delectation. Howbeit, in either of these two cases, forasmuch
as, the party thus tried, had rather lose worldly delectation then Christ, and
does not forsake Christ upon any fear to lose those transitory things albeit
it grieve him to part with them, he saves himself no doubt therein, and yet
as it were by fire: Because the grief of the loss of things which he loved,
does burn him, but it does not overthrow or consume him, being fortified with
a foundation that is permanent and everlasting.

CHAP. 69.
That all this disputation of purgatory fire, is doubtful, and the fire it
self available to few.

THat such a thing may be after this life, is not incredible; the matter being
questionable whether it be so indeed: as also that it may be found out, or
concealed, how diverse of the faithful be so much the later, or sooner saved
by a certain purgatory fire, by how much the more or less they love these
transitory goods: being notwithstanding not of that sort of whom it is
written, that they shall not inherit the kingdom of God, unless their sins
be forgiven, as competent petitioners: I say competent, meaning that they
should not be barren in alms deeds; Whereunto the Scripture does attribute so
much honor, as the Lord affirms, that he will impute the fruitfulness thereof
only to those which stand on his right hand: vpbraiding them with barrenness
of such fruit, which stand on his left hand, When he shall say unto the first
sort, Come ye blessed of my father and receive the Kingdom of God; and to the
second sort, Go ye into everlasting fire.

Animaduersions upon the 69. Chap.
That such a thing may be after this life, is not incredible: the matter being
questionable, whether it be so indeed, etc.

BIshop Jewel, in his apology alleges this place, and diverse others out of
Saint Augustine, showing that sometime he says, there is such a certain
place; sometime denies not, but there may be such a one: sometime he doubts;
sometime again he utterly denies there is any at all, and thinks that men
are therein deceived by a certain natural good will they bear their friends
departed. Out of which variable assertions, he gathers very concludently,
that Saint Augustine took this matter of Purgatory fire, neither for an
Article of the Christian faith (for thereof it had not been lawful for him to
doubt) nor for any tradition of the Apostles. Let no man therefore be led by
this place to believe any such fabulous doctrine.

TOUCHING ALMS DEEDS.
CHAP. 70.
We may not take a liberty to sin, presuming of alms deeds.

Truly, we must take heed least any man do think, that those enormious
crimes, the doers whereof shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven, may be
daily committed, and daily redeemed with alms deeds. For, our life is to be
amended, and God to be made propitious unto us for our sins past in regard of
alms deeds, and not as it were hired thereunto, whereby we may purchase a
liberty to sin without punishment. For God has not given to any man the
raines to sin (although in this world he pardons sins already done
through his own mercy) in case there be a neglect of convenient satisfaction.

CHAP. 71.
That light or small sins obtain pardon at Gods hands by saying of the Lords
prayer ^^ds also that it is an alms deed, if any man forgive his brothers
offense.

THe daily prayer of the faithful makes satisfaction for daily and small
sins, without which this life is not led. Wherefore it properly belongs to
them to say, Our father which art in heaven, which are regenerated to such a
father by water and the holy Ghost. This prayer does whollye procure remission
of small and daily sins: and it blotteth out all those trespasses, which the
life of the faithful, wickedly spent, but reformed by repentance, does
forsake; in case, as it is truly said, forgive us our sins (because there is
no want of sins in us to be forgiven) so, on the other side it be as truly and
unfeignedly said, as we forgive them which trespass against us, that is to say,
that that be fulfilled which is desired: Because it is alms to forgive a man
that asks pardon.

Animaduersions upon the 71. Chap.
The daily prayer of the faithful, makes satisfaction for daily and small
sins, etc.

THis Chapter seems a little to lean unto the doctrine of Ueniall sins: But,
Danaeus (commenting upon this very place) does discuss and clear that doubt:
saying, that by a figurative kind of speaking, that thing is attributed here,
to the effect of prayer, which belongs only to the passion of Christ; whose
blood is the expiation, and cause of remission, both of light and heavy sins.
For, prayer is the way and means, directed by Christ himself, to obtain our
petitions of God, saying in the seventh of Matthew, Ask and it shall be given
you. Which attribute of prayer, is much like unto the Merchant, who, if he
have made a prosperous voyage, or adventure, uses to say, that he has been
enriched by that his voyage or adventure. Finally, Danaeus does cite a
comparatiue speech of ancient Fathers, who affirmed that great sins were to
be done away by penance, and small offenses by iteration or daily saying of
the Lords Prayer: lest any man should take a liberty to sin, hearing that
enormious sins might be redeemed by penance; or on the other side, should be
terrified and driven to despair if he were enjoined penance for every small
fault and insirmitie. Prayer therefore makes way to the remission of both
these degrees of sins, by the blood of Christ alone, howsoever the discipline
of the Church teaches us to know, how to obtain forgiveness in either
kind. Let not therefore this Chapter prejudice Saint Augustine, in that point
of doctrine, nor pervert any other therein.

CHAP. 72.
There be many kinds of alms: howbeit that best, whereby we pardon our
brother when he has offended us.

BY this it appears, that that saying uttered by the Lord, Give alms, and
all things shall be clean unto you, reaches to all good actions done out or
mercy and compassion that is profitable. For, not only he which gives
meat unto the hungry, drink unto the thirsty, apparel unto the naked,
harbor unto the harbourlesse, a place of refuge to the persecuted, to the
sick or prisoner visitation, help to the weak, conduct to the blind, comfort
to the mourner, physic to the sick, direct^o^ to him that is out of the way,
counsel to him that doubts, and to every one in want that which he needs;
But also he which forgiueth him who has offended him, gives alms: yea, and
he who by stripes amendeth him over whom he has authority, or reformeth him
by any discipline, and yet notwithstanding forgiueth him with all his heart the
trespass of him, whereby he was either damaged, or offended, or else prays
that it may be forgive him, He does not only perform an alms deed in y^ he
pardons and prays withal, but also in that he corrects, or inflicteth
some punishment that reformeth, because therein he does a deed of mercy. For,
there be many good offices done unto men against their wills, where their good
is sought, and their own liking not regarded, because they are found to be
their own enemies. And they in very deed become rather their friends, whom
they take to be their enemies. Through which error they render evil for good:
whereas a Christian ought not to render evil for evil. There be therefore many
kinds of alms, the performance whereof helps us in the remission of our own
sins.

CHAP. 73.
That every Christian ought to be such a proficient, as that he can frame
himself to love his very enemies.

But, there is nothing of greater excellency than that charity, whereby we
forgive from out heart that trespass which any other man has done unto us. For
it is not so great a matter to be kind or liberal toward him who has done
thee no harm; But it is a more notable thing and effect of an heroical
disposition, to love thine enemy also, and for thine own part always to wish
well and to do well, when thou may, to him which wishes evil unto thee, and
would harm thee if he could; giving ear unto Christ's saying, Love your
enemies, be good unto them which hate you, and pray for them which persecute
you. But because these things be only in the power of the perfect sons of
God to perform (to the attainement of which perfection every faithful person
ought to extend his uttermost endeavor, and by praying unto God, striving with
himself, and persuasion to bring his mind to that affection) yet, because this
so great a virtue, is not entertained by so great a multitude, as we may
believe are heard in that part of the Lords prayer, where it is said, Forgive
us our trespasses, as we also forgive our debtors: without all doubt the words
of this promise be fulfilled, if a man which is not as yet of that perfection,
as he can upon the sudden love his enemy; yet, when he is entreated by one
that has trespassed against him to forgive him, does unfeignedly and from his
heart forgive him, being led by the same reason that he would in like manner
be forgiven himself being a petitioner to God when he prays and says,
Eue^ as we forgive our debtors: That is to say, So forgive us our debts, when
we our selves do ask remission thereof, as we forgive our debtors, when they
desire the same.

CHAP. 74.
They which forgive not other men the trespasses done unto them, do not obtain
pardon at Gods hand in the like case.

NOw again he that prays that man to forgive him whom he has offended,
being inwardly stirred up to that motion upon a remorse of the offense or wrong
he has done him, such a person is not now to be accounted for an enemy, so as
it should be as hard a matter to love him in this case as it was when he was
a professed enemy: And whosoever does not unfeignedly forgive another man,
which seeks peace, the injury he has done him, being penitent for the same,
let him not think by any means to find remission of his own sins at Gods
hands; because truth cannot lie. For, how can it be unknown unto any that
hears, or reads the Gospel, who it is that pronounces this saying, I am
the truth? who, after that he had taught us a form of prayer, does exceedingly
commend that sentence in the same prayer, saying; For, if you do forgive men
their trespasses, your heavenly father will also forgive you your offenses. He
that is not awaked with so great a thunderclap, is not asleep, but rather dead
and yet is it able to raise up the dead.

CHAP. 75.
That alms does neither profit infidels, nor those which obstinately continue
in sinful life.

Truly, they which live most wickedly, and will not amend such a life and so
bad conditions, and in the midst of their highest offenses and execrable
sins, cease not to multiply their alms deeds, they do vainly flatter
themselves, presuming of that which the lord speaks, saying, Give alms; and
behold, all things shall be made clean unto you. For they do not understand
how far this saying is to be extended. But, to the end they may understand it,
let the^ harken to whom it was spoken. For, it is written in the Gospel, that
a pharisie desired Christ as he was speaking, that he would dine with him:
and Christ, being within his house, set him down to dinner. Now the Pharisie
began to say within himself, wherefore did he not wash before dinner? And the
Lord said unto him, Ye Pharisees do make clean the outside of the Cup and
dish, but that which is within you, is full of rapine and iniquity. Ye
fools, did not he which made the outside, make the inside also? Howbeit, of
your superfluity give alms, and all things shall be made clean unto you. Are
we so to understand this saying, as that all things were clean unto the
Pharisees because they gave alms, as these sinful persons before spoken of,
think they are to do, albeit the Pharisees believed not in the Gospel, nor in
Christ, neither were regenerate by water, and the holy Ghost? And seeing all
creatures be unclean, whom the faith of Christ does not purify, thereupon
was that saying, Purifying their hearts by faith. Also the Apostle says, There
is nothing pure to them that are defiled and unbelieving, but even their mind
and consciences are defiled. How therefore should all things be pure unto the
Pharisees, though they gave alms, and were without faith? Or how could they
have faith, if they refused to believe in Christ, and to be borne anewe by his
spirit? And yet is it true which they have heard, Give alms, and all things
shall be made clean unto you.

CHAP. 76.
That is the best alms amongst all others, if any man have compassion of his
own sinful life, to the end he may amend the same, and please God.

NOw, he that will give alms according to the rule of Gods word, must begin at
himself, and bestow the same first upon himself. For, alms is a work of
mercy, that saying being agreeable to that definition, Thou that seek to
please God, have pity upon thine own soul. For this cause are we regenerate,
to the end we might please God; that sin worthily displeasing him, where with
we were infected in our first birth. This is the first kind of alms, which we
bestow upon ourselves, in as much as we have reclaimed our selves being sinners
by the mercy of God, having pity upon us; acknowledging the justice of his
judgment whereby we were become miserable: of whom the Apostle mea^t saying,
The judgment of one was on al to comdemnation: yielding him thanks for his
exceeding love, whereof he speaks himself being the trumpet of his own
mercy, God himself commending his love toward us; because when we were
sinners, Christ died for us; that also we, truly sentecing our miserable
estate, and honoring Gods mercy toward us, might lead a godly and virtuous
life. Which judgment and love of God because the Pharisees regarded not (yet
had they tithes of the least kind of fruits in respect of the alms which they
gave) Therefore gave they not alms, beginning therewith at themselves, toward
whom they should first of al have been merciful: in regard of which order of
affection it is said, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. When therefore
he had reproved the^ because they washed themselves in the outward part, and
were inward ly full of rapine and iniquity, giving them to understand that there
was a kind of alms first to be ministered to themselves, and that they ought
to purify the inward man howbeit says he, give alms and behold, al things
shall be pure to you: afterward, to declare unto them what he exhorted and
what they neglected to do, least they should think that their alms was
unknown unto him, he says, Woe be unto ye Pharisees: as though he should
have said, I did exhort ye indeed to give alms whereby all things should
be made clean unto you. But woe be unto you which tithe mynte and anniseedes
and every kind of herb; for I know these alms which ye give (whereunto I
would not have ye to think that mine exhortation tended): But ye utterly
neglect the judgment and mercy of God, by which kind of alms ye might be
purified of all inward pollution, your bodies also made clean, which ye wash
outwardly. For, this is the meaning of all things, that is to say, both things
inward and outward as it is written in other places, Make clean those things
which be within, and those things which be outward shall be also clean. But
least he should seem to refuse these alms which are yielded out of the
fruits of the earth; these things, says he, which I have formerly mentioned
ought ye to do, and yet not to omit the others: that is to say, the tithes and
the fruits of the earth.

CHAP. 77.
This true alms which we give to our selves in amending our wicked lives, and
that which we give to others, be not of our selves, but of Gods gift.

LEt them not therefore deceive themselves, which, by the most liberal alms
given either out of their fruits or out of their purse, do think to purchase
impunity of themselves, continuing still in the savage cruelty of heinous
offenses and wickedness of enormious crimes. For, they do not only commit
these sins, but take such delight therein, as they wish always to continue in
the same, if they could, without punishment. But he that loves iniquity
hates his own soul: and he that hates his own soul, is not merciful, but
cruel. For, in loving the same as concerning the world, he hates it as
touching God. If therefore he would give alms unto himself, whereby all
things might be clean to himself, he should hate the same as touching the
world, and love it according to God. No man therefore gives any kind of
alms, but to enable himself to give, he first receives it from him that
wants not: and therefore it is said, His mercy shall pardon me.

TOUCHING THE variety of sins.
CHAP. 78.
That certain things seem little in respect of the kind and quality
thereof: which are sins notwithstanding, albeit reputed in the number of
lesser sins.

IT rests in the judgment of God, and not of man, to determine of sins, which
of them be little, and which be great. For we see that certain things were
permitted by the Apostles themselves by way of pardon; as was that which
venerable Paul says unto man and wife, Defraude not one another except it be
with consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to prayer, and again
come together that Satan tempt you not for your incontinencie. It might be
thought not to be a sin for a man to have carnal knowledge with his wife upon
any other motion then to beget children (which is the good of matrimony) but
for carnal pleasure, that thereby the weakness of those which cannot live
chastely might avoid the deadly sin of fornication, adultery, or any other
kind of vnclea^nesses (too filthy to be uttered, and whereunto lust may
enforce us through the tentation of Satan) therefore might be thought not to be
a sin as I said, but that he adds afterward, This I say of favor and
not of commandment. Who now denies it to be a sin, when as the authority of
the Apostle confesses that they are to have toleratio^ which do the same? It
is also of the like nature where it is said, Dare any of you having business
with an other, be in aged under the unjust, and not rather under the Saints?
And a little afterward, If then ye have judgment of things pertaining to
this life, set up them to judge which are least esteemed in the Church. I
speak it to your shame; Is, it so that there is not a wise man among you, no
not one that shall be able to judge between his brethren? But brother goes to
law with brother, and that under the unbelievers? For, there it may be
thought, that to have sued one against another, were no sin: but because he
would have his cause judged out of the Church, therefore in the prosecution of
that matter, he says further, Now, therefore there is utterly a fault amongst
you, because ye go to law one with another. And, lest any man should excuse
this sin in this sort: saying, that he has just occasion to go in law in
suffering a wrong which he seeks to avoid by the sentence of such as set in
place of authority; by and by he meets with such surmises, and excuses:
saying, Why rather sufferre not wrong? Why rather suffer ye not barned? To
come to that again which the Lord speaks, saying, If any man will sue thee at
the law to take away thy cloak, let him have thy coat also. And in another
place he says, He that takes from thee those things which be thine, do
not seek them again. He therefore forbad those which were his, to go to law
with other men for worldly things. Out of which doctrine the Apostle says that
it is sin to sue: Howbeit, when he suffers such trials of law to pass
between brethren, brethren being judges, but vehemently forbids the same
out of the Church; It appears here, what by leave may be granted to the weak.
In respect whereof, and of the like sins, with others though less then these
committed through offenses growing out of our own words or thoughts (The
Apostle James saying and confessing for in many things we all affend) It is
necessary that we daily and often pray (unto the Lord, saying, Forgive us our
trespasses: not lying in that which follows, as we forgive them which
trespass against us.

CHAP. 79.
The scripture condemns many things, which men would not think to be
sins, but that the word of God does admonish us thereof.

THere be certain sins, which might be thoughtto be of no regard, but that by
the sciptures they are denounced to be greater then the world takes them to
be. For, who would think that a man which calls his brother Fool, should
be guilty of hell fire, but that the Truth it self affirms as much?
Howbeit, presently afterward he gives a salve for that sore, giving there
with a precept how to reconcile thy self to thy brother. For, by and by
afterward he says, If therefore thou do make oblation of thy gift unto the
Altar, and thy self there remembering that thy brother have ought against thee,
etc. Or, who would think it so great a sin to observe days and months and
years and times, as they do which will or will not begin any thing upon
certain days or monenthes, or in certain years (because according to the
vain and superstitious doctrine of some, times be held to be luckie or
unlucky) unless the fear of the Apostle made us dreadful of the greatness
of this evil, saying to such persons, I fear lest I have labored in vain
amongst you.

CHAP. 80.
Certain sins again, which be very great and fearful, are, through use
and custom, held light.

HEreupo^ it comes to pass, that sins, although they be great and
horrible, yet through a custom of committing them, they are taken to be very
small ones, or nothing at all: in so much as men are so far from concealing
them, as it is their glory to make them known, and memorable to the world;
Because as it is written, The sinner is commended in the wicked desires of his
own heart: and he that dot(...) ill, does therein bless himself. Such a
kind of sin is called in holy scripture by the title of iniquity and
clamor; according to that place of Isa^, the Prophet ^ouching the barraine
vyneyard, I (...), ^aith he, that it should have done justice, but it did
injustice: and did not that which was right, but that which gave cause of
clamor and exclamation. W^ereunto that which is said in Genesis, does agree.
The complaint or cry of the people of Sodom and Gomorah is increased, because
not only those heinous sins which reigned amongst them, were unpunished, but
also were openly and usually committed, as though they had a warrant therein by
law. Even so in these our times, as many evils, though not of like quality,
are grow^n to be as visible and common; in so much, as we neither dare
excommunicate any of the Laity, nor yet degrade a clergy man for the same.
Whereupon, when I did certain years past, expound the Epistle to the
Galatians in that place, where the Apostle says, I fear lest that I have
labored in vain amongst you, I was by that occasion forced to cry^ o^t, Woe to
those sins amongst men which are simply of themselves most fearful unto us
before we see them in example; yet afterward being vulgar and usual (for the
purgation whereof the blood of the son of God was shed) although they become
so great and heinous, as they cause the kingdom of God to be viterly shut up
against the^, yet are we enforced by seeing them often, to tolerate them
generally, and by often toleration, to become sinners also our selves in many of
them. But would to God, O Lord, we were not transgressors our selves in all
those sins which we cannot restrain in others. But now will I weigh my words
whether the vehemency of my grief has drawn me to say something that may
bring me into question.

CHAP. 81.
There be two causes of sin, that is to say, ignorance and weakness, or
frailty as he calls it, or rather obstinacy. Of the first, which is
ignorance, we are called sinners: of the other (called weakness or
obstinacy) we are said to be trangressors.

I will now, or in this place, affirm that, which, no doubt, I have often
delivered in other places of my works, that we sin two ways: As, either in
not seeing what we should do, or else in omitting to do that which we see
ought to be done. Of which two sorts of sinning, the first is imputed to the
evil of ignorance, the second to the evil of weakness or frailty of our
nature. Against which evils, we ought indeed to strive; howbeit we are no
doubt subdued and vanquished except the grace of God do assist us, that we do
not only see what we ought to do, but also through the recovery of our
affection lost, our delight in righteousness may overcome the delites of those
things, wherein wittingly and seeingly we sin, either by desiring to have
them, or fearing to lose them: whereby we are not only sinners (which we
were before, when we sinned through ignorance) but also transgressors of the
law, in as much as we do not that which we know we ought to do, or do that
which we know we ought not to do. Wherefore, if we have sinned, we not
only say, for remission of our sins, Forgine us our trespasses, as we
forgive them that trespass against us: But also further, for our assistance
and help, lest we should fall into sin, we say in that respect, Lead us
not into temptation: He being therefore to be prayed unto, of whom it is
said in the Psalm, God is my light, and my salvation; To the end his
illumination might disperse the cloud of our natural ignorance, and his
salvation supply our infirmity and weakness.

CHAP. 82.
That our repentance comes from God, as well in respect of the inward motion
thereunto, as of the effect and open confession of our fault.

FOr, repentance it self, when it is to be performed upon an urgent cause,
according to the manner or custom of the Church, is for the most part
pretermitted through our own defalt and weakness; Because, shame makes us
fearful to be a scorn unto the world, whilst we more regard our
reputation amongst men, than our duty to God. The consideration whereof should
humble us to the performance of penance. By which reason the mercy of God, is
requisite, not only in the action of repentance, but also to incite and stir us
up thereunto. Else would not the Apostle have said of some, least perhaps God did
not give them repentance. And the Evangelist, foretelling the occasion why
Peter wept so bitterly, says, The Lord looked back upon him.

TOUCHING SIN against the holy Ghost.
CHAP. 83.
That is sin against the holy Ghost, when any man does obstinately deny, that
there can be no remission of sins in the Church of God.

Whosoever therefore, in not believing that sins are forgiven in the Church,
does conte^n so great a liberality of Gods gift and ends his life in that
obstinate mind, is guilty of that unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost.
Of which intricate question, I have discoursed as conspicuously as I could, in
a Book purposely composed of that matter.

TOUCHING THE Resurrection of the dead.
CHAP. 84.
All and singular persons of mankind, which now are borne, or hereafter shall
be borne, shall rise again at the later day.

NOw verily touching the resurrection of the flesh (which is not to be raised
from death to life again, as some have been, and to die again, but to
bemou^ted to eternal life as the flesh of Christ did rise) is a matter beyond
my reach how to handle it briefly, and to discuss all questions usually
propounded therein. Howbeit, no Christian ought to make doubt of the
resurrection of the flesh of all men, either living, or to be borne, now dead,
or hereafter to die.

CHAP. 85.
Touching Children borne before their time, whether they shall rise again.

Hereupon first of all their rises a question touching children borne before
their time, which at this present are borne in their mothers womb, howbeit,
not in that ripeness and perfection as that they come to a second birth. For,
if we shall affirm that they are to rise again; then, whatsoever is said of
those which are complete in form, may be admitted. But, as touching children
borne before their natural time, and those without form or fashion, who
thinks not that such do most quickly perish and dye even as the seeds which
never took root being sown? Howbeit, who dare deny (although none dare on the
contrary affirm) that the resurrection will bring to pass that whatsoever
wanted form shall be at that time fulfilled? By which means there shall not
want any perfection which might have grown in time; even as there shall not be
on the contratrary any deformities which happened to any by process of time:
so as Nature should neither be defrauded of that which fullness of time might
accomplish in all parts: nor yet be blemished in that which time had made
defective or deformed; but that made perfect which was imperfect, and that
amended which was deformed or monstrous.

CHAP. 86.
At what time infants begin to quicken and have life in their mothers womb.

BY this occasion it may be very doubtfully questioned and disputed amongst
the learned (and yet can I not tell, whether any man can discuss the truth
therein) at what time a man does quicken in his mothers womb? and whether he
secretly lives in the same, although that life which is in him, does not
appear by any motions or stirrings of the creature so living. For, to deny
that infants be delivered, such as be cut out by peace meal and cast forth
of their mothers woombe, least their mothers should also perish if they were
left dead in their bodies, it seems to be a matter of great impudency and
boldness. For, at what time soever a man begins to live, after that time
also may he in like manner die. And now being dead, I see not in my conceit why
he should not be included in the number of those which rise at the later day.

CHAP. 87.
Touching men which be monsters, how they shall rise in the later day.

FOr neither may it be denied that monsters which are so borne and do live
afterward (although they dye presently after they are borne) shall rise
again; Nor yet are we to believe, that they shall rise again in that
deformity they dyed, but rather reformed and amended in that natural defect.
For, far be it from us to believe, that the Centaure lately borne in the East
parts (of whom both our faithful brethren which saw him made report, and
Jerome the Priest, memorable for piety, left a record in writing) God forbid I
say we should think, that one man; being in shape two, and not rather two
(which should have been, if they had been twins) shall rise again in those
several deformities. In like man her, all other humane things (which be called
monsters; by reason every creature so borne, have more or less, or be more
deformed in their creation then they should have been) shall in the day of
their refurrection, be reduced to the shape of humane nature in perfection: in
so much as all souls, particularly, shall enjoy their proper bodies, no such
things cleaving unto them as were coherent and borne with them in their
nativity; but contrariwise every one particularly being furnished with his
proper parts and members, whereby the body of man may be complete in all
perfection.

CHAP. 88.
That it is an easy matter with God to restore unto us our flesh again,
howsoever it be consumed.

THis earthly matter whereof the flesh of man is created, is not lost with God:
but, into what soever dust or ashes it is resolved, into whatsoever vapors or
coasts it is carried, into whatsoever substance of other bodies, or the
elements themselves it be turned, into the flesh of whatsoever beasts or men
it is incorporated and changed; It returns again in a moment of time to the
same soul of man which at first breathed life into it, whereby it was made
man, increased, and lived.

CHAP. 89.
In the Resurrection of the dead, the question is, whether the whole substance
of the flesh shall be restored: or that every particular part and member
thereof, shall come together again, as, and where it was at the first: and
whether the excrements, shall be in like sort restored.

THat same earthly matter therefore which becomes a dead carcass when the
soul is gone out of it, shall not so and in such sort be renewed in the
resurrection thereof, as that those things which perish with the body and be
turned into these and these shapes and forms of other things (although they
do return to the body again, from whence they fell) should of necessity
turn unto the same parts and members of the body again where they were
placed at the first. Otherwise, in case that which often powling had cut away,
should be restored to the hairs of the head again, and that also to the
nails of our fingers which often cutting had taken away; the excessive and
uncomely imperfection that would follow thereof, does breed an impossibility
of restitution in all those that enter into the consideration thereof, and
therefore believe not in the resurrection at al. But eue^ as in any image made
of any soluble matter, if it be melted, or beaten to powder, or else wrought
into one lump or mass, if that a workman would make the same again of the
substance and matter thus resolved, Is it materall for the perfection thereof,
which part of the substance thus resolved, should be used again in the making
of any part or member of the same image, so as the same being made a-newe, do
resume the whole substance of that whereof it was at the first composed? In like
sort, God being the workemaster of man, after a maruailous and unspeakable
manner, shall of that whole consistence whereof our flesh was originally made,
repair the same again, with wonderful and unspeakable speed. Neither is it
material to perfection in the new making thereof, whether the hairs that were
before, become hairs again, or the nails return to be nails again: or
whatsoever thereof did perish, be changed into flesh, or used to be other
parts of the body, so as the chief workmaster in that new work do foresee
that nothing be made indecently therein.

CHAP. 90.
Touching the stature, the similitude or dissimilitude of form which shall be
in the bodies of the godly that shall rise.

NEither does it follow, that there should be difference in the stature of
every particular person that rises again, because they differed when they
lived: or that they which were spare and lean, should be revived in the same
leanenesse; nor they which were fat, in the same fatness. But, if this be a
matter of secrecy and counsel in the creator, that as touching the form of
every man, the property and known similitude of every one should be
retained, but yet all alike in the participation of the rest of the bodies
felicities: then does it follow that there shall be a measure observed in the
ordering of this matter in every one whereof he was made, so as neither any
part thereof do perish, and be lost; and if there be any thing wanting in any
man, it may be supplied by him, who of nothing was able to make al things that
he would. Now then, if in the bodies of them that shall rise at the later day
there shall be a reasonable difference and inequality (such as is in voices,
making perfect harmony) that shall be effected to every one out of the matter
and substance of his own body, making man equal to the company of Angels, and
yet bringing nothing with it that may be unfitting to the view of those
heavenly creatures. For, there shall be nothing there that is unseemly: but
whatsoever shall be hereafter, shall be comely, because it shall not be at
all, if it be not decent.

CHAP. 91.
That the bodies of the Elect, and godly shall rise again in their bodily
substance, but not with their former faults and deformities.

THe bodies therefore of the godly shall rise again without any fault or
deformity of body, as also without any corruption, burden of flesh, or
difficulty. Of which sort their facility in rising, shall be aunswerable to
their felicity after their resurrection. For which cause they be called
spiritual, albeit no doubt they shall become bodies and not spirits. But, even
as now in this life the body is said to be natural, being not withstanding
yet a body and not a soul: Even so at that time the body shall be spiritual,
howbeit a body and not a spirit. Yet, as touching that corruption which in our
life time does oppress the soul, as also concerning the sins wherewith our
flesh fights against the spirit, at that time it shall not become flesh, but
a body, because they shall be reputed for celestial bodies. By reason whereof
it is said, that flesh and blood shall not inherit the kingdom of God. And
therefore as it were interpreting his own saying, he affirms, Neither shall
corruption enjoy incorruption. That which before he called flesh and blood, he
afterward called corruption. And that which formerly he called the kingdom of
God, he afterward called incorruption. Now, as touching that which concerns
the substance, that same also shall be flesh at that time. For which reason,
the body of Jesus Christ after his resurrection, is called flesh. Thereupon does
the Apostle say, The body is put into the ground in natural substance, but it
shall shall rise a spiritual body; because of the great agreement and concord
which shall be between the flesh and the spirit; the spirit having a vital
power over the flesh, which then shall not rebel, and that without the help of
any manner of supportation: in so much as nothing pertaining to our own bodies
shall resistive; but, as outwardly we shall find none, so inwardly we shall have
no enemies of our selves.

CHAP. 92.
Of what sort or form the bodies of the damned shall be in the resurrection.

Whosoever verily being of that mass of perdition which the first man made,
and are not redeemed by the only mediator of God and man, shall generally also
rise in the later day, every man in his own flesh, howbeit to be punished with
the devil and his Angels. Now, whether they shall rise again with the faults
and deformities of their former bodies, whosoever of that number were misshapen
or deformed in their limbs, to what purpose should we spend our labor, to
inform our selves therein? Neither indeed ought the uncertain form or
feature of those persons to weary us, whose damnation shall be certain and
everlasting. Neither let it trouble us to think, how in them the body shall
be incorruptible, if it be subject to anguish; or else how it may be
corruptible, if it cannot die. For, it is noe true life, but there where it
lives in all felicity and happiness: nor no true inccorruption but there
where the health is impeached with no manner of grief. Now, therefore in that
place, where the person that is forlorn and unhappy, is not suffered to dye
(as I may say) there Death, it self does not dye: and where perpetual pain
does not kill, but does afflict, corruption it self has no end or
determination. This in the holy scripture is called the second death.

CHAP. 93.
Which sort of the damned shall receive the easiest punishment after the
resurrection.

NEither yet the first death whereby the soul is compelled to forsake his
body, nor the second death whereby the soul is not suffered to depart out of
the body that shall be punished, should ever have happened to man; if no man
had sinned. And truly the punishment of such persons, shall be most easy,
who, besides the guilt of original sin have not added more thereunto of
themselves: and amongst those additionall sins, every man's damnation shall
be the more tolerable by how much the less he has sinned in the first life.

TOUCHING Eternal life.
CHAP. 94.
That the blessed in the state of eternal life, which by Gods mercy they
shall obtain, shall most fully perceive the force of Gods grace.

WHen the reprobate of Angels and men, shall remain and have their being in
the place of everlasting punishment, then shall the blessed more sensibly feel
and understand what the favor and grace of God has voutsafed upon them. Then
shall appear in the evidence of things themselves, that which is written in
the Psalms, To thee O Lord shall I sing mercy and judgment; Because no man
is delivered from everlasting destruction, but by a mercy not due unto us by
any specialtie of debt; nor any again condemned to eternal death, but by a
judgment duly inflicted upon him.

CHAP. 95.
In the life eternal we shall know, why rather they, then the other were the
chosen of God.

AT that day it shall be revealed (which now is concealed) as touching the two
infants, whereof the one through the mercy of God, was to be chosen, the
other in his secret judgment to be refused (in which judgment he that shall
be elected shall understand what in justice was due unto him unless mercy had
helped him) why he rather then the other was elected, when the cause was alike
to both: Why miracles or strange works were not done amongst some; which if
they had been done, such persons should have repented: and yet were done
amongst those concerning whom God did know that they would not believe. For,
the Lord does plainly affirm, Woe to thee Corazin, Woe to thee Bethsaida: for,
if in Tire and Sidon those great works had been done, which were do^e amongst
you, they had long sithence repented in sacke-cloath and ashes. Neither,
therefore would not God unjustly have them to be saved, when as they might
have been saved if they would. Then shall that appear in the clearest light
of wisdom, which the godly in this world do apprehend by faith: That is to
say, how certain, immutable, and most effectual the will of God is: how much
he can do and yet will not: and that he wills not that thing which he cannot
perform: as also how truly it is sung in the Psalm, Our God which is in
heaven above has done all things in heaven and earth which he would. Which
assertion is not true, if he would have had somthings yet did the^ not, and
(which had been more derogatorie) did not therefore accomplish it, by reason the
will of man did hinder the performance of that which the omnipotent would have
done. And therefore there is not any thing acted, unless the omnipotent would
have it so, either in suffering it to be done, or effecting it himself.

TOUCHING GODS. Omnipotency.
CHAP. 96.
That God is said to be omnipotent, because all things that be, are by his
will or permission, neither can he be crossed by any creature.

NEither ought we to doubt that God does well in suffering of evils
whatsoever to be done. For, his permission thereof is not without a just
judgment. And no doubt but that every thing is good which is just. Although
therefore these things which be evil in that they are evil, cannot be also
good; yet is it good, that there be not only good, but evil actions also.
For, if this were not good, that there should be also evils, the Almighty, who
is good, would not by any means suffer the same. To which Almighty, as it is,
no doubt, easy to do what he will: so is it as easy for him, not to
permit that which he will not have done. Which unless we do believe, it
shakes the very foundation and beginning of the confession of our faith:
whereby we do confess that we do believe in God the father almighty.
Neither, is he truly called omnipotent for any other cause, but because he can
do whatsoever he will: Neither is the will of the Almighty interrupted by
the will of any creature.

TOUCHING GRACE, and Predestination of the Saints.
CHAP. 97.
The question is, whether certain things which God would have done, may be
crossed by men, that they cannot take effect.

WHe^refore we are to consider how it is said of God in that which the Apostle
most truly affirmed, Forasmuch as God would that al should be saved. For,
seeing not all, but the most part, or greater number is not saved, it seems
therefore that that which God would have done, is not done; man's will forsooth
resisting Gods will. For, when the cause is examined, why all be not saved, it
is wont to be answered, because they themselves will not have it so. Which
saying, cannot be extended to infants, in whom there is no power to will or
nill. For, that which infants do by instinct of nature, if the same were
ascribed to their will, when in baptism they resist and shrink from that water
as much as they can, by that reason we should affirm, that they were saved
against their wills. But the Lord speaks more plainly in his Gospel talking
with the wicked City. How often, says he, would I have gathered together thy
children, even as the hen does her chickens, and thou would not? as though
Gods will were ouerruled by man's will, and that men being most weak of all
creatures, by their unwillingness hindering the same, the most mighty could not
accomplish that which he desired. Where then is that his omnipotency, whereby
he did all things in heaven and in earth which he would, if he would have
brought home the lost children of Israel, and did it not? Or rather would not
that City that he should bring home her Children, and yet notwithsta^nding
whether she would or not, did not the Lord reduce such of them as he would?
for as much as both in heaven and in earth, he did not will certain things
and do them, not doing some other things which he would have done, but he
did whatsoever he would.

CHAP. 98.
Albeit God can, when he will, convert the evil dispositions of men, yet does
he justly although he do not reform the same: and when he turns them
unto him, he does it of his own mere grace and mercy.

WHo moreover is so wickedly unwise, as that he will affirm, that God cannot
make good when he will the evil dispositions of men, which of them he will,
when he will, and where he will? Howbeit, when he does it, he does it of his
own mercy: and when he does it not, he does it not, by reason of justice;
because he takes mercy on whom he will, and hardens whom he will. Which
when the Apostle did speak, he therein extolled grace; for the commendation
whereof he was forthwith to speak of those Twins in Rebeccaes woomb: which
being unborn and doing nothing that was either good or evil, to the end yet
that Gods decree touching election might stand immutable, it was said unto him
that was elected, being not chosen in respect of his works but by the mercy
of him that called, Because the elder shall serve the younger. For confirmation
whereof he adds another saying of the Prophet where it is written, Jacob
have I loved, but Esau have I hated. He therefore perceiving how this which
he had spoken might work in those which were not of capacity to reach unto
the height of this doctrine of grace, What therefore shall ^ee say? says he:
is there any injustice with GOD? Far be it from us to think so. For it
seems to savor somewhat of injustice, that without any merits of good or
evil works, God should elect the one, and hate the o^^er. In which matter if
GOD had meant of ^uture works, either good in Jacob, or bad in Esau (both
which God did fore know) he would not have said, Not by works: but he would
have said, by futureworks, and by that means would he have discus^ed this
controversy; nay, rather have made it no question at all necessary to be
satisfied. Now, in that he answered, God forbid, that is to say, God forbid
that there should be any injustice with God, presently thereupon to prove
that this matter came not to pass through any injustice in God, he says, For
he said to Moses, I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will
show mercy to whom I will show mercy. Who therefore but he that is unwise
will think God to be iniust, whether he do inflict any penal judgment upon the
worthy, or show mercy unto the unworthy? Finally, he infers saying,
Therefore is it not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in God
which takes mercy. For, both the Twins were borne by nature the children of
wrath, not by any of their own works, but being originally tied in the bond
of damnation through Adams fault. But, he which said, I will show mercy to
whom I will show mercy, did love Jacob through a mercy freely proceeding
out of himself, and hated Esau through a fatal judgment. Which judgment
seeing it was due to both, he that was chosen did acknowledge in that which
happened to the other that was refused, That he was not to boast of the
difference of their several works, in that the same punishment did not fall
upon him, being in the self same Predicament of damnation, but to rejoice in
the liberality of Gods grace and mercy, because it was of Gods mercy, and
not of him that willed, or of him that runned. For, the universal face and
countenance (as I may so say) of the holy Scriptures, is observed by a most
high and profitable mystery, to admonish all the behoulders thereof, that he
which glories should glory in the Lord.

CHAP. 99.
Although certain be rejected by God, yet they which be damned, may neither
complain of Gods injustice, nor are they therefore to be held excusable for
their transgressions. For, the reason of Gods secret decree and counsel, is
beyond our understanding.

When as the Apostle had commended the mercy of God in that which he says,
Therefore it is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but in the
Lord that takes mercy: afterward also, to commend his justice (for, toward
whom mercy is not extended, it is not injustice but justice; for there is no
injustice with God) he by and by adds saying, For the scripture says to
Pharao, Because I have stirred thee up to this action, that I might show my
power in thee, and that my name might be known throughout all the World. By
which sayings justifying both his assertions both of mercy and justice, he
says, Therefore does the Lord take mercy on whom he will, and harden the
hearts of whom he will. He is, no doubt, merciful in all goodness, and
bardeneth whom he will without imputation of injustice: to the end that
neither the person pardoned should boast of his own merits, nor the party
damned, complain but of his own deserts. For, by his mercies only he makes
known the redeemed from the reprobate: both which the general occasion drawn
from ADAM originally, had conjoined in one mass or lump of perdition. Which
saying who so does hear in that sort as that he says, What cause is there of
further complaint? for who can resist his own will? as though therefore the
sinner were not to be blamed, because God takes mercy on whom he will, and
(again) hardens whom he will. GOD forbid that we should be ashamed to
answer heereunto, as we see the Apostle has answered it already: saying, O
thou man, what art thou that make this answer unto God? Dare the vessel
say unto him that made it, Why did thou make me so? Is it not in the power
of the Potter, of one and the self same mass or lump of clay, to make one
vessel to honor, and another to dishonor? For, in this place certain foolish
persons do suppose that the Apostle was wanting in his answer, checking the
boldness of the party opposite to supplye the want of reason to maintain
that which he had affirmed. Howbeit, that saying, O man what art thou? is of
great weight and efficacy. By which question, he reduces man briefly, in
one word, to a consideration of his own capacity, howbeit rendering indeed a
notable reason thereof. For, if he be incapable of these assertions, what is
he that dare answer GOD therein? And if he be of understanding to
apprehende the doctrine, he wants matter to make any further reply. For,
he plainly sees, if he understand it rightly, that all mankind generally
by the just judgment of GOD, is originally damned in the Apostasy of ADAM. In
so much as, if noe man thereby be freede from perdition, no man can take
exception to the justice of GOD, or they on the contrary ought to be pardoned
which enjoy Gods favor and mercy therein: to the end it might appear out of
the multitude of persons unpardoned, and left in the state of deserved
damnation, what the universal pollution of mankind did merit, and whether
the just judgment of GOD would have brought all men, if his undeserved mercy
had not assisted us; That the mouth of every one which would glory in his
own merits, might be stopped, and that he that gloried should glory in the
Lord.

TOUCHING THE Will of God.
CHAP. 100.
That nothing happens without the will of God. For, when men do sin, Gods
will has a part therein.

SVch be the wonderful works of the Lord, being most exquisite in all things
which he will have accomplished, and so wisely also contrived, as when as both
the nature of Angels and man had sinned, that is to say had done that, which
not God, but their own nature willed: yet did he effect that which himself
would have done, by the will of the Creature (whereby that was done which the
Creator was against) making thereby a good use of euilles as himself is
absolutely good, to the comdemnation of those whom he has justly predestined
to eternal punishment, and to the salvation of those whom in mercy he has
predestined to grace and favor. For, in respect of their own natures they
did that which was against the will of God: But, as touching the omnipotency
of GOD, they would by no means have done the same. In which act done against
the will of God, his will was wrought by themselves and their own means. And
therefore be the works of the Lord exceeding great and inscrutable in the
accomplishment of all things which he will have done: in so much as by a
maruailous and unspeakable mean, that comes not to pass besides his will,
which is clean contrary to his will; Because it should not be done but by his
permission: neither yet does he permit the same, to be done unwillingly, but
with his will. Neither would, he, being God, suffer that which is evil to be
done, but that in respect of his omnipotency, he could make that which is
evil, to become good.

CHAP. 101.
That the good will or disposition which is in man, does many times dissent
from the will of God. And many times the evil will and disposition of man
agrees with GODS will.

SOmetimes, out of a good disposition, man wills that which is repugnant to
Gods will, although the same be better by many degrees, and more infallible
then man's will (for Gods will cannot be evil): As for example, If a good son
desires the life of his father, whose death also God in a good disposition
does desire. On the contrary, it may be, that man is willing to have another
thing come to pass in an evil affection, which God desires also, in a good
disposition: As for example, if an evil son desire the death of his father,
and God would have the same also; in the first of these two examples, man would
that which God would not: but in the second man would that, which God also
would: and yet notwithstanding the godly disposition of the first man does
better agree with the good will of God, albeit his will was contrary to Gods;
then the impiety of the second man, although he willed the same which GOD
also willed. The only difference therefore in this case is, what it is which
man wills, and what may agree with the will of God, and to what end every
man's will tends, whereby it is either to be approved or disallowed. For, God
does accomplish certain of his wills being good, or to a good end, by the
evil desiers of evil men: as namely, in that action wherein Christ was slain
for us by the malicious Jews, through the good will of the father. Which fact
was held to be of that consequence for goodness, as that the Apostle Peter
being in his will against the suffering of Christ, was thereupon called Satan by
him which came to be slain. Again, how good and charitable seem the
dispositions of the godly faithful to be, which would not have had Paul the
Apostle to have gone to Jerusalem, to suffer injurious dealings in that place,
according to the predictions of the Prophet Agabus, albeit God would that he
should suffer the same for a testimony of the faith of Christ, being therein
the Martyr of Christ: In which action he did not execute his good will and
pleasure by means of these good dispositions appearing in the Christians, but
by the maleuolent wills of the Jews: wherein they, which were against his
will, were rather Gods, than they by whose willinguesse that was done which was
desired; because they did it out of an evil disposition being Gods agents, who
performed it by them out of his gracious and good disposition or vvil.

CHAP. 102.
That nothing comes to pass, or is done without the will of God which is
also just, how diverse soever.

But the wills of Angels or men good or evil, how diverse soever they happen
to be, whether they will the same that GOD vvil, or the contrary, yet is the
will of the Almighty never hindered, but always has his effect; which can
never be evil in it self, because also when it does inflict evils upon any
persons, it is just and right: which being just, is by consequence not evil.
Almighty God therefore, whether out of his own commiseration he has mercy
on whom he will have mercy, or in his judgment does obdurate whom he will
have so, does not any thing that is unjust, neither does he any thing against
his own will, but all things which he will.

CHAP. 103.
How this saying of Paul is to be understood, namely, God would have all men
to be saved.

ANd when by this saying of Paul, we hear and likewise read in holy
scriptures that he would have all men saved, albeit we certainly know all
men be not saved yet ought we not therefore to derogate any thing from the
most omnipote^t will of God, but so to understand that which is written, Who
will have all men to be saved, as though he should say, that no man is saved
but whom he will have saved: Not because there is not any one of mankind but
such as he would have saved, but rather that there is not any man saved but
whom he will have saved: and therefore he is to be prayed unto that he would
save us; because if he will have it so, it must be so of necessity. For the
Apostle treated of prayer to be made unto God, whereupon he grounded this
former speech. For in the same sense we understand that saying which is
written in the Gospel, He which enlightneth all creatures: not because there
is not any man that is not illuminated; but because there is not any man
illuminated. Or else it is is taken in this sense, Which would have all men to
be saved, not because there was not any that he would not have saved, which
refused to perform the virtue of miracles amongst such as he s^eth would have
been brought to repentance, if that work had been performed: But that by all
men, we should understand all sorts of men, of what differences or: distinctions
soever; As, kings and private persons, noble and unnoble, high and low,
learned and unlearned, strong and weak, and the witty, dullards and fools:
the rich, the poor, and persons of mean degree: men and women, infants,
children: youths between 12. and 21. years, young men, elder persons, and old
men, men of all languages, conditions, arts and professions, or whosoever being
in the innumerable variety and differences of dispositions and consciences, or
known by anyother differences amongst mortal creatures. For, what is there
amongst them, out of which God will not by his only son our Lord and redeemer
have to be saved thrughout al nations? and therefore does whatsoever he will;
because the desire on will of the omnipotent cannot be frivolous or vain. For
the Apostle hereupon willed prayers and intercessions to be made for all me^,
but specially for kings and such as were in hig^e place of calling; who by
reason of honor and secular pride, might be thought to despise the humility of
Christian faith. For, it is good in the sight of God our savior, that is, that
wepray for such, adding presently or forth with thereupon (to prevent
desperation) Because he would have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of salvation. For, God thought it good that by the mediation of the
humble and poor he might vouchsafe salvation upon the high and rich: which
thing we see performed accordingly. The like manner of speech the Lord does
also use in his Gospel; where he says unto the Pharisees; Ye t^^he mynte^,
^u^, and oueri^ p^tt^ herb. Neither yet did the Pharisees take tithes of all
other kinds whatsoever, or all the po^hearbes of all strangers throughout the
world. As therefore in this place every pothearbe is taken for every kind of
pothearb: so in the other place where all men be named, we may understand all
sorts of men. And it may be taken in any other sense whatsouer, so as we be
not enforced to believe that Almighty God would have had any thing done which
was not done: who without all ambiguitie, if he did both in heaven and upon
earth all things which he would as the scripture reports of him; then
without all doubt, whatsoever he did not, he would not do it.

TOUCHING GODS Foreknowledge.
CHAP. 104.
That the first man had not sinned, if God had foreknowen that he should not
have sinned. For, the foreknowledge of God cannot err or be deceived.

Wherefore also, God would have preserved man in that state and happiness
(where in he was first made) and in convenient time, after he had had children,
have brought him without mortality or death, unto greater blessings (where
he should neither have sinned actually, nor had any will to have sinned) if
God had foreknowen that he should have had consta^cie of will to have remained
without sin, as he was first of all made. But, because he did foreknowe
that he would abuse his free will, that is to say, that he would commit sin,
he did the rather prepare his will thereunto; that he might do good by that
evil which man should do, and so the good will of the omnipotent should not be
made frustrate by the evil will of man, but rather be fulfilled.

CHAP. 105.
That both the conditions of man were well ordained of God: as well the first
wherein he was subject to sin, as the last wherein he could noe longer
sin.

IT was necessary that man should be made in that sort at the first, as that
he had power both to do well and ill, though afterward such shall be his
estate as that he cannot will that which is evil: and yet notwithstanding
shall he not be without free will; which shall be of greater liberty and
freedom, because it cannot at all be subject unto sin. For there is no man
that will blame that will, or deny it to be a will, or a freewil, whereby we so
desire to be happy, as that not only we do not will that which may make us
miserable, but our will is so settled, that we cannot will any such thing.
Therefore as in this life our soul retains a property of not willing
infel^^tie, so in the life to come it wills not any iniquity or sin.
Howbeit, order in this case was not to be pretermitted, wherein God would show
how good a blessing it was to be a reasonable creature, though subject to
sin; albeit it were better he could not sin at all: even as it was a lesser
immortality, though yet in immortality, wherein he might have dyed, although
that other shall be greater, wherein it shall not be possible for him to die at
all.

TOUCHING MAN'S Will.
CHAP. 106.
Man's will at this day is a servant to sin, and is not freed from that
thraldom but by the grace and mercy of God. The first will of man before he
fell by sin, was free: howbeit it could not retain original righteousness
without the help of God.

Man's nature lost original righteousness by free will, being now made capable
thereof through grace, which (if he had not sinned) he had by merit or desert,
albeit even in his first estate he could not have done anything that was
meritorious, without grace. Because, albeit free will was the only cause of
sin, yet was not free will of power to retain righteousness without the
help of God by the participation of his unchangeable goodness. For, as it is
in the power of man to dye when he will (for there is no man but may kill
himself by forbearing to eat, to speak of no other thing) yet man's will is
not enough to maintain life in man, if the help of meats and other
preservatives be wanting. Even so man being in paradise, had power by his will
to work his own destruction, by forsaking righteousness: But, for him to have
lived in righteousness, his will was insufficient, unless God, who made him, had
given him assistance. Howbeit, after his fall, the mercy of God is of greater
efficacy, in as much as free will it self was to be freed from bondage, being
subject to the power of sin and death. Neither does it obtain freedom solie
by it self, but by the only grace of God (apprehended by ^aith in Christ)
whereby the will of man, as it is written, is prepared by the Lord, and we
made capaple of other gifts of God, bringing us to the reward which is reposed
for us in in heaven.

CHAP. 107.
Man sinned through free will, and therefore death was his reward and deservedly
inflicted upon him. But, life everlasting was from the beginning, that is to
say, freely bestowed both upon the first man, and also upon us by Gods mercy.

VVHereupon the Apostle calls life everlasting which is the reward of good
works the mercy of God. For, says he, death is the reward of sin, and the
mercy of God is everlasting life in Christ Jesus our Lord. Reward for military
service is a matter of debt and not of gift. And therefore he said, that death
was the reward of sin; thereby to demonstrate unto us, that death was not
unworthily inflicted, but was a debt and due recompense. But, mercy or grace,
except it come freely, is not mercy or grace indeed. We are therefore to
learn hereby, that the good works in man, be the very gifts of God: which
good works being rewarded with eternal life, what is re^dred in this case but
grace for grace? Man therefore was in such sort created righteous, that he
might have continued in that righteousness, though not without divine help
and assistance, and might leave it and depart from it upon the only motion of
his own will: yet so, that which soever of these he should choose, Gods will
should be fulfilled, either by him, if man chose the better, or upon him if
he chose the worse. Whether of these two he is to make choice, rests in
Gods will, coming certainly either from, or of God. Therefore, because man
would rather fulfill his own will then Gods; God did in like sort execute his
will upon him: who of the self same Mass of perdition derived from his own
stock and progeny, does make one vessel to honor, and another to dishonor;
that, to honor, by his mermercie: the other, to dishonor through his
judgment; to the end that no man might make too great estimate of the
condition of man, or thereby consequently of himself.

CHAP. 108.
Our salvation is so certainly of God, as that we could not have been saved
by Christ, unless, as he was made man, so also he had been God.

FOr, neither should we have been redeemed by that only Mediator between
God and man the man Christ Jesus, unless also he had been God. When Adam was
created (that is, man in his righteousness) at that time he needed no mediator.
But when sins had made a separation between God and man, we stood in need of
the help of a Mediator to reconcile us to God (being such an one as was
solely born without sin, and so lived and was slain) until the day of
resurrection of the flesh to life everlasting, to the end that the pride of
man might be reproved by the humility of God, and thereby made whole, as also
to make man know how far he was departed from God, when as he was to be
brought back again by God incarnate: and that disobedient man must be taught
obedience by the example of God being made man; As also that the fountain of
mercy should be opened by the only begotten taking upon him the form of a
servant, who had not by any former action deserved such indignity; And that
also the redeemer himself should go before and show unto us in his own
person, the resurrection promised to the redeemed; And that the Devil should
be subdued by the same nature which he rejoiced that he had deceived:
Notwithstanding al which, man was not to boast, least pride should be eftsoons
revived in him: and if any thing else can be inwardly conceived or said
concerning so great a mystery of the Mediator by such as grow and increase
with the increasings of God: or only may be conceived in thought, if it
cannot be uttered in speech.

TOUCHING THE Place and State wherein our souls remain after this life.
CHAP. Cix.
That the souls of men, presently after death, remain in certain
receptacles, until the later day.

THe time that is between the death of man and the resurrection, does contain
the souls of the deceased in certain secret and unseen receptacles,
accordingly as every of them have deserved rest or pain, by the deeds of the
flesh whilst they lived.

Animaduersions upon the Cix. Chapter.
That the souls of men, presently after death, remain in certain
receptacles, until the later day.

Howsoever Augustine, in this Chapter, affirms that the souls of men after
death, remain in certain receptacles, until the day of doom, being drawn to
that opinion, as is thought, by Irenaeus, a most ancient writer, who (as
Danaeus sets down in his Comment upon this Chapter) says plainly, That
the souls of Christ's Disciples, for whom he had wrought these happinesses
or eternal blessings, should depart away into an invisible place appointed
unto them by God, where they should remain until the resurrection; and that
being done, should afterward put on their bodies again, and rise in greater
perfection: Yet afterward in an other place, Augustine does make a question
thereof, being doubtful of that doctrine, and thinks it may be for certain
affirmed, that the souls of the godly be transported, presently after death,
into that place which is more glorious and excellent, than mortal bodies, or
any shapes of bodies; that place being above all the heavens, and that heaven,
where Christ is dwelling. Afterward, writing upon S. John. Tract. 49. upon
better judgment, he would have the souls of the godly, after they be out of
this body, as touching the place, to be with Christ, according to that of John,
Cap. 17. ver. 24. Father, I will, that they which thou have given me, be with
me, even where I am, etc. And Luke 23. v. 43. This day shall thou be with me
in Paradise. And more plainly Augustine in his fifth Sermon touching Saints,
says, that the souls of the holy, are to be believed to be with Christ. And
afterward, discoursing of Paradise, whether it were local or spiritual, he
says, That the Lotte ordained for the godly, is called Abraham's bosom. Which
his opinions being laid together, lot the later and better, be preferred
before the worse, looking into Saint Augustines book of Retractations,
whereunto Danaeus dot brefer those who would be better satisfied of him, in
matters wherein he was either ledor misled by the error of himself, or of that
Age.

CHAP. Cx.
How farre-forth the godly works of men, while they live, be available.

NEither is it to be denied, that the souls of the deceased are relieved by
the godliness of their living friends, when as either the sacrifice of the
Mediator is offered for them or alms distributed in the Church. But these
things be available but only to such, who when they lived, did meritorious
works to make them auailcable unto the^. For, there is a kind of life,
neither so good, but that it needs these helps, after death; neither so
evil, but that it may be benefited by them. And there is a kind of living so
good as needs not these helps: and there is a kind of living so evil, that
it can receive no help or benefit by these, when the course of this life is
finished. Wherefore in this life man procures a possibility of being relieved
after this life, or subiecteth himself to a necessity of grievous and
helpelesse punishment. For, let no man hope when he is dead, by any
after-merite to redeem his neglect of well doing while he lived, with God.
Therefore these, devotions, which the Church, does soofte^ use in praying for
the dead, be not repugnant to that sentence or assertion of the Apostle,
wherein it is said, for we shall al appear before the tribunal of Christ to
receive judgment according to our deeds in the flesh, as they have been
either good or evil; Because every man while he lived in the flesh did such
things as deserved this favor of God, that the prayers of the Church might
be effectual for him after his departure and death. For, they are not
available for all. And wherefore are they not available for all, but in
respect of the diversity of every man's action in this life? When as therefore
either the sacrifices of the altar, or of any sort of alms be offered for all
such as be baptized and dead, they become actions of thanksgiving for such
as were exceeding good, and peace offerings for such as were not exceeding
evil: albeit for such as be exceeding evil, these helps preuail not at al
after they are dead: howsoever they which be living do take comfort thereby.
And to whom soever these things shall be available, they be either
available to the full remission of their sins: or else that thereby their
damnation may be the more easy and tolerable.

Animaduersions upon the 110. Chapter.
How far forth the godly works of the living, do relieve the dead.

Neither is it to be denied, that the souls of the dead, etc.

SAint Augustines greatest blemish in all this book, is contained in this
Chapter, as Danaeus says; this error of his growing out of the doctrine of
Purgatory, which of a little spark, grew to a great fire, the opinion of
that time being, that the souls of men, being not reprobats, were after death
relieved and purged from their sins, by the charitable prayers of the godly
that lived. Which opinion was rather destroyed, then founded out of the word of
God. Howbeit, hereupon afterward grew prayers for the dead, Masses,
Anniuersaries, and indulgences: the cause thereof being imputed to a book
which Augustine did write, touching the care that was to be had of the dead,
the same being ^reduced by the fau^tors of that error of praying for the dead;
that his book being written to those only and chiefly, who were desirous to
know, whether it were available to a christian after death, that his body
should be buried, apud sanctial^cu^us memoriam, his meaning therein being
corrupted by other men's interpretations. And howsoever he thinks in this
Chapter, yet Augustine was not permanent in that opinion. For, he writes in
other places, That there can be no help of mercy performed, by the ^ust, to
the souls of the deceased, although the godly were never so much inclined to
mercy in that case: because the sentence of GOD, is immu(...) being already
pronounced of them at their death, For, says he in an other place, Gods
judgment hangs not in suspense touching the souls of the dead, but is
instantly given and certainly set down: Because, as he affirms, as every
man dies, so is he judged of God: neither can Gods sentence be altered,
corrected or diminished.

Seeing therefore Augustine is not constant herein himself, we ought not to
be moved by his assertion, because it wants the true leuain of Gods word
and assurance or warrant of faith Danoeus moreover affirms, that in the
celebration of the Lords supper, at the first there was a commemoration of the
dead Martyrs of God, who dyed memorablie and triumphantly for the name of
CHRIST, to encourage others to be resolute and constant in the profess on of
the Gospel. Afterward, in time, the memory of them began to be celebrated
in that (...) of the L. supper, which were no martyrs at all; but dying,
desired that they might be remembered in the celebration of the same: And so at
length, every one that was baptized, was remembered therein, as Austin writes
in this place, where he calls the Lords supper a sacrifice, because, as he
says in his 10. book, De ciuitate Dei, and 20. Chapter, It is the Sacrament
of the sacrifice of Christ. For it is the commemoration of Christ his death,
and our thansgiuing, for so great a benefit, at Gods hand. Anselmus also says,
that which men call a sacrafice, is a sign of the true sacrifice. In which
sense the ancient writers called the Lords Supper a Sacrifice, not because
Christ himself should again be offered up by any mortal Creature. This
appellation therefore does nothing at all relieve either the Papists, or their
Mass.

Besides, it appears in many of Saint Augustines writings, what he calls a
Sacrifice, that is to say, either works of mercy toward our selves, or
toward our neighbors, which be rendered unto God; as also the praises and
celebration of Gods name. In other places of scripture, and of his own works,
he shows by what reason every Christian is a Pr^est.

The frequent devotions used in the Church, is the principal reason moving
Saint Augustine, to think, the souls of the godly deceased, to be relieved
by the alms and prayers of the living, because they began to be commonly and
usually performed in the Church for the dead. Howbeit, M. Calvin asks how, or
by what warrant out of Gods word, or example, men dare do this. Against whom if
it be replied, that in the 2. Maccabees, 23. v. 44. it is written, That it is
godly to pray for the dead; I answer, that the excuse of the author is to be
read, appearing in the 15. Chapter. From thenceforth it is not said, that Judas
did sacrifice for the dead: And these words, Pium est ergo, it is godly
therefore, be contained in the gloss, and are no part of the text The ancient
writers used four reasons or arguments chiefly, to make them believe that
these things were truly observed in the Church for the dead.

The first was drawn from that which Luke does write touching Lazarus, and the
rich glutton. To which I answer, that, that whole story, or narration, was
but a parable: and, if any the like reason be collected from that place, for
relief of men's souls, by the living after death, I may as well gather out of
the same that souls have teeth, a tongue, and an hand: Augustine himself
affirming, that this argument is weak and noddeth.

The second argument is this, Why, say they do men that dye, make wills, if
they can receive no help or relief by the living? This matter is answered
again by Augustine, writing upon the hundred and eigh^th Psalm: Because
there is, says he, a natural care of posterity, ingrafted in all the godly
while they live, using no ways the crewell and profane speech of Nero, saying,
When I am dead, Let there be a confusion of heaven and earth.

The third argument is this, why, say they, should the souls of the godly
being dead, appear unto the living, if they felt not an effect of the works
of the living, or that the living again, had none affinity with them? or did
not belong unto them? I answer to this, that the souls themselves are not
sent; but that these visions, if GOD will so have them appear, are presented
unto them by the dispensation of his providence, for the comfort of the godly,
and terror of the wicked, being done by the operation of Angels, and sometimes
also by the power of Satan. And where Augustine says in his book, De cura pro
mortuis, cap. 15. that certain which were dead, we set unto those which were
living, namely Samuel, And on the contrary amongst the living, Paul was taken
up to Paradise, I say plainly, says he, that this reason is weak and
reeleth.

Their fourth and last reason is this, The godly be taken out of this world,
before those evils, which God meant to send amongst them, were comne to pass:
as for example, King Ezechias. To this I answer, that this their own reason
does teach, that things done here upon earth, or in this world, do not
belong at all unto those which be dead, nor be felt by them. For, to what
purpose should this providence for them be made by death, if they should be
partakers of them after death? and how should they become quiet and happy
indeed, if the unquiet life of the living, should trouble them, says
Augustine? But the godly are happy and quiet, as it is in the Apocalipse, cap.
14. v. 13.

Finally, if no man can perform that office of repentance for the dead, as the
schoolmen themselves confess, how can he mitigate their punishment?

All this collected out of Danaus Comment.

CHAP. Cxi.
There shall be two companies universally after the day of judgment: the one
of the godly, as well Angels as men: the other of the wicked, consisting of
both the others.

NOw after the resurrection, the general judgment being done and finished,
the two Cities shall be settled in their final or last estate: the one being of
God, the other of the devil: the one replenished with the good, the other with
the bad; howbeit, both consisting of Angels and men: wherein the good shall
have no will at all, nor the evil any power to sin or to die in any sort: the
good, living indeed and joyfully in that everlasting life, and the wicked being
continued with all unhappiness in eternal death without dying; because both their
states are perpetual. But, in this blessedness allotted to the good, the
condition or state of the one, shall be better then the other: and in the
misery orordained for the bad, one shall have less torment then another.

TOUCHING THE punishments of the damned.
CHAP. Cxii.
That the punishments of the damned be everlasting and the least of them are
exceeding great and fearful, in respect of the weakness of our nature.

Diverse therefore, nay, very many, do vainly (out of humane affection)
lament the everlasting pain of the damned, and their perpetual torment,
without intermission; and do believe that it shall not be so indeed: wherein
though they will not contradict the scriptures, yet do they privately in their
own conceits mitigate the severity thereof and draw God to a more merciful
sentence, supposing that the report thereof in the holy scriptures, is more
terrible, then true. For, say they, God will not forget to be merciful, or shut
up his loving kindness in displeasure. This saying is indeed contained in a
godly Psalm; but it is meant, without all doubt, of such as be called the
vessels of Gods mercy: Because they are delivered out of their calamity and
misery, nor in respect of their own merits, but of God who has commiseration
of them. Or, if this may be thought to be generally spoken, it follows not
therefore that they should think there may be an end of theit damnation, of
whom it is spoken, And they shall go to eternal punishment: lest by this
means the felicity also of them might be thought to hau an end and
determination in time, to whom it is also said, The just shall go to life
everlasting. But let them suppose, if that may content them, that the
punishmo^ts of the damned be mitigated in some measure between whiles. For,
so it may be understood that Gods anger remains still upon them, that is to
say, their damnation is everlasting. For, this damnation, is called the anger
of God, and not a perturbation of Gods mind; So that in his anger, or during
the continuance thereof, his mercies should nevertheless not be shut up,
howbeit the same should not make an end of eternal punishment, but only give
an intermission or some ease of their torments, Because the Psalm says not,
to make an end of his anger, or after his anger was past, but during his
anger. The which his anger if it were alone and by itself, or howsoever it may
be thought to be the least and smallest punishment, to leese the kingdom of
God, to be exiled from that City, to be a stranger from the life of God,
and to want the infinite choice of loyes with God, which he hides from such as
despise him, and affords to all such as put their trust in him: yet is it so
great a punishment, as no torments, which we have known, may equal the same,
in case Gods anger be eternal, and these torments do last but for certain
ages, how long soever.

CHAP. Cxiii.
That in the world to come, neither the feticitie of the godly, not the
punishment of the damned afterward shall be equal.

THe death of the damned shall be everlasting, and have none end. That is,
They shall be estraunged for ever from the life of God, and this misery shall
be common to them an, whatsoever men imagine being led by their humane
affections touching the difference of their punishments, the mitigating or
intermission of their pains: As also the happy life of the Saints shall
likewise endure for ever. In which consideration they shall be all equal
howsoever they shine and glitter in great variety and difference of degrees,
in happiness, yet with absolute peace and sweet agreement amongst themselves.

OF THE LORDS Prayer.
CHAP. Cxiiii.
That the Lords Prayer contains all those things which we are to hope for,
and to desire of God.

OVt of the Confession of faith which is briefly comprised in the Creed and
which, being imperfectly understood, is milk for babes, but more fully and
spiritually conceived, and expressed, is meat for strong men, springs and
grows that good and happy hope of the faithful, which is always accompanied
with holy love. But, among all those things which the faithful must believe,
they only appertain unto hope, which are contained in the Lords prayer. For,
cursed is every one, as the Divine oracles do testify, which puts his
trust in man: and so every one is wrapped up in this curse, which puts his
trust in himself. Wherefore we must not seek but at the hands of our Lord God,
any thing which we hope we shall well perform, or for which well performed,
we look for any praise or reward.

CHAP. Cxv.
That the Lords prayer consists of seven petitions: and what the meaning and
scope of them is.

Wherefore the Lords prayer, as it is delivered by Mathewe the Evangelist,
seems to contain seven petitions: in three of the which we ask for things
eternal; in the other four for things temporal: which yet notwithstanding are
necessary for the attaining of things eternal. For, whereas we say, Hallowed
be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be done, in earth as it is in heaven,
which some men have not unfitly understood, that Gods will should be done both
in our spirit and in our body, all these things are such as must be continued
for ever; and, being here begun, by daily proceeding are increased in us: which
being perfected, which thing we hope shall be performed in the other life,
we shall possess and enjoy them for ever. But where we say, Give us this day
our daily bread, and forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass against us, and lead us not into temption, but deliver us from
evil; who does not see, that al these things respect the wants and necessities
of this present life. In that everlasting life therefore in which we hope to
live for ever, the sanctisication of Gods name, his kingdom, and the
fulfilling of his will, shall remain everlastingly in great perfection in our
spirit, and in our bodies. But the bread which we ask, is therefore called
daily bread because in the state of this life it is necessary; being a supply
of the want, either of soul, or body, whether we understand thereby, either
carnal, or spiritual food, or both. Here is use of that remission of sins,
which we desire; Because here those sins be committed, the remission
whereof we pray for. Here are those temptations which allure and draw us
unto sin. To conclude, Here is that evil, from which we desire to be
delivered. But there, that is to say in heaven, and the state of the other
life, there is none of these things.

CHAP. Cxvi.
That the Evangelists, Mathewe and Luke, do differ in setting down the
petitions of the Lords Prayer.

LVke the Evangelist comprehends in the Lords prayer, not seven, but five
petitions, and yet does not he far from Mathewe: but, by expressing the^
more briefly, put us in mind, how those seven are to be understood. For, the
name of God is hallowed in spirit. But his kingdom shall come when the flesh
shall rise again. Luke therefore showing that the third petition is in some
sort a repetition; by omitting it, makes us the better to understand it. The^
does he add the other three concerning daily bread, the remission of sins,
the avoiding of temptation. But, whereas he adds in the first place, But
deliver us from evil, this Evangelist has it not: That thereby we might
understand, that it pertains to that which formerly was expressed concerning
temptation. For, therefore it is he says, But deliver us; and not, And
deliver us, Thereby showing us that they are but one petition. For he says Let
not this be, that we be led into temptation, but deliver; That euerle one may
know he is delivered from evil, in that he is not led into temptation.

OF CHRIST.
CHAP. Cxvli.
That true Charity is an effect of true faith and hope: and that there is not
true faith, but that, that does work by love.

NOw, for Charity, which the Apostle pronounces to be greater then these two,
that is, faith and hope; by how much the greater it is in any man, by so much
he is the better in whom it is. For, when we ask whether a man be good or
not, We ask not, what he believes or hopes for, but what he loves. For,
he that loves aright, doubtless believes and hopes aright. But he which
loves not, believes in vain, though the things be true he does believe: and
hopes in vain, though the things he hope for, pertain to true felicity:
unless he believe and hope for this also: That God, at his humble suite, both
can and will give unto him, the affection of love. For, although no man can
hope without love, yet it may and does sometimes fall out, that a man loves not
that, without which he cannot attain the thing he hops for. As, if a man
hope for eternal life, and yet neither has, nor loves righteousness,
without which no man attaineth eternal life. This is that faith of Christ
which the Apostle commendes, which works by love: and what it finds defective
in love, it asks, that it may receive, and seeks that it may find, and
knocks that it may be opened unto it. For, faith obtains what the law
commands. For, without the gift of God; That is, without the holy Ghost, by
which the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, the law may require
obedience, but works no obedience, but rather makes a man a more greenous
transgressor, because it takes from him the excuse of ignorance. For, there,
doubtless, carnal concupisce^ce swayeth all, where the love of God has no
place.

CHAP. Cxvlii.
That, as of the whole Church, so of every faithful man, there are four ages
and degrees, by which they go forward and grow to perfection.

WHen as a man lives and abides in palpable darkness of ignorance, following
those things the flesh most desires reason making no re(...), This is the
first (...) of the condition of a man. Afterward, when by the law he
gets the knowledge of sin, it the spirit of God assist him not,
endeavoring to live according to the Law, he is ouercommen of sin, sins
wittingly, becomes the servant of sin, (for of whom soever a man is
ouercommen, his servant he is) the knowledge of the commandment being an
occasion that sin works in man all manner of concupiscence, the transgression
of the law now known being added to the heap of former sins (and so is that
fulfilled which is written, the law entered, that sin might abound) this is the
second estate or condition of man. But, if GOD look so graciously upon man,
that he help him to perform those things he requires, and man begin to
be led by the spirit of God, his desires and endeavors against the flesh
are strengthened with the strength of love; So that although as yet there be in
man that resists, in his best endeavors, the whole infirmity of sin being
not healed, yet the just does live by faith, and lives righteously, in that he
yields not to evil concupiscence, the love of righteousness prevailing in
him. This is the third estate of man. In which causes if with happy continuance
he go forward, the last part remains, the complement whereof shall be
after this life: first, in the happy rest of the soul or spirit, and
afterward in the resurrection of the body. Of these ^ower different estates,
the first was before the Law: The second under the Law: The third under
grace: The fourth, in full and perfect peace. So was the estate of GODS people
ordered in the several diversities of times, accordingly as it pleased him,
which disposes all things in measure, number and weight. For, the people of
God was first before the Law. Secondly, under the Law which was given by
Moses. Thirdly, under Grace which was revealed by the first coming of the
Mediator: which grace notwithstanding was not wanting before to them upon whom
God would bestow it, although it were veiled and hid in obscurities, according
to the dispensation of time. For, there was none of the righteous in old time,
that could obtain salvation without the faith of Christ. And, unless he had
been known of them, they could not have prophesied unto us of him, sometimes
more plainly, sometimes more obscurely, as they did.

OF BAPTISM.
CHAP. Cxix.
That Baptism does profit us, in which soever of these former ages or degrees
we be in.

IN which soever of these four ages or conditions the grace of regeneration
finds each man, there are all his sins past remitted unto him; and the
guilt, contracted by the first birth, is dissolved by the second. And of so
great force is that the spirit breaths where it will, that there be some
which never enter into that second estate of servitude under the law; but in
the first receiving of the commandment have the hands of Gods helping grace
reached forth unto them.

CHAP. Cxx.
That they which die immediately after baptism, are happy.

BEfore a man can receive commandment, it is of necessity that he must first
live, according to the flesh. But if, being initiated with the sacrament of
regeneration, he presently depart out of this life, death shall not hurt him,
because Christ therefore died and rose again, that he might have dominion over
the living and the dead. Neither shall the kingdom of death hold him, for
whom he died that was free among the dead.

CHAP. Cxxi.
That Charity is the Law and the Gospel, which now has her daily increases;
but, in the world to come shall have her absolute perfection.

THat all the divine precepts are referred unto Charity whereof the Apostle
says, The end of the commandment is charity out of a pure heart, a good
conscience, and faith unfeigned; The end therefore of every precept, is
charity. That is, every precept is referred unto charity. But whatsoever is
so done, either for fear of punishment, or any other carnal respect, that it
is not referred to charity, which the holy Ghost does shed abroad in our
hearts, it is not done as it should be done, though it seem to be done. For,
charity reaches both to God and our neighbor. And truly in these two
precepts hangs all the Law and the Prophets: Whereunto we may add the
Gospel and the Apostles also. For, whence have we that saying, The end of the
Law is charity, and God is charity, but out of their writings What-euer
things therefore God commands, of which one is, Thou shall not commit
adultery, and what-euer things are not commanded, but men are advised
thereunto by special counsel, of which one is, It is good for a man not to
touch a woman, both these kinds of things are then well performed when they
are referred to the love of God, and of our neighbor for God both in this
world and the world to come: The love of God, I say, whom now we behold
through faith, but then shall see him face to face: And our neighbor also now
we know but by faith. For, we mortal men, know not the hearts of mortal men:
But then God shall enlighten the hid things of darkness, and manifest the
thoughts of our hearts. Then shall every one have praise of God, because each
neighbor shall praise and love that in other, which divine illumination will
not suffer to be hid in them, but will present it to the view of each other.
Now concupiscence is diminished and weakened, charity increasing till it come,
even in this world, to such a greatness, as greater it cannot be. No greater
love then this can any man have, than that a man should give his life for his
friends. But, who shall be able to express what height of love shall be
there, where there shall be no concupiscence nor no inordinate desire to be
repressed? how whole and sound all things shall be there, where there shall be
no striuing^ of direful death.

CHAP. Cxxii.
What name is most fitly to be given to this work.

But let us now at the last make an end of this work, which choose you, whether
you will call or use in the nature of an Enchiridion. But, I truly not
thinking your studies and endeavors in Christ Jesus to be such as should be
despised, and promising my self all good of you; trusting and hoping in the
help of our redeemer, and loving you most dearly in the sweet fellowship of
his members, I have written and dedicated unto you (endeavoring my self to the
uttermost) a Book of faith, hope and charity: Which, God grant be as pleasing
and profitable unto you, as it is large.

FINIS.

