Two books of the noble doctor and B. S. Augustine the one entiteled of the
Predestinacion of saints, the other of perseueraunce unto the end, whereunto are
annexed the determinacions of two ancient general Councelles, confermyng the
doctrine taught in these books by s. Aug. all faithfully translated out of
Laten into English by John Scory the late B. of Chichester, very necessary for all times, but namely for ours, wherein the Papists and Inabaptistes have
revived again the wicked opinions of the Pelagia^s, that extolled ma^s will
and merits against the fre grace of Christ.

If ryghteousnes comes by the law then Christ dyed in vain.

Gala. 2. Read first, and then judge, who have preached the true catholyke
doctrine of the Church of Christ: we, or our adversaries.

Unto the Christean reader John Scory the late B. of Chichester wysheth grace
and peace from God our Father through Jesus Christ our alone and only
mediator and Advocate.
HE wrote not amysse which notynge thignorancie, ingratitude and vanite of
ma^s nature said, that men commend, praise, and wonder at things past and
ancient: they despise and set naught by the things present, which they have
before their eyes, and in their hands: they earnestly desire and gredely covet
things to come. In ye first we may behold man's ignorance, because nothing
namely in religion and doctrine be it never so ancient, is worthy any
commendacion, except the same be also grounded upon truth. In the second we
may consider thingratitude of man, which contemnynge gods goodness, presently
calling all men to light, life, and liberty, had rather abide in darkness,
death, and bondage. In the third man's vanity is bewrayed, which gapyng
always for news, is never contented nor satisfied, with the manifest truth
obtained and had. The time of Christ's co^uersacion in this world, wa^ted not
these kinds of men: which despysynge the present light of the world, the
fou^tayne of life and truth, Ioh. 8.
whom they beheld with their eyes, and handeled with their hands, they
commended and praised the most ancient Moses, with whom they knew (they
said) that God had talked with: Ioh. 9.
they made none end of garnyshyng the monumentes and graves of the old
prophets, Mat. 23
and just men: they bosted them selves to be the sons and sede of old
father Abraham: Ioh. 8.
not for any love or zeal they had to tholde fathers prophets, and their true
worshippyng of God, but only for the hatered they bare to Christ, and his
heavenly doctrine. Wherefore God did after most justly (according to Christ's
threatnyng) take away his kingdom from them, Mat. 21. and. 23.
making their habitacion waste and desolate And because they loved not ye
truth presently offered unto them, 2. These. 3
be seen them streng delusion, yt they might believe lies. I came (says the
son of God) in my fathers name, Ioh. 5.
and ye received me not, if an other shall come in his own name, him will ye
receive. Thus were the blind, unthankful, and vain Iues most justly
punyshed. Whether our age be not full of such godles men, I report me to thine
own conscience gentle reader. That God has in this our age, Joel. 2.
powered out abou^dant lie the manyfolde gifts of his holy spirit upon the,
the children of men, to open our eyes, that we might be converted from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Act. 20.
that we might receive the remission of sins, and a fellowship among them
which are sanctified through faith, is more manifest then the noone day.
Nevertheless such is the wylful ygnorau^ce, and unthankful vanite of me^,
that (these present manyfolde, and wonderful gifts of Gods spirit being
contemned, and set at naught, which we daily se with our eyes, hear with our
ears, and as it were grope with our hands, they never cease cryenge fathers,
fathers, the church, the church, to the intents only to deface the clear
and open truth reveled unto their own age They would make the world believe
that tholde ancient Ecclesiastical writers (whose only errores they adore,
and worship, but the truth which both they taught, and we defend, they
either hyd, and dissemble or else deprave, and corrupt, as they do the holy
scriptures) taught an other religion, and an other way of salvation, then was
of late taught, and by common consent and authority received in England, in
the days of the most excellent and famous Henry the father, and most
virtuous and Godly Edward the son, the right mighty and noble kings
lately of England, whose most worthy fames and memories (tho some most
ungodly, and unnaturally, do continually endeavor themselves by all manner of
means to deface) shall evermore continue, and be celebrate, commended, and set
out, of all such as were their true and loving subjects. They would (I say)
bear men in hand, that in the days of these most worthy kings, abominable
and new fangled doctrine was openly taught, and a like religion received, and
used. So unthankful they are unto God, for his present benefits. Nevertheless
thou may evidently perceive dear brother, by readyng of these books of S.
Aug. which I have faithfully translated out of laten into Englysh (whereunto I
entend (if god will) to add an other entiteled of the spirit and letter) what
was thold doctrine of the catholyke church, touching our salvation. For
teaching and defendyng whereof chiefly, according to the truth of the holy
scriptures, and the same ancient doctrine of the true catholyke church, our
adversaries are not ashamed to say, that we the preachers that truly preached
gods holy word, in ye days of thaffornamed most noble kings, preached
nothing but newfangels, and abominable doctrine.

And therefore they think, Ioh. 16.
that they do God hye service, to molest and trouble us in every place, to
rob and spoil us of al manner of worldly lyuynges, liberties and goods, to
reuyle and slander us, to rail and lie upon us openly even in the pulpettes,
from the which gods holy word ought only to soude, and be heard, and not
maliciouse slau^ders, and manifest lies. These notwythstandynge, they desire to
be counted catholykes, not only vnlustly vsurpyng that name to them selves
only, but also uncharitably excludyng from the same al such as be true
catholykes in deed. They have many years iugled with the world, under the
title of the catholic church, and notwythstandyng that by sundry means their
leigerdemayne have been openly discovered (whereby the most part of men
perceive well enowe their ypocrisie) yet have they now again put upon their
unshamefast, and horyshe face, the vysar of the catholyke church: which S.
Au. in these books do so pluck of, that all men may perceive, that in
deprauyng the true catholyke dotrine of salvation, which we have most truly
preached, they show themselves to be ye great hoar, that sytteth upon many
waters, Apo. 17
the mother of horedome and abhominacions of the earth, rather the^ yt
catholic church, which is the very and only spouse of Christ Jesus our Lord
Thou shalt therefore in these books gentle reader perceive (as I have said) the
true catholyke doctrine of our salvation, and of all matters that depe^de, and
are annexed to the same: as what is the very original cause of our salvation,
after what manner and sort, we are first called unto salvation, by what and
whose means and deservings we so continue, that we attain the fruicion of
the same in thend: why al are not so called, that they may follow, and obey the
caller: how weak and unable man's will is, either to come to God, or to
continue in him unto the end: whether we be saved, that is predestinate, called,
justified, and glorified freely through the only grace and favor of God, by
faith in Christ Jesus, or by the precepts of good life: For thus S. August.
speaks, De spiritu and littera. Cap. 13.
we conclude (says he) that a man is not justified by the precepts of good
life, but by the faith of Jesus Christ. That is not by ye law of works, but
by the law of faith: not by the letter, but by the spirit: not by the merits
of deeds, but by grace freely given. I pray you which of us all (which are
judged and proclaimed by our adversaries to be new fangled and lyeng preachers)
did ever preach more largely or otherwise, of the doctrine of salvation and
iustificacion, then S. Aug. have here written: I beseech the consider and mark
S. Aug. words well, and then I doubt not but that thou shall perceive
manyfestly, that our adversaries declare themselves most shameless reprobates,
which are not afraid in their frantyke and furious mode, to call that
doctrine which is only ancient, true, and heavenly, new fangled, and
abominable. 2. Tim. 3
Nevertheless as the madness of Iannes and Iambres that resysted Moses was
evident unto al me^, even so I doubt not, but that thou may perceive, that
S. Aug. does discover here the madness of these sorcerers, which can none
otherwise (being destitute of the truth) maintain their madness, but by
violence and tyranny: as their cruel enterpryses and procedinges, do
manyfestly declare to all ye world this day. That thou be not therefore
deceived and bewytched through their incantacions, Gala. 3.
read diligently (I say) these books of S. Aug. whereunto I have in the end
annexed the determinacio^ of two ancient councels, that conferme the truth of
S. Aug. doctrine. And if any thing peradventure shall seame unto the hard to
be understand, I would have the to consider that S. Aug. do in some places
here entreat of gods secret councelles, and iugementes, which can not be
perceived either by external senses, 1. Cor. 2. Mat. 11.
or natural reason, but by faith only, that believes, and rests in the true
understanding of Gods word. The beleuyng man therefore that calls upon
God, shall as easily understand this true catholyke doctrine of salvation, Ioh.
10.
as the sheep knows ye voice of his own shepherd: although the wise of ye
world, that do peryshe, whose unbelieving minds Satan has blinded, 2. Cor. 4.
1. Cor. 1.
will esteem this not only new fangled, but also folyshe and abominable.

Further if any thing that S. Au. here teaches of the state of infantes that
dye without baptime shall peradventure offend the, I must desire the
diligently to wey, and consider, both the horrible deformite of that original
sin, wherein we were all borne, Romans 5. Psalm. 51.
and also the most just and secret judgment of God, upon the children of
wrath for the same, which S. Aug. in the.xii. chapter of this second book do
set forth most plainly. Ephe. 2.
And the^ I doubt not but yt you shall either be persuaded, to credit also s.
Aug. in this matter, or else you wylt with quietness and modeste descent from him.
For s. Aug. intended never either in these books, or in any other tyra^nically
to co^pelle any man (as our adversaries do) to follow his judgment in religion,
but desires only to be credited so far forth, as a man may perceyne, that he
did not err. That he was of this mind, you may in many places of his other
works, and namely in the. 21. chapter of this second book manyfestly se.
Neither have I translated these books to call the from the certain and
infallible truth and authority of Gods word, to hang now upon S. Aug.
but that both thou, and all other that will, may perceive by the testimonye
also of S. Aug. what was and is, The cause of tra^slatynge these books.
thold, ancient, and true, catholyke doctrine of the church touching our
salvation (which co^systeth upon our eternal eleccion, or predestinacion,
vocacion, iustificacion, and glorificacion, as S. Paul testifies to the
Romans) whereby thou may the more truly judge, between us and our
adversaries, which cease not to cry out, affermyng most untruly, that we have
preached new fangled and abominable doctrine.

But this ought not to be passed over with silence that S. Aug. both in these
books, and in diverse other places of his works do teach and afferme, that
infantes can not be saved without the receyuynge of the Sacraments of Christ's
body and blood. Of this judgment was also S. Cipriane, whereby it is manifest
that in their days the Church of Christ did use to mynistre Theucariste to
infantes. The euchariste given to infantes
This was an old and ancient tradicio^ of the church. And notwythstandyng
that our adversaries have omitted the same, as they do diverse other such
like, yet are not we so captiouse, or so uncharitable, either to condemn them
for this omission, or to enforce that they should receive the same tradicions
again. Wherefore by right and equity they ought to grant, that the church of
England, according to the lyberties of the same, in ye days of the most
noble and excellent princes Henry the.viii. and Edward the vi. by common consent
of all the states of the realm, and their supremest authorite in earth under
Christ, might omit or change traditions in religion (as it did) although the
same were ancient, and mentioned in old writers, as long as it did
co^stitute, or ordeyne nothing, against gods written word. Whereupon I may
also justly conclude, that those our adversaries which do now condemn the
hole church of England, that was in the days of thafornamed kings, for
omittyng or alteryng of traditions, that they wet false dissemblyng and
pariured traitores, against their most natural kings and countreye, and
malicious ypocrites against the true catholyke church of England. For what
thing (as touching the common order for religion) have God commanded by his
written word to be done, that was then omitted (except thonly use of Christ's
true discipline) which in deed was then resisted by some, yt have been, and
are, by the just judgment of God compelled, to submit their necks unto the
heuie burden, and grievous yoke, of Antechristes vicare a wretched and vile
shauelyng. Or else what thing has gods written word prohibit and
forbidden, that was then commanded to be done and practiced? I mean still of
the common order for religion. If you can again say any of these, do in some
particular matter, and by gods help you shall be answered. But if you can not
truly deny, but that Gods voice and word was so reverently heard, when the
church of England was the true catholyke church of Christ
in reforming the common order of religion, that al things were approved, and
used (except discipline) that it commands: and all things refrayned, yt it
forbids: then must I also conclude, that the Church of England in the days
of thaforenamed kings, was the true catholyke church of Christ. For the
truth says, he that is of God hears gods word. Ioh. 8. Ioh. 10.
And again he says, my sheep hear my voice: but the church of England in
ye days of the said kings, did hear the word of God, and ye voice of
Christ Therefore the church of England, was then the true catholic Church of
Christ. Can you for shame you children of the deuel, and enemies to all
ryghtfulnes, which cease not to peruerte the straight ways of the Lord, Act.
13.
deny any part of this argument? Are you not driven (for want of the truth)
to build again your new Babylon, with shameful lies, manifest falshode,
and most barbarous and cruel tyranny? But paraduenture you will say that in
the days of king Edward, we did not myngle water with the wine in the Lords
Supper. What then? Did Christ in the institucio^ of ye same give either
example or commandment to mingle water with the wine? Did he not call that
which his Apostles had drunk out of the cup, math. 26 mar. 14.
the fruit of the vine tree? Is wine alone the fruit of the vynetre, or wine
and water mingled together? But you say that tholde writers as S. Cipriane and
other, do make mention of the myngled cup with wine and water. Does not the
same Cipriane and S. Aug. also with other, teach more earnestly, that infantes
can not be saved without receyuyng theuchariste: and for ye same purpose allege
Christ's words, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you?

Therefore likewise as ye (leaving in this point, Joh. 6.
and diverse other, both Cipriane, Aug. and all the hole catholyke church of
their time) do yet think, that nevertheless you are Christ's church. (And so
would I also judge of you, and accept you, if you gave not many horrible and
manifest occasions, to be rather worcester thely counted the synagoges of Satan) even
so do we most justly and truly believe, that the church of England in the
days of the said kings, was Christ's true catholyke church, notwythstandynge
it did not (according to the liberty of the same) myngle water with, wine, not
mythstandynge it did not annoynte infantes and ministres of the word with
oil, or omitted any such like tradicion, or ceremonye, although the same were
me^cioned in the old writers: For as much as it did neither observe, nor
command any thing, that is forbidden: nor yet omytte or forbydde any thing,
that is commanded by the written word of God: which alone is sufficient to
govern ye same true catholyke church of Christ in all matters of religion, 2.
tim. 3
necessary for salvation.

But I appeal unto thine own conscience gentle reader, whether our
adversaries go not beyo^de this lawful liberty, The liberty of the church
which consysteth in the alteracion or cuttynge of of such tradicions as be
either superfluous, or supersticious, according as diversity of times shall
require. For they using a most licentious and leude liberty, disanull gods
commandments, to maintain their own tradicions and inuencions.

For they both do themselves, Mat. 15
and also compel other to do that, which God forbyddeth: and forbid ye which
God by his written word co^maun death. The true doctrine of the gospel
touching remission of sins, eleccion, vocation and iustificacion thef do
corcupte, with the leven of their own doctrine: as I doubt not, but that thou
wylt manyfestly perceive by reading of these books of S. Aug. Our savior
Christ by express words commanded all his to drink of his holy cup: mat.
26.
but they by express words forbid all (except their anointed shauelynges
singing or saying their mass) to drink of ye cup. Saint Mark by the
spirit forseynge this their cursed sacrilege does testefye, mar. 14.
that they al dra^ke of the cup. Dare they yet trifle wc these scriptures, as
they were wont to do, and to say, that all that were with Christ at his last
supper, were prestes, and that therefore they all drank of his cup. I will
not co^tende about words, so that they understand by prestes ministers of the
new testament: but I pray you did any of them sing or say mass at Christ's
Supper, that they might thereby be admitted, to drink of his holy cup? For
they teach, that none may drink of the Lords cup but priests doing mass:
and therefore on maundaye thursdaye, when they have but one mass, they use in
great churches to minister to their priests and all, but only the one kind
of bread. Further if Christ (as they say) did at his last supper give the
Sacraments of his body and blood only to prestes, how dare they give any
part of them to any lay man? By what authorite do they then give the one
part to women? For I suppose ye they will not confess, that either lay men
or women be prestes. But I pray you what can you say you co^mytters of
sacrilege to S. Paul, which writing to the hole church of the Corinthians,
1. Cor. 10 11.
command as well ye lords Cup, as the bread, to be given to al, and not
only to the ministers? Are not you the self same, whom Christ noted when he
said, you break the commandments of God through your own tradicions? math.
15.
Who gave you liberty to mumble in a strange tongue unto the people, which is
not only against the written word of God, 1. Cor. 14
but also against common sense, and reason: The written word says, that if I
pray with tongues, my spirit or breath prays but my mind is without fruit.

The written word says, if thou blessest with the spirit, that he which
occupyeth the romthe of the unlearned can not say Amen, at the gyuyng of
thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say. The written word says,
that it were better in the congregation, to speak five words with the mind,
to thinformacion of other, then ten thousand words with the tongue. The written
word commands all things to be done to edefyeng: But you compel your
prestes to pray with the spirit or breath, to give thanks in a strange
tongue: to speak nothing to thin formacion and edefyeng of other: And the
people you compel to say Amen, and to ratifye that, which they understand
not. 1. Cor. 14
The written word says that this is a point of chyldishnes, and a
declaracion that you are out of your wits. Mark well the. 14. to the
Corinthians and then judge gentle reader, whether I have not truly charged
them, that in this matter they do both contrary to the written word of God,
and also to common sense and reason. What should I speak of their gross
ydolatrye in worshipping of stocks and stones, and of their fine iuggelynges
in erectyng and maintainyng pilgrimages, which I think can never be forgotten
of our age, except they can make us to have as little wit in our heads, as
the Idols which they have compelled us to worship, have life and felyng in
their stocks and bodies (for their retrocedynges tend to this point,
Retrocedinges. backslydinges. deforme defaceor disfigure.
to deforme the church again, as it was in king Henry the.vii. days) Do they
not in this thing also co^mau^d that, which God does expresselye forbid?
Mark well the.ii. commandment and then judge. Does not the written word
call this their ydolatrye, vanity, lies, fornicacion, Deu. 27 psalm 97 106. and
115. Esa. 44 Bie. 10. Eze. 14. Oze. 13. miche. 1. Aba. 2. Gap. 14
adultrye, infidelite, uncleanness, filthy donge, and abhominacio^? The other
rablement of their execrable inuencio^s, wherewith they have disanulled gods
holy ordinances, taking to themselves a most wicked and leude liberty, I will
omit at this present. Nevertheless thou may manifestly perceive by these
dear brother, that for all their malicious railinges upon the poor me^bres of
Christ in England yt lately floryshed here through peace and true doctrine
under the proteccio^ of our late sovereign lord the most virtuous, learned,
and excellent prince king Edward the.vi. and does now most constantly
endure, and most victoriously triumph under the cross of Christ, that the
same were and be the true catholyke church of Christ of England (the omitting
or alteryng of certain tradicions and ceremonies notwythstandyng:)

And that our adversaries (of whose most fylthy and stynkyng manners and
lyuynges, of whose most bloody and cruel tyra^nies, I have made no particular
mention at this present, but only by the way touched two or three points of
their false and antechristean religion) that our adversaries (I say) are no
more worthy of the name of the catholyke church of Christ for all their
stout countenance, then were the bragging Iues worthy to be counted the
true sede and sons of Abraham: Ioh, 8.
Unto whose tethe and face Christ doubted not to say: ye are of your father
yt deuell, and the lusts of your father ye will do: he was a murderer from the
beginning, and abode not in the truth, because there is no truth in him. Do
not our adversaries in their manyfold, bloody, cruel, and strange tyrannies,
in their most filthy and abominable lusts: in their most false and lyeng
doctrines and religion, resemble and express the very lyuelye image of their
father the deuell, painted out in this place by our savior Christ?

Prosperity in wicked doing.
But my think I hear them now obiecte against me, their luckey success in
all their backslydynges (they would have me say procedynges) which (they say)
God would not so prospere, except they were his true church, and allowed their
religion and worshippinges. Verelye I do confess that their tyrannical and
ydololatricall enterprises have he thereto wonderfullye prospered in their
hands, whereby (I fear) a great number ace seduced: Nevertheless they are such
as never had love unto the truth, but had pleasure in vnryghtfulnes (what
soever pretense they made outwardly) whose 2. these. 2.
names are not written in the book of life. Apo. 13. 2. tim. 2.
For the sure ground of god remains, having this seal: the Lord knows
the^ that. are his. etc.

But if this argument of luckye success, wherewith they flatter them selves and
deceive other were a good argument: Then should the Turks be the true church of
God, and their religion the purest. For they have wonderfully prevailed against
the christians, and that many years.

Read the book of the Iuges and ye also shall perceive yt sometime the
Moabites, Iudi. 3.4.6* and 10.
sometime the Cananites, sometime the Madianites, sometime the Philistia^s, the
Ammonites, Ammorites, Sidonians and Amelikites had the vpperhande upon Israel:
sometime by a longer space, somtytyme by a shorter. For thus it is written in
the second chapter of ye same book. The Lord waxed angry with Israel, Iudi. 2.
and delivered them into the hands of rauenares to spoil them, and sold them
into the hands of their enemies round about them, Papistical raueners leave
no manner of thing neither to man, wife, nor child. 4. re. 17.
so that they had no power any longer to stand before their enemies, but
unto what soever thing they went, the hand of the Lord was upon the^ with
euel luck. Did the good luck of these Idolatrous nations prove that they were
the true church of God? God forbid. What should I speak of Salmanaser which
conquered and carried away into captivity ten of the. 12. tribes? 4. re. 25.
Or else of Nabuchodonoser, that in like manner carried away the other two, and
burnt up the city and temple of Jerusalem? Did this happy success of the
Assirians and Babilonians prove that they were Gods people? Further was not
the most worthy and noble king Josias of whom the scripture testifyeth, 4.
re. 23.
that there was none before him like unto him that turned unto the Lord with
all his heart, with all his soul, and al his might, according to all the law
of Moses, neither after him arose there any such, was he not slain of Pharao
Neco king of Egipte when he had put down all manner of Idolatry and false
religion, and erected ye true worshippyng of God according to his written
word? Was not the same true religion and worshippynge immediately after his
death abolyshed, and ydolatrye and false religion again restored and exalted,
as hye as ever it had been in any kings days before? But what followed this
apostasy and backslydyng of thisraelites? Captivity, bondage, and thraldom of
the king and of all his nobles and commons: and wastyng, desolacion, and
burning up of the hole city and temple. God be merciful unto this realm of
England, and grant it grace once again to kiss and embrace the son of God,
less the Lord be in like manner angrye with it. etc. Who does not know of
the victory that Cain had against Abel, Genesis 4. Genesis 33.
or of the dominion that Esau had upon Jacob, or of the success whereby the
Jews prevailed against Christ and his apostels, The Kings and ruelers of
this world against Christ's holy martyrs? What marvel is it then, that
wyckednes has now in like manner the vpperhande. Namelye seeing the holy
scriptures do testifye, that this should thus be. For Daniel the prophet
speaking of the fortunate sucesse of their Antechristean kingdom (which is
compared unto an horn that had a grymme vysage and a mouth speaking
presumpruouse things) says, Dan. 7.
I beheld and the same horn made battle against the saints, yea and got
the victory of them, until the time that the old aged came. etc.

And again he says, he shall speak words against the highest of all, he
shall destroy the saints of the most highest, and think that he may change
times and laws. John also in his revelation comparynge their Antechristean
kingdom unto a beast that rose out of the Sea, says: Apo. 13.
And all the world wondered at the beast, and they worshipped the Dragon,
which gave power unto the beast, and they worshipped the beast saying? Who is
like unto the beast, who is able to war with him? And there was given unto him
a mouth, that speaks great things, and blasphemies, and power was given
unto him to do. 42. months. And he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against
God, to blaspheme his name and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.
And it was given unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them.
And power was given him over all kynredes tongues and nations, and all that
dwell upon thearth worshipped him, whose names are not written in the book of
life of the lamb, which was killed from the beginning of the world: if any man
have an ear let him hear. Wherefore as it behooved that Christ should be
delivered into the hands of the wicked that the scriptures might be
fulfilled, that told aforehande of the same: Even so it must needs be that
their antechristean kingdom should prevail (as it does) and that they should
make war, and overcome Gods church, as touching all worldly victory that
may be had against their bodies: and temporal lives: both that these
scriptures and such like may be fulfilled: And also that we which
vnthankfullye abused the most gracious time of Gods mercyful visitacion,
which have not obeyed the voice of the Lord our God, Dani. 9
to walcke in his laws, which he laid before us by his servants his
prophets, that faythfullye, plainly and earnestlye, spoke unto our king, his
cou^cellers, nobility, and to all the people of the land, that they should
conform their lives unto the most holy doctrine, which they daily herd with
their own ears, and read with their eyes, ye we (I say) which received the
grace of the Gospel in vain, 1. Cor. 6.
and made it a cloak of our wanto^ lusts, gredy covetousness, 1. Pet. 2.
and insatiable ambicion, might be called through this affliccion unto
repentance. For (as the author of the second book of the Machabees says) we
have this grace more then other people, that God does not suffer us long to
sin unpunished like other nations, 2. mac. 6.
that when the day of judgment comes, he may punyshe them in the fulness of
their sins. etc. If we sin he corrects, but he never wythdraweth his
mercy from us: and tho he punysheth with adversity yet does he never forsake
his people. Therefore likewise as the luckey success of the ydolatrose and
wicked Moabites, Cananites, Philisteans, Madianites, Ammonites, Ammorites,
Sidonia^s Amelikites, Philisteans, Egiptia^s, Assirians, Babilonians and other,
which they had against Gods people, the children of Israel, does not prove
that the false and supersticious religions of these abominable ydolatrers were
gods true worshipping, or that they were Gods true church: even so the
luckey success, whereof our adversaries in their barbarous and cruel
interprises do so much brag, do neither prove their supersticious
worshippinges to be true religion, nor their most bestly Sodom to be Christ's
true catholyke church.

If thou be desirous further to know Gods wonderful iugementes in
prospering thongodly in this world, read the.12. of Hieremye, the.1. of
Abacuc, the.21. of Job, the.36. and the.72. psalms. And if thou be in
lykemaner willing, to know what afflictions and troubles tholde and
prophetical church suffered in this life, read the latter end of the.ii. to
the Hebrews. But as for ye Church of Christ, she ought always to prepare her
self after then sample of her head and captain Christ, to deny her self,
and to take up her cross, Mat. 16
and so to follow him into his kingdom: Into ye which she must enter by
sufferyng many troubles. For this is a true saying, Actu^. 14.
(says S. Paul) if we be dead with Christ, we also shall live with him, 2.
tim. 2.
if we be pacient, we shall also reign with him, if we deny him he shall also
deny us. And again he says all that will live godly in Christ Jesus must
suffer persecution. 2. tim. 3
This is therefore the very and true badge of Christ's Church, Act. 5. Romans 5.
2. Cor. 11. and. 12.
whereof Peter and thapostles reioysed, whereof Paul did glory, whereof we are at
this present no more ashamed, then we are of Christ crucified. For because we
do not suffer their raylynge lies, wrongfully enprisonments, malicious
pursutes, even until banyshement from our native country, barbarous and
cruel robbynges and spoylynges of lands, houses, lyuynges, lyberties, and
goods, we do not (I say) suffer these most bocherlye persecucions, because
we may be truly charged to be murderers, 1. pet. 4.
thieves, horemongers, sodomites, ydolaters, or busye bodies in other men's
matters, but only because we are christea^s, glorieng only in the Lord
Christ, and in his most holy and precious death, which we believe alone
without man's merits, 1. Ioh. 2,
or satisfactory Masses, or other like inuencions what so ever, to be our
redemption and satisfaction, and the Lord Christ to be our only
omnisufficient redemer and mediator, 1. timo. 2.
by whom and with whom unto the Father and holy Gooste be all honor dominion
and rule. etc.

Anno. 1555. 10. Calen. Martij.

To the Reader.
LEt no man be troubled that S. Augustine makes no mention of this work that
follows in his Retractacions. He had his books of retractacio^s in hand /
when he wrote these: as he himself does witness in the second book of this
matter.

The first book of the Predestinacion of saints made by S, Aurelius Augustine
bishop of Hippone, and translated into English by John Scory, the late bishop
of Chichester.

Cap. i.
We know that the Apostle have said in his Epistle to the Philippians:
Philip. 3.
It greueth me not to write one thing to you. For to you it is a sure thing.
Notwithstanding the same wrytinge to the Galathians, when he saw that he had
sufficiently wrought that thing among them, which he perceived to be
necessary for them, by the ministry of his doctrine, he said: From hence forth
let no man put me to business: or (as it is red in many books) let no man
trouble me. Gala. 6.
But I, although I do confess, that I am grieved that there is no place given, to
so many and manifest authorites of Gods word, whereby the grace of God is
commended (which is utterly no grace if it be given for our merits) yet your
diligence and brotherly love most dear sons Prosper and Hilari, Grace is no
grace if it be given for merits.
that would not have these men so fondly err (insomoch that after so many
books and epistles made of this matter, yet again you desire me to write of
the same) I do so much love, as I am not able to express: but that I love it
so much as I ought, I dare not afferme.

Wherefore lo I write unto you again, and althoo I am not now present with
you, yet by your means I take in hand again that thing, which I thought
that I had sufficiently entreated already. For when I had consydred your
letters, me thought those brethren for whom ye are so Christeanlye careful,
lest they should follow the saying of the Poet, which is, let every man trust
to him self (and should fall into that which was not spoken by the Poet, but
by the Prophet. Cursed is every one that puts his trust in man) ought to be
handeled after that manner, Iere. 17. Cursed is he that trusts in man. Phi. 3.
as thapostel handeled them to whom he said: and if you be otherwise minded,
God shall open even the same unto you, For they are yet deceived in the
question touching the predestinacio^ of saints. But they have, whereby (if they
be otherwise minded in this matter) God may reuele this also unto them, if they
walk in that whereunto they are come Wherefore thapostell when he had said, if
you be otherwise minded God shall open even the same unto you: notwithstanding
(says he) let us proceed in that, where unto we are come.

But these our brethren for who^ your godly charity is so careful are come unto
this point, that they believe with the Church of Christ, that mankind is borne
subject to the sin of the first man: and that no man can be delivered from
this euel, but only by the ryghteousnes of the second man. They are also come
unto this, that they acknowledge that the will of man is prevented by god his
grace, and that no man is able of himself either to begin, or to finishe any
good work. These things therefore whereunto they are come being retained, do
separate them far from the Pelagia^s error. Wherefore if they shall proceed in
these, By what means a ma may attain to the true knoulege of al matters in
religion, ye come in to controuersye.
and call upon him that gives understanding, (if they have a wrong judgment
of Predestinacio^) God will reuele also that matter unto them: notwithstanding
let us also bestow such affection of love and ministry of the word as he
whom we call upon does give: that we may in these books speak those things
that may be mete and profitable for them.

For how do we know whether parauenture our God by this our service (whereby
we serve them in the fre charity of Christ) will bring this thing to pass?

The second Chapter.
First therefore wy must declare that Faith where by we are Christians, is the
gift of God, if nevertheless it were possible for us to do this with more
diligence, the^ we have already done it in so many and so great books. But now I
perceive that we must make answer unto them, which say that the witnesses of
the holy scriptures, which we have alleged for this matter, prove only that
we have the self faith of our selves, but thencrease of it we have of God: as
tho faith were not given us of God but only increased in us of him, for that
merit sake that it began of us. They do not therefore varye from that opinion,
which Pelagius himself in the judgment of by shoppes in Palestina was
compelled to condemn (as the acts of the same do witness) that the grace of
God was given according to our merits: as tho ye beginning of our faith
apperteined not to the grace of God, but rather that for the beginning sake, it
were added unto us, that we might believe more fully and perfytly: and by this
mean we should first give unto God the beginnynge of our faith, that we might
be recompensed with thencrease of the same, and with what soever else we should
faythfullye ask. But against these, why do we not rather hear: who has given
unto him first, Romans 11.
and he shall be reco^pensed again? For of him, and by him, and in him are all
things. And therefore the very self beginning of our faith of whom is it, but
only of him? For not only other things (this except) are of him: but of him,
and by him, and in him are al things. But who can say that he which now have
bego^ to believe, do deserve nothing of him in whom he did believe? whereby it is
brought to pass, that other things are now counted to be added as Gods
recompense to him that have deserved: and thus the grace of God is given
according to our merits. When this was objected against Pelagius, he condemned
it, that he should not be condemned himself. It is a damnable opinion to
afferme the grace of God to be given according to our merits. Phil. 1,
Whosoever therefore will utterly avoid this damnable opinion, let him truly
understand what thapostel says, unto you it is given for Christ's sake, that
not only ye should believe on him: but also suffer for his sake. He teaches
yt either of these is the gift of God, because that (says he) either is
given: Neither does he say that ye might believe in him more fully and parfitly:
but that ye might believe in him: Neither said he, that he him self obtained
mercy that he might be more faith full, but that he might be faithful. For
because he knew that he had not first given unto God the beginning of his
faith, and was recompensed of him with thencrease of the same, but that he was
made faithful of him, of whom he was also made an Apostell. For the very
begynnynges also of his faith are written, and are most manifest by the
solemn reading of them in the church. For he being contrary to the faith
which he destroyed, and an exceadyng great enemy thereof, was suddenly by a more
mighty grace converted to the same (he co^uertyng him, which was said by the
prophet should work this conversion: Thou converting us, Psalm. 84.
shall quicken us) that not only of onwillinge he might be made willing to
believe, God grant this grace to al Magistrates, that of ignorance through
onbeleue do persecute the right christen faith 2. Cor. 3.
but also that of a persecutor he might suffer persecucion in the defense of
that faith, which he did before persecute. For it was given him of Christ, not
only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him. And therefore he praysyng
this grace, which is not given for any merits, but works al good merits
says, not yt we are sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as it were
of our selves but our ablenes comes of God. Let the^ mark here, and consider
well these words, which think that ye beginning of faith is of us, and
thencrease thereof is of God. For who seyth not that thynkinge goes before
beleuyng? For no man believes any thing, except he has first thought, that it
ought to be believed. For althoo suddenly, although very swyftly certain
cogitacions do go before the will to believe, and she immediately do so follow as
an inseparable companion, nevertheless it is necessary that all things that are
believed, should he believed with a cogitacion going before: although in very deed
believe it self is nothing else, but to think with agreement. For not every one
that thinks be leueth: A short de scripcion of believe.
forasmuch as mani think to that end that they may not believe: but every
one that believes thinks, and in beleuyng thinks, and in thinkyng believes.
As touching therefore, that belongs to religion and godlynes, whereof
thapostell spoke: if we be not able to think any thing as of our selves, but
our ablenes comes of God: certainly we are not able to believe any thing as
of our selves (the which we can not do without thynkyng) but our ablenes whereby
we begin to believe comes of God. Wherefore as no man is able of himself,
either to begin or perform any manner of good work (which these brethren (as
your letters testify) do now confess to be true: whereupon it follows, that
in the beginning and performing of every good work, our ablenes comes of
God) even so no man is able of himself either to begin or to perform faith,
but our ablenes comes of God: For faith if it be not thought, is no faith:
and we are not able to think any thing of our selves, as of our selves, but
our ablenes is of God. We must therefore beware brethren beloved of God, that
man do not extolle him self against God, Who be they that extol the^ selves
against God. Romans 4.
when he says, that he performs that, which god has promised. Was not the
faith of the Gentiles promised to Abraham, and he geuyng praise to God was most
certainly persuaded, yt he which had promised, was able also to perform. He
does therefore work the faith of the ge^tyls, that is able to perform that he
promyseth. Furthermore if God do work our faith, wonderfully working in our
hertes to make us believe: is it to be feared that he is not able to work all:
and should man then chaleng to himself the first part thereof, that he may
deserve to receive the last part of him?

Consider ye if by this means any other thing be brought to pass, but that
the grace of God should by all means be given at cording to our merits, and so
grace should now no more be grace. For by this means it is rendered as dew,
and not given freely: for it is dew to him yt believes, that ye self faith be
increased of the Lord: and that the faith increased, should be a reward of the
faith begone: neither do men mark, that by the affirmacion of this doctrine,
this reward is imputed to them that be live not of favor but of duty.

But why now do they not ascribe altogether to man, Godlynes springs of
faith: therefore do charity spring of faith: and not contrary. 1. timo. 1. Romans
12.
(For I can not perceive by any means, but that he which could hegynne that
he had not, may increase that he has now begone) but only because they are not
able to resyste ye most manifest witnesses of God, whereby faith also (of who
godlynes has her beginning) is declared to be the gift of God. As this place
do declare: God has divided to every man the measure of faith: and that,
peace unto the brethren, and charttie with faith from God the father, and the
Lord Jesus Christ: Romans 1.
and such other. A man therefore that will not strive against so manifest wytn
esses, and yet will ascribe to his own power that he believes, he does as it
were compou^de with God, that he may challenge part of faith to himself, and
that he may leave part to him, and that which is more arrogant, he takes the
first to him self, and gives him that follows: Our adversaries compou^d with
god
and as touching that which he says belongs to both he makes himself the
doer of the first, and God of the last.

The third Chapter.
BUt that godly and meke doctor (I mean the most blessed Cipriane) was not of
this judgment: which said that we ought to glory in nothing, No good thing is
our own
for as much as no thing is our own. This thing to prove he alleged ye Apostle
for witness saying: what haste thou, that thou have not received? 1. Corin. 4
but if thou have received, why do thou glory as tho thou had not received?
By this witness chiefly, was I also overcome, when I did in like manner err,
S. Aug. confesses his error: would to god our B. and P. that have the like
error, would make the like confession.
thynkyng faith where by we believe in God, not to be the gift of God, but to be
in us of our selves: and that we did obtain by it the gifts of God, whereby we
might live in this world soberly, justly, and Godly. For I did not think that
faith was prevented by God his grace, that through it might be given unto us
that we did profitablye ask: but only I thought, that we could not believe,
except we herd first the preaching of the truth: but that we might consent to
the Gospel when it is preached unto us, I supposed it to be our own, and of
our selves. The which mine error is declared in diverse of my works, Out of
these works do our adversaries gather diverse authorities of S. Aug.
that were written before I was made bishop. Among which is also that, whereof
you have made mention in your letters: where as is an exposicion of certain
propositions of thepistle written to the Romans. Furthermore when I retracted
all my works, against grace for the defense of free will and merits.
and did write the same retractacion: of the which I had now fynished two
books, before I had received your long letters: when I was in the first dolume
now come to the retracting of this book, there I spoke after this manner: In like
manner disputing what (I say) God did chose in him ye was not yet borne, Romans 9.
to whom he said that the elder should serve him: and what he rejected in the
same elder, being in like manner not yet borne: of whom for the which cause the
prophet said: Mala. 1.
I have loved Jacob, but Esau I have hated (although this testimony of the Prophet
was spoken long after) at the length I brought my disputacion unto this point,
That I said: God has not therefore in his forknowledge chosen any man's works,
which he should give him: but he has in his for knowledge chosen faith, so that
he has chosen him, whom he knew aforha^de would believe in him, to who^ he
might give ye holy Ghost, that by workynge of good works, he might also
attain to eternal life. I had not yet diligently sought, The cause why s. Aug.
continued solonge in this error Romans 11.
nor yet found out, what manner a thing the election of grace was: whereof the
same Apostle says. The remnaunt are saved by the election of grace: which
verily is no grace, if any merits at al go before it: lest that which is now
given, should not be given according to grace, but rather as duty
recompensed to merits. Wherefore this that I said immediately: For the same
Apostle says, it is ye self same God that works all in all: 1. Cor. 12.
but in no place it is said, that God believes all in all: and then after I
added. For in that we believe, it is our own, but in that we work well, it is
his, that gives the holy ghost to them that believe: suerly I would not have
said thus: if I had then known, that the self faith had been also found among
gods gifts, which are given of the same spirit. Both then are ours, for
the choice of will: and yet that notwythstandyng both are given, through the
spirit of faith and charity. For not charity only, but as it is written:
Charity with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. And where as
a little after I said thus: Ephe. 6.
for to believe and will is ours, but to give to them that believe and will power
to work well through the holy ghost, by whom the love of God is spread abroad
in our hearts, is his: This is true: but by ye same rule, both these are also
his, forbecause he does prepare the will: and both are ours, because they are
not done except we be wyllyng. And by this which I said also after. For
neither can we will, except we be called, and when after calling we shall will,
our will and runnyng are not sufficient, except God gives strength to us
ru^nyng, and bring us thither, whether he do call us: And then after I
concluded thus: It is therefore manifest that it lies neither in the ru^ner nor
in the wyller that we work well, but in God that has mercy: this is a most
true saying. Romans 9.


There is one peculier calli^g that belongs only to gods chosen, whereof is
men on made To. 8. and this is according to the purpose of God.
But I did speak but little of that calling, which is wrought according to the
purpose of God. For this manner of calling belongs not to all that are called,
but only to the elect. Therefore this that I said a little after: For likewise
as in them whom God has chosen, not works, but faith begins the merit,
that they may work through the gift of God: Even so in them whom he
condemn, infidelity and ungodliness begins the merit of pain, that by the
self pain they may also work wyckedly: this I said most truly: but yet I
said not that the merit of faith was also the self gift of God: neither did I
think it a thing worthy to be inquired for. And in an other place. For upon
whom (said I) he has mercy, he makes him to work well: and whom he does
harden, he leaves him to work euel. But both that mercy is given to the
merit of faith going before, and also this harding to the precedynge
wyckednes. The which verily is true, but yet we ought to have serched further
whether that also the merit of faith do prevent gods mercy: that is, whether
this mercy is therefore only wrought in man, because he was faithful: or
whether it was also wrought, that he might be made faithful. 1. Timo. 1.
For we read (as thapostle says) I have opteined mercy, that I might be
made faithful: he says not, because he was faithful. It is then given unto
the faithful, but it was also given, that he might be made faithful. Wherefore
in an other place of the same book, I said most truly. For if not of works,
but through gods mercy, we be both called that we may believe, and also when
we believe, it is given us that we may work well, the Gentyls are not to be
enuyed for this mercy nevertheless. I did not there so diligently entreat of
that calling, which is according to gods purpose, as I ought to have done.

The fourth Chapter.
YOu se verily what was then my judgment of faith and works (althoo I
traueled in the co^mendacion of god his grace) in the which judgment, I
perceive that these our brethren are at this present: because they have not so
much endeavored themselves to profyt, and to go forwards with me in readyng
my books, as they they have in the only readyng of them. The common fault of
al papists in redyng the doctores, which gnawe only upon their errors, and
deprave all that they have written well: as they do the scriptures.
For if they had thus endeavored them selves, they should have found this
matter dissolved, according to the truth of the holy scriptures, in the first
book of the two which I wrote in the beginning of my Byshopryke unto
Simplitianus of blessed remembrance, by shop af the Church of Millane,
successor unto S. Ambrose: except peradventure they never saw them. Which if
it be so I pray you cause that they may have the sight of the^. I did first
speak of the first of these two books, in the second book of my retractacions:
where as my words by these. Among the books (said I) which I made being
Bishop, I wrote the first two unto Simplicianus bishop of the church of
Millane, the successor of the most blessed Ambrose of diverse questions:
whereof I bestowed two in my first book that touch matters that are entreated
to the Romans. The first of these questions is of that which is written: what
shall we the^ say, is the law sin? God forbid: Romans 7.
unto that place where he says, who shall deliver me from this body of death?
The grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. These words of the Apostle, the
law is spiritual, but I am carnal: and the rest which declare the battle
between the spirit and the flesh I did so expound, as thoo thapostle had
described a man, being yet under the law, and not under grace. For long after
I came to the knowledge that those words (and that more truly) might be also
understand of the spiritual man. The latter question in this book, reaches
from that place where he says: neither was it so with her only, Romans 9.
but also when Rebecca was with child by one (I mean) by our Father Isaac:
until these words where he says, except ye Lord of hoostes had left us
seed, we should have been made as Sodoma and had been lykened to Gomorra. S.
Aug. labored to set up the choice of ma^s will but grace ouercam.
In answering of which question, great pain was taken to set up the choice of
man's will: but Gods grace gat the vpperhande. Neither could any more be
attained, but only that we might understand that thapostle had said, according
to the most manifest truth. Who has preferred the? what have thou, that thou
have not received? 1. Cor. 4.
but and if thou have received it, why gloriest thou as thoo thou had not
received it? The which the martyr Cipriane also willing to declare, concluded
altogether in the self title of his work, saying we ought to glory in no
thing, for as much as no thing is our own. Lo this is the cause why I said
before, that I my self also was overcome by this witness chefely of the
Apostle: when I had an other judgment of this matter, then God did open unto me
in the answering to this question, when I wrote (as I said) to Simplicianus the
bishop. This testimonye therefore of the Apostle, where as to subdewe man's pride
he said: what haste thou, that thou haste not received? does not suffer any
faithful man to say: I have faith which I have not received: and this proud
answer is vtterterlye suppressed by these words of the Apostel. Neither may
this be said: although I have not parfit faith, yet I have the beginning thereof
where by I believed first in Christ: because yt it is answered also here: what
haste thou, that thou have not received? but and if thou have received, why
do thou glory as tho thou had not received?

The.v. Chapter.
But as touching that they think, that this saying what have thou, that thou
have not received, can not therefore be spoken of this faith, because that
which was first given to nature being hole and parfyte, remains still in the
same nature although corrupt, do make nothing for their purpose, if we remember
for what intent the Apostle spoke this. For his intent was to bring to pass,
that no man should glory in man: for there were sprung up discencions among the
Christian Corinthians, so that every one said: I hold of Paul, another I
hold of Apollo, but an other said, I hold of Cephas: and from thence he came
to this, that he said, God has chosen the folyshe things of the world, to
confound the wise. And God has chosen the weak things of the world, to co^
found things which are mighty And vile things of the world, and things
which are dispysed has God chosen, yea and things of no reputacio^, for to
bring to naught things of reputacio^, that no flesh should glory in his
presence. The Apostels intent in this place is very manifestly against ma^s
pride, that no man should glory in man. and by this means, should not glory
in himself. Further when he had said, that no flesh should glory in Gods
sight, to declare in whom man ought to glory, he added by and by, of him ye
are (says he) in Christ Jesus, which is made unto us wisdom of God, and
right fulness, and sanctifieng and redemption, that (as it is written) he which
does glory, Iere. 9.
should glory in the Lord. From thence he deduced this his purpose to this
point, that he after (rebukyng them) said: 1. Corin. z.
for ye are yet carnal. For seeing there is among you enuyeng and stryffe are
ye not carnal, and walk after the manner of men? For when one says I hold of
Paul, an other I am of Apollo, are ye not men?

What then is Apollo, what thing is Paul? ministers by whom ye have believed,
and eue^ as the Lord has given to every one. I have planted, Apollo has
watered: but God gave thencrease. So then neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that waters: but God that gives thencrease. Se you not
that thapostle goes about nothing else, Thapostles intent is to bring down
man, that God may be extolled.
but only that man should be brought down, and God alone eralted? Forasmoch
as among the^ that are planted and watered, he says that neither the planter,
nor the waterer is any thing, but only God that gives increase: insomoche that
even this also that one pla^teth, and an other waters, he ascribes not to
them, but to God saying, as the Lord has given to every man: I have planted,
Apollo has watered. From hence therefore he continuyng in ye same purpose, came
to this point that he said: let no man therefore glory in man.

For he had even now said, he that gloryeth, let him glory in the Lord After
these and certain other words that are joined unto these, this self intent
of his is brought unto this that he says: These things brethren I have
figuratively described in mine own person and Apollos for your saks, ye ye
might learn by us, that no man (beyond that which is above writ) swelle one
against an other for an others sake. For who prefers the? what have thou
that thou have not received? but and if thou hane received it, why do thou
glory as tho thou had not received it? In this most evident intent of the
Apostle, wherein he speaks against ma^s pride, that no man should glory in
man, but only in the Lord, to think upon the self hole and perfect nature,
as it was given in her first creation, or upon any of the remnauntes of the
corrupted nature, is (as I suppose) a very great absurdite. For is one man
preferred before, another by these gifts which are common to al men? The
Apostle in this place said first, for who does prefer the? and after this he
added: but what haste thou, that you haste not received? For the man that
swells against another might say, my faith does prefer me, my
ryghteousnes does prefer me: or if there be any other thing. But this godly
doctor meting with such ymaginacions says, what have thou, that thou haste
not received? of whom, but only of him which has preferred the above
another, to whom he has not given that which he has given to thee. But and
if thou also have received (says he) why do thou glory, as tho thou
had not received? does he say any other thing I pray the, but only that
he that does glory should glory in the Lord? But no thing is so contrary
to this understanding as that any man should so glory of his merits, as tho
he him self were the worker of them and not gods grace: There is a certain
special. grace that deuideth the elect from the reprobate.
but such grace, as seuereth ye good from the euel, not that which is common
both to good and evil. Let there be then a grace gene^ unto nature, whereby we
are reasonable creatures, and are preferred from brute beasts: let there be
also a grace given to nature, whereby among men the beutefull are preferred from
the euel favored, or the witty from the foolyshe, and if there be any such
like. But he whom thapostle reprehended did not swelle against brute beasts,
nor against any other man for any natural gift, which may be also in the
most wicked: but he did swell for some good gift, that apperteyned to a godly
life, ascribyng it to him self, and not to God, when he deserved to hear: who
does prefer the? what haste thou that thou have not received? For althoo it
be in the possibilite of nature to have faith, do it therefore follow that she
also has faith in deed? For aldo it be in possibilite for all men to believe,
Romans 10. 2. These. 3.
yet al men do not believe in deed. For thapostle says not, what can thou
have, which thou have not received that thou myghtest be in possibilite to
have: but he says, what haste thou, that thou have not received? Therefore to
be in a possibilite both to have faith and charity is common to the nature of
man: The peculiar grace of gods elect.
but to have faith and charity in deed is peculiar to the grace of the
faithful. That nature therefore wherein is given us a possibilite to have faith,
does not prefer one man before an other: but the self faith is it, that
prefer reth the faithful from and above the unfaithful. And therefore where it is
said: who does prefer the? what have thou, that thou haste not received? Who
so ever dare say, I have faith of my self: (I have not therefore received it)
does certeynlye resist this most manifest truth: not as tho to believe, or not
believe, were not in the choice of man's will: but the will in the elect is
prepared of the Lord. And therefore it does also appertain to the self
faith, which is in the will. For who has preferred the? What have thou that
thou haste not received?

The.vi. Chapter.
MAny do hear the word of truth: but some do believe it, and some do resyst it.
These therefore will believe: but the other will not believe. Who is ignorant of
this? who do deny this? The will of some is prepared, the will of other is not
prepared of the Lord to believe. Romans 11.
But for asmoche as ye will of some is prepared of the Lord to believe, and of
other some it is not: we must certainly put a difference, between that that
comes of his mercy, and that that comes of his judgment. That (says
thapostle) which Israel sought, he has not obtained, but yet the election has
obtained. The remnau^t are blinded, as it is written, God has given them the
spirit of unquietness, Esa. 6,
eyes that they should not se, and ears that they should not hear, even unto
this day. And David says: let their table be made a snare to take them
withal, and an occasion to fall, Psalm. 68
and a reward unto them: let their eyes be blinded that they se not, and bow
down their backs always. Behold here mercy and judgment: mercy in the
eleccion, which has obtained gods mercy: but judgment in the rest which
are blinded: and yet the one believed, because they would, the other believed not,
because they would not. Mercy therefore and judgment were wrought in the self
wylles. For this eleccion comes of grace, and not of merits. For he said
before: even so at this time, Romans 11.
there is a remnaunt **saved through the election of grace. If it be of grace
then is it not of works. For then grace should not be grace. That the^ that
the election have obtained, they have obtained it freely. For there went no thing
of theirs before, which they first gave, god has saved us for no thing.
Psalm. 55.
that they might be recompensed. For he has saved them for nothing. But the
rest which were blinded, were recompensed: as that is also there declared. All the ways of the Lord are mercy and truth. His ways are unsearchable.
Therefore both his mercy whereby he does freely deliver, and also his truth
whereby he does justly judge, are unsearchable

The.vii. Chapter.
But peradventure they say. The Apostle do put a difference between faith and
works: he says in deed that grace comes not of works: but he says not
that it comes not if faith. Yt is even so. Notwitstandyng Jesus says, that
even faith also is the work of God: and commands us to work the same:
Ioh. 6.
For the Jews said unto him: what shall we do, to work the works of God?
Jesus answered and said unto them: This is the work of God, that ye believe in
him whom he sent. So then thapostle does distinct faith and works: as in the
two kingdoms of ye Hebrews, Judas was distinct from Israel, when as yet the
self Judas was Israel. Therefore of faith (says he) that a man is justified,
and not of works: because the self faith is first given, whereby the rest
are obtained, which are properlye called works, wherein men do live uprightly.
For he him self also says, you are saved by grace through faith, Ephe. 2.
and that not of your selves, but it is the gift of God, that is, and that I
said by faith not of your selves but it is ye gift of God. And now faith
(says he) comes not of works, lest paraduenture any man might be extolled.
For it is a common saying: Therefore he deserved to have faith because he was a
good man also before he had faith. Acto. 10. Romans 10. S. Aug. means that
before Cornelius had the knowledge and faith that Christ was incarnate, that he
had dyed and risen again. etc. For Corn lius had the same faith in Christ to
cum, that Abraham and the fathers were saved by: For it is impossible forny to
be saved without any manner of faith in thonly mediator Christ. For no man
comes to the father but by hi^ Ioh. 14. in Christ also is eternal life
without whom is nothing but eternal death Ioh. 3. Ioh. 6. Esa. 54.
Which may be said of Cornelius, whose alms deeds were accepted and his
prayers herd before he believed in Christ: and yet he gave not alms, neither
prayed without al manner of faith. For how did he call on him in who^ he did not
believe? But if he could have been saved without ye faith of Christ, the^ should
not thapostle Peter the chief buylder have been sent unto him to have builded
him: not withstandyng except the Lord shall build the house, the buylders
labor in vain that build it. And yet you say, we have faith of our selves,
other things that apperteyne to the works of ryghteousnes, we have of the
Lord. As thoo faith appertayned not to the buyldyng, as tho the fou^dacion (I
say) belonged not to the building. But if it do chieflye and princypally
belong to the building, the buylder in preaching do labor in vain, except
the Lord by his mercy do build the same within.

What soever therefore good work Cornelius wrought both before he believed in
Christ, and when he believed and also after he did believe, ought to be ascribed
al unto God: lest paraduenture any man might glory, or be extolled. Wherefore
the only master and Lord, when he had said the words which I before rehearsed,
this is the work of God to believe in him whom he sent: in the same his
sermon he says a little after: I have said unto you that you have seen me and
not believed: all that the father gives me, shall come unto me.

The.viii. Chapter.
What means this that he says he shall come unto me, but only that he
shall believe in me? but that this may be brought to pass, it is the gift of
the father. In lykemaner a little after he says, murmr not among your
selves: no man can come to me except the father which sent me draw him: and I
shall raise him up in the last day. It is written in the prophets, and they
shall be all taught of God. Every one that has herd of the father and learned
comes unto me. What me aneth this, every one that has herd of the father and
learned comes unto me, but only ye there is none, which do hear and learn of
the father, but that he comes unto me? For if every one that have herd of
the father and learned comes: out of doubt every one then which comes not,
have not herd of the father nor learned: for if he had herd and learned, he
should have come. For there is not one, that have herd and learned, that
comes not: but every one (as the truth says) which have herd of the
father and learned, The subril and worldly wise dome will not be a scolar in
this scole
comes. This scole wherein the father is herd, and do teach to come to the
son, is far above the understanding of the flesh. In this scole is the
son himself, for he is the very word of him, by whom ye father do thus
teach: neither does he work this in ye ear of the flesh, but in ye ear of
the heart. There is also together the spirit of the father and the son: for
he does also teach together with the father and the son. For we have
learned that the works of the Trinity are inseparable. And this is verily the
holy Ghost, of whom thapostle speaks: but we having (says he) the same
spirit of faith. 2. Corin. 4.
But therefore chieflye is this attribute unto the father, because that the only
begotten is begotten of him: and of him does proceed the holy Ghost: of whom
to dispute more exquisytly would be very lo^gerand further I do suppose that
our labor (of the Trinite which is God) that is comprehended in. xv, books is
come into your hands. This scole I say wherein god is herd and does teach,
is far above the reach of the wisdom of the flesh. We perceive that many
come to the son, because we perceive yt many believe in Christ: but where and
how they have herd this of the father and learned, The grace of thelccre is
secret, whereof hard hertes at not partalers*
we perceive not. For this grace is very secret: but that it is grace who
douteth? This grace therefore that is through Gods gift powered privily into
men's hertes, is not received of any hard heart. For to that end is it given,
that the hardness of heart might first be taken away. Therefore when the father
is herd within, and teaches to come to the son, he takes away the stony
heart, Ezech. 11. and. 36.
and gives a fleshy heart: according as he promised by the preaching of the
Prophet. For after this manner does he make the sons of promise, and the
vessels of mercy, which he has prepared unto glory. Wherefore the does not he
teach all that they may come to Christ, Al are not taught to come to Christ.
but because that of mercy he teaches all, whom he teaches: but whom he
teaches not, of judgment he teaches not: For he has mercy upon whom he
will, and who^ he will he does harden: but he has merci, giving that is good:
he does harden recompensyng that is deserved. Or else paradueture (according as
some men think the distinction to be made) these may also be the words of
him, unto who thapostle says: Romans 9.
Thou say then unto me: So that we may understand that the adversary had
said, therefore he has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he does harden,
and so forth: that is, why does he yet blame us? For who tan resyst his will?
Did thapostell answer this aduersarye thus, O man it is false, that thou have
said? no forsooth. But he answered, O man what art thou, that disputest with
God? shall the work say to the workman, why haste you made me on this
fashion? has not the potter power over the claye to make even of the same
lompe, and so forth as ye know very well. And yet notwithstanding after a
certain manner the father do teach all to ro^e to his son. For it is not
written in vain in the prophets: and they shall al be taught of God, the
which testimony as soon as Christ had first recyted, he added by and by: every
one that have herd of the father and learned, comes unto me. As we therefore
speak truly, when we speak of any one scolemaister, which is only in the
city: this scolemaister teaches all in this city: not because al do learn,
but because none that learn there any letters, learn of any other but only of
him: even so we say truly: God do teach al to come to Christ, not because al
do come, but because no man do come any other way. But why he does not teach
al, the Apostle has opened so much as he thought mete to be opened: because
(says he) God willing to show his wrath, and to make his power known, Romans
9.
suffered with long patience the vessels of wrath ordained to damnacion, that
he might declare the riches of his glory, on the vessels of mercy, which he
had prepared unto glory. Hereof it comes that the word of the cross is
folyshnes to them that peryshe: 1. Corin. 1.
but to them that are saved it is the power of God. All these do God teach to
come to Christ: Which al are those that god will have saved. 1. 11. 2
al these will God have saved, and come, to the knowledge of the truth. For and
if he would teach them to come unto Christ, which esteem the word of the
Cross as folyshnes, without al doubt they also should come. For he neither
deceyueth nor is deceived that faith, every one that has herd of the father
and learned, Ioh. 6.
comes unto me. God forbid therefore that any man should not come, which has
herd and learned of the father. Wherefore (say they) does not he teach al?
if we shall say, be cause they whom he teach not, will not learn: we shall be
answered, what means that then, Psalm. 84. The lord makes of vnwilli^g
willing. Math. 5.
that is said unto him? Lord thou ronuertinge us, shalt quicken us: or else if
the Lord do not make of the unwilling willing, why do the church according
to the commandment of the Lord pray for her persecutours. For so also S.
Cipziane would have this that we say, thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven, to be understand: that is, Math. 6.
as in them which do now believe, and are as it were heaven, even so also in
them which do not believe, and are therefore yet earth. What then do we for them
that will not believe, but only that God should work in them also a will to
believe. As touching the Jews the Apostle verily says. Romans 01.
The good will of my heart, and prayer to God for them is, that they might be
saved. He prays for them that believe not, what else, but that they may believe
For otherwise they do not attain salvation. If the^ the faith of them that do
pray do prevent gods grace: do therefore the faith of them that are prayed
for, that they may believe, prevent the grace of God? For this prayer is made
for them, that faith may be given unto them that believe not, that is to say,
that have no faith. Why somebeleue the preaching of the gospel and so^e not
Math. 13 Acto. 13. Ioh. 6.
When the Gospel is then preached, some believe and some believe not: but they
that believe (when the preacher makes out wardly a sou^de) do inwardly hear
and are taught of the father: but they that believe not, they hear outwardly,
but inwardly they neither hear nor learn: that is, unto ye one sort it is
given that they may believe, but unto the other, it is not given: because no man
(says Christ) comes unto me, except the father which sent me draw him:
the which after is more euydetly spoken. For a little after, when he had spoken
of the eating of his flesh, and drinckyng of his blodde, and certain also of
his disciples had said: this is an hard saying, who can hear him? Jesus
knowing with himself, that his disciples did murmr for this, he said unto
them: do this offend unto you? and a little after. Ioh. 6.
The words (says he) that I have spoken unto you are spirit and life: but
there be certain of you that believe not. And by and hy theuangelist said: Jesus
knew from the beginning who should believe and who should betraye him, and
said: Therefore I said unto you, that no man can come unto me, except it were
geueu him of my father. Therefore to be drawn of the father to Christ, and so
to hear and learn of the father, that we may come to Christ, is nothing else
but to receive a gift of ye father, What is to be drawn of the father Job. 6.
whereby we may believe in Christ. For he that said, no man comes unto me
except it were given him of my father, did not prefer them that hear the
Gospel, from them that hears it not: but did prefer the beleuers, from them
that bebeleue not.

The.ix. Chapter.
Faith therefore is the gift of God, as well when it is begone, as when it is
perfect: And that this gift is given to some, and to other some is not given,
no man may in any wise doubt: which will not strive against the most manifest
holy scriptures. Striuers against the most manifest scriptures
But why this faith is not given to all, ought not to trouble any faithful
man, which believes, that al thorough one man, at brought under conde^pnacion,
and that most justly without al doubt: so that God should not be reprehe^ded
justly, although he delivered none from the same. By the which it is manyf est,
that great is the grace that many are delivered, and in them that are not
delivered, they do acknowledge what should have been dew to themselves: Iere. 9.
Our own merits are damnable.
that they which glory, should not glory in their own merits (which they
perceive to be like unto the merits of them that are damned) but should glory
in the Lord. But why he does rather deliver one, the^ another, his
judgments are unsearchable, and his ways past findinge out. Romans 11.
For in this point also it were better for us, either to hear of other or to
say our selves: O man what art thou that disputest with God: Romans 9.
then to take upon us as thoo we knew the matter, to discuss that which he
would have secret: which nevertheless could not will any thing, that is
unrightful. But as touching that which ye call to remembrance, that I said in
a certain work of mine against Porphirius, having this title, of the time of
the Christian faith: I did so speak, that I omitted this more diligent and
exact disputacion of grace: not without signification, that I would not in
that place declare it any further, which might be done either at some other
time, or else by some other body. For among other words I said thus,
answeryng to the question purposed: why Christ did come after so many ages.
Therefore (said I) seeing they did not obiecte against Christ, that al followed
not his doctrine (for they themselves do also perceive, that that can not be
iustlye objected, either against the wisdom of the philosophers, or against
ye worshipping of their gods) what other thing will they answer, but that the
depenes of gods wisdom and knowledge are unsearchable, where as
paraduenture some other council of God lies very privily hyd, and yet to
answer thus, is without any prejudice peradventure of other causes also, that
may be searched out by wysemen. But let us in discussyng of this question
(because of shortness) make them only this answer, that Christ would then
appear unto men, and have his doctrine to be preached among them, Why Christ
came no sooner.
when he knew, and where he knew were such, as would believe in him. For at
those times and in those places where his Gospel is not yet preached, he knew
aforeha^de, that they would al be so affected in the preaching thereof, as
(althoo not all) yet very many were in his corporal presence, which would not
believe in him, Ioh. 11. and. 12.
no not when he had raised the dead again to life. As we also perceive at
this day, that many will not yet believe, notwithstanding that the prophecies
of the prophets of him are fulfilled so manyfestly, Resisters of truth
but they had rather through man's subtiltye resyste, then to give place to so
clear, to so manifest and to so great authority of God, so excellentlye
publyshed and spread abroad. As long as ma^s understanding is base and weke,
it can not assent to gods truth.

Bear is an answer unto them that aste why the gospel before our days was so
long hid.
What wonder is it then, seeing Christ knew the world in the former ages to be
so full of infideles, that he would neither appear nor preach unto them, whom
he knew aforehande, would neither believe his doctrine nor miracles? For it is
not incredible that all men then were so affected, as we marvel that a great
multitude syns his coming have been, and yet do continue until this day: and
yet nevertheless from the creation of mankind, he neither ceased to preach
unto them, sometime more secretlye, and sometime more openly, according as it
seems unto God mete for the times: neither wanted there that believed in him,
and that from Adam until Moses and among the self people of Israel (which by
a special mystery was a prophetical nation) and among other nations also
before he came in the flesh. For seeing there is mention made in the holy books
of the Hebrews of diverse, even from the time of Abraham, which were, neither
of his kynred, nor of the people if Israel, neither of other nations made of
the common wealth of Israel, which nevertheless were partakers of this mysterye:
why may we not think, that there were diverse here and there also among other
nations, although we do not read any mention to be made of them in the said
authorities? So that salvation that comes through this religion, Christ's
religion is thonly true religion.
by the which (being only the true religion) true salvation is truly promised,
did never want unto any that was worthy, and to whom so ever it was wanting,
he was unworthy to have it. And this is preached syns the beginning of man's
generacio^ unto the worlds end, to some men to salvation, but to some to
damnacion. And by this it appears, that to whom soever it was not preached
at al, that they were known aforeha^de to be such as would not believe: and an
example of these, are al they, to whom this salvation was opened, and yet they
believed not. But when it was preached unto them that would believe, they were
thereby prepared unto the fellowship in the kyngdo^e of heaven, and the holy
angels.

Perceive you not that I would have spoken thus much of the foreknowledge of
Christ, without any prejudice of the secret counsel of God, and of other
causes, as I thought sufficient to convince the infidelity of the Paganes,
which had objected this question? For what is more true then this, that Christ
knew aforehande, what men would believe in him, and at what time, and in what
place? But I did not then think it necessary either to inquire or dispute,
whether (Christ being preached unto them) they should have had faith of them
selves, or have received it by the gift of God: that is, whether God had only
foreknowen them, or had also predestinate them. Therefore when I said, that
Christ would then appear unto men, and have his doctrine to be preached among
the^, when he knew, and where he knew were such as would believe in him: This
might also have been spoken thus, that Christ would the appear unto me^, and
have his doctrine to be preached, then, and where, he knew to be such: as
were chosen in him before the fou^dacion of the world was laid. But and if I
should then have made this answer: I should have caused the reader to have
endeavored himself to have searched out those things, S. Aug. had never so
clearly disputed of grace and predestinacion if he had not ben forced thereunto
by the heresy of the Pelagians.
which now I must needs by reason of the Pelagians error, dispute more
diligently and more largely: I thought it therefore good to speak briefly that,
that was sufficient at that time to be spoken: omitting (as I have said) the
depenes of the wisdom and knowledge of God, and without any prejudice of
other causes: of ye which, I thought not good then, but at some other time to
dispute more conveniently.

The.x. Chapter.
IN like manner where as I said, that the salvation which comes through this
religion, did never want unto any that was worthy, and that to who^ so ever it
was wa^tyng, he was onworthy to have it: if it should be discussed and searched
whereby any man is made worthy: there be that would say, that they are made
worthy by the will of man: Worthynes.
but we say that they are made worthy by gods grace, or by gods
predestinacio^. Furthermore this only difference is between grace and
predestinacion: The difference between predestinacion and grace. Ephe. 2.
predestinacion is a preparacio^ to grace: but grace is the very gift it self.
Therefore this that the Apostle says, not of works lest any man should boast
himself: for we are his worckmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
is grace: but that that follows, which God prepared aforehande that we should
walk in them, is predestinacion: which can not be without a foreknowledge, al
thoo ye before knowledge may be without predestinacion. For by predestinacion
God knew aforehande the things, that he himself would do.

(Whereupon it is said, he ordained those things that were to come,) But he is
able to know aforeha^de tho things also that he does not, as al manner of
sins. For although there be cerceyne sins which are also punyshmentes for
sins (for the which cause, it is written, God delivered them up unto a leude
mind, Romans 1.
that they should do those things that were not comely) yet there is no sin
committed on God des behalf, but there is only his judgment. Wherefore the
predestinacion of God (which is to our benefyt and comfort) is (as I said) the
preparacion aforehande to grace: but grace is the effect of the same
predestinacion. When God therefore did promise unto Abraham the faith of the
gentyls in his sede, Ben. 17. Romans 4.
saying, I have made thee a father of many nations (whereupon the Apostle
says, therefore by faith is the inheritance given, yt it might come of
favor, Gods promise is grounded upon his predestinacion, and not upon ma^s
will.
and the promise might be sure to all the sede.) This promise was not grounded
upon ye power of man's will, but upon the predestinacion of God. For he promised
not that what men, but that what he himself should bring to pass: For although
men do work such good things as apperteyne to the worshippinge of God, yet it
is he that is the cause, Men are not the cause that god performs his promise.
that they do those things that he commands: but they are not yt cause,
that he should perform that which he has promised. For otherwise to perform
gods promyses, should stand in the power of man, and not in the power of
God: and so that which was promised of God to Abraham, should be performed by
man. But Abraham believed not so: but he believed geuyng glory to God, Romans 4.
because he was able to perform those things, that he had promised: he says
not, that he was able to tell aforehande: he says not, that he was able to
know aforeha^de: For he can both tell aforehande, and also know aforehande
deeds that are none of his: but he says, he is able also to perform: and
therefore they are his own works, and none others. Do you think paradue^ture,
that God promised the good works of the gentyls to Abraham in his sede, that
he might promise that which he himself do perform? but that he promised not
the faith of the ge^tyls, which me^ work themselves: but (that he might
promise that which he performs) he knew aforehande faith, that men should
work it? Truly thapostle speaks not after this manner: For God promised
sons to Abraham, which should follow the fotesteppes of his faith. This
thing he speaks most evidently. But if he promised the works of the
gentyls, and not their faith: (Forasmuch as there are no good works but such
as spryng of faith. For the just lives by faith, Abac. 2. Romans 14. Gebr. 11.
and all that is not of faith is sin: and without faith it is impossible to
please God) it must nevertheless follow, that it lies in man's power, that
Gods promyses be performed. For except man do work that without gods help
which belongs to man, God shall not perform his gift, that is to say,
except man have faith of himself, God shall not perform that which he has
promised, that is, that the works of righ teousnes might be given of God. And
upon this it should follow, that it say in the power of man, and not in the
power of God, that God might be able to perform his promises. But if both
truth and godlynes forbid us thus to believe, Then are our adversaries void
both of truth and godlynes
let us then believe with Abraham, that he is able to perform the things that
he has promised: But he has promised sons unto Abraham, which they can not
be except they have faith: he do therefore give even faith also.

The.xi. Chapter.
Seeing then (as the Apostle says) the inheritance is given by faith, Romans 4.
ye it might come of favor or grace, and the promise might be sure, A wonder.
I wonder that men had. rather commit them selves to their own wekenes, then
to the certeinte of gods promise. But thou say, I am uncertain of gods
will toward me. What then? art thou certain of thine own will toward thy
self, and art not afraid? He that seems to stand, 1. Cor. 10.
let him take heed that he fall not. Seeing the^ as both be uncertain, why does
not a man commytte his faith, hope, and charity rather to the stronger then to
the weaker? But when it is said, (say they) if thou believe thou shall be
saved: Romans 10.
one of these is required to be done, the other is offered to be given: that
which is required, is in man's power, but that which is offered, is in the
power of God.

But I pray you, why be they not both in gods power: as well that that he
commands, as that which is offered? For we pray unto God, that he will
give, that he commands: They that believe pray for themselves, that their
faith may be increased: They pray for them that believe not, that faith may
be given them: So that faith both in her increasynges, and also in her
begynnynges may be the gift of God. But this saying, if thou believe thou shall
be saved, is like unto this, if thorough the spirit ye shall mortifye the deeds
of the flesh, Romans 8.
ye shall live. For here also of these two, one is required, the other is
offered. If through the spirit (says he) ye shall mortifye the deeds of the
flesh, ye shall live. That we may then thoroughe the spirit, mortefy the
deeds of the flesh is required: but that we may live, is offered.

Think you then that it were convenient, that we should say, that the
mortificacion of the flesh, were not the gift of God: and that we should not
therefore confess it to be gods gift, because we hear that it is required of
us, (the promise of life being offered) if we shall do accordingly? God forbid,
that they that are partakers and defenders of grace should thus think. A
damnable error.
This is the damnable error of the Pelagia^s: whose mouths thapostle
immediately stopped, saying: For as many as are led by the spirit of God,
these are the sons of God: that we should not believe, that we could mortifye
ye deeds of the flesh by our own spirit, hut by the spirit of God. Of the
which spirit of God he did also speak in that place, 1. Cor. 12.
where he said: All these works one and the self same spirit, deuidyng to
every man several gifts even as he will. Among which al, he named also
faith, as ye know Therefore likewise as although ye mortifyeng of the deeds of the
flesh be the gift of God, yet is it required of us (the reward of life being
set before us) even so faith also is the gift of God, notwithstanding that it
self be also required of us, by this saying, if thou believe thou shalt be
safe (the reward of salvation being set before us) For therefore are these
things both commanded unto us, and are also declared to be the gifts of
God, that it might be perceived, both that we do them, and also that God does
make us to do them: as he says most plainly by his prophet Ezechiel: For
what is more plain the^ this, when he says: Ezec. 36. God makes us to do
his commandments.
I shall make them to do them? Mark well most dear brethren this place of the
holy scripture, and you shall perceive that God does promise that he him self
will so work both faith and works, that they may do the things that he
commands to be don. In the same place he makes mention also of their
merits, but it is of their evil merits, wherein he does declare that he do
render good gifts for euel merits, in yt he makes the^ here after to bring
forth good works, when that he causes them to do gods commandments.

The.xii. Chapter.
But all this disputacion whereby we defend the grace of God through Jesus Christ
our Lord, to be vereli grace, that is to say not given after our merits,
although it be defended most manifestly by the testimonies of Gods word: yet
therbe some that think themselves to be discoraged from al godly living,
except they may ascribe somewhat to themselves, which they may first give unto
God, that they may be recompensed. This may be sometime doubtful among them
that are of age and discrecion that have now the use of the choice of will: but
when we once come to young infauntes, and to the mediator of God and men, the
man Christ Jesus, 1. timo. 2.
all defense of man's merits going before the grace of God do fail. For
neither are any of them preferred before other by any merits of man going
before, that they should belong to the saueor of me^: neither was he (for
asmoche as he himself is also man) made the saueour of men by any merits of
man going before. For who can abide to hear this, that children being baptized
in their infancye, are counted to depart this life for their merits sake that
are to come: and that therefore other dye in the same age without baptism,
because also their evil merits to come are forknowen: but that neither their
good life, is rewarded of God, nor yet their evil life condemned? But (that I
may speak myldly) has thapostle set no bound, beyond the which, it is not
lawful for the rash suspicion of man to pass? Rm. 14. 2. Cor. 5.
For he says, we shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, to
receive every one according to the things that he has done by the body
whether it be good or euel. He says, that he has done, he added not, or
shall do. But what should put this in such men's heads, to think that the
merits to come of infantes (that shall never be in deed) should either be
punished or rewarded, I can not tell. But why is it said that a man shall be
iuged, according to the things that he has done by the body, when as many
things are done by the only mind, not by the body, nor by any part of the
body, and that many times so euel, that such thoughts deserve most just
pain, as is this (that I may omit other) when the folyshe man said in his
heart, there is no God? Psalm. 53.
What means this then, according to tho things that he has done in the
body, but according to tho things that he did when he was in the body: So
that we may understand by the body, the time of the body? After the
dissolucion of the body, no man shall be in the body until the last
resurreccion, Do you think that s. Au. thought here upon the Popes purgatory?
and not then to get any merits, but either to receive rewards for good
merits, or else to be punyshed for euel merits. But in this mean space
between the putting of and the resurreccion of the body, the souls are
either tormented, or else do rest, according to such things, as they did in
the time of the body. Unto the which time of the body do also original sin
belong (which the Pelagians do deny, but Christ's church does acknowledge)
the which when infantes dye being either through gods grace pardoned, or else
through gods judgment unpardoned: they do by the merit of the new birth,
either pass from evil to good, or else by the merit of their first birth,
pass from euel to euel. Baptism of infa^tes
This thing the catholyke faith knows, unto this also many heretics do agree
without against saying. But I marvel exceadingly, upon what ground these men
should think (whose wits as appears by your letters, are not to be
despised) that every man should be judged, not only according to those merits,
which he had as long as he was in the body, but also according to those
merits that he should have had, if he had tarried longer in the body: neither
durst I have believed this, but that I durst not mistrust you. But I trust that
God will so work, that they being admonished, may shortly understand that
such sins as are counted yet to come, if they may be justly punished by
gods judgment, in them that are not baptized, yt they may al so through
gods grace be pardoned, in them that are baptized.

For who soever say, that the sins to come may only be punyshed by gods
judgment, but may not be forgiven by his mercy: ought to consider how great
iniurye he does to God, and his grace: as the the sin to come, might be
known aforehande, but could not be for given. But if this be an inconvenience,
then ought the infantes (which should be sinners if they lived longer) to be
helped in their tender age by baptism, whereby sins are washed away.

The.xiii. Chapter.
But if they paraduenture say, that sins are forgiven to them that repent,
and therefore that these dieng in their infancy are not baptized, because God
knew aforehande that they would not repent, if they had lived: but as touching
them that are baptized, and depart out of their bodies in their chyldhode, God
knew aforehand that they would have repented, if they had lived. But let the^
mark and consider well, if this be so, the^ children that dye without baptism,
are not punyshed for original syn, but for their own sin, which every one
should have done, if he had lived. In like manner, they that are baptized, are
not washed from original sin, but from their own sins, which they should
commyt if they had lived, because they could not sin before they came to age
and discrecion: but so^e are forsene to repent, and some that they should not
repent: and therefore some depart this life being baptized, and some without
baptism. If the Pelagians herd this, they would not now travel in the denial
of original sin, and seek for infantes I can not tell what place of their
joy, without the kingdom of God: namelye, seeing they are convinced, that they
can not have eternal life, Ioh. 6.
which have not eaten the flesh, nor drunk ye blood of Christ: and
forasmuch also as that is a false baptysme, which is given in the remission of
sins to them, that have no sin at al. For they would afferme that there
were utterly no original sin, but yt the infa^tes which are losed from
this body, are either baptized, or not baptized, according to their merits
that they should do, if they did live: and that for their merits to come, they
did either receive, or not receive, the body and blood of Christ, without the
which certeynly the can have no life: In the days of S. Aug. young infantes
received the communion.
and that they were verelye baptized in the remission of sins, althoo they
drew no sin from Adam: For their sins to come, are pardoned them, where of
God knew aforehande, that they would repent. By this means they might
easelye prevail, and obtain their purpose in denyeng original sin, and in
contendynge, that the grace of God is not given, but according to our
merits. But seeing that man's merits to come, that shall never come, are
doutles none at all (which a man may most easily perceived) therefore the
Pelagians could not say this, and much less might these men afferme this.
It can not be declared, how much I am grieved, that these which together with
us, do by catholyke authority, condemn the error of these heretics, did not
se this, which the Pelagians did perceive, to be most false and folyshe.

The.xiiii. Chapter.
CIpriane wrote a book of mortality, commendably known unto many, and
almost to all them that love Ecclesiastical wrytynges, in the which he does
afferme, that therefore death is not only not unprofitable unto the faithful,
Why death is profitable.
but also is profitable, forbecause it conueieth a man away from the danger of
synnyng, and sets him in a saffetye from synnyng any more. But what
profyteth death, if the sins to come be punished, which were never committed?
Nevertheless he says very plentifully and excellently, that dangers to sin
want not in this life: and that after this life there remain none. Where as he
does also allege this testimonye out of the book of wysedo^e, he was taken a
way, Sap. 4.
that malice should not change his understanding. The which in like manner
being alleged of me, you said that these brethren have rejected, as that which
was not taken out of a Canonical book: as tho beside the witness of this
book, the thing it self which we would teach by it, were not many fest. For
what Christian dare deny, that the just man if he be prevented with death,
Sap. 4. Popyshe purgatory pyck purse dare deny this.
shall be in refreshyng? which doctrine if any man shall teach, what man
having a sound faith, will think that he should be resysted. In like manner,
if he shall teach, that if the just man shall depart from his ryghtfulnes,
wherein he has long lived and shall dye in that ungodliness, wherein he has
lived and speak not of an hole year) but only one day, shall go from hence
into pains dew unto the wicked, and that his formare ryghtfulnes past shall
nothing profyt him, what faithful man will agaynesaye this open truth?
Furthermore if it be demanded of us, whether (if he had dyed, when he was a
just man) he should have found pains or rest, shall we doubt to answer that
he should have found rest? This is all the matter, wherefore it was said, of
whom soever it was said: he was taken away, that malice should not change
his understanding, For it was spoken of the dangers of this life, and not of
the foreknowlege of God which knew aforehande, that which was to come, not
that which was not to come, that is to say, that he would preuente him with
untimely death, that he might be taken from the uncertainty of tentacio^s: not
that he should sin, which should not abide in tentacion. For of this life, it
is red thus in ye book of Job, Job. 7.
is not man's life upon earth a tentacion? But why it is granted to some, to be
taken away from the peryls of this life, whiles they are ryghtful: but other
being just, are kept in the same dangers by a longer life, vntyil they fall
from ryghtfulnes, Un sea cheable iugementes but yet just.
who knows the mind of the Lord? And yet herby we may understand, that
those just men, which do live godly until their old age and the last day
of this life, ought to glory in the Lord, and not in their own merits: For he
that has through the shortness of life taken away the just man, that malice
should not change his under sta^dyng: does also in the lo^gestlyfe keep the
just, that malice may not change his understanding. But why he has holde^ in
this life the just, that will fall away, whom (before he did fall) he might
have taken away: his iugementes are certeinely most just, but yet
unsearchable. Seeing that these things are true, the sentence taken out of the
book of wysedom ought not to have been rejected, which have been so much
esteemed in the church of Christ, that it have been many years read in the
place, where the readers of lessons do use to red to the church of Christ, and
have been also herd as Gods word of all christians, even from the bishops
until the poorest lay faithful men, The scriptures, were read in the vulgar
tongue to the poeple according to. s. Paulus doctrine. 1. Corinti. 14.
the penite^tes, and the young scolers called Cathecuumini. But if by the
testimony of the interpretores of holy scriptures which were before our days, I
would defend this doctrine, which now we are co^mpelled to defend, against
the new error of the Pelagians more diligently and more abou^dauntly the^ we
were wont, that is to say, that the grace of God is not given after our
merits: and that it is fre lie given to whomsoever it is given, because it
lies not in man's will or runnyng, but in the mercy of God: but yet to whom so
ever it is not given, by just judgment it is not given, forbecause there is no
vnryghtfulnes with God: If I would (I say) defend this doctrine, Men are bent
rather to credit doctors, then gods word.
by the catholyke interpretures of the holy scriptures that were before our
days: the brethren for whom now we take this labor, would give place. For
so you have sygnifyed by your letters.

But what need is it, that we should search out their works, which be fore this
heresye did spring up, had no need to occupy themselves in aunswerynge to
this hard question: which out of doubt they would have done, if they had been,
by such heretics compelled thereunto? Whi man of thold doctores speak little of
grace.


Whereupon it happened, that they did but briefly and by the way, declare in
certain places of their wrytynges, what they thought of the grace of God: but
their chief exercise was in other matters, which they dysputed against the
enemies of Christ's church: notwythstandyng in their exhortacions unto all
virtues, whereby men serve the living and true God, to attain eternal life and
true blessedness, and in their assembles or prayers, it did plainlye appear of
what strength gods grace was. For the things that he has commanded to be
done, should not be desired of God, except the doing of them were his gift. But
they that would be enstructed, by the testimonies of Ecclesiastical wrytters
or doctors, must prefer this book of wysedom (wherein it is red, Gods
wordepre ferred above all doctores
he was taken away that malice should not change his understanding) before
al doctors. Forbycause the-noble doctors, that were even next unto thapostles
days, did also prefer it before themselves: which, when they did aledge it
for a wytnes, did believe that they did allege nothing, but ye wytnes of God.
And surely it is manifest, that the most blessed Cipriane (to commend the
benefyte of a swyft death) did dispute, that they were delivered from the
dangers of this life, which do end this life, wherein men may sin. In the
same book among other things, he says. Why? seeing that you shall be with
Christ, and being certain of the Lords promise, that thou art called unto
Christ, do not embrace this, and rejoice that thou shall be delivered from
the deuel? And in an other place he says: Children by death avoid the
danger of slippery youth: In like manner he says in an other place: why do we
not make haste, and run, that we may se our country, that we may salute our
parents? A great nombre of our dear beloved parents, brethren, and children,
do tarry there for us. A'great multitude, being now sure of their own saftie, and
yet careful for our health, desire our company. With these, and such like
sentences, in the most clear light of the catholyke faith, this doctor does
manyfestly testefye, that the dangers and tentacio^s of sinning, are to be
feared until the puttyng of of this body, after the which no man shall suffer
any such things. But and if he did not this witness, when would any
christian doubt of this matter? How then, to a man that is fallen, and in the
same fall myserably ending this life, and going unto pains dew to such,
how (I say) should it not have been exceeding profitable for him, if he had been
taken out of ye place of tentacio^ by death, before he had fallen? And thus (if
we set aside rash contencion) this question, touching him that was taken
away, that malice should not change his understanding, is fully answered.
Neither ought therefore the book of wisdom, to have suffered this injury
(which have so many years ben read in the church of Christ, wherein this
sentence is also read) because it is against them, which are deceived in
thextollyng of man's merits, Who be the ennemys of grace.
and enemies against the most manifest grace of God, which do appear chiefly
in young infantes: among whom (for as much as some depart this life being
baptized, and other without baptism) is evidently declared mercy and
judgment: but mercy, that is freely gouen, and judgment that is dew. For if
men should not be judged, according to the works of their life, which they
had before death, but according to such as they should have had, if they had
lived longer: he had received no benefyt, which was taken away, that malice
should not change his understanding: it should nothing have profyted them
(which dye in their sin) if they had dyed before: which no christian shall
dare afferme. The catholic faith is contrary to the pelagians errors.
Wherefore our brethren, which with us in the defense of the catholyke faith,
do impugn the pernicious error of the Pelagians, ought not so much to favor
this opinion of the Pelagians, whereby they think the grace of God to be given
according to our merits: insomuche that they go about to destroy this true,
ancient, and christian sentence (he was taken away, that malice should not
change his understanding) because they can not abide the hearing of it, and
to afferme that opinion, which we thought no man would have believed, no nor
yet have dreamed: that is, that every dead man should be iuged, according to
such works as he should have done, if he had lived longer in the body. Thus
it appears, that that which we afferme, that the grace of God is not given
according to our merits, is invincible: insomuche that wytty men ropugning
against this verity, were compelled to afferme, that the Pelagians errors ought
to be banyshed from the ears and thoughts of all men.

The.xv. Chapter.
Christ is a clear light af predestination.
THe saueour himself the mediator between god and men, the man Christ Jesus,
is also a most clear light of predestinacion and grace: and that he might so
be, by what merits of his going before, either of works, or of faith did the
nature of man that was in him purchase this? Let it be declared (I pray you)
whereby that man deserved, to be assumpte of the word coeternal to the father
in the unity of person, ye he might be the only begotten son of God? Did
there any manner of goodness of his go before? What did he aforhande, what
believed he, what axed he, that he might attain to this unspeakable dignity?
began not the self man (which was made and assumpte of the word) to be the
only son of God, even from the time that he began to be man? Did not that
woman full of grace conceive the only son of God? Was not the only son of
God borne of the holy ghost, and the virgin Mary, not by the lust of the
flesh, but by the singular gift of God? was it to be feared, lest that man
should syn thorough fre choice, when he should come to the years of discrecion?
Or had he not therefore frewyll, and that somuche the more, that he could not
serve sin? For all these most wonderful gifts, and other (if there be any
more that may be counted most justly and peculiarly his) man's nature, that
is, our nature received in him after a syngular manner, without any merytes of
his going before. Let man here dispute with God (if he dare) and say: why have
not I also the like? and if he shall thus be answered: O man what art thou that
disputest with God, and will not so be satisfied, but will augment his
impudency, and say: why do I hear: O man what art thou? Romans 9.
Seeing I am that I hear, that is to say, a man: and so is he also, of whom I
speak: but why am not I also that, that he is? For thorough grace came he to
this excelient dignity: why is grace diverse, where as nature is one? Surely
there is no acceptio^ of persons with God. Acto. 10.
What (I say not a christian) but what mad man would speak these words? In
our head then may appear unto us, ye self fountain of grace, from whence
it does spread it self into all his members according to the measure of
every one. Ephe. 4.
By ye same grace is every man from the beginning of his faith made a
christian, by the which that man from his beginning was made Christ: of the
same spirit, is man also borne again, whereof this man was first borne:
through the same spirit there is wrought in us remission of sins, by the
which it was wrought in him, that he should have no sin. God knew
aforehande, that he would do these things without al doubt. The self same is
therefore the predestinacion of saints, which did most evidently appear in
the most holy which who can deny, that do ryghtlye understand the words of
truth? For we have learned, that the Lord of glory him self (inasmuche as man
was made the son of God) was predestinate The doctor of the Centyls do cry
in the beginning of his Epistles: Romans 1.
Paul the servant of Jesus Christ, called an Apostle, put a part for the
Gospel of Godwhych he promised by his prophets in his holy Scriptures of his
son, which was made unto him of the sede of David after the flesh, which was
predestinate the son of God in power, by the spirit of sanctification of the
resurrection of the dead. Jesus was therefore predestinate, that he which after
ye flesh should be the son of David, might be nevertheless in power the son
of God, by the spirit of sanctification: because he was borne of ye holy ghost
and of the virgin Mary. The self same is that syngular taking of ma^s nature
vnspekeably wrought of God the word, that the son of God, and the son of
man together: and the son of man for ma^s sake that is taken, and the son
of god for the only begotten sake that does take, should truly and properly be
called God: lest that not a trinity, but a quaternite should be believed upon.
This so great, so hye, and so excellent exaltacion of man's nature, as could not
be more, was predestinate: likewise as ye divine nature for our sakes did abase
it self so low (as it could not be lowar) in that it took the nature of man,
with the weakness of the flesh, Phili. 2.
even unto the death of the cross. As therefore that one, was predestinate to
be our head: even so we heyng many were predestinate, that we might be his
members. Man's merits perished in Adam
Here let all man's merits keep silence together, which peryshed thorough
Adam: and let the grace of God reign, which does reign thorough Jesus Christ
our Lord, the only son of God our Lord. Whosoever shall find our in our
head, the merits going before, of that his syngular generation: he may seek
out in us his members, the merits going before of the multiplied regeneracion.
For this generation was not recompensed unto Christ, but given, yt he might be
borne of the holy ghost and ye virgin, void from al bondage of syn: even so
(that we might be borne again of water and the holy ghost) it was not
recompensed unto us for any merit, but freely given: And although faith led us
unto the fountain of regeneration, yet ought we not therefore to think, that
we first gave any thing to God, that we might be recompensed with the
healthful regeneracion. For he has made us to believe in Christ, which for
our sakes made Christ, in whom we do believe: he does make in men the
beginning of faith and fynishing in Jesus, which made the man Jesus the prince
and fynisher of faith: For so is he called (as ye know) in the epistle to the
Hebrews. Heb. 12.


The.xvi, Chapter.
FOr God does call many of his predestinat sons, that he may make them
members of his only predestinate son: not with that calling wherwyth they
were called, Mar. 22. Two diverse callinges.
that would not come to the marriage. For with that calling were called both
the Iues, unto whom Christ crucified was a fro^blyng, and also the ge^tils,
unto who^e Christ crucified was folyshnes: but he calls the predestinate
with that calling, which the apostle marked saying, 1. Corin. 2.
that he preached Christ the power of God and the wysedo^e of God, unto them
that were called, both Iues and Greeks: For thus he says: but unto them that
are called: that he might point out them, that were not called: knowing that
there was a certain peculiar calling, of them that are called according to
purpose, whom he knew aforehande, Romans 8.
and predestinate, that they might be like the image of his son. The which
calling he noted, saying: not of works, but of the caller it was said unto
him. Romans 9.
That the elder should serve the yo^ger. Said he not of works, but of
beleuyng? he did utterly take that also away from man, that he might ascribe
al to God: Therefore he said but of the caller, not with every manner of
calling, but with that calling whereby he is made beleuyng. This manner of
calling he did also consider, Romans 11.
when he said, the gifts and calling of God are without repentance. For I
would also have you a little while consider, when he said, the gifts and
calling of God are without repe^tau^ce. For I would also have you a lyttel
while consider what matter was there entreated. For when he had said: Romans 11.
For I would not have you ignorant brethren of this mysterye, that you should
not be wise in your own eyes: because blyndnes was partly wrought in Israel,
until the fulness of the gnetyls should enter in, and so all Israel should be
safe: as it is written. There shall come out of Sion he that does deliver, and
shall turn away the ungodliness of Jacob. And this is my covenant to them,
when I shall take away their sins: to these he added by and by, which we
must diligently understand: as concerning the gospel they are enemies for
your sakes, but as touching the eleccion they are loved for their fathers
sakes. What means this, as concerning the gospel they are enemies for your
sakes, but only that their enmytye whereby they slew Christ, did promote the
gospel, as we certainly perceive, God can use evil things well.
and this does he declare to have happened by Gods disposition, which can
use well even things that are euel: not yt the vessels of wrath should profit
him: but that they might (thorough his well using of them) profyt the vessels
of mercy For what could be spoken more plainly then that that was said, as
concerning the gospel they are enemies for your sakes: It is the^ in the
power of the euel to syn^. But that by synnyng, they should thoroughe their
malice do either this or that, it is not in their power, but in the power of
God, that deuideth the darkness, and disposes the same: Esa. 45. Gods will
fulfilled.
so that for this cause even in that that they do against the will of God, there
is nothing fulfilled, but the will of God. We read in the acts of thapostles,
when thapostles being let lose of ye Iues were come to their fellows, and had
declared unto them hawe the priests and elders had threatened the^, they all
lift up their voices to the Lord with one accord, Act. 4.
and said: Lord thou art he that have made the heaven, and earth and see, and
al things that are in them, which by the mouth of our father David thy holy
servant haste said: Psalm. 2.
why did the Hiethen range, and the people ymagine vain things. The kings of
the earth stood up, and the rulers came together against the Lord, and against
his anointed. For of a truth Herod and Pilate and the people of Israel are
gathered togehter in this city, against thy holy child Jesus whom thou haste
anointed, to do whatsoever thy hand and council have predestinate to be done.
Behold that was said, as concerning the Gospel they are enemies for your sakes.
For the hand and council of God did predestinate so much to be done by the
enemies the Jews, how much was necessary for the promotyng of the Gospel
for us. But what means that that follow: but as touching thelection they are
loved for their fathers sakes. Are those enemies which did perysh in their
enmytie, and being adversaries to Christ among that nacio^ do yet peryshe, are
they chosen and well-beloved? God forbydde. Who (tho he were never so folyshe)
would afferme this? But although both these are contrary, the one against the other,
that is to say enemies and beloved, although they do not agree in the self same
me^, yet do they agree in the self same nacio^ of the Iues, and in the same
carnal sede of Israel: whiles some of them apperteyne to the halting, and some
to the blessyng of the self same Israel. Genesis 32.
For he did before open this sense more plainly where he said: That Israel did
seek, that has he not obtained, Romans 11.
notwythstandynge the election has opteyned it, but the rest were blinded:
yet the self same Israel is in both. Where the^ we hear, Israel has not
obtained: or, the rest are blinded: there must be understand the enemies for
your sake: where we herd, but thelection has opteined, there must be
understand, the beloved for the fathers sakes: unto ye which fathers these
things were verily promised. For to Abraham were the promises made, Gal. 3.
Romans 11.
and to his sede. Wherefore even into this Olyue is the wild Olyue also of the
Gentyls grafted. Furthermore the election now whereof he speaks, ought
certainly to come of grace and not of duty, for as much as the remnaunt are
saved by thelection of grace. This election has obtained, the rest being
blinded. According to this election the Israelites are beloved for their
fathers sakes.

For they are not called with that calling whereof it is said, Mat. 20.22.
there are many called: but with that calling wherewith thelecte ar called.
Wherefore in this place also after he had said, but as touthyng thelection, they
are beloved for their fathers sakes: he added by and by that, whereupon we
dispute. For the gifts and calling of God are without repentance, Gods
calling ye unchangeable.
that is, they are constantly fastened without change. As many as belong unto
this calling, they are all taught of God: neither can any of them say. I
believed, and therefore I was called after this manner: for the mercy of God does
preuente him, forbecause he was called after such manner that he might believe.
For all that are taught of god come to the son, for because they have herd
and learned of the father by the son, which says most manifestly: Joan. 6.
every one that have herd of the father and learned comes unto me. Not one of
those do peryshe, forbecause that he will not lose any thing of all that the
father has given him. They who^ God call of purpose, shall never be damned 2.
Ioa. 2.
Who so ever therefore is of this number certainly he does not peryshe, neither
shall he be of this sort that do peryshe: Therefore it is said, they went out
from among us because they were not of us: for if they had been of us, they had
certainly continued with us.

The.xvii. Chapter.
LEt us therefore understand the calling to be such whereby they are chosen,
not as tho they are chosen because they did believe, but they are chosen, that
they may believe. For the Lord himself does sufficiently declare this, where he
says: you have not those me, but I have chose^ you. Joan. 15.
For if they had be^ therefore chosen, because they did believe, they did
certainly chose him first, die believing in him, that they might deserve to be
chosen. But he does utterly overthrow this, which says, you have not chosen
me, but I have chosen you. And they did doubtless chose him, when they believed
in him. And for none other cause he says, you have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you: but only for that they chase not him that he might chose them, but
that they might chose him, he chase the^: For because his merci through grace
(but not of duty) did prevent them. He chase them therefore from the world,
when he was conversant here in the flesh, Ephe. 1. The truth of
predestinacion and grace endures for ever.
but yet they were now chosen in him, before the world was made. This is the
immovable truth of predestinacion and grace. For what means that the
apostle says, as he chase us in him before the world was made? Certainly if
this be therefore spoken, because God knew aforehande that they would believe,
not because he should make them to believe: the son speaks against this
foreknowlege sayng, you have not chosen me, but I have chosen you: Seeing that
God did rather know aforehande this, that they should chose him that they
might deserve to be chosen of him. They are therefore chosen before ye world
was made, in that predestinacion, in the which God knew aforeha^d his own
works, that were to come: but they are chosen from the world by that calling,
by the which God has fulfilled that which he did predestinate. For whom he
has predestinate, Romans 8. Whom does God iustifye.
them has he called, that is to say, with that calling that is according to
purpose: he has not then called any other, but those whom he has
predestinate, them has he also called: neither has he justified any other,
but them whom he so called, them has he also justified: neither has he
glorified any other, but them who^ he has predestinate, called, justified,
them has he also glorified with that end, which has no end.

God then has chosen the faithful: but that they might be made faithful, not
because they were faithful. The Apostle James says, Actu. 2.
has not God chosen the poor in this world, rich in faith, and heirs of
the kingdom which God has promised to them that love him? By election
therefore he makes both rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom. Who I pray
you hearing the Lord saying you have not chosen me, but I have chose^ you,
dare be so bold as to say, that men are chosen through believe: where as rather
they are chosen that they may believe, lest that they should be found to have
chosen Christ first, contrary to the sentence of the truth, unto whom Christ
says: Joan. 15.
you have not chosen me but I have chosen you?

The.xviii. Chapter.
Who hearing thapostle saying, blessed be God and the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which has blessed us with all manner of spiritual blessing,
Ephe. 1.
in heavenly things in Christ, even as he did chose us in him before the making
of the world, that we might be holy and without blame in his sight, in
charity predestinatyng us to make us his sons by adoption thorough Jesus
Christ thorough the self same, according to the pleasure of his will, where in
he has made us accepted in his beloved son, In whom we have redemption
through his blodde, the forgeuenes of sins according to the riches of his
grace, which grace has been plentifully in us in all wisdom and prudence,
that he might show unto us the secret of his will according unto his good
will, which he purposed in him when the time were fully come, to repair all
things in Christ, both the things that are in heaven, and also the things
that are in earth in him, in who^e also we are made heirs, being thereto
predestinate according to the purpose of him, which works all things,
according to the council of his own will, that we might be to the praise of
his glory: Who (I say) he aring these things diligently and with
understanding, dare doubt of this manifest truth which we defend? God in
Christ did chose his members before the world was made: and how could he chose
them that yet were not, but in his predestintion? he chase us then,
predestinating us: but would he chose the ungodly and unclean? For if the
question be preponed whether God does chose these, or rather the holy and
blameles: what will he answer that shall be demanded: will he not by and by
give sentence for the saints and the blameles? He knew therefore aforehande
(says the Pelagian) which should be saints and blameles, The pelagian.
through the choice of frewyl, and therefore before the world was made, he chase
the^ in that his foreknowlege, whereby he knew aforeha^de that they would be
such. He did therefore (says he) chose them before they were, predestinatyng
sons whom he knew aforehande would be holy and blameles: certainly he made
them not so, neither saw aforehande that he would make them, but only saw
aforehande that they would so be. Let us then consider the words of thapostle,
S. aug.
and se whether he did therefore chose us before the world was made, because we
were to be holy and without blame, or rather that we might be so. Blessed
(says he) is god and the father of our Lord Jesu Christ, which has blessed
us with all manner of spiritual blessyng, in heavenly things in Christ, even
as he did chose us in him before ye making of the world, that we might be holy
and without blame: Not because then that we were to be, but that we might be.
For it is certain, for it is manifest, The fonteyne of grace.
for therefore we were to be such, because he had chosen us, predestinatynge that
we might be made such through his grace. He therefore blessed us after this
manner with all spiritual blessyng, in heavenly things in Christ Jesus, even as
he chase us in him before the making of the world, that we might be holy and
blameles in his sight, in charity predestinating us to make us his sons by
adopcion thorough Jesus Christ, thorough the self same. Furthermore mark what
he adds, according to the pleasure (says he) of his will, lest that in so
excellent a gift of gods grace, Gods Will.
we should glory in the pleasure of our own will: wherein (says he) he has
made us accepted in his beloved son: in the which his will undoubtedly he
has made us accepted. It is so said, he has made us accepted thoroughe
grace, as it is said, he has justified us thorough ryghtfulnes: In who^
(says he) we have redemption thorough his blood, the remission of sins,
according to the riches of his grace, which grace has been plentefully in us in
all wisdom and prudence, that he might show unto us the secret of his will,
according unto his good will. In this mystery of his will he has put the riches
of his grace, according to his good will, not according to ours: which can
not be good, except he according to his good will should help that it might be
made good. Man's will,
But when he had said, according to his good will, he added, which he purposed
in him, that is, in his beloved son, when the time was fully come, to repair
all things in Christ, both the things that are in heaven, and also the
things that are in earth in the self same, in whom also we are made heirs,
being thereto predestinate, according to the purpose of him, which works all
things, according to the counsel of his own will, that we might be to the
praise of his glory. It would be verilo^ge to dispute of every thing. But ye
do perceive, undoubtedly ye do perceive, The apostolife doetrine defe^deth
grace, agenst the extollares of merits.
how manyfestly this grace is defended by thapostles doctrine: against the
which man's merits are extolled, as tho man should first give somewhat unto God,
that he might be recompensed. God did therefore chose us in Christ before the
world was made, predestinating us to make us his sons by adoption, not
because we were to be, by our own strength holy and blameles, but he chase us,
and predestined us that we might be. But this did he according to the
pleasure of his own will, that no man should glory of his own will, but only
of his good will toward him: he did this according to the riches of his
grace, according to his good will, which he purposed in his beloved son, in
who^e we are made heirs, predestinate not according to our purpose, but
according to ye purpose of him that works all things, in so much that he
does work in us the will also. But he does work according to the council of
his own will, Will.
that we might be to the praise of his glory. This is the cause that we cry
out, that no man should glory in man, and by that, neither should glory in
himself: but that he which does glory, should glory in the Lord, that we
may be to the praise of his glory. For he does work certeinlye according to
his own purpose, that we may be to the praise of his glory, holy and blameles,
for the which cause he has called us, predestinating us before the making of
the world. Calling according to purpose To. ^. 11.
Upon this his purpose is grounded that peculiar calling of the chosen, unto
whom al things work to the best, because the saints ar called according to
purpose, and the gifts and calling of God, are without repentance.

The.xix. Chapter.
But these our brethren of whom we now speak, and for whose sake we now
write, do paraduenture say, that the Pelagians are confuted by this testimonye
of the Apostle, where he says, that we are therefore chosen in Christ and
predestinate before the making of the world, Ephe. 1.
that we should be holy and blameles in his sight in charity, for they
suppose that when we have received the commandments, that now by our own
strength, by the choice of free will, we are made holy and blameles in his
sight in charity: which thing (say they) because God knew aforehande would
be, therefore he chase, and predestined us in Christ, before the making of the
world: when as yet thapostle says, that not because he knew aforehande that
we would be such, but that we might be such, thorough the self election of
his grace, Gods own work.
whereby he has made us accepted in his beloved: Therefore when he did
predestinate us, he knew aforehand his own work which does make us holy and
blameles. Wherefore the Pelagians error is justly reprehended with this
testimony. But we say (say they) that our God knew aforeha^d nothing but
faith, whereby we begin to believe, and that for this faith sake, he chase and
predestined us before the world was made, that now we might be holy and
blameles thorough his grace and workyng. But let them hear also in this
testimony where he says: we are made heirs, predestinate according to the
purpose of him that works al things. He therefore that work all things, do
also work our beginning to believe. For faith self does not go before that
calling, whereof it is said: Romans 11.9.
the gifts and calling of God are such, that it can not repent him of them:
and whereof it is said, not of works, but of the caller, when he might have
said, but of the beleuer, Joan. 15. Faith is the effect of Gods election
and calling.
and the election which the Lord signified saying: you have not chosen me, but
I baue chosen you. For he did not chose us because we believed, but that we
might believe: that we should not be counted, to have chosen him first, and then
this should be false (which God forbydde) you have not chosen me, but I have
chosen you: neither are we called because we did believe, but we are called that
we may believe, and by this calling, whereof God ca^ not repent him, this is
Certainly wrought and performed, that we may believe. Neither is it nedeful to
repete the great multitude of such things, as we have before spoken in this
matter.

To be short, thapostle also in the words that follow this testimony, gives
thanks unto God for them that did believe, not because the gospel was preached
unto them, but because they believed. For he says: In who^ also ye beleuyng the
word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, wherein you beleuyng, Ephe. 1.
are sealed with the holy spirit of promise which is the pledge of our
inheritance, to redeem the purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory
Wherefore I also (after that I herd of your faith in Christ Jesus, and love unto
all saints) cease not to give thanks for you. Their faith was new and
fresh, after the Gospel was preached unto them. For the which faith thapostle
when he herd thereof gave thanks to God on their behalf. Peticio^s and
th^^keste of depar^ed what be they? Gal. 6.
If he should have given thanks to a man for that thing, which he either
supposed, or else knew that he had not done, it might be counted rather flatery
or mockery then thanks gyuyng. Let us not be deceived, god will not be mocked:
For ye beginning faith, is also his gift: otherwise the thanks gyuyng of
thapostle, might worthily be counted false or of false glory. What means
this? is it not evident of whom the Thessalonia^s had the beginning of faith,
for the which nevertheless the same apostle gives thanks unto God, 1. These. 2.
sayng: For this cause we also give thanks unto God without ceasyng,
forbecause when ye had received of us the word, wherewith god was preached, ye
received it not as the word of men, but even as it was in deed the word of
God, which work in you that have believed it. What means this, that he
gives thanks unto God for this matter? For it is a vain and foolyshe thing
if he give thanks to any, for that he has not done. But because this is
neither vain nor folyshe, certeinlye God himself wrought this work, for the
which he gives thanks unto him: That when they had received of thapostle the
word, wherewith God was preached, they might receive it, not as the word of
men, but as it is in deed the very word of God. The manner of Gods working in
his chosen.
God therefore do so work in the hertes of men by that calling that is
according to his own purpose (whereof we have spoken abou^dantly) that they
should not hear the gospel in vain, but that they may after they have herd
it, be converted and believe, receiuyng it not as the word of man, but as it is
in deed the very word of God.

The.xx. Chapter.
This also do teach us that the beginning of men's faith is the gift of God,
when the Apostle writes thus in his epistle to the Collocenses: Collo. 4.
Continue in prayer, and watch in the same with thanks geuyng, prayeng also
for us, that God may open unto us the door of his word, to speak the
mysterye of Christ (for the which I am also in bands) that I may declare it
so, as it behooves me to speak. How is the door of the word opened, but when
the understanding of the hearer is opened, that he may believe, and that after
he have received the beginning of faith, he may allow whatsoever is preached,
and disputed, to the edificatio^ of wholesome doctrine, lest that his heart
being shute up thorough unbelieve, he should improve and reiecte those things
that are spoken? Wherefore he says to the Corintheans also. 1. Cor. 16.
I will tarry at Ephesus until whitsontyde. For a great door and manifest is
opened unto me, and there are many adversaries. What other thing ca^ here be
understand, but only that (the gospel being there by him first preached) that
many believed, and also that there were many adversaries of the same believe,
according to this saying of the Lord, no man comes to me except it were
given him of my father: Joan. 6.
and unto you Luc 8.
it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is
not given? The door therefore was opened in the^, unto who^e it was given: but
the multitude of adversaries were of them, unto whom it was not given. In like
manner the same Apostle in his second Epistle unto the same people says: 2.
Cor. 2.
when I was come into Troa^a for the Gospel of Christ, and a door was opened to
me in ye Lord, my spirit had no rest: forbecause I did not find Titus my
brother: but dydding them farewell, I went out in to Macedonia. Whom bad he
farewell, but only them that believed, in whose hertes de door was opened
thorough his preaching? But mark what he adds, but praised be God (says
he) which does give us the victory always thorough Christ, and does declare
the sauoure of his knowledge in all places by us: For we are the sweet smelle of
Christ unto God both in them that are saved, and in them also that do peryshe,
to some verily the savor of death unto death, but to some the savor of life
unto life Paul is an invincible defendor of grace: this cause will then
prevail agenst the tyranny and subtelty both of deuel and world.
Lo for what cause the valiant sougeor, and invincible defendour of grace
gives thanks. Lo for what cause he gives thanks: because thapostles are the
sweet smelle of Christ unto God, both in them that are saved thorough his
grace, and in them also that peryshe thorough his judgment. But that they
might be the less angry which understand not these things, he warned when he
adds and says: And who is mete unto these things? Not withstandyng, let us
return to the openyng of the door. Whereby thapostle did signifye the
beginning of the faith of the hearers. For what is this (prayeng also for us
yt God may open unto us the door of the word) but a most manifest
demo^stracion, that the very beginning of faith, is the gift of God? For it
should not be asked of him by prayer, except men believed that it were his
gift. This gift of the heavenly grace came down into that purple sellar:
Act. 16.
whose understanding (as the scripture does witness in the acts of
thapostles) God had opened, and she gave head unto those things, that were
spoken by Paul: For she was called after such manner, that she might believe.
For god does work in men's hertes what he will, God works in men's hearts what
he will. Act. 4.
either helpyng or judging, insomuche that even that may be fulfilled thorough
them, which his hand and council have predestined to be done. It is
therefore vain that they have said, that that also which we have proved by the
testimony of the scriptures, out of the books of Kings and Cronicles,
apperteine nothing to the matter whereof we dispute: that is, when God will have
any thing to be done, which can not be don except men be willing, that then
their hertes are inclined to will yt thing that he would have don: he
inclynyng them, which by a wonderful and unspeakable manner, do work also in
us to will. For what other thing is it to say nothing, and nevertheless to
again say: except paraduenture they have made you some reason why they so
thought: which you thought not mete to declare in your letters? But what reason
this may be, I know not.

Is it this think you because we declared that God did work this in the
hertes of me, 1. Reg. 10 2. Reg. 5.
and did persuade the wills of as many as he would that Saul or David might be
made king? Therefore they think that these ensamples make not for this
purpose, because it is not all one thing to reign temporallye in this world,
and eternally with God: and think they therefore, that God do bow the wylles
of whom it pleases him, to set up earth thy kingdoms: but to optaine the
heavenly kingdom, he do not bow the wylles of whom it pleases him? But I
suppose that this was spoken for the kingdom of heaven sake, and not for any
earthy kingdom. Inclyne mine heart unto thy testimonies: or this, Psalm. 118.
Psalm. 36. Pro 16.20 3. Reg. 8.
the goynges of a man are governed of the Lord, and he has pleasure in his
way: or this. The will is prepared of the Lord: Or, let our Lord be with us
as he was with our fathers, let him not forsake us, nor turn us from himself:
but let him bow our hertes unto himself, that we may walk in all his ways
Or this, I will give them an heart to know me, and ears of hearing: or this, I
will give them an other hecte, Ezec. 36.
and a new spirit will I give unto them. Let them also hear this. I will give
my spirit unto you, and I will make you to walk in my ryghtfulnes, and that
you observe and keep my judgments. Let them hear this, a man's goynges are
governed of the Lord, but how shall the mortal understand his own ways:
Pro. 20.
Let them hear, every man seameth just in his own eyes, but it is the Lord
that makes the hertes straight. Act. 3. But owr adversaries will neither hear
these nor none other.
Let them hear, they believed as many as were ordained unto eternal life. Let
them hear these, and all other places of the holy scriptures, which I have
not rehearsed, by the which it is declared, that God do also prepare and
convert the wills of men unto the kingdom of heaven and eternal life. Judge
your selves what manner of doctrine it is, that we ought to believe, that God do
work the wills, for the setting up and establyshyng of the earthy kingdoms
of men: but that men do work their own wylles to attain the kingdom of
heaven.

We have spoken many words, and we might paradue^ture long sins have
persuaded that we go about, and yet we are feign to speak after such manner,
to them that have sharp and quick understandings, as we should do to them
that were dulle, which are not satisfied with that, that is to much.

The.xxi. Chapter.
But let them pardone us, for this new question has compelled us thus to do:
For where as in our formare works we have proved by sufficient witnesses, that
also faith is the gift of God: Therbe some that have invented somewhat to
against say this, and that those witnesses did serve to none other purpose,
but only to show that thencrease of faith was the gift of God. But ye
beginning of faith, whereby men first believe in Christ, is of mansselfe, and is
not the gift of God: but that god required this faith, that when that were gone
before, other that are gods gifts might follow after, as it were for the
merit of faith, and that none of them are given freely when God his grace is
commended in them, which is no grace except it be fre. How absurd and
folyshe this opinion is, you do perceive.

Wherefore we have endeavored our selves as much as we are able, that we might
show, that also the beginning of faith is ye gift of God. Wherein, although we
have longer traueled, then paraduenture they would yt we should have done, for
whom we have take these pains, wherefore we are contented to be reprehended of
them: So that they will confess, that we have brought that to pass that we
have done in deed (although it be done with more words then they would, and although
that it be done with werines and hyrkesomnes of such as have understanding)
that is, that we have proved, that also the beginning of faith is the gift of
God, likewise as is continencye, patience, ryghtfulnes, godlynes and other,
whereof there is no contencio^ between us and them. Let us therefore, make here an
end of this fryst volume, lest any might be offended with to great a length of
one book.

The end of the first book.
The second book of S. Aurelius Aug. bishop of Hippone / of the goodness of
perseueraunce or continuynge to the end / translated by John Scory the late
bishop of Chichester.
The first Chapter.
NOw must we dispute more diligently of perseueraunce. For in the former book
when we intreted of the beginning of faith, we did speak somewhat also of this
matter. We do therefore afferme, that perseueraunce, whereby men do continue in
Christ until thend, is the gift of God: to the end I say, when as this life is
fynished, in the which only men be in danger to fall. Therefore it is
uncertain, whether any man as long as he lives in this world, have received
this gift. For if he fall before death, verily men say that he did not
continue to the end, and this is most truly spoken. For how can he be
counted to have received, or had perseueraunce, which did not continue to
the end? For if any man have continente, and fall from the same, and is become
incontinent, if he have ryghtfulnes, either patience, or faith it self and
fall from them, it may be truly said, that he had these, and not that he has
the^. For he was continent, or he was just, or pacient, or he was faithful as
long as he was so. But when he cease thus to be, he is not then that man he
was: For how had he perseueraunce, which did not persevere, seeing every man
declare his perseueraunce by persevering, which this man did not? But lest
any might resyst and say, if a man after he was made faithful lived ten years,
and in the mids of them, did fall from the faith, did he not continue five
years? I will not strive about words, if that also be counted worthy the name
of perseueraunce, as it were for his time, but as touching this perseuerau^ce,
whereby men continue in Christ unto the end (whereof we now entreat) he ought not
in any wise to be counted to have had it which shall not continue to the end:
and the faithful man of one years continuau^ce, yea and of as short time else
as ye can ymagine, if he lived faythfullye until death, had rather this
perseueraunce, then he that had been faithful many years, if he a little
before death fell from the stedfastnes of faith.

The second Chapter.
This being agreed upon, now let us se whether this perseuerau^ce (whereof it
is said, he that shall endure to the end shall be saved) be the gift of God. Mat.
10.
But if it be not, how is this true that thapostle says, unto you it is
given for Christ's sake, not only, that you should believe in him, Phili. 1.
but also that you should suffer for him? One of these belong to the
beginning, the other to the end: notwithstanding both are the gift of God,
forbecause it is said, that both are given: as we have now declared before.
For what beginning is more true for a christian, then to believe in Christ? what
end is better, then to suffer for Christ's sake? but as touching that which
belongs to the beleuyng in Christ, men have invented a certain
contradiction, that the beginning of faith should not be counted the gift of
God, but only thencrease thereof: unto which opinion we have (thorough gods
help) sufficiently answered. But what can be said, why perseuera^ce unto the
end is not given in Christ, unto whom soever it is given to suffer for
Christ's sake: or (to speak more plainlye) unto whom soever it is given, to
dye for Christ's sake? For Peter also thapostle declaryng this to be gods
gift, says, 1. Pet. 1.
it is better (if it be the will of god) that ye should suffer for well doing,
then for euel, When he says, if it be the will of God, he declares that it
is not given of God unto all saints, that they should suffer for Christ's
sake. For they whom God will not have come to the trial and glory of
sufferyng, do yet attain the kingdom of heaven, if they shall continue in
Christ unto the end. But who will say that this perseverance is not given to
them, which dye in Christ either by sickness of body, or by any other chance,
seeing that a far harder perseueraunce is given to such, as give themselves
over un to death it self for Christ's sake? be therefore strong in the Lord.

For men do continue with more difficulty, whereas the persecutor labors all
that he can, that they should not continue: and therefore they endure eue^ unto
ye death, that they may continue. Wherefore it is an harder matter to have this
perseuera^ce, but to have the other, it is easyer: notwithstanding it is an
easy matter for him to give both, unto whom nothing is hard For this has he
promised sayng: I will give my fear into their heart, Iere. 32.
that they shall not depart from me. What other thing is this, then that the
fear which I will give into their heart, shall be such, and so great, that
they may stycke by me continually. Why is this perseueraunce asked of God, if
it be not given of God? By this rule of. s. Aug. they mock the saints that
desire of them any thing which they can not give or do. Gala. 6.
Is not this also a mockyng prayer, when that is asked of him, which is known
not to be his gift, but to be in the power of man without his gift: as that
also is a mockyng thankesgeuyng, if men shall give thanks to God for that,
which he has neither given, nor done? but look what I said there, that say I
also here: err not (says thapostle) God will not be mocked. O man, God is a
witness, not only of thy words, but also of thy thoughts: if thou shall
truly and faithfully ask any thing of him that is so rich, believe that thou
do receive that which thou asks of him, of who^e thou do ask. Honor
him not with thy lyppes, and in thine heart extolle thy self above him,
believing that thou have that of thy self, which thou pretendest to ask of
him. Is not our perseueraunce asked of him? Who soever now denies this, he
ought not to be confuted with my disputacions, but to be called back again by
godly men's prayers. But is there any of them which will not with ye which is
called the Lords prayer pray unto God for his own tontinuaunce in him, for
as much as the Lord taught the same: whereby the saints desire in a manner
nothing else but perseueraunce? Read at your leisure diligently that
exposicio^, in the book of blessed Cipriane, which he made of this matter:
whose title is of the Lords prayer: and consider what manner a preser uatyue
was so long agone prepared, against the Pelagias poisones that were yet to
come. They that maitaine these the Pelagia^s er rores are not of the catholic
Church of Christ.
For therbe iii. things (as ye know) which chiefly the catholyke church do
defend against them. Of the which the first is, that the grace of God is not
given for our merits: for because all the merits of the ryghtfull, are both
the gifts of God, and given also thoroughe the grace of God. The second is,
that no man be he never so ryghtfull; do live in this corruptible body, without
seem sin. The third is, that man is borne subject to the sin of the first
man, and tied under damnacion: except the gylte that is drawn by the first
birth, be losed by theseconde birth. That only which I last recited of these
three, is not spoken of in ye aforesaid book of the glorious martyr. But the
other.ii. ar disputed there so manyfestly, that we may perceive, that these
aforesaid new heretics, the enemies of the grace of Christ, were convinced
long before they were borne. Among these merits therefore. of the saints,
which are none other but only Gods gifts, he says that perseueraunce
also is Gods gift, saying thus: Cipriane The first peticion of the lor des
prayer.
We say (says he) thy name be sanctified: not as tho we wyshed unto God, that
he might be sanctified thorough our prayers, but because we desire of him, that
his name may be sanctified among us. Furthermore of whom is God sanctified,
which he himself sanctifyeth all? for because he said, be ye holy, for I also
am holy, Leuit. 19.
we do desire and pray for this, that we which are sanctified in baptism,
may continue in that, which we have begone.

And a little after, he disputing more of the same matter, and teaching us to
ask perseuerau^ce of the Lord, which he might not do by any means justly
and truly, except that also were his gift: that this sanctificacion (says he)
may continue among us, we pray. unto God: and because that our Lord and judge
does threaten him, Joan. 5.
whom he had healed and quickened, that he should sin no more, lest any
worse thing might happen unto him: we make this prayer continually, This do we
desire both night and day, that the sanctificacio^ and life, which is
received thorough the grace of God, may be kept thorough his proteccion.
Therefore when we being sanctified do say, thy name be sanctified, we do
desire of God (as this doctor understands the matter) perseueraunce in
sanctification, that is, that we may continue in sanctificacion. For what
other thing is it, to ask that we have already received, but only that he will
also grant unto us, that we may never fail to have the same. As therefore the
holy man, when he prays unto God that he may be holy, does verily desire,
that he may continue holy: even so truly the chaste man also, when he prays
that he may be chaste, the continent man, that he may be co^tinent, the just
that he may be just, the godly that he may be godly, and other which we
defend against the Pelagians to be the gifts of God, they do doubtless desire
this, that they may continue in those good things, which they know that
they have received. Which if they receive, certainly they receive also persevere
aunce, that great gift of God, whereby his other gifts are preserved. The
second peticion.
What, when we say thy kingdom come, do we desire any other thing, but that
it may come unto us also, which we doubt not shall come unto all saints?
Therefore they also which are already sanctified, what pray they else, but
that they may continue in that sanctificacion, which is given them?

For the kingdom of God shall not otherwise come unto them: which certainly
shall not come to any other but only to such as endure until the end.

The.iii. Chapter.
The third peticio^
THe third peticio^ is this, Thy will be done in heaven, and in earth, or as is
red in many books, and is most used of them that pray, as in heaven so also
in earth. Which many understand, as thy holy angels do thy will, so also we
may do the same. But yonder doctor and martyr, would have the spirit and
flesh to be understand by heaven and earth, and that we pray this, that both
these being ag^^ed together we may do the will of God. He perceived also an
other meaning to be in these words agreyng to the most sound faith, whereof
we have now spoken before: that is, that the faithful being cladde with the
heavenly man, and therefore not unworthily called by the name of heaven, might
be understand to pray for the infideles which are yet earthy, bearyng
thorough their first birth the earthy man only. Whereas he does manyfestly
declare, that ye beginning also of faith is the gift of God. For as much as the
holy church does pray, not only for the faithful, that faith may be
increased, or continued in them: but also for infideles, that they may begin
to have faith, whereof they were utterly destitute, and against the which they
also bare hateful hearts. But now we do not dispute of the beginning of
faith, whereof we have spoken in the former book plentefully, but of that
perseverance which verelye the saints that do the will of God do also desire,
saying in their prayers. Thy will be done. For seeing that it is already done in
the^, why desire they that it may be yet done, but only that they may continue
in that they have begone to be? Notwithstanding it may here be said, that the
saints desire not, that the will of God may be done in heaven, but that it
may be done in earth, as it is in heaven: in earth, that is to say, that it
may follow heaven, that is, that man may follow Angel, or the infidele the
faithful: and in this sense, the saints desire, that that may come to pass
which is not yet: not that which is, should continue. For although men excelle in
never so great holiness, yet are they not equal to the angels of God: The will
of god therefore is not yet done in them, as it is in heaven. If this thing be
thus, then not perseverance, but the beginning seameth to be desired in that
part, wherein we pray that of infideles me^ may be made faithful: but in
that part wherein we desire, that men in doing the will of God, may be equal
to the angels of God, when the saints (I say) prays for this, it is many fest
that they pray for perseuera^ce: For no man attayneth that perfect bless,
which is in the kingdom: except he shall continue unto thend in that holiness,
which he received in earth.

The.iiii. Chapter.
THe fourth peticion is: Give us this day our daily bread: The forth peticion
whereby the blessed Cipriane does show, how in this place also we may
understand, that perseueraunce is desired. For among other things he says,
but this bread we desire to be given us daily: lest we that are in Christ, and
daily receive the Eucharist for the meat of health, should be separate from
the body of Christ, whiles (by the means of some grenous fault) we being
absent, and not co^municatyng, are forbidden the heavenly bread. These words
of the holy man of God do manyfestly show, that the saints desire of the Lord
perseuera^ce: when with this intent they say, give us this day our daily
bread: that they should not be separate from the body of Christ, but that
they might continue in that holiness, wherein they should commit no crime,
whereby they might deserve to be separate from the same.

The.v. Chapter.
EYftlye we say in the Lords prayer, The.v. peticion.
Forgive us our dettes, as we forgive our detters: in the which only peticion
persouera^ce is not found to be asked. For the sin whereof we desire
forgenenes are past: but persevere a^ce (which does make us saffe for ever) is
necessary for the time of this present life: not yet for ye time that is
paste, but for that is to come until the end of the same. Neuerthe les it is
necessary somthynge to consider how in this peticion also, these heretics that
came long after, were even then thrust thoroughe with the tongue of Cipriane,
as it were with an inuinsible darte of the truth, The Pelagians are not
afraid to afferme also this, A Pelagian.
that the just man in this life is utterly without sin, and that the
congregation that is without spot or wrinckle or any such thing (which is
thalone and only spouse of Christ) is among such men now in this present
world: Ephe. 5.
as tho that were not his spouse, which (being scatered over the whole earth)
does say, as she have learned of him, Forgive us our dettes. But consider (I
pray you) how the most glorious Cipriane does overthrow them. For when he
did expound the self place of the Lords prayer, he said among other: But how
necessarely, how warely, and how holsomlye are we warned, that we are
sinners, which are compelled to pray for the remission of our sins: that
when forgyuenes is asked of God, the mind might be myndfull of her own
conscience, (that no man as tho he were innocent, should stand in his own
conceit, and by extollyng himself should further perish) he is instruct and
taught that he does daily sin, No man without sin.
when he is commanded to pray for the forgeuenes of his sins. To be short
thus do S. John also teach in his epistle saying: if we shall say, we have no
sin, we deceive our selves, 1. Joan. 1
and diverse such like which were to long to recite in this place.

The.vi, Chapter.
BUt now when the saints do say, The.xi. peticion.
lead us not in to temtacion, but deliver us from evil, For what other thing
do they pray, but that they may continue in holiness? For certainly, when this
gift of God is granted unto them (which to be the gift of God, is
sufficiently and manyfestly declared, for as much as it is asked of him) when
(I say) this gift of God is granted unto them, that they be not led in to
tentacion, there is none of the saints but that do continue in holiness even
unto the end: For there is not one, that do fall away from perseverance in the
purpose of christianity, except he be first brought in te^tacio^. If the^ his
prayer begra^ted to him, yt he may not be brought into te^tacio^, he does
undoubted lie (through gods gift) continue in that holiness, which through the
gift of God he has received. But these brethren (as you write) would not have
this perseverance after this manner to be preached, that by humble peticion it
might either be gotten, or else lost by disobedience: wherein they do not well
consider, what they say: For we speak of that perseverance, whereby men
continue unto the end, which if it be given, they do continue unto the end,
but if that they do not continue unto the end, it is not given, as we have
now before sufficiently also declared. Let not men say then, that
perseverance unto thend is given to any, except the self end shall first
come, and that he shall be found to have continued unto thend, unto whom it was
given. We callym chaste, whom we know to be chaste, whether he shall continue,
or not continue in the same chastity unto the end: And if he has any other
gift of God, that may either be kept or lost, we say that he has it, as long
as he has it, and if he shall lose it, we say that he had it. But as touching
perseverance un to the end, forasmuch as no man has it, but he ye shall
continue unto ye end: many may have it, but none ca^ lose it. For it ought not
to be feared when a man has continued unto the end, lest paradue^ture some euel
will might spring up in him, that he should not continue unto the end.
Therefore this gift of God may be optayned by humble perition, but when it is
given, it can not be lost by disobedience. For when any man has continued unto
thend, neither can this gift, nor any other be lost, which might have been
lost before the end. For how can that thing be lost, whereby it is brought to
pass, that that also that might have been lost, ca^ not be lost? But lest
paraduenture it might be said, that perseverance unto thend can not be lost,
when it is given, that is, when a man has continued un to the end: but that it
is then lost after a certain manner, when a man lives so disobediently, that
he can not attain unto it: Likewise as we say, that the man which has not
continued unto the end, has lost eternal life or the kingdom of God, not
because he had now received it and had it, but because he might have received
it and had it, if he had continued: let us take away strife about words, and
then may we say, that also many things may be lost, that are not had, but
are hoped for to be had. Let any man that dare, say unto me, whether God be
not able to give that, that he has commanded to be asked of him? Whosoever
thinks thus, I say not that he is a fool, but I say that he is mad. But
God has commanded that his saints should say unto him in their prayers,
Lead us not into temptacion. Whosoever then requiring this, is herd of God,
is not brought in to the temptacion of disobedience, whereby he may worthily
lose the perseueraunce in holiness. But every one by his own will forsakes
God, whereby he is worthily forsaken of God. Who will deny this? But therefore we
pray, that we be not led into temptation, that this thing may not happen.
And if we be graciously herd, Certainlye this thing comes not to pass,
because God does not suffer it to come to pass. For there is nothing wrought,
but that he either does it himself, or suffers it to be don. He is therefore
able both to turn the wylles from euel to good, The power of god over ma^s
will. Psalm. 84. Psalm. 65.
and also to turn such as he ready to fall, and to lead them in that path
that is pleasant in his sight. Unto whom it is not spoken in vain, O God
thou conuertyng us shalt make us alive. It is not said in vain, let not my
foot be moved.

It is not said in vain O Lord, Let not the synnar have his desire upon me.
Psalm. 139.
Last of all (that we may not recyte many places, although paraduenture mo come
to our remembrance) it is not spoken in vain, lead us not into temptacion.
For who soever is not led into tentacion, out of al doubt he is not lead into
the tentacion of his own euel will. And who soever is not led in to the
tentacion of his own evil will, Certainly he is led into none. Iaco. 1.
For every man is tempted (as it is written) being drawn away and entised of
his own concupiscence. But God does tempt no man with any hurtful tentacion.
For there is also a tentacion that is profitable, when that we are not deceived
or oppressed, but proved, according as it is said, Psalm. 25.
Prove me O Lord, and tempt me. That tentacion therefore is hurtful, which
thapostle sygnifyed saying, 1. These. 3.
lest paraduenture he that does tempt should, tempt you, and our labor should
be inuaine. God (as I said) does tempt no man, that is, he brings or leads
no man into tentacion. For to be tempted, and yet not to be led into tentacion,
is not euel: yea rather it is also good, For this is none other but to be
proved. Where as the^ we say unto God, lead us not into te^tacion: what do we
say else, but suffer us not to be led? Wherefore many do pray after this
manner, suffer us not to be led into tentacion, and so is it read in many
books, and so does blessed Cipriane allege it. Nevertheless I have not found
it in any place in the gospel written in the Greek tongue after any other manner,
but after this, when are we in most sauegarde?
lead us not into tentacion. We do then live in most sauegarde, if we ascribe
al unto God. But we do not commit our selves partlye to him, and partly to
our selves, which thing this reverent martyr perceived well enough. For when
he did expound the same place of of the Lords prayer, after other things he
said. But when we do pray that we may not come into tentacion, we are put in
mind of our infirmite and weakness, when we so pray, that no man should
arrogantlye extolle himself, that no man should proudly and arrogantly
challe^ge any thing to him self, that no man should say, that either the
glory of confession or of suffering were his own: seeing the Lord himself
teaching humilite said, watch and pray that you come not into tentacion, Mat.
26.
The spirit is ready, but the fle^she is weak: that when we do humbly and
mekelye first knowledge our infirmite, and attribute al unto God what soever
with his fear is humbly asked: it may be granted through his mercy.

The.vii. Chapter.
IF therefore we had none other prove but only the Lords prayer, it would
alone suffice, to prove the matter of grace which we defend: For it has
left us nothing, wherein as in our own we may glory. For this also that we
should not depart from God, it does declare to be the gift only of God, when
it does teach us to ask the same of God, For he that is not led into
tentacion, does not depart from God. But this lies not in the strength of
fre choice by any means, as the strength of it is now: what power free will
has now.
notwithstanding it was in man before his fall. Nuertheles it did appear in
angels, of what power the liberty of will was, in the dignity of man's first
creacion, which did abide in the truth, when the deuel with hysfel from the
same: and have atteyued a perpetual sauetye from falling, wherein we are most
certain that they do now remain. How much belong to grace.
But after man's fall, God would have it apperteine only to his grace, that man
may come unto him: neither would he have it belong to any other thing but to
grace, that man should not depart from him. God has put this grace in him, in
who^ we have optained the inheritance, Ephe.i.
predestinate according to his purpose, that works al things: and therefore
as he works so that we may come unto him: So does he also work, that we
should not depart from him. For the which cause, it is said unto him by the
prophet, Psalm. 79.
let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, and upon the son of man,
whom thou haste made strong for thine own self, and we do not depart from
thee. This son of man verelye is not the first Ada^, in whom we departed
from God: but this is the last Adam, upon whom was the hand of God, that we
should not depart from him. For this is hole Christ with his members, The
church is Christ's body. Ephe. i.
for his church sake which is his body, his fulness. When therefore the hand of
God is upon him, that we may not depart from God, certainly gods workyng do
reach even unto us. For this is the hand of God, for by Gods workyng it is
brought to pass, that we may be in Christ, abydyng with God, not departing
from God, as we did in Adam.

For in Christ we have optained the inheritance, being predestinate according
to his purpose, that works all things. This therefore is the hand of God,
The had of God.
not our hand, that we should not depart from god. This (I say) is his hand
that said, I will give my fear into their heart, that they may not depart from
me. Iere. 32.
For the which cause he would have us to ask also of him, that we be not led
into tentacion: wherinto if we be not brought, we do not depart from him by
any manner of means: The which might be given unto us also without prayer, but
he would have us to be admonished by our prayer, of whom we may receive these
good gifts. For of whom else do we receive them, but of him, Unto who^e we
ought to pray.
of whom we are commanded to ask them? Let not the church in any wise look
for any labored and studied disputacions in this matter, but let her mark well
her daily prayers.

She prays that the unbelievers may believe: God does therefore co^uerte them
to the faith. She prays that those that believe, may continue: God does
therefore give perseueraunce unto the end: This did God know aforehande should
come to pass. The self same is the predestinacion of saints, whom he chase
in Christ, Ephe. i.
before the making of the world, that they might be holy and blameles in his
sight in charity, predestinating them to make them his sons by adoption
through Jesus Christ, through the self same, according to ye good pleasure of
his will, unto the praise of the glory of his grace, whereby he has made us
accepted in his beloved son, in whom we have redemption through his blodde,
the remission of sins, according to the riches of his grace, which was
plentefully in them in all wysedo^e and prudency, that he might show unto them
the mystery of his will, according to, his good will, which he purposed in
himself until the time were full come, to repair al things by Christ both
the things that are in heaven, and also that are in earth through him, Against
the truth man's doctrine ought not to be allowed.
by who^ we are also made heirs, being predestinate, according to his purpose
that works all things. Against this so shirle a trompe of the truth, what
man having a sober and circumspecte faith, can allow any man's doctrine?

The, viii. Chapter.
But why (says he) is not the grace of God given according to men's merits? I
answer, because God is merciful. why grace is not given to all
But why then (says he) is not this grace given to all? Here also I an^were,
because God is a ryghtfull judge: And therefore is grace given ^f him also
freely: and by his ryght^ull judgment in other, it is decla^ed, what benefyt
they have received by grace, unto whom it was given. Let us not then be
vntha^k^ull, that the merciful God does deliver so many from so dew
da^nacion, according to the good pleasure of his will, unto the praise of the
glory of his grace. So that, if he delivered no man from thence yet should he
not be unjust. For by one, Roma. 5. Ephe. 2.
all men brought into condemnacion, are ryghtfully and not unjustly judged the
children of wrath He therefore that is delivered, let him love grace: he that is
not delivered, let him acknowledge debt.

If in the forgeuyng of debt, be understand mercy, and in requiring the same,
be understand justice: by no means is there sound any iniquity with God.
But why (says he) not only among infantes, but also among them that are borne
at one time, having one and the self same cause, the judgment is so diverse?
Is it not a like question, to ask why in a diverse cause, there is one
judgment? Let us therefore call to remembrance those laborers which labored
the hole day in the vyneyard, and those that labored but an hour, For the
cause is diverse of the labor that was bestowed, and nevertheless the judgment
in rendryng the reward is one. Mat. 20.
Did the murmurers in this place also hear any other thing of the good man of
the house, but this I will? For such was his lyber alite to some, that he did
no manner of wrong to the other. And both these verily are in good things:
notwythstanding as touching that, whycy apperteyneth to right fulness and grace,
it may be also truly said of the gylty that is delivered, I will: and also it
may be said of him that is damned, Take that which is thyue, and get the
hence: For I will give unto this man that, which is not due to him: is it not
lawful for me to do what I will? is thine eye euel, because I am good? but if
he shall say here, why did not he give this grace also to me? he shall
worthelye hear, O man what art thou that disputest with God? Roma. 9
whom thou do certeily perceive, to be a most merciful geuer to one of you,
but to the a most just exactor and demaunder, nevertheless not unrightful to
neither of you. For seeing he should be just, although he should punyshe you
both: he that is delyueted, has wherefore to give thanks: he that is damned,
has nothing that he may reprehende. But if now (says he) this must needs
be, that in that al are not damned, he might declare, what should be dew to
all, and so he might more graciously co^me^de his grace in the vessels of
mercy: why in the self same cause, will he rather punyshe me then him: or will
deliver him rather then me? To this I make none answer. If thou demand why?
because I confess that I have nothing to say. If thou wylt also ask why?
because that as in this matter his pre is just, so also his mercy is great,
Unsearchable iugementes,
and in like manner his judgments are unsearchable He goes on yet, and
demands, why has he not given to some, that have truly worshipped him,
perseueraunce unto the end? Why thynkest thou, but only because he lies not
that says, 1. Joan. 2
They went out from among us, but they were not of us, For if they had been
of us, they would undoubtedly have continued with us? Are there then two
natures of men? God forbid. For if there were two natures, there should be no
grace at all: For the fre delyueraunce should not be given to any man, if it
were dew to be rendered to nature. But it seameth in man's judgment, Man's
judgment.
that all they that appear to be good faithful men, ought to have received
perseueraunce unto the end: But God has judged it better, to myngle some that
shall not continue, among the appointed number of saints, that they should
not live in securite, Securite
Unto whom securite in ye tentacion of thyslyfe is not expedient. 1. Cor. 10.
For this saying of thapostle, wherefore he that seame to stand let him take heed that he fall not, has kept down many from pernicious pride. For he that
falls, falls through his own will, and he that stands, stands through
the will of God. For God is able to set him up: he does not then set up him
self, but it is God that does this. Nevertheless it is good not to be hye
minded, but to fear. Romans 12.
For every man does either stand or fall in his own thought. For as
thapostle says, (whereof we have also made mention in our former book) we are
not able to think anithynge as of our selves, 2. Corin. 3
but our ablenes comes of God. Whom blessed Ambrose followed, Ambro. in his
book of fleyng the world. cap. i.
and our thoughts are not in our own power, the which thing every one
perceyueth to be most true, that has humility and truth joined together
with godlynes. But that Ambrose might thus say, he spoke it in that book,
which he wrote of fleyng ye world, teaching, that this world ought to be
fled, not with the body but with the heart, which he declared could not be
done, but only by the help of God. For he says, we do many times speak of
the fleyng of this world, and I would to God our affeccion were as ware and
careful about this matter, as it is easy for us to speak thereof: but (that
which is worse) the flickerynge inticement of earthy lusts, do oftentimes
crepe preuely in, and the spreading abrod of vanities do occupye the mind, so
that thou do ymagyne and think upon that thing, which thou would feign
eschew, which is very hard for a man to beware of, but clearly to put away
it is impossible. Furthermore the Prophet do witness that this thing may be
desired, rather the^ gotten, saying: Bow my heart into thy testimonies, Psa.
118.
and not into covetousness: For our heart and thoughts are not in our own
power, which being suddenly darkened, do confound the mind and understanding,
and draw them an other way, then thou did dest purpose: They call them back
to the world, they do intermingle worldly matters, they throw in voluptuouse
pleasures, they weaue in flickeryng entisementes, and in the self same time
that we go about to lift up the mind, we having vain thoughts engrafted in
us, are often times throwe^ down to earthy matters. It lies not therefore in
the power of me^, but in the power of God, that me^ may have power to be made
the sons of God. Ioh. 1.
For of him do they receive this power, which do put into ma^s heart godly
thoughts, whereby he may have faith, Gala. 5.
that may work by love: The which goodness to receive and keep, and in the
same to go forwards continually unto thend, we are not able to think any
thing as of our selves, 2. Cor. 3*
but our ablenes comes of God, in whose power ar both our hertes and
thoughts.

Wherefore of two infa^tes, that are both fast wrapped together in the ba^des
of original sin, why this is taken, and he forsaken: All are not called alyke.
and of two ungodly persons that be now of age and discrecion, why this is
called after such a manner, yt he may follow the caller, but the other either
is not called at al, Of two godly persons.
or at the lest wise is not called after such a sort that he may follow the
caller: the judgments of God are unsearchable. Notwithstanding this ought to
be most certain to the faithful that the one is of the nombre of the
predestinate, but the other is not. For if they had been of us (says one of
the predestinate, 1. Joan. 2.
which out of the Lords breast did suck this secret) they had undoubtedly
continued with us. What means this I pray you, they were not of us, for if
they had been of us, they had certainly continued with us? Were they not both
created of god, both borne of Adam, both made of the earth, and of him which
said, I have made all breath: Esaias. 57.
Did they not both receive souls of one and the self same nature? Last of
all were they not both called, and followed the caller, both of ungodly
justified, and both renewed by the fountain of regeneracion? But if he (which
certainly knew what he said) should hear this: he might answer and say,
These are true, and according to all these things they were of us, nevertheless
by a certain other difference, they were not of us: For if they had been of us
they should undoubtedly have continued with us. But in conclusion what is this
difference? God his books are open, Gods book.
let us not turn away our face. The divine scripture does cry, let us
therefore give ear. They were not of them, because they were not called
according to purpose: Roma. 8.
They were not elect in Christ before the making of the world. They were not
made heirs thorough him: Ephe. 1,
They were not predestinate according to the purpose of him that works all
things. For if they had been so, they had been of the nombre of the^, and
should without all doubt have continued with them. For (that I may omit to
declare) how possible it is for God, What god can do if he will.
to convert the wills of men unto his faith, that are turned from him and are
against him, and so to work in their hertes, that they may not give place to
any adversities, neither being overcome by any manner of tentacion, should
depart from him (Forasmuch as he can bring this also to pass (as the Apostle
says) that he will not suffer them to be tempted, 1. Cor. 10.
above that they shall be able to bear.)

The.ix. Chapter.
THat I may therefore (I say) omit to declare this, certainly god could
(knowing aforehande that they should fall away) have taken them out of this
life, before this should have happened. Shall we return again thither, that
we may yet dispute, how folyshly it is said, that dead men shall be judged
also for those sins, which God knew aforehande that they would do, if they
had lived? The which is so repugnau^t to a christian understanding, and utterly
to man's judgment that I am also ashamed to confute it. For why may it not be
said, that the gospel it self, both was preached in vain with so great
labor, and sufferyng of the saints, and is also yet so preached if me^ might
be judged also without the hearing of the gospel, according to the
disobedience or obedience, which god knew aforeha^de that they should have
had, if they had herd it? Luce. 10^
Neither should Tyrus and Sido^ have been damned, although more easelye, the^ were
those unbelieving cities, wherein the miracles and signs of the Lord Christ
were wrought: For if they had been wrought among them, they had done penance
in ashes and sackeloth: as the words of the truth do testify, in the which
his words the Lord Jesus do declare unto us, the deep mystery of
predestinacion. For if it shall be demanded of us, why so great miracles were
wrought among them, which beholdynge them, would not believe: and were not
wrought among them, which should have believed, if they had seen them: what
shall we answer? Shall we make that answer, which we have before made in an
other book, where as I answered to sire certain questions of the Pagants:
(nevertheless without any prejudice of other causes, which may be found out
by wise men) For when it was demanded, why Christ came after so many ages: I
made this answer (as ye know) that in those times and in those places when,
and whereas the gospel was not preached, he knew aforeha^de, that they would
all be such at the preaching thereof, as were many in his corporal presence,
which would not believe in him, Io. 11.12.
no not after he had raised up the dead. In like manner a little after in the
same book and in the same question, what marvel is it (said I) forasmuch as
Christ did know the world to be so full of infideles in the formar ages, This
answer may serve for our time also.
that he would not (and that up on good cause) preach unto them, which he
knew aforeha^de would neither believe his words nor miracles? Certainly we can
not say thus of Tyrus and Sydon, and in them we know, that these iugeme^tes
of God do appertain to those causes of predestinacion, without prejudice of
which hid causes, I said that I made then this answer. For it is an easy
matter to atruse ye infidelite of the Iues, that spronge of fre will, The
fruits of frewyll. Math. 11.
which would not believe so great miracles wrought among them. Which the Lord
rebukyng reproved and said: woe be to the Lorozaim and Gethsaida, for if ye
miracles had be^ wrought in Tyrus and Sydon, which have been wrought in you,
they would long ago have done penance in ashes and sackclothe. But are we
able to say, that the people also of Tyrus and Sidon would not have believed,
if such miracles had been wrought among them, or else that they should not have
believed, if they had been done among them? The Lord him self does wytnes,
that they should have repented with great humilite, if so be those signs of
Gods miracles had been wrought among them. And nevertheless they shall be
punyshed in the day of judgment, although with a lesser punishment then those
cities, that would not believe by the miracles that were wrought among them.
For the Lord says after, nevertheless I say unto you, that it shall be easyer
in the day of judgment unto Tyrus and Sidon then it shall be unto you. They
then shall be punyshed more sharply, these shall be punyshed more easily:
nevertheless punyshed shall they be. Furthermore if the dead are judged also
according to those works, which they should have done if they had lived, out
of doubt because these should have been faithful, if the gospel had been
preached unto them with so great miracles, they ought not verelye to be
punyshed: but they shall be punyshed,

The.x. Chapter.
IT is therefore false, that yt dead shall be also judged according to such
works, which they should have done, if the gospel had come unto the, when
they were alive. And if this be false, there is no cause why any ma should say of
infantes, that peryshe dyeng without baptism, that this do therefore worthily
happen unto them, because God knew aforehande, that if they should live, and
that the gospel should be preached unto the^, that they would unfaithfully hear
it. It remains therefore that they are holden fast tied in the bands of
original sin only, and that they go into damnacion only for this sin:
because we do perceive, that unto other having the same cause, the new birth
is not given, but only through gods grace: The secret and just judgment.
of God.
And that by his secret judgment (and nevertheless just, because there is no
iniquity with God) some shall peryshe by living wyckedly also after baptism,
which notwithsta^dynge are kept in this life, until they may peryshe: which
should not peryshe, if they had been helped by the death of the body
preue^tinge their fall: because no dead man is judged, either for the good or
evil, which he should have done, if he had not dyed: Otherwise the men of
Tyrus and Sidon should not be punished, according to those deeds which they
have done, but rather according to such as they should have done, they
should thoroughe great repentance and faith in Christ have optayned
salvation, if those miracles of ye gospel had been wrought among them. A
certain catholyke disputer not of small estimacion, did expound this place of
the gospel after such a manner that he said, that the Lord knew aforehande,
that they of Tyrus and Sidon would depart from the faith, after they had
believed the miracles that should have been done among them, and that rather of
mercy he wrought the^ not among the^: because they should have be^ more
grievously punished, if they had forsaken ye faith, Luce. 11. 2. Pet. 2. Hebr.
10.
which they had received, then if they had never received it. What need I at
this present to declare, what may be desired yet in the judgment of this
learned, and very wytty man, seeing that his self judgment do mayntaine our
cause? For if the Lord of his mercy, did no miracles among these, whereby
they might have be^ made faithful, lest they should be ye more grievously
punyshed, when afterward they should become unfaithful, (because he knew
aforehande, that they would return to their infidelite again:) It is then
sufficiently and manyfestly declared, that never a one of the dead shall be
judged of those sins, which God knew aforeha^d he should have done: if he
be helped by any means, that he may not do them: As (if this judgment be
true) it may be said, that Christ did help them of Tyrus and Sidon: whom he
would should rather not come to the faith, then by departing from the faith,
committee a more grievous offense: the which he saw aforehande that they would
do, if they had come to the faith. Nevertheless if it should be demanded, why
it was not rather wrought, yt they might believe, and that this might be
granted them, that they might depart out of this life, before they should
forsake the faith: I can not tell what may be answered. For he that says,
that it was a good turn for them, that should forsake the faith, that they
might not begin to have that, which they should with greater wickedness for
sake: does sufficiently show, that no man shall be judged of that euel, which
was known aforehande that he should do, if by any means it be provided for
him, that he may not do it. It was therefore well provided also for him, which
was taken away, that malice should not change his understanding. But why it
was not thus provided, for the men of Tyrus and Sidon, that they might believe
and be taken away, that malice should not change their understanding, he could
paradue^ture make answer to this, which thought it good to dissolve this
question after this manner. But I perceive that it is sufficient for the trial
of the matter, which I have in hand, that (by the judgment also of this man)
it may be declared, that men shall not be judged of those sins, which they
have not done: althoo they were forsene, yt they would do them Nevertheless (as
I said) I am also ashamed to confute this opinion, whereby it is supposed, that
those sins shall be punyshed in them, that are dyeng or dead, which were
forsene that they would do, if they had lived: lest it might appear, that we
also did esteem this opinion of any valor, which we might seame to keep down
with disputacions, rather then to let pass with silence.

The.xi. Chapter.
Therefore (as thapostle says) it lies neither in the wyllar, Roma. 9.
nor in the ru^nar, but in the mercy of God: which does help among the
children also, so many as he will (although they neither ru^ne nor will) whom he
chase in Christ before the making of the world, unto whom he will also give
grace freely, that is to say, What is freely.
for no merits sake of theirs going before, either of faith or works: And he
does not help those that are also of age and discrecion, which he will not
help, whom he before saw would believe his miracles, if they had been wrought
among them: Whom in his predestinacion secretly, but yet justly he has
ordained to an other end: All are not ordained to one end Romans 11. Psalm. 24.
For there is no iniquite with God, but his judgments are unsearchable, and
his ways paste finding out: but all the ways of the Lord are mercy and
truth. His mercy therefore is unsearchable, whereby he has mercy upon whom
he will, without any merits of his going before: And his truth is also past
fynding out, whereby he does harde^ whom he will, for his merits verily going
before: but yet such as are common oftymes to him, upon whom he has mercy. As
of two twynnes whereof the one is taken, the other for saken: the end is diverse,
but the merits are common. Among who^ nevertheless, as the one is delivered by
the great mercy of God, so the other is damned by no iniquite upon gods
behalf. For is there any iniquity with God? God forbydde. But his ways are
past fyndyng out. Let us therefore believe most certainly, what we ought to
believe.
that his mercy is showed in them that are delivered, and his truth in them
that are punyshed: neither let us go about to search out such things as are
unsearchable, nor to find out such things as are paste fynding out. For out
of the mouth of infantes and suckelynges he has made perfyte his praise:
Psalm. 8.
that that which we perceive in them, whose delyueraunce no good merits of
theirs went before, and in them whose damnacion only original sin common to
them both went before: the same we should not doubt to be done to them also,
that be of age and discrecion, that is to say, that we should not think,
Grace is not given to any man for his merits.
either that grace is given to any man for his merits, or that any man is
punyshed but for his merits, whether that they which are delivered and
punyshed, have their euel causes like or unlike, that he that seems to stand
should take heed that he fall not: and that he that does glory, 1. Cor. 10.
Iere. 9.
should not glory in himself, but in the Lord. But why can not these men
abide (as ye write) that the cause of infa^tes, should be brought forth for an
ensample of such, The Pelagians and Maniches deny original syn
as are of age and discrecion, which doubt not to confess against the
Pelagians original sin, that thoroughe one man entered into the world, and
that by one man damnacion is come upon all men? The which also ye Manicheis do
not allow, which have in no reverence, not only the scriptures of thold
testament, but also they do receive the scriptures that belong to the new
testament after such a manner, that by a certain privilege of their own, yea
rather sacrilege, they allow what they will, and what they will not allow,
they reiecte. Against whom I wrote in my book of fre choice: out of the which
these brethren think to prescribe against us. Prescripcion.
Therefore would I not clearly dissolve the most besy and hard questions that
there happened, lest my work should have be^ to long, whereas the authorite of
Gods word did not help me, against these that are so perverse and wicked.
And I could have concluded (as I did) with an undoubted reason, which soever
of these should be true, which I did not then determinatlye auonche that God
ought to be praised in all things, The wicked heresy of the Maniches.
without any necessity to believe, that there should be two coeternall
substances of good and evil myngled together. Furthermore in the first book of
retractacions, (which work of mine you have not yet read) when I was come to
the retracting of the same books of free choice, thus I spoke: In these books
(I say) many things are disputed after such a manner, that certain questions
happenyng (which I was not either able to dissolne, or else required at that
present a long declaracio^) might be to that end deferred, that upon both
parts, or upon every of the parts of the same questions (it did not appear
what was most consonant unto the truth) our disputacion might be yet
concluded upon this point, that (which soever part should be true) men might
believe and also perceive that God ought to be praised. The fountain of evil.
That disputacion was taken in hand for their sakes, which deny that euel do
originally spring of the free choice of will: and do contend that God (if this
be so) the creator of all natures ought to be blamed, willing by this mean
according to their ungodly error, (for they are Manitheis) to bring in a
certain nature of euel, unchangeable, and coeternal to God. In like manner a
little after in an other place. After these it was declared (said I) out of
what mysery (most justly throwe^ upon sinners) the grace of God did deliver,
because man was able willyngly, that is, by free choice to fall, but not in
like manner to rise again: unto which mysery of just damnacion, ignorance and
difficulty do apperteine, Difficulte, troble, painfulnes, danger, travel.
which every man do suffer from the beginnynge of his natiuite, neither is any
man delivered from this evil, but by the grace of God. The which myserye the
Pelagians would not have to spring of just damnacion, denyeng original
sin. Although ignorance and difficulty did apperteine unto man in their
natural beginninges, yet ought not God to be blamed but praised, as in the same
third book we have disputed. The which disputacion ought to be had against
the Manicheis, which do not allow the holy scriptures of the old testament,
wherein original sin is declared And what soever is read in thapostles
wrytynges, that is taken out of tholde testament, they contend with detestable
unshamefastness, that it was thruste in of them that corrupted the scriptures,
as tho it had not be spoken of thapostles.

But against the Pelagians that ought to be defended, that both the new
testament and tholde do approve, which they profess, that they do allow.
These words did I speak in the first book of my retractacions, when I
retracted my books of fre choice. Neither are these things only there spoken
of me concerning these books, but many other also, which I thought to long,
and not necessary to be put into this work written to you: which I think you
will also judge, after ye have read altogether. All tho we did then so dispute
of infantes in the third book of fre choice, that notwithstanding that were
true, which the Pelagians do afferme, that ignorance and difficulty (without
which no man is borne) be the begynnynges, and not the punishments of nature:
yet should the Manicheis be overcome, which will have two natures of good and
evil to be coeternall: should therefore the faith be called into doubt, or
else forsaken, which the catholyke church do defend against the self
Pelagians, which do confess original sin, the gylt whereof is drawn by the
first birth, and losed by the second birth? But if they also together with us
do acknowledge this, that we may both together in this matter, destroy the
Pelagians error: Why think they that it should be doubted, that God does also
deliver from the power of darkness, Collo. i.
and does transtate into the kyngdo^e of the bryghtenes of his son those
infantes, unto whom (through the sacrament of baptism) he has given his
grace? Grace is not given to all.
In that then that he gives this grace to some, but to some he does not give
it, why will they not sing unto the Lord mercy and judgment? But why this
grace is rather given to some then to other, who has known the Lord his
mind? Roma. 11
Who is able to search out such things as ar unsearchable? Who is able to
find out such things as are paste fyndyng out?

The.xii. Chapter.
YT is therefore brought to pass that the grace of Go^d is given not
according to the merits of the^ that receive the grace, but according to the
good pleasure of his will, unto the praise and glory of the self grace of his,
that he that does glory, should in no wise glory in himself, but should
glory in the Lord: which gives to such men as he will, The will of god.
because he is mercyful: and if he gave not, yet he is ryghtfull: and to whom
he will not give, he does not give: that he may cause the riches of his glory
to be known, Roma. 9
among the vessels of mercy. For in giving to certain that which they do not
deserve, he would undoubtedly have his grace to be fre, and so to be his grace
in deed: Grace.
but in not gynyng to all, he does declare what all did deserve. He is good in
showing mercy to some, he is just in punyshyng the rest: Yea he is good to
all, For it is a good thing to render that which is duty: and he is just to
all, for it is a just thing, when that which is dew, is given without fraud
of any man. But the grace of God is defended to be without merits, that is, to
be true grace, although the baptized infantes be not (as the Pelagians judge)
delivered from the power of darkness, because they are not (as they think)
holden under any sin, but are only translate into the kingdom of the Lord:
For so also the kingdom of heaven is given, Heaven given to infantes with out
merits.
(to whom it is given) without any good merits: and to whom it is not given,
without any euel merits, it is not given. The which we are wont to obiecte
against the same Pelagians when they lay to our charge, that we ascribe the
grace of God to desteny in affermyng that it is not given for our merits sake.
Satum.
But they do rather in infantes ascribe the grace of God to destenye, which
say that there is desteny, where as is no merit. For no merits by the self
Pelagians judgment also, can be found in young children, why some of them
should be sent into the kingdom, and some of them should be banyshed out of
the kingdom. But like wise as (that I might declare that the grace of God is
not given for our merits sake) I had now rather defend this, according to
both our judgments, that is, as well according to our own judge met, which
do afferme that young children are bond under original sin: as also the
judgment of the Pelagians, which deny original sin: (And notwithstanding
this I ought not therefore to doubt, but that the infantes have somewhat, which
he may forgive them, that do save his people from their sins) Even so also
in my third book of fre choice, Math. 1.
I did resyste the Manicheis according to both vndersta^dinges, whether
ignorance and difficulty (without the which no man is borne) be the
punyshmentes, or the begynninges of nature, and yet nevertheless I do defend
but one part of those. I have there also evidently enough declared, that this
is not the nature of the created man, S. Aug. books were objected against
himself.
but the pain of the condemned man. The au^cienty therefore of that my book,
is vaynely objected against me as a prescripcio^ that I should not entreat the
cause of infantes, as I ought to do, and upon their cause convince by the light
of the manifest truth, that the grace of God is not given for man's merits
sake. For if I (when I began my books of fre choice at Rome being a lay man,
and did fynyshe the same in Aphrica being priest) did yet doubt both of the
da^nacion of infantes that were not regenerate, and also of the delyueraunce of
them that were renewed: No man (as I suppose) is so unjust and so envious, Who
be unjust and envious.
which would forbid me to profit and go forwards, and would judge it mete,
that I should continue and abide still in this doubt. But seeing this may be
understand more truly, they ought not to think that I therefore doubted of
this matter, because I thought it good thus to convince them, against whom I
the^ wrote: that whether these were the pain of original sin in young
children (according as the truth teaches:) or were not (as some errynge
suppose.) Nevertheless the mynglyng together of two natures, that is, of good
and evil (which the Manitheis error does bring in) ought not to be believed
in no wise: God forbid that we should leave ye cause of young children after
such a manner, that we should say, that we were uncertain, whether the
infa^tes that dye being regenerate in Christ, do pass into eternal lyse: but
those that are not regenerate, do pass into the second death: because it is
written, By one man sin entered into the world, and death by the means of
sin, and so death went over all men: Roma. 5.
Otherwise this can not be truly under stand: neither do any deliver from
eternal death (wherewith sin is most justly recompensed) either great or
small, but he only, which being without any sin of his own, either
original or actual, dyed for the remission of our sins, Let us not be
ashamed to repere one answer to the same obieccion
both original and actual. But why do he deliver rather these the^ them? We say
again and again, neither ar we weary or ashamed of this answer, O man what
art thou that disputest with God? his judgments are unsearchable, and his
ways past finding out: whereunto we add this, To. 9.11. Eccle. 3.
Seek not out the things that are above thy capacity, and search not out ye
things that are to mighty for thee. Do you not perceive dearly beloved, how
folyshe an opinion it is, and how contrary to the wholesome faith and sincere
truth, that we should affirm that young children yt be dead, shall be judged
according to such works, as they were afor seen to have done, if they had
lived? In to this opinion are they compelled to fall (which certainly all men
that have understanding (thoo they have never so little wit) and namely
christians do abhor) which would none otherwise varey from the Pelagians
error, but that they might yet stille think it lawful for them to believe, and
also to defend by disputacion, that the grace of God through Jesus Christ our
Lord (whereby alone, We are helped by grace alone.
after the fall of the first man, in whom we all fell, we are helped) is given
according to our merits. Which Pelagius himself (for fear that he should be
condemned) did condemn in the presence of the bishops of the East church
being his judges. But if this can not be affirmed (I mean) of the works of
the dead, good or evil, which they should have done if they had lived, and
therefore none at al, and such as never shall be in Gods forknowlege: but if
this (I say) can not be affermed (which you perceive how falslye it should
be said) what remains there, but that we should (blind contencion set apart)
acknowledge and confess, that the grace of God is not given for our merits,
Thennemies of grace are uone of the catho like church.
which the catholyke church do defend against the Pelagians heresye: And
this may we perceive by a more evident truth chefely in yongel children. For
neither is God compelled by desteny, either to help these infantes, or not to
help those, forasmuch as they have both one cause: neither yet shall we
think that human matters in young children, when reasonable souls shall be
either damned or delivered, are not governed by gods providence, but by
casual fortune, Seeing that not so much as one sparowe does fall upon the
earth, Mat. 10.
without our fathers will that is in heaven: or that the dyeng of children
without baptism, should be so imputed to the negligence of the pare^tes, that
gods judgments wrought no thing in that matter: as tho they themselves
(which by this means do myserably dye) had chosen to the^ selves, by their
own will such negligent parents, of whom they might be borne. Gods
iugententes in children.
What should I speak of this, that some time the infant gives up the ghost,
before he can be helped by the mynistery of him that do baptize? For often
times when the parents have made haste, and the ministers were ready, that the
infant might be baptized, yet God would not have it to be baptized, which did
not keep it alive, that it might be baptized.

What should I speak also of this, that sometime the infantes of infidels may
be helped by baptism, that they should not go into perdicion, and the infantes
of the faithful can not be helped by baptism? Wherein is certainly derlared,
that before God there is no respect of persons: For then he would rather
deliver the young children of his worshippers, then of his enemies.

The.xiii. Chapter.
But now (seeing we entreat of the goodness of perseverance) what means this,
that one being at deaths door, is helped that he should not dye without
baptism, and an other that is baptized, is not helped, that he might dye
before he fall. Except paraduenture we will yet harken unto that absurdite,
whereby it is auermed that it does nothing profit any man to dye before he
fall, because he shall be judged according to those deeds, that God knew
aforehande that he would do, if he did live.

Who can patiently hear, who can abyd this peuishe opinion, ye does so
excedyngly repugne against ye wholesome faith? And nevertheless they that will not
confess ye the grace of God is not given according to our merits, are
constrained to afferme this. But they that will say, that every one of the
dead shall be judged, according to those deeds, which God knew aforeha^de,
that every one would do if he lived, (perceiuyge with how manifest falshode
and great absurdite this is affermed) there is nothing left wherefore they
should say that which Pelagius condemned, What opinion the church compelled
pelagius to condemn.
and which the church caused him to condemn, that the grace of God was given
for our merits: Seeing they perceive, that young children are taken out of this
world, some being not regeuerat unto eternal death, but other that are
regenerate unto eternal life. And among them also that are regenerate, some
do depart hence perseueryng to thend: other are kept here until they may fall
away, which certainly should not have fallen, if they had departed hence,
before they did fall: And again some that are fallen do not depart this life
before they may repent, which certainly should have peryshed, if they had
departed this life, before they had repented. Whereby it is plainly enough
beclared, that the grace of God as well to begin, as to continue also unto
the end, is not given according to our merits, but is given according to his
most secret will, and the same also most just, most mercyful, most wise:
For whom he has predestinate, To. 8.11.
them has he also called with that calling, whereof it is said, The gifts and
calling of God are such, that it can not repent him of them: No man with
certain affirmacion can be judged of me^ to belong unto this calling before he
shall depart out of this world: but in this life (which is a te^tacion upon
earth) he that seems to stand, let him take heed that he fall not. i. Cot. 10.
For therefore (as we said before) by the most provident and forseyng will of
God, they that shall not continue, are myngled among them that shall continue:
that we might learn not to be hye minded but to make our selves equal to
them of the lower sort, Romans 12.
and to work our own salvation with fear and tremblyng. For it is God that
works in us, both to will, Phi. 2.
and also to work, even of good will. We will then, but it is God that works
in us also to will: we work then, but it is God that do also work in us the
work, even of good will. It is expediet for us both to believe this, and also
to confess this, This is godly, this is true, that our confession may be
humble and lowly, and that all may be ascribed unto God. We thynking believe,
thinking we speak, thynkyng we do what soever we do: but as touching that,
that apperteine unto the way of godlynes, 2. Cor. 3.
and true worship of God, we are not able to think any thing as of our selves,
but our ablenes comes of God. For our own heart and our own thoughts are
not in our own power: wherefore the same Ambrose which taught this, said also,
Ambro.
who is so blessed, that in his heart do always ascend? But without Gods
help, how can this be done? certainly by no means. Furthermore he says
upon the same scripture, Blessed is the man whose help comes of the O Lord,
Psalm. 83.
whose heart is bent toward heaven. That Ambrose might speak this, he did
not only read it in the holy scriptures, but he felt also the same in his
heart, as we ought without all doubt to believe of that man. Therefore that which
is spoken in the Sacraments of the faithful, that we should lift up our
hertes unto the Lord, is the gift of the Lord: For the which gift, they unto
whom those words are spoken, Thinfe you that this admonicion was in a
strange tongue, spoken to so me little boy stan dyng at an altares end? Collo.
3.
are admonished by the priest, to give thanks unto the Lord our God, after
which words they make answer, that it is both mete and right, that they
should so do. For as much then as our own heart is not in our own power, but
is helped with Gods help, that it may ascend, and be fired upon such
things that are above, where as Christ is sitting at the right hand of God,
and not upon such things as are upon earth: unto whom should we give
thanks, for this so great a benefyte, but unto the Lord our God that works
ye same, which by the like benefyte delyueryng us, has chosen us out of ye
bottom of this world, and predestined us before the foundations of the
world were laid?

The.xiiii. Chapter.
The doctrine of predestinacion is no hinderaunce to preaching.
BUt they say, that the definition and determinacio^ of predestinacion, is
contrary to profitable preaching, as tho it had hyndered the preaching Apostle.
Did not that teacher of the Gentyls in faith and truth, many times commend
predestination, and nevertheless ceased not to preach the word of god? Because
he said, it is God that works in us both to will and work, even of good will
did he not therefore exhort us both to will and also to work those things
that please God? Phi. 2.
Or because he said, he that has begone in you the good work, Phi. 1.
will verforme it, even until the day of Christ Jesus: did not he council men
buthe that they should begin, and also continue unto the end? For the Lord
himself commanded men that they should believe, and says, believe ye in God
and believe in me? Joan. 14.
and yet neither was his saying false, nor his determinacion vain, where he
says, No man comes unto me, that is, no man believes in me, except it were
given him of my father. Joan. 6.
Nor yet, because this determinacion is true, therefore is that commandment
vain. Why then do we think, that the determinacion of predestinacion is
unprofitable, seeing the self same scripture of God does commend it, that do
teach us to frequente and use all these, namely preaching, co^maundyng,
exhortyng, rebukyng? Dare any man say, that God knew not aforehande unto whom
he would give faith, that they might believe? or that he knew not aforhande
whom he would give unto his son, Jo. 6.7.
that he should not lose one of them? all which if he knew aforehande, he
knew aforehande undoubtedly those his benefits, whereby he does vouchesaue to
deliver us. This precestinacion of saints is nothing else, what is
predestinacion.
but for the foreknowlege and preparacion of the benefytes of God, whereby they
are most certainly delivered, as many as ar delivered. But as touching the
rest, where are they left but in the lump of perdicio^ by the iusse judgment
of God? wherein were lest they of Tyrus and Sido^, which might also have
believed, if they had seen those wonderful, signs of Christ. But because it
was not given them, that they should believe, therefore that was also denied
them, whereby they might believe. Whereby it appears, that some have in the
self nature, a gift of god naturally to understand, whereby they may be moved
to believe, if they shall either hear words, or sesygnes, agreyng and
conformable to their minds: and nevertheless if they be not in the deep
judgment of God severed and parted from the lompe of perdicion, through the
predestinacion of grace, the self words and miracles of God are not applied
unto them, whereby they should believe, if they either herd them, or saw them.
In the same lompe of perdicion were the Iues also left, which could not
believe the great and manifest miracles, that were wrought before their own
eyes. But why they could not believe the Gospel has declared saying, Job. 12.
but when he had done so many miracles before them, yet believed not they on
him, that the saying of Esaias yt prophet might be fulfilled that he spoke.
Esa. 53.
Lord, who believed our saying? and to whom is the arm of the Lord opened?
Therefore could they not believe, because that Esaias says again. He has
blinded their eyes, and hardened their heart, that they should not se with
their eyes, and understand with their hertes, and should be converted and I
should heal them. The eyes therefore of them of Tyrus and Sido^ were not so
blinded, nor their heart so hardened, For they had believed, if they had seen
such miracles as these saw: but it did neither profit the^ that they might
have believed, for they were not predestinate of him, whose judgments are
unsearchable, and his ways past finding out: Romans 11.
neither should it have hindered these, that they could not believe, if they had
be^ so predestinate, that God would have lyghtned the^ being blind, and would
have taken from them their stony heart heyng hardened. Nevertheless that which
the Lord spoke of the Tirians and Sidonians, may be vnderitande parhappes
some other way, yet he does undoubtedly confess, that no man comes unto
Christ except it shall be given him, and that this is given unto them, which were
chosen in him before the making of the world, which does hear the word of
God, not with the ears of ye flesh, but with the ears of the heart: And that
not wythstandyng this predestinacio^ (which is also declared by the words of
ye gospel very manifestly) did not let ye Lord to say the words which I
recited a little before, both to move us to begin (believe ye in God and believe
in me) and also to continue saying, Joh. 14.
that we must always pray and not be weary. Luce. 18.
For they unto whom it is given, do both hear and do, but they unto whom it
is not given, do not, whether they hear, or they hear not. For unto you
(says he) it is given, Math. 13.
to know the mystery of the kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given:
whereof one of these belong to the mercy, Psalm. 100
the other to the judgment of him, unto whom our soul does say. O Lord I
will sing unto thee mercy and judgment. Neither the^ should the faith that
continues and goes forwards, be hyndered by the preaching of predestinacion,
that they may hear that which behooves them to hear, and that they may
obey, unto whom it is given. For how shall they hear without a preacher? Nor
yet by the preaching of faith that goes forwards, and continues unto the end,
should the preaching of predestinacion be hyndered: that he which lives
faithfully and obedie^tly, should not for the same obedience be extolled, as
tho he had not received it, but had it of himself, but that he which does
glory might glory in the Lord. Nothing is our own. Cipriane.
For we ought to glory in nothing, for nothing is our own. This thing
Cipriane most faith fully perceived, and most boldlye determined, whereby he
did undoubtedly pronounce, that predestinacion was most certain. For if we
ought to glory in nothing, forasmuch as no thing is our own, certainly we
ought not to glory of obedience, tho it had continued never so long. Neither
ought it so to be counted ours, as tho it were not given us from above. And
therefore the self perseueraunce is the gift of God, which every christian
ought to acknowledge, that God knew aforehande, that he would give to his
called, being called with that calling whereof it is said, Calling.
the gifts and calling of God ar such, Romans 11.
that it can not repent him of them. This is therefore the predestinacion,
which we do faythfullye and humbly preach. And this notwythstande the same
teacher and doer (which both believed in Christ, S. Aug. preached predestinacion.
and also did continually live in holy obedience, even unto the suffering of
death for Christ's sake) did not therefore cease from preaching the Gospel,
exhorting to faith and godly works, and from the self perseueraunce unto
the end, because he had said, that we ought to glory in nothing, forasmuch as
nothing was ours: wherein he did most clearly set out the true grace of God,
that is, which is not given for our merits, which God knew aforehande that he
would give.

By these words of Cipriane predestinacion is undoubtedly commended, which if
it did not hinder Cipriane from preaching obedience, certainly neither ought it
to hinder us. Wherefore although we preach that obedience is the gift of God, yet
do we exhort men unto the same. But to them that do obediently hear the
exhortacion of the truth, the self gift of God is given, that is, to hear
obedie^tly: but they that do not hear after that manner, unto them it is not
given. For it is not every man, but it is Christ that says, no man comes
unto me, Ioh. 6.
except it were given him of my father: Math. 13
And unto you it is given to know the mystery of then kingdom of heaven, but
to them it is not given: And of continencye he says, all men can not away
with that saying, Math. 19
save they to who^e it is given. And when thapostle did exhort the married
folks unto the chastity of wedlock, 1. Corin. 7
I would all men were (says he) as I am my self, but every man has his
proper gift of God, one after this sort, an other after thatr where as he does
sufficiently declare, that not only contine^cy is the gift of god, but the
chastity also of the married. Seeing therefore these things are true, Chastity
in marriage.
we do exhort unto this as much as we can, and as much as God gives to every
one of us. For this is also his gift, in whose hand, are both we, and our
words. Whereupon thapostle says. According to the grace of God given to me,
1. Corin. 3.
as a wise buylder I have laid the foundation: and in an other place he
says, even as the Lord has given to every man, I have planted, Apollo has
watered but God gave thencreace. So then neither is he that planteth any
thing, neither he that waters, but God that gives thencrease. And thus, as
he does exhort and preach truly, which have received the gift so to do:
even so undoubtedly he does obediently hear the exhorter and preacher, which
had received this gift. Here of comes it, that when the Lord did speak
unto them, which had their carnal ears open, he said nevertheless, he that
has ears to hear, Luce. 8.
let him hear: which he knew most certainly that all had not. But of whom
they have these ears of hearing, who so ever have them, the Lord him self does
show where he says, I will give them an heart to know me, and hearing ears.
Then the ears of hearing, It is the peculiar gift of thelect to hear the
gospel obedie^tly.
is the self gift of obeyng, the which who that had, might come to him,
unto whom no man comes, except it were given him of his father. We therefore
do exhort and preach, and they that have ears of hearing, do hear us
obediently: but they that have them not, it happens unto them that which is
written, that they hearing, may not hear, that is, hearing with the ears of
the body, may not hear with the consent of the heart. But why these have
ears of hearing and the other have not, that is, whi it is give to them of
the father that they may come to the son, but to the other it is not given,
who has known te mind of the Lord? or who was his counselor? Or what art
thou O man that disputest with God? To. 11.9.
Should it therefore be denied that is manifest, because that can not be
comprehended which is secret? Should we therefore say (I say) that it is not
true, which we manifestly perceive to be true, because we can not find out,
why it is true?

The.xv. Chapter.
Predestinacion is no hinderaunce to rebuking or correcting.
But they say (as you wryt) that no man can be styrred up with the profyt of
rebukyng. If it should be preached in thassemble of the church, in the
hearing of a multitude, The determinate sentence of the will of God touching
predestinacion, is thus, That some of you did come from infydelitie to faith,
when ye received the will to obey, or may continue in faith after ye have
received perseverance: but as for the rest of you that do remain in the
delectacion of sin, you have therefore not yet risen, because the help of the
merciful grace have not yet raised you. Nevertheless if any of you be not yet
called, whom God has predestinate by his grace to be chosen, ye shall receive
the same grace, whereby you may will, and be chosen. But if any of you do now
obey, The words of an adversary.
and be predestinate to be reiecte, the power to obey shall be taken from you,
that you may leave obedience. But these their words, ought not to discourage
us from confessing the grace of God, that is, which is not given according to
our merits, and from confessing ye same grace to be given according to this
predestinacion of saints: Likewise as we are not discoraged from co^fessyng the
aforeknowlege of God, if any man should preach of it unto the people after
this manner, that he would say: whether ye now live godly or ungodly, ye shall be
such hereafter, as God knew aforehand that ye should be, either good, if he
knew ye should be good or euel, if he knew ye should be evil. For if after
the hearing of this doctrine, many be turned unto slothefulnes and negligence,
and being ready, from labor to lust, do follow their own concupiscences:
Should it be therefore thought, that that were false, which was spoken of the
foreknowlege of God? Shall not they be good (how ungodly now so ever they
live) which God knew aforhande should be good: but if he knew the^
aforehande to be evil, shall they not be euel, how Godly so ever they seame
now to be? There was one in our monastery, which being rebuked of the
brethren, because he did certain things that ought not to be done, and
omitted cectein things which he should have don, made answer and said, what
so ever I am now, I shall be such a one, as God knew aforeha^de that I should
be. Which undoubtedly said the truth, and yet by this true speaking, did not
profit in goodness: but fell so far unto wyckednes, that he (leauyng the
fellowship of the monastery) became a dog returned to his vomete: and
nevertheless what he yet shall be it is uncertain. 2. Pet. 2.
Should those things therefore which are spoken of the true forknowlege of
God, be either denied, or kept under silence for such occasions, namelye
then: when if they were not spoken, men do fall into other errors?

The.xvi. Chapter.
Prayer is not hyndered by preachi^g of predestinacion Math. 6.
There be also some, which do therefore either not pray at all, or pray very
coldlye, because they have learned of the Lords preaching, ye God does know
whereof we have neade, before we ask of him. Shall it therefore be thought
either that the truth should be forsaken, or else wyped out of the Gospel for
such men's judgments? but rather, seeing it is manifest that God has
prepared, to give some things to them also that pray not for them, as the
beginning of faith, and somthynges to none, but to such as pray for the^, as
perseverance unto the end: Certainly, who so ever thinks that he has this of
him self, prays not that he may have it. We must therefore take heed, lest
whiles we fear that prayer should not wax fervent, prayer be quenched, and
pride sit a fire. When the truth ought to be spoken, understand yt who that
can.
Let the truth therefore be spoken, namely where any doubt compels, that it
should be spoken, and let them understand that can, lest paraduenture they
which are able to understand the truth, whereby falshed may be eschewed,
should (whiles the trutho is kept under silence, for their sakes that can not
away with it) not only be spoiled of the truth, but also caught with
falshode. For it is a good matter, yea and also profitable, that some truth
should be kept in silence for their sakes, that can not away with it. For to
this purpose was that spoken of the Lord. Joan. 16. 1. Cor. 3.
I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye can not now bear them: and
that of thapostle, I could not speak unto you as unto spiritual, but as unto
carnal: even as unto babes in Christ. I gave you milk to drink, and not
meat. For ye then were not strong, neither are ye as yet. Nevertheless by a
certain manner of speech, it may be that the self thing that is counted to
be milk for babes, should be also meat for them that are strong. As for
ensample, In ye beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the
word was God. What christian can keep this secret? Who is able to understand
it?

Either what greater or higher matter can there be found in wholesome doctrine?
which nevertheless is not kept from babes under silence, nor yet hyd, either
from great or small. But the consyderacion to keep the truth under silence is
one, the necessity to speak the truth is an other. It would be a long matter
to seek out, or to write here, When the truth may sometime be in silence.
al causes of keeping silence of the truth, among the which yet this is one,
that we should not make the^ worse which do not understand, whiles we go
about to make them better learned, that have understanding: which (as long as
we keep such a rerteine matter in silence) are not in deed made better
learned, but neither are they made worse. But when a truth is after such a
sort that by declaryng the same, he that can not away with it is made worse:
and when we keep it in silence, he is made worse, that can well away with it,
what do we think ought then to be done? Should not the truth rather be
spoken, that he that can take it should take it, then to be kept in silence,
whereby not only neither of them may take it, but also he which is of better
understanding is made worse? Which if he did hear, and might away with it,
many also through him should learn. For ye better capacite he has to learn,
the more mete he is to learn other. The enemy of grace do prease on, and
enforce by all means, The ennemy of grace.
that grace should be believed to be given for our merits, and so grace
should now no more be grace. And shall not we speak that, which we are able
to speak by thautorite of the scriptures? For we are afraid forsooth left (if
we should speak) that he would be offended, Ironia.
which can not away with the truth, and are we not afraid, lest that by
holdyng our peace, he should be deceived with falshede, which can understand
the truth? For either must a predestinacion be preached after such manner, S.
Aug. dilemma
as the holy scripture does manifestly teach it, that the gifts and calling
of God in the predestinate be such, that it can not repent him be them: or else
we must confess, Romans 11.
that the grace of God is given arcordyng to our merits, according to the
opinion of the Pelagians: (Although this opinion (as we have now often said) be
read in the Acts of the Bishops of the East church, to be condemned by the
mouth of Pelagius himself.) Furthermore these for whom we take these pains,
are so far severed from the peuyshe heresy of the Pelagians, that although they
will not yet acknowledge, that they are predestinate, which by Gods grace are
made obedient, and do continue, nevertheless will they now confess that grace do
prevent their wills unto whom grace is given? Therefore certainly, that grace
should not be believed to be given freely, as the truth speaks, but rather
according to the merits of the will going before, as the Pelagia^s error
barketh against the truth. Grace do therefore go before faith also, otherwise
if faith go before grace, undoubtedly the will also goes before grace, because
faith can not be without the will. But if grace do go before faith, because it
does prevent the will, Certainly it goes before all obedience, it goes before
charity also, whereby only God is obeyed pleasauntly and truly: And in him in
whom are all these virtues, and to whom they are al given, grace do prevent
them, and work them.

The.xvii. Chapter.
Among these virtues there remains perseueraunce unto the end, which is daily
asked of the Lord in vain, if the Lord do not work ye same in him by his
grace, whose prayer he does graciously hear. Consider now how far it
varyeth from the truth to deny that perseueraunce unto the end of this life, is
the gift of God, forasmuch as he himself sends an end to this life, when
he will, which if he grant before the houeryng fall, he makes a man to continue
even unto the end. But the largest of Gods goodness appears more wonderfullye
and more manifestly to the faithful, in that this grace is given also unto
young infantes, Grace appears most manifestly in infantes.
which in that age have no obedience, wherefore it should be given. Unto whom
so ever therefore God do give these his gifts, out of doubt he knew aforehand,
that he would give them, and did in his forknowlege prepare them. Those then
whom he has predestinate, the self same has he also called, with that
calling whereof to make often rehearsal, I am neither weary nor ashamed: whereof it
is said, The gifts and calling of God are such, that it cannot repent him of
them. For this is certeinlye to predestinate, What is to predestinate.
and none other thing but only to ordeyne in his own foreknowlege (which can
neither be chasiged nor deceived) his own works that are to come. Gods
foreknowlege can not be changed nor deceyned.
As he therefore do so live that he may be chaste, whom God knew aforehande
would be chaste, (although this be unknown unto him) even so he who^ he has
predestinate to be chaste (although he be ignorant of this) do not therefore so
live that he should not be chaste, because he understands that he shall be
chaste by Gods gift, but rather his charity does also rejoice and he is
not puffed up, as tho he had not received the same. By the preaching therefore
of predestinacion, Iere. 9.
he is not only not hyndred from this work, but also he is thus far
forthered, that when he does glory, he might glory in the Lord. But that
which I have spoken of Chastity, may be also most truly verefied of faith,
of Godlynes, of charity, of perseue rau^ce (and that I may not rehearse every
one) the same may be said of all obedience, whereby men obey God, But these men
which do so place and appointe the only beginning of faith, and perseueraunce
unto thend in our power, that they think them not to be the gifts of God,
neither that God do work our cogitacions and wylles, that we may have and
keep the same, but as for other virtues, they grant that God does give them,
when they are opteined of him by faith of the beleuer: why are they not
afraid, that their own exhortacion unto these other virtues, and other men's
preaching should be hyndered by the determinacion of predestinacion? Will they
also paraduenture say, yt these are not predestinate? If it be so, either they
are not given of God, or else he knew not that he would give them. But if they
be both given of God, and also he knew aforehand that he would give them,
certainly he did predestinate them. As therefore they do also exhort to
chastity, godlynes, and other which they confess to be the gifts of God and
they ca^ not deny but that they were foreknowen of him, and therefore
predestinate: neither do they say, that their own exhortacions are hyndered,
by preaching of gods predestinacion, that is, by preaching Gods
foreknowlege of these gifts of his to come: even so let them understand, that
their exhortacions either to faith or perseueraunce are not hyndered, if that
the self works (according to the truth) be counted gods gifts, and such
as were foreknowen, that is, predestinate to be given: but rather by the
preaching of predestinacion is hyndered, and quite overthrown that only most
pernicious error, what pernicious error that is, which is confounded by
preaching of predestinacion.
whereby it is affermed, that the grace of God is given for our merits, that he
that does glory, should not glory in the Lord but should glory in himself.
Which thing that I may declare more manyfestly, for their sakes that have
dulle understandings, I must desire them that have received of God quycke and
sharp wits, to bear with my taryeng: Iaco. i.
The Apostle James does say, if any of you want wisdom, let him ask it of
God that gives aboundauntly to al men, and casts no man in the tethe and it
shall be given him. Pro. 2.
It is written also in the proverbs of Salomo^, That the Lords gives
wisdom. And of continency it is read in the books of wisdom, the
authority whereof noble learned men have alleged, which long before our days
entreated the holy scriptures: there then it is read, when I knew that no man
could be continent, except God gave it: Gapi. 8.
and this self same was also a point of wisdom to know whose gift this was.
These therefore (that I may pass over other with silence) namely continency and
wisdom are the gifts of God. These me^ do also agree to these: For they are
not Pelagia^s, that they would contend against this manifest truth with a
stubburne and heretical peuishnes. But that these things (say they) might be
given us of God, faith has obtained which begins of us: the which faith
both to begin to have it, and also to continue in the same unto the end, they
contend to be our own, as tho we do not receive it of the Lord. Here
undoubtedly thapostle is agaynesayd, which says. For what haste thou, 1.
Cor. 4.
that thou have not received? The martyr Cipriane is also agaynsayd, that
says that we ought to glory in nothing, for as much as nothing is ours.
But when we have spoken both these and many other things which I am weary to
repete again, and have showed that both the beginning of faith, and also
perseuera^ce unto the end are the gifts of God, and that there were no gifts
of his to come, but that he knew them aforehand, both what should be given,
and also to whom they should be given, and therefore that they whom he does
deliver and crown, Our adversaries suppose and obiecte the self same.
were predestinate of him: they suppose that we ought be answered, that the
determinacion of predestinacion is contrary to profitable preaching, because
that after the hearing of it, no man can be stered up with the good profit of
rebukyng. They saying these words, would not have the gifts of God preached
to men, that they both come to faith, and also continue in the same, lest it
might seame, that men were rather brought to desperacion then exhorted, whiles
they that hear the preaching do think, that it is uncertain to man's
ignorance, unto who^e God will give these gifts, and to who^e he will not
give them. But why then do they themselves preach also with us, that wisdom
and co^tinency are the gifts of God? But if that exhortacion whereby we exhort
men to be wise and contine^t be not hyndered, although we preach that these are
the gifts of God: what in gods name is the cause, that they should think,
exhortacion to be hyndered, whereby we exhort men to come to the faith, and in
the same to continue unto thend? And if these may be counted gods gifts, as
it is proved by the witnesses of his scriptures, lo (that we may pass over
co^tinency with silence) let us in this place dispute of wysedo^e only.
Wysedo^e Iaco. 3.
For the fornamed thapostle James says. The wise done that comes from
above. First it is chaste, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be persuaded, full
of mercy and good fruits, inestimable, without simulacion. See you not, I pray
you, how wisdom comes down from the father of light, replenyshed with
many and great virtues? For every good gift (as the same Apostle says) and
every perfyte gift is from above, Iaco. i.
coming down from the father of light. Why then (that I may let other
things pass) do we rebuke the unclean and contencious, unto whom
nevertheless we preach, that chaste and peaceable wysedo^e is the gift of God:
neither are we afraid lest they (being troubled with the uncertainty of
Gods will) should find in this preaching more desperacion then exhortacio^.
And should be stered up with the good or prick of rebukyng, not against
themselves, but rather against us, because we do rebuke them having not these
gifts, which we say are not gotten by the will of man, but gyuyng through
the lyberalitie of God? Furthermore, why did not the preaching of this grace,
fear thapostle James himself to rebuke the unquiet, and to say, if you have
bitter enuyeng and strife in your hertes, rejoice not, neither be liars against
the truth: Iaco. 3.
this wisdom descends not from above, but is earthy and natural, and
deuelyshe. For where enuyeng and stryf is, there is unstableness, and al manner
of evil works. Therefore likewise as the unquiet ought to be rebuked, both by
the testimonies of Gods word, and also by the self deeds of ours, which
these have common with us, neither is this correction hyndered, because we
preach that peaceable wisdom is the gift of God, whereby the contenciouse
are corrected and healed: even so infydeles, or they that continue not in the
faith ought to be rebuked, notwythsta^dyng the preaching of the grace of God,
whereby both faith it self also, and continuau^ce in the same, Iaco. i.
are commended to be the gifts of God: For although wisdom is obtained by faith
(as James himself when he said, if any of you want wisdom, let him ask of
God that gives aboundauntly to all men, and casts no man in the tethe and it
shall be given him: he added by and by: but let him ask in faith nothing
doutyng:) never theles because faith is given, before he does ask it unto
whom it is given, we may not therefore think, that it is not the gift of
God, but that we have it of our selves, because it is given unto us without
askyng. For thapostle says most manifestly, Ephe. 6.
Peace unto the brethren and charity with faith from God the father, and the
Lord Jesus Christ. He therefore that is geuer of peace and charity, is also the
giver of faith, For the which cause we beseech him, not only to increase faith
in them that already have it, but also to give faith to the^ that have it not.
Neither do these (for whose sake we speak these things, Our adversaries cry
after the same manner.
which cry out that by the preching of predestinasion and grace, exhortacion
is hyndered) exhort men unto those gifts only, which they contend, not to be
given of God, but to spring of our selves: as is the beginning of faith, and
co^tinuau^ce in the same unto thend: which certainly they ought to do, so that
they should only exhort the infydeles that they might believe, and them that
are faithful, that they might continue: but as for other which they together
with us deny not to be the gifts of God, that they may with us overthrow the
Pelagians error) as is chastity, continency, patience, and such other, which
are obtained by faith, and whereby men live godly, They ought only to declare
that men should ask these of God, and pray unto God, that he would give these,
both to themselves and to others, but they ought not to exhort any man to
take and reteyne these.

But seeing that they do also exhort men unto these gifts (as they may do) and
in exhortyng confess them selves to be me^, they do declare manyfestly, that
exhortacions either to believe, or to continue unto the end, are not hyndered
by this kind of preaching, because we preach that these also are the gifts
of God, and that no man have them of himself, but they are given of him. But
that every man through his own leudnes forsakes faith, when he gives place
and consents unto tentacion, whereby it is wrought in him yt he does forsake
faith, who denies this? But we should not therefore say that perseueraunce in
faith were not the gift of God. For he that says, lead us not into
tentacion, does ask this daily: and if he be graciously herd, he receives
this: and therefore he daily prayeng that he may continue, do certainly put the
hope of his perseueraunce, not in him self, but in God. But I will not amplify
this matter with my words, but I leave it rather to he judged of themselves,
that they may perceive, what manner a thing that is, wherein they have persuaded
themselves, Are not owr aduersarcis also persuaded even thus.
yt by preaching of predestinacion, the people are rather brought in to
desperacion, the^ exhorted to live godly: This is even as much as if they
should say that a man must then despair of his salvation, when he has
learned to put his hope, not in himself but in God: when as yet the Prophet
cries. Iere. 17.
Cursed is every one that puts his trust in man.

These gifts of God which are given to the chosen, that are called at cordynge
to the purpose of God, among the which the beginning of faith, and
perseueraunce in the same unto the end of this life (as we have proved both by
many reasons, Fol. 100.
and also by the wytnessynge of many authorities) certainly these gifts of God
(I say) are not for known of God, if there be no such predestinacion as we
defend: But they are foreknowen, this is therefore the predestinacion which we
defend.

The.xviii. Chapter.
Wherefore the same predestinacion is sometime sygnifyed by the name also of
foreknowlege, as thapostle says, God has not cast away his people which he
knew aforehande.

This that he says he knew before hand, is not truly understand, Romans 11.
but by this, he did predestinate, as the circumstaunce of the self place
does declare: For he spoke of the remnauntes of the Iues that were saved, when
the rest did peryshe. For before he said, that the prophet had said unto
Israel, Esa. 63. Romans 10.
all the day long have I stretched forth my hands, unto a people yt believes
not, but speaks against me: and as thoo he had been answered.

What is therefore become of Gods promises made unto Israel, he added
straitwayes, I say then, has God cast away his people? God forbydde. For
even I also am an Israelite, of the sede of Abraham, and of the Tribe of
Benjamin, as tho he should say, for I am also of the self people: Then after
he added that, whereof we now speak, God has not cast away his people which
he knew aforehande. And that he might declare that there was a remnaunt left
through the grace of God, not through the merits of their works, he added
afterward, either wot ye not what the scripture says of Glias, how he
makes intercession to God against Israel, and so forth But what says the
answer of God again to him (says he) I have reserved unto my self seven
thousand men, 3. Re. 19.
which have not bowed the knee to Baal. For he said not, there are reserved
for me: or they have reserved themselves for me, but, I have reserved unto my
self. And therefore he says, even so at this time, the remnaunt are saved
through theleccion of grace. But if it be of grace, then is it not of works.
For then were grace no more grace. And he ioynyng those words which I have
now before written, and aunsweryng to this question, said, what then? Israel
has not obtained that he soughts. No, but yet thelection has obtained it, the
remnaunt are blinded. Therefore in this election, and in these remnauntes which
are left through thelectio^ of grace, he would have the people to be
understand, whom God had not therefore cast away, because he knew them
aforehande. This is that election, whereby he chase whom he would in Christ,
before the making of the world, that they might be holy and blameles in his
sight in charity, predestinating them to make them his sons by adoption.
Noman therefore that understands these things, is permitted either to deny
or to doubt, that thapostle did signifye predestinacion, when he said, God
has not cast away his people whom he knew before. For he knew before a
remnaunt, which he would save through thelection of Grace: that is therefore to
say, he did predestinate, for undoubtedly if he did predestinate, he knew
before: for to predestinate is to know before that, which he himself would do.
What does then forbid us, when we read of the foreknowlege of God, among some
interpretors of Gods word which do entreat of the calling of thelecte, to
understand the same predestinacion? But peradventure they did rather covet to
use this word in this matter, both because it is more easy to be under
stand, and also because it does not only not repugne, but rather a gree to
the truth, which is preached of the predestinacion of grace: This I am
assured of, Erronius disputers.
that no man wych out error could dispute against this predestinacion, which
we defend according to the holy scriptures.

The.xix. Chapter.
Nevertheless I suppose, that they which require the judgments of
interpretours in this matter, ought to be satisfied with the authority of holy
Cipriane and Ambrose, Cipriane Ambrose
men notablye and co^mendably known in the christian faith and doctrine, whose
testimenies (that are so manifest) we have alleged: that is, that they beleuyng
the grace of God to be free in every point as it ought to be believed, might
preach the same by all means as it ought to be preached: and also that they
should not think the same preaching of grace, to be contrary to that
preaching, whereby we exhort the slothful, or rebuke the euel. Because that
these men also, when they did preach the grace of God after such manner, that
one of them said, we ought to glory in nothing, for as much as nothing is our
own: the other said, that our own heart and our own thoughts, were not in
our own power: nevertheless they ceased not both to exhort, and also to
rebuke, that the commandments of God might be observed: Neither were they
afraid, that it should be objected against them: why do you exhort us? Why do
you rebuke us if we have no good thing of our own, and if our own heart be
not in our own power? These holy men could not be afraid lest that these
things should be objected against them: whereby they understood that it was
given to very few, that they might receive the doctrine of salvation, not by
the preaching of any man, but by the Lord himself, or else by the Angels of
heaven: but that it was given to many that they might believe God through men.
Nevertheless by what so ever mean gods word is preached unto man, undoubtedly
it is the gift of God, that any should so hear, that he may obey ye same.
Wherefore thaforsayd most excellent interpreters of gods word, did both
preach ye true grace of God as it ought to be preached, that is, such grace as
no ma^s merits do prevent, and also did in stantlye exhort men to keep God
his commandments, that they which had the gift of obedience, might hear
what co^mau^deme^ts they ought to obey: For if any manner of merits of ouers
do prevent or go before gods grace, Certeinlye it is either the merit of
some deed, or of some word, or of some thought, wherein is understand also
the self good will. But he which said that we ought to glory in nothing,
forasmuch as nothing is our own, did briefly comprehend al kinds of merits:
but he ye said, that our own heart, and our thoughts, were not in our own
power did neither pass over deeds nor words, For there is neither word nor
deed of man, that do not proceed from the cogitacion of the heart.

But what could the most glorious martyr, and most eloquent doctor Cipriane,
do more in this matter then he does, when he teaches us, that we ought also
to pray in the Lords prayer, for thennemyes of the christian faith: (whereas
he does also declare, what he thought of the beginning of faith, that it was
also the gift of God) and shows that the church of Christ, do daily pray
for perseverance unto thend, because that God does give ye also, but only to
them that have continued, The blessed Ambrose in like manner when he did
expound yt which Luke theuangelist said, Ambrose
it seemed also good unto me: It may be (says he) that that seemed not good to
him alone, which he says seemed good unto him: For not by man's will only this
seemed good, but as it pleased him that speaks in me Christ, which does so
work, that that which is good, may also seem good to us: for upon whom he
has mercy, him does he also call. And therefore he that follows Christ may
(being demanded why he would be a christian) answer thus, it seemed also good
unto me: which answer when he makes, he denies not that it seemed good unto
God: For the will of man is prepared of the Lord.

For it comes of the grace of God, that God may be glorified of his saint.
In like manner in the same work, that is, in therposicio^ of the same gospel,
when he should come to that place, whereas the Samaritanes would not receive the
Lord going to Jerusalem: Learn also (says he) that he would not receive
them, that were not converted with a simple mind: For if he had would, he had
made them that were without devotion devout. But why they did not receive him
the self same Evangelist declares saying, because his face was, Luce. 9.
as though he would go to Jerusalem the disciples verily desired to be
received into Samaria, But God does call whom it pleases him, and makes
whom he will devout or religious, what is more plain, what do we seek more
evident of the interpretor of this word of God, if we delight to hear that
also of them, which is manifest in the scriptures? But to these two (which
ought to suffice) let us add also a third I mean) holy Gregory, which do
witness both that to be leave in God, Gregory nazianze ne not Gregory the. b.
of Rome.
and also to confess that which we believe is ye gift of God, saying, we
beseech you that ye will confess the Trinity of one Godhead. But if ye will
otherwise, say ye that they be of one nature, and God shall be beseched to give
you a voice from his holy spirit: that is, god shall be prayed unto, that he will
permit such a voice to be given you, whereby you may confess that, which you
believe. For I am certain that he that has given the first, will give the
second also: he that has given you believe, will give you also confession.
These excellent and noble doctors, affermyng that there is nothing whereof we
may glory as of our own, which God has not given us, and that not so much
as our own heart, and thoughts ar in our own power, but ascribyng all unto
God, and confessing that we do receive all of him, that we may be converted un
to him, and continue unto the end, that that which is good, may also seame good
unto us, and that we may will the same, that we may honor God and receive
Christ, that of un dououte we may be made devout and religious, that we may
believe in the self Trinite, and confess with mouth also that, which we
believe: These certeinlye do they ascribe to gods grace, these do they
acknowledge to be Gods gifts, They do witness that we have not these of our
selves, but of him. But will any man say, that these doctors did so confess
this grace of God, that they durst deny his foreknowlege, the which not only
the learned, but also the unlearned do confess? Furthermore if they knew,
that God did give these gifts after such a sort, that they were not
ignorant, that he knew aforehande, that he would give them, and that he could
not be ignorant to whom he would give them, out of al dout they knew
predestinacion, Thapostles preached predestinacion,
the which being preached by thapostles, we defend against new heretics with
great pain and diligence: and yet nevertheless it could not be iustlye objected
against the^ preaching obedience, and ernestly (according to their power)
exhortinge men to the same, if you will that obedience whereunto ye exhort us,
shall not wax cold in our heart, preach no more this grace of God unto us,
which we confess that God does give, whereunto ye also exhort us, that we may
do it.

The, xx. Chapter.
Wherefore if both thapostles, and also the doctors of the church that
succeeded them, and followed their ensample, did observe both these things,
that is, They did both truly preach the grace of God, which is not given
according to our merits, and did also teach godly obedience with wholesome
precepts: what is the cause that these our brethren being shut up: with
thinuineible power of the truth, do think that they themselves yet speak
truly: saying, although that which is spoken of the predestinacion of gods
benefytes be true, whether predestinacion ought to be preached.
yet ought it not to be preached unto the people. It ought to be preched in any
wise, that they which have ears to hear may hear But who is that that has
eats of hearing, if he have not received them of him which says: I will
give them an heart to know me, and hearing ears. Truly let him that takes
not, refuse, and retect, whiles yet he that takes, may take and drink, may
drink and live. For likewise as godlynes ought to be preached, that God may be
truly worshipped of him that has cares to hear: Chastity ought to be
preached, that no unlawful thing be committed with the priuey members of him,
ye has ears to hear. Charity ought to be preached, that God and the
neighbor may be loved of him, that has ears to hear, even so also this
predestinacion of gods benefits ought to be preached, that he yt has ears
to hear, may not glory in himself, but in the Lord. But where as they say,
that there was no need to trouble so many hertes, (of such as do not well
understand) with this vncer teintie of such disputacion, because the
catholic faith has be^ no less profitably defended, without this
determinacion of predestinacion so many years, both against other he retikes,
and specially against the Pelagians, as well with our own formare books, as
also with the books of many catholyke writters and others: I marvel much that
they will thus speak, and do not consider the self books of ours (that I
may at this present pass over other men's with silence) both written and
publyshed, before also the Pelagia^s began to appear, wherein they may
perceive, in how many places we (not knowing the Pelagians heresye to come) did
believe in preaching grace, whereby God does deliver us from our euel errors and
manners, workynge this, not for our good merits going before, but for his own
free mercy. The which thing I began more fully to understand, S. Aug. was
more sincere in doctrine after he was bishop, then he was before: God grant
that our b. may be so.
in that disputacion which I wrote unto Simplicianus of blessed reme^ braunce
bishop of the church of Millane, in the beginning of my byshopryche, when as
I both knew and also defended that the beginning of faith was the gift of
God. For which of my works could be better known, and more gladly read,
then the books of my confessions, seeing I had also published them before the
Pelagians he resye sprange up? In these books I said verily unto our God, and I
said often, give that thou commaundest, and command what thou wylt. The which
my words Pelagius could not abide, when they were rehearsed of a certain
brother a felowbyshop of mine in his audience at Rome, and he speaking against
them somewhat angerly, did almost fall out with him, that had recyted them.
But what else does God first and chiefly command us, but that we should
believe in him? and this then does he give, if it be well said unto him, give
that thou commaundest. And in ye same books also, that I might show my
conversion, when God converted me unto the faith, which I had wasted with
most miserable and furious bablyng: do you not remember that I declared the
same after such a sort, that I might show that I was converted by the
faithful and daily tears of my mother, that I should not peryshe? whereas I
did certeinlye preach, that God by his grace do convert men's wills, not such
only as are turned from the right faith, but such also as are adversaries unto
ye same. Furthermore how I prayed unto God, For perseueraunce that goes
forwards, ye both know, and can also declare when you list. Who therefore (I
will not say dare deny, but) dare once doubt, that God knew not a forehande
that he would give all his gifts, which I either desired, or praised in the
same work, and that he could never be ignorant to whom he would give them?

This is the manifest and certain predestinacion of saints, which necessity
after compelled us to defend more diligently and painful lie, when we did now
dispute against the Pelagians. For we have learned, that every heresye have
brought into the church their proper doubts, The catholic doctorce confuted
heretics wht God desiwode.
against the which the holy scripture might be the more deligently defended,
then if no such necessity had compelled. For what is that, that has enforced
the places of the scriptures, (where by predestinacion is commended) to be
defended more largely and manyfestly by this our trauail, but because the
Pelagians say, that the grace of God is given according to our merits:
which what else is it, but a manifest and utter denyeng of grace.

The.xxi. Chapter.
THat this therefore opinion which displeases God, might be destroyed, which
is enemy to the free benefytes of God, whereby we are delivered, we have
defended by the holy scriptures (out of the which we have now alleged many
places) that as well the gegynnyng of faith, as also perseverance in the same
unto thend, are the gifts of God. For if we do say, that the beginning of
faith is of our selves, that by it we may deserve to receive other gifts of
God, the Pelagians do conclude, that the grace of God is given according to our
merits. The which ye catholyke faith has so much abhorred, that Pelagius
(fearing to be condemned) did himself condemn it. In like manner if we say,
that we have our perseueraunce not of the LORD: but of our selves, they will
answer that we have as well the beginning of faith of our selves, as thend:
reasonyng thus, that we have much more of our selves that beginning of faith,
if we have of our selves the continuance in the same unto the end: Forasmuch
as to perform, is more then to begin: and so in like manner they conclude,
that the grace of God is given according to our merits. But if both be the
gifts of God, and that god knew aforehande, that he would give these his
gifts (which who can deny?) then ought predestinacion to be preached, that
the true grace of God (that is, which is not given according to our merits)
may be defended with an invincible fortress. And I verily do suppose, that in
that book whose title is, of correccion and grace (which could not satisfye all
our friends) that I have so plainly declared, that perseverance also unto thend
is the gift of God, as I did either in no place, or almost no where before
write the same so expressly and so manyfestly (if my memory do not fail me.)
But I did not so speak these, as tho no man before me had spoken the same: For
blessed Cipriane did so expound our peticions in the Lords prayer (as we
have before declared) that in the self fyrit peticion, he taught us to ask
perseueraunce: affermynge that we prayde for this when we said, thy name be
sanctified: that (forasmuch as we were already sanctified by baptism) we
might continue in that wherein we had be gonne. Nevertheless let these brethren
consider (unto whom for the good will they bear me I ought not to be
unthankful, which do profess (as ye wryre) that they do embrace all my
doctrines, except this that is now come into question:) let them I say
consydre, whether in the latter part of my first book, of the two books which
in the beginning of my byshopryche, I wrote unto Simplicianus bishop of
Millane, before the Pelagians heresy did appear, there were left any thing,
that might cause this to be called in to doubt, the grace of God is not given
according to our merits: and whether I did not there sufficiently prove, ye
the beginning also of faith was the gift of God: and whether upon those things
that are there spoken, it does not consequently follow (although the same be not
expressed) that also perseueraunce unto the end, is given of none but of him,
which has predestined us unto his own kingdom and glory. Furthermore did
I not publyshe many years agone, the self epistle which I had now written
against the Pelagians, unto ye holy Paulinus bishop of Nola (against the which
epistle they have now begone to bark) Let the^ also look upon that epistle,
which I wrote unto Sixtus priest of the church of Rome, when we strove against
the Pelagians in a sharp bickerynge: and they shall find it like unto that
which was wrote unto Paulinus. Let them therefore call to remembrance that
these were now many years agon spoken and written against the Pelagians
heresye, which (that is wonderful) do now displease the^: Nevertheless I would
have no man so to embrase al mine, that he should follow me in any thing, but
in such wherein he shall perceive that I do not err. How far. S. Aug. would
be followed.
For therefore do I now make books, where in I have taken in hand to retracte
my works, that I may declare, that I have not followed mine own self in all
points, but I suppose that I have through gods mercy writing as one that
goes forwards, although I was not perfect in the beginning: Follow then sample
of S. Aug. but beware ye follow not lottes wiffe nor demes that loved this
present world.
For I do speak more arroga^tly then truly, if I should yet say that I were
now in this age come to perfection in writing, with out any manner of error.
But there is great difference, how far and in what matters a man does err,
and how easily a man does either reform, or how stobernly he labors to
defend his error. For the is a good hope to be conceived of ye man, who^e the
last day of this life, shall find thus going forwards, that the things which
he wanted in his trauaillinge may be given him, and that he may be iuged rather
worthy to be made perfyt the^ to be punyshed. Whefore if I will not be
unthankful unto men, which did therefore love me, because they had received
some profit of my labors, before they loved me: how much more should I not
be unthankful unto God, whom we should not have loved except he had first
loved us, and had made us his lovers: for charity comes from him (as they
said) who^e he made not only his great lovers but also his chief preachers.
For what is more unthankful, then to deny the self grace of God, saying, that
it is given according to our merits? The which opinion the catholyke faith
has abhorred in the Pelagians, insomuche, that it was objected against
Pelagius himself as a capital crime, the which Pelagius himself not for the
love of God, but yet for fear of his own co^demnacion condemned. But who
soever would say, that the grace of God is given according to our merits,
which the faithful catholyke man do abhor, he may not wythdrawe the self
faith from the grace of God, by ye which grace he optained mercy, that he might
be faithful. And so let him ascribe perseueraunce also unto the end unto the
grace of God, whereby he obtains that which he daily asks, that he may not
be brought into tentacion. But between the beginning of faith, and end of
perseuerau^ce, there are mean gifts, where by we live virtuously, the which
(as they also agree) are given of God by the means of faith. But all these,
that is, as well the beginning of faith, as all other gods gifts eue^ unto
thend, God knew aforehand, that he would give the^ to those his called. It is
therefore a point of to great contencion, either to agaynstsaye predestinacion,
or to doubt of the same. Which never theles ought not to be preached unto the
people after such a sort, that it should seem by the self preaching to be
after a certain manner reprehended before the unlearned multitude, or before
such as have but a blunte understanding: as the foreknowlege of God (which
certeinlye they can not deny) seems to be reprehended, if it should be said
unto men thus: whether you run or sleep, you shall be such, as God A good
medicine evil ministered.
(that can not be deceived) has forknowe^ you to be. (It is the part of a
deceytfull physician, or of such one as is also unlearned, to minister a good
medecyne after such sort, that either it may hurt, or at least wise not
profit him to who^e it is ministered) 1. Cor. 9.
but we ought thus to say, run so that ye may obtain, and in this self
course of youres ye shall perceive, that ye are so forknowen of God, that ye may
run laufully: And if after any other manner the foreknowlege of God may be so
preached, that the sloggishenes of man may be banyshed away.

The.xxii. Chapter.
Although the^ the determinat sentence of gods will, touching predestinacion be
such, that some by receyuyng a will to obey are converted from infidelite unto
faith, orels continue in faith, but other which tarry in the delectacion of
damnable sins (if they be also of the nombre of the predestinate) have not
yet therefore risen, because the help of gods merciful grace, have not yet
raised them. For if any be not yet called, whom God through his grace have
predestinate to be chosen, they shall receive the same grace, whereby they may
both will to be chosen, and be also chosen in deed. But if any do now obey,
which never theles are not predestinate unto this kingdom and glory, they are
but for a time, How predestinacion ought to be preached to the people.
neither shall they continue unto the end in the same obedience. Although then (I
say) these things are true, yet ought they not to be preached in the
audience of the multitude so as these words should also be applied unto the^,
and that these words of these brethren should be spoken, which you have
written in your letters, and which I have declared before: The determinate
sentence of Gods will touching predestinacion is such, that some of you, by
receiuyng a will to obey, shall come from infidelite to faith. What neaded it
to be said some of you? For if we speak unto the church of God, if we speak
unto the^ that believe, why in saying that some of them are come to the faith,
are we judged to do injury to the rest: seeing we might more conveniently say,
The determinate sentence of Gods will touching predestinacion is such, that
by receyuynge a will to believe, ye are come from infidelity to faith, and may
continue in the same unto the end? Neither ought that which follows to be
spoken at al, that is, but the rest which do abide in the delectacio^ of
sin, ye are not therefore yet risen, because the help of gods merciful
grace, have not yet raised you: seeing, that it both may, and ought to be
spoken well and conveniently thus: But if there be any of you, that do yet abide
in the delectacio^ of damnable sins, take hold of most wholesome discipline.
Which nevertheless when ye have done, be not puffed up, as it were for your
own works, and glory as tho you had not received this. Phi. 1.
For it is God that works in you both the will and the work, even of good
will: and again your goinges are so guyded of the Lord, that you may covet
his way. But as touching your self good and godly runnynge know ye also
that it does apperteine to the predestinacion of Gods grace. In like manner
that which follows and is said: Nevertheless if any of you be not yet called,
who^e God through his grace have predestinate to be chosen, ye shall receive the
same grace, whereby ye may both will to be chosen, and be also chosen in deed:
this is sorer spoken, then it might be, if we do consider, that we speak not
to al sorts of me^, but to ye church of Christ. For why is it not rather
spoken thus: and if there be any yt are not yet called, let us pray for them,
that they may be called? For paraduenture they are so predestinate, that they
may be granted unto our prayers, and that they may receive the same grace,
whereby they may both desire to be elect, and be made so in deed. For God
which has fulfilled all things that he has predestinate, has wylled us also
to pray for the enemies of faith: that hereby we might understand, that he
does grant also unto the unfaithful that they may believe, and does make of
unwilling willinge. But that now which is joined unto these words, I marvel
if any weak membre among the christian congregation, can by any means
patiently hear, when it is said to them: And if any of you that do now obey,
be predestinate to be reiecte, the power to obey shall be taken from you, that ye
may fall from obedience, For thus to speak, what other thing seameth it else,
but to curse, or after a certain manner to prophecy mischief? But if it please
you, or if you think it necessary to speak somewhat also of the^ that do not
continue, why at the less wise do ye not rather speak after that manner, as is
spoken a little before: First that this should not be spoken of them, which
being among the people do not yet hear, but should be spoken of others to
them, that is, that it be not spoken thus, if any of you that do now obey be
predestinate to be rejected, but if any do obey, and so forth to be spoken by a
verb of the third person, and not by the second person, For an abominable
and no pleasant matter is spoken, and by this speaking, the foreheades of the
auditorye, are as it were most rygourously and most hatefullye knocked one
against another, when any man do say to them unto who^e he speaks: and if
any of you which do now obey be predestinate to be reiecte, the power to
obeyshal be taken from you, that you may fall from obedience. What part of
the sentence is left out, if it should be spoken thus: But if there be any that
do now obey, which never the les are not predestinate unto his kingdom and
glory, they are but for a time, neither shall they continue in ye same
obedience unto the^de? Is not now the same thing spoken both more truly and
also more comely, that we may not seame as it we to wyshe unto them so great
an evil, but to tell of other that which they hate, that they may not think
it to belo^ge unto them, which do hope and pray for better things. That same
phrase of speech, which they think ought to be used in predestinacion, may be
spoken in a manner by the same words also of gods foreknowlege (which
undoubtedly they cannot deny) so that it may be said, And if any of you, that
do now obey be foreknowen to be reiecte, ye shall fall from obedience. For as
this is most true, even so verily it is most impudent, most untimely, most
un comely, not because it is false doctrine, but because it is not holsomlye
ministered, unto the disease of ma^s infirmity. I think also that that manner
of speaking, which we have said ought to be used in the preaching of
predestinacion, should not suffice him that speaks to the people, except he
should add this, or some such like thing, that he would say. You ought
therefore to trust to obtain also the self perseueraunce in obedience of the
father of light, from whom comes down every good gift and every parfyte
gift, Iaco. 1.
and to ask the same by daily prayers, and in this doing to believe, that you
are not strangers from the predestinacio^ of his people, because he does
grant unto you, that you may also this do. God forbid that you should
therefore despair of your selves, because you are commanded to put your-trust
in him, and not in your selves. For every man is cursed, that puts his
trust in man: Ieri. 17. Psalm. 117, Psalm. 2. Tit. 1.
and again, it is better to trust in the Lord, then to trust in man: For
they are all blessed that trust in him. And you holdyng fast this hope, serve
the Lord in fear, and rejoice before him with tremblyng. For no man can be
certain of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, has promised before
theternall times unto ye sons of promise, before this life (which is a
tentacion upon thearth) shall be fynyshed: but he unto whom we do daily say,
lead us not into tentacion, shall make us to persevere in himself until
the end of this life. Seeing that these and such like are spoken whether it be
to a few, or to the hole multitude of the church, why are we afraid to
preach the predestinacion of saints, and the true grace of God, that is,
which is not given after our merits according as the holy scripture does teach
the same? Is it to be feared that a man should the^ fall into desperacion, when
he is taught to put his trust in God: and that he should not despair, if he
should most proudlye and most unhappily put his trust in himself? and I
would to god that such as have dulle understandings, and are weak, which
either can not, or at the least wise yet can not understand the scriptures, or
their exposicions, would either hear or not hear our disputacions in this
matter after such a manner, that they would rather diligently consider their
own prayers, which the church has always used from her beginning, and shall
use unto the worlds end.

The.xxiii. Chapter. He proves predestinacion and grace by ye prayers of the
church.

EOr the church have always made mention of this matter in her prayers which
we are now compelled against these new heretics, not only to make rehersall
of, but also to defend and maintain manifestly, yea and sometime she has
thought it good, yt it should be declared in sermons, when she was not vexed
with any aduersari. For when did not the church pray for infidels, and for her
enemies that they might believe? When was there ever any faithful man, that had
an infidele to his friend, neighbor, or wife, and have not desired for them of
the Lord such a mind, as might obey the christian faith? Who is it that do not
always pray unto the Lord, that he may continue in him? Or who at any time
hearing the priest calling thus upon the Lord for the faithful. O Lord
grant unto them, that they may continue in thee unto thend, durst either by
word, yea or by thought once reprehende him for this prayer, How could he
say, Ame^, except he understood his blissynge 1. Cor. 14.
and have not rather with a beleuyng heart and confessing mouth made answer
unto this his blessyng sayng, Amen. Seeing that the faithful in the self
prayer of the Lord, pray for nothing else, (namelye when they say this.

Lead us not into tentacion) but that they may continue in holy obedience. As
therefore in these prayers, even so also in this faith the church did spring
up; and does both grow, and have grown, by the which faith it is believed,
that the grace of God is not given, for the merits of the^ that receive it.
For neither would the church pray that faith might be given to infideles,
except she believed that God would turn men's wills unto himself, both of
such as are turned from him, and also of such as are enemies unto him: nor
yet would she pray that she being not deceived, nor overcome with the
tentacions of the world, might continue in the faith of Christ, except that
she believed that the Lord had our heart so in his own power, that
notwythstandyng we do not keep godlynes but by our own will, yet nevertheless
that we cannot keep the same, except he should work in us also the will. For
if the church askyng these things of him should think yt they were given her
of her self, the prayers that she uses are not true prayers, but made for a
facion: which God forbid that any of us should say.

For who can truly morn, desyring to receive of the Lord that which he
prays for, if he should think that he has this of him self, and not of
him: namelye because we know not what to desire as we ought, Romans 8.
but the spirit himself (says thapostle) makes intercession for us with
gronynges, which can not be expressed with tongue? For he that searches the
hearts knows what is the meaning of the spirit: for he makes intercession
for the saints, according to the pleasure of God. What means this, the
spirit makes intercession, but only that he makes us to make intercession
with unspeakable gronynges, but yet wc such as are true, because the spirit
is the truth? For the self same is he, of whom he speaks in an other place:
God sent ye spirit of his son into our hertes cryeng Abba father And what
means this cryeng, Gala. 4.
but making us to cry, by the same figure of speech that we use, when we call
that a merye day, that makes me^ meri? The which i^ an other place he
declares where he says. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage to
fear any more, but ye have received the spirit of adoption whereby we cry
Abba father. Romans 8.
There he said, that the spirit does cry, but here he says, by whom we
crier declaryng certainly what he mente, when he said cryeng: True and
spiritual prayer is gods gift.
that is, (as I have now expowned) making us to cry. Whereby we do understand,
that it is also the self gift of God, to pray unto God with a true heart and
spiritually. Let them therefore consider, how far they are deceived, which
think yt to ask, to seek, and to knock, come of our selves, and are not give
unto us. And this they say unto this end, that grace might be preached to
follow our merit, when we in askyng do receive, and in sekyng do find, and
when it is opened unto us knockyng. Neither will they understand that to pray,
that is, that we may ask, seek, and knock is also the gift of God: For we
receive the spirit of the sons of adoption, by whom we cry Abba father.
The which the blessed Ambrose perceived to be true: for he says, to pray unto
God appertains to spiritual grace: as it is written, 1. Cor. 12.
no man says that Jesus is ye Lord, but in the holy Ghost. These things
therefore which the church askethof the Lord, and which she has always
asked syns her beginning, The same God, knew aforehande that he would give to
such as are his called, according as he had now already given in the self
predestinacion, which thapostle declared with out all manner of doubt: For he
writing to Timothe says, 2. Tim. 1.
suffer thou adversity with the Gospel, through the power of God, which saved
us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our deeds, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which grace was given us through
Christ Jesus before theternall times, but is now declared openly by the coming
of our savior Jesus Christ. Let him therefore say that sometime the church
believed not the truth of this predestination and grace, which is now more
diligently defended against these new heretics, let him (I say) thus say,
which dare afferme, that some time she prayed not at all, or else that she
prayed not truly, both that the unfaithful might believe, and also that the
faithful might continue. The which good things if she always prayed for, she
did undoubtedly always believe yt they were the gifts of God, It was never
lawful for the church to deny the truth.
nether was it at any time lawful for her to deny, that the same were evermore
known of him. And thus it appears, that the church of Christ have always
believed this predestinacion, which against new heretics is now with a new
travel defended.

The.xxiiii. Chapter.
But what shall I say more? I suppose that I have sufficiently taught (or rather
more the^ needs) that both to begin to believe in the Lord, and also to
continue in him unto the end, The true worshippi^g of God.
are the gifts of God. But as for other virtues that belong to a godly life,
whereby God is truly worshipped, they also for whom we write these, do grant
that they are the gifts of God. Furthermore they can not deny, both that God
knew aforehande all his own gifts, and also that he knew before, to whom he
would give them. As other gifts therefore ought to be preched, that he which
preaches them may be obediently heard: even so also predestinacion ought to be
preached, that he which obediently hear these things, should not glory in
man, and therefore should not glory in him self, but in the Lord, because
also this is Gods commandment, that we should obedientlye hear: that is,
that he which glories, might glory in the Lord, is the gift of God in like
manner as other gifts be. To glory in the Lord is gods gift.
The which gift whosoever wants, I am not afraid to say, that what so ever
gifts he has besides, he has them in vain This gift we wyshe unto the
Pelagians, that they may have, but unto these our brethren we wyshe, that they
may have it more fully. Let us not be therefore ready to dispute, and stoo to
pray. Let us pray most derely beloved, let us pray, ye God may also give
grace to our enemies, and namely to our brethren and lovers, that they may
understand and confess, that no man (after that great and unspeakable ruin,
whereby all we fell in one man) can be delivered but by ye grace of God, and that
the same grace is not recompensed as dew, True grace.
for the merits of them that receive it, but is freely given as true grace, for
no merits sake going before it. For there is no clerer ensample of
predestinacion, then Jesus him self: whereof I have now disputed, both in my
first book, and the same I have also chosen to commend in the end of this: for
there is no ensample (I say) of Predestinacion more clear, then the self
mediator. What so ever faithful man is desirous truly to understand
predestinacion, let him behold him, and in him, he may also find himself: Let
the faithful (I say) do this, which do believe and confess, that the true
nature of man, that is, our nature is in him, notwythsta^dyng that it be
syngulerlye exalted to be the only son of God, by that that God the word
did take it, so that both he that does take, and it that was taken, might be
one person in Trinity. For by the taking of man, there was not a quaternite
made, but the Trinite continued, when the truth of one person in God and man,
was vnspeakeablye wrought, by the taking of man's nature. For we say not, that
Christ is God only, as the heretical Manicheis say: neither that he is Man
only, as the hereticalle Photinianes say: neither do we say, that he is man
after such sort that he should have any thing less, then other have, as
touching that which is certain to belong to man's nature: whether it be the
soul, or in the self soul the reasonable mind, or the flesh, not taken of
the woman, but made of the word, being converted and changed into the
flesh, all which being false, and the vain inuencions of the heretical
Appollinaristes, have made three several and diverse sects. A Christian and
true descripcio^ of Christ
But we say that Christ is true god, borne of God the father without beginning
of time, and that the same is true man, borne of his mother a woman, when the
appointed fulness oftyme was come: and that neither his humanite (whereby he is
inferior to the father) do in any point make less his divinity, whereby he is
equalle to the father: but that both these are one Christ, which according to
his divine nature did both say most truly, I and the father are one: Ioh. 10.
and according to his man's nature did also most truly say, Ioh. 14.
the father is greater the^ I am. He therefore that of the sede of David made
this man just, which should never be unjust, without any merit of his will
going before: the self same do make of unjust just, without any merit of
their will going before, that he might be the head, and that they might be
his members. He then that made that man without any merytes of his going
before, that no sin could be forgeuen him, which he either should draw by
generation, or commytte by will: the self same do make beleuers in him, without
any merits of theyrs going before, unto whom he may forgive all sin. He
that made him such a one, that he never had, nor should have an euel will: the
self same in his members do make of an euel will, a good will. And therefore he
has both predestined him and also us, for because he saw aforehand not our
precedyng merits, but his own work^s: both in him that he might be our
head, and also in us that we might be his body. If they which shall read
these do understand them, let them give thanks to God: but they that do not
understand them, let them pray, that he may be their inward teacher, from
whose presence knowledge and vnderstanstandyng do come. But they which think
that I do err, I would wish that they would often times diligently consider
what is spoken, lest paraduenture they may err themselves. But I do perceive
that God is merciful unto me, when by them that read my works I am not only
made better learned, S. Aug was contented to be admonished of his errores in
writing
but also more godly: And this is the thing that I chieflye look for of the
doctors of the church, if it be so that that which I now write, do come into
their hands, and they do vouchsaue to consider the same.

The End of the second book.
Unto the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, which only has immortalite,
and dwells in the light that no man can attain, whom never man saw,
neither can se, be honor and rule everlasting.

Amen.
Fautes escaped in printyng.
Fol. 57. pa. 2. li. 11. be therefore strong etc. this hole line should be an
annotacion in the mergent. Fol. 89. pa. i. li. 27. read but the fore knowledge.
Fol. 96. pa. 2. li. 15. read ought to be aunswerid. Fol. 98. pa. i. li. 8.
read the larges.


Thou have here following gentle reader the determination and sentence of two
ancient counsels, whereby thou may also perceive what was thold catholyke
doctrine of the church of Christ touching grace and fre will.
The second council Arausicanum.
Cap. 4.
If any man do contend that in the purgynge of our sins God does abide and
tarry for our will, but do not confess that the will also to be purged from
sin is wrought in us, by the infusion and operacion of the holy Ghost, he
does resyst the self same holy ghost speaking by Solomon, the will is prepared
of the Lord, Pro. 10. and 20.
and he does also resyst the Apostle holsomely preaching, it is God that does
both work in us the will, Philip. 2.
and also ye performaunce of the deed, even of good will.

If any man do afferme that as well thencrease, as also the beginning of
faith, Cap. 5.
the self affeccion to believe, whereby we believe in him yt iustifyeth the
ungodly, and whereby we come to the new birth of baptyme, is in us naturally
and not by the gift of grace, that is to say, by thinspiracion of the holy
Ghost, that redresseth our will from infidelite to faith, from ungodliness to
godlynes, is an adversary to the doctrine of thapostle: for as much as blessed
Paul says. Philip. 1.
We trust that he which the has begone in you a good work shall perform it
until the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. And this: Philip. 1.
Unto you it is given for Christ's sake, not only that you may believe in him,
but also that ye may suffer for him.

And again, ye are saved by grace through faith, Ephe. 2
and that not of your selves, for it is the gift of God.

If any man do afferme that unto us beleuyng, Cap. 6.
wyllyng, desyryng, endeuouryng, laboring, watching, studyng, askyng, sekyng,
knocking, mercy is given without the grace of God: but do not confess, that it
is wrought in us of God, by the infusion and inspiracio^ of the holy ghost, that
we may believe, will, or be able to do all these things as it behooves, or do
put the help of grace under man's humilite, or man's obedience, neither
co^senteth that the gift of obedience and humility do apperteyne to the self
grace, resysteth the Apostle, which says. What have you that thou haste not
received? 1. Cor. 4 1. Cor. 15
and again, by the grace of God, I am that I am.

Consilium mileuitanum.
Cap. 5.
It is agreed that who so ever shall say, that therefore the grace of
Justification is given unto us, that we may through grace fulfill that more
easelye, which we are commanded to do by free choice: as thoo if grace also
were not given, although not easelye, yet nevertheless we might also without grace
fulfill gods commandments, let him be accursed. For the Lord did speak of
the fruits of his commandments, where as he said not, without me ye can do
them very hardely: Ioh. 15.
but he said, without me ye can do nothing.

Praised be God our Father, the Lord of heaven and earth: because he has hyd
these things from the wise and prudent, and has opened them unto babes. etc.

Math. 11.
