ARTICLES OF PEACE, ENTERCOVRSE, AND Commerce, Concluded in the names of the
most high and mighty Kings, and Princes JAMES by the grace of GOD, King of
great Britain, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. And Philip the
third, King of Spain, etc. And Albertus and Isabella Clara Eugenia, Archdukes
of Austrice, Dukes of Burgundy, etc. In a Treaty at London the 18. day of
August after the old Style in the year of our Lord God 1604. Translated out of
Latin into English.

IMPRINTED AT LONdon by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty. ANNO 1605.

blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family

The Commissioners for the most renowned King of great BRITAIN, etc.
THOMAS Earl of Dorset, Baron of Buckhurst, high Treasurer of England. CHARLES
Earl of Nottingham, Baron Howard of Effingham, chief Justice, and Justice
itinerant of all Forests on this side Trent, high Admiral of England, and
Captain general of the Nauies, and Seas of England, Jreland, and the Jles,
and Dominions thereof. CHARLES Earl of Devonshire, Baron of Mountioy,
Lieutenant in the Kingdom of Jreland, Master of the Ordinance, Governor of
the Town, Jland, and Castle of Portesmouth, Knights of the most honorable
order of the Garter. HENRY Earl of Northampton, Lord Howard of Marnehill, Lord
Warden, and Admiral of the Cinque Ports. ROBERT Lord Vicount Cranborne, Lord
Cecill of Esenden, Principal Secretary, Master of the Court of Wards, and
Liueries. All Lords of his Majesty's Privy Counsel.
Commissioners for the King of Spain, etc.
JOHN DE VELASCO Constable of Castile, and Legion, Duke of the City of Frias,
Earl of Haro, Lord of the Towns of Villalpand, and Pedraca de la Sierra, Lord
of the house of Velasco, and of the seven Jnfants of Lara, great Chamberlain
unto PHILIP the Third, King of Spain, etc. Counselor of State and War,
President of Jtalie. JOHN BAPTISTA DE TASSIS, Earl of Villa Mediana, Gentleman
of the Kings Chamber, and Postmaster general in the Kingdoms and dominions of
the said King. ALEXANDER ROVIDIVS Professor of the Law in the College of
Millaine, and Senator of the Province of Millaine.
Commissioners for the Archdukes.
CHARLES Prince, and Count of Aremberge, Knight of the order of the Golden
fleece, Counselor of State; and Admiral general to the said Archdukes. JOHN
RICHARDOT Knight, President of the Privy Counsel, and Counselor of State.
LODOVIKE VERREIKEN Knight, Principal Secretary, and Audienciarie.
Articles of the Treaty.
FIrst it is concluded, and accorded, that from this day forward, there shall
be a good, sincere, true, firm, and perfect Amity, League, and Peace, to
endure for ever, and inuiolably to be observed and kept, as well by Land as
Sea, and fresh waters, betwixt the most renowned King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, etc. And the most renowned King of Spain, etc. And the
most renowned Archdukes of Austrice, Dukes of Burgundy, etc. and their Heirs
and Successors whomsoever, their Kingdoms, Countries, Dominions, Lands,
Peoples, Liegemen, and Subjects now being, or which hereafter shall be, of
whatsoever condition, state, or degree they are or may be, so as the said
Vassals and Subjects from henceforth are each of them to favor other, and to
use one another with all kind and friendly offices.

II.
ANd that from henceforth all Hostility, and enmity shall cease, and all
offenses, injuries or damages which either part (in time of the troubles) has
sustained by the other, shall be taken away and forgotten, in such sort, as that
hereafter neither party against other, for, or upon occasion of any damages,
offenses, depredations or spoils past, may pretend any matter, but that there
shall be a perfect abolition of all and every of them until this present day:
and that all actions for the same shall be held and reputed to be extinguished,
excepting only such depredations as have been committed since the xxiiij. of
April 1603. (because of these an account is to be made:) And each party shall
hereafter abstain from all depredations, offenses, and spoils as well by Sea
as Land, and fresh waters, in whatsoever the Kingdoms, Dominions, Places, or
Governments of the other: neither shall the aforesaid Princes consent, that any
of the grieuances before mentioned, be done by any of their Vassals,
Inhabitants, or Subjects: and they shall also cause restitution to be made of
all depredations and spoils which hereafter shall be committed, and of the
damages growing by means thereof.

III.
ITem, that none of the forenamed Princes, their Heirs, or Successors
whosoever, by himfelfe or by any others, shall do, treat, or attempt any thing
against the other, or against their Kingdoms, Lands or Dominions whatsoever in
any place, on Land or Sea, or in the Ports, or fresh waters, by pretense of any
cause, or upon any occasion; neither any of them shall give assistance or
consent unto any War, Counsel, Attempt, or Treaties, had, made, or to be
made in the prejudice of either, or against the other.

IIII.
ITem, that neither of the former parties, shall themselves give, or shall
consent to be given, by any of their Vassals, Subjects, or Inhabitants, aid,
favor, or counsel, directly or indirectly, on Land, Sea, or fresh waters: nor
shall supply and minister, nor consent to be supplied and ministered, by their
said Vassals, Inhabitants and Subjects, unto the Enemies or Rebels of either
part, of what nature or condition soever they be, (whether they shall invade
the Countries and Dominions of either of them, or withdraw themselves from
their obedience and subjection) any Soldiers, provision of Victuals, Moneys,
Instruments of War, Munitions, or whatsoever other aid else to maintain
War.

V.
ANd furthermore, the foresaid Princes shall renounce, as by the tenor of these
Presents every of them has, and does renounce, whatsoever League,
Confederation, Capitulation, and Intelligence made by what manner soever, in
the prejudice of the one, or the other, which does or may repugne against this
Peace, and Concord, and all, and singular the Contents thereof: all which and
every of them, so far as they do concern the effect aforesaid, they shall
adnull, and make void, and declare to be of no force, or moment.

VI.
ITem, it is agreed and accorded, that the said most renowned Kings, and
Archdukes, shall take care, that their Subjects shall from henceforth abstain
from all force, and wrong doing, and that they likewise shall revoke all
Commissions, and Letters of Reprisall, and Mart, or otherwise containing
License to take Prizes, of what condition, or kind soever they are, being to
the prejudice of the one, or other of the said Princes, or of their Subjects,
whether the same have been given, or granted by them unto Subjects, or
Inhabitants, or unto Strangers, and shall declare the same to be void, and of
no force, as by this Treaty of Peace they are declared so to be; And whosoever
shall do any thing to the contrary, he shall be punished not only criminally
according to the merit of his offense, but shall also be compelled to make
restitution, and satisfaction for the losses to the parties damnified,
requiring the same.

VII.
ITem, as concerning the towns of Flushing, Brill, Ramekins, and other Forts
and places thereunto appertaining, in which the garrison Soldiers of the
renowned King of England, Scotland, etc. do now remain, for as much as the
renowned King of England, etc. affirms that by contracts heretofore made,
between Queen ELIZABETH of most happy memory, (unto whom his Majesty in
his Kingdoms does succeed) and the States of the united Provinces of the low
Countries, he stands in such sort bound, not to redeliuer the said Towns,
Forts, and places to any others, then unto those who delivered the same for
Caution, as that by the said Contracts, his Majesty's Faith, and Honor, (which
he resolves religiously to keep toward all persons) being engaged, it is not
free for him now to restore those places unto the Archdukes; yet, in the word
of a King, he does promise to enter into Treaty hereafter with the said
States, wherein his Majesty will assign a competent time unto them, to accept
and receive Conditions, agreeable to Justice, and equity, for a pacification
to be had with the most renowned Princes his dear Brethren: which if the
States shall refuse to accept, his Majesty from thenceforth, as being freed
from the former Conuentions, will determine of those Towns according as he
shall judge it to be just, and honorable, wherein the said Princes his loving
Brethren, shall find, that there shall be no want in him of those good offices
which can be expected of a friendly Prince.

VIII.
ITem, that the said most renowned King of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, etc. will command, as he seriously promises shall be commanded, that
his garrison Soldiers upon what cause or pretext soever, shall not serve,
succor, victual, or furnish with Artillery, Gunpowder, Bullets, Saltpeter,
or any other Munition, or assistance for War, the Hollanders, or other
enemies of the King of Spain, and the Archdukes: neither that they shall give
unto them Aid, or do any hostile Act against the said King of Spain, and
Archdukes, or their Subjects: As also on the part of the King of Spain, and
the Archdukes, no hostile Act shall be committed, or done against the said
garrison Soldiers, or against the most renowned King of England, etc. or his
Subjects.

IX.
ITtem, it is agreed and accorded, that between the most renowned King of
England, Scotland, etc: and the most renowned King of Spain, etc. and every of
their Vassals, Inhabitants, and Subjects, as well by Land, as Sea, and fresh
Waters, in all and singular their Kingdoms, Dominions, Islands, and other
Lands, Cities, Towns, Villages, Havens, and Streights of the said Kingdoms,
and Dominions, there be, or may be free Commerce, in which before the Wars
there has been Commerce, like, and according to the use and observance of the
ancient Leagues, and Treatises, before the War, in such sort, and manner, as
that without any safeconduct, or other License general, or special, the
Subjects of the one, or other King may freely, as well by Land as by Sea, and
fresh Waters, go, enter, and sail, in and to the said Kingdoms, and
Dominions, and all the Cities, Havens, Shores, Sea rodes, and Streights thereof
and put themselves into whatsoever Havens of the same, where before the War
there has been Commerce, like, and according to the use, and observance of the
ancient Leagues, and Treatises before the Wars, with Carriages, Horses,
Burdens, Ships as well laden, as to be laden, to bring in Merchandises, and
there to buy, or sell as much as they will, and in the same places upon just
prices to procure, and have provision of Victuals for their sustenance, and
Voyages, and likewise as occasion shall require, to repair such shipping and
carriages, as either appertain unto them in property, or else they have hired
or borrowed, and from thence also with their Merchandises, Goods, and other
commodities whatsoever, (the Customs, and Tolles, as they are presently rated
according to the Ordinances of the places being paid) they may with like
freedom depart, and go to their own Countries, or any other places at their
pleasure without let or impediment.

X.
ITem, it is likewise agreed and accorded, that it may be lawful, to have
access unto the Ports of the said Princes, and there to make stay, and from
thence with the same liberty to depart, not only with their Ships of
Merchandises, and burden, but also with other shipping furnished for War,
and prepared to withstand the force of enemies: Whether they shall arrive
there, either by force of tempest, or for repairing their Ships, or for
provision of victuals, so as they exceed not the number of six, or eight
Ships, when they come in of their own accord, nor that they continue, nor make
stay in the Havens, or about the Ports longer then they shall have just cause
for the repair of the same shipping, or for provision of other necessaries,
lest they should be any occasion of Interruption unto the free Commerce and
intercourse of other friends and Nations in amity: And whenever any greater
number of Ships of war then is before specified, shall have occasion of
access into those Ports, then shall it not be lawful for them to make any
entrance without the priuitie and consent of the Prince. Provided also that
they do no hostile act, within the said Ports, to the prejudice of the
Princes, but demean themselves there quietly, as friends and confederates,
with special Caution ever to be had, that under the color and pretext of
Commerce, no warlike aid, provision of victuals, or of arms, or of munition
or other such like materials for the Wars, be carried by the Subjects,
Vassals, or Inhabitants of those Kingdoms, to the commodity or benefit of the
enemies of the one or other King. And whosoever shall attempt to the contrary,
shall be punished with those sharp pains and punishments, used to be
inflicted upon seditious persons and breakers of Faith and Peace. Provided
also, that the Subjects of the one, in the Dominions and Territories of the
other, be not worse handled, then the natural Subjects in their sales and
contracts for their Merchandises, as well in respect of the prises, as
otherwise, but that the Condition of Forreiners be equal and like herein, unto
natural Subjects: Notwithstanding any Statutes or Customs to the contrary.

XI.
ITem, it is agreed and accorded, that the most renowned King of England,
Scotland etc. shall prohibit, and after the confirming of these present
Articles, by Proclamation forthwith provide, that no one of his Subjects,
Inhabitants, or Vassals shall lade, or carry over by any means directly, or
indirectly in his own name, or in the name of any others, neither shall lend
his Ship or other vessel for carriage, or use his name for the transporting or
conueying of any Ships, Merchandises, Manufactures, or any other thing, out of
Holland, and Zeland into Spain, or other the Kingdoms and Dominions of the
King of Spain, or the Archdukes, neither shall carry in his Ships, any
Holland, or Zeland Merchant unto the said Ports, upon peril of his Majesty's
indignation, and other punishments usually inflicted on the contemners of his
Highness commandments. And to the effect that fraud (which through the
likeness of Merchandise might happen) be the better avoided: It is also
provided in this present Article, that the Merchandises to be carried, and
conveyed out of England, Scotland, and Ireland, to the Kingdoms and Dominions
of the King of Spain and Archdukes, shall be Registered and Sealed with the
Seal of the Town or City from whence they shall be laden, and that they
being so Registered and Sealed, shall without any difficulty or question
whatsoever, be reputed, and held for English, Scottish, and Irish
Merchandises, and so respectively according to the Seal or Mark, be allowed
and admitted: Always excepted, that in case of fraud, proof shall be
admitted, without stay notwithstanding or let of the course or venting of the
Merchandises in the mean time: And touching such Merchandises, as shall not be
Registered nor Sealed, the same are to be Confiscated and taken for good Prize:
And likewise all Hollanders and Zelanders, which shall be found in the same
Ships, may also be taken and detained.

XII.
ITem, it is agreed that English, Scottish, and Irish Merchandises may be
conveyed, and transported out of England, Scotland, and Ireland into Spain,
and other of the Kingdoms of the King of Spain, (before mentioned) without
the payment of the Imposition of thirty in the hundred, lately imposed; but
paying only the Custom and Tolles usually required, before the said
Imposition of thirty in the hundred.

XIII.
ITem, it is likewise agreed, that for the Merchandises. which English,
Scottish, and Irish Merchants shall buy in Spain, or other the Kingdoms of
the said King of Spain, and shall carry in their own Ships, or in Ships
hired, or lent unto them (except as before has been said the Ships of
Hollanders and Zelanders) they shall pay only such Tolles as were accustomed
to be paid before the Imposition of thirty in the hundred, yet so as they
convey and carry the same goods and Merchandises to the Kingdoms of the said
most renowned King of England, Scotland etc. or to the Ports of the Provinces,
being in obedience to the Archdukes. And for the more surety that fraud be
not committed herein, and that the said Merchandises be not transported to
other places and Kingdoms, and especially into Holland or Zeland, it is
concluded, that the said Merchants shall bind themselves, at the time that
they do lade their Ships in Spain, or in the other Kingdoms and Dominions of
the said King of Spain above declared, before the Magistrate of the place in
which they shall lade, to pay the said Imposition of thirty in the hundred, in
case they carry the same goods and Merchandises to other Dominions and
Countries: And to obtain also within the space of twelve months following, a
Certificate from the Magistrate of the places, where they shall discharge or
unlade the same goods, testifying their discharge to have been either in the
Kingdoms and Dominions of the King of England etc. or in the Ports of the
Provinces under the obedience of the said Archdukes: upon the exhibiting
whereof, the Obligations concerning those matters shall be delivered up, unto
the bringers of the same Certificates.

XIIII.
ANd also that the said most renowned King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, etc. shall prohibit soon after the confirming of this accord, that
none shall exporte any merchandise out of Spain, or other Kingdoms of the
King of Spain, to be carried to other places then to his Majesty's Kingdoms,
and the said Ports of Flanders, upon penalty of confiscation of all their
merchandises, to the use of the said King of England, etc. to be paid into his
Majesty's Exchequer: of which merchandises, or the value thereof, one half is
to be given to the Informer, (the imposition of thirty in the hundred being
first deducted) to be paid to the Ministers and Deputies of the King of
Spain, and the proofs lawfully received in Spain, and transmitted into
England in authentical form, are to be credited.

XV.
ITem, that the Magistrates of the said towns or Cities of his Majesty's
Kingdoms, which shall make Certificates of the vnlading of ships, and are to
give testimony of the registring of the merchandises, shall not commit any fraud
therein, under peril of indignation of the Kings Majesty, and pain of loss
of their offices, and other more grievous punishments at the Kings pleasure.
This declaration being added, that when the King of Spain and Archdukes shall
agree with the French King, or with any other upon the last Placard of thirty
in the hundred, and the Commerce betwixt them be restored, then it shall be
lawful to the Subjects of the said most renowned King of England, Scotland,
etc. to transport their merchandises to the Kingdoms and Dominions of him, or
them unto whom Commerce shall be restored without the payment of thirty in the
hundred, but only paying the Tolles and Customs used and paid before the
said imposition.

XVI.
THat which has before been expressed, concerning the free Commerce granted
unto the Subjects of the said renowned kings, is to be understood to be
likewise agreed on, for the Subjects of the most renowned King and Princes, the
king of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc. and the Archdukes, to wit,
that in all places whatsoever, their Subjects are bound reciprocally, to
respect and to favor each other, and by mutual kind offices friendly to
intertaine the one the other, and that by land, sea, and fresh waters, without
any safe conduct or other license general or special, they may unto the said
Kingdoms, Dominions, Lands, Villages, Towns, Cities, Sea shores, Havens, Sea
rodes whatsoever, freely, safely, securely, come, enter, sail, carry and
recarie their merchandises, buy, and sell, remain, abide, and converse in the
same, so long as it shall please them, any kind of provision for victual, and
things necessary for sustenance, and for voiages at just and reasonable prices,
and there repair also (as occasion shall require) their shipping, and
cariages, whether the same be their own, or whether they be hired or borrowed:
As also to depart from thence with like liberty, with merchandises, goods, and
other things whatsoever (the Customs and Tolles according to the Statutes of
those places being paid) and to dispose and follow their businesses freely, and
to return at their own pleasure, either into their own Countries, or to any
other place, without any impediment or let, so as the Subjects of the most
renowned King of England, etc. use not the shipping of the Hollanders, or the
united Provinces, and bring not into the Provinces of the Archdukes any of the
manufactures of Holland, or of the united Provinces bought wheresoever, neither
any other thing, for which there was paid in Holland any tribute, nor that they
transport any thing from the Archdukes Provinces, unto them of those Provinces
until a pacification be accorded: Nor that they receive any the goods or
Hollanders, or of those other places united into their ships, nor trust any of
their own goods in the ships of Hollanders, nor fraudulently by lending their
names, color the goods of any Hollander, or other of the united Provinces: for
that if any thing be committed to the contrary, and the same be found, it shall
be held for just and lawful Price.

XVII.
ANd the aforesaid Prouisoes are not only to be understood of ships laden or
to be laden in cause of Commerce, but also of ships of War which the said
Princes have or shall have armed to repress the Attempts of their Enemies:
insomuch as that it may be lawful for such Ships of war, not exceeding the
number before mentioned, if they happen to be constrained either by force of
tempest, or for buying of Victuals or other things, or for repair of shipping,
to use the same liberty in arriving, staying, and departing: so that they do
no Hostile act in the said Ports, but demean themselves honestly and quietly,
as it becomes confederates and friends: and so that they stay and remain not
in, or about the same Ports any longer then shall be needful for reparation
and provision of necessaries, that thereby they be not a hinderance or
interruption to the free Commerce and Intercourse with other Nations that are
in Amity and Friendship: but where occasion shall fall out of arrival of any
greater number of Shipping then before specified, it shall not be lawful for
them to enter, but with the knowledge and allowance of the Prince.

XVIII.
ANd as the said Kings and Archdukes do religiously promise, that they will
not at any time yield any Warlike succor to any of the others enemies, so it
is provided that their Subjects, or the inhabitants in their Realms, of what
nation or quality soever they be, may not under color of Intercourse and
Commerce, nor upon any other color or pretense give any aid or help to the
enemies of the said Princes, or of either of them, or confer, or supply them
with money, provisions of victuals for war, Amor, Municion, Ordinance,
Artillery, or other warlike provision, and those which shall do the contrary,
are to take knowledge, that they shall be punished with the severe punishments
accustomed to be inflicted upon breakers of League, and seditious persons.

XIX.
AND that also greater benefit may through this Concord come unto the Subjects
of the most renowned King of England, Scotland, etc. and of the Archdukes, it
is accorded and concluded, that the said most renowned King of England, etc.
and Archdukes jointly and severally, will do their endeavors, that their
Subjects have not the passages stopped or let unto any of their Ports,
Kingdoms and Dominions, that thereby they be not hindered, freely and without
impediment to come and go, with their Shipping, Merchandise, and Carriages
(the ordinary Customs and Tolles being paid) to all the said Ports,
Kingdoms, and Dominions: and with the like liberty (when it shall seem so
good unto them) with other Merchandises from thence to depart.

XX.
But as concerning the ancient Treatises of intercourse and Commerce, whereof
diverse are extant, betwixt the Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and
the Dominions of the Dukes of Burgundy, and Princes of the Low Countries,
which notwithstanding during the late troubles have been intermitted, and
peradventure in some parts impaired; it is agreed by way of provision, That
they shall retain and have their ancient forte and authority, and that they
shall be used on both parts, as they were before the Wars: And if it happen
that either by both parts or any one part any breach thereof be alleged, or
that the Subjects shall complain that the Conuentions are not observed, or
that more grievous burdens then were accustomed are imposed on them, there
shall be Deputies appointed on either part which may meet, and calling unto
them (if need be) Merchants experienced in such matters, may friendly Treat,
and equally renew, and restore such things, as shall be found either to have
slipped out of course, or to have been changed by the injury of time, or by
corrupt custom and use.

XXI.
ANd for that the rights of Commerce which do ensue by Peace ought not to be
made unfruitful, as they would be if the Subjects of the most renowned King of
England, Scotland etc. whilst they have recourse to and from the Kingdoms and
Dominions of the said King of Spain and Archdukes, and do remain there for
Commerce, should be molested in the cause of Conscience: therefore to the
intent their Traffic may be safe, and without danger, as well on Land as on
Sea, the said renowned King of Spain, and Archdukes shall take care, and
provide, that for the said cause of Conscience they shall not be molested, nor
inquieted in using their Trade and Commerce, so as they give not scandal unto
others.

XXII.
ITem, that if it happen any goods or Merchandises prohibited to be carried, or
conveyed out of the Kingdoms and Dominions of the said most renowned Kings and
Archdukes, by the Subjects of the one or of the other, that in such case the
person only offending shall incur punishment, and the goods only prohibited
shall be Confiscated.

XXIII.
ITem, that the goods of the Subjects dying within the Kingdoms or Dominions
of either, shall be conserved to the right heirs and successors of the
deceased, the right of a third Person always reserved.

XXIIII.
ITem, that the Graunts and Priueledges given by the Princes to Merchants of
either of the Kingdoms coming to their said Kingdoms, and which Priueledges
through the Wars have ceased, shall from henceforth wholly be revived and
have their full force and strength.

XXV.
ITem, if it shall happen hereafter, (which God forbid) that any displeasure
do arise, between the said most renowned Kings, the King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, etc. And the King of Spain, or the Archdukes,
whereby danger might grow of the interruption of intercourse and Commerce, then
the Subjects of either Prince are thereof so to be admonished, as that they may
have six Months from the time of the monition, to transport their
Merchandises without any arrest, disturbance, or hurt in the mean season, to
be done or given unto them either in their persons or Merchandises.

XXVI.
ITem, that none of the foresaid Princes shall imbarge or stay for their
provision in war, or for any other service, to the prejudice of the owners,
the ships of the Subjects of any of the others, being in their Ports, or
waters, unless the Prince of those parties to whom the ships do appertain,
shall first be admonished thereof, and shall also yield his consent thereunto.

XXVII.
ITem, it is accorded, that if during this Peace and Amity, any thing happen
to be attempted, committed or done, against the force and effect thereof, by
land, sea, or fresh waters, either by any of the said Princes their Heirs and
Successors, their Vassals, Subjects, or Allies comprehended in this League, or
of any the Heirs or Successors of those Allies their Subjects, or Vassals,
yet notwithstanding this Peace and Amity, shall remain in his strength and
virtue, and the attempters, and such as do offend therein only, and no other,
shall be punished for their attempts.

XXVIII.
ITem, that such as have been taken in war, and are Captives on either part,
although they be condemned to the Galleys shall be released and dismissed, the
charges of the diet of such as are not in the Galleys being first discharged,
and the ransomes of such as have before agreed for the same, being by them
paid.

XXIX.
ITem, it is concluded, that all civil actions, which at the time when the
last wars began, were of validity, and of force, may yet be exercised and
pursued, notwithstanding any lapse of time during the same war, so as no
prejudice shall be understood to have grown unto them, by the continuance of
the war, those only excepted which are already come to the Exchequer or
Princes Treasury.

XXX.
ITem, if any controversy happen to be moved in the Kingdoms and Dominions
of the one or other of these Princes, by any person not being Subject to the
same Prince, for, or upon occasion of any depredations or spoils committed,
the cause is to be remitted to the Judge of the jurisdiction, under that Prince
against whose Subject or Subjects the suite is commenced.

XXXI.
ITem, that if the Hollanders and other confederate States, will accept of
conditions of pacification with the most renowned Archdukes, or their
Successors, through the means of the most renowned king of England, etc. the
said Archdukes and their Successors, will always willingly hearken unto that
which shall be proposed therein, and will desire that by the help of the said
most renowned King of England, etc. they may be brought to embrace equal
conditions, wherein they shall well understand, how much the said Archdukes do
attribute unto the authority of the most renowned King of England, etc. their
loving brother.

XXXII.
ITem, it is concluded and accorded, that in this present Treaty of peace,
there be comprehended the Adherents, friends, and confederats, of the
forenamed Princes: That is to say, on the part of the most renowned King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, etc. Rodulphe Roman Emperor, with the
Archdukes of Austrice, and the Electors of the Empire, together with the
States, and Cities of the Empire, the Duke of Lorrain, the duke of Sauoy, the
dukes of Brunswicke, Lunenburg, Meckleburg, Wirtemberg, the Landgraue of Hesse,
the Marquess of Baden, the duke of Pomerane, the Prince of Anhalt, the Earl
of East-freisland, the Cantons of Heluetia, and the Grisons, the Haunse-cities;
The French King, the King of Poland, and Swethland, the King of Denmark, the
duke and State of Venice, the duke of Holst, the duke of Florence.

XXXIII.
ON the part of the King of Spain and Archdukes, Rodulphe Roman Emperor, and
his Brethren, and other Princes, Archdukes of Austrice, Princes of the Empire,
the Electors, Cities, and States subject to the Empire, the French King, the
King of Poland and Swethland, the King of Denmark, the duke and State of
Venice, the duke of Sauoy, the duke of Bauire, the duke of Cleue, the duke of
Holstein, the duke of Lorraine, the duke of Parma and Placentia, with his
Brother, the Cardinal, the Bishop and Province of Liege, the duke of Florence,
the duke of Mantua, the duke of Mutina, and Regium, the duke of Vrbine, the
Confederats and Cantons of the Heluetians, and Grisons, the Cities of the
Haunse, the Earls of Eastfriesland (without notwithstanding any prejudice of
the right by the King of Spain, and Archdukes pretended for their States) the
duke and Common wealth of Genua, the Common wealth of Lukes, the Principal of
the House of Columna, the Prince of Oria, the Principal of the house of
Vrsine, the duke of Sermoneta, the Lord of Monacho, the Earl of Mirandula, the
Marquis of Massa, the Earl of Sala, the Earl of Colorno.

XXXIIII.
ITem, it is likewise accorded and concluded, that the said most renowned
Kings and Princes, JAMES by the grace of God King of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, etc. And PHILIP King of Spain, etc. Albert and Isabella Clara
Eugenia, Archdukes, etc. shall sincerely, and faithfully observe and keep, and
procure to be observed and kept, by their Subjects, and Inhabitants, all and
singular the Capitulations in this present Treaty accorded, and concluded,
neither shall they directly or indirectly infringe the same, or consent that
the same shall be infringed, fringed, directly, or indirectly, by any of their
Subjects or Inhabitants, and they shall ratify, authorize and confirm, all and
singular the Conuentions as before accorded and concluded by Letters Pattents,
subscribed with their own hands, and sealed with their great Seals in
sufficient, available, and effectual form, and the same so formed and made,
shall upon the first occasion deliver or cause to be delivered faithfully,
really, and effectually; And they shall make the like promise to observe all
and singular the premises, in the word of a King and Prince, and shall also
swear to observe and perform the same by oath upon the holy Evangelist,
(whenever they shall, by either part be thereunto required.) And the said
Kings and Archdukes shall take care that this present Peace and Amity be
published in places accustomed, so soon as conveniently the same may be.

Articles concerning Merchandise of high Germany to be transported into
Spain, free of the Imposition of 30. in the 100.
THE more to express observance toward the most renowned King of England,
etc. and for the commodity of his Majesty's Kingdoms, the Illustrious and
excellent the Constable of Castile, etc. Procurator special of his Cath.
Majesty, hearing how much the Subjects of the most renowned king of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, do desire to be permitted to vent the
merchandise of Germany in Spain, does by these presents promise, that it
shall be lawful for the said Subjects of the most renowned King of England,
etc. to convey merchandise out of high Germany, being subject to the
Imposition of thirty in the hundred, and which without payment of the said
Imposition could not be carried into Spain, and the same merchandise having
first been conveyed into England, and there discharged, and customed, from
thence after to be transported into Spain, or other the Dominions of the King
of Spain, without payment of thirty in the hundred, so as the said
merchandise has paid nothing to the Hollanders, and Zelanders, and other
enemies of the King of Spain, and the Archdukes: and so as they be conveyed in
the proper ships of the most renowned King of England, etc. or his Subjects,
and not in others of any other Prince, or Nation, or of other whomesoeuer. And
to the effect that fraud herein may be avoided, the Merchandises of high
Germany, which are to be transported forth of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, to the Kingdoms and Dominions of the King of Spain and the
Archdukes, shall be Registered and marked with the Seal or Mark of the Town
from whence they shall be laden, and certified by a Certificate from the
Magistrate of the said Town or City, testifying that the said Merchandises
were discharged in England, Scotland or Ireland, and that they have paid
Custom there, as well upon peril of the Kings Majesty's indignation, as also
upon pain of loss of their Offices and other more grievous punishments, to
be inflicted at the Kings pleasure, upon the Magistrates of the Towns and
Cities of the Kingdoms, of the said most renowned King of England, etc. which
are to certify the vnlading of Ships, and to testify of the Registring
thereof, if they shall herein commit any fraud.

II.
ITem, that whatsoever merchandises of high Germany, shall not be discharged
in England, Scotland and Ireland, and yet shall be conveyed into Spain, and
other Kingdoms of the King of Spain as such merchandises, shall be
confiscated, and be reputed as good Prize.

Three Articles concerning a moderation to be had in the proceedings of the
Inquisition, toward the Kings Majesty's Subjects, in SPAIN.
FIrst, if they have exceeded in any thing before their entrance into Spain,
they shall not be called into the INQVISITION for the same, neither shall be
molested for any of those things so committed, out of Spain, neither shall any
Account for the same be demanded of them.

II.
ALso if they will not enter into the Churches, no man shall compel them
thereunto, but if they do enter into the same, they shall perform those
duties and reverence, which are used toward the holy Sacrament of the Altar
being there, and if they shall see the holy Sacrament coming toward them in
any street, they shall do reverence by bowing their knees, or else to pass
aside by some other street, or turn into some house.

III.
ANd if any of the said persons being Masters, or Masters Mates, or any other
Officers of ships, which be not their own, do exceed in any matter herein,
the INQVISITION proceeding against them by Office, is only to sequester their
own proper goods, and are to leave free the ships and all other goods not
belonging to the Offenders; the same is to be understood for the Traders and
Factors.


