

STatuta bonu^ publicum concerne^cia edita in parliamento tento apud
westmonesterium xiiij die Octobris Anno regni Illustrissimi Domini nostri Regis
Henrici septimi





The statutes concerning the common we will made in the parliament holde^ at
westmestre the fourtenth day of Octobre. In the reygne of our sovereign lord
the king. king henri the leuenth. the enleuenth year.

The table of every chapitre or act following / That men gooyng to bataylle
with ye prince etc^. shall not be atteynted Capitulo. primo. For punishment of
vagabundes and beggars Capitulo..ii. That acts before made against unlawful
reteynours. ryottes etc^ should be put in excucyon Capitulo..iii. That one
weight and one mesure shall be vsyd. thorugh all this reame Capitulo..iiii. The
names of towns lymytted for ye sauf custody of weyghtes and mesures according
to the kings standarde Capitulo.iiii. For puttyng away wears in the port of
Southampton Capitulo..v. For packyng and payen custumes of wullen clothes
Capitulo..vi. For punishment of ryottes Capitulo..vii. For punyshemente of
usurers Capitulo..viii. An act concerning the Inhabitauntes of North and
Southe Tyndale Capitulo..ix. For leuyenge of the arrerages of the benyuolence
last granted Capytulo.x. An act concerning taking of apprentyses in the
cite of Norwyche Capitulo..xi. For writtes to be given and learned counseylle to
be assygned to the poor people with out payen any money therefore Capytulo..xii.
That horses shall not be conveyed out of the land without ye kings license
another mares over the price of six shelynges and eight pence Capitulo. xiii.
That strangers made deynezyns shall pay custume and subsydies as strangers
Capitulo..xiiii. Against untrue demeaynge of Shirefs and their officers in
holding their Countees Capitulo..xv. For keeping of the watch in Calyce
Capitulo..xvi. Against dystroyenge of pertryches and fesauntes with unlawful
gynnes Capytulo.xvii. Not being with the king intyme of need etc^. Shall lose
fees and annewytees to them granted Capitulo..xviii. Against unlawful making
of fether beds. pylowes and matresses Capitulo.xix. Against wy^men covert
making alienaco^n of lands moved by the first baron Capitulo..xx. For
enqueste hereafter to becharged within London Capitulo. xxi. For wages of hy^ys
in husbandry and of Artyfycers and laborers Capitulo..xxii. For gawgynge and
packyng of Salmon Elys and hearying Capitulo.xxiii. For punysshing of perjury
and lessyng the penalytee in atteint Capitulo.xxiiii. For punyssynge of
periowrie by examynacion of the Chasiceler Tresorer Capitulo.xxv. For holding
the Shyrefs Tournes within Countees of Suth^. Surt and Sussex. Capitulo..xxvi.
For fustians to be shorn with the broad Shere Capitulo. xxvii.


The king our souereyne lord Henry the vij after the conquest by the grace of
god king of England and of France and lord of Irlond. At his parliamente
holden at Westminster. ye.xiiii day of October in the.xi. year of his reign to the
honor of god and holy church. And for the common prouffite of the reame by
the assent of the lords spyrytuell and temporell and the comi^s in the said
parliament assembled and by auctoryte of the same parliament has do to be made
certain statutes and ordenaunces in manner and form following.
That men going to battle with the prince etc: shall not be atteyned Capitulo
Primo
THe king our souereyne lord calling to his remembrance the duty of
alligeau^ce of his subgettes of this his reame. and that they by reason of the
same are bound to serve their prince and souereyne lord for the time being in
his wars for the defense of him and the land against every rebellyon power
and might reared against him. and with him to enter and abide in seruyse in
battle if caas so require / And that for the same seruyse what fortune ever
fall by chance in ye same battle against the mind and will of the prince. as
in this land sometime passed has be seen / That it is not reasonable but against
al laws reason and good consyence that the said subgettes going with their
sovereign lord in werres attendy^g upon hy^ in his person. or being in other
places by his commandment within this land or without. any thing should
lose or forfeyte for doing their true dute and seruyse of alligeaunce. It be
therefore ordained enacted and establysshed by the king our souereyne lord. by
advise and assente of the lords spyrytuell and temporell and comyns in this
present parlyament assembled. and by auctorite of the same that from hensforth
no manner of person ne persons what so ever he or they be that attend upon the
king and sovereign lord of this land for the time being in his parsone. and
do him true and faithful service of alligeaunce in the same. or be in other
places by his commandment in his werres within this land or without. that
for the same deed and true service of allygeaunce he or they be in no wise
conuycte or atteyne of high treason ne of other offenses for that cause by act
of parliament or otherwise by any proses of law whereby he or any of them shall
mow forfeyt life lands tenementis re^tes possessions heredytamentes goods
cataylles or any other things but to be for that deed and seruyse utterly
discharged of any vexacyo^ trouble or loss / And if any act or acts or other
prosesses of ye law herafter thereupon for ye same happ to be made contrary to
this or denaunce / that thenn^ ye act or acts or other process of the law
whatsoever they shall be. stand and be utterly void / Provided always that no
parsone ne persons shall take any benefice or advantage by this act which
shall herafter declyne from his or their said allygeaunce.

For punysshment of vagabondes and beggars Caplo^ ij
FOr asmoche as the kyngis grace most entyerly desires among all erthly
things the prosperyte and restfulnes of this his land and his subgettis of ye
same to live quietly and surely to ye playsure of god and according to his
laws willing always of his pity intendyng to reduce them thereunto by softer
means than by extreme rygour therefore purueyed in a statute made in the time
of king Rychard the second. consyderyng also ye great charges that should
grow to his subgettes for bryngyng of vagabundes to the gaoles acordyng to ye
same statute and the long abiding of them therein. whereby by lyklehede many
of them should lose their lives. In modryng of the said estatute his highness
will by thauctoryte of this present parlyament it be ordained and enacted. that
where such mysdoers should be by examynacyon committed to the common jail there
to remain as is aforsayd. that ye Shyrefs / Mayres / Bayllifs hygh^ Constables
and pety Constables and all other governors and officers of Cytees Burghs
Towns townshyp^s villages and other places. within three days after this act
proclamyd. make due search and take or cause to be take all such vagabundes
idle and suspecte persons living suspecyously. and them so taken to sytte in
stocks there to remain by the space of three days and three nyghtes. and there
to have none other sustenaunce but bread and water. and after ye said three
days and three nyghtes to be had out and set at large and then to be
commanded to avoid ye town / And if eftsoon he be take in such defaute in
the same town or towneshyp then he be set in like wise in stocks by the
space of.vj. days with like dyete as is before reherced. and if any person or
persons give any other mete or drink to the said mysdoers being in stocks in
fourm before said or the same prisoners favor in their misdoyng. that thenn^
they forfeit for every time so doing.xij. d / And also it is ordained by the
said auctoryte. that all manner of beggars not able to work within.vj. wekes
next after proclamacyon made of this act goo rest and abide in his hundred
where he last dwelled. or there where he is best known or borne. there to
remain or abide without beggy^g out of the said hundred upon pain to be
punysshed as is before said / And yt no man be excused by that he is a clerk
of one University or of other without he show the letters of the Chaunceler of
the University from whens he says he comyth / nor none other calling himself
a Souldeour Shypman / or Trauelynge man without he bring a letter from his
cappytayne or from the town where he londed. and that he then to be
commanded to goo the straight high way in to his country / And over this it
is ordained by auctotoryte abouesayd. that if any Shyreff or other offycer
before reherced execute not the premysses as is abouesayd of every vagabunde^
heremyte or beggar able to labor or clerk Pylgreme or shypman as often as any
such comyth in his syghte or that he has thereof knowledge within the Town
where he has auctorite rule or governance. that as often as any such of the
said mysdoers abydinge there by the space of a day departen vnexamyned and
unpunished as is above said. for eueri mysdoer so deparded. he to lose.xx. d
/ And that the lord of every Let within this realm and the Shyref in his
Turn. have auctoryte to enquire thereof in his Let and Turn. and the lord
of the Let to have for every defaute found as is above said.xx. d / and the
Shyref to inquire in his Turn of such escapes within the Iurisdicco^n of his
Turn / And to have.xx. d. for every such defawte found in his Turn / and
that the penaltee lymytted by this ordinance to be forfeyted by any offycer or
any other person for none punysshment of vagabundes and other mysruled
persons within every Cite where Mayre and aldermen ben / yt ye profit of
every such penalte be unto the alderman of every ward where such forfeyture
is had or made to his own And also it is ordained and enacted by the said
auctoryte yt it shall be lawful to eueri man Intytled to have the said penalte
dystreyne for it in like wise as the lord of any Let may do for amerciamentes
and fines had assessed in the same Let and ferdermore it is ordained and
enacted by the said auctoryte that none apprentyse ne servant of husbondri
ladourer ne servant artyfycer play at the tables from the tenth day of Ienuary
next coming but only for mete and drink ne at the tenys clossh dyse cards
bowls nor any other unlawful game in no wise out of Crystmas. and in
Crystmas to play only in ye dweling house of his master or where the master of
any of ye said servants is present upon pai^ of empresomentee by ye space of
a day in the stocks openly And yt the household where dising cardynge tenis
playenge bowls closshe or any other unlawful ga^ before rehersid shall be used
otherwise than is before rehersyd. and that lawfully be presented before
Justices of the peace. the mayr shiref in his turn or steward in his let or
by examynaco^n had before ye said Justices of peace yt process be made upon the
same as upon enditement of trespass against ye kings peace. And yt the said
mysdoer be admytted to no fine under the sum of.vi. s. viii. d. And that it
be lawful to.ij. of the Justices of the peace whereof one shall be of the Quorum
wti^ their auctorite to reject and put away comen ale selling in towns and
places where they shall thy^ke convenient and to take surete of the kepars of
ale houses of their goodbehauyng by the. dyscreco^n of the said Justices. and
in the same to be aduysed and aggreed at the time of their sessions / Provided
always that dymynyco^n of punyshme^te of vagabundes and beggars aforesaid may
and shall be had for wymmen great with child and men and wymmen in extreme
seknes by him that has auctorite to do the said punysshementes this act
notwythstondynge /

That acts made against unlawful reteynours: riottes and cetera should be put
in excuco^n Capitulo::iij:
THe king our souerayn lord calling to his remembrance that many good
statutes and ordenaunces be made for the punysshment of riottes unlawful
assembles reteyndours and yeuyng and receyuyng of lyuerees signs and tokenes
unlawfully. extorciones mayntenaunces imbracery exsesyue taking of wages
contrary to the statute of laboreres and artyficers. the use of unlawful games
inordinate apperayll and many other great enormities and of fences which ben
committed and done daily contrary to the good statutes for many and diverse
behofull consederacyon. seuerly made and ordained to the high dyspleysure of
almighty god and the great let of ye common law we will of this land.
notwitstondynge that generally by the Justices of ye peace in every Shyre within
this realm in the open Sessyons is given in charge to inquire of many offenses
committed contrary to diverse of the said statutes and diverse enquestes thereupon
there straytly sworn and charged before ye said Justices to inquire of the
premysses and therein to present the truth which are let to be found by
imbracery mayntenau^ce corrupcion and favor by occasyon whereof the said
estatutes be nor can not be put in dew execucyon / For reformacyon whereof
for somoche that before this time the said offenses extorcyons conte^ptes and
other ye premysses might not nor as yet may be conuenyently punyshed by the
dew order of ye law except it were first found and presented by the vdyte
of: xij. men thereto dewly sworn. Which for the causes before reherced will not
find nor present the treuth. Wherefore be it by ye advise and assent of ye
lords spyrytuall. and temporal and the comins in this present parlyament
assembled and by auctoryte of the same enacted ordained and establisshed. that
from hensforth as well the Justices of Assyse in ye open Sessyons to be holden
before them and every of them. as the Justices of the peace in every Countee of
ye said realm upon Informacyon for the king to fore them to be made. have
full power and auctoryte by their discrecyon to here and determyne all offenses
and contemptes commyted and done by any person or persons against the form
ordinance and effect of any statute made and not repellyd. And that the said
Justices upon the said Informacyon have full power and auctoryte to awarde and
make like process ayenste the said offenders and every of them as they should
or might make against such person or persons as ben presented and indyted
before them of trespace done to the kings peace. and the said offender / or
offenders duly to punyssh^e acordinge to the purporte form and effect of
the said estatutes. And also be it enacted by the said auctoryte. that the
person which shall give the said Informacyon for the king / shall by the
dyscrescrecyon of the said Justices content and pay to the said person or
persons against whom the said Informacyon shall be so given. his reasonable
costs and damages in that behalf sustained if that it be tried or found
against him that so gives or marketh any such Informacyon. Provided always
that any such Informacyon extend not to treason murder or felony nor to any
other offense wherefore any person shall lose life or Membre. nor to lose by
ner upon the same Informacion any lands tenementes goods catelles to the
party making the same Informacyon / Provided also that the said Informacyon
shall not extend to any person dwelyng in a another Shyre than there as the
said Informacyon shall be given or made. Saving to every person and persons
Cytees and Towns all their lybertees and fraunchyces to them and eueri of
them of right belonginge and apperteynynge /

That one weight and one mesure shall be used thorugh all this realm
Capitulo:: iiij:
PRayen the comyns in this present parlyament assembled where diverse acts
statutes and ordinances in the times of the noble progenytours and
predesessours of our now souereyne lord ye king have be^ made ye one mesure
and one weight should be used through out this noble realm / and also that in
every Cite Burgh and town within the same realm upon certain and several
pains in the said statutes and ordynaunces lymytted / should be common balaunce
with common weyghtes and comen mesures marked acording to the estandarde of the
Eschequer. by the which and other like balaunces weyghtes and mesures marked
acordynge to ye said estandarde. all men should bye and sell in auoyndynge of
all frawde and discord in that. behalf to be used which acts statutes and
ordynaunces have not be observed and kept as now in this present parlyamente
it has be openly by diverse persons of diverse parties of this realm
remembered to the great hurt and vexaco^ of diverse and many of the kings
subgett of this his realm. For remedy whereof be it of your habundant grace
and charge our most gracious sovereign lord by thassent of the lords spu^all
and te^porall and by the comyns in this present parlyame^t assembled and by
auctoryte of ye same enacted and establisshed That unto the knights and
citezins of every shire and cite assembled in this present parlyament. barons
of the.v. ports and certain burgeyses of Burgh towns or they from depart this
p^se^t. parlyame^t be delivered of every weighe and mesure which now our
soueray^e lord has caused to be made of brass for ye comy^ we will of all his
subgett and lyeges within this his realm England acordy^g to ye king our
souereyne lordis standard of his Echequer of weight and mesures as they ben in
the eschequer of our said sovereign lord and that the said knights Cytezyns
and Burgeyses to whom the said weyghtes and mesures shull be delivered as is
before said surely convey or cause ye same to be conveyed on this half the feste
of Ester next coming by the said Citeyzins to their Cytees and by the said
knights unto such Burgh or town corporate / or market Town within the shyre
for which they ben elected as is specifyed and contained in a sedule unto this
present byll annexid. there to remain for ever in the kepinge of the Mayre
Baylly or other heed Offycer for the time being of the same Cytee Burgh or
town as the kings standarde of weight and mesure / And that thinhabytauntes
of all Cytees Burghs and market Towns within eueri of the said Shyres. shall
on this half the fest of ye Natyuite of saint Ikn Baptist next coming make
or cause to be made comin mesures and weyghtes acordyng to ye weyghtes and
mesures above said to remain within the said Cytees Burghs and market towns /
and every of they^ and the weyghtes and mesures to be vewed examined printed
signed and marked by the Mayre Baylly or other heed officer in whose possession
the aforesaid have auctorite and power to make sign and printe under the sign
and print for ye same with a letter. H. crowned to be printed to assign and
printe like weyghtes and mesures unto every the kings leyges and subgettes
duly requiring the same. taking for markinge of every bushel.i. d. and from
the said feast of the Natiuyte of saint. Iho^n Baptist no marchau^te neother
person ne perso^es within any Cytee or market town bye ne sell with any
weight or mesure except it be markid sygned or prynted in manner and form
before said. ne any other person or persons out of the said Cyttes Burghs and
marked towns except it be like and egall with the said estandarde / and that
every person as well without Cytees burghs and market towns as within. bye
and sell with a busshell sealed sygned or marked after the form aforesaid and
none otherwise. and that all the Mayres Bayllyes and other heed officers of
every cytee Burgh or market Town shall cause twyes in the year or oftener as
they shall thynk nesessary. all weyghtes and mesures within the said Cytees
Burghs and market towns to be brought before them and to be duly vewed and
examyned and such as they shall upon the said examynaco^n find defectife.
immedyatly to be broken and brent and the party or parties which in that
behalf has offended and be found defectyf. shall forfeyte for the first
time.vi. s. viii. d. the forfeyture thereof to be unto the said Mayre Bailey or
any other having Iurisdicco^n and correco^n in that behalf and at the second
time the said offender like wise to forfeyt.xiii. s. iiii. d. and at the third
time like wise to forfeyte.xx. s. and for ferther punysshe^t to be set upon ye
pillori to the ensample of other. And two Justices of peace whereof one shall be
of the Quorum have auctoryte as well by examynacyon as by enqere to here and
determyne the defawtes of the said Mayres Bayllyes and other heed officers in
that behalf. and also of all buyers and selers doing contrary to this present
act and ordinance / and to set fine and mercement upon the offenders by
their dyscrecion And the said weyghtes and mesures so found defectif to be
forfeyted and burnt Be it also enacted that there be but onnely.viii.
busshelles raised and stryken to the quarter of corn. and.xiiii. li. to the
stone of woll and xxvi. stone to the Sack / Be it also ordeynyd by thauctoryte
above said that the Justices of peace above said have auctoryte to make like
process ayenste all persons founden as is above said defectyf / and for such
fynes and amerciamentes as upon them shall be sessed as if they were endited
before theiym brekyng of the kings peace / And that whereby other statutes and
ordenaunces before lymytted. it is ordained that every Cite Burgh and town that
has a Constable should have common weyghtes and mesures. sealed upon penalties
in the same lymytted. that those penalties in yt behalf extend not to any
town which is no Cite Burgh nor market town. Provided always that this act
shall not extend nor be prejudicial to any person sellyng or byenge by water
mesure with in the ship board / And that it be by thauctoryte abouesayd
enacted ye premises or any other ordinance before made notwithstanding / that
the said water mesure within the shyp^ bord^ shall only conteyne: v. peckes
after the said standarde rased and streken. Provided also that the examynacyon
of defawtes abouesayd and punysshment to the offenders of every offense
commyted hereafter within any of the said.v. ports / shall be had done and
admystred by the lord wardeyn of the said.v. ports or by his lyeutenaunt of
the same for the time being and none other the premysses notwithstondynge /
Provided always y^ this act of weyghtes and mesures extend not nor be in no
wise hurtful or prejudicial to the prince within the duchye of Corneu all for
any weyghtes apperteyny^ge to the Cunage of tynne within the Countees of
Cornwall and Deuonshyre / but that all such weyghtes be used ordered demeaned
and corrected as it has been used and accustumed before this time / ye said act
and ordynau^ces notwithsto^di^g

The names of the Towns lymytted for the sauf custody of weyghtes and mesures
according to the kings estandarde for the shyres following as pertyculerly
apperyth
Westm^l the town. of Appulby Northumbc^ the town. of newcastell Cumbr^ the
cite of Carleof Lanc. the town of Lancaster Eborum. the cite of York
Lincoln^. the cite of Lincoln^. Derb^. the town of Derby. Notingh^. the town
of Notingham Leyc. the town of Leyceter. Warr^. the cite of Couentre Rotel.
the town of vppyngham / North^. the town of Northampto^ Bed. the town of
Bedford Buk. the town of Bukyngham Canterbr^ the town of Cambryge Hunt: the
town of Huntyngdon Norff. the cite of Norwych^ Suff. the town of saint
Edmondes bury Essex. the town of Chelmesford. Herts. the town of hertford
Mydd. In Westmynester Kanc. the town of maydestone. Surr^ the town of Gulford
Sussex. the town of Jews. Oxon^. the town of Oxenford Berk. the town of
Redyng Salop^. the town of Shrewesburi Staff. the town of Stafford Hereford
the cite of hereford. Glouc. the town of Gloucestre. Wigorn^. the cite of
Worceter. Wiltes. the cite of new Salesbury. Suth^. the cite of Wynchester.
Som^s. the town of Ilchestr^. Dors. the town of Dorchestre Deuon^. the cite
of Excestre. Cornub^. the town of Lustudyell Lodon^. the same cite Bristoll.
the same town Quinque portus the castle of Dover. Cuntas Couentr^. the same
cite. Suthampton. the same town. Cuntas Cestr^ the same town.
For putti^g away wears in the port of southa^pto^ Caplo v
FOr asmoche as the ports havens ryuers crekes and aryuell of ships within
this realm of England. and the costs of the same ben now of late greatly
anoyed and hurt and decayed / and in especyall the port of Southampton the
which before this time has been the gretest haven socour and resceyte as well
for merchants and ships of this reame of England. as of Carrikes Galeys
and other ships and merchants of other regyons and countrees there aryuyng
and resortyng to the profit of our sovereign lord the king the great
increase of the merchants of this land and the common we will and comfort all the country thereto adioynyng the which is now latly greatly decayed / and is
like shortly more to decay by reason and occasyon of diverse and many wears
and other engynes for fysshynge there made leuyed fyred and hadd between a
certain place in the said haven called calshord and another place in ye said
haven called Redbrydge dyrectly / So yt by reason by ye said wears and engy^s
wtin few years. no ship of great burdo^ shall mow come or aryue in ye said
haue^ without due and hasty remedy be purueyed in this behalf / For remedy whereof
and for ye common well of this reame of England and thencrease of the
merchants of ye same The king our soueray^e lord by thasse^t of his lords
spyrituall and te^porall and ye co^y^s^ this present perl yament assembled and
by auctoryte of ye same ordeyneth establyssheth and enacteth yt it be lawful
to every man to abate pluck and take away all and every of the said wears
and engynnes and every of them at all times at thyr pleysure being in the said
haven bitwene the said places called Calshorde and Redbryge dyrectly without
trouble let or vexaco^n of any man and that no man let trowble vex hurt
or sue the pluckers up takers away of the said wears and engynnes or them
upon pain of forfeiture of xl.li. of every of them that so lettyth trowblyth
sueth vexith or hurtyth / And that if any person or persons from hensforth
make leuy fyxe or set any wears or engynes for fysshynge stone timber or
earth in the said haven dyrectly between the said places then he or they that
so do. shall forfeyte.C.li. the one half of either of the said sommes to be
to the king our sovereign lord and that other half to him or them that
will sue in that behalf by acco^n of debt playnt or byll or in formacion in
the kings Eschequer / And that the defendaunt in such acco^n playnt byll of
informacyon be not essoyned nor any proteccyon be allowed for him nor be
admitted to wage his law in that behalf / And this act to endure the space
of.xx. years now next ensuynge /

For packynge and payenge custumes of wullen clothes Capitulo.vi.
WHere as in the parlyament holden at westmyster the twelfyth year of ye reyne
of king Edward the forth late king of England among other things it was
ordained establisshed and enacted that where any wullen clothes were or should
be packed in any port within this realm of England and then to be carried
from thens to any port within this realm to be carried over the sea. that
then the same clothes so to be packed and carried. should be packed in the
presence of the custumers and countrollers of the port where ye same clothes
should be so packed / And that the custumes and subsidies of the said clothes
due to the king should be paid and content unto the Collectours of the
custume within the same port as in the said act plainly apperith. which act
for diverse and many causes and co^sideraco^ns is thought hurtful and
prejudicial as well unto the king our sovereign lord as to the merchants In
consideraco^n whereof be it ordained establisshed and enacted by ye king our
souereine lord by ye asse^t of ye lords spiritual and te^porall and ye
Comy^s of this present parliament asse^blid and by auctorite of ye same. yt
from hensforth ye custume and subsydee of all wullen cloches to be shippyd or
carried over the sea where so ever they ben packed. shall be paid to the
Custumers of the port or ports where any such clothes shall be lade or
shypped or to their deputes. this act or any other act here before made to
the contrary notwythstondynge.

For punishment of ryottes Capitulo vii
Prayen the comyns of this your land in this present parliament assemblid that
where for the great surete rest peace and tranqyllyte of your said comyns true
lyege men and subgettes enhabyted in this your realm diverse and many good
statues acts and ordinances have been made in times past ordained and
stablysshed to subdue and punysshe riottes for the unlawful reysinge and
ledinge of your people riottes routes and other unlawful assembles. whereby
many evil deeds Ieopardees perilles fere and dread to your subgettes have
growe^ and there upon great penaltees set upon the said ryottours and
offenders as in diverse remembered statutes acts and ordinances in the days of
your noble progenytours at several times made ordained and provided more at
large does and may appear / yet the same acts notwithstondinge. some persons
not dredynge god. their sovereign lord ne ye punysshment of ye laws made and
had in this beal^e. oftymes as well by color of such offices as they have
obtained. as Receynours Stuardes and Bayllyfs of lordshyps and other offices.
as by preuy reteynders by other promise covenant and otherwise and clamynge
also duty of their tenauntes and servants where none such duty is to goo
with them when such assemble ryotte or route shall be. And after the same
diverse of the said servants and persons often times retret and absent
theimselfe by the agreement couyne and counsel of the said masters and of the
said pryncipall ryottours So that they may not be taken ne brought to answer
to ye law as the laws require / And if any inditementes be had. it shall be
made upon such persons as so retret and absent themself and no thing
founden against the said pryncypall riottours in dysceyte and frawde of the said
good statutes acts and ordinances thereof made to the great courage and
boldness and comfort of the said evil doers. most danger Ieopardie and
peril of your said well disposyd subgettes and to the werst ensample that
thereby may ensue if hasti remedy therein be not provided. It may therefore
playse your hyghnes of your most loving dysposicio^n that ye bear and owe to
the comen we will of this your land and to the great surete of your subgettes of
the same. by the advice of the lords spirytuall and temporal and the comens
in this present parliament assembled and by auctoryte of the same to do ordyne
enacte and stablissh^. that what so ever perso^e or persons within this your
realm of what estate degree or condico^n he be. that hereafter unlawfully
reyse assemble or led your people within this your realm without your
commandment or auctoryte of your law and commit any riott that then if
the party grieved or any other perso^e in the kyngis behalf compain to the
Justices of the peace within the Country where such riotte is done or to oni of
them having auctoryte to enquire of the same where such ryotte and unlawful
assemble shall be made by bylle co^teininge the riotte and the circumstaunce of
the same and of what Town Shyre. mystery or condycyon every of the persons
ayenste whom the same complaynte be made / is dwelling. or else. if the said
ryottours be endyted thereof. then theru upon the said Justices and every of
them have auctoryte and power in the next general Sessyons of the peace within
ye same Count to be holden after the complaint so to them made or inditememt
thereof had before the same justice to do make proclamacyon that the said
master or masters pryncypall or princypalls leder or leders that unlawful
cause the said people to gader or rise. that they appear personelly at the next
general Sessyons of ye peace after the said proclamacyon so made. and every
other person or persons that were present and attendaunt upon him or them by
his or their commandment procuryng or assent contained in ye said
proclamacyon at the said ryotte rout and assemble and every of them personelly
to appear at the said next Sessyons of the peace next after ye said proclamacyon
to be holden within the said Countye / At which day if the said master or
masters pryncipall or pryncypalles leder or leders or any other or the
forsaide offenders appear. then^e he or they to be put to answer thereunto if
it seem the said Justices reasonable and be put to ^uffycient bayl by
reconysaunce before the said Justices to appear personelly from lessyons to
Sessyons unto ye time that the complaynt he discussed. And if he or they refuse
so to do then he or they be committed to ward there to remain till they will /
And if any of ye persons against whom such complaynt or indytement is had or
made dwelli^g other Countee than in the same Countee where such ryotte rout
and assemble is made / That then the Justices to or a fore whom the same
complaynt or indytementes is had or made / do send a transcrypte of the same
complaynt or i^dytement to some Justice of ye peace in ye Countye where such
person is dwelling desiring him to cause proclamacyon to be made in ye next
general sessyons of ye peace in that countee to be holden yt the same person
or persons appear at the next general sessyons of the peace in ye thyre where
the said ryotte is done next after the same proclamacyon to be holden. And if
the same person or persons dwelling in a forayne shyre appear. then like
order to be had for hy^ or them so apperyng as is before specyfyed for and to
them that been dwelling in the said shyre where ye said ryotte is supposed to
be done or made / And if the same person or persons or any of the^ against
whom such proclamaco^n is made in the Countye where the said riot is supposed
to be done and they be dwelling at the time of the same proclamacion making in
the same County make defawte and appear not at the said general sessyons to
him or them lymytted in the said proclamaco^n and eftsoon after that make
defaut and appear not at the next general Sessyons after that / So that like
proclamacyon be made as is aforesaid. And if any of the said ryottours
ageynste whom proclamacyon is made in a Foreyne shyre where they be dwelling
make defawte at the day and place in the said proclamacyon to them lymytted
then he or they in whether of he said Shyres they dwell that so make
defawte / to sto^de and be adiuged and conuycte upon the same defawte of the
said ryotte and unlawful assemble if he or they were thereof conuycte by the
due order of the law / without he or they can make such lawful excuse as
the said Justices shall think reasonable by their dycrescyon. And thereupon
such process to be awarded against them as is acustumed upon condempnaco^ns of
trespace in your comen benche at the suit of the party. And that the said
Justices of ye pease have auctoryte and power to here and determyne ye reherced
causes as well upon byll before them as by enditementes and upon the same byll
or indytementes to proceed and determyne ye same by inquestes according to the
course of the common law. And the party thereby and thereupon to stand conuycte
as perfytly as if they were thereupon conuycte by due process of the law. And
if ye said master or masters pryncypall or princypalles leder or leders or
any other before reherced offender be conuycte upon the premysses then he or
they be committed to prison. there to remain and abide without bayll or
maynpryse by such time and space as shall be thought reasonable by dyescrecion
of ye said Justices. And then he or they depart out of prison / to pay their
fine sessed after the dyscrecyon of the said Justices his or their haueour and
offenses considered And that it be enacted by the said auctoryte that by the
dyscrecyon of ye said Justices and as they se need every of the said master or
masters pryncipall or princypalles leder or leders and other the said
offenders so couicte be bound to ye kings pease from hensforth in such so^me
or so^mes of money as shall be considered by the said justices / And the said
surete to stand by the discrecion of the said Justices And if it be so that
the said ryotte and unlawful assemble be committed with the number of xl.
persons or above or with less number thanne.xl. and that by the discrecyon of
the said Justice it be thought heinous. yt then if the said master or
masters pryncipall or princypalles. leder or leders yt have appeared and so
thereof be conuycte. that then they remain in prison unto the time that they
have found suffycyent surety to appear before the king and his counsel at a
certain day by the said Justices to be lymytted at the which day or before the
keeper of the gaol rolls of the said records shall do to be sent under his
seal the said hole record of the conuyction to the king our souerayn lord
and his counseyll to thentente that his hyghnes and his Counsel may awarde
such emprysonement and fines of the said master or masters pryncypall or
pryncypalles leder or leders as by his highness and by his said Counseyl shall be
thought conuenyent / And if the party complaynaunt as is aforsayd can not
prove the matter of his said byll to be true then he to pay reasonable costs
and damages of the party vexed as shall be thought resanable by dyscrecyon of
the same Justices / and they to make against the same complaynaunt not proui^ge
the matere of his said byll to be true. such process against him for the said
costs and damages as is before lymytted against the said ryotours conuycte of
the said ryotte for the payment of their said fynes. And if the said
complaynaunt or complaynauntes have not suffycyent whereof to restore the party
and parties so vexed or trowbled in form aforesaid / that then he
ymmedyatly be rommytted to ye comen jail by ye said Justices there to remayn
ye space and time as shall be thought by the said Justices conuenyent and
reasonable. And yt this act endure but unto the next parliament /

For punishment of Usurers Capitulo viij
PRaye^ge ye comyns in this present parliament assembled yt where in the
parlyament holdenat westmystre the third year of your most noble reygne It was
enacted ordained and establysshed that of for and upon bargeynes grounded in
usury colored by the means of new cheuesaunce or eschaunge contrary to the
law of natural Justices to the great displesure of god and of our said
sovereign lord and the common hurt of this his land. that certain
punisshmentes and penaltees should run upon the offenders in that behalf as
in the said act more at large is contained which act was and is so obscured
derke and defuse. that the true entente of the makers thereof can not perfitly
be understand wherefore and for the plain explanaco^n and declaraco^n of usury
and penaltees to be hereafter excuted upon thoffenders in the same / The king
our sovereign lord by thassent and advice of the lords spiritual and
temporal and the comyns in this present parlyamen assembled and by auctorite
of the same ordeineth enactyth and establysshth that all manner of person or
persons lenynge money to and for a time taking for the same lone any thing
more besides or above ye money lent by way of contracte of covenant at the
time of the same lone. Saving lawful penaltees for none payment of the same
money lent: and that all manner of person and persons which hereafter sell
oni goods catelles or marchaundyses to any person or persons being in
necessite. and the seller himself or by his brokar or factour in that behalf
again bye the same goods catelles or marchaundyses of the same person to
whom they were sold being in necessite of his brokar or factour in that
behalf within three months after they ben sold fore a less sum of money
than they were sold for knowing the same goods so bought again / before by
the same byer or buyers to be sold after the form before said / And that every
person and persons lenynge or taking any money to any person or persons to
a certain time and takyth lands renementes or any hereditamentes or other
bounds for surete perfyte and sure repayment of his or their money lent at the
time assygned without condyco^n or adventure / and also at the time of the same
lone or taking of the said money couenauntyth appoyntyth or contractyh
couenaunten appoynten or contracten that he or they that so lene or take
money / shall have the revenues and profytes of the lands tenementes or
hereditamentes of him that so boroweth or takyth money by a certain time that
then every person hereafter upon any of the promysses conuycted. forfeyt the
moyte of the value in money of the said money goods catalles marchaundyses as
is above said so sold or lent after such value as they ben sold or lent
for after any form aforsayd. whereof the king shall have the one moyte of the
same forfeyture / and the party that will sue the other moyte / And if no man
will sue. then the king have the hole / And this suit for the said penalte
and forfeyture to be as well at the kyngis suit as any other yt will sue by
informaco^n in any of the kings Courts of record. And such process to be had
in the same. as is used in other accio^s of de^te at the comen law in the same
Courts. Provided always that in the courts of Chauncery and Eschequer they
shall make such process as has be used before time Informacions before them
co^menced wherein the defendaunt shall not wage his law nor proteccyon ne
essoine de service le roy in the same alowable / And that the same act and
ordinance made the said third year and all thing there in contained be from
henforth utterly void and of none effect Reserving alweye to the spiritual
Iurisdicco^n their lawful punysshme^tes in every cause of Usury /

An act concerning thinhabitantes of North and South Tyndale Capitulo ix
FOr asmoche as thinhabytantes and dwellers within the lord shypp^ and bounds
of North Tindale and South Tindale not only in their own persons but also
often times accompanied and confedred with Scottis ancient enmyes to this
realm. have at many seasons in times paste committed and done and yet daily
and nyghtly committed and do great and hanoyous murdres treasons robberies
felonies depredaco^ns riottes and other great trespaces upon the king our
sovereign lordis true and faithful lyege people and subgettes inhabitours and
dwellers within the shires of Northumbrelonde Cumbre land westmerlonde
Examshire the bisshiprishe of Duram and in a part of York shire which
treasons murdres robberies felonies and other the promysses. have not in time
past in any manner of form be punysshed after thorder and course of the comen
law by reason of such fraunchises as was used within the same while it was in
the possession of any other lord or lords. than our sovereign lordis. and thus
for lack of punysshment of the said treasons murders robberies felonies and
other the premises. the kyngis true and faithful liege people and subgettes
inhabiters and dwellers within shyres and places before reherced. can not be in
any manner of surety of their bodies or goods another yet lie in their own
howses but either to be murdered or take or carried in to Scotlonde and there
raunsonned to their great distrucco^n of body and goods and utter
empouerisshynge for ever on less due and hasti remedi be had and found in ye
premis-Inconsideraco^n whereof ye king our sovereign lord for very zele and
gracious favor yt he berith to ye come^ well of these his realm not willi^g
his true and faithful lyege people subgettes to fayl of remedi i^ ye p^mysses.
has ordained establysshid and enacted by thassent of his lords spu^all and
temporal and the comens of the same his realm i^ these p^se^t perliame^t
assembled and by auctorite of ye same yt ye said lordship and bounds of north
and south ti^dale now being i^ his ho^des and allo^des and teneme^tes with i^ ye
sam^ i^ whose possession so ever they be and eueri perte yer of sto^d and be
from he^sforth gildable and part of the shyre of northhumbrelonde aforesaid
and no fraunchyse ne fraunchysed but that all manner of the kings wryttes
shall run and all his officers. as well the wardeyne or wardeyns of the Este
and mydyll Marches of England toward Scotlonde their lietenaunde or
lieutenauntes the Justices of peace shyref Eschetour Coroners Bayllyes and other
officers and their deputies and every of them of and within the County of
Northumbrelonde before said and all there warrau^tes and precepts shall be
obeyed and of great auctoryte in the law by reason of this act within the
said lordeshype and bounds of North and South Tyndale and in every part thereof
as in oni other party of ye said shyre of Northumbrelonde. and over this yt no
person or persons of what estate degree or condico^n he or they be of that
now has or that hereafter shall have auctorite or power i^ his or their own
right or any other mannis to dimitte or let to ferme for year or years term
of life or at will any lands or tenement within the lordship^ and bounds of
North and South Tyndale aforsayd. let or dimitte to ferme for year or years
term of life at will any lands or tenementes within the said lordship^ and
bounds aforsayd but that the less or lesses before he or they take or occupye
beforce of any such leas any such lands and tenementes find good and
suficient surete at the ieest two persons having lands and tenementes
within the said shyre of Northumbrelonde not being within the said lordship
and bounds of North and South Tindale to ye full yearly value of forty
shelynges over and above all manner charges and repryces / by reconysaunce to
the king our sovereign lord in.xx.li. before two at the leest of the Justices
of the peace of the said Shire of Northumbrelonde for the time being whereof one
shall be of the Quorum. upon this condition that if the said less or lessees
within.viii. days warning to them or any of them personally or openly at
his or their own house or in his or thyr paryssh church yeuen by any of the
said Justices of the peace. the Shyref of the said County of Northumbrelond and
warden of ye Eest and myddell Marches for against scotlonde or his lietenau^t
personally appear not before the same Justices of the peace warde^ or
lietenaunte at any sessession or sessyons jail delyuere warden court at such
place and dai within the said shyre of Northumbrelonde. or day or days of
trues whersoeuer it. shall fortune them to be assygned and as they or any of
them shall be therun to as before is rehercyd warned. there and then to
answer all such treesons felonyes murdres and trespacers or attemptates
contrary to the trues from hensforth by them or any of them to be done / that
then the said sum of.xx.li. shall be forfeyted the one half thereof to the
king our sovereign lord and ye other half to him or them yt will sue
therefore yeuynge thereof to ye Justices before whom the reconysaunce is or shall
be taken after thexecucyon thereof he had of is said part so recovered.xl.
shelynges. And that the said Iustyers of peace before whom the said reconysaunce
is or shall be taken as before is rehercyd and all other Justices of the peace
within the said shyre of Northumbrelonde for time beyn^ge shall by reason of
this said act hauefull auctorite to enquire there of and to take presentementes
and Informaco^ns thereupon and to awarde process and execuco^n of and for the
same so^me upon any presentement or Informaco^n made thereon in like and as
ample form as the kings Justices of his Benche shall or may do of or for
any reconysaunce taken before them forfeyted for the kepeynge of the kings
peace / And if any person or persons after the feast of Ester next coming
take upon him or them to let or dymytte as before is reherced any lands or
tenementes within the said lordshyp or bounds of North and South Tyndale where
no such surety is before had and found as before is reherced. that person
and persons that so letten or dimitten shall by this same act for every acar
of ground and every mese and mansyon or dwelling place within the said
lordshyppe and bounds aforesaid by him or them so letten or dymitte
forfeyte.xl. shelynges. the one half to the king and the other to him or
them that will sue therefore / And that ye Justices of the peace of the said
Shire of Northumbrelonde for the time being / shall have like auctoryte in all
things concerning this forfeyture as by this act and ordinance is given to
they ym in reconysaunce before expressed. and that all manner of leasses
dinussions made or to be made of any lands or tenementes within the said
lordship and bounds of North and South Tyndale for the which no such surete
shall be had and found at the said feast of Ester. and so forth as tofore is
rehercid. be and stand from thens forthwarde void and of none effect And if
any person or persons of what estate degree or condico^n he or they be of /
take upon him or them after the said feast of Ester to enter occupy dwell
hold or inhite any lo^des tents or ground which the said lordeship and
bounds of North and South Tyndale not being his own inherytaunce in fee
simple or in fee tayll without unlawful or suffycient auctoryte and sufficient
surety by him or them found as before is reherced except he be a lord
spiritual or temporal of this realm / that he and they so doing have
ymprysonement by the space of a year without bayll or maynpryse and so to
continue till he have found suffycient surete to the king by reconysaunce
before the Justices of peace of the said County to be of good beri^ge against the
king and all his liege people /

For leuyenge of the arrerages of the benevolence last granted Capitulo x:
PRayen the comyns in this present parlyament assembled that where diverse and
many of your subgetes severally granted to your hyghnes diverse sommes of
money of their free wylles and benevolence for the deffence of this your
realm toward the charge and great expenses that your hyghnes sustained and
bare for the said deffence as well in your said viage royal in the parties of
France beyond the sea as on this side in and for abowte the same which viage
your said hyghnes took upon you in your most royal person ^o the great
Ieoperdye and labor of the same as well for ye said defense of this your said
realm as for the suerty profit we will and commodite of us all your true lyege
men and subgettes enhabited in the same / of which sommes of money diverse your
said subgettes inhabyted in the same of which sommes of money diverse your said
subgettes full louyngly have made to you true payment according to their
grauntes and other many several sums of money by diverse your subgettes to
you in that party granted as yet remayn not content ne paid. part whereof
rest in the hondes of the said grauntours and part in the hondes of the
Commyssyoners Collectours and receyuours in that party assignyd for the leuy
rerynge and keeping of the same which is not only to the damage loss and
hurt of your said hyghnes / but also to the murmr grudge and myscontentynge
of such your said subgettes as haven made their said paymentes in that behalf
/ Wherefore may it please your said hyghnes by the advise and assent of your
lords spyrytuall and temporal and the Comyns in this present parlyament
assembled and by autoryte of the same / to ordeyne enacte and establyssh that
proclamacyon be made in every Shyre town and hundred within this your reame /
that every person and persons which have not co^tente and paid the sommes
of money by them granted to your hyghnes for the causes remembered / That such
Commyssyoners Collectours Receyuours and other persons deputed to receive the
same that they do make payment thereof within three months next after the said
proclamacyon made to the said Commyssyoners Collectours Receyuours or other
persons that herafter shall be thereunto deputed or assyngned by your highness
by your letters patentes under your great seal in like wise to be proclaimed /
And that the said Commissyoners have auctoryte and power to make process to
take every such person or persons as so shall make defaute of payment by his
body. and the same to commyt to the common jail there to remain and abide
without bayll or may^npryse unto the time he has paid his said duties or
ellys-fynde suffycyent suerty for the payment of the same to the said
Co^myssioners agreeable / And if any such person that has made payment of his
said duty granted. be decessed. that then the goods and catayles of him
decessed being in the hondes of his executures of admistratours not admynystred
be charged and chargeable to the said payment / And that the said Commyssyoners
have like auctoryte and power to do ordeyne and awarde process for the leuy
of the same / as the Barons of the kings Eschequer do and may do for the
kings duties resting before them of record in the said Eschequer And the
said Commyssyoners Collectoures or Receyuours before this time thereunto deputed
or that hereafter for and to the same shall be deputed having and taking the
Recept of the same your money or any perell thereof. be severally countable for
the porcyons by them several received before your Tresorer of your wars
that was by you assygned in your said vyage royal or any other person or
persons that herafter by your highness shall be thereunto deputed and assygned
of and for all such sommes of money as they seuerly have received or shall
come to their hondes before such Auditors as by your hyghnes shall be
assygned in that party. And if any of the said Commyssyoners Collectours or
Receyuours come not to make their accomptes at such day and place as shall
be lymytted in your pryue seal to them dyrected in that party that then
upon Certyfycat of the delyuere of ye said wryttes or pryue seals made by him
that the same delivered upon his oath unto the Chaunceller of England for the
time being. the said Chaunceller for the same time being have auctoryte and
power to make Commyssyons under your great seal to certain persons by his
discrecyon to be lymytted and chosen to take the bodies of the said persons
that so shall make defawte and them to commyte to ward on less then he
make before the said Tresorers or Commyssioners such excuse as to them shall
seem reasonable. there to remain till they have made their accomtes of and for
the premysses and satysfyed content and paid the duty by them dew upon
their said accomptes Tresorer of your wars or to such other person or
persons to your use as your grace shall depute and assygne in that party to
receive the same / And ^uer this be it enacted by the said auctoryte. that if
any trauers fortune to be ^ytwene the said Commyssyoners before this time
assigned to receive the kyn^es said duties collectours and the said grauntoures
of and for payeng and not ^^yenge receyuynge or not receyuynge of the said
sum or sommes of money or any part thereof that then if the said grauntours
show acquytaunce writings bylles or byllettes whereby it may appear before the
Commyssyoners hereafter to be assygned the Commyssyoners or Collectours before
this time assygned in form reherced have received the sum or sommes of
money or any part thereof that shall be in trauers / or that the said
grauntours offer to bry^ge two witness or mo that will witness and testefye
the said payment or that any grauntour or grauntours deny the grant of any
such sum or so^mes of money or any part thereof of them demanded. that
thereupon the said commyssyoners herafter to be assygned. have auctoryte and
power to here the hole matere euydence wrytynges witness and proves
concerning the said trauers and denyenge of the said grauntes and then to
charge and discharge every of the said persons by their dyscrecyons as they
shall seem best / and the same charge or dyscharge to bind and discharge every
of the said parties against ye kings highness as if it were adiuged before ye
Auditors assygned by due oryginal in any of ye ky^ges courts of record
between party and party in accyon of accomptes or ellis that the king were
playntyf in the said accyon of acco^pte Be it also ordained by the said
auctoryte that the said Commyssyoners he^eafter to be assygned by ye kings
hyghnes / shall by their dyscrecyon upon their account and full payment made of
all sommes of money by them received or to be received by the Collectour or
receyuours of the said so^mes of benevolence shall by theyr-dyscrecyo^s allow
unto ye said receyuours and Collectours / such their reasonable costs and
rewards as they for ye gadery^g of ye said so^mes have sustened / Provided
always yt this act shall not exte^d to charge any heir of any man that has
before time granted any sum of money by way of his beneunlence

An act concerning taking of apprentyses in the Cite of Norwyche Capitulo
Vndecimo
PRayen the comens in this present parliament assembled that where the Cite of
Norwyche which is an ancient Cite. is greatly decayed. the especyall cause
whereof is for asmoche as there is a statute made at westmestre the seventh year
of the regne of king Herry the fourth containing among other things. that
no man nor woman shall putt sone or daughter to be apprentyse within any Cite
or town within the realm but if they have lands or rentes to the value
of.xx. s. at the leeste by the year and that to be testyfyed under the Seals
of two Justices of peace where the said child was borne. by force of which
statute many and diverse great vexacions trowbles and losses have be done to
the Cyteyzins of the said Cite as well for the receyuynge of their own children
as other to be their apprentyses whereby the most substancial craft in the
said Cite called wortedeweuers and Clothyers by which crafts ye we will of the
said Cite has and should be mayntened supported and continued among other
diverse crafts there used ben greatly decayed. by reason whereof the young
people of the said Cite ben given to ydylnesse vices and other diverse
mysgouernaunce. And if no remedy herein be had / it is like to be the utter
dystrucco^n of the said Cite. wherefore pleas it your hyghnes of your most
benynge grace in consideraco^ of the premises by thassent of the lords
spiritual and temporal and the comyns in this present parlyament assembled
and by auctorryte of the same / to enacte / ordained and establysshed that the
said Citeyzyns and every of them for ever from hensforth shall be at their
lybertees to receive and to take to their apprentyses the sone or daughter of
any person or persons which woll put their said sons or daughters to be
apprentyses in ye said Cite the statute aforsayd and the pains in the same
contained not withstonddyng. And that they and every of them for ever from
hensforth shall be forprised and except out of every punysshment and hurt
contained in the said statute / Moreover where in the said Cite in time paste
has of long time be used. that there should no man take upon him to shere
worstedes called te^yerdes Stamyns ne other worstedes but if he had be
apprentyse to thoccupacyon or sherynge of worstedes by the space of.vij. years.
So that he might have the knowledge and cunning in yt craft how be it now of
late many and diverse persons as well alyence strangers as other foreyns not
dwelling nor inhabyted have within your said Cite by suportacyon and
mayntenaunce of diverse persons inhabitauntes in the said Cite for their
synguler lucre. take upon them the occupacyon of sheryng of worstedes and
stamyns which have not the sight nor conning in that occupacyon nor have be
apprentyse to the same by whom great hurtes and diverse losses have be for the
defawte of cunning by cuttyng and other wise of the said worstedes / to the
owners and other your subgettes in this your realm. infamy also and sclaunder
as well to thoccupacyons of worstedes and worstede shermen / as to the
merchants which put them so hurt and kytte in the sheryng to sale / And if
ready remedy be not had in these premysses and reformacyon both the said
occupacyon of worsted making and also of worsted sheryng which god forbid / is
lykely to be distroyed for lack of good polycy and order / Wherefore it may
pleas your highness by thauctoryte aforesaid for the common well of your
merchants and other your subgettes of this your realm / and for the
conseruacyon and susteynyng of the said occupacyon of worstedes and worsted
sheryng to enacte ordeyne and establysshe. that from hensforth no man shall
take upon him to shere worstedes within the said Cite but if he has be
apprentyse to the said occupacion of worstede sheryng by the space of.vii. year
or such as the masters of the said occupacyon wtin the said Cite for the time
being approuyng their cunnyng with the advise of the Mayre for the time being
will admytte. And they that take upon them the contrary and the mayntenours of
him or them so mysdoyng as before is said each of them to forfeyt for every
defawt.xx. shelynges half to you gracyous and souerayn lord. and half to the
said Mayre and masters of the said occupacyon of worstede sheryng for that
time being / And yt no man inhabitaunt in the said cite cytezyn or other being
no shereman keep any sherman of worstedes within his house after the feste of
Ester next coming under the pain of xl. s. as often as he be in defaute in ye
same / the one half to. be enployed to you our souerayn lord / and the other half
to the said mayre and masters of the said occupacyon of sheryng of worsted And
that the said masters of the said occupacyon of sherynge of worsted have fre
search of the said craft of worsted sherynge in every place as well within the
dwelling places of shermen dies and calenderers of the. same worstedes and
other inhabitauntes in the said cite and precyncte of the same. and if any
cytezin or inhabitaunt of the said cite. deny the said wardens of worsted
sheryng due search or go contrary to this prouysyon and ordinance / shall
forfayte ye sum. of.xl. s. for every defawte / the moyte thereof to you
souerayn lord and the other moyte to the foresaid Mayre and masters of the said
ocupacyon / The said pains to be leuyed after the form and ordinance
purueyed for the correction of the craft and occupacyon of worsted weuers wtin
the said Cite / Provided always that the said occupacyon of worsted shery^g
shall make or do to be made none ordinance concerning the said occupacyon
among themself but such as the mayre for that time being with his brederne
aldermen shall think necessery and proufytable to the kings subgettes.

For wryttes to be given and learned counseyl to be assigned to the pore people
without paye^g any money therefore Caplo xij
PRayen the comens in this present parlianient assembled that where the king
our souerayn lord of his most gracyous dysposycyon wylleth and entendeth
indyfferente Justice to be had and mynystred according to his comen laws to
all his true subgettes as well to the pore as rich which pore subgettes be not
of habylyte ne power to sue according to the laws of this land / For the
redress of Injuries and wrongs to them daily done as well concerning their
persons their Inherytaunces as other causes. For remedy whereof in the behalf
of the pore persons of this land not able to sue for their remedy after the
course of the common law / Be it ordained and enacted by your hyghnes and by the
lords spyritual and temporal and the comyns in this present parlyament
assembled and by auctoryte of the same / that every pore person or persons
which have or herafter shall have cause of acco^n or acco^ns against any
person or persons within this realm. shall have by the dyscreco^n of the
Chaunceler of this realm for ye time being wrytt or wryttes orygynal and
wryttes of (sub pena) according to the nature of their cause therefore no
thing payeng to your hyghnes for the seals of the same nor to any person for
the writing of the same writ or wryttes to be herafter sued. And that the
said Chaunceler for the same time being shall assygne such of ye clerks
which shall do and use the making and writing of ye same wryttes to write
the same ready to be sealed / And also learned counseyll and attorneys for ye same
without any reward taking therefore / And if the said writ or wryttes be
returned / if it be before the king in his benche / the Justices there shall
assygne to the same pore person or persons counsel learned by their
dyscrecyons which shall give their counseyls no thing taking for the same
and in likewise the same Justices shall appoint attorney and atturneys for the
same pore person or persons and all other officers requylyte and necessary to
be had for ye speed of the said suits to be had and made which shall do their
duties without any reward for their counseyls help and besynes in the same
and the same law and order shall be observed and kept of all such suits to be
made before ye kings Justice of his comen place and barons of his Eschequer /
And all other Justices in courts of record where any such suits shall be.

That horses shall not be co^ueyd out of the lo^d without the kings lyce^ce:
nor maares over the price of vi shelynges viij pence: Capitulo xiiij
FOr asmoch as many horses and mares of ye bread of this lord now of late have
be carried and co^ueyd out of ye same i^ to ye parties of beyond yese which
causes not only ye smaler no^bre of good horses to be wti^ this realm for ye
defense thereof but also ye great and good ple^te of ye sam^ to be i^ ye said
perties beyo^de ye se yt in times paste were wont to be within this land / and
over yt the price of every of them to be greatly enhau^ced hereto ye loss and
noyau^ce of al ye ky^ges subgettes wti^ ye sam^. For remedy whereof it be
ordained enacted and establisshed by ye king our souerayn lord by ye advise of
ye lords spu^al and temporal and ye comi^s i^ these p^se^t perliame^t assembled
and by auctoryte of the same / that from hensforth no manner of person ne
persons carry or convey any horse out of this land without the kings special
license upon pain of forfeyture of the same / Or any maare above ye value
of.vi shelynges.viii. pence without the kings special license upon the said
pain of forfeyture of the same maare / the owner thereof or his deputy
receyuynge for the same maare.vi. shelynges.viii pence at the time of the
seasire upon the said forfeiture or else it to be not forfeite and at ye time
of seasire of the said maare or maares they shall be praised by ye heed
officers of the town where any such maare is taken and there openly to be
sold to the best price / and the half deal of ye over price of her being
above.vi. shelynges.viii pence / to be to ye king and the other half to him
that so seiseth. and the kings part thereof to be delivered to the Custumer
of the said port / And yt no manner person ne persons hereafter ca^y or
convey any maare or maares out of this land except every of the said maares
so carried be of the aege of iii years at ye leest and not over the price
of.vi. shelynges.viii. pence payenge to the king for every of them not above
ye value of.vi shelynges.viii. pence so to be carried or conveyed in the same
port. such custumes as has be for maares before used. And that for every
maare of more ^alue hereafter by ye kings license after the form aforesaid
conveyed or ca^ed beyond the sea / the owner thereof or his deputy assygne or
servant shall pay.vi. shelynges.viii. pence for the custume of the same
before it be shipped under ye pain of forfeyture of every maare so shypped or
they be^ custumed / And over yt be it enacted yt if any person at the port
will give for any of the maares so to be carried.vii. shelynges. yt it be
lawful to him so geuynge and payenge the said.vii. shelynges to take the said
maare if she be not before taken by the kings offycer nor the kings license be
not in the behalf aforsayd for the same maare to be carried obtained / Provided
always yt it shall be lefull to every person or persons being Deynezyns
hereafter to carry horse beyond ye see ye kings license in yt behalf not
obtained for their own uses not in tendynge at the time of the shyppynge of
the same nor then fully purposed to selle him and that entente to be known
by the oath of him that shall do ship the same horse taken before ye custumer
or sercher of ye same port this act notwithsto^ding

That strangers made deynezens shall pay custume and subsidiees as strangers
Capitulo xiiii
WHere the king our sovereign lord is greatly dysceued in his custumes and
subsidies by merchants strangers such as the king our sovereign lord has
grauntyd by his letters patentes to be deynezyns and to pay none other
custumes ne subsidies for their marchaundyse Inward and outward but as a
deinezinge under color where of they custume not all oo^li their own
marchaundyse under the form aforesaid but also they colorably enter in to the
Custumers books the marchaundyse of other strangers calling and saying the
said gods of other merchants to be the gods of them so made denesins / to
the great loss and defraude to ye king our sovereign lord / wherefore be it
enacted by ye king our sovereign lord the lords spu^all and temporal and
the comyns of this present parlyamente assembled and by auctorite of the same
that all merchants strangers and other yt be made deynezins the kyngys
letters patentes or otherwise / peye from hensforth such custumes and
subsidees for their gods and marchaundyse Inward and outward as they should
have paid if such letters pate^tes and grau^tes had never to them be made.

Against untrue demeanyng of Shyrefs and their officers in holdyng their countes
Capitulo xv:
WHere as great extorco^n is yearly used and had within diverse Countes within
this realm of England by the subtyltee and untrue demeanoure of Shyrefs
vndershyrefs Shyre clerks or any other officers holding or keeping the
Countees in the name of a Shyref. that is to say if any man afferme a playnt
before the shyrefs in the cou^ties / ye said shyrefs vndershirifs or his shyre
clerk or before any other of the said officers will enter or cause to be enter
in to their books in the same playntyfs name diverse and many plaintes both of
debt trespace and couenaunte at their playsure and unknowing to the said
playntif in whoos name the said playntes ben affermed / to thentente that if
the defendaunte appear not at every shire day or court having the same
playnt he shall lose for his defawte made at every playnt.iiij. d / where
diverse times by couyne between the said Shyrefs vndershirefs shire clerks and
the other foresaid officers / the said defendauntes being never attatched
su^mone nor warned according to the due form of the comen law / wherefore
the same parties so put in suyte have no knowledge of any such suit had again
them and over that the same shyrefs vndershyrefs shire clerks will cause
diverse playntes to be take in the names of such persons that are not in
plain life / where the said defendaunt shall have like loss as is before
reherced / So that by the unlawful demeanor of the said shirefs vndershyrefs
shyre clerks for time being and the bayllyfs of the hundredes for their
defawte and neclygence in their ofices and couyne between the said shyrefs
vndershyrefs shyre clerks and other of the foresaid officers causes the
amercyamentes to be in one year after the books be ingroced to a monute to
great and importunable so^mes of money which so^mes of money ben yearly
leuyed of the poor comens in the said Counties by the shyrefs vndershyrefs and
shyre clerks and other deputies being of none substance neither of haucour /
which deputees takyth and leuyeth more by extorco^n than is contained to their
estrettes to the express pyllage and empouerysshinge of the said Comens / Be
it therefore enacted ordained and establysshed by the king our souereyne lord
and by thassent of ye lords spiritual and te^porall and the comens in this
present parliament assembled and by auctorite of ye same yt no shyrefs
vndershyrefs shire clerks hereafter another any person in their names nor by
their commandment shall take and enter no playntes in to their books in no
man's name / on less the parti plaintiff be in his proper person present in
the courts or else by a suffycient attorney or deputy yt is known to be of
good name and dysposicion and that the same parti plaintiff shall find pledges
to pursue his said playnt such persons as. are known there in that counties
/ and that the parti playntif shall have but one playnt for one trespace or
contracte / And if the said shyrefes vndershirefs shire clerks take and enter
or cause to be enter any moo playntes than the playntif supposith yt he has
cause of acco^n against the defendaunt / yt then the said shyrefs vndshirefs
shire clerks yt does enter or cause to be enter any such playntes contrary
to the said prouysion and ordinance / shall forfeit for every defawte.xl. s.
the one half thereof to be had to the use of our said sovereign lord the king
/ and the other part to him or them that woll sue and prove the same matere
by accion of debt or Informaco^n in the Eschequer / And over that the Justice
of peace in the same Cou^ties and every of them shall have auctorite upon
complaynte made by the party so unlawfully greuyd to examyne the said shirefs
vndershirefs or shire clerks and playntifs. And if ye said Justices of peace or
one of them find by their examynacion defawte in the said shirefs vndshirefs
or other shire clerks in entryng of the said playntes dysceyfully for his or
their advantage as is before reherced contrari to this present act / yt then
ye said shirefs vndshirefs and shire clerks shall be conuicte and atteint of
the same offense without ferder enquerre or examinacion and that he shall
forfeit upon the same examynaco^n.xl. s. to ye use of our sovereign lord the
king for every defawte / And ye said Justices of peace that so / shall take the
examynacion shall certefie the same examinacion within a quarter of a year in
to the kings Eschequer upon pain of.xl. s. And ferdermore that the said
shirefs and vndshirefs and shire clerks make or cause to be made a sufficient
presept to the bayllyfs of the hundredes to attache summone or warn the
defendauntes that are so in suit to appear and answer to the said playntes /
And if there be any defawte in the said bayllyfs of ye hundredes in warning of
the said defendaunce to appear and answer to the said playntes commended
again them their Courts in executinge their said office / that then the
same bayllyfs shall forfeyt for every defawte unto our sovereign lord the
king.xl. s. and to be atteynt and conuicte thereof by like examynacion of ye
Justices of peace or every of them as before is reherced / And that the same
shirefs vndershyrefs shyre clerks and their deputies for the time being shall
make none estrettes to leuy the said shyrefs lamercyamentes until such time
that two Justices of peace whereof one shall be of the Quorum have had the view
and ouersyght of their books / And that the estrettes be ende^ted betwyx the
said Justices of peace and the said sheirefs and vndershyrefs and sealed with
their seals / the one part to remain with the said Justices and the other
part with the said. Shyrefs or vndershyrefs to the entente understand if any
dysceyte be or untrue demeanynge in them in making of their books. And that
those persons shall be gaderers of the same amercyamentes as bayllyfs or other
officers be sworn by the said Justices that they take no more money than is
forfeyted and contained in the ostreytes sealed with the seals of the said
Justices of peace upon the same pain of forfeyture as before is reherced.
thereof the same gaderers to be conuicte by examynaco^n of ye Justices of peace
shall be appoy^ted / and named at the general Sessyons after the feast of saint
Mychell tharchaungel by him that is Custos Roculorum of the said Countees or
else by the eldest of the Quorum in his absence to have the ouersyght and
countrollement of the said Shyrefs vndersherefs and shyre clerks and other of
the said officers and of the said Shirefs amerciame^tis / and the said Justices
of peace upon subgestyon or Informacon of the parti so greuyd shall make like
process as in an accyon of trespace again the said Shirefs vndershyrefs or
shyre clerks and other yt foresaid officers mysdemeanyng as before is reherced
for to appear before them to answer to the said suggestyon or informacyon.

For keeping the watch in Caleys Capitulo xvi
WHere king Edward the third upon the wynny^g of ye town of Caleys
establysshed and made diverse good statutes ordynaunces and laws with in the same
town for the sure and saaf keeping of ye same. and there upon for the same
entente gave diverse tenementis and fair places builded there / to diverse lords
and noble men of his army freely to them and their heirs without any rentes or
charges yeldyng for the same. save only the finding of certain watches
limytted to every of the said places for the sure keeping of the same town to
thentent specially that the said watches the said lords and honorable men
should ye better and more sure and fermly be kept and mayntened / And so it
is now yt the owners of the premysses consider not their said charges ne do
not bear ye said watch by them due as is aforsayd by mean whereof the
Burgeyses of the said town for the suerty of the same have been many years and
yet nyghtly ben fore charged to their great importable loss which they can
nor may contyue and sustain without the king our souerayn lord provide for
the releif of the same town. For the remedy whereof the king or sovereign lord
by thassent thaduyse of the lords spyrytual and temporal and the comens of
this present parlyament assembled and by auctoryte of the same ordeyneth and
enactith that who that has any fre hold within the town of Calays out of the
which any yerly charge is going for the sure keeping of the said town for
watch or otherwise / that hereafter ceasses in doing of the said charge by
the space of a year and a day / that then the said fre hold be seysed in to the
kings ho^des he to have it to him and his heirs and during the time it be in
the hondes of ye kings hyghnes The Tresorer of Calays take the proufytes
thereof to the ky^ges use and bear the charges yearly going out of the said
free hold toward the said keeping of the said town as be fore that time it
was accustumed to be are if the said free hold will bear the said charge.
And in like wise be charged the kings Co^myttes or his patentis for the
keeping of the said town as before is said / And for defaute of the doing of the
same by the space of a year and a day the said tenementis ettsones to be
seassed as is aforsayd. and so from time as often as the said charge is not
content ne paid by the said time / and during the time the said tenementes be
in the hondes of the kyngys highness (And if the said Tresorer of Calays pay
not the said charge within a year and a day / that then the said Tresorer
forfeyt the dowble value of the same to the kyngys highness if the reneues be
able to find the said watch

A yenste dystroyenge of pertryches and fesauntes with unlawful engynes
Capitulo xvii
ITem for asmoche as diverse persons having little substance to live upon use
many times as well by nets snares and other engynes to take and distroy
fesauntes and pertryches upon that lordshyppes manners lond^s tenementys of
diverse owners possessioners of the same without license consent or a grenent of
the same owners or possessiones / by the which the same owners and
possessyoners lose not only their pleasure and disporte yt their friends and
servants should have about tha wkyng and huntyng and taking of the same / but
also they lose the prouffyte and avail that by thoccacyon should grow to their
household to the great hurt of all lords and gentylmen and other having any
great lyuelode within this realm / Wherefore it is ordained and enacted by the
auctoryte of this present parlyament that it shall not be lefull to any person
of what co^dycion he be to take or cause to be taken any fesauntes or
partryches by nets snares or other engynes out of his own waren upon the fre
hold of any other person without thassent aggrement and special license of
the owner or possessyoner of the same upon pain of forfeyture of.x.li. the one
half thereof to be to the party that will sue for the same by accyon of debt or
by byll or otherwise And the other thereof to the owner or possessyoner of the
said ground upon yt which the said fesauntes and pertryches be so taken / Also
it is ordained by the said auctoryte / that no manner of person of what
condicyon or degree he be take or cause to be taken be it upon his own ground
or any other mannis. the eggs of any fawcon goshaukes laners or swannes out of
the neste upon pain of imprysonement of a year and a day and fine at kyngys
will / the one half thereof to the king and the other half to the owner of the
ground where the eggs were so taken and that Justices of the peace have
auctoryte by this present act / to here and determyne such matere as well by
inquysico^n as Informaco^n and proves / Also it is ordained by ye said
autoryte-yt no man fro the fest of Pasnext comy^g. bear any hawke of ye bread
of Eng^ond called an Nyesse goshawke Tassel Laner Laneret or Fawcon upon pain
of forfeyture of his hawke to ye king and the said hawke to be at the kings
playsure. And yt all such persons that bring any Nyesse hawke or hawks from
any of the parties beyond the sea bring a Certyfycat under the Custumers seal
of the Port where he first londed with the said hawke or hawks. Or if he
come out of Scotlond. then under the seal of the wardeyn or lyeutenaunt of
that March that he comyth thorough testefyenge that the same hawke or hawks
be of the parties beyond she see or of Scotlonde upon the same pain. And that
person that brings any such hawke or hawks to the king / shall have a
reasonable reward of the king or else the same hawke or hawks for their
labor / Also it is ordained by the same auctoryte that no man take any ayrer
fawcon goshawke ta^sell or laner or lanerettes in their waron or wodes or in
other place / nor purposely drive them out of their couertes accustumed to
bread in to cause them to go to other couertes to bread. nor sle them for any
hurt by them done / but suffer the^ to pass at their lybertees upon pain
of.x.li. the one half thereof to the party yt will sue for the same by accyon
of debt examynacyon before Justices of the peace informaco^n or otherwise / and
the other half to the king / Provided al way that the moyte of the forfeyte
above said given to the owner of the ground for taking of swannes eggs / be
unto the owner of the said swannes and not to the owner of the ground.

Not being with the King in time of need et cetera shall let fees and
annuytees to him granted Caplo xviij
WHere every subgette by the duty of his allygeaunce is bounden to serve and
assyst his prince and souerayn lord at al seasons when need shall require. And
most specially such persons as have by him promocyon or auauncement as
grauntes and gifts of offices fees and annuitees. which owe and verily be
bounden of reason to give their attendaunce upon his royal person to defend
the same when he shall fortune to goo in his person in wars for the defense
of the realm or against his rebellys and enmyes for the subduyng and
repressyng of them and their malycyous purpoos / Wherefore it be enacted and
establysshed by the king our souerayn lord by the advise of his lords
sperytuall and temporal and the Comyns in this present parlyamente
assembledde and by auctoryte of the same / That if any person or persons
being within this realm of England or Wales having such offices fees or
annuytees by any of his reherced gifts and grauntes / do not give their
attendaunce upon him when he shall fortune to go in wars in his person. in
their said persons as their duty byndeth them / that then they and every of
them making thereof defawte / the kings special license not had or else he
have such vfayned syknesse lettyng or disease that he may not in his person
come to do his personal attendaunce and service after the form aforsayd /
and that duly proved That then every such person or persons forfeyt and
lose their said offices fees and annuytees and stand void at ye kings
pleasure / any act ordinance or statute to the contrary before this time had
or made / in any wise notwithstondynge. Provided that this act extend not to
no spyrytuell person Master of ye Rolls ne to none other offycer and clerks
of the Chau^cery. Justices of either benches Barons of the kings Eschequer and
other officers and clerks of the said places. the kings Attourneyes and
Solicitour and the Sergauntes of the law / Provided always that this act shall
not extend to any person having any such offices of the kings hyghnes and
being in his service within his towns and fortalyces of Berwyk and Carlyle ne
to the Clerk of the kings Counsel for the time being /

Against unlawful making of Federbeddes pyllowes and Matrasses Capitulo xix
TO the right worshypfull comens in this present parlyament assembled Shows
unto your discrete wysdomes ye Wardeyns of the felyshyp of the craft of
Vpholders within the Cite of London / that where as diverse persons within the
realm of England out of the said Cite makes and does to be made unlawful
and falls wares and marchaundyses to the great rebuke and disclaunder of the
said craft and also great Ieoperdy loss and disceyte to the kings subgettes.
Wherefore there is no suffycyent remedy purueyed for so much as the same
Wardeyns have no power nor aucturyte to make due search of such falls
dysceyuable wares and marchaundises put to sale out of the said Cite / as they
have power and auctoryte within the same Cite / as in fedbeddes bolsters and
pyllowes made of two manner of corrupt stuffes / That is to say of scalded
feders and dry pulled feders together and of locks and feder together which is
contagyous for man's body to lie on / And allo in quyltes materas and cusshons
stuffed with horse here. fenne down neetes here deres here and gotes here
which is wrought in lyme fattes / and by the hete of man's body the savor
and taste is so abominable and contagyous that many of the kings subgettes
thereby ben dystroyed / Which dysceyfull making of the for said cyrrupt and
unlawful stuff is to the great loss and empouerysshynge of the kings lyege
people and also great rebuke and dysclaunder to the said craft of Vpholders /
Therefore it may pleas the kings hyghnes by thaduyse of of the lordis
spyrytuall and temporal and his comens in this present parlyament assembled
and by auctoryte of the same / to establyssh ordeyne and enacte that from
hensforth no person ne persons shall make ordeyne utter ne put to sale / in
feyrs nor in markettes wthin this his said ream ny federbedes bolsters or
pyllowes except they ben stuffed with one manner of stuff / that is to say with
dry pulled feathers or else with clean down alon^. And with no scalded feathers nor
fen^ down nor none other unlawful and corrupt stuffes as is before reherced /
but vttly to be dampened for ever / Except if any person^ or person^s for their
own proper use in their houses make or do be made any of the foresaid corrupt
and unlawful stuff and wares / So they ben not offered to be sold in fayres
and markettes upon pain of forfeyture / And also in like wise quiltes matrasses
and cussons be stuffed with one manner of stuff / yt is to say with clean
wulle or clean flocks alone / and with none such unlawful before reherced
upon pain of loss and for feyture of all such unlawful wares and
marchandyses /

Against wymen covert making alienaco^n of lands mouyd by the first baron
Capitulo: xx
FOr certain reasonable consideraco^ns. be it ordained enacted and establisshed
by the king our sovereign lord and by thassent of the lords spiritual and
temporal and the comens in this present parlyament assembled and by auctorite
of the same / that if any woman which has had or hereafter shall have any
astate in dower or for term of life or in taylle Jointly with her husbo^de or
only to herself or to her use / any maneres lands tenementes or other
hereditamentes of thenherytaunce or purchase of her husbonde or given to the
said husbonde and wif in tayll or for term of life by any of the auncestres of
ye said husbonde or by any other person seized to thuse of the said husbonde
or of his auncestres and have or shall hereafter being sole or with any other
after taken husbonde / dyscontinued or dyscontinue alyened releassed or
confermed aliene releas or conferme with warantie or by couyne suffered or
suffer any recover of the same again them or any of them or any other seized
to their use or to ye use of either of them after the form aforsayd / That
all such recouerees discontynaunce alienaco^ns releasses confermaco^ns and
warantees so had and made / and from henforth to be had and made / be utterly
void and of none effect / And that it shall be lefull to every person and
persons to whom the interest title or inherytaunce after ye deceasse of the
said wymen of the said manners lands and tenementes or other hereditamentes
being discontinued alyened or suffered to be recovered after the first day of
Decembre next coming in ye form aforsayd should apperteyne to enter in to
all and every of the premysses / and peasible to possede and enjoy the same in
such manner and form as he or they should have done / if none such
discontinau^ce warantie nor recover had be had nor made / and over this be it
ordained and enacted by the said auctorite / yt if any of the said husbondes
and wy^men or any other seized or yt shall be seized to the use of them of the
estate before specified after the said first day of Decembre do make or cause to
be made or suffer oni such discontynuaunce alienaco^ns warantes or recouers in
form aforsaid yt then it shall be lefull to ye person or persons to whom
ye said manners lands ten^tes should or ought to belong after the deceas of the
said woman / to enter in to the same and them to possede and enjoy accordy^nge
to such title and e^terest as they should have had i^ ye same if ye same woman
had be deed no disco^tinuau^ce wara^tie nor recouerees had as against ye said
husbo^de during his life / if the said discontinuaunce alienaco^n waranties and
recouerees be hereafter had by or against the same husbondes and wymen during
the couerture and e^posell betwyx them / Provided always yt the said wymen after
the deceas of their said husbonde may reentre in to the manners lands and
ten^tes and them to enjoy according to their first estate in the same / And
over this it be ordened and enacted by the said auctorite yt if the said woman
at the time of such discontynuaunce alyenaco^ns recouerees waranties after the
said day of Decembre in form aforesaid to be had and made of any of the
premysses be sold that then she shall be berred and excluded of her title
and interes in the same from hensforth / And that the person and persons to
whom the title interst and possessyon of the same should belong after the
deceas of the said woman shall ymmediatly after the said dyscontynuaunce
alyenaco^ns waranties and recouerees. enter in to the same manners lands
ten^tes and other hereditamens and them to possede and enjoy according to his
or there title in the same / Provided also that this act extend not to avoid
any recouere dyscontinuaunce or warantie after the form aforsayd before this
time had made or suffered but only where the said husbo^d and woman or either
of them now being alive or any other to their use now have entres and title to
the said maneres lands ten^tes or other hereditamentes alyened dyscontinued or
suffered to be recovered after the form aforsayd and thereof now taking
thissues and proffites or any other person or persons to their use* Provided
also yt this act extend not to any such recouere or discontinuaunce to be
had with the heirs next in heritable to the said woman or he or they ye next
after the death of the same woman should have of astate of inheritance in ye
same manners lands or ten^tes be assenting or agreeable to the said recouerees
where the same assent and aggrement be of record or in rolled / Provided also
that it shall be lefull to every such woman being sole or married after the
death of her first husbonde / to give sell or make dyscontinuance of any such
lands term of her life oonly after the course and use of the comen law before
the making of this present act /

For enquestes hereafter to be charged wythyn London Capitulo: xxi
WHere as perjury is much and custumably used within ye cite of London among
such persons as passen and ben impanelled upon issues Joined between party
and parti i^ ye courts of ye same cite to ye great dysplesure of almighty god
and also to the dysherytaunce and many fold wrongs of the kings subgettes
for asmoche as there is impanelled in the same enquestes persons of lytill
substance discreco^n and reputaco^n / and also none atteynt ne other
sufficient punysshment is for such perjured persons before this time purueyed
and ordained within the same cite Therefore it may pleas the kings highness by
thaduyse and asse^t of ye lords spiritual and te^porall and and yt come^s in
this present parlyament assembled and by auctorite of the same to establysshe
ordeyne and enacte / that no person ne persons hereafter be impanelled
su^monde or sworn in any Iuri or enquestes in courts within the same cite /
except he be of lands ten^tes or goods and catalles to the value of.xl.
marc^ / And yt no person nor persons hereafter be impanelled so^moned nor
sworn in Jury or enquest in any court within the said cite for lands or
ten^tes or acco^n personell wherein the debt or damages amountyth to the so^me
of.xl. marc^ or above. except he be in lands ten^tes gods or catalles to the
value of.C. marc^ and the same matere and cause alleged by any of the said
parties by way of challenge and so founden / shall be admitted and taken in every
of the same courts as principal challenge / And yt every such person
hereafter to be impanelled or so^moned to appear in any Jury or enqueste before
any of the said Iuges of ye same cite making defawte at first so^mons lose and
forfeyte in yssues.xii. d. and at second defawte.ij. s. and so at every such
defawte after yt / the yssues and penalties to be dowbled / and all such
yssues left in the mayres court / shall be forfeyted leuyed and perceived to
thuse and behofe of the mayre and coi^altie of the said cite / And all such
yssues lost in the shyrefs court or courts / shall be forfeyted leuyed and
perceived to thuse of the shyrefs of the same cite for ye time being towardis
their feeferm^. And also be it enacted by like auctorite that the party grieved
by any untrue or falls verdite hereafter to be given in any of the courts of
the said cite shall and may have and sue atteynt by byll in the hustynges of
london holden for comen plees before the mayr and aldermen of the same cite for
the time being and thereupon a presepte to be awarded and made by the same mayr
to every alderman of the said cite or his deputy in his absence to present and
certiefie the names of.iiij. indefferent and dyscrete persons of good fame and
every of them of substance of.C li. or more cyteizyns of the same cite
dwelling in his ward to the mayr and aldermen of the said cite for the time
being at the Hustynges of coen^ plees within the same cite than next ensuenge
to be hold / of which persons so presented and certyfyed the said Mayr and
vi aldermen or moo holdyng the same court of Hustynges / shall take name and
impanell.xlviij. by their discreco^n thought most able sufficient and
indeferent / And the mayr and his successors mayres of the said cite shall do
to be su^moned the said.xlviij. persons so by the said mayr and aldermen
named and impanelled and also the Iuryours of the petie Jury and the party or
parties named as tenauntes or defendauntes in the said byll of atteynt to
appear before the mayr and aldermen of the same cite at the Hustynges of comen
plees than next to be hold in the same cite / And if the same atteynt then
or any other time hap to remain untaken for or by defawte of Iuriours by
challenge or otherwise / that upon every tales granted the said Mayr and
aldermen shall impanell the said persons which were certified by the said
aldermen or their deputyes and omytted out of the said panell or put theryn
other person or persons being cytezyns of the said cite and of the
substance of.C.li. or more. And also that all the plee and plees to be
alleged or pleded by or for the tenant or defendaunt tenau^ts or defendauntes
or by any of the Iuriours of the pety Jury in the same atteynte and triable by
oni Iuri or enquest / shall be tried within the same cite and by thenquestes of
the same and in none other place ne county / And yt none of the said peti Jury
ne other parties named in any such byll of atteynte / shall or may have any
challenge to tharraye or to any person or poll therein being impanelled for
lack of sufficiens of gods or of lands / Over yt be it provided and enacted
yt the judgment in any such atteynt shall not extend to any lands or
ten^tes ne to other punysshment of the pety Jury ne other process to be in the
same atteynt than is lymytted and appointed in this present act / And if
the.xxiiii. persons of the said.xlviii. persons sworn^ in the same atteint
find yt the Iuriours named in the pety Jury have made and yeuen an untrue
verdyte / that then the Judgment shall ayenste the party defendaunte in ye
same atteynte as is used in atteynte sued by writ at comen law And
ferthermore ye Judgment in the same atteynt shallbe again the pety Jury yt
every of the Jurors of ye sam pety Iuri shall forfeyt and lose: xx.li. or more
by the dyscrecion of the mayre and aldmen of ye said cite keeping the same
Hustynges or any other Hustynges of comen plees to such use and behof as other
yssues and penalties ben forfeyted and lost in any accion or playnte co^menced
before ye mayre and aldermen of the same cite and his body to be ympresoned
there to remayn without bayll or maynprise.vi. months or less by the
dyscreco^n of the mayre and aldermen of the same cite for the time being and
to be dysabled for ever to be sworn in any Jury before any temporal Judge /
And over yt it be enacted by the same auctorite / that if it be founden by the
graunde Jury in the same atteynt that petit Iuri have given a true verdite that
then the graunde Iuri shall have auctorite and power to inquire if any of the
pety Jury took or perceived any sum of money or other reward or promise of
money or other reward of them named defendauntes or tenauntes in the same
atteynt / or if any other person or persons by the commandment couine or
assent of any of them to or for thentent of their verdite geuyng whereupon the
same atteynt is grounded / And after any such corrupco^n by the said graunde
Iuri is founden that then the Iurour or Jurors of the said pety Jury that is
found so defectyf in taking and perceiving any sommes of money or other
reward or promise of reward / shall lose forfeyt and pay to the playntyf or
plantifs named in the said atteynt.x. times the value of that sum / other
reward so taken perceived or promised in form abouesayd and to suffer
ympresonement with out baill or maynpryse.vi. months or less by the
discrecyon of the said Mayre and aldermen. and to be disabled for ever to be
sworn in any Iuri before any temporal Judge. And over yt be it enacted yt
such defendaunte or tenaunte defendaundes or tenauntes in the same atteynt
shall lose forfeyte and pay to such use and behof as other penalties ben
forfeyted within the same cite.x. times the value of that sum of monei or
other reward by hy^ or them so yeuen to any of the said pety Iuri / And the
same defendaunte or tenant defendauntes or tenauntes to be ympresoned there to
remain without bayll or maynprise during.vi. months or less by the
dyscrecyon of the said mayr and aldme^ / And if any dettes damages or costs be
recovered in any acco^n whereupon such attey^t is grounded and bu ye sam^
attey^t yt found yt ye pety Jury have given a falls sereme^t / yt the^ for ye
recover and restytutio^ of ye same debt damages and costs / the playntyf or
playntyfs in every atteynt shall and may sue an accyon of debt against the same
defendaunt or tenant by writ byll or playnte in every of the kings courts
wherein the same defendaunt or tenant and every of them shall not be received
to do his law / And over that be it enacted that if any play^tyf or playntyfs
in any such atteynt co^menced before the said mayr and aldermen upon any
record remaynyng within the same cite and therein be none suyyte / or if the
first serement therein be affermed / that then he or they shall have
ymprysonement and make fine by the dyscrecyon of the mayr and aldermen of the
said cite for the time being / And that fine to be and goo to the Mayre and
comynaltye of the said cite / and if there be two or mo playntyfs in any such
atteynt ordained by this estatute / and any of them dey or be nonsuyte / the
other by this act shall be enhabled to sue for the procedynge in the same
atteynt / and notwtstondy^ge the death of ye defendaunt or tenant defendauntes
or tenau^tes or any of the pety Jury named in the same atteynt so that there be
two of the same pety Jury on live / the same atteynt shall not abate / And also
be it ordained by the same autoryte / that if any of the Iuryours of the said
graund Jury impanelled and su^moned in form aforsayd at the su^mons make
defaut so that the ateynt remains to be taken for defaut of Jurors / that
then every of the same Iurous so making defawte / lose and forfeyte for the
first defawte.xl. s. and at the second defawte.v.li / And at every defawte
after that.x.l / And like process to be made and sued therayenst the graund Jury
and the pety Jury / And the party and parties / as is to be made and sued in
atteynt sued at the comen law / And that the same process to be retornable at
every Hustynges of comen plees and that the atteynte remain not to be taken
after the first su^mons returned for or by the defawte of the defendante or
tenant defendaunt or tenau^tes / or of any of the pety Jury named in the same
atteynt by this act ordained. And that the said yssues or penalties forfeited
by any of the said graunde Iuri / be forfeyt leuyed and perceived to thuse of
the wayr and coi^altie of the said cite And that no protecco^n nor essoyne be
allowed in this atteynt by this act purueyed / Provided always that upon all
atteyntes hereafter to be co^menced wythyn the said cite upon only record
wherein the trial and enquest was by half tongue That the said mayr and
aldermen shall impanell ye graundez Iuri in the same atteynt / the tone half of
strangers of good fame / and of the substance of goods to the value of.C.li.
and more inhabytynge wythyn the same cite at large And the residue of the same
graunde Jury to be of like value and substance of goods impanelled of
citeyzins as is aforsayd / And over this be it enacted by the said auctoryte
that no act of atteynt of the pety Jury made in this present parliament nor no
thing therein ronteyned other than this present act nor none other penaltye or
punysshment in oni other act than is before contained in this present act / be
hurtful nor extend to any Jury or enquest herafter to be taken before any
Judge of and within ye same Cite

For wagys of hynes in husbondrye and artyfycers and laborers Capitulo xxii
WHere diverse estatutes before this time have been made and ordained for
servants of husbondrye and also for laborers and artyfycers by diverse and
many ryall and noble progenytours unto our souerayn lord ye king now being /
and in especyall a statute made by the right noble christian pry^ce of blyssed
memory king Henry ye.vi. uncle unto our said souerayn lord ye.xxiii. year of
his of his reyne / which notwtstondyng great and many defawtes daily increase
rest and continue among laborers and artyfycers / some by cause the said
estatutes be not executed and some by cause the remedy by ye said estatutes is
not very perfyte nor yeuith certain ne hasty remedy so yt daily by their
subtle ymagynacyon in defraude of the said estatutes many of the king our
souerayn lords subgettys ben hurt disceyued let and damaged in their
buyldyng and husbondry Be it therefore establysshed enacted and ardeyned by
auctoryte of this p^sent parlyament / First that no baylyf of husbondry shall
take for his wages by ye year above.xxvi. s. viiij d. and for his clothing.v.
s. with mete and drink. No cheyf hyue as a carter or cheyf shepherd above.xx.
s. by the year / and for his clothing.vi. with mete and drink. No comen servant
of husbo^dry above.xvi. s. viij. d by ye year. and for his clothyng.iiij. s. with
mete and drink / No woman servant above.x. s. by the year / and for her
clothing.iiij. s. with mete and drink / No child wtin thage of.xiiij. years
above.vi. s. viii. d. by the year. and for his clothyng.iiij. s. with mete and
drink / And that no artyfycer ne laborer herafter named take no more ne gretter
wagis than in this estatute is lymytted upon the pain assessed as well unto the
taker as to the yeuer / that is to say A fremason master carpynter rough mason
brykleyer master tyler plu^mer glasyer keruer nor Ioyner fro Ester unto
Mychelmas every of these artifycers aforsayd.vi. d. by the day without mete
or drink / and with mete and drink.iiij. d. And fro Mychelmas unto Ester.v d.
without mete or dry^k / and with mete and dry^ke.iij. d / and yt ye wages of a
shypwright fro ye fest of Candelmas to ye fest of saint mychel charcha^gel
shall not excede ye form ensuyng. That is to say a mastership carpy^ter taky^g
ye charge of ye work hauy^g men vnd hy^ by ye day.v. d. with mete and dry^ke and
without mete and drink.vij. d And other shypcarpenter called an hewer / by the
day.iiij. d. with mete and drink / without mete and drink.vi. d. An able
clyncher by the day.iij. d / with mete and drink / and without mete and
drink.v. d / An holder by the day.ij. d with mete and drink / and without
mete and drink.iiij. d / A master calker by the day iiij. d with mete and
drink / and without mete and drink.vi. d / Another mean calker by ye
day.iij. d with mete and drink and without mete and drynk.v. d / A calker
laboryng by ye tide for aslong time as he may above ye water and bineth ye
water. shall not excede for his wages for every tide.iiij. d with mete and dry^k.
And from ye fest of mychelmes to Ca^delmas the wages of a master shypwryght by
ye day.iiij d with mete and drink / and without mete and drink.vj. d. An
hewer by ye day iij. d. with mete and drink / and without mete and drink.v.
d. An able clyncher by the day.ij. d. ob^ with mete and drink. and without mete
and drynk.iiij. d. ob^. An holder by the day.j. d. ob^ with mete and drink.
and without mete and drink.iij. d A master calker by the day.iij. d. with
mete and drink. and without mete and drink.v. d. An other mean calker by the
day.ij. d. ob^ with mete and drink. and without mete and drink.iiij. d. ob^.
Be it also enacted that in such shyres and countrees that where it has be and
is now used to give less wages that in those shyres and countrees they shall
so give And the taker of wages be compelled according as they have less used
to take this act notwtstondy^g / And yt you master mason and master carpynter
which shall take the charge of the work having under any of them.vi. men /
shall have.vij. d. without mete and drink. and v. d. by the day with mete and
drink / And yt every person and artifycer specyfied in this estatute being
not retained in any service for any work be compelled to serve every other
person for such wages as in this estatute before is lymytted / And not
artyfycer retained in service to work with the kings highness or any person
depart not from his said highness or from the said other person till such
time as the work be fynysshed if the person so reteynynge thartyfycer so long
will have and pay his wages upon pain of imprysonement of any person so
departing by the space of a month and to make fine of.xx. s. always provided
and forseen yt if the same artyfycer be desired unto the kings service and
work that then he may lawfuly depart. So yt enter and be in the kings seruyse
and work. And it is fether ordained be the said auctoryte / that other laborer
and artyfycer not before named. shall take from Ester till Mychelmas for every
day yt he so laboreth except the season of heruest.iiij. d. without mete or
drink / and.ij. d. with mete and drink / And from Mychelmas to Ester.iij. d.
with without mete or drink and.i. d. ob^ with mete and drink. And in the said
time of harvest every mower shall take by the day.iiij. d. with mete and drink
/ and without mete and drink.vi. d. A repar and carter every of them ^iij. d.
by ye day with mete and drink and without mete and drink.v. d. A woman
laborar and other laborers every of them.ij. d. ob^ by the day with mete and
drink and with out mete or drink.iiij. d. ob^ / And that no artifycer nor
laborer werkynge but the half day / take no wages but for the half day and
nothing for the hole day / And if any bailly of husbondry hyne carter
shepeherde common servant or child servant above specyfyed not retained in
any service or work refuse to serve according to thordynaunce above specyfyed
/ Then the same person to be committed to ward by the Conestable or there
head offycer within the cite Town or Vyllage where the party so refusing is
/ at complaynt of him that will reteyne such servant there to remain till
he have found suerty to serve according to the said ordinance / Ferthermore
if any artifycer or laborer being not retained in any seruyse or work refuse
to serve after the rate of this estatute or take gretter or more wages than
therein is lymytted for the same artyfycers and laborers / or if any artyfycer
or loborer take wages for the hole day where he werketh but the half day /
that then every artyfycer and laborer offendynge in any of ye sorsayd
artycles / forfeyte for every defawte as often as they offend.xx. s. and they to
be conuycted for every such defaute by presentment before ye Justices of peace
in the sessyons according to the common law or by examynaco^n of the same
Justices in the same sessyons / or by examynaco^n of ij. Justices of the peace
out of the sessyons in any place within the shyre where they ben Justices / and
where such defawte shall be made / and that the said for feyture of.xx. s. be
leuyed of their lands goods and catayles so offendynge. And ferthermore where
diverse artyfycers and laborers retained to work and serve waste much part of
the day and deserve not their wages / sometime in late coming unto their work /
erly departing therfro long syttyng at their brekefast at their dinner and
nonmete / and long time of slepyng at after none to the loss and hurt of
such persons as the said artyficers and laborers ben retained within service
/ It is therefore establysshed enacted and ordained by auctoryte aforsayde every
artifycer and laborer be at his work between the mids of the month of
March and the mids of the month of September before five of the clock in
the morning / And that he have but half an hour for his brekfast and an
hour and an half for his dinner at such time as he has season for slepyng to
him appointed by this said estatute / And at such time as is here appointed /
that he shall not sleep / then he to have but one hour for his dinner and
half an hour for his noonmete / And that he depart not from his work between
the mids of the said months of March and September till between.vij.
and.viij. of the clock in the evening / And if they or any of the^ offend in
any of these artycles / that then their defawtes be marked by him or his
deputy that shall pay their wages / and at wekes end their wages be abated for
such rate of time as they have offended contrary to this estatute / And that
fro mids of September to the mids of March / every artyfyand laborer be at
their work in the spryngynge of the day and depart not til night of the same
day / And that the said artifycers and laborers sleep not by day / but only
from the mids of the month of May / unto the myddyl of the month of August
/ And also it is enacted by the said auctoryte that no person from hensforth
give no more wages to any bailey of husbondrye hyne shepeherde or other before
named nor to any artyfycer or loborar in this estatute spefycyed than in the
same estatute is lymytted and assigned upon pain of forfeyture for every such
defaute xl. s. And that the party so offendynge / be conuicte thereof before the
Justices of peace as well by presentment in the sessions as by examynacyon of.ij.
Justices of peace out of the sessyons in like wise as is before reherced of
laborers and artyficers / Also it is establysshed and enacted that by ye said
auctoryte / that if any artyfycer or laborer retained in seruyse with any
person for byldyng or reparcayon make or cause to be made any assemble to
assaut harm or hurt any person assygned to comptroll and over see them in
their werkyng / that he or they so offendyng have ymprysonement for a year
without lettyng to bayl or mayn pryse / and fetther to make fine at kyngys will
/ This act to begin and take effect at saint Gregoryes day next coming and in
the mean time the same to be proclaimed in every good Cite burgh and Town of
this realm.

For Gawgyng and packyng of salmon Elys and heryng Capitulo xxiij
WHere at a parlyament holden at westmynster in the.xxij. year of the reyne of
king Edward ye.iiij. among other things / it was enacted ordained and
establyssed that no merchant stranger nor deynezyn after the ieest of saint
Mychell tharchaungell than next coming / should sell nor put to sale any salmon
by but barel half barel or on other vessel / before it should be see but if the
same but should hold and conteyn.lxxxiiij. galons / the barell.xlij. galons. the
half barell.xxi. galons well and truly packed upon pain of forfeyture for every
but barell and half barell so lackyng their said mesure.vi. s. viij. d / Also
that no such merchant being under ye said kings obeysaunce after ye fest of
saint Mychell should sell nor put to sale / any manner salmon by but barel or
other vessel but if it should be well and truly packed / yt is to say ye great
salmon by it self without medlyng of any grylles or broken belyed salmon with ye
same / and that al small fyssh called grisles should be packed by themself only
without any medlyng upon pain of for feyture and lesyng of ^vi. s. viij. d. for
every but barell or demi barell contrary to ye said act meddled packed and put
to sale / And that no such matchaunt nor other person should put any heryng to
sale / by barell demi barell or fyrkyn / but if ye same barell conteyne.xxxij.
galons the half barell and fyrkyn after the same rate / And that ye same
herynges should be well truly and justly laid annd packed / and should be of one
time taking and saltyng / And that the same heryng should be as good and as well
packed in the mids and every part of the same barel and other vessel as it
should be at any of the ends of the same barell and vessel upon pain for
forfeytyng and losyng of.iij. s.iiij. d for every barell half barel and fyrkyn
so lackyng their said mesure. and also upon pain of forfeytur, and losyng
of.iij. s.viij d. for every barell half barell and fyrkyn of heryng contrary to
the said act sorted laid or packed / Also that no such merchant nor palyng
man should sell or or put to sale any etysby barell half barel or fyrkyn. but if
the barel should conteyne.xlij. galons the half barell and fyrkyn after the same
rate. Nor that any such merchant nor palyng man should meddle any gall bytten
^^oruen or pylyd ^^es with good elys / but that the same good elys should be well
and justly packed and sold by themself / nor should meddle with the said good
elys nor put to sale any red elys by on pain of forfryture and lessynge of vi
shelynges for every barell half barell and fyrkyn so lackyng their said mesure.
and upon pain of lesyng (...) every barell half barell and fyrkynne so as is
aforesaid medeled and contra^ to the said act packed or put to sale / Also
that no merchant after ye said feste should sell / nor put to sae any
barelled fysshe. but if the same fysshe should well and truly packed. that is
to say the tale fysshe by themself and the small fysshe called gulles by
themself without any medlyng of the said small fysshe with the great fysshe and
without medlynge and packynge of Thokis or broken belyed fysshe with the said
tale fysshe or small fysshe. And that neither the tale fysshe nor small fysshe
should be laid dowble in packynge / And that every tale fysshe should conteyne
in length from the bone of the fynne to the third Joint of the tale.xxvi
inches at the leest / And yt the napes of all such barelled fysshe should be
no longer than the little bone that syttyth upon the great fynne / And that the
bone of every such salt fysshe should be take away unto the nauill of the same
fysshe / And that every such fysshe should be platted down to an handful of
the tayll upon pain of forfeyture of lesynge of.iij. s.iiij. d. for every
barell of fysshe which from henforth should be found packed sorted and meddled
naped laid dowble or not boned nor splatted according to the said act. And
also in eschewyng of the comen hurtes and disceytes above reherced / the said
late ki^ge ordained and enacted by the said auctoryte that all Mayres Bayllyfs
and governors of cytees towns burghs mark^ttis and all other places of this
realm for the time bring where they should be Mayres Bayllyfs and governors
should have power and auctorite to name and chose a discrete and expert person
or persons dewly to search and gawge all such vessels as ben above reherced
yt they hold be truly packed and keep their true mesure and assyse according
to the ordinance above said as in the foresaid act thereof made more plainly
appears and for asmoche as in the said act is no certent appointed how much
every such gawger packer and sercher should take for his labor in executynge
of their said office / they ben their own Iuges and at their plesures take for
the same gawgynge packyng and searching by way of extorcion such great so^mes
of money as them lyketh / whereby ye kings true subgettes are greatly
e^pouerisshed and wronged / That it might therefore pleas the kings hyghnes by
thaduyse of the lords spiritual and temporal and the comyns in this present
parlyame^t assembled and by auctorite of the same to conferme ratify and
establyssh the said act and every thing therein comprised / And over that by
the same auctoryte to ordeyne and establyssh that every such gawger packer and
sercher take no more for gawgyng of a barell samon barell heryng barell fysshe
barell elys half barell and fyrkyn for every piece so gawged but a ferthyng /
and for his labor for se^chyng and packyng if it be need of a barell samon
from heed to heed.i. d. and for his labor for bonyng napyng and packyng of a
barell fysshe if it be need. i. d and for his labor in serchyng and packing of
a barell heeryng from heed to heed if it be needful.ij. d. and for searching
and packyng of every barell of elis.ij. d. And for serchyng and packyng of
every half barell of heeryng from heed to heed.i. d / and for every half barell
elys serchyng and packyng i d / And for serchyng and packyng of every fyrkyn of
heeryng if it be needful ob^ / and over ye that all and every such gawger
sercher and packer that mysbehauen or offend in any thing concerning the
said offices of gawger sercher and packer contrary to this act and so proved
before any of the said mayres bayllyfes or governors of any cite town burgh
market or any other place wtin this realm where he or they so be gawgers
packers or serchers gawger packer or sercher shall lose and forfeyt his said
office and the same from thensforth no longer to enjoy / Any lease grant or
grauntes thereof made notwtstondynge / and for ferder punysshement to have and
suffer ymprysonement by the space of.xl. days with out bayll or maynpryse /
Provided always yt the said sercher and packer or any of them / shall no thing
receive of ye said fees by color of their office but only for such buttes
barels half barels and fyrkyns as by them shall herafter be suffyciently
serched and packed and be not before suffycyently packed / This present act to
begyn^ and take effect at the feste of Ester next coming and not before /

For punysshynge of perjury and lessynge the penaltye in atteynt Capitulo xxiiij
THe king our souerayn lord of his most goodly and gracyous dysposycyon
calling to his remembrance how that perjury in this land is in manyfold
causes by unreasonable menes detastly used to ye dysherytau^ce and great damage
of many and great number of his subgettes well dysposed / and to the most
hygh^ dyspleasure of almighty god / the good statutes against all officers
having return of wrytt and and their deputyes making panelles percyally for
rewards to them yeuen against unlawful mayntenours imbrasours and Iurrours /
and against iurrours untruly lyeuyng there verdyte notwithstondyng For
reformacyon of the same by the king our souerayn lord and the lords spuall
and temporal and the comens in this present parlyament assembled and by
auctoryte of the same. be it enacted ordained and establysshed that upon eueri
untrue verdyte herafter yeuen betwyx party and party in any suyte playnt or
demand before Justices of record where the thing or demand and verdyte
thereupon geued extends the value of.xl.li. and concerns not ye Ieoperdy of
ma^nis life. the party grieved by the same verdyte shall have a write of atteynt
agay^ste every person herafter so yeuyng an untrue verdyte and every of them
and against the party which shall have judgment upon the same verdyte / And yt
in the same atteynt ther^ shall be awarded against the petyte Jury. the party and
ye grau^de Jury Some resom^ and dystresse infynyte which graund Jury shall be
of like number as ye graund Jury is now in atteynt and every of them yt shall
pass in ye same shall have lands and ten^ementis to ye value of.xx. marc. by
ye year of fre hold out of ancient demean and upon ye dystres which shall be
delivered of record upon ye same open proclamaco^n to be made in ye court there
ye dystres shall be awarded more tha^.xv. days before ye retourn^ of ye sam^
distres / every such distres shall be made upon ye land of every of ye said
grau^d jury as in other distres is and has be used And if ye said party
defe^dau^t or ye pety Jurors or any of the^ apere not upon ye distres then the
graund Jury to be taken against them and every of them yt shall so make
defaute / And if any of the said petyte Jury appear / then ye party
complaynaunt in ye behalf shall assygne the false serement of the first verdite
untruly yeuen / whereunto they of the petyte Jury shall have none answer if they
be the same persons / and the wryt process retourn and assygnement good and
law full / except yt the demaundaunt or playntyf in the same atteynt / has
before by nonsuyte or discontynued his suit of atteynt taken for the same verdite
/ or has for the same verdyte in a writ of atteynt had judgment against the
said pety Jury / but only yt they made true verdite / which issue shall be
tried by.xxiiij. of the said graund Jury / and ye party shall plede yt they
gave true verdyte or oni other matere which shall be a suffycyent bar of the
said atteynt / and yt plee notwithstondynge the graund Jury to be taken without
delay to inquire whether ye first Jury gave true verdyte or no / and if they
find yt ye said petite Jury gaaf an untrue verdyte / then every of the said
petyte Jury to forfeyt.xx.li. whereof the one half shall be to the king our
souerayn lord and the other half to the party yt sucth / And over that that
every of the said petyte Jury shall seueralll make fine and raunsonne by the
dyscrecyon of the Justices before whom the said false serement shall be found
after their several offenses defawtes and suffyciencie / of every of the said
petyte Jury And after that yt those of the said petyte Jury so atteynted / shall
never after be of no credence nor their oath accept in any court / And if
such ple as the party pledeth which is abarre of the said atteynt be found or
demed against him that so pledeth then ye party yt so sueth shall have
Judgment to be restored to that he lost with his reasonable costs and damages.
For even always that any outlawre in any acco^n or cause personel or
excomengement pleded or aleyed in the party playntyf or demaundant shall be
taken but as a void plee. and to that he shall not be put to answer. And that in all tha foresaid process such day shall be yeuen as is in a write of dower and
none assoyne or proteccyon to ly nor to be allowed in ye same / And if the said
graund Jury appear not upon the first dystres had against them. so that the
Jury fortheyr defawte do remayn he that so makes defawte shall forfeyt to the
king xx. s. / And upon the second dystres.xl. s. And after making defawt for
eueri such defawt.v.li. And like penaltyes and forfeytures to be against them
and every of them that shall be named named in the tales as is before expressed
against every of the said graunde Jury aforsayd / And that for and by the death
of the percy of any of the said petyte Jury the said atteynt shall not abate
nor be deferred against the remenaunt as long as two of the said petyte Jury be
alive / And if herafter any falls verdyte be given in on any accyon suit or
demand before any Justice or record of any thing personell as debt trespace
and other like which shall be under the value of.xl.li. that then^e the party
grieved shall have atteynt with such process and plees as is before reherced / And
delays to be taken away as before is remembered / except that in this case of
atteynt / every person of the graund Jury that may dyspend.v. mare. by the
year of frehold out of ancient demean or is worth.C. marc^. of gods and
catalles. shall be able to pass in the same atteynt / And if the petyte Jury
be atteynted / yt then they shall in this case of atteynt every of them in
forfeyt. but.v.li. whereof one half shall be to the king and the other half to
the party after the form before reherced / and over that to make fine and
raunsonne by the discreco^n of the Justices as is aforsayd / And if there be
not persons of such sufficiency within the shyre where any of the said
atteyntes shall be taken as may pass in the same / be it ordained by the
auctorite above said / that then the tales shall be awarded in the Shire
next adioininge by the discresion of the Justices before whom the same
atteyntes shall be taken which shall be warned to appear upon like pains as
is aforsayd and enabled to pass in the said atteyntes as if they were dwelling
in the shire where the same atteynt shall be taken and that the same laws
acco^n and remedy ordained by this present act / be kept for and to all them
that shall be grieved by such untrue verdites of any inheritance in descent
reuercion or remayndre or of any fre hold in reuercion or remayndre / And if
the party in atteynt given by this act be nonsuyt of the same discontinue /
that then the parti so mo^sute or so discontinuenge the said atteynt / make
fine and raunsonne by ye discreco^n of the Justices before whom the said atteynt
shall be taken and dependynge / And that all atteyntes hereafter to be taken
shall be taken before the king in his benche or before the Justices of ye comen
place and none in other courts / And that (Nisi prius) shall be granted by
discreco^n of the Justices upon the distres And every of the said petite Jury
may appear and answer by attorney in the said atteynt / and yt the moyte of
the said forfeyture of the petite Jury shall be levied to thuse of our
souerai^e lord by Capias ad satisfaciend) or (Fieri fac) or Elegit) or by
acco^n of debt against every person of the petite Jury so forfeitynge and
against his executours and administratours having then sufficient goods of
their said testatour not administered / And the other moyt shall by like process be
levied to thuse of the party that sueth any atteynt given by this act against
every of the said petite Jury and his executours or adminystratours having
then sufficiency of goods as is aforsayd not administered / And ye judgment
of restituco^n to the party grieved suynge this act and execuco^n of the same
to be had and like Judgment for the party defendaunte or tenaunte to be
discharged of restitucion as before this present act in case of a graunde
atteynt has be used / Be it also ordained and enacted by thactorite abouesaid
that in every writ of attei^te hereafter to be taken by or upon this act /
yt which shall be such as other writtes of attey^t be^ and aft ye Test of ye
same write shall be written these words in latin (per statutum anno vndecimo
henrici septimi editum) Be it also ordained and enacted by the same auctorite /
that all penalles hereafter to be returned which ben not at the suyte of any
party that shall be made and put in before any Justices of Jail deliuere or
Justices of peace in their open Sessyons to inquire for the king shall
hereafter be reformed by addicio^s and taking out of names of persons by
discreco^n of the same Justices before (whom such panell shall be returned /
And that the same Justices shall hereafter command the Shiref or his
ministres in his absence to put other persons in the same panell by their
dyscrecions. and that panell so hereafter to be made to be good and lawful /
This act to endure oonly to the next parlyament /

For punysshment of perjury by examinaco^n of the Chaunceller Tresorer etc
Capitulo xxv
THe king our sovereign lord well understanding the heinous and detestable
periuries daily committed within this realm in enquestis and Iuries taken
as well betwix his highness and other his subgettes. and parti and parti as in
enquestes of office to the high dysplesur of almighty god and lettynge of
administraco^n of Justice the which perjury growyth by unlawful reteyndours
mayntenaunce embracyng champart^e and corupco^n of good as well of the Shirefs
as of other officers Notwithstondyng any laws before this time made for the
punysshment of such offenders / wherefore the king our sovereign lord by the
aduyce and assent of his lords spiritual and temporal and of the comens in
this present parlyament assembled and by auctoryte of ye same enacteth
establysshy^h wylleth and co^maundyth that all the said laws be duly put in
excuco^n / And it be ordained by the said auctoryte that the Justices of peace
within this realm in any enquestes of office before them or any of them to
be taken Admit nor take any panell of such enquestes to be returned before
them but if the same panell be first seen / before them and they to refourme
it by their dyscrecion if cause be / and that every panell otherwise received
be void and of none effect / And ferthermore be it enacted by the said
auctoryte as for any periuri committed by any enquestis between the king and
the party. party and party / whereupon judgment is herafter given that the
party grieved or any other that will complain of any unlawful maintenance
ymbracynge corrupco^n of any officers whereby ye said perjury was induced and of
perjury by the said enquestes comytted / may complain by by^l to be presented
before the Justice or Justices be whom judgment shall be geu^n Which Justice or
Iust^ces shall be bound to receive it so that ye co^plainau^t present the
same byll before the same Justice or Justices within.vi. days after the
judgment given and find sufficient surety before the same Justice or Justices
by his discreco^n to be admitted yt will bind them by recognisaunce or
otherwise in such so^me or so^mes of money shall be lymytted by the discreco^n
of the same Justice or Justices to the several party upon whom he shall
complain upon condyco^n that if the party complaynaunt preue not suffycyently
the matere of his complaynt to be true / that then the said complaynaunt to
pay such costs and damages to the several parties grieved / and at such
time. as shall be considred and awarded by the discreco^n of the said persons
that have power by this present act to examyne the same / And that the said
Justice or Justices after the receyte of the said byll of complaynt in form
reherced / certyfye the said byll under his or their seal or seals unto the
Chaunceller of England for the time being / And then the same Chau^celler
shall cause by writ at the suyt and costs of the party complaynau^t all
such person or persons against whom the said complayntis so made to come
before the same Chaunceller and Tresorer of England the chyef Justice of either
be^che and the clerk of the Rolls for ye time being. which shall have full
power and auctoryte by this present act by their dyscrecyon to examyne all
such person or persons apperyng before them of all things comprysed in the
bylle of complaynt and to punyssh^ al and every such person or persons as by
that examynaco^n shall be found offend^r or offenders as well of perjury as
other after their dyscrecyon / And over that be it enacted that if the party
complaynaunt pursue not or prove not his byll of complaynt / then he to yield
to every person by him wrongfully vexed his costys and damages and make fine
to the king atter the dyscrecyon of them before whom the examynaco^n is so
had / And it is ferder ordained that this act extend not to the anyntisement
another undoing of the verdyte and judgment yeuen / but that the said verdyte
and judgment stond in his strength to the time it be undone or avoid by writ
of error or atteynt or otherwise after such order as the comen law was before
the time of making of this statute this present act notwythstondynge / And
over that be it ordained by the said auctoryte that if perjury be committed by
proves in the kings court of the Chauncery or before the kings honorable
Counseylle or else where / that then the fore named Chaunseller upon a bylle
to him put with like suretye as is before reherced / make like process to call
in the supposed perjured persons before the said Chaunceller Tresorer Justices
and clerk of the Rolls and they to have power to here and examyne the said
persons and if the said persons of the perjury or other mysbehauing before
reherced so be conuycte / that then they to be punysshed under like form
as is before reherced / Provided always that this act begin to take his effect
at the feast of the Natiuite of our lord next coming and no longer to endure
but unto the next parlyament /

For holding the Shyrefs Tournes within the Countees of Suth. Surr. and Sussex
Capitulo xxvi
PRayen the comens in this present parlyament assembled that where it was
establysshed and enacted the first year of the reyne of king Richard the
third late in deed and not of right king of England / that no Bailly nor
other offycer should return or lawday any person but such as be of good name
and fame and have lands and tenementes of free hold within the same countee
where they ben enhabytaunt of the yearly value of.xx. shelynges / at leest or
else lands and tenementes holden by the custume of the Maner^ called
copiholde within the said County of the yearly value of: xxvi. shelynges.viii.
pence over all charges at lest as in the said stature more plainly it appears
/ And that all inditementes and presentementes taken before any Shyref in his
Torn otherwise / be void and of none effect. By reason of which statute
many Shyrefs of the Countees of Suth^ Surt and Sussex intending truly / have
lost the proffite of many of his or their Tornes and many great myssantes and
offenses not presented nor the offenders and trespassours i^ the same
punisshid to the great hurt of thinhabitauntes of the same for within some
hunders there There ben not so many persons of such lands and tenementes
dwelling out of Fraunchyses / and though they were of that hauyour / they would
not appear for the loss of two pence or four pence at the day of the
Turn which small amerciament is of old time used / whereby the kings said
courts in diverse parties of the said Counties ben lost / In consideraco^n
whereof it may be stablysshed and enacted by the advise and assent of the
lords spiritual and temporal and the comyns in this present parlyament
assembled and by auctorite of the same / that it shall be lefull to every
Shyref of any of the said Countes to impanell and su^mon.xxiiij. lawful men of
such Inhabytauntes within the precyncte of every of his or their Tournes / as
owe suit to the same Turn or Tornes / And whereof every of the said.xxiiij.
men have lands and tenementes of free hold to the yearly value of x.
shelynges over all charges / or lands and tenementes of Copy hold to the
yearly value of.xiii. shelynges.iiii. pence over all charges within any of the
said Counties where such Turn or Tournes is or to be kept / And so many
there to appear at the day of the Turn before the said shyref vndershiref or
clerk to enquire of the articles of the said Turn / And that every of the
said.xxiiii. men so being impanelled and so^moned not apperynge be amerced in
the said Shirefs Turn or Tournes for not doing of their suyte to the
same.xii. pence / Provided always that if there be.xii. of ye said Inhabitauntes
so impanelled within the precyncte of every Turn appear So that in every
Turn there be a lawful Jury of them sworn / that then all the
remanaunte of them so impanelled that make defawte be not. amerced for that
defawte but oonly for their suyt / And as it was lawfully used before the making
of the said statute / And over that be it enacted that after dew and lawful
so^mons had of the Inhabitauntes as is aforsayd / if that there appear not.xii
men in every of the said Shyrefs Tournes of the said Inhabitauntes having land
and tenementes of the yearly value of.x. shelynges or.xiii. shelynges.iiij.
pence. as is above said / And if there be not.xxiiij. such Inhabitauntes
which may be ympanelled and so^moned i^ manner and form above said in any
of the said tournes That then it shall be lefull to every shyref vndershiref
clerk baylly or other mynystre to charge and swear any other person or
persons in any of the said shirefs tournes where such none suffycient and
defawte of Inhabytauntes and apparaunce is had / such as be of good name and
fame and the best by his or their dyscrecion yt appear before him or them and
none offycer nor servant to the said shyshyrefs vnd^shy^s clerks bayllyfs or
mynysters / And that all inditements and p^sentmentis other than felony so
taken concerning the said shyryfs tournes / be good and effectuell
notwithstondyng the said act made in the first year of king Rychard aforsayd
/ And yt the shyryfs vndshyrefs clerks nor bayllyfs of any of the said
countyes nor none of them doing according to this present act / forfeyt any
thing or be in any wise preiudised for doing any thing contrary to the said
statute made in the first year of the said king Rychard / And yt every shyref
under shyref clerk baylly or mynyster that do contrary to this ordinance in
any point forfeyt the so^me of C. s at every time that they or any of them do
the contary of the same in any point of the same / Saving to every person and
persons their lawful lybertyes and fraunchyses and tenaun^es and i^
habytantes of the same / This act to endure unto the next parlyament. /

For fustyans to be shorn with the broad sheare Capitulo xxvij
PRayen the comens in this present parlyament assembled yt where as fustyans
brought from the parties of b^yond these unshorn in to this realm / have be
and should be ye most profytablest cloth for doublets and for other weryng
clothes greatly used among the comen people of this realm and lengest have
endured of any thing that has comen in to the same realm from the said
parties as to ye intent / whereof the cause has been that such fustyans before
this time have be truly wrought and shorn with ye broad shere and with none
other instrument or other duceyfull mean occupied upon ye same / Now so it is
ye diverse persons by subtylte and undue sleyghtes and means have dysceyuably
ymagyned and contryued instruments of Iron / with the which yrens in the most
highest and secret places of their houses they stryke and draw ye said yrons
on the said fustia^s unshorn / by means whereof they pluck of both the noppe
and the cotton of the the same fustyans and break comynly both the ground and
thredes in sunder / and after by crafty slykyng they make the same fustyans to
appear to the comen people fine hole and sound / And also they reyse up the
cotton of such fustya^s / and then take a light candell and set in the fustyan
bre^nyng which sengeth and bre^nyth a way the cotton of the same fustyan from
the tone end to that other down to ye hard thredes instead of sheryng and
after that put them in color and so subtylly dress them / that their falls
work can not be espied without it be by werkmen sherers of such fustyans or
by the werers of the same / And that by such subtyltees where as fustyans made
in doublettes or put to any other use were wont and might endure the space of
two years or more will not endure now hole by ye space of.iiij. months
scarcely to ye great hurt of ye pore comens and seruy^g men of this reame to ye
great damage loss and disceyt of ye ky^ges true subgetes buyers and werers of
such fustyan / for remedy whereof be it enacted ordained and establysshed by
the king our sovereign lord and ye lords spyrytual and temporal and the
comyns in this present parlyament assembled and by auctoryte of the same / that
none such yren or instrumentys nor any other untrue subtle mean of sleyght be
from hensforth used upon any fystyan within this reame but only by the broad
sheres upon forfeyture of.xx. s. to be leuyed for every defawte of every such
person or persons herafter offendyng and vsyng any such dysceyuable
Instrumentis or sleyghtes as is aforsayd / The tone half of the forfeytures to
be to the king our souerayn lord and that other half to him or them that will
sue for the same forfeytures by accyon of debt byll or Informacyon in any of
the kings courts of record where the same may be determined after the course
of the comen law and that the defendaunt in such behalf / in no wise be
admytted to wage his law nor that any proteccyon or essoyne be in the same
alowable / And over this be it ordained by the said auctoryte / that the mayr
and wardeyns of shermen of the Cite of London for the time being have auctoryte
to enter and search the werkmenshyp of all manner persons occupyeng the broad
shere as well fustyans as cloth and the execucyon of this present act to as well
of deynezyns as of forens and strangers /




