A Collection of the substance of certain necessary statutes, to be by the
Justices of Peace diligently executed, within every sheare of the Realm.
The Collection,
i. Of Alehouses. ii. Of Apparel. iii. Of Apprentyces iiii. Of Archerye. v. Of
plays and games. vi. Of Rebellion. vii. Of Regrtors and forestallets. viii. Of
Tyllage. ix. Of Vyttels and Wodde. x. Of Wynes. xi. Of Woddes. xii. Against
Vacaboundes. xiii. Against reteyners and geuers of liueries xiiii. For
Robberies and Watches. xv. Against reports of slau^derous tales and news
Of Alehouses. Anno. 5. Edw. 6. cap: 25.
IVstices of peace, shall remove comen alehouses, and tiplinghouses where they
shall think mete.

None shall be suffered to keep any common alehouse or, tiplinghouse, but such
as shall be admitted in the sessions of ye peace, or by two Justices of peace,
and they shall be bound by recognisaunce, against the using of unlawful
games, and for maintenance of good rule.

The Justices of peace shall certifye the recognisaunce at the next quarter
sessions.

Justices of peace in their quarter sessions shall inquire and determine of
them that be too admitted and bound.

If any not admitted shall keep a common alehouse or tiplingbouse, the Justices
of peace shall commit him to the common gayle, for.iii. days, and before his
delyueraunce shall take recognisaunce with two suertyes that he shall not keep
any alehouse or typlinghouse.

The Justices shall certifye those recognisaunces and offenses, at the next
quarter sessions, which certificate shall be of conviction of the offense,
and.xx. s. shall in the sessions be assessed for the syne.

Fayres be accepted.

Of Apparayle. Anno. 1 and. 2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 2.
NO english man, other then the son and beyre apparaunte of a kuight, or he
that has yearly revenues of, xx.li. or be worth in goods.cc. li. shall were
sylke, in or upon his hatte, cappe, nyghtcappe, gyrdelles, scabarde, hose,
shoes, or spurreleathers, upon forfeyture of x. li. for every day, and
imprysonment by three months.

Justices of Assise, and of the peace, Sheriffs, Stewardes in letes, head
officers of towns corporate, shall inquire and determine the offenses, and
commit the offender to prison, till he have paid the forfayture.

If any knowing his servant to offend, do not put him out of his se ruice,
within.xiiii. days, or so put out, retain him again within a year after
such offense, he shall forfeyt.C. li,

Any above the degree of a knights son or daughter, or wife to any of them,
or Mayor or head-officer in any town corporate, or the wife of any of them, or
the kings or the Queens servants in ordinary wages attendaunt, wearinge
ordinary liueries, may wear as they might before.

None shall be compelled to put away his apprentice, or hired servant, before
thend of term.

Women may were in their hattes, cappes, gyrdels, and hoodes, as they might
before.

Of Apprentices. Anno. 7. Henri. 4. cap 17
APprentice where his father and mother can not dispende xx. s. by year, his
couenaunte shall be void, and he shall be put to, such labor, as his father and
mother uses, or to some other, as his estate requires, upon pain of a
years imprysonment, and to make fine and ransom, to the king, and he that
reteyneth him shall pay.C. s. to the king if the yearly valewe of his fathers
and mothers land he not syrst testified under the Seal of the two Justices of
peace, of his country.

And he that wylsue for the king shall have the one half. And in every let the
that be out of services, shall be sworn to serve or else put in suertyes until
they will serve.

And this suit shall be taken as well before the Justices of peace, as other
Justices.

By Anno. 8. Henri, 6. cap. ii. London is except, And by. Anno.xi. Hen. 7. cap.
ii. Norwich is except.

Of Archerye. Anno. 33. Henri. 8. cap. 9.
EVerye subject under.xl. years of age, not haninge impedimente, (except
spiritual men, Justices and barons of thescheker) shall use shoting. in long
bows, and have a bow and arrows redye.

The fathers and rulers of menchildren shall bring them up in shoting and have
in his house for every man child of vii. year old till he come to xvii.
abowe and two shaftes, and to abate the money for the^ of their wages, upon
forfeyture vi. s. viii. d. for every month lackyng.

Every man after his age of xvii, years shall have a bow and four arrows
and occupye the same upon forfeiture of six shillinges eight pence, for every
month lackyng. None under xxiiii, years shall shote at pry^kes upon forfeyture
of.iiii. d. for every shote. None above xxiiii. years shall shote at a mark
of xi. score or under, with any prickeshafte. under pain of six shillinges
eight pence for every shote.

None under seuetene years except he his father or mother have ten pound
Lands, or be worth forty marks in goods, shall shote in any bow of ewe
bought for him vpo^n forfeiture of vi.s.viii. d.

Butes shall be made and continued in every place by thinhabytauntes upon
forfeyture.xx. s. for every iii. months lackyng. The inhabitauntes shall
excertise shoting in holy days and times conueniente.

Bowyers out of London for every bow that he makes of Ewe, shall make.iiii. of
Elm, which, or other apt wodde, upon forfeyture iii.s.iiii. d. for every bow
lackyng, and in London for every bow of ewe. shall make.ii. of asshe elm or
other wodde mete.

No bowyers shall sell any bow of ewe for any under fouretene years, above
twelve pence.

And shall have bows of ewe for them fro six pence to twelve pence. And for
them under one and twentye years at reasonable pryces, and shall sell no bow
of ewe of the tax called olk above three shyllynges four pence upon
forfeyture of twenty shyllynges.

Bowstaues of ewe shall be sold open, and not in bundelles.

Fletchers of London may sell timber to other, and ordinances, made by their
wardens or otherwyle to the contrary to be void.

Bowers, fletchers, stringers, Arrohedmakers in London, not free shall by
thappointmente of one of the Council. inhabit in other Towns upon forfeyture
of xl.s. No alien nor denisen shall convey out of the kings obeysaunce any long
bows, or arrows upon forfeyture thereof, or the value, and to have
imprisonmente till he have made a fine before the Justices of peace, or find
surety for the fine. nor use shot ynge without license upon forfeyture of
their bows and arrows to them that will sease.

Justices of assise gayle delivery, and of the peace, and Stewardes of letes to
enquire an determine the premises.

Of plays and games. Anno 33. Hen. 8. cap. 9.
NOne for gain shall keep any common place of bowling, tenis, dylinge, or
cardinge, or unlawful game, upon forfeyture of forty shyllynges every day.

Every person hauntyng the same to forfeyt for every time six shillinges eight
pence.

Every placarde for a common gaming house, shall conteyne what game shall be
there used, and who shall play thereat or else to be void, and the party
opteinyng such placard, to be bound in the Chauncetye to use the placarde not
otherwise.

Justices of peace and head officers, to resort to suspected places and to
impryson the kepers and players until they have found suertie to leave it.

The head officers to make search monthly in suspecte places upon forfeyture of
fortye shyllynges.

No artificer husbandman apprentyse nor servant, shall play at tables, tenys,
dyse, cards, bowls, or other unlawful game out of Chrystmas, upon
forfeiture of twenty shyllynges. And in Chrystmas in their master houses or
presence.

None shall bowl in open place without his garden or Orcharde, upon
forfeyture of vi.s.viii. d.

Justices of peace, and head officers, shall commit to awarde such as shall use
unlawful games till they be bound to the contrary.

All suits upon the Statute to be comensyd within the year. The Lord of the
let to have the one Moyte and he that will sue to have the other and out of
fraunchyses the king to have the one moyte.

Proclamation to be made by the Justices and head officers, four times in the
year, in every markette and sessyons.

Against Rebellion. Anno. 1. Ma. cap. 12.
IF.xii. or above assembled together, intend or practice with force, and of
their own authority, to change any laws made for religion by parliament,
or any statutes, or to overthrow, cut, break, or dig up the pales, hedges,
dyches, or other enclosiers of any park or ground enclosed, or the banks of
any fyshe pond or pole, or any conduyt, conduyt heads, or pypes, having course
of water, to the entente that the same should remain not enclosed or void,
or unlawfully to have common, or way in the said park or ground, or to
destroy the dear in any park, or any warren of connyes, or any douehouses, or
any fyshe in any ponde or pole, or to pull or cut down any houses,
barnes, milles, or bays, or to burn any stacke of corn, or to abate the
rent of any lands. or the price of any victual, they being commanded (by the
sheriff, or any Justice of peace, Mayor or Bailiffe of any town corporate,
where such assemble, shall be) by proclamation in the Queen's name, to retire to
their houses, and shall remain together by an hour after the proclamacion, or
after shall inforcible manner attempt any thing abouesayde, this is felonye.

It is felony in any person, that without aucthorytye by ringinge any bell,
soundynge any trompet, drum, horn, or other instrument, fyryng any beacon,
malictous speaking any words, making any outcrye, setting up. or castinge
any writing, or by any act shall repse or cause to be raised twelve persons
or above, to thyntente that the same persons should do any thing above
mentioned, which persons so raised, after commandment as is aforesaid, do
continue together, or vnlawefully do any thing abouesayde.

It is felonye in any wife or servant, or any other that without compultion
shall send deliver or conueye any money, harnes, artyllery weapon, or vyctual
to any so assembled, which do not depart to their houses after commandment as
is aforesaid.

If above.ii. and under xii. assembled together, entende or practice with force
of their own authority, to kyl any subject, or to overthrow cut, break, or
dig up the pales, hedges, diches, or other closure of any park or ground
enclosed or the bancke of any fyshe pond or pole to thentent that the same
should rem ayne open or void, or to have common or way there, or to destroy
any park, fyshe pond or pole, or any warren of connies, or any donehouse, or
to pull or cut down any house, barn, mill, or to burn any stackes of corn,
or altar or abate the rentes of any lands of any subject, or the price of any
vyctuall, or any other thing usual for the sustenaunce or apparel of men,
and being commanded as aforesaid, to retire to their houses, and shall not so
do, but after shall in forcible manner attempt or put in ure any of the
things last mentioned, they shall suffer imprisonment by a year.

If any shall be damnifyed by the doing or putting in ure of any thing above
mentioned, he shall recover against the offenders, damages with the costs of
the suit trebled.

If above two vnlawefullye assemble to the intent with force to do or put in ure,
any of the things abouesayd, it shall be lawefull to every justice of peace,
Sheryffe, Maire, baylyfe, or head officer of any town corporate, or any
other having the Queen's commission or letters, as well to raise the subicetes in
manner of war in such number as he shall think mete, to the intent by strengeth
to supprese and take the persons so assembled, and that if those persons so
assembled, after such commandment by proclamation shall continue together,
and not endeavor them selfs to return toward their habitations, in such
short time as they may conveniently, then it shall be laweful to them.

Having authority, as is aforesaid, to suppress and take them so
vnlawefullye assembled, and that if any of them shall fortune to be killed or
hurt about the suppressing or taking of them, every person having
authority as is aforesaid shall be vnpunyshable of such kyllyng or hurtyng.

Every copyholder, and fermer being yoman, artificer, husbandman, or labourer
of xviii. years old or under ix. not impotent, nor having reasonable excuse,
being required by them having authority as is aforesaid (they declaring
their authority) or being required by the Lord imediate of their copiholde or
by the landelorde of the ferme to serve the Queen for any cause abouesayd and
refuse so to do, shall during his life lose to his lord al their copyholdes, and
to his landlord his ferme, and they to enter into the same, and to retain the
same during the life of the offender.

If any which shall be moved to make commotion or unlawful assembly for any of
the ententes abouesayd, do not within xxiiii. hours (oneles he have reasonable
excuse) declare the same to a justice of peace, or sheriff, Mayor, Bayliffe, or
other head officer of town corporate, where such mocion is, he shall be
imprisoned by three months, onles he be discharged by three Justices of
peace, of that Shyre (whereof one to be of the Quoum). If any above xviii.
years old and under ix. able to serve, which shall be required by any Justice
of peace, or the Sheriff there, or by the Mayor, Bailiffe or other head officer
of any Town Corporate, or by any, of their commandments, to go with him to
suppres the persons vnlawefully assembled, do willinglye and obstinately refuse
so to do, he shall be imprisoned by a year.

If the Queen by letters patentes make any liuetenaunt in any Shire for the
Suppression of any commotion, than the justices of peace, Sheriffs, head
officers, and al subicetes there, (except they have reasonable excuse) shall upon
declaration of the letters patentes and request made be bound to give
attendaunce upon the liuetenaunte to suppress the commotion upon pain of
imprisonment of a year.

If any do let hinder or hurt any that shall proclaim or go to proclayme the
proclamation, whereby the proclamation, shall not be made, he so offendyng,
having knowledge of his mesage, shall incur such pain and forfeyture as the
persons assembled should have incurred for not obeyng the proclamation, if it
had been made.

And every person assembled to the number aforesaid to attempt or do any thing
aforesaid, to who^ proclamation should or ought to have been made (if the same
had not been let as is aforesaid) if they do afterward commit any thing
aforesaid, having knowledge of the let so made or procuringe the same let,
shall incur like pain and forfeytures aforesaid, as though the proclamation
had been made.

Theffect of this act shall be declared at every quarter sessions, and at every
let.

The heir of every offender aforesaid, and al other, except such persons as
shall be attaynted convicted or outlawed of any felony aforesaid, shall enjoy all
such right and interest, as they have or shall, or ought to have, as if such
atteynder had never been made.

Saving to all persons their liberties and fraunchises. If any do procure any
to do any of the offenses aforesaid, he shall suffer such imprisonment as is
before expressed against conceiloures, of such offenses.

If fortye or mo assembled in forcible manner, and of their own authority, to
the intent to do any of the things abouesayd, or other feloneous or rebellious
act, and so shall continue together three hours, after proclamation made, at or
nigh the place of the assemble or in some market town next, and after notice
thereof to the given, every of them shall be adjudged a felon.

No liuetenaunte, shall make any deputy, nor shall convent before him by
authority of lieutenanncie any, for any cause, save only for causes
expressed in this act.

None shall be put to any loss or punishment as accessory to any of the
offenders aforesaid, for receyuynge, comforting or aydynge any such offender
after such act committed or done. None attaynder or conviction for any offense
aforesaid, shall be corruption of blood, between the offender and any of his
Auncesters, or such as should be heir unto him if no such atteinder or
conviction had been.

Of Regrators, Forstallers, and ingrocers. Anno. 5. Edw. 6. cap. 14.
HE that shall bye any thing coming to ward any markette or fair, to be
sold, or coming toward any place from beyond the sea to be sold, or make
any bargayue or promise for having the same before it shall be in the markette
fair or place to be sold, or make any motion, for inhauncinge of the price,
or dysswade any coming to the markette or fair, to abstain to bring any
thing thither to be sold, shall be adindged a forstallor.

He that shall regrate or get into his hands in any fair or market any
vitayle and do sell the same again, there or in any other fair or market
within four miles there of, shall be taken a regrator.

He that shall ingrosse and getre into his hand by byinge or promise (other
then by demyse or lease of land or tithe) any deed vitayles to sell again,
shall be taken an ingrocer.

The offenders aforesaid shall for the first offense be imprisoned by two
months, and forfeyte the value of the thing boughte. And for the second
offense shall have imprysonmente by half^ (...) year and forfayte the double
value of the thing bought, and for the third offense be on the pyllory and
forfayte all his goods, and be imprisoned at the kings pleasure.

Bying of barley big or otes to make malte, or bying of any thing by an
inholder or vitayler as concerning his facultye to sell again by retayle upon
reasonable price, or taking of vytayle reserved upon a lease, or bying of
vitayle by any bager or carier or drouer that shall be allowed or common
provision made for any town, ship, or forte without forstallinge, shall not
be judged any offense.

Bying of sold corn, and having sufficient before for his own provision, not
bringing so much to the markette shall forfayte the double value.

Byinge of quick cattle and selling of the same within.v. wekes shall lose the
double value.

Justices of peace shall inquire and determine the offenses aforesaid.

Of tillage and increase of Corn Anno. 5. Edw. 6.
AS much Land shall be put in tillage and so continue in every Town, as was in
tillage by four years since. Anno. 1. Hen. 8. upon forfeyture for every acre.
for every year.v. s.

The king may dyrecte commissions and the Commissioners shall search by the
oath of twelve men, what lands in every Town have since. Anno. 1. Hen. 8.
ben converted from tillage to pasture, and so continues. And the twelve men
shall present the names of thoccupiers thereof, and then presentmente shall be
estreted into thescheker.

The commyssioners shall take an oath to execute the statute and shall dyrect
their precept to the Sheryfe, to warn men to enquire and present the
premises, and to set fynes issues, and amerciamentes, and estrete the same
into the escheker.

Certain grounds be excepted.

Justices of assise, of oyer, and determiner, and of the peace shall and inquire
and certifye the presentmentes, and the party grieved may tend his trauers.

Sherifes shall not enter into any liberties for thexecution of this Act.

He that is sued by force of this act shall not be sued by any statute before
made for reformation of this matter.

Of Vycteles and wodde. Anno. 1. and 2. Philip. and Nari.
NOne shall carry out of England, any corn or malte, bear, butter, Chese,
hering or wodde, except to Callys, Hames, Gines and Barwicke, upon forfeiture
of the ship or vessel, and the doble value of the thing carried, and the
master and maryners of the Ship, to forfeyte al their goods, and to be in
prison by a year.

And if any conueye any things, aforesaid, to any vessel on the Sea or within
any place of the border of this realm, to be carried out, the forfeytures to be
as is aforesaid.

If any obtayninge any license, to the contrary, or his assigns do carry any
more then shall be in the license, he shall forfeyte treble value of the thing,
and suffer imprysonment by a year.

None having a license shallade at sundry places upon forfeyture of the thing,
and al his goods.

Justices of peace shall inquire and examyne al offenders of this act and
determine the offenses.

When corn is at certain pryces, it may be carried over.

Vytaylyng of ships is excepted. The Admyrall may execute his iurisoiction.

Of VVynes. Anno. 7. Edw. 6. cap 5.
NOne shall retayle any Gascoyne or french wynes but at viii. d. the gallon,
and rochell wine, but at iiii. d. the gallon, upon for feyture of five pound
for every offense.

None except he have of yearly profits certain.C. marks, or be worth in
goods a thousand mar kes, or the son of a Duke, Marquis, Earl, Viscount, or
baron, shall have in his house to spend any piece of Gascoyne, French or rochel
wine, above ten Gallons upon forfeyture of x.li.

None shall keep any cauerne or sell by retayle any wynes, except certain places
appointed in the statute, and except such as have the kings and Queen's
letters, upon forfeyture for every day.xx.li.

None shall keep any tavern nor retayle any wine but such as shall be assygned
thereunto by writing upon forfeyture of five pound for every day.

There shall be assygned, but two tauernes in every town (except certain towns)

Forty tauernes shall be in London, and certain number is appointed for diverse
cities, and towns.)

None shall sell by retayle any wynes to be spent in his house, upon forfeyture
of ten pound.

March auntes aduenturyng for wines may spend in his house such wynes as he
brings into England, not selling it.

Sheryffes and head officers of town corporate, and kepers of fortes, may have
wine in their howses, to spend there without selling.

Justices of peace, Stewardes of letes, shiriffes, and eschetours, may inquire
by xii. men of these offenses, the moitie of the forfcytures there found to
the king, and the other to the pore people of that place.

This Act shall not take away the priuiteges of the universities.

Of VVoodes. Anno. 35. Hen. 8. cap. 17.
Upon woods, Copyes, or under wooddes, there shall be left vnfelled for every
acre felled twelve standelles like to prove timber, which shall be preserved till
they be of ten inches square, within shre fots of the ground upon forfeyture
for every standell so not left.iii. s. iiii. d.

All copyes and vnderwoddes at thage of fourtene years, during four years
shall be enclosed or the sprynges thereof preserved upon forfeyture for every
rode iii.s.iiii. d. for every month.

All copyes and vnderwoddes felled above the age of xiiii. years during six
years shall be enclosyd or the spring preserved upon forfeyture of iii.s.iiii.
d. for every monthe.

None shall return into pasture or tyllage any copyes or under woddes
conteininge two acres now preserved for thincrease of wodde, upon forfeyture
for every acre.xl.s.

Every person having any several wods, or copyes with great trees above iiii.
and twenty years groth, shall at the felling leave for every acre twelve trees to
be preserved during twenty years.

And during seven years enclose them, or preserve the springes upon forfeyture
for every of those trees felled six shillinges eight pence, and for every rode
iii.s.iiii. d. Saving those trees may be cut down for buildinges and
reparations.

None having wodes, wherein any has common shall sell those woddes but to his
own occupation, till the forth part be by the owner enclosed as is declared in
this act.

And at every felling it shall be enclosed and preserved.vii. years, and no
bestes during those seven years, shall be suffered to feed in the part, and
the commons to have their common in the resydewe, and the lord is excluded to
put any cattle there or to take any profitte of the pasture there during those
vii. years, and after the vii. years al to lie in common for the lord and the
commons.

And if that part enclosed be not filled within iiii. month, than the commons
to use their comen, and the owner to leave open places, whereby the common
beasts may come in as long as it shall stand vnfelled.

Certain places and former bergaynes be excepted.

Breakers of fenses shall forfeyt.x.s.

If any suffer his swine to go in any common or woddes, not ringyd or pygged
the owner shall forfeyt for every swine.iiii. d.

Where woods shall be felled in any ground enclosed where dear shall be kept,
their enclosure shall be kept for four years.

If the inclousures be broken against the wylles of the owner, the penaltyes to
be exte^ded upon those by whom the spring shall be hurted.

After the wodes preserved by two years, Coltes and Calves under a year old
may be put there.

Against Vacaboundes. Anno. 22. Hen. 8. cap. 12.
THe justices of peace, Majors, Sherifes, Bailifes, and other officers within
their limits shall divide them self, and so divided shall make diligente
search and inquiry of all aged poor and impotente persons which of necessity
be compelled to live of alms that shall be abiding within the limittes of their
division, and thereupon shall have power by their discretions to enable to beg,
within their limittes, such impotent persons, which they shall think
convenient within the limittes of their division to live of alms, and to
command them not to beg without the lymittes to them so appointed, and
shall write the names of every such beggar, in a roll indented whereof the one
part to remain with them selfs, and the other to be certified at the next
sessions of the peace, and they so divided, shall have power to make seals with
the names of the hundredes, rapes, wapentakes, cities, boroughes, towns, or
places, within which they shall limit every such beggar and shall deliver to
every such beggar a letter sealed with the said Seal, and subscribed, with
the name of one of the said justices, or officers, containing his name and
witnessyng that he is aucthorised to beg, and his lymyttes, and if he beg
out of his limittes, the justice of peace, and al other the kings officers,
shall imprison him in the stocks by two days and two nyghtes, giving him only
bread, and water, and after shall cause him to be sworn to return without
delay to the place where he is auctorised to beg in.

No impotent person shall beg except he be auctorised by wrytinge under seal
as is above said, and if any impotent person goo a begging having no such
letter, the constable and other inhabitauntes there, shall cause them to be
brought to the next Justice of peace or high constable of the hundredth, who
shall cause the bryngers to strippe him naked from the middle upward, and cause
him to be whypped, where the said Justice or high constable shall appoint, or
else command him to be set in stocks where he was taken, by three days and
three nights, there to have only bread and water, and thereupon the said
Justice or high constable shall lymit to him a place to beg in, and give him
a letter under seal as is aforesaid, and swear him to repair thither
immediately.

If any being whole and able to labor, be taken in begginge, or having no
land, master, nor vsyng any lawful marchaundise or craft to get his living,
be vagaraunt and can give no reckening how he does get his living, then it
shall be lawefull to the constables and subjects of every place, to arest him
and bring him to any Justice of peace, or to the high constable of that
place, and if he be taken in any town corporate, then to be brought to the
mayor, Sherifes, or bayliffes there, and they to cause him to be had to the
next place where they shall think conueniente, and there to be tied to the end
of a carte naked, and to be beaten with whyppes through out that place till his
body be bloody, and the^ he by them to be enjoined by his oath, to return
forthewith the next way to the place where he was borne, or where he last
dwelt by three years, and there to put him self to labor, and he to have a
letter sealed with the seal of the place wherein he shall be punished,
witnessing that he has been punished according to this estatute, and
conteyninge the day and place of his punishmente, and the place whereunto he is
lymitted to goo, and by what time he is limytted to come thither, within which
time he may lawefully beg by the way. And if he do not accomplish that
letter, then to be efte soones whypped, and so often as any default shall be in
him, in every place to be whypped til he be repaired where he was borne, or
where he last dwelt by three years, and there to labor for his living.

And if any so whypped be an idle person and no common beggar, then after
such whyppinge he shall be kept in stocks til he have found suertye to go to
service or labor, or else to be sworn to repair where he was borne, or where
he last dwelt by three years, and to have like letter and punishment if he
eftsoon offend, as is above appointed for the common strong beggar, and so
from time to time till he get his living. Justices of peace shall have power
to inquire of all Majors and other officers, and persons, that shall be necligent
in executing this act. If the Constables and inhabitauntes where any such im
potente persons or strong beggars do beg, be necligent and do not punish him
as is above limited, the to wneshyppe for every such impotent beggar shall
forfayt.iii.s.iiii. d. and for every strong beggar six shyllynges eight
pence the moyte. etc.

All Justices of peace shall have power to determine every such defaulte and to
make process by dystres against the inhabitauntes there, by which distress the
Shyriffe shall deteyne the good of such one or two, of the said inhabitauntes,
as he may have knowledge were most necligent in the execution of this act, and
the said distres retain till he find suertie to appear at the sessions
limited in the said distres. and if he appear and confess the default, or
transgress the presentment, and it be tried agayust him, or deny the
information and it is proved against him, then the Justices of peace in their
Sessions shall assesse their fine if it grow by presentme^t the leuiyng of the
same by distres, of the inhabitauntes of the town, ye fines and to make process
for to the king, and if it grow by information, then the moyte to him that
sueth. etc.

If any person distreyned, appear not, then upon the return he shall lose at
the first.iii.s.iiii. d. and at the second.vi.s.viii. d. and so to be doubled
for every distres.

Scolers of universities that go a begging not being auctorised under the seal
of the university, and al shypmen pretending losses on the sea, going a
begging without authority, shall be punished like strong beggars. And all
procters and pardoners going without authority, and al other idle persons,
some using unlawful games, and some fayning to have knowledge in physic,
phisnomy, palmistry, or other crafty sciences: if he before two Justices of the
peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, be found gyltye, shall be whipped two
days together after the manner before rehearsed, and for the second offense to
be scourged two days, and the third day to be put on the pyllory from nine of
clock unto eleven, and to have one of his ears cut of, and for the third
time to have like punishment and to have his other ear cut of.

The Justices of peace have like authority within their fraunchyses.

This act shall be yearly read in the open sessions.

If any give herborow or money to any beggar hable to work, he shall make fine
to the king by the discretion of the Justices of peace at their general
sessions.

If any let thexecution of this act or make rescues, he shall forfeit C.s. and
have imprisonmente at the kings will, the one moyte. etc.

This act shall not be prejudicial to the barons and inhabytauntes of the five
ports.

And the Mayor, Baylyffe, electes and Iurates in any town within the five
ports have like authority as the Justices of peace have in any sheyre.

And the inhabitauntes within the said five ports shall be bound to thexecution
of this act upon like pain, before remembered, and if any that shall inhabit
within the five ports, beg without the five ports he to be punished according
to this act, every letter to be made whereby any impote^t shall be aucthorised to
beg shall be made in this form. Kent. S. Memorandum that A.B. of D. for
reasonable considerations is licensed to beg within the hundred of P.K. and L.
in the said county, given under the seal of that limit. tali die and anno.
And every letter delivered to such beggar or vagabounde after he has been
whypped shall be made in this wise. Kent. S. I. S. whipped for a vagabound
strong beggar at Dale in the said county according to the law, the xii. day
of July in the xxiii. year of king Henrye the eight, was assigned to pass,
forthwith and directly from thence to Gale in the county of Med. where he says
he was borne, or where he last dwelled by the space of three years, and he is
lymytted to be there within fourtene days next ensuing at his peril, In witness
whereof the seal of the limitte of the said place of his punishment hereunto
is set.

And every such letter above reharsed shall be made at the equal costs of all
such Justices, Mayors and other officers, above rehearsed, and shall be
subscribed with one of their hands, after this form Per me. A.B. vnum
Iustitiariorum pacis, or Maiorem ciuitatis, or Ballium uillae, or
Constabularium talis hundredth, or else in like form in English.

And they that have the custodye of any galoes, shall make a seal granted,
with the name of the prison or jail, and they that be delivered out of prison
for suspicions of felonye and have not wherewith to pay their fees, shall have
liberty to beg for their fees by vi. wekes, and then compelled to go where he
was borne, or where he last dwelled by three years, and every one so
delivered, shall have a letter to him delivered by the clerk of the peace, or
by the town clerk where he is delivered, wytnessinge the time and space of
his deliverance, and before whom, and the time appointed him to beg for his
fees, and the place whether he is assigned to go, and to every such letter the
jailer shall put to the seal before rehearsed, and every such letter shall be made
in this wise folowinge, Essex. S. The.xx. day of July. An. regni regis. H.
viii. xxiii. I. S. was delivered for felonye out of the jail of D. in the
said countye at the Sessions holden before. A.B. and his fellows at Gale, the
day and year aforesaid, and is allowed to beg for his fees by the space
of.vi. wekes, and in case he can get him no master to work with, within the
said term, then he is assigned to pass directly to Dale in the said countye
of Kent, where he said he was borne, or where he last dwelled by the space of
three years; and he is allowed.xiiii. days next after the said six wekes, for
his passage thither. In witness whereof the seal of the said prison is hereunto
set.

And in such shyres where is no gayle, the Sheriff shall cause a seal to be
ingraued with the name of the shyre, and shall order and use the same in like
form. And every clerk of the peace or town clerk shall make for euerysuch
person so delivered the said letter without any see therefore taken, and
deliver it to the jailer or the Sheriff of the Shyre if there be no jailer,
within one day after the sessions, upon pain of forfeiting for default of
every letter.xii. d. to the king. Nor the gaolers nor Shyriffes shall suffer
none to depart out of prison except it be to service or labor, without he
first deliver him the said lettre sealed with the said seal, under like pain
for every defaulte.

And if any being delivered out of prison, do beg without having such letter,
or do beg contrary to ye tenor of his letter, the^ he to be taken and whipped
as above is said of the strong beggars, and that to be done upon such pain as
is before limited for none execution of punishment of strong beggars.

Every person being bound by any foundation, to give any money in alms, and
to every person at common doles used at buryalls or obyttes, to give money in
alms to al persons coming to such (...) as (...) before this time ^^ue ^^ne.

Masters of hospitalls may lodge any person according to their foundation,
and to give money in alms in such wise as they are bound to do.

Against Vacaboundes. Anno. 3. Edwar. vi. Ca. 16.
If any aged or impotent offend this statute, he shall be punished as is proved
in the statute of two and twentye. H. viii. capi.xii.

Common laborers hable in body, using loytering and refusyng to work for such
reasonable wages as is most commonly given where he dwells, shall be for every
refusel adjudged a vagabound, and shall be punished as strong and mighty
vacaboundes, in such form as is declared in the said act of. 22.

All mayres, Sheryfes, baylifes, constables, or head officers of city Town or
village, shall before the purificacion. Anno.domi. 1549. se al such idell
impotent maimed, and aged persons, who can not be taken for vacaboundes, which
were borne there, or have been there most conuersaunt by three years, and now
decayed provided of houses, at the costs of the said Town, there to be
releued and cured by the devotion, of the people there. And that they do not
suffer there any other to beg within that precinct, except such as are
aucthorised by this act upon forfeyture for every four days.x.s. to him that
will sue.

Mayres, Baylifes, Sherifes, constables, and other head officers shall every
month once, make a view of aged impotent and lame beggars within their
precinct, and se al such as were not borne there nor has been for the most part
there conuersaunt by three years, or be not aucthorised by this estatute,
conveyed to the next constables and they to convey them to the next constables,
and so from constables to constables, til he be brought to the place where he
was borne or was most conuersaunt, there to be nouryshed, of alms, as is
aforesaid, upon forfeiture for every default.x.s. the one moite. etc.

If any such aged maimed or impotent person not so impotente but that they
may work in some work than such Town shall either in common provide such
work for him as he may be occupied in or appoint him such as will find him
work for meat and drink which if he refuse to do or tun away and beg
than to punyshe him with stokkyng, beting, or other wise as shall seem
convenient.

All lepers and bedderedes may remain in such houses appointed for them as
they be now in, and may appoint their proctours, so they be not above two for
one house, together alms wtin four miles.

Commissions may be granted to such as has their howses, or barnes burnyd, or
such losses, or to lepers, to gather alms.

If any child above five year old or under.xiiii. go wanderyng or alone, if
any that is able to keep it, will take it from any beggar being the father or
mother or other, and bring it before one of the Constables there, and the next
quarter sessions, next present it in the presents of the constable before the
Justices of peace and there promised to bring it up til the woman child be xv.
year old, and the man child.xvii. year old these Iuistces shall adiudg yt child
unto those ages, to be servant to him so promising which child shall be ordered
as servants without wages, and that, judgment to be entered by the clearke of
the peace.

If such child run away, the master to take it, and keep it and punish
it, at the liberty of the master, and to have a warrant from a Justice of the
peace, for the child running away, and thereby the child to be taken and
ordered as is provided by the statute laborers, for servants, departing out
of their masters service.

If any person stele or intise away any such child so adjudged for a
servant, the master to take an action upon the statute laborers, against such
steler or intiser, or an action of trespass, wherein he shall recover damages and
treble costs, of his suit.

If the master be unreasonable in ordering such child, then upon complaynte
made at the quarter sessions, by two honest neighbors, if it shall then appear
by honest wytnes, the complaint to be true the Justices of peace shall discharge
the child from his master, and appoint him to some other, and that to be
written in the book of the clerk of the peace, for which he shall have four
pence, and shall have also four pence for the first entry of the child to be
servant, this to be paid by the master.

If such woman child be married before fiuetene year old, she shall be dyscharged
of service.

Every vacabounde or beggar being alien, shall in form aforesaid and upon the
forfeitures aforesaid be conveyed from place to place, to the place next
adjoining, to his country, or to the next port if there be sea between this
realm, and his country, there to be kept of the inhabitauntes, of that port,
in convenient labor or otherwise, till he may be conveyed over, and than at
the costs of those inhabytauntes, (if him self shall not have where with) to be
conveyed over to his country.

Against reteiners and geuers of liueries made in Anno octauo Edwardi quarti
Capitulo secundo.
NOne may give lyuerye or other sign nor retain any but only his manuell
servant, officer, or a man of the one law or of the other, by any writing, oath,
or promise. And if he does contrary, the geuer shall lose.C.s. for every
month, that there is any with him, so retained, and the receyuer.C.s and he
that will sue shall have an accion by byll of information, against a^^^ my
offenders, as he will in every of the kings courts, before Justices of Peace
of assise and gayle delyuery, or Countye Palentyne, and in Duresme and in
Examshire, there-vpon process shall be as in trespass, except that in county
Palentyne, nor in Duresme, no exigente shall be awarded, and if any of the
offenders be present in Court the justices may command him to be brought,
to answer, and first the informer shall be exaamined upon a book that his
complaynte is true, and after they examine that defendaunte, and judge him
conuicte by their discretion, as well as by trial. And the informer shall recover
the one half and the king the other half, if it be not in city or town, that
has like forfeyture, by the kings grant and that no essoigne nor proteccion
be allowed. And that the sheriff or coroner may return no less issues at the
first day then.x.s. and the second.xxx.s. and so at every day.x.s. of
increase. And if the sheriff or coroner to the contrary he shall forfeyte every
time.xx.s. And the mayer and gouerners of cities and towns, that have power to
here and determine plees personnels, have power to examine and to determine it
as is beforesayde, as well by examination as by trial. And upon that the king
shall have the one half, the Mayors or governors, the other half, to be
employed to the use of the city or town.

Item the kings and the Queen's majesty's pleasures are, that all other
statutes consernyng reteiners, and geuyng lyueryes now remaynyng in force
shall be put in execution.

The statute of Winton for robbeties hew and cry and for watches to be kept.
AFter a robbery or felony done fresh suit shall be made from town to town.
etc. and if need be inquestes shall be made in towns, hundredes, fraunchyses and
counties, so that the felones may be attaynt and suffer execution, and if they
be not taken, then the people where such robbery was done, as in hundred and
fraunches shall answer therefore. And if it be done between two Shyres. etc.

Within xl. days if the misdoers be not taken. Also in great towns the gates
shall be closed from the son risyng to the son setting, and no man herborowe
none in the suburbs, but such as he will answer for, and the Baylyffes of
Towns shall inquire of such every weke. Also watch shall be made and kept from
Assention tide till Myghelmas, in every city, by six men at every gate, and
in every borowe by twelve men in every hole town, by six men or four after
the number of thinhabitauntes contynually all the night from the son set, to
the son rysynge. And if any stranger come by them, he shall be arrested until
morning, and if he be suspicious, he shall be brought to the Sheryffe to be kept
until he be delivered by due order, and every town adioyninge shall be ayding
to other. Also the hye ways of market towns, shall be enlarged where there is
any woddes, hedges, dyches, or bushes, nygh the hye way.CC. foot one the one
side. and CC. foot on the othersyde, but this statute extends not to oaks,
nor great fustes, so that they be clear under, and if the Lord will not do
thus, if any robveries or murder be done, he shall answer therefore, and make
fine at the kings will. Also in the hye ways, in the kings wodde, or park
nygh the high ways, it shall be done after the same manner, or else that the
Lord shall make such wall, diche, or hedge, that the evil doers can not
escape, and no fair nor market be holden in no Churcheyarde.

Against reports of slanderous tales and news. VV. 1. cap. 34.
IF any person shall publishe or forge false news whereof discord or slander
may arise, between the king and his people or the nobles of his Realm, the
same shall be unprisoned until he shall bring forth in court the Author of such
news.

Anno. 2. R. 2. cap. 5.
THe forgers and counterfeictors of false news and horrible false messynges of
Prelates, Dukes, Earls, Barons, and other nobles and great personages of the
Realm, or of the Chauncellor, Treasourer, Clerk of the preuye Seal, Steward
of the Kings House, Justices of the one bench or the other or of any other great
officers of the Realm, of things which by the same Prelates, Dukes, etc. were
never spoken or thought of to their great slander, whereof debates and discord
may arise berwene ye said Lords and Commons, shall suffer the punishment
mentioned in the said Act of W. 1. until they have brought forth in court
thauctor of the said false news and messinges.

Anno. 12. R. 2. cap. 11.
ANd if the said forgers and counterfeictors cannot bring forth the Aucthor of
the said false news, then they shall be punished by thaduise of the kings
Counsel.

Anno 1. et 2. Phi. and Mar. cap. 3.
THe Justices of peace within the limittes of their Commission, may hear and
determine all offenses committed and done against the form of the said several
statutes

And further if any person or persons maliciously of his or their own
imagination speak any sedicious or slanderous news, Rumors, sayings and
tails of our Sovereign Lady the Queen's Majesty, every person so offending
for the first offense shall in the market place, nere where the words were
spoken, be set openly upon the pillory and shall have both his ears cut of,
onelesse he pay C. l. to ye queen's hyghnes use, within a month next after
judgment given against him, and also be imprisoned by the space of three
months next after his or their execution.

If any such sedicious or slanderous news be spoken by any person of the
report or saying of any other, then the same person to be set openly upon the
pillory as is aforesaid, and to have one of his ears cut of, onles he pay on
hundredth marks within the time and to thuse aforesaid, and also sustain a
month imprisonment next after his execution.

And if any person maliciously devise, write, print, or setforth any Book,
Ryme, Ballade, Lettre, or writing, containing false matter clause, or sentence
of slander, reproach, and dishonor of the Queens highness, or the encouraging,
sterring, or moving of any insurrection or rebellion, or shall procure any of
the said offenses to be done (if the same be not punishable by the statute of
xxv. E. 3. cap. 2. touching treasons. etc. the said person shall after
conviction for his first offense in some market place have his right hand
cut of.

Item if any person once conuicte of any of the said offenses punishable by
loss of ear, ears, or hand do after wards offend in any of the said
offenses, then he shall suffer imprisonment during his life, and forfeyte to the
queen's highness use al his goods and cattels.

The said offenses are inquirable and determinable before Justices of Oyer and
determiner, Justices of assise or gayle delyuery, or Justices of peace.

If any Justice of peace upon vehement suspicion may commit any person
suspected to prison, there to remain without bail or maynepryse.

The offenders against this act must be accused and convict within three
months next after thoffence committed.

God save the Queen.
Imprynted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge, and John Cawood,
Prynters to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum Priuiligio Regiae Maiestatis.


