This is the ordinance for the conservation and keeping of the Queen's Majesty's
swannes and sygnettes, and of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and of her
Commons within the Counties of Lincoln, Forthampton, Rutland, Huntyngton, and
Cambridge, and the liberties and fraunchyse of the same: And for the
conservation of fyshe and soul, with the assissing of all manner of nets
within the said Counties and liberties of the same.
FIRST it is ordained and statuted, that every person having any Swannes, shall
begin yearly to mark or cause to be marked the same upon the Monday next after
Trinity Sunday, and no person before, but after as the company may, so that the
Master of the Queen's game of Swannes or his deputies be there present, and if
any person or persons take upon him or them in marking to the contrary, to
forfeyte to the Queen.xl. s.

Item it is ordained, that no person nor persons being Swanheards nor other,
shall go on marking without the master of the Queen's game of Swannes or his
deputy be present, whith.vi. or.iii. of the company of Swanheardes, upon
pain to forfeyte to the Queen's grace.xl. s.

Item it is ordained, that no person take up no signet nor signets unmarked,
nor make no sale of the^, but if the Queen's Swanherde or his deputy with.iii.
other Swanherdes next adioynyng be present or have knowledge of the same, upon
pain to forfeyt to the Queen's grace.xl. s.

Item it is ordained that the Swanherde of the duchy of La^caster whithin the
said counties, nor within the liberties and frasiches of the same, nor no other
person for him nor by him, shall make no sale nor take up no Swannes, nor mark
them within the said duchy, without the Queen's Swanherde or his deputy be
present, upon pain to forfeyt to the Queen's grace.xl. s. And in like wise it
is ordained that the Queen's Swanherde of the foresaid counties nor his deputy,
shall not enter into the said duchy to take up any Swannes or signets, nor them
to mark without the Swanherde of the duchy be present, upon pain to forfeyte
to the Queen's grace.xl. s.

Item it is ordained, that if any Swannes or signets be found without the said
duchy double marked or put out or right mark, that then it shall be seized for
the Queen, and to be delivered to the master of the Queen's game of Swannes or
to his deputy, and so to remain to it be proved by.iiii. or.vi. sufficient
Swanherdes, to whom the said Swa^nes or signets belong or appertain, so that
the knowledge of the same be had by the said Swanherds after the said delivery
before the sessions of Swannes than next to be kept within the county, where as
it shall ha^ the said Swans or signets to be seized and delivered in form
aforesaid. And if so be the proprety of the same Swannes or signets can not be
known by the said sessions, that then the Queen to be assured of the value of
the same Swannes and signettes,

Item it is ordained that if any person or persons wylfully put any swannes
from their nestes, wheresoever they breed, or else take up and destroy of bear
away the eggs or egg of the said swannes, to forfait for every default and
presented in the sessions of swannes to the Queen's grace.xiii. s. iiii. d.

Item it is ordained that no man shall make sale of no white swnnes, nor make
delyuery of them wihtout the master of the game or his deputy be present,
with.iii. or.vi. swanheardes next adjoining under pain of.xl. s. whereof
shall be to the fynder.vi. s. viii. d. and the residue to the Queen.

Item it is ordained that no person or persons hunt in fene time or in any
haunt of swannes with dogs, from the feast of Easter to the sunday after
Trinity sunday, upon pain for every time so doing.vi. s. viii. d.

Item it is ordained that if any person set any snares or any manner of
inginnes to take Bittors or swannes betwixt the feast of Easter and Lammas, he
or they to forfeit for every time so setting any such ingins.vi. s. viii. d.

Item it is ordained, that no person nor persons shallay no net nor nets, nor
dragge with net nor nets within the common stremes, waters nor maryshes upon
the day time, from the feast of the Inuencion of the holy cross, unto the
feast of Lammas, upon pain as often as they be found in fault and presented in
the sessions of swannes before the Queen's Justices.xx. s. to forfeit to the
Queen's grace.

Item it is ordained, that every swanherde intending to keep any swannes or
signettes, that they shall keep the^ in a pen or pit within.xx. foot of the
common streme, or else within.xx. foot of the Queen's high way, so that the
Queen's subjects passing by may have the sight of the said swannes, upon
pain of.xl. s.

Item it is ordained, that there shall be no forfeyt of white swannes nor gray
swannes nor signets but only to the Queen's grace, as well within the fraunches
and liberties as without: and as often as any person sease and deliver the
said swannes to any other person, but only to the master of the game or to the
Queen's use, he to forfait to the Queen's grace.vi. s. viii. d.

Ite^ it is ordained, that no manner of person nor persons shall lay nor set
nets named trameles, nor nets called drayes, nor dray with no net from
the.xvi. day next before the feast of siant Mark the Evangelist, unto the.xvi.
day next ensuing the same feast. That is to wit, within the common streams,
waters, fennes and marshes in the county of Lincoln, Northampton, Rutland,
Huntyngton, and Cambrige, nor within the I Will of Ely, upon pain of.xl. s.

Item it is ordained, that no man shall take no gray swannes nor white swannes
flying-but that he shall within.iii. days next after the said taking, deliver
it or the^ to the master of the Queen's swannes or to his deputy to the Queen's
use, and the taker to have for his taking.viii. d.

Item it is ordained, that no manner of person of what estate, degree, or
condition he be, having any game of swannes of his own, shall be no swanheard
nor keeper of none other men's swannes, upon pairs of.xl. s.

Item it is ordained, that not swanherde nor fisher, nor fowler, shall not vex
nor trouble another swanhearde, fysher nor fowler, by way of action, or
otherwise, but only before the Queen's Justice of her sessions of swannes, upon
pain of forfaytyng to the Queen's grace.xiii. s. iii. d.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at Lodon in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilogio Regiae Maiestatis.


