Godly Meditations made in the form of prayers, by S. Augustine.

A prayer wherein through commemoration of Christ's passion, we desire pardon
of our sins, and continuance in virtue and godliness.
Behold (O pitiful father) thy most pitiful son, which suffered for me
being so wicked. Behold (O most merciful king) who suffers, and remember (as
thou art loving and kind) for whom he suffered. Is not this (O my Lord)
innocent, who^ although he were thy son, thou did deliver to redeem and
raunsom a servant? Is not this the author and beginner of life, which being
led as a sheep to be killed, and being made obedient to thee, even unto
death, was not afraid to take upon him ye most cruel and sharp kind of
death? Call to remembrance (O thou distributour of all health) that this is he
whom (although thou did begette him by thy power, yet notwythstanding) thou
would have to be made partaker of mine infirmity and weakness.

Truly this same is thy Godhead which did take upon him my nature, which was
hanged upon the gibbet of torment or cross, which in the flesh which he had
taken upon him, did suffer sorrowful punishment. Turn the eyes of thy majesty
(O lord my God) toward the work of thine unspeakable pity. Look upon thy
dear son, whose whole body is stretched forth. Mark the harmeles and pure
hands, which do drop, and distill down innocent blood. And I beseech thee,
be pacified and pardon ye wicked deeds which my hands have committed. Consider
his bare and naked side, being thrust through cruelly with a spear, and renew
and wash me with thy holy fountain or well, which I believe did flow from
thence. Mark the unspotted feet which have not stand in ye way of sinners,
but always have walked in thy law, how they are persed through with sharp nails,
and make perfect my steps in thy paths, and make me (of thy loving kindness)
to hate all the ways of iniquity. Remove from me the way of iniquity, and
make me of thy mercy) to choose the way of truth. I beseech thee (O king of holy
men) by this holy one of all holy ones, and by this my redemer: to make me
run the way of thy commandments, that I may be united and knit unto him in
spirit, which did not disdayue to be clad in my flesh. Do thou not look
upon and mark (O pitiful father) the head of thy most dearly beloved soune,
a young man, how it leaned upon his shoulder when he was past the most precious
death? Behold (O my most gentle creator) the humanity, and gentleness of thy
beloved son, and have compassion upon the febleues of me thy weak and feeble
handy work. Behold (O most glorious parent) ye torn and rent members of thy
most kind and loving child, and remember gently what substance I am of.
Behold the pains of God and man, and release and loose man (which is thy
creature) out of misery and bondage of sin. Behold the punishment of him,
that did redeem and pardon, the offense of them that be redeemed. This is he O
Lord, whom thou did strike for the sins of thy people, although he be thy
well-beloved, in whom was found no guile, and yet nevertheless was he reckoned
amongst them that were full of iniquity.

A prayer wherein man confesses himself to be the cause of Christ's passion.
WHat have thou committed (O Lord) that thou should be so judged? what have
thou offeded that thou should be so cruelly handled and ordered? what was
thy fault? what was thine offense? what was the cause of thy death? what was
the occasion of thy condemnation? I (Lord) I am the cause of thy sorrow, the
fault is in me, that thou was killed for, I have deserved thy death, I
committed the offenses that were avenged upon thee. Oh merueilous kind of
judgment, and unspeakable disposition or ordering of mysteries. The vninst man
offends: and ye righteous is punished. The guilty does evil, and the
innocent is beaten. The evil does trespass, and the good is condemned. That
which the evil man deserves, the same does ye just suffer. That which the
servant does amiss, ye master makes amends. That which man trespasseth, God
suffers it. O (thou which art the son of God) how low did thine humility
descend? How greatly did thy charity even as it were wax hot and burn
toward us. How far did thy pity proceed? whither did thy benignity and
gentleness grow and extend? how far did thy love stretch? how far came thy
compassion? for I did wrongfully, and thou wast punished. I committed ye
mischievous deeds, and they were avenged upon thee. I did the fault, and thou
submittedst thy self to ye torments. I was proud and thou wast humble and
meek, I was swelled and puffed up, thou wast extenuated, and appaired. I was
disobedient, nevertheless thou being obedient, barest the pains and
punishments of disobedience. I obeyed and was as it were a servant to all
excess and gluttony, and thou wast punished with scar^itie and lack of food.
The tr^e did draw me violently unto unlawful concupiscence and desires, but
perfect charity led thee unto punishment. I presumed being forbidden: but thou
did smart therefore, I took my pleasure with delicateness: thou wast vexed
with the cross. I abou^d and have plentye of all pleasures, thou art all to
torn with nails. I do cast the pleasant sweetness of the apple: and ehou the
bitterness of Baull. Behold (o king of glory) mine iniquity and vngodduies*
and thy piety, and goodness is manifest. Be hold mine unrighteousness; and thy
justice is plainly declared.

What thing (O my king and my God) shall I render unto thee, for all those
things which thou have bestowed upon me? for nothing can be found in yt heart
of man, that may worthily recompense such, rewards. Can ma^s wit excogitate or
imagine any thing yt is worthy to be compared unto thy divine mercy? Neither is
it yt office of a creature to go about to reco^pe^ce fully and justly yt aid
and help of a Creator. There is truly O son of God in this thy merueilous
dispe^sation, and apointmentes somewhat in which my frailenes may help a
little, if so be that my mind once pricked and stirred by thy visitation do
punish the flesh, with the vices also and evil concupiscences thereof: and
this thing if thou will grant, and give me grace to do, then shall it begin
as it were to suffer and sustain sorrows and griefs, because that thou also
did vouchesafe to die for my sin. And so by the victory of the inward man,
it shall be armed (thou being a Captain) for the external and outward
victory, forasmuch as (the spiritual persecution once ouercom) it shall not
be afraid, for thy sake to be obedient unto the material sword, and cross
of this world. And so the slendernes of my state and condition (if it please
thy goodness) shall be able according to the little power thereof, to answer
unto the greatness, and excellency of my creator. And this is the heavenly
medicine (O good Jesu) this is (as it were a preservative of thy love. This I
beseech thee, by thine accustomed and ancient mercies, to pour into my
wounds, (the soul and filthy matter of the venomous contagion, and infection
once cast away, which may refresh, and restore me to my former purity and
cleannes, that when I have tasted of the pleasant sweetenes which is to abide
in thee it may make me to despise, and utterly set naught by the enticementes
of this world, and to fear (for thy sake) none adversities thereof, and that I
(remembering thine everlasting nobility and excellency) may always abhor,
and disdain the troubles of this transitory world. Let nothing (I beseech
thee) be delectable unto me, nor please me without thee. Let no precious, nor
beautiful thing be acceptable unto me but thee: Let all things (I beseech
thee) be counted as vile, and of no estimation unto me, without thee. That
which is against thy nature, let it be ircksome, and grievous also unto me, and
that which pleases thee, let it be continually desired of me. Let it i^ke me
to rejoice without thee, and let it delight me to be sad for thy sake. Let thy
name be an hartening unto me, and the remembrance of thee, a consolation and
comfort. Let my tears be made unto me as bread both day and night, searching
thy instifications. Let ye law of thy mouth be better unto me, then thousands
of gold and silver. Give me an arde^t de sire and love to obey thee, and an
extreme hatred to resist thee. I require thee (O my hope) for all thy pity and
goodness sake to have mercy upon my impietye and wickedness. Make open mine
ears to thy commandments, and let not mine heart be inclined (I beseech thee
by thy holy name) to any evil thing, to be minded as ye ungodly or wicked men.
I require thee also by the merucilous humility, that I be not moved with pride,
nor yet with sinners.

Here does man declare unto God the Father, that the Passion of his son, was
for his reconciliation and atonement with God.
Behold O almighty God, Father of my Lord, I beseech thee of thy benignity
and gentleness to have mercy upon me, because of the most precious thing yt I
could find, the same have I offered devoutly unto thee, the thing of most
estimation, yt I could imagine, I have presented humbly unto thee: I have left
nothing, but I have declared it to thy majesty. There is nothing remaining yt
I may add more because I have committed and betaken my whole hope unto thee. I
have sent unto thee my advocate and spokesman, even thy welbeloned son. I
have sent thy glorious child to be a mediator betwixt me and thee. I have set
(I say) an intercessor, by whom I trust to get pardon and forgenenesse of my
sins. I have sent word unto word, that is, God unto God, according to yt
which S. John has in the beginning of his gospel, where he calls God the
word, saying: In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and
God was the word. etc. which word (as I have said) was sent for my misdeedes.
And I have rehearsed unto thee the passion of thy most holy son, which passion I
believe was suffced for me. I believe, that the Godhead which was seat of thee
did take upon him my humanity, and nature, in y^ which he thought not scorn
to suffer buffertes, bonds, spittings, mocks, yea, he took upon him to suffer
the cross, nails, and dart. I believe also, yt his manhood being in this my
nature, during his infa^cy was troubled with creping and scraulings, and was
wrapped in clothes after the manner of other children, was vexed in his youth
with labors, made lean with waking and fastinges, weryed with iorneying,
afterward whipped, and all to torn and rent with diverse kinds of punishments,
reckoned amongst the dead, and when it was endued with the glory of
resurrection, he carried it into the joys of heaven, and placed it upon the
righthand of thy majesty, (this I say) he is my ma^hode, way, and means of
pacifying and appeasing thee, and thy way and means of having mercy upon me.
Mercifullye look upon, hear thy son which thou did beger, and the boude
servant which he redeemed. Behold here a Creator, and do not despise a
creature. Receive the shephearde welcomed with a gentle and loving
countenance, and mercifully look upon the sheep which he has brought home
upon his owue shoulders. This is that most faithful shepherd, which by many
and diverse labors, and trauailcs over steep hills, and through headlong and
deep valleys, did search for his own sheep that was strayed away, which also
when he had found it faint, and almost dead through long wandering, gat himself
under it with great rejoicing, and making it fast unto him with a merueilous
bond of charity, lifted it up out of the depth of confusion, and brought it
home to the ninety and nine. Behold (O Lord) my king and God almighty, behold
a good shepherd, which renders to thee, that which thou co^mittedst to his
charge. He took upon him through thine ordinance to save man, whom he has
delivered unto thee clean and pure from al spots through the washing in his
blood. Lo, thy most dearly beloved Son has reconciled unto thee thy
handiworke, which was gone far out of the way. Lo, a gentle shepherd
brings again to thy flock, him that yt violent pirate, and robber had
driven away. He has brought unto thy sight the servant whom his own
conscience had made to run away: that he which by himself had deserved
punishment, by thy son being his solicitour, has deserved forgeuenes, unto
whom also for his offenses everlasting fire was due: nevertheless being a
soldier under such a Captain, he does hope to be brought home to his own
country. I was able (O holy Father) by my self to offend thee, but I was not
able of my self to pacify and appease thee. Thy well-beloved Son (O my God)
was made my helper, by taking upon him mine humanity, to the intent he might
cure mine infirmity, that whereof the first occasion of thy wrath did spring
of the same, he might offer up to thee a sacrifice of praise, and that he might
render, and make me also well pleasing to thy goodness by yt thing, in the which
he sitting now on thy right hand, did always show and declare himself to be
equal with my substance, and as it were fellow with the same. Lo, my hope,
beehold in whom is all my trust. If thou despise me (as it were right) formy
iniquity: yet look upon me (at the least wise) mercifully for the charity of
thy beloved Sou. Beue heed to thy son whereby thou may have mercy upon thy
bo^dseruant. Look upon the sacrament of flesh, and pardon the offenses of
the flesh. How often soever thou do remember the wounds of thy blessed
son: so often I beseech thee let mine iniquities be hid. And because flesh
has stirred thee to anger: let flesh I beseech thee move thee to mercy, that
like as flesh has seduced, and led me to sin, so flesh may get and obtain
for me remission. For certainly it is much, that mine iniquity has deserved,
but much more it is, that the goodness of my redemer may even of right require.
Mine unrighteousness is great, but his righteousness is bigger. For look how
much God is superior unto man: even so much is my malice and evil inferior
unto his goodness both in quality and quantity. For what have I sinned being a
man, that the son of God being man has not redeemed? what pride could be in
me so exceeding hie, but such humility as was in him, should bring it down?
what power of death was there in me so great, but the punishment which the
son of God suffered upon the cross, might deface it, and utter ly destroy
it? Trueiy my God, if the sins of sinful man should be wayed in a just and
equal balance, with the love and favor that was in our redeemer toward us:
the East is not so far distant from the west, nor the in nermost part of the
earth so much separated from the uppermost part of y^ heaven: as they should
be unlike, so much less should mine iniquity be then is his goodness. Now
(O mostnoble creator of light) now pardon mine offenses for the unmeasurable
travails, and pains that thy beloved son did sustain. Now (I beseech thee)
let his goodness be set against my wickedness, his modesty and temperance,
against mine ungracious frowardnes: and his mecknes, against my fierce
cruelty. Let his humility recompense my pride: his patience, mine impatie^ce:
his gentleness, mine unkind churlishnes: his obedience, my disobedience: his
quietness, mine unquietness: his pleasant to wardnes, my bitter frowardnes: his
sweet facility and gentleness, mine anger and fretting fumes: to conclude, let
his charity, make amends for my heinous and detestable cruelty.

Amen.
A devout prayer to the Holy Ghost.
NOw (O ahmighty, and holy Ghost) which art the love of the divine power, the
holy participator and partener, with ye almighty Father, and his most blessed
son, the most merciful comforter of the sorrowful. I beseech thee to slide
by thy mighty power into the inward parts of mine heart, y^ thou dwelling
there, may make glad, and as it were lighten every darcke corner of the
neglect and forletten cottage, with the bright shining of thy light, and that in
visiting the same, thou would ornate and deck with the plenteousnes of thy
dew, the lothsom places thereof, which be corrupted with filthiness. Kindle the
priuye wounded parts of the inner man, with thy wholesome flames, and with
pearsing y^ inward parts of my foul entrails with the dart of thy love. Feed
all the inner parts both of my mind and body, by the illuminating and
lightening with the fire of thy holy and feruente love. Give me to driuke of
thy most pleasant river, to the intent I may have no lust to taste any worldly
things which be mixed with poisor. Give sentence with me (O Lord) and defend my
cause against the ungodly nation. Teach me to do thy will because thou art my
God. For I believe that in whom so ever thou do dwell: thou buildest an
house in him for the father also, and the son. Blessed is that man that
gets such a ghest, because that by thee, the father and the Son also will
dwell and abide with him. Come now (o most loving conforter of my so rowfull
soul) which art a protector in all necessities, and an help in troubles and
adversities. Come O purger of sins, healer and curer of wounds. Come the
strength of the frail and feeble, the relieuer and raiser up of them that
slide. Come the instructor and teacher of the humble and make, the destroyer
and plucker down of the proud and stubberne. Come the good and kind Father of
the fatherles, the gentle Judge of widows. Com thou which art a guide unto
them yt are tossed in the waves of this te^pestions world, like as a bright and
notable star is to them that sail on the sea, an haven unto the^ that are
affrayd of shipwreck. Come the worship and honor of all them that live, the
only health of the dead. Come most holy Ghost, come, and have mercy on me,
make me meet for thee, and mercifully grant unto me according to the
multitude of thy great mercies yt my baseness may please thy majesty, and my
weakness, thy almighty power for Jesu Christ my sauiors sake, which with the
Father, and thine unity, lives and reigns world without end.

Amen.
A prayer to the holy Trinity.
WIth all my heart and mouth do I confess, praise, and bless thee, O God the
father unbegotten, and thee O God the Son only begotten, also thee O holy
ghost and comforter, to thee be glory in the world of worlds.

Amen.
An acknowledging of almightis God in his Majesty.
O Most high Trinity, one only power and undefiled majesty, our God, God
almighty, I the abject, and hinmost of all thy servants confess and
acknowledge thee, and being the least member of the church, I worship thee with
a due sacrifice of praise, as much as I am able, and according to that which
thou have vouchsafed to endue me withal. And for as much as I am destitute of
outward gifts to offer unto thee: Those vows of praise which I have of the
gift of thy mercy, behold willingly and gladly I offer them to thee, which
be an unfeigned faith, and a pure conscience. I believe therefore with all my
heart (O king of heaven, and Lord of the earth) and with my mouth do I confess
thee the Father, the Son, and the holy ghost, to be three persons, and one in
substance, the true and very God almighty, of one simple, incorporall, and
invincible nature, incomprehensible, and of such a nature, as is not in a
place, as other natures be and that thou have nothing superior or above thy
self, or lower, or any thing bigger the^ thy self. But in all manner of means
perfect without all spot of deformity, and that thou art great without
quantity, good without quality, everlasting without time, life without death,
strong without infirmity or weakness, true without lying, present in every place
without any situation, or being placed in any place, to be alleuery where
without place, fulfilling all things with out stretching forth thy hand: going
every where without any contradiction or gainesaying, passing over all things
with out moving: abiding within all things, without any kind of proportion:
making all things having need of nothing: governing all things, without
labor: giving all things their beginning, having no beginning thy self:
making all things mutable and variable, thy self being without all kind of
mutabilitie: in greatness without measure: in power, almighty: in goodness, the
chief and best: in wisdom, inestimable: in counsels, ententes, and purposes,
terrible, and fearful: in judgments, most upright and just: in cogitations
and thoughts most secret: in words true: in works holy: in mercies abundant
and plentiful: toward offenders most patient: toward the penitent, and those
that be sorye for their sins, most gentle and loving: always the same
everlasting, and continually continuing immortal, and incommutable, impossible
to be changed or altered: whom neither the amplitude or largenes of places
does make bigger, nor the shortness, or litlenesse of places lesser, nor any
places or corners ca^ co^tem or pres together: neither does thy will or intent
vary, or alter: nor familiarity or acquaintance corrupt thee: nor sorrowful
things, trouble or amaze the: nor glad things make thee pleasant or frolike
(as a man would say:) from thee ca^ forgetfulness take norbing, nor mindefulnes
or remembrance give any thing: neither are things passed unto us, passed also
unto thee: nor things which to us are come, come toward thee: for neither
beginning does give any beginning to thee, nor time any increase, nor yet
chance gives thee any end: but before all worlds, and in worlds, and by
worlds, into everlasting, thou do live, and thou have continual praise, and
perpetual glory, most high power, and singular honor, everlasting kingdom,
and rule, and imperie without end, through the infinite, and vnweery, and
immortal world of worlds.

After what sort God the father vouchsafed to help mankind, and of the
incarnation of the word which is Christ, and of the giving of thanks.
HItherto (O almighty God, the beholder and sercher of mine heart) have I
acknowledged the almightifulnes of thy majesty, and the majesty of thine
almightifulnes. But now like as with heart I believe (which is counted righteousness
unto me:) so with mouth do I coufes before thee (which is to my salvation,)
after what sort, and manner thou did vouchsafe in the end of the world,
to succor and aid mankind. Thou indeed only (O God the father) art not ready
at any time, or in any place to be sent. But of thy Son the Apostle writes:
when that the time was fulfilled, God sent his Son. In that he says, he
sent, he does sufficiently declare, that he being sent, came into this world,
when as he being borne a very, and perfect man of blessed Mary a pure virgin)
did appear, and show himself in the flesh. But what is that, which he that is
the chief of the evangelists does say? He was in the world, and the world
was made by him. Thither truly was he sent by his humanity, where he always is,
and always has been by his divinity. The which sending or embassage, I believe
with all my heart, and confess with my mouth, to be the consent and work of all the whole Trinity. Oh holy and good Father, how did thou love us? How great
favor did thou bear toward us, most merciful creator? which have not
spared thine own son, but for us wretched sinners have delivered him. He was
obediente unto thee until death, yea, death upon a cross, taking the
obligation, or handwriting of our sins, which was his flesh, and fastening it
unto the cross, he crucified sin, and led death. He alone, is amongst the dead
fre from death, having power to lay down his soul for us, and to take it
again for us. Therefore was he both a vanquisher, and a sacrifice, and
therefore was he an ouercommer, because he was a sacrifice for us. He was both
the priest and sacrifice unto thee: and therefore was he a Priest, because he
was a sacrifice. Notwtout a cause have I great hope in him, for as much as thou will make whole all my diseases, for his sake, that sits on thy right hand,
and does continually make intercession for us, for my diseases (O Lord) are
great and many: oh, they are many in number, and great: for the prince of this
world (as I very well know, and confess) has many things in me. But I
beseech thee deliver me through our redemer which sits on thy right hand, in
whom the said prince of this world could find none evil, that was his, of
his own commiting. By him do thou justify me, whom his self did not sin,
neither was there any deceit, or guile found in his mouth. By him which is our
head, in whom there is not one spot of evil, deliver me which am one of his
members, though I be but a little member, and feeble, and weak. Deliver me (I
beseech thee) from my sins, offenses, faults, and ignorances. Fulfill me
with thy holy virtues, and make me to shine in good manners, make me (I beseech
thee) for thy holy names sake, to continue in holy works until the end,
according to thy will, and pleasure.

Of the trust which a soul ought to have in our Lord Jesu, and in his passion.
I Might despair verily because of my manifold sins and negligences without
number, if it were not that thy word O God was made flesh, and dwelt amongst
us. But I can not now despair, because that seeing (when we were enemies) we
were reconciled by the death of thy son: how much more are we (now
reconciled) saved by him, for all the hope, and the certitude, and surenes of
all my trust, is in his precious blood, which was shed for us, and for our
salvation. In him do I take hartening, and trusting in him I have a desire to
com unto the. not having mine own righteousness, but that which I have
through thy son our Lord Jesu Christ: for the which (O most merciful God,
and most gentle lover of mankind) we give thee thanks, which through Jesus
Christ thy son, our Lord, when we were not, did mightily make us, and when
we were lost through our sins, most marueilously did deliver, and recover
us again. To thy goodness (I say) do I give thanks, and manifold praises do I
show forth unto thee, with all my heart, and mind, which through the unspeakable
love, wherewith thou have vouchsafed of thy maruuylous goodness to love us
wretches, and unworthy to be loved) did send that same thiue only
begotten son from thy bosom, unto our common weal, to save us sinners which
were at that time, the children of perdition and damnation. I render unto thee
thanks for his holy incarnation and nativity, and for his blessed mother, upon
whom he did vouchsafe to take flesh for us, and for our salvation: to the
intent, that like as he is very God of God, so he might be very man of man. I
give thee thanks for his passion and cross, for his death, and resurrection,
for his ascension into heaven, and his seat of his majesty on thy right hand.
For he the forty day after his resurrection, asceuding up above all the heavens
(his disciples seeing it) and sitting on thy right hand, did pour out his holy
spirit abundantly according to his promise upon them whom he had chosen to be
his children. I give thee thanckes for that most sacred sheding forth of his
precious blood, wherewith we are redeemed, and also for the most holy and
quickening sacrifice of his body, and blood, which daily in thy church we
feed of, and drink of, wherewith we are washed, and sanctified, and are made
partakers of the only high divinity. I give thee thanks for thy marvelous,
and unspeakable charity and love, wherewith thou did love us unworthy
persons, and did save us, by thine only and beloved Son: for so thou did^^
love the world, that thou gave thine only begotten son, to the intent that
none which believed in him should perish, but have everlasting life. This thing
truly is everlasting life, to know thee, and also Jesus Christ, whom thou
sentest to be very God, by an upright faith, and works worthy for faith.

Of the exceeding love of the everlasting Father toward mankind,
OH unmeasurable pity and fatherly love, oh inestimable charity, that thou
should deliver thy son to suffer death, to the intent thou might redeem
and ransom a servant: God was made man, to the intent yt man, being lost
might be plucked out of yt power of devils. How gentle and kind a lover of man
was thy son our God, who thought it not enough to humble himself to be made
man, of the virgiue Mary: but also took upon him the pains of the cross, in
shedding his blood for us, and for our salvation. He came a pitiful God, he
came for his pity, and goodnesses sake, he came to search, and to save that
which was lost. He sought the straye sheep, he sought and found, and he being
a good lord and truly a very good, and plentiful shepherd, brought him home
upon his shoulders unto the foldes of the flock. Oh charity, oh pity, who
heard any such things? who is not astonished to consider the bowels of so great
mercy? who would not marued? who would not honor, and worship thee for thy
great charity wherewith thou louedst us? Thou did send thy son into the
similitude of flesh, subject to sin, that we might condemn sin for sin,
that we might be made thy righteousness in him. For he was the very lamb
without sport, which took away the sins of the world, which destroyed
our death, by dying himself. But what may we render unto thee (our God) for so
great benefits of thy mercy? what praises, or what thanks? Uerely if we
should have that same knowledge and power, that blessed angels have, yet
should we not be able to requi^^ thy so great pity and goodness, with any thing
of valor. No if all our members were turned into tongues, to repay unto thee
due praises: yet were not our fle^dernes sufficient. There is one thing that
exceeds all knowledge, even thine inestimable charity which thou did
show unto us unworthy persons, for thy goodness, and pities sake. Thy Son (our
God) did take upon him to be the seed of Abraham, not of Angels, yea, and he
was made like unto us in all things, sin only excepted. He therefore taking
man's nature not Angels, and glorifying it with the stole of holy resurrection,
and immortality, carried it above the heavens, and above all the melodious
companies of angels, above Cherubin and Seraphin, placing it upon thy right
hand. This humane nature do Angels praise: all the powers of heaven do tremble
to see a man to be God over them This truly is all my hope, all my trust. And
this same human nature is in Jesu Christ our Lord, who is the portion of
every one of us, the flesh and blood. Therefore whereas my portion reigns,
there do I believe to reign: whereas my flesh is glorified, there do I believe to
be glorified: where my blood rules, there do I perceive me to bear rule:
although I be a sinner, ye^ do^ I not inistrust, nor dispeire of the communion
and partaking of favor. Although my sins do hinder me, and in a manner
forbid me, nevertheless my substance requires it. And albeit that mine offenses
do exclude me, yet the communion of our nature does not expel me: for God is
not so ungentle, as to forget man, and not to remember that thing which himself
bears, and yt which for my sake he took upon him, and that which for my sake
he requires. But truly the Lord our God is lowly and meek and wonderful
gentle, and loves his flesh, his members, and his bowels. In the very same God
our Lord Jesus Christ, who is most gentle, loving, and merciful; in whom we
are risen from death, that is to say, from the state of pernition, and eternal
damnation, and even now by him we asccude into the heavens, and now sit in the
heavens (in him I say) our flesh loves us. For we have in him, and by him a
prerogative, and as it were a prefermence of our blood: for we are his members,
and his flesh: and he is our head, of the which depends the whole body (as it
is written) a bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh, and they shall be two in
one flesh, and no man at any time hates his own flesh, but rather
cherishes, and loves it. This is a great mystery, I speak in Christ, and in
the church (says the Apostle.)

Of the double nature of Christ, which has mercy upon us* and makes
intercession for us.
WHerefore with my lips and heart, and with all the might that I may, I render
thanks unto thine infinite mercy (O Lord our God) for all thy mercy, wherewith
marueilously thou have vouchsafed to help, and succor us that were lost by
the same thy son our savior and recouerer, which dyed for our sins, and
rose again for our justification and living, without end sits on thy right
hand, and entreats for us, and together with the takes pity and mercy upon
us, because he is God through thee (O father) ever lasting, and of one substance
with thee in all things: whereby always he may save us, but forasmuch as he is
man, in which thing he is less, and inferior unto thee, all power both in
heaven, and in earth, was given unto him, that in ye name of Jesu, every knee
should bow, both of celestial, and earthlye creatures, and also of infernal,
that all tongues may confess that our Lord Jesus Christ is in thy glory (O
Father almighty.) He verily was constituted of thee, and ordained to be a
judge of the quick, and dead, for thou truly iudgest no man, but have given
all thy judgment to thy Son, in whose breast al treasures of wisdom and
knowledge ar hid. He truly is both a witness, and a Judge, a Judge, and a
witness, whom no sinful conscience can fly or avoid: for all things be
they never so secret, are open, and even naked, and uncovered unto him. He
verily which was unrighteously judged himself, shall judge the whole world in
equity, and the people in righteousness, and according to justice. Therefore do
I bless thy name everlasting, and glorify the same with all my heart (O
almighty and merciful Lord) for yt unspeakable and marvelous conjunction of
Godhead, and manhood together in the unity of a person, and not after this
sort, that y^ one should be God, and the other man: but one and the same was
both God and man, man and God. Nevertheless, although by thy marvelous will,
the word was made flesh yet neither of both the natures was chainged into
others substance. In the mystery of the Trinity, there is not a fourth person
added: for y^ substance of the word of God, and of man, was united, and knitte
together, but not confused and mixed, that that thing which was taken of us,
should be turned into God, and that which never had been before that time,
that his flesh and manhood, should be the same that had been ever without any
beginning, that is, his Godhead. Oh marvelous mystery. Oh unspeakable
fellowship. Oh marvelous meeknes of thy heavenly mercifulnes, which is ever
worthy marueiling, and ever to be loved we were but vile servants, and
behold, we are made the sons of God: yea, and heirs of God together with
Christ. From whence came this goodness? and who brought us unto this state? But
I require thee (O most merciful father) by thine inestimable pity, goodness,
and charity, to make us worthy of these many and great promises of the same,
thy son our Lord Jesu Christ. Send forth thy strength (O God) and establish
the thing, that thou have wrought in us. Make perfect that, which thou have
begun, that we may be able to come unto the fullness and perfectnes of thy
pity. Make us through y^ holy ghost, to understand, and through thy Son to
deserve, and with due honor always to worship this great mystery of thy pitic,
which is manifest in our flesh: justified in the spirit: did appear unto
Angels: was preached unto nations: was believed to be in the world, was taken
up into heaven.

Amen.
Of the thanks which man ought to give unto God for the benefit of his
redemption.
Look how much (O Lord our God) we are in debt unto thee, even for so great a
price were we redeemed, with such a great gift were we saved, and with so great
a benefit helped. How much ought we wretehes to love, dread, bles, praise
honor, and glorify thee which have so loved us, after such fashion saved us,
after such a sort sanctified us, to set us on hie. To thee truly do we owe and
are bound, as much as we are able, even our life, and all our study and
endeavor. But who has any thing yt is not thine? But do thou (O Lord our God)
from whom al goodness proceeds, even for thy holy names sake, give us of thy
goodness, that we may serve thee of thine own goods, and gifts, and that we
may please thee in truth, and repay unto thee daily due praises for so great
benifites of thy mercy. For by none other means ra^ we serve the, but by
thine own gifts, that thou have lent us, while we be in this world. For every
good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the
father of light, with whom there is none alteration, or variablenes, neither yet
is he chainged unto darcknes. O Lord our God, and a pitiful God. a good God,
and almighty God, an unspeakable God, and incompre^sible, of such a nature,
that can not be contained as in a place. O God which art the beginner of all
things, and the father of our Lord Jesu Christ, which did send the same
thy beloved son our Lord, forth of thy bosom, to our common profit, to
take upon him our life to the intent he might give us his life, and that he
might be perfect, and very God of thee his father and very perfect man of his
mother, a whole, and a perfect God, and a whole and perfect man, and yet but
only Christ, both everlasting, and enduring but for a space, both immortal and
mortal, both a creator and a creature, strong and weak, an ouercommer, and
one ouercommed, a nurse, and one that was nursed him self, a shepherd, and a
sheep, dead for a time, and living with the everlasting, promising to the^
that loved him, the freedom of life: who said to his disciples, what thing
soever ye ask the Father in my name, he will give it unto you. For that hie
priests sake, which was also a Bishop indeed, and a good shephearde, that
offered himself in a sacrifice to thee, putting his life in ieoperdie for his
flock: for his sake (I say) I beseech thee, which sits on thy right hand, and
makes intercession for us, being our redeemer, and our advocate, that thou
would grant unto me, that together with thy Son, and the holy Ghost, I may
in all things bless, and glorify thee, with much contrition of heart, and a
fountain of tears, with much reverence and fear: For the gift of them that
be all of one substance, is all one. But because a body that is corrupted does
aggranate, and burden the soul: stir up, and awake (I beseech thee) my
sluggishnes with thy pricks and prouokinges, and make me boldly to persevere,
and continue in thy co^manndements and laws day and night. Grant me that my
heart may wax warm within me, and that many meditation, and prayer I may be
fervent. And for as much as thy only son said: No man can come to me,
except my Father that sent me, shall draw him: and again, No man comes to
the Father but by me. I ^^quire, and humbly beseech thee, draw me always unto
him, that he at the length may bring me to thee: thither (I mean) whereas he
is sitting on thy right hand, whereas is everlasting life, and continual
blessedness, whereas is perfect love, without all kind of fear: whereas is one day
everlasting and one spirit of al men: whereas is most sure security and
safety, sure quiet^es, and quiet plesantnes, pleasant felicity and happiness,
happy eternity, continual, and eternal seeing, and praising of thee without
end, whereas thou with him, and he with thee, in the communion and unity of the
holy Ghost everlastingly, and continuallye live and raignest throughout all
worlds of worlds.

Amen.
A devout prayer unto Christ
O Christ and God which art my hope, and the true and gentle lover of mankind,
the light, the way, the life, the health, the honor, and worship of them that
be thine, I beseech thee call to thy remembrance all things that thou
willingly did suffer for the^, both bands cross, wounds, death, and
sepulcher: which after three days, death being ouercommed, did rise, wast
seen of thy disciples, reforming their hearts, and establishing them that were
almost declining from thee: the forty day after did ascend up to heaven,
which live euerlastinly now, and raignest throughout worlds. Thou art my God
both loving and true, my father, and my God, both holy and pitiful, my mighty
king, my good shepherd, mine only master, my best helper, one whom I am
most bound to love, my living bread, mine everlasting priest, my guide unto my
coutry, my true light, my holy sweetness, my right, and straight way, mine
excellent wisdom, my sure and unfeigned simplicity, my peaceable concord, my
safe garrison, my good portion, mine ever lasting health, my great mercy, my
strongest patience, mine unspotted sacrifice, my holy redemption, my sure and
steadfast hope, my perfect charity, my very and true resurrection, mine
everlasting life, my joy, and most blessed vision, and continual without end: I
humbly beseech thee, I desire and pray thee, yt I may walk by thee, that I may
come to thee, that I may rest in thee, which art the way, the truth, and the
life, without the which no man ca^ come unto the Father. Thee do I desire and
covet (O good Lord) which art the brightness of thy Fathers glory, which
sit above the angel called Cherubin, and do behold the low and deep
places, which art the true light, the light that lighteneth all things, ye
light that never falls, nor goes out, which the angels have desire to
behold. Lo, my heart is before thee in thy sight, put away the darcknes from
it, that it may fully be replenished with the clearnes of thy love. Give unto
me Lord thy self, behold I do love thee, and if that be but a thing of small
valor, make me to love thee more strongly, and earnestly. I can not measure to
know how much I lack of thy love, neither can I tell, how much should be
sufficient for me, that my life may fulfill, his course in thy love, and not
turn back until it be hid in the secrets of thy countenance. Nevertheless,
this I know, that it were evil with me, if it were not for thee (O Lord) and
that not only with the outward things that belong unto me: but also with the
inward things. For all my riches (God except) is but mere poverty: but thou
only art a treasure and a parcel of riches, that can neither be chainged
into better nor worse. Thou art he to whom it is not one thing to live, and an
other thing to live happily, because thou are thy blessedues, thy happiness and
thou art all one. But I which am thy creature to whom it is not one thing to
live, and an other thing to live blessedly and happily: all, both in that I
live, and in that I live happily, I ought not to attribute nor refer it, to
be received of any body, but of thy favor: and therefore have we need of the,
but not you of us, because if were not at al, yet should thou lack nothing of
thy goodness. Therefore (O Lord) it is necessary for us to stick and clean
unto thee, that by thy continual help we may be able to live holily,
virtuously, and as we ought to live: for with the weight of our frailuesse, we
are drawn even downward, but by thy gift we are stirred and carried upward: we
serue^tly desire to ascend, we make certain ascensio^s in our hearts lifting
the^ upward, and sing the song of stars, with the fire of thy love (I say)
are we kindled, and moved to go with thee. Whether go we now upward, unto
the peace of Jerusalem? because I was glad, and did reioyee in those things
which were spoken unto me: we will go into the house of our Lord, there has he
placed us: we will have good thinthat we may will or desire nothing else, but to
tarry, and remain there for ever. But for as much as whilst we be clad with
this body, were do (as it were go astray, and are straingers unto thee: we have
not here an abiding place for ever, but we seek for one yt is to come. Our
abiding place is in heaven: therefore thy favor and grace being my guide, I
enter into the chamber of my heart, and sing unto thee songs of love my king
and my God, mourning with merueilous sighinges in this place of my
peregrination, whereas thy justices are made my songs, and when. I remember
Jeru salem, I extend and strerch forth toward it the senses of my heart:
Jerusalem, I say, which is my country, Jerusalem, which is my mother, and
toward thee which art a king over her, her light, her father, her defender,
her patron, her governor, her keeper, her chaste and strong delight, her only and
whole pleasure, and all her goodness come of thee, because thou art the chief
good, and the true good, and I will never turn back, until you bring me home
from this pilgrimage (in which I am deformedly scattred abroad) unto the peace
of my dearly beloved mother, whereas be the first fruits of my spirit; and
until thou (O God) which art my mercy, fasion me, and confirm me for ever.

A prayer declaring with how great miseries this (...) is replenished.
I Am wonderful weary (O Lord) of this life; and of this careful, and painful
pilgrimage. This life is a wretched life, a life that will sonefade away, an
uncertain life, a painful life, an unclean life, a life that worthily may be
called the maistres of all euilles, the queen of pride, full of miseries and
errors, which is not worcester thy to be called a life, but rather a death, in the
which every hour, we dye by diverse defectes, and failinges of nature by
mutabilities, alterations and diverse kinds of deaths How can we therefore call
this that we live in this world, a life which is puf fed up, and swollen often
with humors, made lean and feeble with for rows, dried with angers, and whot
hasty furies of the mind, the air fills it full of diseases, meats do
infect it, fasting does extenuate, and make it lean, pastimes make it to
dissolute and rechles, pensiuenes does shorten and lessen it, security and too
much case makes it dull and nothing lusty, riches sets it a flote, and
puffs it up into pride, poverty dismayeth and discourageth it, youth
extolleth it, age lameth it, infirmity breaks it, for row oppresses it.
And immediately after these evils, as though it were by succession, comes
death and makes an end of all the joys of this miserable life, after such a
sort, that a man would not think (when he leaves this life) to have lived at
all. This living death, and dying life, although it be sprinkled and mixte
with these, and other sorrows and miseries, yet (oh good Lord) how many men
do it catch, and entangle with her entising snares? and how ma ny does she
deceive with her deceitful, and false promises? and al for that she of her
self is so false and bitter that her blind lovers can not be kept long
secret, nor close unknown, yet does she daily cause an infinite number of
fools to drink of the golden cup, which she bears in her hand: yea, and
makes them utterly drunken with the love of her. Happy are they, but very few
of them is there that refuse her acquaintance and familiarity, or yt despise
to use her joys, or that neglect her friendship, and fellowship, least when
their deceiuer perishes, that they should perish also.

Of the blessedness of that life, which God has prepared for them that love him.
BUt thou heavenly life thou art she whom God has ordained, and prepared for
them that love him, thou art the heavenly life, the blessed life, the sure life,
the quiet life, the fair life, the clean life the chaste life, the holy life,
the life that know no death, know no sadness or pensiuenes, a life without
spot, without do lour, without vexation, without corruption, without trouble,
without variety or mutabilitie, a life most full of pleasure, and dignity,
whereas is none adversary, to strive against a man, no inticements of sins,
whereas is perfect love, without all manner of fear, whereas is day continually,
and one spirit of all men: whereas God is seen face to face, and the mind is
fed with this meat of life without end. I have a very good mind and desire to
mark and give heed to thy clearness, with thy goods the desire and appetite of
my heart is delighted. Look how much I am able to consider with my self in
musing, and thinking of thy commodities: even so much am I ravished, and rapte
with thy love, with the ardent desire of thee, and the sweet and comfortable
remembrance of thee, am I wonderfully delited. I have a pleasure therefore
surely, to lift up the eyes of my heart unto thee, to erecte the state of my
mind, and conform or fashion the affects of my mind unto thee. It pleases me
to talk of thee, to hear of thee, to write of thee, to confer and meditate
of thee, to read every day of thy blessedness and glory, and to muse oftentimes
in my mind of yt things I have read concerning thee, that at the least by such
means I being under the sweet refresshing and comforting of thy lively air,
may pass from the vexatio^s, ieoperdies, labors, and travels of this mortal
life that will soon perish, and that in passing I may lay my weary head in thy
bosom to sleep, or to rest a little. For this cause do I enter into the
pleasant meadow of ye holy scriptures, and in plowing. I pluck the goodliest
green herbs of sentences, and in reading I do eat them, and in frequenting I
do meditate, and as it were, cut them, and in gathering them together, at the
last I last them up in my memory, yt by such means when I have tasted of thy
sweetness, I may somewhat less feel the bitterness of this most wretched life. O
thou most happy life, oh kingdom which art blessed in deed, which lackest
death, which art without end, no time does successively pass at any time to
thee, whereas continual day without night knows no time, whereas that
captain and conqueror is accompanied with those quires of Angels, singing of
himnes, and songs, they sing unto God without ceasing, the ballet of ballets
of Sion. Oh most noble head which art compassed about with a perpetual crown,
oh that pardon, and forgeuenes of my sins were granted unto me, and then
immediately this burden of my flesh laid away, that I might enter into thy
joy, to have true rest, and that I might get with in the goodly and beutifull
walls of thy city to receive a crown of life at the hand of our lord, that I
might be amongst those most holy quires, yt I might stand with the most
blessed spirits of the creator of glory, that I might see presently the
countenance of Christ, that I might behold always yt most hie and unspeakable
light, incomprehensible, which can not be contained as in a place. And so I
should not only be out of al fear of death: but also I might rejoice always
at the gift of the everlasting incorruption.

Amen.
Here do we complain that we be not moved, nor pricked in our conte^plation
and prayer, like as the Angels be, which tremble at the sight of God.
PArdon me O Lord, pardon me, mercifully forgive me, and have mercy upon me,
spare mine ignorance and my great imperfectness, do not reprove me as a rash
fellow, because I dare be be so bold which am but thy servant, but would to
God I were either a good servant, or none un profitable, nor evil servant. And
therefore am I an evil man, because I praise, bless, and worship thee, which
art our God almighty, terrible, and very much to be feared. I worship thee, I
say, with out contritio^ of heart, and without a well of tears. For if so be
that the Angels when they worship, and praise thee, do tremble, being fulfilled
with merueilous gladness: I which am a sinner, whilst I stand before thee,
saying praises, and offering sacrifice, why am I not afraid in my heart? why am I
not pale in my countenance? why do not my lips quake and tremble? why is not
all my body afraid? and why do I not mourn and bewail before thee after such
a sort, that tears might spring out of mine eyes? I would feign, but I am not
able, because I can not do that which I desire to do. This makes me truly
wonderfully to marueill that I am no more moved when I see with the eyes of my
faith, thee which art so fearful. But who can do any thing without the help of
thy grace, except thou make our stony hearts to relent, we of our selves are
not able to mollify them, but all our health depends upon thy great mercy. O
wretch that I am, how is my soul made without any feeling or perseverance?
that it is not afraid with ouermuche fear, whilst it stands before God, and
sings to him his own praises? Alas how is my heart so hardened, that mine
eyes do not gush out great floods of tears without ceasing when I which am but
a servant or bondsman do common and talk in my Lord, and masters presence?
Yea, a man with God, a creature with a creator. I that am made of the shine of
the earth do speak with him yt made all things of nothing? Put me before thee
(O Lord) and whatsoever I perceive of my self in ye secrets of my heart, I do
not keep it close from thy brotherly ears. Thou art rich in mercy, and liberal
in rewards, give me of thy goods that with them I may serve thee. For with
nothing else can we serve or please thee, but with thine own gifts which thou
have vouchsafed to bestow upon us. Fasten I beseech thee thy fear in my flesh:
let my heart rejoice, and be glad to fear thy name. Would God my sinful
soul feared thee so much, as that holy man which said: I always feared God,
as though it were great swelling floudes should come and tumble upon me. O God
ye geuer of all good things give me amongst thy praises a well of teres with the
pureness of heart, and reioyeing of mind, that I loving thee perfitly and
worthily praising thee, may feel, taste, and savor, in the palace of my
heart, how sweet, and pleasant thou art O lord, as it is written: Do ye taste and
see how sweet, and delectable the Lord is. Blessed is the man that puts his
trust in him. Blessed is yt people which knows glad and joyful praising.
Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways,
which going through ye vale of misery, use it for a well. Blessed are the
clean in heart, because they shall see God. Blessed ar they that dwell in the
house of the Lord, they shall praise thee, world without end.

A very devout prayer for the giving of thanks.
O Lord Christ, which art the word of the Father, which came into this
world to save sinners. I beseech thee by the most loving bowels of thy mercy,
to amend and repair my life, make better my deeds, take thou the ordering of
my manners, take from me that which noyeth, and hurts me, and displeases
thee: and give me that which thou know will please thee, and profit me. who
can make clean y^ which is conceived of an unclean seed, but thou alone?
Thou art the God almighty, of infinite piety, which do justify, and make
righteous even those that were wicked men, and raysest again to life them that
were dead in sin, thou chaingest sinners, and they are no sinners. Take away
therefore from me whatsoever is in me that pleases not thee: for thine eyes do
see much imperfectness in me. Lay thy hand I beseech thee of thy pity on me, and
whatsoever offends the eyes of thy pity, remove it from me. In thy sight is
both my health and my disease: the one I beseech thee to preserve, the other to
cure: do thou heal me O Lord, and I shall be healed: do thou make me safe, and
I shall be saved: Thou I mean which do make whole them that be disesed, and
do preserve them that be cured, which only with a beck do restore and
repair things that be decayed, and fallen into ruin. For if thou will
vouchsafe to sow any good seed in the field of my heart, of necessity thou
must pluck up first with the hand of thy pity, the thorns of vices which
be in it. Put in my heart I beseech thee, so great plenty of delectation in thee,
yt I may desire no earthly or carnal thing, nor yet think upon them, but yt I
may love thee alone: that I may have thee only in my heart, and in my mouth.
Write with thy finger in my breast, the delectable remembrance of thy sweet
name, so that it may be blotted out with no forgetfulness. Write thy will in the
tables of mine heart, and also thy iustifications, that I may always and in
every place have thee (o Lord) before mine eyes in my sight. Inflame my mind
with that fire, which thou did send into the earth, and willedst it to be
kindled, that I might offer unto thee daily with tears, a sacrifice of a
troubled spirit, and a repentant heart. O sweet Christ, O good Jesu, eue^
according unto my desire, and even as I heartily require thee with my whole
mind, give me thy holy and chaste love, which may replenish and keep me, and
also fully posse^sse me. Give me an evident sign and token of thy love, and a
flowing well of tears, which will continually run, that those tears (may
somewhat testify thy love) in me, that they may show forth, that they may
declare how much my soul loves thee, whilst for yt great delectation it has
in the sweetness of thy love, it may not refrain from tears. I call to my
remembrance sometimes (good Lord) that virtuous woman Anne which came to the
tabernacle to pray that thou would send her a son: of whom the scripture
makes me^that her countenance after her tears and prayers) was not again
chainged or altered. But when I think upon so great virtue, constante, and
stedfastnes: I am vexed with sorrow, and confounded with shame, because I a
wretch do perceive my self to be fallen overmuch from thee. For if a woman did
weep after such a sort, and continued so in weping, which did search for
nothing else but a son: how ought my soul to mourn and to persist and abide
in weping, that seeks and loves God, and has a desire to come unto him? how
ought such a soul to mourn and weep which seeks God day and night, which
will love nothing but Christ? My tears now truly should be made unto me,
meat day and night. Look upon me therefore, O Lord, and take pity on me
because the dolours and sorrows of my heart are many in number. Give me thy
heavenly consolation and do not despise nor cast away a sinful soul, for the
which thou did die. Give me inward tears, I beseech thee from the bottom
of mine heart, which may wash away the spots of my sins. Replenish my
soul always with heavenly delectation and heavenly mirth, that I may obtain
some little portion or part in thy kingdom, although not amongst the perfect
men, whose steps I can not follow, yet at the least wise amongst the inferior
sort. The marvelous devotion of another woman comes now unto my mind, which
with a virtuous love did seek thee lying in ye sepulcher, which when thy
disciples went away, and departed from thee, did remain with thee her self,
which sat there sad and sorowfully weeping, long and very much, and when she
did arise, she serched with a diligent eye, and with many tears the corners of
the sepulcher, which was left emptye, if she might espy thee out in any
place, whom she with a fervent desire sought: yea, and moreover she went
again, and again to the sepulcher, but that was not enoughe unto her, neither
did it satisfy her desire: for the grace of a good work is to persevere and
continue in the same: and because she did love more then other and that in
loving she wept, and in weeping she searched, and in seaching she continued,
therefore was it thy pleasure that she should first find thee, see thee, and
talk with thee, before all other: and not only this, but also she was a
^^dinges bearer of thy glorious resurection unto thy disciples, when thou
did command her, and bid her, go, and tell my brethren that they go
unto Galilie, there they shall see me. etc. Seeing therefore that a woman did
weep, after such a sort, and continued in weping, which did seek him yt was
alive among the dead: which touched thee with the hand other faith: how ought a
soul to mourn, and to continue in mourning, which believes in thee, and with
his mouth does acknow ledge thee to be his redemer, that sit now in heaven,
and raignest every where? how much therefore ought such a soul to mourn and
weep, which loves thee with all his heart, and with his whole desire does
covet to see thee? Oh only refuge, the only hope of wretches, unto whom no
man needs at any time to pray without hope of mercy, grant unto me this
grace for thy sake, and for thy holy names sake, that as often as I think upon
thee, as often as I speak of thee, write of thee, read of thee confer of thee:
as often as ever I remember thee, stand before thee, offer up praises, prayers,
and sacrifice unto thee, so often I may weep abundantly with tears in thy
sight, so that my tears may be to me in stead of bread, day and night. Thou
truly king of glory, and master of all virtue, have taught us with thy word
and with thine ensample to mourn and weep, whereas thou say: Blessed be
they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Thou did weep for thy friend
that was dead, and did let tears fall down plenteously for the city which
should perish. I beseech thee (O good Jesu) by those most precious tears, and
by all thy inercies and pities, wherewith thou did vouchsafe marueilouslie
to help and succor us that were lost: gene me the grace to weep, and to be
earnestly repentant for my sins, which grace my soul desires, and coueteth
very mutch, and except it come of thy gift, I can not have it, but by the holy
ghost, which does molifie the hard hearts of sinners, and provoke them to
weeping. Give me the grace of tears, like as thou gave to our forefathers,
whose examples we ought to follow, that I may bewail my self in all my life,
like as they did bewail themselves day and night: give me the dew of thy grace
from abone, and also a dew of tears beneath, yt my tears may be unto me in
stead of bread day and night, and that I may be made in thy sight (O Lord my
God) by the fire of thy provocation, a far and acceptable sacrifice. Make me to
be mortified and killed upon the altar of mine heart, and that I may be
received of thee as a fat and a sweet smelling sacrifice. Give unto me (O good
Lord) a plentiful flowing and clear well of tears, in yt which I may wash
continually this foul and spotted sacrifice: for although I have offered up my
self wholly unto thee, by the help of thy grace. Yet nevertheless, in many
things I offend thee daily, because of my great fragilitie and weakness. Give
me therefore the grace of tears (O blessed God) and most especially through
the great sweetness of thy love, and the remembrance of thy great mercies,
prepare this table for thy servant in thy sight, and give me power that as often
as I list, I may be satisfied of it. Grant unto me for thy goodness and pity,
yt this thy cup replenished and filled full, may satisfy my thirst, that my
spirit may covet the, and that my mind may burn in thy love, forgetting all
vanity and misery. Hear (my God) hear, thou that art the sturrer up and
quickner of my dull cares hear what I desire and ask: and give me grace to
ask that which thou hear. O pitiful Lord which art woute to be easily
entreated, be not hard to be entreated of me, because of my sins, but for
thy goodness receive the prayers of thy servant, and grant me the effect of my
petition and desire.

In this prayer man's mind is very much and plenteously stirred and moved, if
it be said in quietness.
O Lord Jesu, O gentle and loving Jesu, O good Jesu which did vouchsafe to
dye for our sins, and did ryseagayne for our justification, I beseech thee
by thy glorious resurrection, to raise me up out of the sepulcher of vices and
all my sins, and give me daily part in thy first resurrection, to the intent
I may receive some part in the latter resurrection. O most mighty king which
did ascend into heaven, with ye triumph of thy glory, and sit on the
right hand of thy father, draw me upward toward thee, that I may run after
thee in the sweet savor of thine anointmentes. Let me run and not faint when
thou drawest me and leadest me running: draw the mouth of the soul that
thirsts after thee, unto the high floudes and streams of thine eternal
abundance and society, ye draw me wholly unto thy self, which art the living
well, to the intent I may according to my capacity, drink of that whereupon I
do live. O my God, my life thou did say with thy holy, and blessed mouth. If
any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink. O well of life, grant unto my
thirsty soul always to drink of thee, that according to thy holy and true
promise, waters of life may flow out of my belly. O well of life replenishe and
fill my mind full of ye river of thy pleasure. Make my heart to be drunken, as
it were in thy love, that after the manner of them yt be drunken with wine,
which forget all things save that cup, so I may forget all vain and earthly
things, and continually have nothing else in my cemembraunce, but thee only,
according as it is written: I remembered God, and was delighted. Give me the
holy ghost, whom those waters did signify, which thou did promise to give
to them that thyrsted after thee. Grant (I beseech thee) that I may assay to
go with my whole desire, and all my study toward that place, unto the which we
believe thou did ascend the forty day after thy resurrection, that in this
present misery, I may be only in body: but in thought and desire always
with thee, that my heart may be there, whereas you art which art my treasure
worthy to be coueted, and much to be loved, wherewith no treasure is worthy to
be compared. In this great flood of this life, whereas we are tossed with
storms on every side, there is no sted fast standing, or place hie enough
above yt waters, no not for the foot of a dove to rest upon, in this (I say)
there is no safe or quiet peace, no where any sure rest, every where battle
and strife, every where enemies and fightings without doors and fear at home
within doors. And forasmuch as the one part of us is heavenly, and the other
earthly: our body which is corrupted, does laden and is burdenous unto ye
soul: therefore my mind which is my fellow, and friend, being weery with
wandering forth of the way, is sick, and lies all to torn, and rent, of those
things which it has passed by. It hungreth and thirsts greatly after
vanities, and I have nothing to set before it, because I am pore and a beggar.
Thou (O Lord my God) art rich in all good things, and the most plenteous geuer
of the daiuties of heavenly society, give meat unto the weery: not such as it
lusts after, but such as is conueient for it. Gather together the dispersed,
renew and refresh the corn, lo, he stands at the door and knocks. I
beseech thee by the bowels of thy mercy, wherewith thou being the dayspring
from an high have visited us, open the hand of thy pity to a wretch that
knocks, and vouchsafe mercifully to bid him enter into thee, and that he may
rest with thee, and be refreshed of the, which art the living and heavenly
bread, wherewith when he is once fed, and that his strength is come to him
again: he may asce^d unto more high things. And being lifted up out of this
vale of misery and tears, with the wings of his godly desire, he may fly
unto the heavenly kingdom. Let my spirit (O Lord I beseech thee) take wings
as an Egle, and fly without fainting, let it fly, and come to ye beutifulnes
of thy house, and to the place where thy glory dwells, where as upon the meat
tables of thy supernall citezens, it may be fed of thy secrets, in the place
of thy pasture, by the most pleutifull rivers sides. Let my heart rest in thee
my God, my heart I say, which is as though it were a great sea swelling with
waves. Thou which did rebuke the winds and the sea, and there was made
straight way a great calm: come and walk upon the floods of mine heart, that
all things which belong unto me, may be made calm and clear, that I may
embrace thee which art mine only God, and that I may behold the which art ye
sweet light of mine eyes, without any blind darkness of troublesome cogitations
and thoughts. Let my mind fly (O Lord) under the shadow of thy wings from
heat, that it being concred with the temperatnes of thy pleasant coolnes, may
sing joyfully, and say: I will lay me down, and rest in peace. Let my memory
sleep (O my God I beseech thee) from all evils, make it to hate iniquity, and
to love righteousness. For what can be better or more delectable, then in the
midst of the darkuesse of this life and amongst the manifold and bitter
miseries of the same, to desire fervently heavenly sweetness? to co uet
everlasting blessedness? a man's mind to behold ever there, whereas he may be
most sure to have infallible, and true joys. O Lord which for thy loving
kindness art most worthy to be desiered and coueted of all things, when shall
I see thee? when shall I appear before thy face? when shall I be satisfied of
thy glory? when will thou bring me forth of this darcke prison, that I may
confess thy name, so that afterward I be no more pricked? when shall I pass
and go to that merueilous and beutifull house of thine, whereas ye voice of
gladness and rejoicing does sound in the tabernacles of just men. Blessed are
they that dwell in thy house (O Lord) they shall praise thee ever, world without
end. Blessed are they, yea, blessed in deed, whom thou have chosen, and taken
into that heavenly inheritance. Behold (O Lord) thy saints flourish before
thee, like unto lillies, for they are replenished with the ple^teousnes of thy
house and thou do give them to drink of the flowing river of thy pleasure,
because thou art the well of life, and in thy light and brightness they do see
light, so greatly that they them selves which are a light, which was made
brighte by thee O God, which do give them light, do shine like unto the
sun in thy sight. O how marvelous, how fair and beutifull, how acceptable
ar thy mansions and dwelling places of thy house, O Lord of powers. My sinful
soul does covet to enter into them. O Lord I have loved the comeliness of thy
house, and the place where thy glory dwells, I asked one petition of thee,
(Lord,) and the same will I require, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord
all the days of my life. Like as the heart coueteth to go unto the water
brooks, even so does my soul desire to come unto thee. O God when shall I
come and appear before yt face of my Lord? when shall I see God, after whom my
soul longs very sore? when shall I see him in the land of the living? For in
this land of the dead, he cannot be seen with mortal eyes: what shall I do
wretch that I am, which am fettered with the heavy gives of mortality? what
shall I do? Whilst we continue in this body we go astray from the Lord: we
have here no abiding place for ever, but we labor for one that is to come. Our
free city is in heaven. Woe is me, me think I dwell amongst the barbarous
nations and infidels: and not amongst the faithful Israelites, I led my life
in the tents of Cedar. My soul has dwelt too long with them that hare peace
and quietness. Who will give me wings as a dove, that I may fly, and rest me.
There is no thing that I desire or delight so much in, as is to be in my Lords
company: it is good for me to clean unto God. Oh grant me (O Lord,) whilst I
am in this frail members, to stick unto thee, as it is written: He that
cleaves unto the Lord, is all one spirit with him. Give me therefore I
beseech thee, the wings of contemplation, wherewith when I am appare led, I may
fly upward. And forasmuch as every unlucky and unfortunate thing lies
beneath: do thou O Lord hold up my mind, lest it fall headlong into the lowest
bottoms of the dark valley: and lest the shadow of the earth should come
between, and separate it from thee, that art ye bright son of righteousness:
and lest it once hid with the clouds of darkness should not have liberty, but
be let to look for heavenly things which be above. Therefore I do assay to
go upward unto the joys of quietness and peace, and unto the delectable and
pleasant state of light. O hold my heart with thy hand, because it cannot be
drawn unto high things without thee. Thither do I make have, whereas most chief
and principal peace reigns, and continual quiemes shines forth. Hold and
govern my spirit, and take it according to thy will, that thou being a guide
unto it, it may ascend into the region and country of plentifulnes, whereas
thou feedest Israel everlastingly, with the food of truth, to the intent that
there at ye least wise with my swift cogitation and thought, I may come nie thy
wisdom, which remains above al things ouerpasseth all things, and
governs all things. But alas there be many things, which when my soul
would fly unto thee, do cry out upon it. Command them all (O Lord) to hold
their peace and speak not unto me: as for my soul it self, let it gene never
a word to answer: let it pass by all things: let it clune above al things
that be created, and come unto thee, and that it may faste^ the eyes of faith
upon thee which art the only creator of al things: let it covet unto thee,
and be bent toward thee: let it think upon thee by meditation and
conte^platio^: let it lay thee before his eyes for it self: let it role and
toss thee in his heart: thee (I say) which art the true and chief goodness, and
the joy that will remain ever without ending. There is surely many
contemplations, in the which man's soul is marueilously ^^^ of thee, but in
none of them my soul is so much delighted, nor yet has so good rest in, as in
thee: And when as it thinks upon thee, and has thee only in contemplation:
Oh how mutch is thy sweetness, O Lord? how marueilously do thou enspire the
hearts of them that love thee? how delectable is thy love? the fruition whereof
they have yt love nothing but thee: they seek for nothing else: they couete to
think of nothing else. Happy are they whose only hope thou art, which have no
trust but in thee only, and all their whole work is prayer. Blessed is he
that sits solitarely alone, and holds his peace, and stands upon his
ward that he is set to keep continually day and night, that yet while he is in
this frail body, he may be able to taste somewhat thy pleasantnes. I require
thee by those thy wounds which bring health unto us, which wounds thou
suffredst upon the cross, for our health, out of the which thy precious blood
wherewith thou redeemedst us, did distill and drop down: wound this my
sinful soul, for the which also thou did vouchsafe to die. Wound it (I
say) with the fiery and mighty dart of thy great charity: for the word of God
is lively and effectuous, and more pearcing, and sharp, then any two edged
sword. Thou O chosen dart and most sharp sword, which art able by thy power to
pearce thorough the hard shield or buckler of man's heart, fasten and stick the
shaft of thy love in my heart, that my soul may say unto thee. I am wounded with
thy charity, so that forth of that same wou^d of thy love, tears may flow
most ple^teously both day and night. Strike (o Lord) strike I befech thee, this
most indurated and hardened mind of mine, with the sharp dart of thy love,
and pearce it deper and deper, into the innermost parts thereof, by thy
mighty power, and so bring out of my head, abundance of water, and out of
mine eyes, a very well of tears, continually running through the great affect
and merueilous desire to see thy glory, that I may mourn day and night,
without taking any comfort in this life, until (in thy heavenly weddyng
chamber) I may see thee my weldeloued and beutifull spouse, my God and my
Lord. And that there when I see thy glorious, merueilous, and beutifull face,
full of all swetenes, together with them which thou have chosen: then I say, I
may worship humbly thy majesty, and there at the last being replenished with
heavenly and unspeakable rejoicing of everlasting gladness, I may even cry out
with them that love thee (saying). Behold that which I have long desired, now
I have obtained. For I am joined in heaven unto him, whom, when I was in earth,
I loved with all my strength: with all my charity I embraced him unto whom
with all my love I did stick and cleave. Him do I praise, bless, and worship,
that lives and reigns GOD world without end.

Amen.
A prayer in time of tribulation.
Have mercy on me (o lord) have mercy on me a most wretched sinner, which do
commit wickedly, and do suffer therefore worthily, which do sin continually,
and suffer thy scourge therefore daily. If thou take my daily tribulation as a
recompense for the evils which I have committed: the^ it is not so much that I
suffer. For it is a great deal more grievous which I have trespassed, then
that which I do suffer. Thou art just, O Lord, and thy judgment is according
to right. Yea, all thy judgments are just and true, and thou (O Lord our God)
art just and righteous: for there is no iniquity in thee. Thou do not
unjustly, nor yet cruelly scourge and punish sinners. O almightye and
merciful God, which when we had no being at all, did mightily create and
make us. And when we were lost by our own fault, thou by thy pity and
goodness marueilously did dest recover us. I know and am very certain and sure
that our life is not led by sodeine motions, but it is disposed and governed of
thee O Lord our God. Whereby I know thou take care for all men, and most
chieflye for thy servants which have put their whole hope in thine only
mercy: Therefore do I beseech and humbly require thee, that thou would not
deal with me according to my sins, wherewith I have deserved thine anger, but
according to thy great mercifulnes, which exceeds the sins of the whole
world. Thou O Lord, which outwardly do punish and scourge, grant me
inwardly a patience, that will never fail, so that thy praise never depart
away from my mouth. Have mercy on me (O Lord,) have mercy on me, and help me,
as thou thinckest best to be most necessary for my body and soul. Thou know
all things, thou caust do all things, which live for ever and ever.

A very devout prayer to the Son.
O Lord Jesu Christ son of the living God, which being upon the cross, with
thy hands spread abroad, for the redemption of all mankind did drink the
most bitter cup of thy passion: I beseech thee yt thou would vouchsafe, to
give me help this day and ever. Lo, I a poor wretch come unto thee which art
rich: a sinner, unto thee that art merciful. Let me not return home
conte^ned and despised with nothing. I begin an hungered Let me not leave of
fasting: I come unto thee as though I were famished, let me not go away unfed.
Although before I eat, I sigh and sorrow: yet after my sorrow gene me somewhat to
eat. First of all good Jesu, I acknowledge before thy majesty mine
unrighteousness toward thee. Behold (O Lord) I was conceived in sin, and
borne in the same: and thou did wash them of from me, and sanctified me:
but I afterward defiled my self with bigger and more grievous sins. For I
was born in sin of necessity, because I could be borne none otherwise: but
afterward I rolled my self willingly in sins. Nevertheless thou (O Lord) being
mindful of thy pity, did take me out of the house of my carnal father, and
out of the tents of the ungodly, and have enspired me and put me in mind, to
follow thee, with the generation of them that seek thy face, of the^ that
walk in the right path of them that abide and continue amongst the lilies of
chastetie, and of them that sit down together with thee at supper of most
scarcity, and less excess. But I an unkind person, forgetting so many great
benefits, after that I was entered into religion and holiness, did commit many
unlawful things. I did offend wonderful ungraciously: and where I should of
right have amended mine evil life, and left my sins: I heaped sins upon
sins, and these be the evils (O Lord) wherewith I have dishonored thee, and
have spotted and defiled my self (whom thou did create after the similitude
and likeness of thine own self) with pride, vaineglory, and other many evils,
wherewith mine unlucky soul is vexed, punished, torn, and destroyed. Behold
(O Lord) mine unrighteousness is gone over my head, and are like a sore
burden, over heavy for me to bear. And except thou whose property is ever to
have mercy and to forgive, do lay under me the right hand of thy majesty: I
shall be constrained miserablye to sink into the deep, and be drowned.

Give heed O Lord God and behold, because thou art holy, look how mine enemy
assaulteth me saying, God has forsaken him, I will persecute him and catch
him, because there is no man that will deliver him. But thou Lord how long?
Turn again and deliver my soul, save me for thy mercies sake. Have mercy
upon thy son, whom thou have brought forth with no small sorrow and pain:
and be not so ententife unto mine euilnes, that thou forget thine own goodness:
what father is there but he will deliver his son? yea, and what father is
there that will not correct his son and chasten him? but with the rod of
pity. Therefore, O father and Lord, although I be a sinner, yet can I not
choose but be thy son, because thou have made me, and made me again when I
was marde with sin. Repair and amend me now (O Lord) but first of all, I
being mended and chastised with thy scourge, deliver me to thy son. Can a
mother forget the child she bare of her womb: and surely, although she
sometimes be sorrowful, yet thou (O father) have promised not to forgette us.
Behold I cry, and thou do not hear me, I am vexed with sorrow, and thou
comfortest me not. What shall I say? or what shall I do, most wretched caitife
that I am? I being desolate of so great comfort, and cast out from the sight of
thine eyes. Woe be unto me, from how great goodness into how great a mischief am
I fallen? whether purposed I to go, and whether am I come? where am I? and
where am I not? whom did I study to attain unto? and what evils have I
obtained? I sought for good things, and behold I have found trouble and care.
Behold now I am in ye state of death, and Jesus is not with me. And surely it
were better for me to have nothing at al, yea no being at all, the^ to be without
Jesu. It is better not to live, the^ to live without life. And thou O Lord
Jesu, where be thine old mercies? will thou be angry toward me for ever? Be
pacified I beseech thee, and have mercy upon me, and turn not thy face away
from me, which to the intent thou might redeem me, did not turn away thy
face from them that rebuked thee, and spitted upon thee. I confess and
acknowledge that I have sinned, and my conscience deserves damnation, and the
penance that I am able to do, is not sufficient to make amends for mine
iniquities. But sure and certain I am that thy mercy excedeth all offenses
that a man can do. Oh do not (I beseech thee most pitiful Lord) write my
heinous sins against me, that you should enter into judgment with thy
servant. But according to ye multitude of thy mercies, cross and blot out
mine iniquities. woe be unto me wretch that I am, when the day of judgment
comes, and the books of consciences shall be laid wide open, when it shall be
said of me: Lo, look upon this fellow, and his works: what shall I do then, O
Lord my God, when the heavens shall reuele and show forth mine iniquity, and
the earth shall arise up and restifie mine iniquity, against me? Behold I
shall be able to give never one word to answer, but to stand in thy presence
trembling, quaking, utterly confounded and holding down my head for shame.
Alas wretch that I am, what shall I say? I cry unto thee O Lord my God. Why am
I consumed and fretted with holding my peace? But if I should speak, my
grief would not cease: And if I hold my peace, I shall be most bitterly vexed
within me Mourn O my soul, and lament as a widow for her first husband that
she had in her young age. Houle wretch, and cry out with weping, because thy
spouse Christ has forsaken thee. O God almighty, let not thine anger fall upon
me: because that if thou lay so much to my charge, as is due for my sins, it is
so much that I can not receive it. Surely my power is not able for to suffer or
bear it. Have mercy upon me, least I despair: but in dispairing I will take
heart to me, and be somewhat comforted. For although I have committed so much
that thou may condemn me worthily: yet thou have not lost that wherwyth thou
wast wont to save sinners, neither do thou rejoice at the destruction and
loss of the^ that die: yea, to the intent ye dead men might line, thou thy
self did die, and thy death did kill the death of sins. And if they were
revived again, and did live by thy death: I beseech thee, let not me die, now
that thou linest. Send down thy hand and power from hye, and deliver me out
of the hands of mine enemies, that they rejoice not over me, and say: let us
devour him. who ever (O good Jesu) needed to mistrust of thy mercy? which when
we were thine enemies, did redems us with thy blood, and reconciled us
unto God. Behold, I being hid under the shadow of thy mercy, do come unto the
throne of thine glory, requiring, and I do run crying, and knocking, until
thou take pity upon me. For if thou did call us to pardon and forgeuenes.
before we labored for pardon, how soon shall we obtain forgeuenes, when we
ask it? Do not remember (O most bountiful Jesu) thy justice toward a sinner?
but think upon thy liberality and gentleness toward thy creature. Do not
remember thine anger toward the guilty, but remember thy pity and mercy
toward a wretch. Forget me in that I proudly did provoke and move thee to
wrath, and look upon a wretch that calls upon thee. For what is Jesus but a
savior? Therefore good Jesu, for thine own sake, arise, and help me, and say
unto my soul: I am thy health, and thy safegarde. I presume mutch and am very
bold of thy goodness (O Lord,) because thou do teach us to ask, to seek,
and to knock: wherefore, I being admonished by thy word, do ask, seek, and
knock. And thou (O Lord) that commaundest us to ask, make me able to receive:
thou that geuest counsel to seek, grant that I may find: thou that teach
us to knock, open to me when I knock, and confirm me which am unstable and
wanering: restore me that am lost: raise me up that am dead: and vouch safe to
direct and govern in thy favor all my senses, my thoughts, and doings, that
from henceforth I may serve thee, I may live toward thee, and that I may
commit my self unto thee. I know (O my Lord) that through this that thou have
made me, I owe and am in debt unto thee, eue^ mine own self: and because thou
have redeemed me, and wast made man for my sake: for this (I say) I owe unto
thee more then my self. Lo, I have no more: neither can I give that which I
have unto thee, without thee. But do thou take me, and draw me unto thee, that
I may be thine in following and loving thee: like as I am thine in condition
and creation: which live and raignest world without end.

Amen.
FINIS.
IMPRINTED at London by John Day, dwelling over Aldersgate beneath S. Martyne.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis per decennium. ()


