The Orders for Swannes, both by the Statutes and by the ancient Orders and
Customs used within the Realm of England.
FIrst, ye shall enquire if there be any person that does possess any Swan,
and has not compounded with the Kings Majesty for his mark: that is to say,
vj. s. viij. d. for his Mark during his life: If you know any such, you shall
present them, that all such Swans and Cignets may be seized for the King. 2
Also you shall enquire if any person does possess any Swan or Cignet, that may
not dispend the clear yearly value of five marks of Freehold, except heir
apparent to the crown: then you shall present him. 22. Edw. 4. 3 Also if any
person or persons do drive away any Swan or Swans, breeding or providing to
breed, be it upon his own ground or any other man's ground, he or they so
offending shall suffer one years imprisonment and fine at the Kings pleasure,
xiij. s. iiij. d. 11. H. 7. 4 If there be found any Wears upon the Rivers, not
having any Grates upon them, it is lawful for every owner, swanmasters or
swan-heards, to pull up or cut down the Birth net or gyn of the said Wear or
Wears. 5 If any person or persons be found carrying any Swan-h^^ke, and the
same person being no Swan-heard, nor accompanied with two Swan-heards: every
such person shall pay to the King xiij. s. iiij. d. that is to say, iij. s.
iiij. d. to him that will inform, and the rest to the King. 6 The ancient
custom of this Realm has and does allow to every owner of such ground there
any such Swan shall heiry, to take one land bird, and for the same the Kings
Majesty must have of him that has the land bird xij. d. be it upon his own
ground or any other. 7 It is ordained, that if any person or persons do convey
away, or steal away the egg or eggs of any Swans, and the same being duly
proved by two sufficient witnesses, that then every such offender shall pay to
the King xiij. s. iiij. d. for every egg so taken out of the neast of any
Swan. 8 It is ordained that every owner that has any swans, shall pay every
year yearly for every swan-mark iiij. d. to the master of the game for his
fee, and his dinner and supper free on the Upping days. And if the said master
of the game fail of the four pence, then he shall distraine the game of every
such owner that so does fail of payment. 9 If there be any person or persons
that has Swans that do heiry upon any of their several waters, and after
come to the common river they shall pay a land-bird to the King, and be
obedient to all Swan Laws: for diverse such persons do use collusion to
defraud the King of his right. 10 It is ordained that every person, having any
Swan, shall begin yearly to mark, upon the first of August, and no person
before; but after, as coueniently may be, so that the master of the Kings game,
or his deputy, be present, And if any take upon him or them to mark any Swan
or Cignet, in any other manner, to forfeit to the Kings Majesty for every Swan
so marked, xl. s. 11 It is ordained that no person or persons, being owners, or
deputies, or servants to them or other, shall go on marking without the master
of the game or his deputy be present, with other Swan-heards next adjoining,
upon pain to forfeit to the Kings Majesty xl. s. 12 It is ordained that no
person shall hunt any Ducke or any other chase in the water, or near the haunt
of Swans in Fencetime, with any Dog or Spaniels, viz. from the feast of Easter
to Lammas, upon pain for every time so found in hunting, to forfeit six
shillings eight pence. 13 It is ordained, that if any person does set any
snares, or any manner of nets lime or engines, to take Bittorns or Swans, from
the feast of Easter to the Sunday after Lammas day, he or they to forfeit to
the K. Majesty for every time so setting, vj s. viij. d. 14 It is ordained,
that no person take up any Cignet unmarked, or make any sale of them, but that
the Kings Swan-heard, or his deputy be present, with other Swan-heards next
adjoining, or have knowledge of the same, upon pain to forfeit to the Kings
Majesty xl. s. 15 It is ordained that the Swan-heards of the Duchy of Lancaster
shall up no Swan, or make any sale of them, without the Master of the Swans or
his deputy be present, upon pain to forfeit to the K. Majesty xl. s. 16 And in
like manner, the Kings Swan-heard shall not enter into the Liberty of the Duchy,
without the Duchy Swan-heard be there present, upon the like pain to forfeit
xl. s. 17 It is ordained, that if any Swans at Cignets be found double marked,
they shall be seized to the Kings use, till it be proved to whom the same Swans
or Cignets do belong. And if it cannot be proved to whom they do belong, that
then they be seized for the King, and his Grace to be answered to the value of
them. 18 It is ordained, that no person make sale of any white Swans, nor make
delivery of them without the master of the game be present, or his deputy, with
other Swan-heards next adjoining, upon pain to forfeit xl. s. whereof vj. s.
viij. d, to him that will inform, and the rest to the K Majesty: 19 It is
ordained that no person shall lay Leapes, set any Nets or Drag, within the
common streams or rivers upon the day time, from ye feast of the Invention of
the Cross to ye feast of Lammas, upon pain so ost as they be found so
offending, to sort. xx. s. 20 It is ordained, that if the master of the Swans
or his deputy, do seize or take up any Swans as strayes, for the K. Majesty,
that he shall keep them in a pit within xx. foot of the Kings stream, or
within xx. foot of the common high way, that the K. subjects may have a sight
of the said Swans so seized, upon pain of xl. s. 21 It is ordained, that if
any person do raze out, counterfeit or alter the mark of any Swan, to the
hindering or loss of any man's game, that every such offender duly proved
before the K. Majesty's Comissioners of Swans, shall suffer one years
imprisonment, and pay in l vj. s. viij. d. to the King. 22 It is ordained that
the commons, that is to say, dinner and supper shall not exceed above xij. d. a
man at the most. If there be any game found where the dinner or supper is
holden, upon that river, the owner being absent, and none there for him, the
Master of the game is to lay out viij. d. for him, and he is to distraine the
game of him that fails the payment of it. 23 It is ordained that there shall be
no forfeiture of any white Swan or Cignet, but only to the K. Grace, as well
within the Franchise and Liberties as without: and if any do deliver the Swan
or Cignet so seized, to any person but only to the Master of the Kings Game, or
to his deputy, to the K. use, he is to forfeit vj. s. viij. d. and the Swans to
be restored to the master of the game. 24 It is ordained, that no person shall
take any gray Swans or Cignets, or white Swans flying, but that he shall within
four days next after, deliver it or them to the Master of the K. game, and
the Taker to have for his pains viij. d. and if he fail, and bring him not,
he forfeits xl. s. to the King. 25 It is ordained, that no person having any
game of his own, shall be Swan-heard for himself, nor keeper of any other man's
Swans, upon pain to forfeit to the K. Majesty xl. s. 26 It is ordained, that
no Swan-heard, Fisher or Fowler, shall vex any other Swan-heard, Fisher or
Fowler, by way of action, but only before the K. Majesty's Justices of Sessions
of Swan-heards, upon pain to forfeit xl. s. to the King. 27 The master of the
Kings game shall not take away any unmarked Swan coupled with any other man's
Swan, for breaking of the brood: and when they do heiry, the one part of the
Cignets to the King, and the other to the owner of the marked Swan. 28 Also,
any man whatsoever he be, that kills any Swan with Dog or Spaniels, shall
forfeit to the King xl. s. the owner of the Dog to pay it, whether he be there
or no. Also the Master or the Swans is to have for every white swan and gray
vpping j. d. and for every Cignet ij. d. 29 It is ordained, that if any Heiry
be leyed with one swan, the swan and the Cignets shall be seized for the King,
till due proof he had whose they are, and whose was the swan that is away, Be
it Cobbe or Pen. 30 Lastly, if there be any misdemeanour or offense committed
or done by any owner of any game, Swan-heard or other person whatsoever,
contrary to any law, ancient custom or usage heretofore used and allowed, and
not before herein particularly mentioned or expressed, you shall present the
same offense, that reformation may be had, and the offenders punished,
according to the quantity and quality of the several offenses.
GOD SAVE THE KING.

