Statutyts for the orderi^ge of Purueytours or Achatours for the kytnges most
honorable household.
IT is ordained anno xith. E. iij. that no purueyour nor Achatour shall or may
take for the king by any Co^myssion or without any Corn / Hey / bestys /
caryages / nor any other goodys of any Archebysshop / bishop abbotys priours /
abessys / pryoressis / persons / vicairs / or of any other folks of holy
church again their will.

Anno primo Ricardi scdi.
And it is ordained if any of the said Purueyours / or Achatours so do. Than
they shall pay treble damages to be recovered in an accyon of Trespass by any of
the said Archebisshops / bishops / and other before named so wronged.

Anno xxv. E. iij. Ca. xv.
It is ordained that the said Purueyours nor Achatours shall take any Sheep of
the people bytwyxt Ester and Mydsomer / nor till the time of clyppynge be done
nomo than shall be necessary for the kings household and so after / and if they
do they shall be punysshed as robbers and felons.

Anno xxiij. Henrici sexti. Rehersynge the Statutys following.
It is ordained that according to the Statute made the xxvi. year of king
Ewarde the third: that purueyaunces shall be made for the king and the quenys
howsholdes / and that ready payement shall be made in hand after the pryces in
the markettys about.

And that the heinous names of the Purueyours should be changed and named
achatours.

And if they can not agree with the seller of any vitayll: than the pryses which
shall be for the said two howsholdes shall be made by the view: wytnessynge
and appreysement of the lords / or their baillyfs and constables and iiij.
prouable men of every town / and that by ende^ture to be made bytwyxt the
said achatours / and the said lords or baillifs or constables / or the said
iiij. men containing the quantyte of their pryses / and the price of the same
s^ ^ppoynted.

And that such pryses shall be takyn and mad^ in couenable and easy manner
without dures thr^ manasses / or other velany and that to be don in places
where grettest plenty is and shall be and time conuenyent.

And that no more be taken than shalb^ nede^ul in his season.

And that the noumbre of Achatour^ be made as ^ewe as may be to serve.

And that the same Achatours be chosen suffycient to answer to the king and
to his people.

And that none of them shall have deputee.

Also that Co^myssyons of them shall be ensealed with the kings great seal and
every half year to be restored into the Chauncery and other new Co^myssions
to be made. And that in the said Co^myssions shall be contained the manner and
matyer of their taking and byinge.

Also that no person shall be bounden to obey the Achatours of any other lords:
nor the said achatours for the king and the queen again their will. but if
they make ready payment in hand: as before is said.

Also it is ordained that the Pryses and takynges of all manner corn and (...)
for the said two Howsholdes shall be mesured by mesure according to the said
standard by strykyng^ and not by heap.

And that for the caryages of the said Corn and for all other manner of pryses
and achatys to be made for the said ij. housholdes ready payement shall be made
in hand.

And that no more of Caryage be not had than shall be needful in that behalf.

And if any Achatour make any pryses / and achatys or taking of caryage in
other manner than is comprysed in their co^myssion: he or they so doing shall be
aiuged as felons and have judgment and execucyon according.

Also it is ordained in the said perlyament that no Achatour of vitayll nor
taker of caryage: take / nor receive of no manner person gift nor charge nor
grieve any person because of any such pryses achatys or caryagys for hatred /
envy / evil will / or procurement and if he or they so do / and thereof be
attaynt at the suyte of the party they shall yield to the party treble
damages / and shall have the Inprysonement by the space of two years / and
shall be raunsoned at the kings will / and after shall abjure the kings court.

And if the party will not sue: who so ever will sue for the king shall have
the third penny for his suyte. And nevertheless the said Achatours and takers
shall have the penance aforesaid in this present article.

And that every achatour upon his account shall make plain declaracyon and
severally show all manner pryses and achates and of every town and person.

King henry the vj. considering the premysses the said xxiij. year o^ his
reig^e at his parlyament holden at westminster the xxv. day of seuerere ye same year
has ordained and commanded by auctoryte of his said parlyament: That the
said statutys before reherced shall be for ever duly observed and kept and put
in execucyon. And over yt by the same auctoryte that every purueyour and
Achatour before they have any co^myssyon shall be sworn in the Chauncerye that
they shall no thing take of the people contrary to the said ordynances.

And over that has ordained by the auctoryte aforesaid because pore folks
be not of power no: dare not make resystence again the purueyours and
achatours / nor dare not sue them by the law though they do contrary to the
said Statutys: That the appreysours and also all the town and Towns
aioynynge if need be: shall endeuer them with all their power to resyst and
withstand the said Achatours and Purueyours which does contrary to the said
Statutys and asmoche as i^ them is to execute the said Statutys upon the
said Purueyours if they be required.

And that any person grieved of his goodys contrary to the said statutys may
chose to have an acco^n of debt again the said appreysours Town or Towns
and every of them which do not there deuer / or make not resistance again the
said purueyours or achatours in form aforesaid when they shall be required.
Or else again the said purueyours or achatours / and every of them to
recover the treble value of his goodys so unlawfully taken. And over that his
costys / and damages trebled.

And if any purueyour or other officer of our souereyne lord the King make to
be troubled / or vexed in marchaise or else where any of the people by any
evil suggestion / cause feigned Imagened or color upon them for and because
the execuco^n of the said statutys shall forfet xx. li. to be paid to the
party grieved beyond his costys and damages in that behalf sustained: and that
he may have an acco^n of debt and that every issue tryable in that accion
shall be tried in the same countye where the said pryses were made.

And that the defendau^tys in that accion / and i^ all the said cases be not
admytted to wage their law

And they shall be put to answer without fourchynge and that essoyne / aid of
the king nor proteccion to any of them be allowed.

And that the Seriant of the chatery shall satisfye all the damages / dettes /
and execucio^s which shall be recovered again every purueyour and achatour
^^der him in all the cases aforesaid. In case the Purueyour / or achatour be
not sufficyent to satysfye.

And that the plainty playntif shall have a scire facias to have execuco^n
again the said Seriant in that case.

And that the said ordynaunces be sent to the Justices of peace in every shyre
to proclayme them every year and to enfourme the people of the same

Finis.
printer's device of Richard Pynson (1492-1530)consisting of Pynson's monogram
on a shield upheld by a boy and girl and surmounted by a helmet and surrounded
by a border with the Virgin and a saint in the lower left- and right hand
corners, respectively R P
depiction of Pynson's initials, consisting of a conjoined 'R' and 'P' Richard
Pynson

O BEATA M MEMEN^





