DIEV ET MON DROIT.



Laws and Ordinances Of War, For the better Government of His MAJESTY'S
Army Royal, in the present Expedition for the Northern parts, and safety of
the Kingdom. Under the Conduct of his EXCELLENCE, The Right Honorable THOMAS
Earl of ARUNDEL and SURREY, Earl Marshall of ENGLAND, etc. and General of His
Majesty's Forces.



Imprinted at Newcastle by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty: And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL. 1639.

Laws and Ordinances of War.
SIR THOMAS HOWARD, Chief of he Howards, Earl of Arundel and Surrey, First
Earl, and Earl Marshall of England: Lord Howard, Mowbray, Brews of Gower,
Fitz-Allen, Clan, Oswaldesty, Maltravers and Graystock: Chief Justice, and
Justice in Air of all his Majesty's Forests, Parks, and Chaces beyond Trent:
Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Norfolk, Sussex, Surrey, Northumberland,
Cumberland, and Westmerland: Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, One
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in all his Majesty's Kingdoms
of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and GENERAL of all his Majesty's Forces in
the present Expedition for the defense of this Realm, etc. To all Officers of
the Army, Colonels, Lieutenant-Colonels, Sergeant-Majors, Captains,
Lieutenants, Ensigns, and all other Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot:
And to all his Majesty's Subjects, and others, whom these LAWS and Ordinances
of War shall concern: Which LAWS being thus ordained and proclaimed in
the Army, all the said Persons, respectively and severally, are to swear unto;
and thereafter to observe and keep, upon the pains and penalties to the LAWS
and Ordinances severally expressed.

Concerning Religion: and breach of Moral duies.
FIRST, Whosoever shall Against blasphemy.
impiously blaspheme the Deity, or ay of the blessed Persons of he holy
Trinity, and be lawfully convicted thereof; shall for the first offense make a
public acknowledgement with detestation of his fault before the Preacher or
his Regiment, and all others present at the time and place of Divine Service*
and be kept three days in prison with bread and water. The second time, he
shall have a red* hot iron thrust through his tongue; and after that, be
ignominiously for ever turned out of the Army.

2. The like penalty shall they incur for the Deriding of Gods word, or
Ministers.
first and second times, who shall either do or say ought in despite or
derision of Gods word, any known or received Article of Faith, or the
Ministry of holy Church, and their Office.

3 Whosoever shall be convicted for a common Common* swearing, cursing, and
profaning of holy Scripture.
Swearer or Curser, or for a profane abuser of holy Scripure, in vain jesting
or scurrilous fashion; shall orfeit such a proportion of his entertainment and
suffer, besides, so long imprisonment or other punishment; as according to the
quality of the person or offense, the Court of war shall adjude it to have
deserved.

4 Likewise shall they be punished, that profane, Sacrilege.
rob, or ab^^ any Church, Chapel, or other place of Gods ublike worship; or
any thing that is in them or belonging to them.

5 All Commanders and Officers of the Army, Observation of the Lords day, and
frequenting of divine Service.
are straightly ^^arged, that in their several Regiments, Quarters, and
Garrisons, they take care that God Almighty be duly served, the Lords day with
other Holy days of the Church, more reverently observed; that Morning and
Evening prayers with the Sermons at the appointed times, be diligently
frequented, by themselves, their soldiers and servants, so far forth as the
necessity of the wars will permit. And that all repair to the places appointed
for Divine Service, upon solemn warning given for it, by sound of Drum or
Trumpet.

6 And forasmuch as gaming is often times the Gaming.
provocation unto swearing, quarrelling, neglect of military duties with other
dishonours of God Almighty, loss to the soldiers, with danger to the whole
Army, all common playing at dice and cards, with other unlawful games, are
utterly hereby forbidden to the soldiers, especially to the meaner sort: who,
if they be convicted to offend herein, shall befirst admonished* and if they
leave not, they shall be fined, imprisoned* or otherwise severely* proceeded
against, according as the offense and scandal of it shall deserve.

7 All suspicious and common women shall be Whoredom.
turned out of the Army or Garrison, so soon as ever they shall be discovered*
Where, if they be taken the second time, they shall be soundly whipped like
common strumpets, Soldiers also that frequent their companies, shall be fined
and imprisoned; and Officers for the same faults, shall utterly lose their
places.

8 All wilful murders, rapes, burning of houses, Notorious crimes.
thefts, outrages, unnatural abuses, with other notorious and abominable
crimes, shall be punished with death.

9 Whosoever shall dishonestly touch any Abusing of women.
married or unmarried woman, women in childbed, or children; shall be cashiered
without money or pasport; or be otherwise punished, as the Marshall court shall
think fitting*

10 Whosoever shall be drunk in Camp Garrison, Drunkenness
or Quarter, shall be imprisoned and fed two whole days with bread and water:
As for common drinkards, they shall be fined and cashiered the Army without
pay or pasport.

11. Whoever being set Sentinel by his Officer, Drunkenness upon the watch
etc.
or in his Watch, Guard, March, or other Service, shall be found drunk, shall
dye for it.

12 Whoever in his drunkenness shall commit Offenses done in drink.
any outrage, or do other injury* shall be punished both or his drunkenness
and offense, according as either of them shall in a Marshall court be judged to
have deserved.

13 No enterprise shall be taken in hand, but To pray before the taking in hand
of any enterprise.
the Company that are to execute the same, shall first commend themselves to
God, and pray to him to grant them good success.

Concerning the safety of the Army Royal, and of the Kingdom.
FIrst, Whoever, in savor of the enemy, Treacherous speeches.
or other pretense, whatsoever, shall presume to say, or secretly insinuate to
any, that his Majesty's Forces, or Army Royal is unlawful or not necessary,
shall suffer as an enemy and rebel.

2 All that conspire against our sacred Sovereign Conspiracies.
Lord King Charles, or any of his Majesty's dominions or countries; As likewise
against the Lord General, or other Generals, Governors or Commanders in the
Army or Garrison; or that shall go about to betray the same, or any part or
person of them, or that shall consent thereto, or conceal them; shall suffer
death without mercy.

3 All such as by discourse, sign, letter, or Intelligence with the enemy.
otherwise, shall practice and entertain intelligence with the Enemy, Rebels,
or others in action against his Majesty, without direction from their
Commanders, shall be punished as Traitors and Rebels. Assisting the enemy with
munition, etc.


4 No man shall assist or relieve an enemy with money, victuals, munition, or
other necessaries, upon pain of death, without mercy.

5 Whosoever shall begin or maintain any Mutinies.
mutiny or unlawful assembly in the Army or Garrison, shall die for it.

6 Whosoever yields up any Town, Fort, Yielding up strengths, etc.
or other strength, unto the enemy, as likewise any Magazine, Victuals, Arms,
or Ammunition; or that motioneth any such matter but upon extremity, and that
to the Governor, or in Council, shall be executed as a Traitor.

7 Whosoever sees any chief Officer or Reseues.
Commander of the Army in the hands or danger of the enemy, shall, to the
uttermost of his power, endeavor to rescue or to fetch him off, upon pain of
death.

8 Whoever in the neerenesse of the enemy, Refusing to repair to the Army, etc.
shall refuse to repair unto the Army or place whither he is commanded, or
that without order shall depart from them, shall be punished with death.

9 Whoever shall revolt or run over to the Revolters.
enemy* or that shall attempt it, shall be punished as a Traitor.

10 No man shall bewray the Word unto the Discovering the Word.
enemy, or shall give out a false Word in time of Service, upon pain of death.

11 Whosoever shall be convicted to have Sleeping upon the guard.
slept upon his Watch, Guard, or sentry; or that shall not have given timely
and sufficient warning of the coming of the enemy shall be put to death without
mercy.

12 Whoever shall disparage the actions or Disparaging them Commanders.
directions of any chief Commander of the Army, unless he be able to make it
good, shall die for it.

Concerning Captain and Soldiers duties in paticular.
FIrst, all Captains, Soldiers, and others, Obedience without resistance.
shall yield their obedience to the lawful commands of their Superiors*
without resistance: neither shall any draw, lift, or offer to draw his weapon,
speak, or mutter against his Commanders, or others, correcting them orderly
for their offenses, upon pain of death.

2 All Soldiers that wilfully, and without Absence from their colors.
cause, absent themselves from their colors or company, that goes to charge
or resist the enemy, shall die without mercy.

3 No Captain nor Officer shall defraud Keeping back pay.
the Soldier or other person of his pay, upon pain of loss of his place,
fine, and imprisonment.

4 No Captain or other Officer shall make False musters.
or subscribe false muster-roll, or fraudulently give in more or other names
then he has in his Troop or Company, upon pain of fine, imprisonment, and
loss of his place.

5 No Captain, Lieutenant, or other Officer, Officers to serve armed.
that ought to be armed, shall come into any battle, skirmish or assault,
without their ordinary Arms, upon pain of imprisonment: Nor take upon hit by
word or deed to control or hinder the Serjeant-Major in the execution of his
office, upon pain of death.

6 No Officer or Soldier shall go upon Word or mark
service without the word, and some other mark to be known by from the enemy
(especially in night services) upon pain of fine and imprisonment.

7 No Captain, Officer, or other, shall entertain Entertaining other men's
soldiers or servants.
any other man's soldier or servant, without consent or lawful dismission from
his former Captain or Master, upon the penalty of a months pay. Neither shall
any soldier or servant depart from his Captain or Master without lawful
cause, upon pain of imprisonment, and returning again of Soldiers to their
Captains, and Servants to their Masters.

8 Captains and Officers both of Horse and Watching and warding.
Foot, shall watch and ward with their Troops or Companies: upon pain of
fine, and loss of their places.

9 No Soldier shall march along with the Disarray.
baggage, but such as shall be appointed. Neither shall any march out of his
array, or straggle abroad from his colors to pillage or plunder, when he is
appointed to watch, guard, or to other service, upon pain of imprisonment. And
if they be taken in the manner, they shall presently be corrected by their
Officers* but for the second time they shall suffer death.

10 No Troop or Company shall go forth Designs to be by direction.
on foraging, or upon any design or enterprise upon the enemy, without the
particular direction of such as command in chief, upon pain of death.

11 No Soldier shall sell, pawn, lend, lose, Making away of arms, etc.
give, cast away, play away, or otherwise make away his horse, Arms or
furniture, where with he is appointed to serve, nor shall suffer his horse by
his default to decay, or his Arms to rust or be broken or spoiled, upon pain
of imprisonment and infamy. And that both to the offender, and his abetters
and receivers.

12 No private Captain shall give a pasport Pasports.
or license of departure to his soldier that is able to serve, upon pain of
fining and loss of his place. Neither shall any soldier depart from the Army
or Garrison without a pass, upon pain of death.

13 No soldier or Officer being once placed For saking his colors.
in array, either in march or battle, shall refuse to guard or defend unto his
utmost, the Standard-royall or other Cornet, Ensign or Colors of the Army:
or shall desert, abandon, or run away from any of them, upon pain of death.

14 No soldier or others shall use any showting, Clamours.
noise or clamor, or without cause discharge his piece, either in the march,
Quarter, or Ambush; upon pain of being bastinadoed by his Officer; and of
imprisonment afterward.

15 No man shall give any Alarm to the Alarmes.
Army, Garrison or Quarter, but upon just causes: nor shall either give it or
take it in any clamourous or tumultuous manner, but shall orderly and quietly
with as much speed as he may repair to the place of Arms to answer the
Alarm, and to do as he shall be commanded.

16 No man shall challenge or defye another, Challenges.
in Camp or Garrison; nor shall accept of the challenge, upon pain of
imprisonment and public disarming before his Company: nor shall any, by words
or injuries provoke another to the fight or duel; or shall revenge his own
injuries or provocations, upon the like penalties.

17 All brawls and quarrels betwixt soldiers, Duels, etc.
shall be severely punished. And whoever in such like brawle or quarrel shall
kill another, except upon extremity and or defense of his own life he be
enforced to i, shall be put to death. And he likewise that strikes his
fellowsouldier, after they are put into array of battle.

18 Whoever shall give the lie to any person The lie.
of the Army whatsoever, shall be fined and imprisoned for it, at the
discretion of a marshallcourt.

19 No soldier or other shall fraudulently or Stealing.
thee vishly take any thing away, from any man's person, Quarter, house,
lodging, tent, or hutt, upon pain of death.

20 No Companies of soldiers either of Abuses upon the march or quarter.
Horse or Foot, in their marching, retreating, or enquartering in or through any
towns or countries within the allegiance of the King; shall do hurt, spoil,
or injury unto the persons, or goods of the inha^itants; upon pain of death,
or other such grievous punishment, as the quality of the offense shall have
demerited.

21 No man shall burn up any Corn, Hay, Burning of corn, houses, etc.
or Forage, or otler Provisions; nor any House, Barn, Mill, or other building
that may serve for the use of the Army, upon pain of death.

22 No Soldier shall muster in two Troops Mustering by two names, etc.
or Companies, or answer to two names in one Company; neitler shall any
Victualler or other that is no Soldier, be allowed to pass the muster for a
Soldier, upon pain of death or imprisonment, as the Court shall find cause
for it.

23 Whosoever shall set upon, or resist the Commissary of the Musters.
Commissary of the Musters, or shall wrong him by word or deed in the execution
of his office, shall be put to death.

24 Whatever Muster-master for hatred or Cheques.
for favor, shall put a lesser or a greater cheque upon an Officer then his
fault demerits, or any cheque at all at his own pleasure, without view taking,
shall lose his place for it, or at least be liable to such fine or punishment,
as in a Court-marshall shall be adjudged.

25 No Soldier having victuals or ammunition Wasting of victuals, etc.
delivered to him for certain days, shall spoil or spend them in less time
then is appointed him, upon pain of imprisonment.

26 All Captains and Officers shall be diligent Exercising of Companies.
in training and exercising of their Companies; and shall be careful for the
well disciplining and providing for them, upon such pains as the Marshall-court
shall think fitting.

27 Every Soldier shall diligently observe Sound of Drums and Trumpets.
and learn the distinct and different sounds of Drums, Fifes, and Trumpets,
that he may know how to answer and obey each of them in time of service.

28 Every Regiment, Company, and Servitor, Content with their own quarter.
either on horse or foot, shall be contented with such quarter, lodging, or
billet, as is appointed by the Quartermaster: nor shall any disturb another in
his quarter, or take it from him, upon pain of being punished as a mutinyer.

29 Whatsoever Captain or other Officer shall Righting of injuries.
do injury to a common soldier, or to other his inferiors: upon complaint in
the Marshall-court, he shall be obliged to condign satisfaction.

Concerning the Camp, or Garrison.
FIrst, Whosoever shall deal fraudulently or Deceiving trusts.
negligently in a trust or charge committed unto him by his Camerade, shall be
enforced to make double restitution out of his entertainment, and be further
punished by a Court of War, according as his offense shall have deserved.

2 After the watch is set, every man shall repair Quiet after the watch is set.
unto his own Quarter, and there use such silence as his neighbors rest be not
disturbed. And all straglers found abroad after that time, shall be imprisoned
until the cause can be examined, and order taken for their further punishment
or dismission.

3 No man in Camp or Garrison shall lie Lying out of his Garrison.
out of his Quarter, but by leave of him that commands there in chief; nor
upon warning or command given, shall refuse or delay to repair thither: upon
such pains of fine, imprisonment, or other punishment, as in a Marshall Court
shall be awarded.

4 No Soldier or other, shall entertain any Lodging of strangers, ^pies,
(...).
stranger into his Tent, Hut, or other lodging, without leave of his Corporal
or other Officer whom it concerns, upon pain of imprisonment. But if he be
proved to have concealed a spy, he shall suffer death for it without mercy.

5 No man shall pass in or out of the Camp Passing in by the Ports.
or Garrison, but by the ordinary and then usual Ports, Avenues or other
entrances, upon pain of death.

6 All idle persons, boys or women, which Idle persons.
have no particular employment for the necessary and honest use of the
soldiers, and which be not allowed, shall be banished the Camp.

7 No Captain, Officer, or Soldier, in Making or ^^p^iring the works, etc.
time of necessity and for defense of the Army, shall refuse to make or
repair the walls, quarters, or other works and defenses about the Camp or
Garrison where he is commanded. Be it to work with Spade, Basket,
Wheel-barrovv, or other instrument or Engine, then used for those purposes:
upon pain of fine and imprisonment.

8 No Soldier appointed to stand Centinell, Centri^s an^ guards.
to lie Perdue, or to guard in such a post or place, shall come off thence till
he be relieved by his Officer, upon pain of death.

9 For keeping the Camp as clean and healthy Annoyanc^
as may be, some places shall be assigned to kill beasts in, and for such other
necessaries, upon the outsides of the Camp, Quarter, or Garrison. Out of which
places it shall not be lawful to do these or other noisome or uncomely offices
upon pain of imprisonment.

10 Every Provest Marshall shall take care Cleansing the Quarters.
for the cleansing of his quarter, every third day at the least: and shall
cause all garbage, carrion, filth, and other noisome offenses to be buried. The
refusers or neglecters, he shall have power to bring to fine or imprisonment.
Which punishment himself also shall be liable unto for neglect of his own duty.

11 No man shall spoil or offer violence to ^reedome of merchants, ^c.
any merchant, victualler, Sutler, or other person coming with provisions to
the Army or Garrison, nor shall break open any shops or warehouses, or steal
aught out of any house, Tent, hutt, or other place, upon pain of death.

12 No Soldier or other shall break down ^^using of ^uses, ^ings, etc.
any house that may serve for the lodging or sheltring of the company: nor
shall trouble or defile any spring, well, pond, or stream of water serving for
the Army, upon pain of imprisonment.

14 Whatever Commissary, Officer or other Deceits of Commissaries, etc.
appointed for levyes or musters; or for making provision of Arms, Ammunition,
Carriages, Ships or the like, for the Army or Garrison, shall be convicted to
have dealt deceitfully or negligently in his charge, shall suffer such fine,
imprisonment, or death; according as the crime or dis-service shall have
deserved.

15 No Soldier, Waggoner, Conducter of Corn fields.
drawing-horses, or other persons having horses in the Army, shall put, or
suffer their horses to be put into any corn-grounds: and that upon pain of
imprisonment and sufficient satisfaction to the owner.

16 No man bearing Arms, shall tarry above Strangers not to stay in the Army.
four days in the Camp or Garrison, or follow the Army, unless he puts
himself under some company, or have license from the General or other, then
commanding in chief.

Concerning lawful Spoils and Prizes.
FIrst, After that the Enemy is driven out of Not to leave rank or Ensign.
the field, or that the Camp or town be entered; no soldier shall leave his
rank or Ensign to fall upon the spoil or pillage, till the sign be given,
or license be obtained, upon pain of death.

2 Whosoever shall have taken or recovered Prizes.
from the enemy or Rebel, any lawful Spoils or Prizes above the value of
ten shillings, shall presently upon his return to the Camp, make the same
known to the Lord General, or whoever commands there in chief; that the
prizes so taken may be recorded, and afterward be sold in the said Camp or
Garrison (and not elsewhere) by sound of Drum or Trumpet. And that upon
forfeiture of the said Prize, and such other punishment, as a Council of War
shall think fitting.

3 No man having taken any Spy or prisoner, (...) prisoners.
shall presume to keep him longer then conveniently he may certify his Captain
or other chief Officer. Much less shall he presume to let him go, upon
ransom or exchange; but shall deliver him to the Provost marshall general,
upon pain of death. And if such Prisoner be a person of quality, the Taker
shall have an honorable revvard for his service of the Lord General, or else
license of him to make the best of his prisoner.

4 No Officer or Soldier shall steal, spoil, or Booty.
diminish any prey or booty taken or recovered from the enemy, but shall
endeavor to keep it entire to be disposed of by the General, or him that
commands in chief; upon pain of death.

5 No man shall presume to break, burn, Abuses to Churches or Churchmen.
or pillage any Church, School, Hospital or College; nor to tyrannize over
any Churchmen, Scholars or poor people, women, maids, or children, upon
pain of death, or other such punishment, as in a strict Council of war
shall be awarded.

Concerning the administration of Justice.
FIrst, That such as commit disorders may be detected, and punishment
accordingly Disorders punished.
awarded; it shall be lawful for the Council of war and the Advocate for
the Army, to enquire of the Actors and circumstances of offenses committed, by
the oaths of such and so many as they think convenient: and shall further use
all means for examination and trial of persons dilated, suspected, or defamed.

2. All causes and controversies arising betwixt Causes determined,
Captains and Soldiers, and all others within the Camp or Garrison, shall be
heard and discussed summarily, and execution done according to the military
Laws, by the Council of war, without appeal: unless the greatness of the
cause or other circumstances require stay or deliberation.

3* All proceeding in the Court-marshall, And recorded.
as well civil as criminal, shall be truly and fairly recorded.

4* If any Captain, Gentleman, or Soldier* Wills.
declare or make his Testament or last Will of the goods he has in Camp or
Fortress, or which he has got in service, as also of the debts which are
owing to him; all shall be recorded in the Court-marshall, and executed by
those that are named Executors. If no Will be made, then shall his goods
descend to his wife or next kindred, if he have any. But if he have none, or
that none comes to demand his goods within one year, then shall his goods be
administered and distributed at the appointment of the Lord General according
to the Laws civil, and the customs of the wars.

5* No man shall seize upon, spoil, take, or Goods of the dead.
conceal the goods of any man that dies or is slain in the Kings service,
upon the penalty of restoring double, whenever it shall be discovered: and
further to be punished at the pleasure of the Lord General, or Court-marshall.

6 No Captains, Officers, or Soldiers, shall Discovering malefactors.
refuse to discover, apprehend, and bring forth to justice, any whom they know
to be offenders, as they will answer their neglect before the Lord GENERAL, or
Council of war.

7 None of the Kings liege people shall Runawaies to be returned.
conceal, receive into their service, or conveigh away any Soldiers that have
run away from their Colors: but shall be obliged to stay, discover and
deliver them, or assist to the delivering of them to the Provost-marshall so
soon as possibly they may. And that upon pain of imprisonment or other
punishment* according to the discretion of the Lord General or Council of
war.

8 The Provost-marshall general shall see all Provost-Marshall
Judgments, sentences and commandments of the Lord General and Council of
war put in execution.

9 Every Soldier and others being desired, to be assisted.
shall assist the Provost-marshall and his Officers, in the apprehending of
malefactors, and in the execution of justice, upon pain of imprisonment.
Neither shall any rescue a prisoner so apprehended upon pain of death.

10 No man shall interrupt or trouble the Officers of Justice to be assisted.
Council of war or Officers of justice doing their offices: but upon request
made, shall be ready to assist and guard them: upon pain of fine and
imprisonment.

11 No Provost-marshall shall refuse to keep Prisoners to be safe kept.
a prisoner committed to his charge, nor shall dismiss him being once
received, without warrant: upon pain of the like punishment, that the party so
dismissed or let go, should have endured.

12 Whoever shall presume to draw or present Menacing of justice.
any weapon in the Court of justice, and while it is sitting; shall die without
mercy.

13 Whatever Regiment, Troop, or Company on Horse or Foot, shall be found
culpable in the Court-marshall for any of the matters in these Ordinances
mentioned; all the Officers of such Regiment, Troop or Company, and every
tenth soldier thereof, shall be punished with all severity as the nature of the
offense shall require: and all other of the soldiers shall be put to do some
servile offices in the Army, until by some brave exploit they purge
themselves, or otherwise be punished as the Lord General or the Marshall-court
shall think fitting.

14 In whatever cases or accidents that may Cases not here met withal.
occur, for which there is no special order set down in the Laws here
published; there the ancient course of Marshall discipline shall be observed,
until such time as his Excellence, the Lord General shall cause some further
Orders to be made and published in the Army: which shall thenceforward stand
in force, upon the pains therein expressed.

The Oath.
I A. B. do swear before the Almighty and everliving God, that I will bear
all faithful Allegiance to my true and undoubted Sovereign Lord King CHARLES,
who is lawful King of this Island, and all other his Kingdoms and Dominions,
both by Land and Sea, by the Laws of God and Man, and by lawful succession:
and that I will most constantly and cheerfully, even to the utmost of my
power, and hazard of my life; constantly oppose all Seditions, Rebellions,
Conspiracies, Covenants, Conjurations, and Treasons whatsoever, raised or set
up against his Royal Dignity, Crown, or Person, under what pretense or color
whatsoever: and if it shall come veiled under pretense of Religion, I hold it
more abominable before God and man. And this Oath I take voluntarily in the
true faith of a good Christian and loyal Subject; without any equivocation or
mental reservation whatsoever; from which I hold no power upon earth can
absolve me, in any part.

This Oath is to be taken by all the Officers and Soldiers in the Army, by his
Majesty's express Commandment, as a Touchstone of every man's fidelity and
loyalty.

The form of this following Oath is to be taken by every Soldier, upon the
reading and publishing of these Orders. At which time the Soldiers holding up
their hand or fingers, shall say after him that reads the Oath, in these
words following.

ALL these Laws and Ordinances which have publicly here been read unto us, we
do hold and allow of as sacred and good: and will confirm, fulfill, and keep
them to the uttermost of our power: So help us God.

FINIS.

