An Introduction to the love of God.

Accoumpted among the works of S. Augustine, and translated into English, by
the right reverend Father in God, Edmund, Bishop of Norvvitch, that now is,
and by him Dedicated to the Queens most excellent Majesty, to the glory of
God, and comfort of his chosen.

And newly turned into English Meter, by Robert Fletcher. 1581.

Matthew. 22. Thou shall love the Lord thy God alone, with all thy heart, with
all thy soul and mind, this first commandment is the greatest one: the
second like unto it, shall thou find, to love thy neighbor as thy self in
deed, these two, the Law and the Prophets have decreede. Imprinted at London
by Thomas Purfoot, and are to be sold at his shop without Newgate, over
against Saint Sepulchers Church.

To the right Honorable Sir Frauncesse Knowles Knight, Master Treasurer of
the Queens Majesty's householde, and of her Highness most honorable privy
Council. etc.
IT has been the usual course of Writers (right Honorable) to plead pardon
by authority, when they think or know themselves far from intent of
offending, either by example of the mighty King of Persia, for his friendly
accepting a small gift, esteeming the good will of the giver: or else by
comparing their endeavor, by the example of some grave Philosopher. I do not
so, but confess my presumption in two sorts committed, the one to your
Honor, the other to the honorable and reverend Father in God, my Lord Bishop
of Norwitch, that now is, being the Translator of this Book, and having
dedicated the same to the Queens most excellent Majesty, being called, An
Introduction to the love of God, and so it may right well be called. My
presumption to your Honor is, in pressing your name in print, before I knew
your Honors pleasure therein, for which, most humbly I crave your honors
pardon. My presumption to his Lordship is, in taking upon me to alter the
course and nature of to excellent and profitable a prose, but I hope to have
his good Lordships favor for the same, when he shall understand the cause of my
so doing, considering the prose is still exstaunt, to the profit of the
Readers, and my meter now instaunt to the pleasure of the Readers, for so I
accoumpt it, having therein followed the example of diverse godly minded, which
have turned into English meter many Books out of the Bible, being sacred and
canonical, as other pithie Pamphlettes; being profane and Historical, yet
to good purposes, as well appears by their writings, which so meant them:
the parties with their Pamphlettes, as impertinent to my purpose, I omit to
repeat. But as his Lordshippe did make her Majesty patroness of the matter,
so I thought it my duty, to make your Honor Patron of the Meter: assuring
your Honor not to have committed any error therein, my presumption only
excepted, nor have not altered the sense of the matter, more then the nature of
the meter must of necessity compel me. The causes moving me to solicit your
Honor with this Introduction to the love of God, was for that I have beholden
the same most bountifully bestowed, not only in your Honors own person,
but also in your Honors both honorable and Worshipful offspring and
posterity, in your own person, the fear and love of God with severity in
Justice (according to your Honors calling) and precise rule, and laws of God,
which I my self have not only beholden, but also been beholden unto. In
your Honors offspring, that virtuous, Noble, and towardlie young Gentleman,
the Earl of Essex, does show himself a lively graffe and goodly member of
so good a Grandfather, which together with your Honor, I beseech God long to
bless and continue, he only may serve to confirm the love of God toward
your Honor: although his gracious blessings be apparauntlie multiplied in the
rest your Honors, both good and godly Children. For the continuance whereof,
I shall not cease to beseech almighty God, to send your Honor long and
honorable life, in this life, but after the same ended, eternal happiness,
in the life to come.

Amen.
Your Honors most humble and duetifull bounden, Robert Fletcher.

To the Christian Readers.
Whatsoever has been written before time, was written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the scriptures, might have hope. Among which
(right courteous Readers) I may insert this present Pamphlet, being translated
by my Lord Bishop of Norwitch, to the benefit of our corporal bodies, and
comfort of our souls, accoumpted amongst the works of S. Augustine, and no
less commended by that famous and learned Father of godly memory, Erasmus of
Rotardam, to taste of good learning: which to peruse, I refer you to the
Preface in the Prose, written to the Reader, by that honorable and godly
Bishop, who translated the same, naming it, An Introduction to the love of
God. Declaring thereby the love he bears unto his Prince and Sovereign
Lady, to whom he Dedicated the same: as also the good will to comfort in the
love and mercy of God, his loouing neighbors, and countrymen, following ye
example of a true Shepherd and faithful Pastors, in penning this so
profitable a Discourse, which distinguishes unto you by equal portions, the
gracious benefits of our creation, preservation, sanctification,
justification, and redemption, by God the Father, through the merits and free
grace of Christ Jesus our Lord. Which great mercies you may behold in this
little Book, even as if in a glass you were disposed to take view of your
countenance shape, and bodily proportion, but much more to your profit, for
that the one is presently forgotten, the other remains permanent for ever,
if it be sought in singleness of eye, and simplicity of heart.

Which worthy work, according to my skillesse capacity, I have turned into
English Meter, not thereby to derogate the Prose, or to arogate the praise
thereof in any part to my self, for so might I justly be condemned of
presumption, and arrogant folly: but he which knows the secret of all
hearts, knows also how far I am from seeking vainglorie thereby: only this
moved me thereunto, the profit that I saw contained in the Prose, which I
hope will be no less pleasant in the Meter, being plain, and not much
alienated from the former sense. I having so good a theme, thought good to
meditate therein, following the example of these godly minded, with whom I
will make no comparison, but only for endeavor, which have turned many Books
of the old Testament into English meter, as ye Psalms of David, the life of
David, containing the second book of Kings, the five books of Moses, the
Proverbs of Solomon, and diverse other, as well Canonical, as Historical:
according to that saying of the Apostle James, If any be afflicted, let him
pray, if merry let him sing Psalms. So he that is disposed to profit in the
prose, it is an excellent meditation, if to pleasure, in the meter, it is
present for him that fears God. Moreover, I know y^ meter is more acceptable
to some then prose, and may with less capacity be comprehended, as of
children, young men and maids, etc. which moved me also to take this pains
therein, and the rather to suppress that huge heap, and superfluous rabble of
balde Ballads, Rimes and Ridles, Songs and Sonnets, yea, and whole volumes of
vanity, which tend to the nourishing of vice, and corrupting of Youth, which be
not written for our learning, but for the confusion of those that delight
therein, to teach unlawful lust, and outrageous ribauldry, and to train up in
the toys of vanity, the vain, fickle, and fantastical youth, yea, and some
aged, whose modesty ought to be ashamed of such immoderate folly. It is not
long since I happened to speak with a good friend of mine, concerning the
Printing of this Book in meter: truly (says he) it is worthy the publishing
in Print, but Books of vanity be better sold twenty to one, which is
lamentable, that vanity should be preferred, and Virtue supplanted, or at the
least, very much suppressed. Is that the fruits of our profession (said I)
that have enjoyed the clear light of the Gospel, now full three and twenty
years? No (says he) God be thanked, many have, and do receive the glad
tydinges of the Gospel, with reverence and fear: but there comes up so many
fine heads, newly pullished for the purpose, that profess Poetry, and commit
paltries, for he that can either Prose or Rhyme will be in print, if his Pen can
but blotte forth a Babble, it shall be a Ballad, with Finis, etc. at the end.
They be all Chaucers and Gowers, Lidgates, and Bocases, and he is a fool that
is not five Skeltons for cunning: these write woonders, news never seen
before, no, nor never heard of, but at Billings gate, or in Grauesende Earge. I
would to God, these witty writers would take pains in penning profitable
Pamphlets, either godly Meditations, or good Prayers, whether in Prose or in
Verse, that the practice of Popery, which was wunt to be published in Fables,
to delude the simple ignorant and unlearned, might be abolished, with their
master the Pope, and new matters, professing Faith and Religion, published in
place thereof. I speak not of any the commendable works of many worthy
wits, set forth of late by diverse Worshipful Gentlemen, good Scholars, and
well experimented Poets, which contain both pleasure and profit: but of
those which in deed, their works smell not so much as of an honest mind, but
will make a man's ears ache to hear them, and his face blushe to read them:
and because they abound, I am bold to bewraie my mind of them, wishing you
that shall read this my simple endeavor, in so worthy a work, to esteem the
matter as it is, and the meter as it shall please you, and both so, as God may
be glorified, and you certified of his entire love, if so you love him, as
herein is expressed. To whose love, grace, and mercy, I commit you for
ever.

Amen.
Yours, ever in Christ, Robert Fletcher.

Th. Prat, Gent. to the Reader.
IF thou will learn, thy sovereign Lord to love
And practice how to praise his holy name:
Here may thou see, his mercy does thee move
That thou of duty, ought to do the same.
Then read this Book, and therein shall thou find
Sweet remedies, to ease thy careful mind.
It shows thee how, thy God did love thee first,
Yea, long before, thou did begin to be:
It shows thee how, for sin thou wast accursed,
Yet he in mercy has redeemed thee.
The goods thy Gods, but thine was all the gains
The profit thine, but his was all the pains.
Th. Prat. Gent.

FINIS.
Tho. Lee, to the Reader.
IF thou desire thy God to love,
And would the causes understand:
It shall be good for thy behooue,
This little Book to take in hand,
The way to heaven it will thee teach,
And how to shun the pains of hell:
It to thy soul, pure things does preach,
Peruse, and immitate it well.
Tho. Lee.

FINIS.
Io. Breifilde, in the behalf of this Book.
THe Prose is to our profit pend,
From godly learned skill:
The Meter does it self commend,
For he that has good will.
Does read them both, he profit shall,
And pleasure eke attain:
Buie both the Books, the price but small,
much greater is thy gain.
^he Prose, the power of God displayes,
and thy redemption free:
^he Meter even, in mind bewrayes,
Like comfort unto thee.
^mbrace them both, thank God therefore,
Esteem thy grace enioyde:
Give thanks to them, to salve thy sore,
That have their pains imployde.
Io. Breifilde.

FINIS.
An Introduction to the love of God.
That the love of God and thy Neighbor, cannot be separated, first Chapter.
WIth wakeful heed and earnest mind
and diligent indeauor eake:
How to escape Hell torments, it
with care becomes us to seek.
And for to purchase us the place,
of joy in Heaven there to dwell:
The one we cannot comprehend,
the other we cannot expel.
Except the means we mark and know,
to shun the worst and choose the best:
The one by prayer to prevent,
in faith to purchase endless rest.
Let us with willingness therefore,
the words of the Apostle way:
The difference between these two,
he does in order thus bewray.
The heart of man cannot conceive, 1. (...)

the eye of man has never seen:
The Ear of man did never hear,
What things for these preparde has been.
Which love the Lord and keep his Laws,
that in his fear their lives do lead:
These joys expressed they possess,
that serve the Lord in word and deed.
Lo, now behold the present place,
in which The Apostle does assure:
Us of the lasting love of God,
if we our love to him endure.
But yet the love of God alone, (...). 4.

without the love of neighbors too:
Can not be had the text does tell,
which gives us council so to do.
He that his Brother does not love,
with whom he here has present been:
How can he love the Lord his God,
which with his eyes he has not seen.
And this commandment have we from
the Lord our God, that so we do:
First love the Lord, our neighbor next,
for love consists in these two.
The Apostle Paul proceeds again,
persuading love, and thus does say: (...). 12.

For to confirm you in the same,
I show a more excellent way.
The which shall safely you conduct,
and lead unto that heavenly place:
Which only is preparde for those,
whom God does gonerne with his grate.
But who is in this way, or who
does know the same? for soothe even he,
That first does love the Lord his God,
and next his neighbor by degree.
Then love our God more then our selves,
and as our selves, our neighbors then:
According unto this our God,
we rather must obey then men.
And that is done when we prefer,
his pleasure and commandments:
Before our wills which be perverse,
as all our councelles and intents.
But yet our neighbors we are not,
commanded for to love them more:
But as our selves, that is to wish,
as to our selves is said before.
Especially, the joy and bliss,
that everlasting does remain:
That we with them, and they with us,
may at the length the same obtain.
Them to assist, and help likewise,
with bodily and ghostly food:
As reason and habillitie,
(requires) so to do them good.
And as the Gospel does you give,
to understand even so to do:
To other men, as you would wish,
that other should do to you.
For so says John, let us not love
neither in tongue nor yet in word: 3.

But even in truth and verity,
that love is liked of the Lord.
But now where are those neighbors, whom
we ought to love, forsooth even all:
Both Christian, Heathen, Jews and friends,
and those which Enemies we call.
Why, and how, God is to be loved. Cap. 2.
SInce our souls health consists in
the love of God, let us provide
To way the cause with diligence,
when, why, and how, our life is tried.
But to exite and to increase
the love of God in us for aye:
To nourishe it not greater force
then on his providence to stay.
Remembering his benefits,
which he does heap upon us still:
That in the view thereof our souls,
do faint as though our lives would spill,
For in this case we cannot be
so able as we would desire:
To yielde him thanks for all his gifts,
as love and service does require.
Yet must we do what may be done,
what rests in the power of man:
So many thanks to render him,
as we by nature render can.
And see wherefore: for benefits
which we by merits might not have:
He has bestowed abundantly,
that by decerte we could not crave,
Entirely he of us therefore,
is to be loved with true intent:
But how, and in what sort, forsooth
even keep his straight commandment.
Give ear therefore O man to that,
which greatest is of others chief,
In memory imprint the same,
Day, night and hour it yieldes relief.
And this commandment it is,
Love God the Lord with all thy heart, Deu

With all thy soul with all thy might,
With all thy mind, as his deserte.
With all thy memory and thoughts,
With all thy skill and knowledge eke:
Yield unto him obedience due:
with humble heart and mind most meek.
Yet peradventure thou will think,
alas his love to me is light:
Therefore I will not be afraid,
to answer him with love more slight.
Search all thy thoughts and have in mind,
what he ere this has done for thee:
And what hereafter promised is,
to be bestowed in like degree.
Then shall thou find how much thou art,
unto him bound, beyond thy might:
Yea and beyond all measure eke,
if thou regard his grace aright.
But to the end the love of God,
may quickened and augmented be:
Waighe and consider well the cause,
and love him more abundantly.
Whom, why, and to what end, mankind
was first created, and what things
God made for the use and ease of man,
these unto him, thy senses brings.
Whether they heavenly were or not.
visible or terrestrial,
Invisible or in what sort,
till his mercy did them call.
Our first creator Lord and God,
one God and eke one Lord alone:
Whose goodness of such greatness is,
that he does bless us every one.
Of which his blessings he does bid,
we on our partners some bestow:
It cannot be diminished,
but does increase and ouerflow.
That goodness therefore which him self,
is he to others would extend:
Only of his free goodness, for
necessity may not contend.
Because unto thy goodness chief,
it appertains, and else to none:
Our mighty and eternal God,
he profitable is alone.
Man of himself unable is,
partaker of his bliss to be:
But by the understanding of
his mercy, perfect made is he:
The more that he does understand,
the more in grace he does abound:
The less that he does understand,
for that he is more guilty found.
God made a reasonable man,
that he the chief might understand:
Of goodness which the immortal God,
had framed with his mighty hand.
By understanding he might love,
and loouing might the same possess:
And so possessing it might have,
unto his profit nothing less.
The creature he distinguished, The ^^^^rence ^^twee^ ^^gelles (...) men.

that part most purely might remain:
Unto himself and not be ioynde,
with human shape, the same to stain.
The Angel is that perfect part,
without a body passing pure:
The other is the soul of man,
that with the body does endure.
The reasonable creature is,
divided thus as here you see:
Into the thing which it has not,
And whith it has, for both these be
That which no body has is calde
an Angel as the word we scan:
That which a body does possess,
we know does represent a man.
He does consist of flesh and blood,
his mighty maker to extol.
Who by his power did him compact,
in shape with reasonable soul.
The cheifest cause Gods goodness is,
by which both men and angels were:
With reason and with grace indewed,
Herein his goodness does appear.
So in as much as God is good,
so are we by his power divine:
For goodness his he gives to them,
that from his grace do not decline.
And to this end created were,
these reasonable creatures then:
to praise their God and him to serve,
as best becomes christyan men.
And by the same we do possess
all profit to the creature:
For God himself fulfilled is
with sovereign bounty perfect pure.
He neither is deminished
nor need increase, he is all one
A Creator, the profit is
the creature his own alone:
Therefore to them that will demand
why to what end were creatures made:
A profitable reason straight
is here set down them to persuade.
The goodness of the Creator,
for profyt of the creature:
So that he love the Lord his God
and in his service still endure.
Finis 2. Cap.
The cause of the creation of Angels men, and all other Creatures. 3. cap.
BOth men and angels are therefore
said to be made for God above.
But not because he needs them,
but for because he does them love.
He needs not the service have
of Angels or the sons of men.
He has no want of worldly goods,
but that they both might use him (whom)
The servant profit does receive,
not he to whom the service due:
Is done him, has no need thereof,
all textes in Scripture prove it true.
As for him self, the Lord made man,
the world for man he made also:
That it might serve at all assayes,
the use of man in wealth to flow.
Where being placed in such state,
and high degree as wish he could:
Both that he might be servant there,
and serve his God as reason would.
That all the goodness might redound,
unto him self of that he sought:
The service of the Lord his God,
which he to pass in him has brought.
That man might helped be thereby,
to serve the Lord in godly trade:
Both in the thing for him ordaind,
as for the thing that man was made.
All things are ours The Apostle says, 9.

above or equal, how they be:
Inferior, or in what sort else,
all things in high or low degree.
A high comparison he makes,
for to persuade us to the same:
Is God in Trinity, says he,
and Unity in one to frame.
The equal things with us are ours,
in one consent with them t'agree:
As Angels at this present, though
far distant from our sightes they be.
In time shall be our equal mates,
where time in time, no end shall have:
That worthy we may be thereof,
Lord for thy mercy grant we crave.
The things inferior eke are ours,
and stand us in most happy steed:
As necessary instruments,
to serve our turn in time of need.
As things pertaining to a Lord,
or Master of an earthly man:
May be his servants portion like,
not robbing his said Master than.
But pertinent by title due,
to serve the use of servant his:
Hereby the Master has no wrong,
the servant has not done amiss.
In sundry sorts the Scriptures say,
that Angels for our sakes be sent:
To serve and to administer,
to us by Gods commandment. Hebr*

The Apostle has these words likewise,
are they not ministering Spirits callde:
Sent for their sakes that fear the lord,
that they in sin should not be thrald.
Believe the same, and let it not
incredible seem unto you
That he which king of angels is,
us for to save thought good to sew.
To save and not be saved he came,
to dye for our redemptions all
He gave his life for many souls
them to redeem from endless thral:
The angels eke are said for us,
to offer vows and prayers pure
Unto the seat of mighty Jove
thereby our pardons to procure:
But not because they do instruct
or teach the lord our deep desires.
For he himself does know our thoughts sees ougnen.

to show the same there is none aspires
Before that we do crimes commit
and afterward to him is known:
Our fond imaginations al
our selves before his face have showen:
And they do wait to understand
his will and what his pleasure is
And do to us the same convey
to keep us least we walk amiss. 12

And for this cause the aungel said
to men at such times as you pray.
I offered up the same to God
who sent you aid without delay
In like case also when you pray,
take not in hand our God to teach
As if that ignorant he were
what at his hands we beseech
But man must of necessitye
commit his causes temporal
Unto theternall verity,
who can redeem him out of thrall
Whether he do desire the thing
he could by his endeavor have
Or by consenting to the will
of God, and so the thing do crave
From thabitacion of the heavens
our sovereign Lord does angels send
Even down to us, and for our sakes
his heavenly pleasure to attend:
To visit and to help us eke,
for God, for us, and for themselves. for G

For him because most meet it is
they wait upon no creature else,
But to reveal his lasting love
the bowels of his mercy great
His pitye and compassiou both
to imitate his mercy seat
For us because that we in them for v.

and they in us like image have:
And reverently they do admire
his power, the which such likeness gave.
Now for themselves, because that with them s.

desire, and fervent longing they:
Do wait our coming from this world,
with them in bliss to live for aye.
Finis. 3. Cap.
Of the love of God toward us. 4. Cap.
THis therefore is most needful now,
and necessary to each man:
That he consider with him self,
and eke in several sort to skan.
When his own worthiness is wayde,
and dignity, he do not take
It from his mighty creator,
which him of nothing thus did make.
Love him abooue all earthly things,
of what estate, or what degree:
Esteem not equal with his might,
those things that his inferiors be.
What folly were it to compare,
the things that beautifullest be:
With those that vile in sight do seem,
which serve in foul and base degree?
For sure it is no seemly sight,
where beauty is but counterfeit:
To match it with the fairest, and
for beauty with the same to set.
Therefore my soul peruse thine own,
thy beauty understand and prove:
And by the same soon shall thou learn,
whose beauty thou art bound to love.
But if thy sight be duske and dull,
or darkened by thy negligence:
That thou thy self can not behold,
thou do commit a foul offense.
Yet at the least let others judge,
and do thou hold their judgments true:
What estimation thou art of,
when they with clearer sight thee view.
Thou have a Spowse of beauty such,
his bounty, favor and his grace:
Such Majesty, and Mercy great,
that thou could never see his face.
And yet behold he has thee seen,
if not, he would not love thee so:
His gifts may make thee grant thee same,
and tell if this be true or no.
The perfect pledges of his love,
and tokens of his kindness try:
Of this if thou did see his face,
thou nothing doubtful then would be.
Then perfectly thou should perceive,
that he in beauty passes all:
So singular, so comely fair,
as never set the like thou shall
And yet enamored is of thee
so much thy beauty does appear,
Above all creatures that he made
that none with thee compared were
This beauty yet was not thine own
but his in thee left for thy wealth
that having it thou might perceive
it came from him thy saving health
But what meanst thou because thou can.
not see him present as he is,
Art not ashamde iuinriously
him to abuse with works amiss
Not only in contemning these
his loving graces to thee lent
But servile to thy sensual lust
as vassaile thou do give consent
But o my soul take heed of this
and do not so though able thou
Be not assuredly to conceive
whatone he is his grace allow,
His earnest and his pledgefot thee
the gage and token which he gave
As leasses of his love iutyre,
from endless death he did thee save
In thy possession these be plast
that thou may learn thy lord to love
With zeal and with affection great*
thy mind from him not to remove.
His gift right noble is and great,
great me^ give great rewards we know:
Which do receive them at their hand:
as with his Majesty may stand.
A wise man for a trifle will
not give a rich reward we see:
But none can give so great a gift,
as thy good God has given to thee.
Yet greater is the gift which he,
in thee does love, thy self t'assure:
And eke much greater will he give,
if thou thy faith to him endure.
But O my soul, what are these gifts?
Examine, look, the world behold?
If every thing therein containde.
To serve thy turn be not controlde,
Behold how every creature does,
to serve thy turn his course direct:
Thy profit to supply, and for
thy wealth to use as thy subject.
For to accomplish thy delight,
commodities do all abound:
Within the world, for thy wealth,
or that which in thy self is found.
The Heavens, the earth, the air, the Sea.
and all that is containde therein:
Cease not to accomplish thy desire,
Unto thy God thy self to win:
The seasons and the times likewise,
the reuolucions of the year:
The sweet reviving spring, which does
of humors dry thy body clear.
Thy ruins it does fresh repair,
it does restore thy state decade:
Even with continual sustenaunce,
to serve thy turn, as here is said.
Who did for thee these things ordain,
or who prescribed nature this:
Whose whole revenue is reserved,
thee to mainetaine least ought thou mis,
These benefits thou do receive,
the Author is to thee unknown:
Thou of the giver takes gifts,
which heretofore were not thine own.
These gifts therefore, must us persuade,
which do declare who looues us well:
And who is to be loou'd again,
these sweet rewards unto us tell.
And what great folly is it then,
him not to love that looues us so:
Even one so mighty worthy love,
and but in him, to love no mo.
If any worldly thing thou love,
that under heaven is containde:
As thine inferiors love the same,
and as thy worldly servant gainde:
Or as the tokens of thy Spowse,
or benefits bestowed on thee.
From faithful friend, or from thy Lord,
that has this rare respect to thee:
Acknowledging how much thou art,
bound him to love, not for the same:
Not with him self but for him self,
and by him self thy love to frame.
Yea finally abooue them all,
both love and honor to him give:
That by his power did make them all,
and gave them thee, wherewith to live.
FINIS. 4. Cap.
Of the fruition of God, the 5. Cap.
ANd now beware my soul that thou,
break not thy faith as God forbid:
For these his gracious benefits,
which thus bestow on thee he did.
Abooue the giver do not love,
the gifts: which are bestowed on thee:
First love the giver then the gifts,
with zealous love in good degree.
Yet shall thou greatly him iniure,
in so receiving of him still
His gifts, and never for the same,
yield recompense for his goodwill.
Either refuse his gifts therefore,
or if thou like not so to do:
Yield love for love in measure due:
it is all the pains he puts thee too.
So that thou love him for him self,
and love thy self for him also:
But in such sort thy self for him,
as that no hatred pass him froe
To thee: but love him for the gifts,
that he in love left for thine use:
So love thy self for him likewise,
for in this love is no abuse.
This love, is holy, pure and chaste,
dishonesty, nor filthy stain:
Nor transitory toys of crime,
within this love, does once remain.
Consider therefore, O my soul,
what things thou have received now:
Even proper to thy self though some,
like grace enjoy as well as thou.
In all these things which God thee gave,
that common or especial be:
Or proper to thy self alone,
or howsoever in degree.
Entirely love thy self with them,
for look how much thou art preferred:
By these his precious benefits,
much more he did thy state regard.
In every creature thou may say,
Behold how well I am beloou'de:
Withal the good that I can wish,
all evil is from me remooude.
If small to thee this thing do seem,
that thou abooue all evil art,
Belooude of him that made them all:
and that it some what grieve thy heart,
Consider well how good these things,
by virtue of Creation be:
And yet in each condition have,
not been rewarded like to thee.
Then O my soul, if thou aright,
do way thy liberty thus got:
The time has been and even that time,
when as apparaunt thou wast not.
And what thou have thou did receive,
of thy good God which gave it thee:
And that it was his gracious gift,
that ever thou began to be.
FINIS. 5. Chap.
Of the gifts of Creation and Regeneration. Cap. 6.
IT was therefore the grace of God,
that ever thou wast made in deed:
Thou had not hired him so to do,
but so his wisdoome had decreede.
If he had nothing given to thee,
but thy bare being in this place:
Yet art thou bound to praise his name,
and love him for his lasting grace.
But truth it is much more he has,
unto thy person done repair:
Not only making thee to be,
but also beautiful and fair.
Nor could his bounty here be staide,
to finishe up his worthy trade:
He left us not until we were,
like to his heavenly Image made.
For this in deed, his meaning was,
his will and pleasure us to prove:
To draw by likeness those to him,
which he before had drawn by love.
Therefore he gave us for to be,
and by our being for to live:
That those we might excel in deed,
to whom he no such things did give.
That have no being, such I mean,
which maimed are, and out of frame:
Inordinate misshapen, or
for lack of victall, linis be lame.
By means whereof thou art my soul,
indebted to thy Savior dear:
For sure thou have received much,
yet recompense does none appear.
That which by love thou have receyu'de,
by love deliver back again:
It is a payment light enough,
and puts thee unto little pain.
But now I will begin to tell,
how this thy Spowse most excellent:
Appeard and so created thee.
vouchsaued eke with glad intent.
Even to be humble for thy sake,
that he thy ruin might repair:
In lowly wise these latter works,
unto the former equal were.
For in the former marvelous,
great things thy benefit to be:
He did bestow, and in the last,
sharp showers, he did endure for thee.
For to the end he might restore,
thee to thy former state again:
Which thou had lost by Adams fall,
he to descend did not disdain.
And willingly did suffer death,
which thou by right deserude for sin:
He undertook, he overcame.
he did for thee the conquest win.
Discending to mortality,
he frailety took upon him than:
In torments he did death subdue,
and by that means redeemed man.
Behold and see these things my soul,
and be abashed at this news:
Let these his gracious benefits,
persuade thy mind on him to muse.
Consider how he looued thee,
that vouchedsafe so much to do:
For thee and for thy sake my soul,
way well what pains thou putst him to
By him thou beautiful became,
that erst most ugly was through sin:
Now in his mercy may thou vaunt,
as clean and purified by him.
Before that thou did him desire,
thee to create that thou might be:
When thou ill favored was and foul,
with beauty he adorned thee.
And finally thee to redeem,
from endless death, himself would dye:
And in so doing did declare,
his vehement love and charity.
With bounty great he has therefore,
the breath of life in thee, O man:
^s the first creature which he made,
when by his power thou first began.
For that self man and creature he,
has given and himself bestowde:
None other goods for thee he gave,
to him therefore be lasting lawde:
Thou art his workmanship, and yet
the price of thy redemption too:
Because that price most precious was,
it was his mercy so to do.
Man being prisoner thrall to wretch,
beset about with filthy sin:
His freendly favor thought it fit,
he should be raunsomed by him.
O happy fault of mine therefore,
for purging of the which my Lord:
Was drawn by love, it to redeem,
according to his holy word.
I never fully should have known,
his love and favor unto me:
But that the perrill of my state,
my present true proportions be.
How fortunate was then my fall,
that by the same more happily:
I was restorde and raisde again,
redeemde from endless misery.
Then is no love so great as this,
no zeal so pure, no charity:
Nor no affection like to that,
an innocent for me should die.
He freendly was, but found no cause,
of love and favor which he bare:
Even unto me, deceiving none,
therefore O Lord my mind prepare.
And tell me what remainde in me,
which thou esteemde so gratiousty:
Why thou so dearly did me love,
that for my sake desirde to die.
What haste thou found in me O Lord:
in nature, or in quality:
The which so willing might thee make,
to suffer this great cruelty.
FINIS. 6. Chap.
Of the benefit of God, in calling us to faith. 7. cap.
ANd thou my soul, to the end thou may
behold this love, and joy therein:
Consider what comparisons,
between this love and thee has bin.
How much thy betters be forlorn,
refusde and cast away likewise:
That never to like grace with thee,
nor to like favor could arise.
Thou know that since the world began,
whole generations passed be:
Without the knowledge of their God,
and price of their redemption free.
The which are fallen into the lappes,
of deep destruction endless days:
Unless it please our Savior sweet,
of mercy his, them thence to raise.
Hereby it does appear to thee,
thou wast preferred before them all:
Fie thy redeemer, which by grace,
so franck and freely did thee call.
No cause at all remaindt in thee,
thereby to claim more then the rest:
The mere love of thy Savior dear:
his mercy more to thee expressed.
Thy Spowse, thy Loouer, and thy Lord,
thy God and thy redeemer eke:
Has chosen and forchosen thee,
before all worlds in mercy meek.
For his great love thus borne to thee,
thy God and Savior he became:
That thy memorial might remain,
he calde thee by his proper name.
He would thou should partaker be,
both of his name and truth also:
Because thou art anointed with,
the oil of gladness which does flow.
Even from himself, that with himself,
he being Christ the corner stone:
Thou may in him a Christian, so
be called by his name alone.
But were thou stronger then the rest,
in noble, ritche, or wise degree:
Thereby receiving special grace,
above them all to make thee free.
How many wise, how many strong,
how many noble, rich also:
Rejected were? yet chosen thou,
when they forsaken thence did go.
They perished, thou prospered,
and highly do in favor stand:
Great has his bounty been to thee,
which thou received at his hand.
When thou wast foul, he made thee fair,
when thou with sin deformed was:
Yea lothesome, ragged, rent and torn,
this mighty work he brought to pass.
His grace he gave to be thy guide,
his love for to inritch thee more:
A resolution absolute,
of mercy his, take this therefore.
Most resolute in this respect,
persuade thy self even so to be:
Except thou with endeavor do,
as herein is discribed thee.
That is thy former decency,
thy comlines and cleanenesse all:
To comprehend and to retain,
which thou enioyde before thy fall.
Else meet thou never shall be thought,
to enter that Bride Chamber, where
Thy Spowse, in heavenly manner sits,
thou shall not in that place appear.
Trim up and deck thy self my soul,
prepare, make ready now in time:
Let present leisure give thee leave,
for to redress thy former crime.
Sleeke up thy forhead from thy face,
and fashion fine thy trim attire:
Fret of thy freckles, rub thy Warts,
wash of thy spots of foul desire.
Smoothe all thy wrinckles, handsome be,
thy rude behavior now amend:
With all thy might endeavor thou,
clean to continue to the end.
In order all things see thou set,
that thou maiste be accepted now:
Of this most loving spowse and mate,
as heretofore is told thee how.
Prepare thy self I say with speed,
as best becomes the Bride of him:
That is immortal even thy God,
with whom thou shall remain most trim.
And as beseems such a Spowse,
that thee he may his Spowses call:
Thy Savior and redeemer, even
thy mighty King celestial.
FINIS. 7. Cap.
Of the gift of virtues. The 8. Cap.
KNow this also my soul that thou,
have where withal thy self to dect:
As golden Bracelets for thine arms,
and Chains to put about thy neck.
Which of thy self thou could not have,
but that thy God does give them thee:
For to bestow at pleasure thine,
if thankful for the same thou be.
For thou of him received have,
thy vesture and thy garments all:
All thy good works, thy fruits of alms,
thy fasting, and what does be fall.
To thee, thy prayers powered forth,
to him with faith, he heeres the saine:
All other virtues be his gifts,
and by his grace in thee do frame.
He garnisheth in goodly wise,
with gorgious and with trim attire:
As if a robe both fresh and fair,
of sundry colors thou desire.
Least thou should fail in any point,
of health and of refection good:
He bountifully has bestowde,
on thee thy health and daily food.
And whatsoever may repair,
thy comeliness and beauty both:
What else thy credit may conunend,
that thou should lack it, he is loathe.
Think on the same, I pray thee then,
with diligence advised be:
That nothing hereof was thine own,
till he in grace had given it thee.
That which before thou had receiude,
of him it stood thee in no cost:
Of much which was on thee bestowde,
the same by negligence thou lost.
That which lost, is thee restorde
again, whereby thou may be sure:
Not destitute thou shall be left,
he still thy profit will procure.
In such sort, as thou shall perceive
and know, how that entirely he:
Does love thee like a Parramour,
most loath my soul, for to loose thee.
And for this cause he does attend,
and patiently the time does stay:
Long sufferaunce and liberty,
he lets thee have, him to obey.
According to his mercy great,
so often as thou art to blame:
So often he thy faults remits,
as thou art sorry for the same.
Wherefore record and call to mind,
how many may be found, which have
Received like reward with thee,
as here recited which he gave.
Nor yet with the like favor might,
find for to be renewd again:
When they defiled had themselves,
with foul abuse their state did stain.
Just cause thou haste, considering then,
thy self belooued more then all:
For that the things which thou have lost,
he thee to answer does not call.
But does beningly them restore,
his mercy thou in these have tried:
Which others by themselves have lost,
and are most strictly still denyde.
Thou by his gracious bounty art,
not once denayde, the truth to tell:
His providence may thee persuade,
thy works for to accomplish well.
If readily great things thou do,
thou highly art aduaunst therefore:
If hardly thou small things perform,
thou humbled art so much the more.
Thy God does know what is good for thee,
much better then thy self can tell:
Have thou a duetifull regard,
that does for thee provide so well.
Such is his mercy unto man,
infirmities cannot endure:
But are by goodness his disposde,
that they our profits do procure.
Perhaps thou have not strength and grace,
in trade of virtue to persist:
But shaken with Suggestions art,
of vice and virtue has dismissed.
Yet art thou in humility,
made stronger then thou wast before:
Humility persuades thy mind,
thy life miss led for to deplore.
For weakness with humility.
has better favor in the sight
Of God, then virtue with the strength
and pride of mind, in one complight.
Be not therefore to mallepart,
or bold for to presume of this:
Gods secret disposition if,
thou prejudice, thou do amiss.
But still with reverence and fear,
direct thy prayers to his grace:
That he vouchsafe to help thee then,
as one that knows thy present case.
The evil that in thee remains,
he will with mercy it redress:
If thou in humbleness of mind,
and faithful heart do it confess.
If goodness do begin to grow
in thee, and thou would it mainetaine:
Refer it to the will of God,
who will increase it to thy gain.
Yea finally conduct and bring
thee to him self by such away:
As best he likes for himself,
where thou with him shall dwell for aie
FINIS. 8. Chap.
Of the gift of understanding and knowledge. 9. Cap.
NOw tell me O my soul, what we
in recompense shall give the Lord:
For all the goodness which we have,
receiu'de of him in deed and word.
He only not contented is,
to give us those good things which we
Receive with other creatures eke,
our fellow partners by degree.
But also has provided, that
in our afflictions we may feel:
And take and taste his mercy great,
and loouing kindness every deal.
We singular occasions here,
in our adversity may take:
And in prosperity we may,
embrace his kindness for his sake.
Within the arms of faithful love,
unto our selves we thus may say:
In all our meditations, Lord
give us thy grace thee to obey.
And eke to know thee, grant us Lord,
much more then other creatures do:
Because thou have in secret wise,
thy self disclosed us unto.
Our understanding thou did frame,
thy hidden mysteries to conceive:
More then our mates and equalles were,
in ignorance thou did them leave.
Darkness of infidelity,
as vailes has shadowed their face:
But unto us thou have declarde,
thy light and pureness of thy grace.
^hy verity and truth it self,
on us thou did bestow indeed:
On us much more thou haste bestowde,
then on the rest of Adams seed.
As sense and aptnes to conceive,
strength to perform good works and eke:
That which is ill a wit to hate,
grace in conversion for to seek.
Prosperity for to conserve,
profit by study to apply:
Wit in conceyts which turn to good,
and comfort in adversity.
Which way so ever we do turn,
thy grace, thy mercy and good will:
Our pathe are ready to prevent,
and thou dooste rule and guide us still.
When utterly we seemed waste,
(my soul) and quite consumed were:
He suddenly relieved us,
and straight his mercy did appear.
When we were ignorant and rude,
when wandering we went astray:
He taught us for to fear his name,
and us directed in the way.
When we were sad his comfort came,
he held us up, when down we fell:
When that we stood, he was our stay,
from falling headlong into hell.
Now finally grant us thy grace,
more verily to know thy name.
More sincerely thee to believe,
more purely for to love the same.
More fervently to follow thee,
because that more pertaines us too:
For benefits which we receive,
more then thy other creatures do.
Therefore O Lord my God to thee,
what recompense shall I devise:
Thou sweetenes of my life and eke,
the Lamp and light of both mine eyes.
Will thou that I shall love thee well?
then teach me how to do the same:
How greatly eke thou will that I,
to thee my God, my love shall frame.
For what am I that so may love,
the Lord my God, my stedfastnes?
My refuge, my deliverer,
my helper in my deep distress.
The horn of my salvation, and
my mainetainer at all assayes:
What shall I say? my Lord and God,
O give me grace thy name to praise.
FINIS. 9. Cap.
Of Gods provident care over us. 10. Cap.
FOr manifold be these good things,
which thou O Lord have done for me:
Most sweet and pleasant to behold,
and in no case can numbered be.
To speak thereof great pleasure is,
Lord make me thankful for the same:
For these thy gracious benefits,
aye blessed be thy holy name.
Lo now my soul, thou have thy pledge,
thy pledge thy spowse does represent:
Untouched keep the same therefore,
and vndefilde with glad intent.
Yea unpolluted keep it safe,
yea keep it clean, and perfect sound:
Albeit thou once defiled was:
thou art now an honest Virgin found.
According to his fancy firm,
and opperation of his love:
With purity he does restore,
corrupted things, that so they prove.
In those that pure remain indeed,
a chaste condition to conserve:
Unspotted to his holy name,
that in no case it cannot swerve.
Apply thy cogitations, see
how mercifully God does deal
With thee, and how his love is bent,
all thine infirmities to heal.
Not suffering thee to want at all,
his benefits, nor yet to be:
So ignorant, but that thou should,
remember what is given to thee.
And this I say to thee, because
thou should mark his mercy great:
It seems my God does nothing else,
but me with mercy still entreat.
I see him wholly occupied,
for my salvation, and I see
His care so great, that nothing else
he does but only nourish me.
Continually God present is
with me, and that to my behooue:
He offers himself for me,
all this his goodness I do prove.
Which way so ever I me turn,
he never does my soul forsake:
And wheresoever I become,
for me he does provision make.
And as a woorkeman which will be,
inseparable to the same:
(His woorks) what wants in my form,
with precious he a new does frame.
Although his face cannot be seen
with us, his presence does appear:
His Spirit does inspire our hearts,
as though he still among us were.
What pleasant thing is it my soul,
which while I think on him, does often
Even sweetly handle with desire,
and touch me with his fingers soft.
And presently me thinks I feel,
my self even ravished for joy:
I drawn and carried am from hence,
as one conuayde from all annoy.
But whether, God does know, not I,
and yet forsoothe even thus it is:
A creature now my self I seem,
in great felicity and bliss.
I cannot with my tongue express,
what joy of conscience I receive:
My wretchedness and misery,
my sorrows past I there do leave.
They utterly forgotten are,
and blotted out of memory:
My understanding is made bright,
my heart is lightened thereby.
My self I feel as though that in,
another country I remainde:
And as it were I do embrace,
most happy love I there have gainde,
I labor then with all my might,
continually the same to keep:
And never for to lose it, why?
in it my soul does sweetly sleep.
And would in no case be remoou'd,
but there to rest my soul aspires:
In quiet sort as it had found,
therein the end of all desires.
Yea highly does it self advance,
for joy, and seeks none other thing:
None otherwise but as it is,
not place to chaung, with Prince or king.
Then is not this that loouing spowse,
my Lord and God? yes verily:
Invisible and secret sort,
he comes now to visit me.
Incomprehensible, and yet
he comes for to touch me now:
Me to admonish yet he does,
that I should see him not allow.
His meaning is not to infues, This is c^^trary to (...) deuillish doctrine H.
N.

himself all wholly into me:
But even in part to be assurde,
and likewise tasted for to be.
Not giving his sacietie,
according to my full desire:
But more and that a great deal more,
then I of duty can require.
And this it is that cheefely does,
to his betrothing appertain:
The earnest of his heavenly will,
which we in him on earth do gain.
This is a token true my soul,
if here on earth thou godly be:
Assured in the world to come,
his own self he will give to thee.
For ever thou shall see him then,
and of him full possession haste:
Whereof now presently thou do,
but as it were enjoy a taste.
That here thou in this world may know
how pleasant thou shall find him then*
And feel him in his kingdom sweet,
far distaunt from the sons of men.
Wherefore it does my soul behooue,
yea it does with thy duty stand:
To love thy God for these his gifts,
which thou received at his hand.
FINIS. 10. Cap.
Of the gift of the senses, and preservation of life. 11. Cap.
But to the end thou maiste the more,
be kindled with the fire of love:
Consider if with more then these,
his benefits he did thee prove.
If so he have, thou art the more
to him beholding for the same:
Both for them past, and those to come,
give thanks, or else thou art to blame.
Even from the bottom of thy heart,
he is for to be loou'd of thee:
For when my Parents did transgress,
he with his mercy made them free.
Yea me created of their flesh,
and breathde in me the spirit of life:
And seperating from them seed,
yt was brought forth with mortal strife.
I therefore have receiu'de of him,
the grace for to become a man:
And understanding have obtainde,
twixt man and beast, the scence to skan.
Of body I received have,
the shape, and reason to defyne:
And difference betwixt these two,
my mortal sense, and grace divine.
Mine eyes to see, mine ears to hear,
my nose to smell, my mouth to taste:
My hands to feel my feet to walk,
nothing in me was framed waste.
And that is more, I do enjoy
all these in health and happy rest:
Those benifyts, these do augment,
that severally each sense possessed.
Things consonant God did create,
agreeing to the use of these:
As shining bright, and pleasant sound,
or sweet in taste, the sense to please.
This good provision of our God,
the creator of every thing:
These variable qualities,
for purpose ours to pass does bring.
The sight one special thing conceaues,
the hearing is an other plight:
The smelling, feeling, and the taste,
in several sense, finds their delight.
For beauty, colors please the eye,
sweet Music most the ear contents:
The fragrant smell of sweetest flowers,
delights the nose, with pleasant sense.
Thus every sense his season sees,
and every one in order plaste:
The verder and the reals sweet,
are found most meetest for the taste.
And who is able to rehearse,
the pleasures that on us attend:
So sundry set, so manifold,
each in his kind to comprehend?
They wounderfull do seem and strange,
and straungely we inritcht thereby:
How many pleasures to the eyes,
do we in colors fresh apply?
What sundry soundes unto the ear?
how diversely each tune is plaste?
Men mutually their minds resign,
and tell what things be gone and past.
With deep delight some demonstrate,
things fit for present time, and some
Divine of hidden secrets, and
prognosticate of things to come.
If these were missing in the life
of man, he might compared be:
Unto the rudenes of a Beast,
most bent and vile in base degree.
What need I tell you of the Byrds,
whose warbling notes I may compare:
For pleasure with the pleasures past,
which heretofore expressed are?
And as I here have amplifyed,
the deep delight our senses have:
As seeing, feeling, hearing, taste,
and all by grace that nature gave.
This may not be gainesayde therefore,
but that the goodness of our God:
Exceeding is, and wonderful,
his glory does extend abroad.
And by how much our benefyts,
abooue desert he did bestow:
So much the more his glory shines,
so much the more his power does show.
Not only he our bodies made,
but also beautifyed the same:
With diverse virtues which he gave,
blessed be therefore his holy name.
He made me healthful, fyrme and sound,
my friends might not me noisome deem:
Not ougly to their eyes, nor yet,
reprochefull unto strangers seem.
He me indewd with more then this,
he did my mind to reason bring,
He understanding did me give,
to judge the truth in every thing.
I can discern a right from wrong,
and good from evil can divide:
By this I search, I sue, and long,
with my Creator to abide.
But if I shall confess the truth,
a greater benefyt then this:
Wherewith the rest may not compare,
a blessing rare, and that is this.
Namely that I should here be borne,
bred and brought up, in such a time
And season, and among such men,
as do condemn each fylthy crime.
Such people as profess his faith,
his Sacraments in honor hold:
How I accordingly should live,
whereby my sins be all controlde.
All this I see, and this I know,
denyde to many other men:
Which precious is to be esteemde,
Lord grant me to be thankful then.
For these thy graces given to me,
in which I glory and rejoice:
Yet with the other by all right,
should stand my state in equal choice.
That are forsaken of their God,
and in his justice overthrown:
But I am called by his grace,
and in his mercy am his own.
In contemplation now therefore,
I will proceed and eke declare:
His goodness and benignity,
that me such parents did prepare.
Which brought me up within his fear,
in safety unto man's estate:
Deuoide of danger done by fire,
by water or like mortal fate.
That I by Beasts was not deuourde,
and that the Devil had no hold
On me, but that all these mishaps,
was by the grace of God controlde.
By means whereof I now am grown,
to competent and seemly age:
To love my God, him serve and fear,
by faith in him my sins t'asswage.
Finis. 11. Cap.
Of the patience and long suffering of God. 12. Cap.
GReat is thy pity Lord therefore,
and infinite thy mercy eke:
Which thou have used unto me,
when I in faith the same did seek.
Most wonderful in all thy works,
because thou art them all abooue:
Yea thou do seem most marvelous,
even in the bowels of thy love.
For sure no man thou do despise,
abhor, nor any man reject:
But such as do forsake the Lord,
and dreadfully themselves detect.
These are thy gifts, therefore O Lord,
these are thy treasures which thou have
Indewd me with, and by thy grace,
me in the midst of mercy plaste.
When I in dreadful danger was,
and in the sinck of filthy sin:
Thou me delivered from the same,
and left me not to die therein.
When I unmindful was of this,
thereof thou did remember me:
When from thy presence I returnde,
thou callde me home again to thee.
And gently did me entertain,
with pardon, when I did repent:
And did with mercy me remit,
when I deserved punishment.
Not only pardon for my sins,
which I in wicked will did frame:
But for such sins I did eschew,
thy pardon did contain the same.
As into many sins I fell,
and foul offenses did commit:
My wicked will was bent to more,
if thou had not withholden it.
Yet headlong further had I run,
with rash attempt from thee to swerve:
By thy especial means I do,
remember, thou did me preserve.
From doing of such wicked deeds,
that otherwise I should have done:
But only thy especial grace,
I had no means the same to shun.
But thou occasions all did kill,
and gave me strength sin to resist:
By keeping and continuing me,
in thine affection ere I wist.
Had I at liberty been left,
my wilful nature to obey:
In manifold offenses I
committing, should have went on stray.
But so great was the mercy of
my Lord and God, bestowed on me:
Not once such sin could me arest,
nor find that opportunity.
For much a do he had to stay,
me from the doubling of my sin:
The violence of temptation great,
so grievous unto me have been.
As every man has feeling in,
his frail desire and fickle mind:
Had not the Lord of mercy, his
assistaunce unto me assignde.
Whereby I vanquished my lust,
my fleshly, and my fond desire:
Concupiscence I kilde thereby,
which in my members burnt like fire.
From certain other sins, O Lord,
thine indulgence and favor did:
So far estraunge and stay my mind,
that from my heart, them quite I rid.
I did abhor and hate them sore,
and loathe the filth of former time:
Iniquity that did suggest,
me to commit each heinous crime.
Yet, all these same had not the power,
to touch or move me to consent:
Although they made what means they could,
my steadfast purpose to prevent.
Not least point of thy pity Lord,
nor meanest motion of thy grace:
When as the hugeness of my sins,
had brought me into wretched case.
When I unkindly kindled had,
by doing evil in thy sight:
Provoked thy fury, stirde thy mood,
with grievous sins, for which thou might
Have punished my perverse mind,
yet patiently thou did forbear:
That notwithstanding, all things past,
thou pardonedst through thy mercy mere.
If I do put repentance off,
deferring time from day to day*
And do securely sleep in sin,
yet thou will pause and use delay.
Preventing patiently the time,
and gently tarriest till I come:
When I do wander, thou do haste,
me in the race that I shall run.
Again, when I resist and strive,
rebelliouslie against thy grace:
Thou do vanquish, and conquer me,
and quite from me, my sins do chase.
When in the feeldes of fantasy,
I loyter or do ling ring stay:
Thou either forward wilt me force,
or tarriest for me in the way.
When I divert from wicked ways,
and try thy footsteps for to trace:
Forthwith, thou freendly me receyues,
and loouinglie does me embrace.
When I in ignorance do dwell,
full soon I shall instructed be:
When I for grief lament and mourn,
thou come straight to comfort me.
I stumble, fall, and yet thou do,
both rear me up, and art my stay:
Thou give what comfort I do crave,
thou do redeem my dire decay.
That which I seek, in thee I find,
I knock, thou openest unto me:
Thou art my Loadstone and my life,
my staff and stay in each degree.
I neither will nor cunning want,
to walk directly in thy way:
The greater is my danger then,
if wandringlie I walk astray.
This also worthy is O Lord,
(of admiration) that before:
(I had discretion) in my youth,
what things to ask, thou gave me store*
As also in mine age, when I
through thee was able for to crave:
And ask for that by goodness thine,
which I in heart desirde to have.
Again, when nothing I requirde,
nor any thing in mercy sought:
But rechleslie and carelessly,
esteemed all thy gifts as naught.
And now I do esteem this grace,
A great and mighty gift, that thou
Did over me give Angels charge,
from birth to keep me safe till now.
More then till now, for even between,
my day of birth, and day of death:
Thou my protector art as long,
as I enjoy this vital breath.
In contemplation of which thing,
a certain holy Father said:
Great is the dignity of those,
whom God electes, and Angels aid.
As garders set, them to defend,
the Wise man in this sense expressed:
The righteous souls are in the hands, Sapi. 3.

of God, and there do safely rest.
I cease not here for to commend,
thy pity joined with patience:
But rather double do thy praise,
that so have borne my foul offense.
And not according to the same,
my due desarte did me requite:
Nor that I should for sinful life,
be recompenst with deep despite.
The earth to swallowe me, nor fire
from heaven sent my corpse to burne^
Not water floods to drown me, nor
such pains of death should serve this turn.
That I so sore deserved had.
both anguish and afflictions great:
I had deserved for my sins,
but so he did me not entreat.
For when by sin I went away,
and would no longer with him dwell:
His creatures did disdain me sore,
I had deserude the pains of hell.
No marvel is this same, for if
a hired servant run away:
But from his earthly Master here,
and do not all his hestes obey.
His punishment shall sure be great,
his Master is against him sore:
His servant and familliar friends,
do soon abhor this wretch therefore.
Therefore when I displeased thee,
O Lord my God, just cause I gave:
That all thy faithful creatures should,
great indignation at me have.
As first the earth, thy creature great,
which does the world so wide contain:
Against me might conspire and stay,
I thee to nourishe do disdain.
Ne might I make my moan for this,
if it molest or trouble me:
If I complain, it answer might,
in truth I loathe to carry thee.
For as I Dathan did deuowre,
Abiram eke, and Corah caught:
As they were swallowed quick, even so
for thine offenses die thou ought.
Which have not been afraid to fall,
from thy Creator, and to join:
Even with his mortalst foe the fiend,
the Devil which would thee purloyne.
The author of iniquity,
of disobedience and of sin:
The father of those froward fools,
that do delight to live therein.
The Sun also to thee might say,
I ought my beams to thee deny:
Because unto thy lasting light,
thy duty thou do not apply.
Thus every creature might controwle,
and unto thee this sentence give:
But that thy Savior them restraines,
who bids thee to repent and live.
It me behoues, therefore O Lord,
more humbly to thy mighty hand:
More loyal and obedient I,
before thy mercy ought to stand.
Least by deferring of the day,
to punish my transgressions then:
Even in thy dreadful day, O Lord,
more greeuouslie with sinful men.
And thou my soul, thy self persuade,
that this long suffering of the Lord:
Expected has a great while now,
what we in faith can him aforde.
The Effect of his election free,
Predestination is most pure:
Which he fulfilde in us will have,
by faith for ever to endnre.
Through his excessive love likewise,
which he has borne, and bears us still:
His eyes be turned from our sins,
according to his holy will.
As once unwilling to behold,
how often I offended have:
His mercy is disposoe I see,
from endless death my soul to save.
This is the cause I see, why he,
has stayde so long, our hearts to prove:
And that thereby he might commend,
his patience, and confirm his love.
My self I do remember well,
he struck my heart, and stirde the same:
For to behold the skarres of sin,
which wicked life in me did frame.
Yea, for this cause he did convey,
and lead me to the gates of hell:
Describing unto me what pains,
they suffer that therein do dwell.
And to this end, that I should not,
dismay with motions of my sin:
Nor that rrmembraunce of the same,
might not remain my mind within.
He did inspire and comfort me,
that I a full remission had:
A general pardon he me gave,
for all my life that was so bad.
That neither should revenge be sought,
nor I vpbraided once should be:
Condemned nor consounded, for
such was his love and zeal to me.
Though some that in the world remain,
and no small number God he knows:
That pardon crimes committed, yet Men (...) not (...) lie (...) one (...) there
(...) doot (...) give (...)

will cast the parties in the nose.
And other that do silent sit,
do still in stomach rancour bear:
Even in their silent shadow does,
reserved spite, and hate appear.
But neither of these sorts be such,
as charity with heart embrace:
Nor yet according to the rule,
and love of God, which we by grace
Do taste and feel for comfort ours,
how plainly he does always deal:
His pardon freely is bestowde,
on all that to the same appeal,
According to the text, which says,
even where our sins did most abound:
Grace did most plentiful appear, 1. 3.

which benefit Saint Peter found. ^8.

Who having thrice his Lord denide,
the same his Lord, did thrice command* 21.

To feed his Sheep, and of his Church,
the cheifest Pastor for to stand.
Paul did his Gospel persecute, ^.

yet he a Vessel was elect:
And teacher of the will of God,
the Heathens lives for to correct.
And Matthew was a worldly man, ^9.

he did receive the common towle:
Which Office does contain abuse,
if Officer do bribe and powle.
Yet he was an Apostle made,
the Lord his God so gave consent:
And of Apostles was the first,
that wrote his Will and Testament.
FINIS. 12. Chap.
Of the gift of Continency. 13. Cap.
But after all these things which are
right good, and many as you see:
Of Continency perfect gift,
my God did also give to me.
Not only from all carnal lust,
but from each other filthy vice:
By whatsoever they be callde,
a gift of rare and worthy price,
So that I, who in former time,
could hardly any thing forbear:
Three days together, but I did,
unto my former faults repair.
Now through the grace and help of God,
I can for ever be content:
That to forbear, which does entice,
or unto sin does give consent.
By just occasion I can stay,
and thereof well assured be:
Behold my God of mighties most,
what great things he has done for me.
Some man perhaps will thus reply, Luk*

thou may accomplish this with ease:
Of light importance is that pain,
that to forbear, which does thee please.
Assure your self, I think not so,
I know what enemies it has:
How strong and sturdy ones they be,
what might they have ye mind to skathe.
It needful is for to resist,
a brood of such impiety:
A Nurse of naughtines, and eke
a sincke of all iniquity.
The first and cheifest enemy,
that continency does despite:
Is our own flesh, whilst it does lust,
strive and rebel against the sprite.
And what an enemy is this,
know you, that so familiar can:
Keep residence, and force conflict, (...)

within the secret shape of man.
How dangerous is this my soul,
a fearful fight most like to be:
Thou haste no means to skape the hurt: Devil, ^orld, (...)

of this thy mortal enemy.
This foe most cruel, stern and stout,
unnatural and tyrannous:
No way thou have him to escape,
nor policy to fly but thus.
Mauger our heads we needs must bear,
this mortal foe, about us still:
To us it tide and lincked is,
we cannot leave it when we will.
And therefore what more wretched is,
us miserable men to charm.
To feed and foster up this foe,
being forbid to do it harm?
Thus may thou see what great regard,
and care thou have thy self to keep:
From such a foe, as must of force,
within thy bosom lie and sleep.
But yet my soul, if this were all,
thine enemies which do thee hate:
And that there were none other, thou
thrice happy were, and fortunate.
For one there is, as bad as this,
as sturdy stout, as stout may be:
As cruel crafty dangerous,
and eke as hurtful unto thee.
As hard to be escaped and,
where ever thou thy self bestow:
It does inuiron thee about,
and no way from it can thou go.
This enemy, the wicked world,
unto five gates I can compare:
The which five gates for to defyne,
compact, in thy five senses are,
This enemy does wound thee sore,
with darts, and at thy windows will*
Watch time for to procure thy death,
for he has sworn thee for to kill.
The third is sworn thy deadly foe,
and common enemy to all:
Of Adams whole posterity,
the subtle Serpent men him call.
More wily then the Creatures all,
that in the world ever were:
No eye his countenance can discern,
he in no likeness will appear.
And therefore to avoid him quite,
it passes man's habillitie:
Some time he does assault us sore,
with violence, even openly.
Some times he secretly will steal,
and guilefully he always will:
Continue in his cruelty,
and seeks means, our souls to kill.
But who is able to endure,
all this his mischief to withstand:
Or who is fit t'encounter with
this chapion, stout to take in hand.
In very deed, no earthly man,
but he that long has looued us:
And that by his triumphant death,
this victory atchieude for us.
Now may thou know therefore my soul,
how hard and difficult it is:
Even to be continent, if that
the grace of God thereto thou miss.
Great cause therefore we have to love,
him most intyrelie for the same:
For only in the Lord we have,
this power, praised be his name.
Our might he gives us to withstand,
this tryple battrey (all by force)
Maintaind, against us by these foes,
that would of us take no remorce.
It is our God, that does therefore,
tread underfoot each foul offense:
Our love, our lust, our lauishe mind,
our fleshly vile concupiscence.
As also all the world, and all
her vile, and worldly vanities:
Her treacherous entisements, and
of men the woeful myseries.
And finally, the Devil, with
his craft and false suggestions vile,
His subtle shifts, whereby he sought,
my simple soul for to beguile.
Then have not I just cause think you,
of duty to confess that he:
Which mighty is, of mighties most, Luke.

all these great things has done for me.
FINIS. 13. Cap.
Of the gift of Hope. 14. Cap.
Moreover, my good God does give
me grace, that I my self persuade:
And to conform that by his will,
I am to him obedient made.
And fully am assured by faith,
that finally I shall not miss:
But by his promise shall inioye,
his kingdom and eternal bliss.
In the especial points this grace,
consists and continues too:
That I contempne, detest, and hate,
my sins forepast, of purpose do.
Disdayning present pleasures all,
or fond delights, and seek in some:
To frame and force, our foul desire,
to look and long for things to come.
Which to attain this hope we have,
supported by three things also:
Which strengthen and confirm my heart,
that from this hope it does not go.
And so does animate my mind*
me so encourage and persuade:
That lack of merits, want of works,
nor worldly bliss, my mind may glad.
Nor estimation of the joys,
which with delight my heart does grope:
Not any of these shall hable be,
to hale me from the fort of hope.
First, I consider that the love,
of him that has adopted me: 1.

And secondly, the truth of him,
whose promises performed be.
The third, his mercy, might and power,
that in these three, did me redeem:
Have I not cause these benefits,
most highly them for to esteem?
Now therefore let my fleshly thoughts,
repine and murmr with disdain:
Even as they lust, and ask me how,
I can these heavenly joys attain.
With confidence, I answer will,
I know, whom I believed have:
His benefits persuades me so,
which undeserved his mercy gave.
Most condempnable were to doubt,
I am assured of his truth:
I fully am resolude from hence,
Grace and adoption both ensues.
That he his promise will perform,
as one best hable to fulfill:
He may and does, both heaven and earth,
command, and they obey his will.
For these his merits, I of right,
my God and Savior ought to love:
It is the working of his Grace,
and mercy so, my mind to move.
When I do flee, out from his face,
me to his presence, he allures:
When I for sinful life despair,
my present comfort he procures.
I am unthankful for his gifts,
yet does he benefit me still:
When I uncleanness would commit,
he does my carnal humors kill.
When I in vanities delight,
his truth to me he does declare:
When I lie bound in snares of sin,
he does my freedom straight prepare.
And to conclude, he does preserve,
and keep me from the pit of hell:
And draws me from the wicked world,
within his kingdom for to dwell.
FINIS. 14. Cap.
Of Gods bounty, of our iniquity, and of thanks giving. 15. Cap.
But yet my soul behold and see,
consider how Gods goodness shown:
In all his gifts and benefits,
which thou receyuest as thine own.
What gladsome comfortable cheer,
if thou thy worldly will deny:
Christ offers him self to thee,
what delycates he does apply.
With food thy hunger to refresh,
he store in mercy does bestow:
Thy poverty he does enritch,
All these his graces thou do know.
What secret good affections he,
even with the same thy heart aspyres:
As with a pleasant cup of love,
he does replenishe thy desires.
That thou his footsteppes follow do,
and transitory things forsake:
Hereby thou may behold thy God,
how great accoumpt of thee does make.
This is no simple thing thou see,
(or vile) contempned for to be:
That thou a gadding fugitive,
his mercy more should give to thee.
Thou wast a rechlesse rebel rude,
thou to each treachery wast thrall:
Yet he unto his settled home,
and heavenly mancion did thee call.
And plentifully did refreshe,
with consolation spiritual.
He harkened to thy mishappe,
or ever thou had mind to call.
He comfortes thy confused mind,
if thou were tempted, he sustaind:
If he in danger did thee find,
thy liberty was quickly gaind.
He thee releeu'de, if sorrowful,
by him thou should comforted be:
If wavering in mind thou waste,
he did confirm and strengthen thee.
How often, even with very fear,
thou seemed like a withered wight?
He quickly did thy state redeem,
and thee endude with strength and might.
When thou in drought did dry away,
he did himself to thee infuse:
And often he with spiritual light,
thine understanding did peruse.
Thy sense with sweetness he perfumde,
when thou delightst to read or sing:
To pray or meditate thy mind,
in any kind of heavenly thing.
He ravished thy deep delight,
from deep delight in worldly vice:
That thou might take thy pleasure in,
his everlasting Paradise.
I leave to speak of mighty works,
it pleased his Majesty so to do:
Of kindness and of mercy more,
which he restorde my soul unto.
Least any part of his due praise,
should be ascribed unto me:
And that the giuers graces should,
with the receipt united be.
Or knit together with the same,
or seem as equal in consent:
Or he like praises should receive,
whom God does make his instrument.
For if the creature should presume,
to be pertaker of the praise:
Injuriously, he deals with
his good Creator diverse ways.
For what has any man a live,
that he of God did not receive?
Why should he then be praysde for that,
which he enioyes not, but by leave?
To thee therefore, O Lord my God,
all honor, praise, and glory be:
Thanks giving, laud, dominion, power,
for these thy Graces govern me.
See now therefore my soul, how that
not only bounty does commend:
But our iniquity likewise,
does, with our God, therein contend.
For if his bounty be so great,
to give, where we could nothing crave:
And that we nothing did deserve,
of all the goodness which we have.
How ought that goodness be esteemde,
that us with goodness does requite:
That by our manners merit could,
naught else but evil and despite?
O what great love is this, I say,
the which our sins can not suppress:
Nor that we may not overcome,
with this our wilful wickedness.
He pardons sin, and grace does give,
in place of vice, does Virtue plant:
So in the one he lyberall is,
in the other loouing we must grant.
Let us therefore confess that we,
even from our selves, our sins possess:
That he may pardon them, and eke
from him, our Virtues still increase:
And let us not forget, that we
be thankful for his pardon past:
And not unmindful be of that,
which he does give for aye to last.
Thus let him do that fears God,
and does desire to love him still:
For love can not dissemble sure,
in love is left no kind of ill.
What therefore works dilligent
consideration of this thing:
But earnestly for to withdraw,
thy mind that so thy love does bring.
From all such other sorts of love,
to love the Lord above them all:
Not forced, but of duty, for
his love to lasting life does call.
If lightly we the Lord do love,
not doubting but we so may do:
Some man perhaps will not conceive,
how much he bound is him unto.
But if he seek, he soon shall find,
occasion for to think the same:
As all his days him to adore,
whilst life does last to praise his name.
For who so wants any thing,
that he for his souls health would use:
Let him not murmr for the same,
nor yet therefore his God accuse.
For he does all things for the best,
his actions be performde with skill:
In judgment he is well advised,
and mercy has on whom he will.
And whom he will does also judge,
and whom he will, in heart makes hard:
To whom he will, his grace he gives,
from whom he will, it is debard.
What so does with his pleasure stand,
most needful is, and also fit:
And we that profit must thereby,
most need we have to call for it.
Not only sorry be and sad,
but also labor them to gain:
And pray unto our gracious God,
that we unto them may attain.
Which having gotten, grateful be,
give thanks to him, which sent the same:
No recompense he does require,
but that thou praise his holy name.
FINIS. 15. Cap.
Of the benefits of Christ's death and Passion. 16. Cap.
Both great and many are therefore,
thy benefits most gracious Lord:
Innumerable, infinite,
which we receive by thine accord.
That thou have heaped upon me,
for which I bounden am therefore:
To love and praise thy holy name,
which blessed be for evermore.
What ever goodness presently,
I have, or in times past have had:
Or whatsoever I shall have,
in time to come, me for to glad.
My God the Author is of all,
from whom, what so is good in deed:
Or so accoumpted it does flow,
yea, issue and from him proceed.
But there is one thing more then this,
does me inflame, yea, urge and move:
To set my soul delight thereon,
my pleasure and my perfect love.
This does especially, O Lord,
so fair and amiable make:
Even thee thy self, that did vouchsafe,
vile death to suffer for my sake.
The work of our Redemption dear*
a shameful death on thee was done:
Whereby our life and service all,
our love and labor thou have wunne.
Even this I say, most sweetly does,
our deep devotion draw to thee:
It does increase my love much more,
then all which else, thou gave to me.
We in this work were reconcilde,
thy bitter panges did purchase grace:
Thy sore oppression made us pure,
thy care our comfort in like case.
The universal Creator,
was so oppressed with woe and pain:
The workmanship of all the world,
did not to him like toil contain.
When he at first, the world did frame,
he spoke the word, and it was made:
He did command, all creatures straight, Psalm

created were, even as he bade.
For restoration of mankind,
the sorrows which he suffered were:
In all respects most marvelous,
and manifold, as does appear.
Behold therefore, he looued us well,
not having need, did not disdain:
On this behalf, but for our sins,
he suffered this mortal pain.
I therefore truly here may say,
all benefits before expressed:
Which he in bounty did bestow,
this one excels all the rest.
A man that to his friend does give,
his worldly goods deserves praise:
But he which for his friend will die,
shall be remembered many days. ^^amon ^^thias.

It is an argument of love,
and few or none, there be of those:
That will as our redeemer did,
die for his friends, and for his foes.
For so we were, yet would he die
the death, and to be interd in grave:
That we might reconciled be,
to God, thereby our souls to save.
A man will hardly die, says Paul,
for him that just and righteous is: (...). 5.

Our Savior for the wicked sort,
(did die) and such as lived amiss.
That blameless he might us present,
before his heavenly father dear:
We being banished and exilde:
within his kingdom might appear.
O how unspeakable therefore,
was this his love and charity:
What tongue is able to express,
the comfort of this courtesy.
That God for man, should man become,
in human flesh for man to die:
And to be tempted in all things,
that touches man's infirmity.
In him was only sin except,
whereby behold, it does appear:
How great a ransom he did pay,
before from sin thou could be clear.
Thou unto Satan thralled was,
(as his) condemnde by sentence due:
Eternal death thou had deserude,
before he did thy state renew.
Nor this may not be hidden now,
that if this ransom had not been:
The Devil and his Angels had,
the end of all thy labors seen.
And all this truth I have thee told,
that thou thereby might understand:
How much unto thy God art bound,
that wrought thy wealth with mighty hand.
And that thou may with all thy might,
with all thy fervent power abide:
Such grief and sorrow for his sake,
as time may to thy state provide. 4.

By many tribulations we,
unto his kingdom must attain:
Most happy to possess the same,
with that our loouing Lord to reign.
O Lord, now let my soul embrace,
thy blessed body crucified:
And let me drink, one draught so sweet,
of thy most precious blood beside.
By deep imprinting of the same,
thy Passion in my memory:
This Sacrifice most sweet, by which
my soul shall live eternally.
Yea, let this pure remembrance,
into my heart, and mind so frame:
That no oblivion, wealth; nor want,
be able to obscure the same.
But give me grace, that with Saint Paul,
my judgment may, like his be tried:
That nothing in this world I know, 2.

but Christ my savior crucified.
So that vain error take no place,
nor suffered be my mind to draw:
From this the soundness of my faith,
in which the grace of God does grow.
And finally, let all this love,
bestowed on me, this title claim:
Even all my love, my hope and faith,
and what good gifts in me remain.
So that desire of worldly wealth,
have not the power to swallowe me:
For this I know, whose heart and mind,
thou fillest with the love of thee.
Can neither frighted be with fear,
nor yet defilde with filthy lust:
Nor torn with wrath, aduanst with pride,
nor in vain Treasure puts his trust.
Vnbowled with ambicion, nor
stirde up, vile madness to commit:
Not shruncken up with couetise,
nor does consumde in sadness sit.
Nor envy has not worn away,
nor yet corrupt with other vice:
Whilst in the sweetness of the Lord,
it rests in this Parradise.
He therefore in this world that can,
good things unto his servant give:
What think you God reserues for such,
as lastingly with him shall live?
The things that present he bestows,
as gifts we term them temporal:
Things promised in the life to come,
we do esteem them eternal.
Much better they, then are the first,
they gotten are with travail great:
And quickly are they wasted, for
the which we long our brains did beat.
When surest we seem them to enjoy, 4

Lord what a care it is them to keep:
What grief to lose, that pain procures,
with sorrow we for them do weep.
The riches of the world to come,
are never lost, they not decrease:
But always are possessed with joy,
with quiet rest, and endless peace.
These things are ever longed for,
they hated, nor once lothed be:
And who these riches has obtainde,
a happy man no doubt is he.
Which shall not lose these benefits,
that earnest was them to desire:
He never them again forgoes,
that thus in faith he did require.
FINIS. 16. Cap.
Of the benefit of God his promises. 2
17. Cap.
RIght highly therefore is our God,
in these his promises so pure:
For to belooude who has us hight,
that greater things he will procure.
For he has promised rest from pain,
from thraldom liberty to give:
Security, that we from fear
and sorrow, shall in safety live.
And resurrection from the dead,
and after that our bodies are.
Raysde up again to perfect bliss,
which without end he did prepare:
And finally, his promise past,
of it we may our selves persuade:
That he would give him self for us,
this oath he to our Fathers made.
Great are the promises of God, Luke.

he will of us be looude for these:
And in this sort it does behoue,
that we the Lord our God do please.
But if thou will desire to know,
in what sort it behooves us:
To love thy God even vehemently,
with deep desire, I answer thus.
We crave his promise to perform,
in this our love required is:
And duetie-dooth us so persuade,
Let us not then our duties miss.
How ever we desire the same,
his gracious promise, truly we,
So often not, desire the same,
as it desired ought to be.
And he that profits in love,
let him ensue the same therefore:
Have care that love may still increase,
that thou may love thy God the more.
The earnest longing after God,
it has no mean in some respect:
For who that thinks it does exceed,
does of his duty much neglect.
And where as in all other things,
Impatiencie is ever blamde:
But use it to this end, and it
thy commendations great has framde.
Gods promises for to expect,
that is to have, and him possess:
The more he does his praise commend,
and he commended is no less.
The more a man our God does love,
the more he after him does haste:
Impatiently vex and torment,
till he with him his soul has plaste.
These precious Iuelles in this world,
are promised, had and enioyde:
Even in the heavenly Palace, when
this earthly mansion is destroyde.
And therefore of that good, which is
chief of all goodness, what it is:
And how it is, shall be declarde,
the Chapter shows, which follows this.
FINIS. 17. Cap.
Of the consideration of the Deity, and joys of Heaven. 18. Cap.
LEt us therefore our minds advance,
so far as God assistes the same:
Our understanding eke prepare,
that we our judgments rightly frame,
How great the pleasures they possess,
and joy unto the chosen there:
Prepared for the Lords elect,
that in his Palace do appear.
Which is to say, not only high,
but sovereign good, both Life and Light:
Eternity, and Wisdom great,
and blisfull Beauty shining bright.
But yet in Nature, only one,
most excellent, most good, most hie:
Suffising all things to it self,
not wanting any ones supply.
This good is God, the Father great,
his word likewise, his only son:
This is that one and common love,
which we have in the Father won.
Namely, that blessed spirit of life,
the Father and the Son in deed:
By equal porcions this from both,
in grace does issue and proceed.
That which in every one of these, (...) per^one

we do distinct in persons three:
The Father, Son, and holy Ghost,
one only God in Trinity.
The sovereign unity of these,
the Dietie of God declares: 10.

Not altered, multiplied, increast,
but must consist in equal shares.
This only one thing needful is,
with all in one, and one in all:
Which only good is in it self,
and we this only good do call.
If every several good be good,
that here amongst us does remain:
How pleasant is that good, which does*
all goodness in it self contain?
Not such as we in creatures find,
but such as the Creator is:
Most excellent above them all,
no difference is like to this.
For life was first created good,
how good is then that life, which did
Create the same before it was,
it in obscurity was hid?
If health be good, which we enjoy,
how good is that which gave the same?
If Wisdom amiable be,
how fair is yt which wrought the frame.
If our delights so diverse be,
and pleasures passing manifold:
How delectable, he that does,
the sum of all our Pleasures hold?
How happy is that Soul which may,
even all this good at pleasure have?
What shall he miss or want, that has
more in this good, then he can crave?
What lackes he not, that lacks this?
for he that has, has all in deed:
That either body or the soul,
at any time do hap to need.
And that so passing excellent:
as the eye of man has never seen:
Nor ear has heard, nor yet conceive,
within the heart of man has been. 1. C^^

Why wander we and range about,
and through so many things do trace:
For soul and body goods to get,
which rests in, this only grace?
Let us this our God rather love,
in whom is all the goods that is:
And that shall be enough for us,
we sure sufficient shall not miss.
We shall no further need to seek,
but for to take that simple good:
(Simple) is only self to be,
and so of us is understood.
What do thou then desire my soul?
what is it that my mind does move?
Within this good is all contriu'de,
that comes from God the Lord above.
To speak therefore of all the goods,
his heavenly kingdom does contain:
No man that is clothed in his flesh,
the same is able to explain.
All Fame, that kingdom does excel,
surmounteth cunning, praise and skill:
It royal is, and glorious eke,
according to Gods holy will.
It Is full of light, of charity,
of patience, and of endless peace:
Of worship, glory, and renown,
all pleasures there, do still increase.
Delight, and everlasting joy,
perpetual eke in blissfulness:
Replenished with all the good,
that heart can think, or tongue express.
It can not comprehended be,
nor measured by the wit of man:
Why should our silence this conceal,
but yield it all the praise we can?
Because we can not as we would,
God is unspeakable we know:
And so believe, and should we not,
abroad his power and mercy show?
Should we not everlasting life,
which. God to us by promise plight:
None otherwise believe, but as
we find it written to our sight?
His promise made to us is sealde,
of lasting love in greater sort:
Then either can the tongue declare,
or else the Pen for truth report.
The heart much more can comprehend,
it is of more capacity:
And yet it can not sound the depth,
of his great power and Majesty.
The joys and glory of the life,
(to come) therefore believe we must:
For everlasting in it self,
it is, and so should be discust.
It everlasting, happy is,
and does contain tranquillity:
All pleasantness most peaceable,
and our assurde security.
This perfect love, no dread, no fear,
no want of day, no doubt of night:
But cheerful motions, and one sprite,
amongst us all, even in the sight
Of God there to abide in joy,
among his Saints, and Angels all:
Bright shining in the righteousness
of Christ, which has redeemde our thrall.
Even where salvation does abound:
where truth does reign, where no deceit
Is used, betwixt man and man,
where is no measure false nor weight.
No happy man can thence be cast,
nor may from thence exiled be:
No wicked wretch, may there be plast,
nor once aduaunst to that degree.
There is the life contemplative,
which fruitful Faith, who does attain:
Shall like the blisfull spirits be made,
with God in kingdom his to reign.
For what they have believed here,
there shall they it behold and see:
The substance of their Creator,
in whom all good things perfect be.
With innocent, and humble eyes,
with hearts most pure, they shall rejoice:
And triumph in this happiness,
of which in God they made their choice.
And doing thus, possess the love,
of God our everlasting Lord:
In charity together they,
with unity and sweet concord
Do live, and portion like receive,
the privilege of heavenly place:
Like Citizens enfraunchized,
they all enjoy the God of grace.
There shall such joy and gladness be,
such heavenly sollace shall abound:
For there the fullness of his grace,
and mercy of our God is found.
Unto the giver of the same,
incessauntlie they shall sing praise:
Without all kind of irksomeness,
yield lawde and thanks to him always.
The hearts of every creature there,
shall lay abroad and opened be:
As here we corporal things behold,
and with our eyes the same do see.
Men's consciences so perfect are,
so pure and clean without all blame:
That for their former foul offense,
they need not now to blushe for shame.
No sin, nor sinner, shall be there,
of power they are depriude therefore:
That means is taken from all men,
they shall be sure to sin no more.
Neither shall they, which perfectly
are blessed, be ignorant of this:
Of any secret mystery,
the same to know they shall not miss.
For they shall him behold, which has
the Author of all secrets been:
And they shall see him face to face,
even so as they of him are seen.
For then shall all mankind be made, 12.

so absolute, and perfect pure:
It thencefoorth never shall be chaungd,
but so for ever shall endure.
And of that substance shall remain,
although transformde, and glorifyde:
Into his mighty maker, and
in him most blessedlie abide.
And all the goods which we receyu'de,
disfigured by our filthy sin:
Shall Be in bliss repayrde again,
in happy state, and stay therein.
That is, our understanding shall
without all error perfect be:
Without oblivion in that place,
assured is our memory.
Thoughts without wandering likewise,
Charity, void of fained sense:
Health without sickness, sorrow shall
not unto any breed offense.
Mirth, Pleasure, Pastime, without pain,
Life, without death, Agilitie
Without impediment is there,
where safety syts in each degree.
For whatsoever in this life,
the violence of Beasts, or rage:
Or what misfortune did impair,
or what thy sickness did assuage.
What cruelty had wasted, or
some foul disease had putrifide:
Or age, by nature comborsome,
had thee benumde, or strength denide.
Shall all again, be fresh restorde,
by Resurrection all renude:
In glorious sort we shall receive,
most perfect lymmes: and to conclude,
Our bodies with our members all,
shall to our souls united be:
And both together be endude,
with grace and immortality.
And therefore whosoever, that
in blisfull state possessed is:
Shall by no distaunce of the place,
of this his great preferment miss.
No difference of merits may,
nor means of any other kind:
Once separate us from this love,
which in the Lord we hope to find.
This grant us for thy mercy sake,
through fullness of thy glory great:
Our sinful souls from hence do take,
and place them on thy mercy seat.
Amen.
FINIS.
A very fruitful Prayer to God the Father, for the obtaining of these
benefits, promised in this Book, and necessary to be used at all times.
MOst holy Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, we give unto thee most
humble thanks, for all thy goodness toward us, which thou have found in thy
self before the beginning of the world, and have declared unto us from time to
time, acknowledging our selves to be far less, then the least of thy
mercies. Thou art perfect in thy self, and have no need of any thing: but it
has pleased thee to create all these things, wherein thy glory does appear
as Angels and men, and all things else for them, that them selves might know
that they are created only for thee: not that any thing by them, could be
added unto thee, but that thy glory which is perfect in it self, might be
seen in them, and they also be made pertakers of that happiness, which is
with thee, the which thou have given us in thy belooued. In whom also thou
have chosen us before all worlds, for so thy wisdom has appointed it, that we
should pass through a world and so come unto thee, and see thy glory, and the
riches of thy mercy, and that pleasure which is with thee for ever. And to
this end have thou given us thy most holy word, and thy sanctifying spirit
to attend thereupon: whereby thy elect children might be reformed unto thee.
Holy Father, who is able to comprehend this thy great work of our salvation in
Jesus Christ: but thine own wisdom which is infinite? as thy mercy is, all
goodness, mercy and truth come from thee, and end in thee: but the evil
and corruption which befalls thy Creatures comes of them selves.
Notwithstanding, this also thou turnest to good, for even the wicked thou
suffer for a time, that at the length thy justice might be seen in them:
but to thy children thou ordainest all things to the best, for even the
punishments for their sins, and the afflictions of this life, thou have
appointed for good: that by thy justice, thy mercy might more appear, and
their own happiness which thou have prepared for them, in more glory might be
revealed. To this end have thou set them from thee for a time in this life,
that in the life to come they may know the better, what it is to enjoy thy
presence. Thou have made them here mortal, that they may then perceive, what
it is to be immortal with thee, thou give them over some time to their own
sin, that they may know how much better it is to be holy with thee in thy
kingdom: thou make them taste of the afflictions of this world, that they may
feel in them, how great thy glory is, and to be happy and blessed, with thy
everlasting goodness. Lord, in thy great power have thou created all things,
and orderest them in thy wisdom, preseruest them in thy goodness, and have
redeemed us in thy mercy to thy self, in thy belooued: but thou know this
vain and corrupt nature, which is fallen from thee, and can not rise again
unto thee, except it be drawn by thee. Do away our sins, O Lord, and
possess us, sanctify us with thy holy spirit, that we may walk before thee,
as becomes thy children, and know and feel in deed, that there is no
pleasure nor comfort of it self, in these things which are mortal of them
selves, but only in thee the everlasting goodness in all things else, in
thee and for thee. Increase our faith, that we may walk before thee in
obedience of faith: give us also those things which thou know good and
expedient for us, in this mortal life: that we may use them to thy glory,
and to the comfort of our selves and others, whom thou have commanded us to
love in thee, that thou being our life, in this life, and in the life to
come, we may enjoy the presence of thy Majesty, and glorify thy holy name
for ever, among thy elect people, and blessed Angels.

Amen.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, and are to be sold at his shop
without Newgate, over against Saint Sepulchers Church.


