FOr asmoche as it is often seen ye mannys reason whereby he should decern the
good from the evil / and the right from the wrong / is many times by seduction
of the devil / worldly couetise and sensual appetites repressed and vanquysshed
/ wheruppon comunely ensuen discordes. murdres. robbries. divisions.
disobeissance to sovereigns. subversion of royalmes. and destruction of people
/ so that where thies reign victory in tym of war and justice in time of
pea^ be utterly dampened and exiled. Therefore Emperoures princes and governors
of time past for refrainynge of such inordinat appetites and punysshement of
thoes folnes which rather eychue. to offend for fere of bodily peyn or losses
of gods then for the love of god or justice full wisely and polletiquely
ordained diverse laws servyng to the same purpos aswele in tym of war as peace.
Semblabely our sovereign lord Henry of this name the. un. by the grace of
god king of England and of France and lord of Irlande entendynge by the
same grace with af goodly speed to pass the sea in his own person with an
army and of^ ass for the repressinge of the great tyranny of the frenshmen
now lately done and yet of new purpensed determined and prepaired to be done:
to the manifest daungier of his royalme of England / and subgetes of the same
/ unless the said frenshme^ be the sooner and mightiliar withstonde and
recountred. considers well that for the great surety of his said often and
thachieuynge of his most noble purpose it appertains and bihoueth a well to
order his folnes of the war in Justice. by the minystres of the law as to
arryue them in bataile by the chiefteyns of his army. for which purpose his
highness by thaduyse of such lords of his blood capitaignes of his army and
other folnes as be of his counseil has made ordained and establisshed /
certain statutes and ordynaunces herafter ensuynge

First that almaner of men of the kings often of what nation. estate or
condition / soeuir they be. be obeissaunt unto the king our souerayn lord
upon pain of drawinge hanging and quarteringe And ouir that that every man
aforsaide the kings lieutenant for the time being only except / be
obeissaunte unto the marshal of the has aggreed wirh his capitaigne aftre the
ward of the court.

Also that every capitaigne keep duly his watch ward stale and forrey with
asmany men of arms and archers as to him shall be assigned / but ^f he have a
cause reasonable first allowed bifo^e the marshal / and to abide upon his ward
wa^he and stale the term to him limyted without ^eparringe from it no way but
it be by the assig^ement or license of him by the which the said watch ward
and stale is made upon peyn his body to be emprisoned and to stand at the
kings will. Also that every captain have day and night watch within his
loginge upon pain of losinge iiij. days wages

That no man disaray him in the battal for no scrie that comes in the oste.
Also that for no tidings ne for no manner of scrye that may come in the
oste that no man mean him in disaraye out of the battle if they ride or goo
but by leave of the chieftayne vpone

pain that he that so ^ff^^deth shall be. (...) to the ward of (...) unto
the time he have made his fy^ with him and found suertie that he shall no more
so offend / and at the second time. his body to stand at the kings will.

For vnlaufulle escries.
Also that none unreasonable ne outragies escry be in the oste by day nor night
upon pain that he that is fond the begynner thereof to dye therefore and the
remenant to be imprisoned and their bodies to be punisshed at the kings will.
and he yt certifieth who is the begynner shall have xl. s. for his labor of
the marshalle.

Also that every capitaigne keeping the oste that shall fortune to have
soldier of his retynue to be discharged or to depart out of his company or
to be ded. be it naturelly or by mu^^^e or slaughter within.x. days next and
immediately ensuynge his said dischargynge. departinge or death certifye by byl
his name with the day of his discharging departing or death unto the treasourer
of the wars. And if the same l^e^ and seal upon pain to forfaite his part
in the prisoner unto his capitaign / and he to be under arrest of the marshal
unto the time he have agreed with his capitaigne. In likewise that no captain
raunson or sell his prisoner without license of the king or his treasourer of
the wars upon pain of forfaiture of the same prisoner unto the king / and
that no man bye no such prisoners upon pain to lose the gold and money that
he paieth for him / and the prisoner to be arrested to the capitaigne aforsaide
Alsoo the capitayn upon notise had of the said prisoner and license aslred
by his soldiour shall not without cause reasonable showed unto the marshal let
the said soldier to take his best advantage of the said prisoner how be it
that if the capitaigne wol give asmoche for the said prisoner as another he
shall have the prisoner and preferrement

Also if any man take any enemy the which has been sworn and had billet^
^^y man which owes ligeaunce unto our liege for^ the king that is to wit
englisshe wasshe^ she or any other of such condition that the^ sone as he is
comen into the oste or else where. he be brought into the ward of the marshal
/ upon peyn to have the same death that the same tratoure or enemy shall have
And he that any siche brings in shall have an hundredth shillinges of the
king or of the marshal for his trauail

Also if any man take any prisoner forthwith as he co^myth into the oste he
bring his prisoner unto his capitaigne or master / upon pain of losing of his
part to his forsaide captain or master And then that his said capitaigne if
he be within the oste certifye the marshal within two days And if he be out
of the oste in garrison / or else where that he certify the said marshal as soon as he conveniently may / and declare his name and hauyour by byl as nigh
as he can aftre his knoulege so that he be not led noon other way upon pain
to lose his part to him that shall do first the marshal to have witting thereof
and his body to be emprisoned and punysshed at kings will And that every man
do keep or do to he kept his prisoner yt he ride not nor goo at lar^ in the
oste ne in loginges / Butte if ward be had upon him upon pain of losing of
the same prisoner Reserving to his lord or maistre his thriddes of the hole
if he be not party / of the defaulte. and the second part to him that first
shall accuse him / and the thridde part to the marshal / and also more ouir his
body in arreste at the kings will. Also that he suffer not his prisoner to go
out of the oste for his ransom ne for non other cause without saufconduit of
the king or the marshal upon the pain aforesaid Also that every capitaigne
in like wise bring his prisoner unto the tresourer of the werres vpone peyn of
forfaitur of the same prisoner unto the king Also that the marshal from viii
days to viii. days duringe the kings army do certifye the treasourer of the
wars of all such certificates as shall be brought in by the capitayns or any
other unto him aswele of his own as of other almaner prisoners / taken by any
man in the ost certified unto him upon peyn of renning in the kings
indignacion and to forfaite the double of the value to the king / of the said
prisoner or prisoners so concei^ And like as every

capitaigne and souldioure is bound to bring in and certify his prisoner under
the form above rehearsed. so in the same wise and under semblable penalties
they and every of them shall bring in and certify al other prays goods and
catalles by them won by the war.

For paynge of thriddes /
Also that every nan pay his thriddes to his capitayn lord and mastre of al
manner wynnyng by werre / and that as well those that be not in sold but logeinge
or hostynge under the baner or penon of their capitaigne upon peyn to lose his
part of his forsaide winning to his capitayn and his body to be in ward of
the marshal unto the tym he have aggreed with his forsaid master / And also
that every capitaigne pay unto the king as well the third part of his own
wynnynges of the werre / as the thridde of the thriddes whereof each of his
retynue shall be aunswering unto him / of which thirdes and thirdes of
thirdes / every captain shall be accomptable before the tresourer of the kings
wars upon peine of forfaiture of the said winnynges unto the king.

For geuynge of saufcondu
^ytes or congies and for brekinge of them.

master or captain upon pain of losinge horse harneys and his part of the
same child / reserving to his lord mastre or capitayn his duete so that they
be not consentaunt unto the said defaulte And also that the said lord mastre
or capitaigne bring him unto the king within viii days

Also for asmoche as our said sovereign lord for thenwarde love tender zele
and entier affection which he bears naturelly to his subgettes being of his
said oste and army would be lothest and most displeasaunt to se or
understand any of them to do that offens whereby he should deserve the lest
punysshement by the said ordynances provided / His highness therefore desires
and tenderly prays his said subgettes to considre and understand that his
good speed in his said journey / the honor of his royalme and the well and
surety of the same his subgettes stondeth upon the obser^ (...) said statutes
/ wherefore though it (...) the gretest heuinesse and displeasure / yet (...)
necessitye. when the case it requires (...) the said statute^ executed / and
the off^er (...)

In considerato^n whereof he wills and straightly chargith his said subgettes to
have them self in so good awayte yt in no wise they offend the said statutes
and to thentent they have no cause to excuse them of their offenses by
pretense of ignorance of the said ordenances / his highness has ouir and
above the open proclamacion of the said statutes commanded and ordained by
wey of emprynte diverse and many several books conteignyng the same statutes to
be made. and delivered to the capitaignes of his ost charginge them as they will
avoyde his great displeasure to cause the same twyes or ones at the lest in
every weke holy to be read in the presence of their retynue.

Here ends certain statutes and ordenaunces o^ war made ordained enacted
and establysshed by the most noble victorius and most christian prince our most
^rad souerayn lord king Henry the vii. king o^ France and of England by the
(...) discrete counsel holding the his high (...) parliament at his pale^ of
westmynster the xvii. day of October in the (...) MCCCC.lxxxxii. and (...)

