An Introduction to the love of God. ()

Accounted among the works of S. Augustine, and set forth in his name, very
profitable to move all men to love God for his benefits received

MATH. 22. Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, with al thy
soul, and with all thy mind. This is the greatest and the first commandment.
The second is like to this. Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thy self. In
these two commandments hang all the law and the Prophets.

1 JOHN. 2. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If a
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him.

Seen and allowed according to the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions. Anno, 1574.



TO THE MOST virtuous and noble Princes Queen Elizabeth, by the grace of God,
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith. etc.
AMong all other benefits, most gracious sovereign Lady, which God in mercy
has bestowed upon your roial person* the knowledge of GOD is most singular,
and for the which we your humble Subjects have most cause to praise God. But
I mean not the knowledge of his essence or being, which none of the Angels or
heavenly powers are able to comprehend: Neither yet that general knowledge of
God which is gotten by his creatures and works from the creation of the world.
Which although it be of no force to change the mind, and regenerate to true
godlynes, yet are all men by it made inexcuseable before God, in as much as
when they knew God, Roma. 1.
they glorified him not as God. But I mean the chief and singular knowledge of
God, whereby not only his universal power, and infinite mercy replenishing the
whole earth, but also his unsearchable counsel in saving us by Christ, hidden
from the world, is well perceived and known. This knowledge of God has
eternal life annexed unto it, John. 17.
as says Christ: This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. And as this knowledge of God
does comprehend in it the counsel of God to save us by Christ: so it does
renew the whole man, and urges him to apprehend that good thing which it
shows, according to the saying of Christ: you shall know the truth, and the
truth shall make you free.

That this knowledge of God, by his good spirit, already planted in your
Majesty's heart, might daily increase, and more and more be confirmed, I have
chosen out a little short treatise, stirryng and moving very much to the love
of God, through the consideration of his benefits: Accounted among the works
of saint Augustine, and set forth in his name, to dedicate the same to your
Highness. The diligent vewe and consideration whereof, I know right well, will
not a little inflame and set on fire those sparks of the knowledge and love of
God, already by Gods good spirit kindled in your royal heart. For I am not
ignorant, most gracious sovereign, of your good and gracious nature, and how
much your Majesty is inclined to love and mercy, to pity the poor and
miserable, to respect the causes of such as are in distress, to help the
oppressed, to pardon offenses, to do good to all men, which all are nothing
else but fruits of that knowledge and love of God, which by the word of God,
and Gospel of Christ you have conceived. And as the same has already brought
forth these fruits, so I nothing doubt, but the continual meditation of Gods
infinite love, and innumerable benefits, will bring forth more love of God, to
solace and comfort her self only in his love, in respect whereof, all
pleasure, joy, and love of this world waxes vile, and chooses rather with him
to bear afflictions, and suffer hard things, then with the world to enjoy
the pleasures of sin for a season. For surely such is the nature of the love
of God, that as it nothing forces of, or regards not the afflictions of this
life, so it utterly contemns and treads under foot the vanities and love
of this world, as nothing, in respect of his love, who first has loved us.

To the furtherance whereof, the diligent reading of this little treatise, will
very much help. Wherein the Author, even of sense and feeling, and as one all
together ravished with the love of god sets forth how diversely, by his
benefits and love, we are moved to love him, and that his unspeakable love
toward us, can no ways better be recompensed, then by love again. Wherein if
it shall please your Majesty to bestow some short time, I know the more it is
read, the more comfortable delight will be conceived therein. And though
paraduenture this might be thought of some a travail altogether superfluous,
to translate the same out of Lattin, in which tongue it was first written, and to
dedicate the same to your highness, considering the excellency of your
knowledge in the same tongue, wherein you might with more delectation and
pleasure have solaced your self: yet to me it should not seem superfluous,
being set forth in a language that most of your Subjects do understand, and
therefore like to redounde to the profit of the more. And besides forth, that
which is set forth under the protection and privilege of Princes, is of all
men the more diligently read.

And to whom might I more aptlye dedicate the introduction to the love of God,
then to so godly and virtuous a Prince, out of whose breast there flovveth such
streams of mercy, and flames of love tovvard her subjects, that she seems
an apt and meet soil of God, wherein the love of God might profitablye be
planted. The God of love therefore, inflame your most royal heart with his
love, and with his holy spirit direct you in the right course to eternal
life: That in this life your Majesty may have such sense and feeling of his
love, that in time to come you may have the full fruition thereof in his
eternal glory. Amen.

Your Majesty's most humble Edmund Roffen.

Viuat Regina.
Ad serenissimam D. D. Elizabetham Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Reginam,
fidei defens. etc.
EPIGRAMMATA.
Nescia virgo viri, regni Regina potentis,
Nobilibus multum sollicitata procis
Non sociata tamen: quia non mortalevidetur
Coniugium mentem tangere posse tuam.
Accipe diuini coelestia pignora scripti,
Vnde tuum flagret pectus amore Dei.
Qui pius, in Christo te tam redamab it Jesus,
Quam fuerit Christus totus amore tuus.
Sed tuus ille quidem manet, aeternu^que manebit
Illius in studio tu quia fixa manes.
Nil opus est igitur nostro, Regina, libello
Qui doc^t vt facias quod prior ipsa facis.
Nil opus est fateor: forsan tamen ista legendo
Esse tuus poterit multiplicatus amor.
Ad eandem Principem.
Sacra deo Princeps, et sacro nomine virgo,
Accipe quae sacro pignora font fluunt:
Omni digna quide^, sed te dignissima (pri^ceps)
Principe, sacrato nomine, cord, fide,
^en ab Hebraeis sacrati foederis index:
Men's venit a summo numine sancta tibi.
Atqui sancta^ sacra decent, tibi co^secro sacra,
Principibus multis vix been nota viris.
Ad eandem Principem.
Chara deo Princeps, diuinum dilige numen:
Viue Deo, et viues, Elizabetha diu.
Et patriae perchara tuae, perchara Britannis,
Quae nacta es, recta sceptra tuere manu.
Grataque tum musis gratas amplectere musas:
Maximus at tibi sit rel^igionis amor.
Quae facis, et facies, neque ta^ monuisse iuuabit,
Quam fecisse iuuat singula sponte tua.
Ad eandem Principem.
Summa laus regum fuit inclytorum,
Fortiter fines patriae tueri:
Quod tamen non praestitit vlla regum
Regia virtus*
Extulit quosdam Deus ipse reges:
Depulit quosdam Deus ille reges:
Praestiterunt omnia sola diui
Sceptra potentis.
Ergo diuinum reuerere numen:
Numinis tanti celebrato nomen:
Vnius laudem tua vota spectent
Fusa per auras.
Ad Librum.
Faelix marmoreas migrato in aedes:
Intra limina clarioris Aulae:
Si noui dominam palatij huius,
Vltro purpureum petet libellum.
DE MODO DILIGENdi Deum distichon.
Dilige mente deum tota, ratione modoque,
Omnem qui superet cum ratione modum.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
FOR as much as that famous Clarke Erasmus, and profounde Censor, both of wit
and skill, lets not first to confess that this treatise following, tastes
of good learning, though the style, phrase, and order differ from the works of
S. Augustine, in the number of the which it has been accounted: And next, that
it descryeth or bewraieth a very diligent Reader of that holy father his
volumes, out of whose confessions especially he has inserted into this
Pamphlet many wholesome and proper sentences, as well teaching and proving
that S. Austine does so often inculcate: namely that nothing was create without
the word of God, as moving and styrring us to ghostly love and affection, from
the right feeling of the which it seems to have flowen: I am the bolder to
presume that to thee (good Reader) it shall be both the more leefe and
acceptable: And the rather because that I have endeavored my self to the
uttermost of my power, in the translatyng hereof, so to express the copye used
by the Author, as no obscurity (I trust) may seem to remain, and so with him
to have iterated one thing or matter, that it may rather serve as a drop by often
falling to pearce more deepelye, then to breed or induce any lothsomnes or
sacietie. For albeit that things earthlye, vain, and transitory may justly
bring with them a certain tedious disdain, when they are to often or commonly
repeated, or lack the relief of pleasant variety, yet am I persuaded, and so
would I have thee, that things heavenly, everlasting, endless and durable, and
verily repleate with bliss and felicity, so worthily deserve the Poet his
testimony, that the oftener they be inculcate, the more they shall double
their pleasure with profit. Take this therefore in gree and good worth, how
soever for want of good method it seem to be confused, as a wholesome
meditation, and no less needful then fruitful for this time and season, in
the which self love, frie^ding of the flesh, and vanity of the world so
universally rage and reign, as I pity to see, and am sorry to report. For
herein thou may by contemplation and view of thy duty to God, and his love to
thee, learn to abandon whatsoever to thy soul health is repugnant or
aduersant, without the interlacing of superstitious vanities or fear of
infection proceeding from popery. For in avoiding thereof, I confess me plainly
that I have even wittingly used in this translation a certain fredome and
liberty, and reduced the sense of the Author, to the consonancy, and Canon of
the holy scripture.

For as I acknowledge it to be great and presumptuous impiety, to rack or use
force in divine testimonies, such I mean as are included within the compass
of both Testaments, as holden and allowed for canonical scriptures: being by
God his own mouth prohibited any way to wrest or to wring them: so I think it
not unlawful, but rather requisite and necessary, in translating or readyng
the books of Interpretours, be they old, be they new, or what soever they
be, since they cannot well be without some wartes of error, especially when
they are conceived and written in mood and affection, or rest in the
preiudicate opinions of humane infirmity, or willingly follow the iniquity
of their time: to use such moderation, discretion and judgment grounded up on
holy writ, as by diminishing, adding, altering, or rasing, they may reasonably
be amended, and as in part, so in all made fruitful to the Reader. This if any
man either of spiced conscience, or wayward mind, dislike or control, I wish
him more wit, then fantastically to desire to have hurtful things joined to
the wholesome as of necessity, especially when they may conuenientlye either
be taken away, or changed, without prejudice done to God his word, or offense
given to good men. For I hold him an vnwiseman, and more then frantic in
folly, that will have any such opinion of any Physician, how learned or skilful
so ever he be, that bccause he has received at his hands many wholesome
drugs, and comfortable confections, which at sundry times turned to his ease,
health and sanitie: that a poison by the same Physician in the end or among
them so ministered, shall not be able to annoy or to hurt him: especially when
the drugs or confections before given, had neither quality, quantity, nor
operation in them to qualify, resist, or expel the poison. And yet is there
no earthly poison so pestilent to the body, as the poison of error is noisome
to the soul. And therefore to fantasy any earthly man so much in the
dyscourse of any piece of doctrine (considering that as he may both deceive
and be deceived, so he may therein covertly convey into the ears of his hearer,
as many damnable paradoxes as Christian articles) that not only the care shall
be taken away from us to eschew his heresies, but also a desire fair
kindled to like and to learn them, where nothing is infarced to their
confutation, I hold it so incurable a piece of frenzy, as all the policies
in the world are not able to tame.

Thus trustyng that I have not only acquaynted thee with the profit and
commodity which this treatise shall yield thee, but that I have also rendered a
sufficient reason of my liberty in translation, and of alteryng the sense
where it tended any way to the derogation of Gods glory by attributing to much
to man his merits and deseruinges, and aduertising thee to esteem no man his
works, opinions, doctrine, or counsel, further then they shall agree with the
touchstone of all truth and verity: I wish thee the grace of God his holy
spirit to conduct and lead thee into all such things as shall stand with
thine own duty, and tend to the glory of the whole Trinity.

FINIS.
IF good to learn be thine intent,
And not to plain of time ill spent:
But so temploy thy present pain,
As endless fruit may be thy gain:
This Treatise read, and herein view
Al duties to thy Savior dew.
For this does teach for thy behoue,
The lord thy god how thou shall love
For love of thee him self that gave
To death, from death thy soul to save.
An introduction to the love of God.
The first Chapter.
That the love of God and thy neighbor cannot be separated.
WIth wakefull heed, and diligent mind, earnest endeavor, and continual
carefulnes, it becomes and behooves us, to search and to learn, how, and
what way, we may escape hell torment, and purchase heavens joy: Since neither
that torment may be avoided, nor that joy procured, except the means be
known, how that one may be shunned, and that other attained. Let us therefore
the more willingly hear, and the more diligently consider, the words of the
Apostle, in the which he proposes these two things, to were, that heavens joy
is unspeakable: and which is the way that leads unto life: 1. Cori. 2.
For he says, that neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, nor the heart
of man conceived the things which God has prepared for them that love him. Lo
now, even by this that the Apostel says, that GOD has prepared good things
for them that love him, it appereath, that love is both the way, and the mean
by the which we aspire unto them. But the love of God, without the love of thy
neighbor cannot be had, as witnesses s. John, who says: He that loves not
his brother whom he sees, 1. John. 4
how can he love God whom he sees not? And this commandment have we from
God, that whosoever loves God, shall also love his neighbor. And thus in these
two loves consists that true love which thapostle speaks of saying: And yet
show I unto you a more excellent way. 1* Cor. 12.
This more excellent way is love, which leads to that heavenly country, and
without the which no man can come unto it.

But who is in this way? or who knows it? Forsooth he that loves both God and
his neighbor. How then is God first, and next the neighbor to be loved? We
must love God more the^ our selves, and our neighbor as our selves. We love
God more then our selves, when we in all things prefer his pleasure and
commandments before our own wyls. But our neighbor we are not commanded to
love above our selves, but as our selves, that is: to will, and to wish unto
him all the goodness which we ought to will or wish to our selves, and specially
the everlasting joy and bliss, and to the attainment thereof to assist, and to
help him both with bodily and spiritual goods, as reason requires, and
ability permits. In consideration whereof the Lord says in the Gospel:
Math. 8.
Whatsoever ye would that men should do unto you, do ye even the same unto
them also. And s. John says: 1. John. 3.
Let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and verity. But who
are those neighbors whom we ought thus to love? Truly all Christian men,
Jews, and Heathen, friends and enemies.

The second Chapter.
Why and how God is to be loved.
Since al our soul health then consists in love, why, and how the Lord is
to be loved, let us diligently weigh and consider But to excite, noorish, and
increase the love of God in us, nothing is so forceble, as the often
remembrance, and diligent consideration of his benefits. So great things has
he given us, heaped and bestowed upon us, that our soul utterly faints in
the view of his bounty and goodness. But in this case though we be not able to
yield unto him so many, and so great thanks, as beseems our love, and
becomes our service: yet must we not fail, to render him so many, and so
great as we can. And see wherefore: to wete, for his benefits, which for his
great love, and free benevolence, our merits or deserts requiring none such,
the Lord has most graciouslye bestowed upon us, he is entirelye of us to be
beloved. But how, or in what sort God is to be loved, that his commandment,
which he so straightly prescribed, and so preciselye will have kept and observed
on our part, does manifestly show and declare.

Give care therefore, O Man, to that commandment, which of all other is
greatest, and chiefest. Give ear I say, and hear it diligently, print it in
memory, think on it continuallye, and to thy power fulfill it daily and
hourelye. That commandment is this: Deuteronomy. 6.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, that is, with all thine
understanding, and with all thy soul, that is, with all thy will, and with all
thy mind, that is, with all thy memory, that thou may reserve and keep all
thy thoughts, al thy life, and all thy skill and knowledge, to yield unto him
thine obedience and service. But peradventure, because thou deemest thy self
to be loved of God but a little, therefore thou art not afeard to love him
again but lightly. Search therefore, and weigh with thy self in thy mind,
with what gifts and benefits he has endued thee already, and what he has
promised to bestow on thee hereafter: And thou shall forthwith find, that
thou art bound to love him beyond all might, and measure. But to the end that
the love of God may in thee be quickened, and augment the more aboundantlye:
weighe and consider by whom, why, and to what end mankind was first created,
and what things* God made for the use, and ease of man. For this is to be
gathered, that of the things created, whether they be heavenly or
terrestrial, visible or invisible, there is none other cause, but the mere
goodness of the Creator, which is the Lord God only one, and alone. Whose
goodness is of such greatness, that of that blissefulnes, by the which he is most
highly happy, and blessed for ever, he wills other to be partners, because
he sees it may be imparted, but not diminished. That goodness therefore which
him self is, and by the which him self is blessed, only of his free goodness,
and not of necessity, would he impart and communicate unto others, because it
appertains to the chief good, to have will to be profitable, and beseems
the most mighty, not to be hurtful. But because no man is able to be
partaker of his blissefulnes, but by understanding, (for the more it is
understood, the more fully it is had) God made a reasonable creature, which
might not only understand the chief good, but that by understanding might
also love it, and by loving, might possess it, and by possessing, might use
it: and so distinguished that creature, that part might remain in the purity
of him self, and not be joined with a body, as the Angel, and part might
be coupled to a body, as the soul. The reasonable creature therefore, is
divided into that which has not, and to that which has a body? That which
is void of body is called an Aungel. And that which has body, is called a
Man, consistinge of the flesh, and a reasonable soul.

The principal cause therefore, why the reasonable creature was ordained, is ye
goodness of God. So that both man, and Angel, were made because of Gods
goodness, for by reason that god is good we are, and in as much as we are, we
are good also. But to what end, was the reasonable creature created? To praise
God, to serve him, and to use and enjoy him. In the which the creature him
self profits, and not God. For God is ever perfect and fulfilled of all
sovereign bounty, and goodness, and can neither be increased, nor diminished.
And therefore that reasonable creature was created of god, is to be referred
to the goodness of the Creator, and the profyt of the creature. In so much that
as often as this question is asked, why or to what end, the reasonable creature
was made? The answer must be, for the goodness of the Creator, and the profit
of the creature. For it avails the creature to serve God, and both to have
and enjoy him.

The third Chapter.
The cause of the creation of Angels men, and all other creatures.
BOth Angel therefore, and Man are said to be made for God, not because God
the Creator, and most blysfull, has need of the service either of Angel or
Man, for he has no want of our goods, but that both Man and Angel, might
serve and use him, whom to serve is to raygne. For in this the servant
receives the profit, and not he to whom it is done. And as man was made for
god, so the world was made for man, that it might serve him. Man therefore was
placed in such state and degree, both that he should be served, and that he
should serve: that on each side, all the goodness might redound to him self, as
well of the service which he receives, as of that which he does. For so God
would that Man should serve him, that not God, but Man might be profited by the
service. And he also would that the world should so serve Man, as Man thereby
might in like sort be helped. All the goodness therefore redou^ded to man, both of
that which was made for him, and of that also, for the which him self was
made. For all things are ours says the Apostle, 1. Cor. 3.
the things above us, the things equal with us, and the things inferior
unto us: The things above us are ours, to use and enjoy, as God in Trinity,
and trinity in unity. The things equal with us, are ours to agree with all:
as the Angels, who albeit at this present they be above us, shall in time to
come notwithstanding be our Mates, and our equals. The things inferior unto
us, are also ours, to stand us instead, and to serve our necessities. As the
things which pertain to the Lord and Master, are also the Servants, not by
taking from the Lord or Master his right or title, but because they also serve
to the use of the servant. It is therefore said in certain places of the
scriptures, that Angels do serve us, because they for our sakes, are sent
forth to minister. In consideration whereof the Apostle has these words: Are
they not all ministering spirits, Heb. 1.
that are sent to minister for their sakes which shall be heiers of salvation?
Neither let this seem incredible to man in as much as the creator him self,
and King of angels came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life
for many. And the angels are said to offer our prayers, and vows unto God,
not because they teach or instruct God of our desires or meaninges, who
knows all things before they come to pass, as well he knows them after
they are done, but because they crave to understand Gods pleasure and will
touching these things, and what they shall know to be disposed, according to
Gods hest, and commandment, that they convey to us, either openly or in
secret: Tobi. 12.
Where upon the Angel said unto men. When ye prayed I offered your prayers unto
God. In like manner, even we also, when we pray we do not teach god, as if he
were ignorant either of our desire, or of our need: but ye reasonable creature
must of necessity commit and refer his temporal causes to the eternal verity:
either by desiring that which he could have, or by consentinge and asking what
Gods will is, he shall have. From the high habitation of the heavens therefore,
does the sovereign bountye and love of God draw down unto us the angels of
God, to enquire Gods will for us, to visit and to help us, for God, for us,
and for themselves. For god, because that as meet is, they imitate the
merciful bowels of his love, and pity toward us, for us because that in us,
they have their own^ image and lykenes, in great admiration and reverence, for
them selves, because that with fervent desire and longing, they awayte the
supply of their orders by us.

The fourth Chapter.
Of the love of God toward us.
THis therefore is most needful and necessary, that every man severally do
consider himself, and when he has attained the full perfect knowledge of his
own worthynes and dignity (least he do injury to his creator) in no wise to
love any thing, that any way is to him self inferior. For the things that
in them selves considered, do seem to be beutifull, when they are compared
with other, are but homely, and vile. And as it is great folly, to ioyn foul
things, with fair things, So is it not unseemly, of those things which have a
mean and no counterfayte beutye, to make a comparison, and to match them with
the things that are most fair, and beutiful. Theefore my soul view well thine
own beuty, and thereby learn and understand what beutye thou shall love. But if
the sight of thy self be so duld, duskt, or darkened, by thine own negligence,
that thou can behold thine own self, neither as it becomes, nor as it
behooves thee: Why yet do thou not by the judgment at the least of some
other, gather that true estimation of thy self, which thou should do? Thou
have a Spouse, but his sovereign beuty thou know not, because thou never
yet saw his face or countenance. But he sees thee: and if he saw thee not, he
would not love thee. This Spouse differryng to show, or present him self unto
thee, has sent thee gifts, as pledges and tokens of his love, whereby thou
might know his affection toward thee. If thou myghtest see his face, thou
would be nothing doubtful: for then should thou perceive that he, who is
so fair, so comelye, so beutyfull, and so synguler, would not be enamoured at
the sight of thee, if some synguler beutye in thee, far passing the beuty of
every other creature, did not move and allure him to that love and affection,
not because it was thine, (...) his own beuty in there. Therefore what meanest
thou? or whereabout go thou: Because thou can not see him presentlye, by
means of his absence, therefore will thou neither be afearde nor ashamed to do
him injury, and not only contemn his synguler love, but also to yield thy
self vassaile to thine own lust and sensualiti^? Do not so my Soul, do not
so, for if thou be not yet able to conceive what one he is, that loves thee,
yet consider at the least, the earnest, the pledge, the gage, and the token
which he has sent, and given thee: for it may so be, in and by his gift
which thou have with thee, and in thy possession, thou may learn with what
affection thou ought to love him, and with what zeal and diligence thou
should reserve thy self for him. His earnest is notable, his gift is great,
and noble: For it stands not with the Majesty of a great man to give small
things, nor with the discretion of a wise man, for a small thing to give
great. And yet a great thing is it which he has given thee. But greater is it,
which he loves in thee. But what is it O my Soul, which thy Spouse in his
kindness has given thee? Look upon the world, and examine whether there be
any thing therein that does not service unto thee. Every creature directs his
course to this end, to wait and tend upon thee, to do thee service, to
supplye thy need, and to tender thy profit. And accomplisheth both thy delight
and commoditye, according to that which either abounds in them, or remains
in thee. The heaven, the earth, the air, the sea, and all that in them is,
cease not to accomplish and to fulfill the same. The circuit of times also,
and the annual revolution, which with revived parts does renew, and refresh
the old, repair the ruinons, and restore the decayed, with continual
sustenance serves thy purpose. Who then think thou, has ordained these
things? Who has given that commandment, or prescribed to Nature, with her
whole revenues as it were, to maintain thy port? Thou receauest a benefit,
and know not the Author, the gift is manifest, but the geuer is hidden, and
yet thine own reason suffers thee not to be doubtful, but instructs thee,
that this is not thine own due, but an other bodies benefit. Whatsoever he be
therefore, he has done very much for us. And he that could find in his heart
to give us so much, has also loved and affectioned us as much. The gift
therefore declares both who loves, and who must so highly be loved.

And what great folly is it, not to covet the love of one so mighty: and how
wicked and peruers not to love him that is so loving and louelye? Therefore if
thou love any things contained under heaven, love them as thine Inferiors,
love them as thy servants, as the tokens of thy Spouse, as the gifts of thy
friend, and the benefits of thy Lord: and in such sort yet, as thou may
always remember, that thou art bound and beholding unto him, and that thou
ought to love those things, not for the^ selves, but for him, nor with him,
but for and by him, and finallye, that thou must love him above them, because
he both made them, and gave them unto thee.

The fifth Chapter.
Of the fruition of God.
Now beware my Soul, that thou (as God forbydde thou should) be not
accounted a breaker of thy faith to him, by loving the gifts of the geuer,
more then the affection or zeal of the Lover. And yet shall thou do greater
iniurye to his love, if thou receive his gifts, and do not recompense his
good will. Either therefore refuse his gifts, if thou can, or if thou cannot so
do, yield love for love, in due quantity and measure. Love him for him self,
love thy self for him: love him to use him, and so love thy self that thou
may not be hated, but loved of him. Love him I say in the gifts that he has
given thee, love him to thy use, and love thy self for him. For this is pure
and chaste love, that has in it neither dishonestie nor filth, nor any thing
else that is evil or transitory.

Consider therefore (O my Soul) what things thou have received, common with
all, special with some, and synguler or proper to thy self alone. And in all
these things which he has given thee, whether they be common, special, or
proper, love thy self entirely. For together with all them, before whom he
has preferred thee, by singular gifts, he has also loved thee. Thou art loved
I say, in every creature, thou art loved with all good things, and thou art
loved above all evil things: And if this yet seem but small unto thee, that
thou art loved above all evil things, weygh how good those things are by
virtue of creation, that in every condition have received less goodness then
thou. And first think, O my Soul, that the time was when thou were not, and
that thou receiuedst it by the gift of God, that thou began to be,

The sixth Chapter.
Of the free gifts of creation, and regeneration.
IT was therefore the gift of God that thou were made. But had thou given him
any thing before thou were made, or before thou were created, that in respect
thereof he should make or create thee? Verelye nothing had thou given,
neither could thou give before thou were framed, or fashioned. If God
therefore had given thee nothing else but thy being, yet were he to be praised,
and loved of thee for ever. But truth it is, he has given more, in that he
has not only given it thee, to be: but also to be both beutifull, and fair.
Neither could the bountye of the geuer be herein finished. For over and above
this he has given more, and thereby the more drawn us to his own image, and
lykenes. For this was his meaning, this was his will, and pleasure, to draw
the^ unto him by likeness, who^ he had drawn to himself by love. He has
therefore given it us to be, and not only to be, but also to be fair, and not
only to be fair, but also to live, so as we may pass, and excel such things
as have no being: and such also as be inordinat, maimed, or imperfit, as
neither shapened by form, nor quickened with living spirit. By means whereof
thou art mightyly endebted O my Soul. For thou haste received much, and of thy
self thou had nothing: and for all these things thou have no mean to make
recompense, but only to love. For that which is given by love, no way better
then by love may again be requited. And this by love thou have also received.

But now will I begin to tell the how much this thy Spouse, who appeared so
excellent when he created thee, vouchedsafe to be humbled, when he repaired
thee. And yet notwithstanding, he that in creating thee, seemed so excellent
and high, and that in repayring thee seemed so lowly, is no less wonderful in
the latter work then he was in the former. In the former he mightily gave
great things unto thee, and in the latter he mercifullye suststeyned sharp
things for thee. For to the end that he might advance thee again to that,
from the which thon wast fallen, he disdained not to descend hither where thou
art, and that it might fullye be restored to thee which thon had lost, he
was willinge to suffer that which thou did deserve. He descended therefore
undertook, suffered, overcame, and restored. He descended to mortallitye, he
took upon him freylty: he suffered pain overcame death, and restored man.
Behold these things, O thou my Soul, and be astonished at these so great
wonders, and at these benefits, exhibited for thy sake. Consider how much he
loved thee, that vouched safe to do so much, and so many things for thee.
Thou wast beutyfull by his gift, and thou became foul through thine own
iniquity: Again, thou were cleansed and purified by his mercy, his love yet
working on every side to help thee. In times past, when thou were not, he
loved to create thee, when thou were foul and ill favored, he loved to beutyfie
thee. And finally, to show thee of his love the feruency, he would deliver
thee from death, by none other means, then by dying for thee. And all to utter
therein not so much the benefit of his mercy, as the great vehemence of his
charity and love.

With great bounty therefore has this loving Creator, poured the breath of life
into the first Man his creature, but with much more love has he, for that
self Man and creature, given and bestowed not his goods, but him self.
Greatly then does this set forth Gods goodness toward me, that I am his
workmanship: but much more does this commend it, that he made him self the
price of my redemption. The rather, because that my redemption was with so
royal a price performed, that man therein might seem a prisoner, not unfit by
God to be rau^somed. O happy fault of mine, for the purging of the which, while
my Sovereign Lord is drawn with that love and affection, his love is opened
and revealed unto me, greatly longing and coveting to peruse the same. For I
should never have known his love so fullye, had not my great peryls,
proportioned mine experience accordingly. O how happelye therefore fell I: that
after my fall, was raised again more happelye. There is no love greater, no
zeal purer, no charity hollyer, no affection feruenter, then that an Innocent
vouched safe to dye for me, finding in me no cause to love or to favor me.
Tell me therefore O Lord, what it is that thou have so loved in me, and so
dearelye loved, that thou would needs dye for me? what have thou found in
me of that quality or nature, that might make thee to be wylling to suffer for
me such cruelty?

The seventh Chapter.
Of the benefit of God in calling us to the faith.
ANd thou my Soul, to thend thou may behold this love more perfectlye, and
joy in it more aboundantlye, ponder with thy self how many and how worthy in
comparison of thee, are left, forlorn, refused, and utterly cast away, that
could never attain to the grace which thou have given unto thee. Surely thou
have heard say, that from the beginning of the world to this day, many
generations have passed, all the which without the knowledge of God, and the
price of their redemption, are fallen into the lappes of everlasting
destruction. And hereby appears that thy redemer preferred thee before them
all, when he gave thee his grace so frankly and freelye, which none of them
all could get or come by: and yet why thou were taken and chosen before them,
or why he dealt with thee more lovingly then with the^, thou can find in thy
self no cause, but only the mere love of thy merciful Savior. Thy Spouse
therefore, thy Lover, thy God and thy Redeemer, has both chosen, and
forechosen thee. He has chosen thee I say in all* and has taken thee from
among all, and has loved thee in all, and called thee also by his own name,
that the remembrance and memorial of him might remain with thee for ever. He
woold have thee partaker of his name, and partaker of the truth of his name,
because he has anointed thee with that self oil of gladness, with the which
him self was anointed, that of the anointed thou might be anointed,
because that of Christ thou art called a Christian.

But were thou stronger, were thou wyser, were thou nobler, or were thou
ritcher then they all, in that thou have atchiued this special grace over,
above, and before them all? How many strong, how many wise, how many noble,
how many rich were there, in those days, and yet all they forsaken, have
perished every one? highly therefore, have thou stand in his favor, and great
I confess is the bonntye which he has extended toward thee. For when thou
wast foul and polluted, deformed also, and miserably defiled, ragged and
torn, ougsome, and grysely, and as one that was fulfilled of lothsomnes, and
enormity, so God thy Lord loved thee, yt with all the gifts of his grace he
vouched safe to enritche thee. Take this therefore for an absolute resolution,
that except thou endeavor with great and earnest study, to adorn and deck
thy self, and to recover thy first comelines and decency, thou shall never be
thought meet to be brought into the Bride chamber of thy spouse, that is
glorious celestial and heavenly. Now therefore, while thou have time, and
opportunity, trym and dress thy self O my Soul, sleeke up thy foreheade,
facion thy face, frame thine attire, fret of thy freckles, rub of thy warts,
wash away thy spots, smoth thy wrinkles, be all hansome and cleanlye, amend thy
behavior, and with all thy might, and main, set all things in good order,
that thou may be accepted of so louinge a Spouse. Prepare thy self I say, as
becomes the Bryde of him that is immortal, and as besemeth the Spouses of a
King celestial.

The eight Chapter.
Of the gift of virtues.
KNow this also O my Soul, that thou haste wherewith to deck, and adorn thy
self, and yet that thou shouldeste not have of thy self, if God did not geeue
it thee. For of him thou haste received the vesture, and garment of good
works, with the fruict of alms, fasting and prayer, besides diverse other
virtues, wherewith thou may be garnished, trymd, and made gorgious, as with a
robe of variable, fresh, and sundry colors. And least thou should fail
in any point, he has bountefully bestowed upon thee what so ever is known
partinent to health, or refection: And what so ever may repair comelines, or
increase thy beuty. From the which how plenteous store, and distribution,
presents it self unto thee on al sides, I pray thee be advised diligently to
think on. Thou had nothing, and much was given thee, that was given thou
had lost, and it was restored unto thee, whereby thou art assured, that thou
shall never be left destitute, but in such sort rather, as thou shall have many
fold occasion to know, and to see, how entirely he loves thee, that is thy
Paramour. He is loath, my Soul to lose thee, and that is the cause why he
awayteth thy loyalty with such patience and long sufferaunce, giving thee
leave, and liberty, according to the multitude of his mercy so often to
repent thee, as thou co^mittest any folly. And now record and call to memory,
how many may be found which with thee have receued all that I have recited, and
yet have not with thee obtained that favor in the^, to have renewed what soever
they have impaire^, which being considered, thou haste just cause to think,
that thou art yet loved more then they al: for that the things by thee lost,
are so beningly restored, which to them, by the^ lost, are so strictly denied.
For thou by his grace and bounty were never denied to work well and wisely.
Therefore if thou redely do great things, thou art mercyfullye advanced, and if
thou hardly do small things, thou art worthily humbled. For he knows what is
good for thee, better then thy self do, and therefore if thou wylt have a
good and dutyfull opinion of him, understand and conceive, that whatsoever he
does to thee is both good, and well done. Such is the love of God toward us,
that the infirmity of man endures nothing, but that by his goodness is
disposed to our profit. Perhaps thou have not the grace of strength to do
virtues, but whilst thou art shaken with the suggestion of vices, thou art
made more strong in thine humility. For weakness with humilitye has a better
savor in the presence of God, then pride of mind has with the strength of
virtue. Be not therefore so bold or malapert, as any wai to presume to
prejudice Gods disposition, but always with fear and reverence address thy
prayers to God, that he may vouchsafe to help thee, as he knows it most fyt
and expedient for thee. And that if as yet any evil remain in thee, he may
mercifully redress it, and that if any goodness begun in thee, be not yet
finished, he may bountifully accomplish it, and finally conduct and bring thee
to him self, by such way as he him self best lyketh.

The.ix. Chapter.
Of the gift of understanding and knowledge.
NOw tell me O my soul, what recompense shall we make to the Lord, for all the
goodness that we have received of him? For he has not contented him self to
give us only those good things which he has given to others and the residue
of his creatures, but he has also provided that in our afflictions we may
feel and taste of his love toward us, and thereby take occasion singularly,
and that as well in all our adversities, as prosperities, to embrace his
kyndnes in ye arms of our love. Say we therefore in our selves, and use we
this meditacion: Lord thou have given us the grace to know thee, and more then
to other creatures, thou haste disclosed and opened thy secrets unto us, by
framing our understanding to conceive thy hydden mysteries. Other our Equals,
Mates, and companions, as well in age, as dignitye, thou have left lyinge in
ignorance, and the darkness of infidelity, but to us thou haste showen the
light of thy grace, verity and truth, more then to other of Adams children.
For unto us thou haste given, capable sense, easy understanding fast memory,
strength in working, grace in conversion, mayntenaunce in prosperity, profit in
study, wit in conceyts, comfort in adversity, and which way souer we turn,
thy grace and thy mercy does prevent and go before us. For right often my
Soul, when as to our selves we seemed utterly wast and consumed, he did
suddenly relieve us, when we wandered and went astray, he brought us into the
way, when we were ignorant, he taught us, when we were sad, he did comfort us,
when we were fallen, he did rear us up, and when we stood, he did hold and
stay us from falling. Finally he gave us the grace more verelye to know him,
more purely to love him, more sincerely to believe in him, and more fervently to
follow him, then he gave it to any other of his creatures.

Therefore O Lord my God, the swetenes of my life, the light of mine eyes, what
recompense shall I make thee for all that thou have done for me? will thou that
I shall love thee, then teach me how, and how greatly I shall do it. For who am
I, that I may love thee, my strength my Lord, my stedfastnes, my refuge, and my
deliverance: my God, my helper, my defender, the horn of my salvation, and my
maintainer, what shall I say more? but my Lord, and my God.

The.x. Chapter.
Of God his provident care over us.
FOr manifold and innumerable are the good things which thou have done for
me, O lord my God, and of them to think and to speak shall it always be
sweet, and pleasant unto me: the rather if thou Lord shall make me thankful,
that I may praise, and love thee for all thy benefits. Lo my Soul, thou have
now thy pledge, and thy pledge does manifest and show forth thy Spouse. Keep
it therefore untouched, keep it undefiled, keep it unpolluted, keep it safe,
keep it whole, keep it clean, keep it sound. For albeit thou were sometime
defiled, thou art now made honest, and a Virgin again, according to the
natural operation of his love, which wonteth to restore purity to the
corrupted, and in them that are pure, to keep chastity unspotted. Occupy
therefore thy cogitacion, and always busy thy self in thinking how mercifully
he has dealt with thee, and therein ponder how greatly he loves thee, in
that he neither suffers his benefit to be wanting unto thee, nor thee to be
ignorant how diversely thou enioyest it. And this say I to thee, because that
so often as I note or mark the course of his mercy, it seems to me that God
does nothing else, (if I may so say) but only provide for my salvation. For I
see him so wholly occupied, and busyed in keeping of me, as if he had forgotten
all other things, only to attend me: so continuallye is God present with
me, so continuallye does he offer him self ready for me, that which way
soever I turn me, he never forsakes me: wheresoever I become, he never goes
from me: whatsoever I do, he does still assist me. Finally he is the perpetual
beholder of all my doings, and so much as may beseem, or become his goodness,
as an inseparable workman together with me, he stands by me, and does not
only help, and set forward what wants in me, but also patiently perfiteth
theffect of his workmanship. And hereby it appears, that albeit his face
cannot yet be seen of us, his presence notwithstanding is evermore with us.
But what is the pleasant thing trow you which while I think on him, is wont
not only to touch me, but also so effectually and sweetly to affect me, that
even presently me thinks, I am distraitt from my self, and both drawn and
carried hence, but God knows I wot not whether. Forsooth this it is, that I am
altogether altered, and changed into an other, and a new creature, and feel
my self in such felicity, as I cannot express. My conscience is cleared with
joy and solace, all the wretchedness and miseries of my sorrows forepast, are
utterly forgotten and blotted out of memory. My mind rejoices, mine
understanding is made bright, my heart also is lightened, and with longing made
joyful and pleasant. And now I know not how I see my self in an other
country, and as it were in the arms and bosom of love I inwardlye hold and
embrace, but what I wot nere. And while I labor with all my might continually
to keep it, and never to lose it, my Soul wrestleth after a pleasant manner,
as loath to forgo, that so feign it would have. And as if it had found there in
the end of all desires, it highly and vnspeakeablye aduaunceth it self for
joy, seeking none other thing, nor desyring any more, but always well willing
to be as it is. And is not this now think ye, that most loving and louelye
Spouse? Yes verelye, this is that my Lord and God which visits me, and yet
comes unto me inuisibly, secret, and incomprehensible: This is he, which
comes to touch me, and not to be seen of me: which comes to admonish
me, and not to be comprehended: which comes not to infuse him self wholly
into me, but in part to be assayed and tasted of me, and neither fulfilleth my
desire, nor gives the fulness of his own sacictie.

And this is it that chieflye appertains to the earnest of his betrothyng,
that he which in the world to come shall give him self unto thee my Soul, for
ever to be seen and possessed of thee: does now presently give but a say or a
taste, that thou may know here in this world, how pleasant thou shall find him
and feel him in his kingdom. And therefore it behooves thee my Soul, yea and
stands with thy duty, highly to love thy God, that so diversely has
benefited thee.

The.xi. Chapter.
Of the gift of the senses, and of the preservation of life.
BUt to the end thou may be the more kyndled with the fire of love,
diligently consider whither thy spouse have endued thee with any more benefits
then those already recited. For if he have, thou art the more bounden both for
them recited, and for them that thou shall receue hereafter, to show thy self
obedient and dutyfull, and to give him thanks from the bottom of thine heart.
For I understand that my God is dearelye to be loved of me, for that well using
the transgression of my Parents, he has created me of their flesh, and has
breathed into me the spirit of life, seperating me from them which were borne
before their time, or that being suffocated in their mothers womb, seemed to be
conceived not to live in this world, but to dye. I have therefore received of
him, not only to be, but also to be man, and thereto have also attained the
vnderstauding, what difference there is between me and a beast. I have I say,
received the shape of my body, and in my body the distinction of senses, mine
eyes to see, mine ears to hear, my nose to smell, my hands to feel, my
mouth to taste, my fete to walk, and that more is then them al, the health of
them all. And albeit these are great things, yet serves this to augme^t those
benefits, that to the several delyght of every several sense, God has
created things consonant and agreeable: as many things brightly shining, many
melodiouslye sounding, many pleasantlye sauering, many swetely tasting, and
many delectable in feeling. For the providence of the Creator, to this use and
purpose has given to things, such diverse and variable qualities, that every
sense of man might have wherein to be delighted. In as much as the sight
conceaueth one thing, the hearing an other thing, the smelling an other, the
taste an other, the feeling an other. The beuty of colors feeds the eye,
the harmonye of music pleases the ear, the fragrancye of savor delights
the nose, the sweet verder and reales contenteth the taste. And who is able to
rehearse, or to reckon up all the delights of the senses, which are so
manyfold, that if any man should consider each one in his kind, each one
should seem wonderful, and straungely enritched. Now many pleasures to the
eyes show we forth in colors, how many to the ear hear we, in diversity of
sounds, by the which men co^municat their minds and meaninges mutually, tell
of things past, demonstrate the present, pronosticate things to come, and
reveal things hidden, privy and secret* So that if the life of man should
want them, it might be compared to the rudenes and brutishnes of beasts.

What need I tell you of the warbling of Birds, the pleasant melodye of men's
voices, or the harmony of music in the diversity of tunes: For there are more
kinds of consent and concord in Music, then thought can conceive, or
speech express, all the which notwythstanding do serve the ear, as things
create and made to that use and purpose. And as I have examplified the delyght
of the ear, so may you conceive ye pleasures of taste and feeling, being as
pleasant and as manyfolde as are the other. This therefore by no means may
be gaynsaide, but that the goodness of God in these is exceedyug wonderful:
But yet is this to be added, so much the more to his glory, as it is our
greater benefit, for my God has not only made my body, and beutified the same
with diversity such as is before mentioned, but has also made it healthy and
sound: that I might neither be noysom to my friends, nor a reproach among
strangers. Neither is this the whole that I have received, for I am also
endued with reason, which can understand and conceive the verity in every
thing, and can discern right from wrong, and good from evil: and can search
for my Creator, long for and desire him, and that finallye can praise him, and
be contented to abide with him. But if I shall confess a further truth unto ye,
nothing is all this, in respect of this benefit: namely that it has pleased my
God so to dispose of me, that I should be borne, bred and fostered in such a
time and season, and in and among such men, and such people, as professing his
faith, and using his Sacraments, may teach and instruct me to believe, and
live accordingly. For this I see denied to an infinite sort of men, which I
glory and rejoice to be granted unto me: And yet with the other by all right
should my state be all one, alike, and equal. They are forsaken through God
his justice, and I am called by Gods mercy and grace. I will yet now proceed
and go somewhat further, namely in the contemplation of his further benignity,
in that my Parents have brought me up in such state and safetye, that the
fire has not burnt me, nor the water drowned me, nor the Devil possessed me,
nor Beasts devoured me, nor any fall or mischaunce has caught or destroyed
me, but that I am grown up to competent age to profess my faith in Gods love
and favor.

The.xii. Chapter.
Of the patience and long suffering of God.
GReat therefore is the pity, and infinite is the mercy (O Lord my God) which
thou have used toward me. And albeit that thou art in all thy works
wonderful, yet art thou thought most marvelous in the bowels of thy love. For
thou despisest no man, thou reiectest no man, thou abhorrest no man, but only
such but as madly abhors, witlesly lotheth or dreadfully does forsake thee.
These are therefore thy gifts, O Lord, these are thy riches, these are thy
treasures, with the which thou have endued me in the multitude of thy mercy:
namely, that thou have sundry and often times delivered me, when I was in
danger, and that in my sins thou have neither left nor forsaken me, but that
when I was unmindful, thou dydst put me in remembrance of thee: when I was
turned from thee, thou did call me back unto theer and when I came to thee,
thou did gently receue me, and when I repented, thou did mercifully pardon
me. For not only the sins which I committed, but those also which by thy
protection I eschewed and escaped, within compass of thy pardon are benignly
contained. And as I fell into many sins and offenses, so if thou had not
saved me, into far many more had I fallen and run headlong. But I well
remember me, that by three special means thou did preserve me, from doing
the wickedness which otherwise I had done: that is, by withdrawing the occasion,
in strengthenyng me in resisting, and by keeping and continuing me in the
foundnes of affection. For if occasion had been left at liberty, manifold are
the offenses which I should have incurred. But so great was the mercy of my
Lord and God toward me, that no such opportunity could arrest or hold me. And
with much ado had I been stayed from the doubling of mine iniquity, the
violence of temptation there to so greuouslye urging, as every man has feeling
in his own frailty: had not thou my Lord, with strength assisted me, not
only to vanquish my lust and appetite, and to tread under my feet my
fleshly desire, but also to withdraw my consent from the concupiscence, which
would have forced me to fulfill the longing and liking which I felt in my
members. But from certain sins O Lord, thy favor and indulgence stirred with
pity, did so far estraunge me, that I utterly abhorred them in my heart, and so
hated, and loathed the fylth of their iniquity, that no suggestion of the same
had might or power to touch me. Neither is this O Lord, the least point of thy
pity, nor the meanest token of thy goodness and bounty: that notwithstanding the
hugenes of mine iniquity (wretch that I am) and notwythstandyng that I have
unkindly kindled thee, and by doing evil in thy sight, provoked thy furye,
stirred up thy mood, and deserved thy wrath against me: notwithstanding I say,
that I have greuouslye sinned, thou of thy mercy have patiently suffered, and
even yet do forbear to punish my wyckednes.

For if I repent, thou pardonest me, and if I return, thou receiuest me. And
while I differ to repent, by presumption or securitye, thou do pawse in
thy patience, and gently tariest for me. When I wander thou do waifte me
into the way of thy verity: again when I strive or resist, thou do
vanquish, and conqner me. When I loyter, or linger in the leases of fantasy,
thou do either prick me forward, or lovingly stay for me. When I reuert to
thy ways to walk in thy paths, and to trace thy foot steps, thou do
forth with receive, and courteously embrace me. When I am ignorant, you do
teach, and instruct me: when I mourn or lament, thou do calm and comfort
me: when I fall or stumble, thou do stay and rear me up: when I am in
decay, thou do repair me: When I crave or ask, thou geuest largely: when
I seek thee, I find thee: when I knock, thou openest unto me. Finally thou art
my loadsman to good life, my staff, and stay to walk by, so as I neither
want will nor cunning through thy gyfts and grace to walk directly in thy way.
And this also O Lord is worthy of admiration, that not only in my youth,
before I was able to ask or had discretion to desire or know, but also in mine
age, when I was able through thee, to ask, and ^^aue of thee, when I could
seek thee, when I could desire thee, when I could rest in thy mercy, and
cleave fast unto thee, of thy free grace and bountye thou gave me many
gifts, and then also when I neither craved, nor sought, nor desired them, but
retchlesly, and carelessly set all at naught. But yet I esteem this as the
greatest benefit which thou haste bestowed upon me, that thou gave to me thine
Angels, to guard and to keep me from the day of my birth, till the day of my
death. The contemplation whereof constrained not only a certain holy father to
say: That great is the dignity of the Elect, which have for their Gardians God
his holy Angels, but the wise man also to confess that the Souls of the
righteous are in the hand of God, Sapi* 3,


Neither cease I here to commend thy pity, since with such patience thou have
borne mine offenses. For I rather think my self bound to double thy praise,
and to give thee thanks with all my might: For as much as thou have not
required me according to my synfulnes, nor suffered the earth to swallow me,
nor fire from heaven to touch me, nor lyghtening to burn me, nor the rivers
to drenche me, nor any other pain, peril, death, or destruction (as I have
well deserved) to trouble or afflict me. For when by sin I went away from
thee, I not only deserved thine anger and indignation, but iustlye also
provoked each creature of thine to malign me. And no maruayle, for if any man's
thrall or servant do run from his Master, he does not only exasperate his
Master against him, bnt also all his servants, friends, and familye.
Therefore when I displeased thee O Lord my God, Creator of me, and of al
things being, I justly for mine offense moved every creature to be offended
at me. So that if the whole world should for thy sake conspire to fight against
me, or any way else to molest or trouble me, I have no cause to complain that I
suffered wrong or iniurye. For the earth might say unto me, I ought not to
bear thee, but rather to swallowe thee, in as much as thou have not been
afearde to fall from my Creator, and to join with his adversary the Devil, the
author of disobedience, sin, and iniquity. The Sun also might use this
language: I ought not to shine, nor give light to thy health, safety or
salvation, but in revenge of my Lords quarrel, who is both light it self, and
of light the fountain, utterly to hyde from thee the beams of my beuty. And
thus might every creature else, control and taunt me, and thus might they
wreake their Creators injury, if he who created them, did not also restrain
them, as not willing the death of a sinner, but that he should turn, repent
him and live. It behooves me therefore O Lord, to be the more humbled under thy
mighty hand, and to show my self unto thee so much the more thankful,
obedient, and loyal, as thy great benefits exact and require I should be:
least that differring the punishment of my transgression, thou chasten me at
thy dreadful coming so much the more greuouslye, as thou have awaited my duty
with patience. And thou my Soul, persuade thy self I pray thee, that the long
suffering of God has now long time expected the effect of the election of his
predestination, which he will have fulfilled in us, through the excessive love
which he has borne and does bear us. For this is the cause why the Lord has
patiently waited, and inclined unto me, and that he has turned his eyes from
my sins, as unwilling to see how often I have offended him. This is the
cause I say, why he has dissembled, that he might commend his patience, and
confirm his love. For this cause, as I well remember me, he stroke my heart,
and stirred it up to behold the scarres of mine own sins, and to feel the
great grief and sorenes of the same. And for this cause he lead and conveyed
me to the gates of hell, and to the pains and torments provided for the
wicked. And to the end that no hurtful consideration of my sins might remain
within me, he enspired into me a better comfort, and gave not only hope of
remission, but also a full and perfect pardon. And so fully did he pardon me,
that neither revenge can condemn me, nor vpbraiding confou^d me, nor imputing
diminish his zeal or love toward me. Yet there be some in the world, and
those no small many, that in such sort pardon injury, as though they revenged
it not, and yet they cast it in the teeth. And other there be also, that albeit
they be silent, hold their tounges, and say naught, yet they reserve the malice
in the bottom of their stomach, and under the cloak of silence hide spite and
rancour. But neither of these sorts pardons according to ye rules of Gods
love and charity. And therefore very far from these differs the most
merciful nature of God: which always deals plainly, and pardons and
forgeueth so fully and freely, that the constant faith of the sinners that do
repent their sins, and forethinke their offenses, may with Paul's words be
comforted, that where abundance of sin was, Roma. 5.
there grace is more plentiful. Witness saint Peter, who after he had thrice
denied his Master, John. 18.
by a tripple commandment was of Christ his Church made a Shepherd and
Pastor. John. 21.
Saint Paul also of an enemy and persecutor of the Gospel, Acts. 8. 9.
was made a vessel of election, and a teacher of the Heathen. Math. 9.
Even as Matthew of a tole gatherer was made an Apostle, and the first in the
new testament that wrote any Gospel.

The.xiii. Chapter.
Of the gift of continency.
But after all these things which are right many as you see, God also gave
me the gift of continency. Continency I mean, not only from carnalitie,
but also from all other vices, whatsoever they be called. So that I, who in
former time could scantlye forbear a thing three days together, can now
through Gods help forbear it for ever. And thereby find occasion right
iustlye to say, Luke. 1.
that he that is mighty, has done great things for me. But some man perhaps
thinks, that continency is a matter of ease, and light of importance. But so
think not I, I will ensure you, for I know what enemies it has, and of what
might they be, and therefore how needeful it is for it to be sturdy and strong
to resist and withstand such a brood of impiety.

The first and chief enemy that continency has, is our own flesh, whilst it
lusts and coueteth against the spirit. And what a familiar enemy is this
trow you? Or how perilous is the conflict that grows hereby? Or how secret
and how sore is the fi^ht like to be, where the enemy has such might and
oportunitye to hurt? Truly my Soul, this foe is most dangerous, most stern,
most cruel, most unnatural and tirannous. Neither is there any way to flee, or
to escape her, nor any means or policy to put her to flight but maugre our
heads we must bear her about us, because she is ever lynked and tied unto us.
And therefore what is more perilous, wretched or miserable, then to be not
only forced to feed and sustain her, but also to be prohibited to do her
hurt or harm? Thou see then what need thou have, carefullye to beware and
to keep thy self from that foe, whom thou suffer to sleep in thine own
lap and bosom. But well were thee (my Soul) had thou none other enemy,
or if this one were al, thou were thrice happy and fortunate. But alas the
while, there is one other as stout, sturdy, cruel, dangerous, and hurtful as
she, and as hard also to be escaped, whersoeuer thou do bestow thy self.
For he does enuiron and compass thee round about. And which way soever thou
convert or turn thee, he is ready and at hand to assault and encounter thee.
This enemy is this present wicked world, which by five gates, which are thy
five senses, wou^deth thee with his darts, and shifteth in death at thine own
wyndowes.

The third is that common aduersarye sworn deadlye foe, to all Adams
posterity, that old subtle Serpent I mean, which is more crafty and wylye
then all other creatures either ar or can be. This enemy is he, whom no eye can
discern, and therefore to avoid him, passes man's ability. For sometime he
assaulteth us openly, and violently, sometime he steals on us secretlye and
guilefullye, and always continues his cruelty and malice, seeking to
oppress us by might, slight, or policy. And who is able to endure all this?
Or who is fyt to encounter this Champion? Verily no man, but he that has
loved us, and that by his triumpha^t death has atchiued this victory for us.
Thou may therefore know O my Soul, how hard and difficult it is to be
continent, and what God gives to make it easy for us. And thereby the more
entirely to love him for assisting us with his grace, when we should otherwise
faint through our own frailty and weakness. For only in the Lord have we this
power and might, to withstand the force of this tripple batterye, mayntayned
against us with such force and violence. And he it is, and none other but he,
that confounds thy foes, and all them that trouble thee. It is only God I
say that treads under foot for us, not only our flesh, and all our fleshly
concupiscence, but also the world with all worldly vanities: and finally the
Devil with all his wicked suggestions. Have not I therefore just cause to
confess, Luke. 1.
that he that is mighty has done great things for me?

The.xiiii. Chapter.
Of the gift of hope.
But yet moreover, our God and Savior has given me the grace so to conform
my self to his will by obedience, that I am fully assured through faith in his
promise, that finally I shall enjoy his kingdom and bliss. And this grace
consists in three especial points: The detestation and hate of my sins
forepast, the contempt and disdain of present pleasures, and the desire and
longing after the joys to come, which to attain he has given me the hope, and
supporteth the same by three things also, which strengthen and confirm my heart
in marvelous sort, and so animate and encourage me, as no want of works, nor
lack of merits, nor consideration of private commodities, nor deep
estimation of the heavenly bliss shall be able to cast me down from the tower
of hope, but that my Soul therein shall be rooted for ever. And if ye long to
know what things these are, they are these that follow.

First I consider the love of him that adopted me: Secondly the truth of him
that did promise me: And thirdlye, the might of him that redeemed me. Now
therefore let my fleshly thoughts repine and murmour as them list, and say: who
art thou? or how great is heavens joy? or by what merits do thou hope to
attain it? For I will confidently answer, I know in whom I have believed, and
am fully assured, and wholly resolved, that God in his soueraygne love has
chosen and adopted me, and that he is true in his promises, and able to
perform them: and that he may do in heaven, and in earth, whatsoever he will.
And for these merits ought I to love my God and savior. For it is the
working of great grace and mercy, that when I flee from God, he does follow me:
when I fear to come nigh him, he does allure me: when I despair, he does
recomfort me: when I am unthankful, he does still benefit me: when I commit
uncleanness, he does cleanse me: when I delight in vanities, he shows me his
truths: when I lie bound in the bonds of vnsoluble wickedness, and custom of
evil, he loses me from them, sets me at liberty, and finally from the
world, does draw me to his kingdom.

The.xv. Chapter.
Of God his bounty, of our iniquity, and of thanks giving.
But yet now (my Soul) behold and consider those gifts of gods goodness, which
are only known to thy self: As with how gladsome and comfortable chere Christ
offers him self unto thee, renouncing the world, and with what delicates he
refreshes thy hunger, and with what store of mercy he does enritch thy
poverty. What secret affectious he does enspire into thee, and with how
pleasant a cup of love he does make thee merrye, when thou folowest his paths,
forsaking things transitory. Is it a thing small, trowest thou, vile or
contemptible, that of his only and mere mercy he calls thee a fugitive,
thrall, and rebel, from thy restles gadding, to his settled home, and
plentyfullye refreshes thee with spiritual consolation: For if thou were
tempted, he sustained thee: if thou were in danger, he relieved thee: if thou
were sorrowful, he comforted thee: if thou were wavering, he did confirm thee.
How often also were thou ready to wyther away for fear, when he lovingly
stood by to cherish thee? And when to quench thy drouth, he infused him
self into thee? Neither can thou forget how often with his spiritual light
he clered thine understanding, sense, reason, and feeling, when thou were
singing or reading any spiritual thing. And yet in thy memory it is rise also,
how often when thou were in prayer, he ravished thee with vnspeak able desire
from all things that are earthlye, to delight thy self in the pleasure of
that everlasting and heavenly Paradise. I leave here to speak of the great
works of mercy, which it pleased his Majesty to do, and work by me,
least any part of that praise, honor and glory, which is only his own,
should any way seem to be ascribed to me. For in the judgment of man the
grace of the geuer, and the felicity of the receauer, seem so united and knit
together, that he is not only praised, who is only praise worthy, but he
also commended, whom God in his works does make but his instrument. And the
receauer made partner of the praise with the geuer, which to the glory of God
is not a little injurious. For what has any man that he has not received? 1.
Cor. 4.
Why then is he praised that has freely received, for that in the which he
has nothing deserved? To thee therefore O my God, be all laud, glory, praise
and thankesgeuing, but to me thy creature shame and confusion, that have done
so much evil, and received so much good. Se now therefore O my Soul, that not
only Gods bountye, but also our own iniquity does highly commend the love of
God toward us. For if this be great liberality, to give much to them that
have deserved nothing, how greatly shall or ought that goodness to be esteemed,
that requires the^ with good, who have merited evil? O what love is this which
no wickedness or iniquity is able to over come? Some things there be which God
mercyfully pardons, other there be which he bountifully gives. For he
pardons our vices, and gives us his virtues, always as ready to forgive,
as to give: being on the one side loving, and on the other side liberal.

Let us therefore confess our syns unto him: Let us I say confess that we
have our sins from our selves, that he may pardon them, and our virtues from
him, that he may continue and increase them. And let us endeavor without all
ceasyng, that we appear neither unthankful for that which he pardons,
neither yet vnmyndefull of that which he gives. This I say let him endeavor
that believes in God, or earnestlye desires to be his lover. For true love
neither hides nor dissembleth any thing. What therefore works the diligent
consideration of all these things, but marueilously to withdraw the mind of
the lover from all other love to love God alone, who has given all this? But
if any man conceive that God has given unto him what soever is foresaid, and
doubts not yet to love him but lightly, let him be assured that there is no
man but that if he seek, he may find occasion why to think him self to God
most beholding, and with all his power most diligently to thank him, while
life and breath shall prolong his days. He therefore who wants any thing
necessary to further his soul health, ought neither to murmour against God,
nor to accuse him. For he does all things upon just occasion, diligent
deliberation, and advised judgment, and has mercy on whom he will, judges
whom he will, and hardens whom he will. And is able not only to give to
whom he will, but also to take away from whom he will, what, and when best
stands with his pleasure. Right good is it then, and also fyt and necessary,
that he who has not those things which be needeful for him, should not only
be sad and sorry, but also labor and pray to get and attain them: And then
when he has gotten them, to show him self grate and thankful unto God for
them.

The.xvi. Chapter.
Of the benefit of Christ his death and passion.
GReat therefore and many, nay rather infinite and innumerable are the
benefits, O Lord my God, which thou have heaped upon me: And for them am I
bounden ever more, both to love and praise thee. For what soever goodness I have
presentlye, or what soever I have had in times past, or what soever I shall
have in time to come, it comes from thee (thou Author of al goodness) from
whom what soever is good in deed, or so accounted, does issue, flow and
proceed. But yet one thing is there, which more then these all does inflame,
urge, and move me, to set my whole delight, and all my love upon thee.

This I say specially, O my Lord Jesus, makes thee to me both louinge, and
amiable, that thou vouched safe of thy mere mercy, to suffer for me most shame
full and cruel death, in accomplishinge the work of my redemption. This
only, this wholly, and this more then all things, does challenge unto it,
even by special desert, all our life, all our labor all our service, and
love. This is yt* I say, that better stirs, swetelyer seeks, and greatlyer
increases our devotion toward thee, the^ all thine other kindness or goodness
toward us. For in this work of our reconsiliation made by the bitter panges
of his passion, the universal creator was so oppressed with pain and travail,
that he was nothing like wearied in the workma^ship of ye whole world. For of
the world, and of al things in the world, Psalm. 32.
he only said the word, and they were made, he gave the commandment, and
they were created. But for the restoration of mau kind, the pains and the
sorrows which he suffered, are in all respects manifold, maruailous, and
unspeakable? Behold therefore how he loved us, that for no need or necessitye
on his own behalf, but only for the love which he bare to us, would bear,
and sustain such pains and so marvelous. Justly therefore have I said, and
may I say, that this one thing excels all other his benefits. For though
it be greatly to be wayed, and also to be esteemed for no small token of
bountye, that a man contenteth himself, or condescendeth frankly to give his
goods to another, yet is this much more and infinitely incomparable to geeue,
and be stowe a man's own self for his neighbor. And though this be an
argument of great love, and charity, to give a man's life for his friends: yet
is this a plain proof of great affection to dye for foes, and enemies, as the
son of God did, when he dyed for us. For when we were enemies to God, we were
reconciled by the death of his son. Roma. 5.
Hardely says Paul dies a man for a just man, but he nevertheless dyed for ye
wicked, the just for the unjust, that he might present us blameles in the sight
of his father. And from heaven became he exiled and banished, that he might
restore us to the joys of that kingdom.

O how unspeakable therefore is this love and charity? Or what tongue can
express the sweetenes of this affection? Or how marvelous a mercy was this I
pray you, that God for man should become man, or that God for man should dye
in the flesh? and to be tempted in all things belonging to man's infirmity,
Hebr. 4.
sin only excepted: For behold it shall forthwith appear to the eye of thine
understanding, with how great a raunsom man was redeemed: which by reason of
his sin was iustlye enthrauled to the Devil, and the most dreadful sentence
of death and damnation. Neither is it to be hidden, that if man had not ben
raunsomed, according to gods good mercy exhibited in his son, with the
Devil and his angels he had been lost for ener. And all this do I tell
thee, that thou may have some feeling how much man is bound to be loving
to God for althinges: and not only patiently, but also willinglye, and with
all the might of power and feruencye, to abide and endure sorrow and grief for
him, that suffered for us such extremity of grief and sorrow. Acts. 14.
For by many tribulations must we enter into the kingdom of god. Let my Soul
therefore (O my Lord Jesus) hold and embrace thy blessed body crucified, and
let it drink a sweet draught of thy most precious blood, by deep imprintyng
of thy passion in my mind and memory. Yea let this pleasant remembrance so
possess my memory, that no oblivion or forgetfulness be able to abscure it.
But give me grace to judge of my self as Saint Paul did, 1. Cor. 2.
namelye, that I know nothing but Christ Jesus, and him also crucified: so that
vain error be not suffered to withdraw my knowledge from the soundnes of
faith. Finally let this wonderful love toward me challenge to it self all my
love to thee? that no worldly desire have power to swalow me. For this I know
O Lord, that the heart or mind that is fulfilled with the love of thee, can
neither be straightned with fear, nor defiled with lust, nor torn with
wrath, nor advanced with pride, nor wasted with vain glory, nor styrred with
madness, nor vnbowelled with ambition, nor shroonken with covetousness, nor
overthrown with sadness, nor consumed with envy, neither yet corrupted with
any other vice, while in the sweetenes of thee it rests constant and
immovable. He therefore that to his Servants gives so great things in this
world present, how great trow you, does he reserve for them, and lay up in
store, in the world to come?

The things yet that he presently gives, are temporal, but those which he
promises to give hereafter, are eternal, and incomperably better then all the
temporal goods of the world. For temporal goods are painfully gotten, and
easily wasted. And when we have them surest, Lord what a care it is to keep
them, what sorrow to lose them, and what endless pain and travail to recover
them again? But the riches of the world to come, are never lost, never
diminished, but always possessed with joy and quietness, as things evermore
longed for, and never hated or loathed. For he that to these heavenly riches
is once aspired, and has gotten them into his hands and possession, shall be
as well assured that he shall never lose them, as he has earnest desire never
to forgo them.

The.xvii. Chapter.
Of the benefit of God his promise.
RIght highly therefore is God to be loved in his promises, in as much as he
has behight us greater things, then hitherto he has given us. For he has
promised unto us rest from pain, liberty from thraldom, security from
fear, comfort from sorrow, resurrection from the dead, and after that our
bodies are raised up again, such full and perfect bliss as never shall have
ending. Finallye he has promised him self unto us, even as he swear to our
fathers, Luke. 1.
that he would give him self for us. Great therefore are the promises of God
and unspeakable, and for these, and in these will God be loved of us: and in
such sort and manner as it behooves us.

But if thou wylt know in what sort it behooves us to love God, vehementlye to
desire to have the promise performed, is only the manner that in this our love
is of duty required. The promise of God yet, how soever it be desired, is
much less desired, then it ought for to be. And how soever the Lover of God
profits, and increases in loving him, he ought still to profit, and to
increase to more. For the earnest and true longyng after God in some respect,
has no mean nor measure, when as it can never so exceed, that it may be
thought to much. And where as in all other things impaciencie is ever blamed,
vehement impaciencie of the delay in the expectacion of gods promises, that is,
to have and possess God, deserves laud and praise, as a thing most
commendable. For the more a man loves God, and the more he longs after him,
the impatiencie in that delay tormenteth the more, and the hope which is
differred, sore vexes the soul. But these precious jewels in this world
promised, are only had and enjoyed in the heavenly palace. And therefore of
that good which is chief of all goodness, what it is, and how it is, shall first
be declared.

The.xviii. Chapter.
Of the consideration of the Deity and joys of heaven.
LEt us stir up therefore and advance all our understanding, as far forth as
the grace of God may assist it, to weigh and confider how great the only and
proper joy of the chosen is there, where the place is prepared for them. That
is to say, that only high sovereign good, which is life, light, blyssefulnes,
wisdom, eternity, and such other like: and yet is but only one in nature
most excellent, and high good, sufficing to it self in all things, needing or
wanting nothing: and which all have need of, not only to be, but also well to
be. This good is God the Father, this is the word, that is, the Son of the
Father, and this is that one and common love, to the Father and the Son,
namelye that holy Spirit, which from them both equally does issue and
proceed. And that which every one of these is in parson particularly, the
same is the whole Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost. For
every singular parson of this Trinity, is doubtless nothing else but that high
sovereign unity, of the godhead I mean, Luke. 10.
and the Deity, which can neither be multiplied, increased, nor altered.

Moreover, this is that only one thing which is needful and necessary. And
that only is necessary, in the which all good is, or which of it self is the
only one, and aloue good. For if each several good thing, be good and
delectable, then think with thy self how delectable that good is, which
contains in it the pleasure and delight of all that is good, and not such as
we find, or taste in Gods creatures, but so far differing in all kind of
excellency, as the Creator in worthynes does excel the creature. For if life
created be good, how good is that life which did create it? If health made, or
given be good, how good is that health that made or gave it? If the wisdom
amiable, that consists in ye knowledge of things yt be made, how amiable is
yt wisdom that made all those things of nothing? Finally, if in things
delectable the delight be great and manifold, how great is the same in him
that made, and ordained what soever is delectable? O how happy is that Soul,
which may have use of that good? What shall he have mysse of, that has it?
or what shall he not want, that lackes it? For who so has that, shall together
have the goods both of body and soul: and those such also, so passing and so
excellent, as neither eye has seen, 1. Cor. 2.
nor ear has heard, nor the heart of man has thought or conceived. Why then
wander we through so many things, to seek the goods of our body and soul?

Let us rather love that one God in whom is all that good is, and it shall be
inoughe and sufficient for us. Let us long after that simple good, which of it
self is all good, and we shall be well, and shall need to seek no further. For
what love thou O my flesh, or what desire thou, O my Soul? There and in
that same self good, that is: in thy Sovereign Lord God, is doubtless al
whatsoever ye love, or desire. To speak therefore of the goods of the
heavenly kingdom, or to conceive or understand them, no man clothed in the
flesh, suffiseth, or is able. For in truth they are much greater and better,
then either they are thought or perceived to be. For the kingdom of God
excels all fame, passes all praise, surmounteth all cunning, and excels
what soever glory is thought most royal or famous. The kingdom of god
therefore is full of light, and peace, charity and patience, woorshippe and
glory, pleasure and delight, everlasting in joy, perpetual in blisfulnes, and
replenished with all other goods, what soever are impossible to be spoken, or
comprehended. And yet ought I not therefore to be mute or silent, but to say so
much as I can: Because I cannot say so much as I would. For because we
believe that God is unspeakable, it is not forth with reason to think our
selves not bound to speak of him that we can, or are able. Neither is this
tolerable, yt we should not believe of that life everlasting, which God by his
promise has sealed unto us more a great deal, theu is set forth in writing.
For neither can the tongue, nor the pen express so much, as the heart can
comprehend, and yet the heart which is of greatest capacity, and of al things
conceaueth most profoundly, and depely, is far to light to comprise the
Majesty of God, his joys and glory. Of the life to come therefore, we must
earnestly believe that it is both euerlastiug in it self, and euerlastinglye
happy: And that there is assured security, and secure tranquillity, peaceable
pleasantnes, blysfull eternity, and eternal blisfulnes, where is perfytte love,
no fear, no dread, no want of day: But cherefull motion, and one spirit among
all, assured of the sight of God, and there to abide in his joy, where that
city is, which is the blessed congregation of all Angels and Saints,
glistering and shyning in the righteousness of Christ. There I say where
everlasting salvation abounds, where truth reigns, where no man deceaueth,
nor can be deceived? where no happy man can be cast out or exiled, nor
whither any wretch may be drawn or advanced. This is the blyssefull
contemplative life, to the which such as come by faith fruitful and
charitable, shall be made like to the blysseful spirits, and reign in Gods
kingdom with them for ever. For what they believed here, that shall they see
there, and beholding the substance of their Creator, with pure hearts, and
innocent eyes, shall triumph in joy everlasting, and through the possession of
gods love in mutual charity, shall be each together with other, and joined
with their God in unity and concord. And having received the privilege of the
heavenly country, as perpetuallye enfraunchized into the same, shall enjoy
the benefit long before promised.

There shall be such gladness, and such plenty and store of heavenly solace,
abou^ding in the fulness of gods goodness and grace, that to their Lord god
soueraygne geuer of such gifts, they shall incessantly yield thanks and praise
without any kind of yrksomnes conceived, in the using, or having of gods so
manyfold blessings. For the hearts of every one shall there be open each to
other, as corporal things are here seen with the sight of our bodily eyes.
And so perfect and so clean shall men's consciences be there, that they shall
have continual cause to thank God for their purity, and not blush nor be
ashamed for their former offenses, in as much as neither sinner nor sin
shall be there, where power is taken from all men to sin any more. Neither
shall they which be perfectly blessed, be ignorant of any mystery of
secret, for they shall see him in whom all secrets are opened, 1. Cir. 13.
and that face to face, as them selves are seen. For then shall mankind in all
perfection be made so absolute, that from thence forth it shall never be
altered or changed, but of that substance of Man, by glorification transformed
into the likeness of his most blessed Maker, all the natural goods erst
received of God, and disfugured by man's sin in this wretched world, shall
there in that bliss be repaired to better, that is to say: understanding
shall be without error, memory without oblivion, thought without wandering,
charity without fayning, sense without offense, health without sickness, mirth
without sorrow, pleasure without pain, life without death, agility without
impediment, fulness without lothsomnes, and soundnes without disease. For
whatsoever in this life, either the violence of beasts, or rage of misfortune
has impaired in man's body, what soever sycknes has feebled, or crueltye
wasted, or disease putrified, or age in it self combersome has benumbed or
consumed, shall all again in the glorious resurrection be renewed and restored,
and the whole bodies with all their lymmes and members united to their souls,
shall together be endued with incorruptible nature. And therefore who soever in
that blyssefulnes, is blysfully possessed, shall by no distance of place,
difference of merit, nor any other mean what soever it be, at any time be
separated from the full fruition of God, in the fulness of his glory.

FINIS.
The table of the matters contained in every chapter of this book.
That the love of god and thy neighbor cannot be separated. Chap. 1. Why and
how god is to be loved. 2. cha. The cause of the creation of Angels, men, and
all other creatures. 3. chap. Of the love of god toward us. 4. chap. Of the
fruition of god. 5. chap. Of the free gifts of creation, and regeneration. 6.
chap. Of the benefit of god in calling us to the faith 7. chap. Of the gift of
virtues. 8. chap. Of the gift of understanding and knowledge. 9. chap. Of
Gods provident care over us. 10. Of the gift of the senses, and preservation of
life. 11. chap. Of the patience and long sufferyng of God. 12. chap. Of the
gift of continency. 13. chap. Of the gift of hope. 14. chap. Of God his
bounty, of our inquitye, and of thanks giving. 15. chap. Of the benefit of
Christ his d(...) passion. 16. chap. Of the benefit of God his promise. 17 Of
the consideration of the Deitye and joys of heaven. 18: chap.
Errata.
In the first line and the 3 page of the 3 Chapter for as well he, read as
well as he. In the same page, for he could, read he would. For consenting,
read consultinge. In the 4 page of the 4 Chapter, for remains read wants.
In the 4 page the 2 line of the 11 chapter, for sounds read languages. In the
5 page of the 16 Chapter, for abscure read obscure. In the 1 page of the 17
chapter for hau^e read have.


Imprinted at London by Thomas Purfoote, dwelling in Paul's Church yard at the
sign of the Lucres. 1574.


