his part to him that shall give first to the Marshall knowledge thereof / and
his body to be emprysoned and punysshed at the king will. And that every man
do keep or do to be kept his prisoner that he ride not nor go at large in the
host ne in logynges / But if ward be had upon him / upon pain of losing of
the same prisoner Reserving to his lord or master his thryddes of ye hole if
he be not party / of the defaute* and ye second part to him that first
shall accuse him / and ye thrydde part to the marshall / and also moreover his
body in arreste at the kings will. Also that he suffer not his prisoner to go
out of ye host for his ransom ne for none other cause without saufconduyt of
the king his lieutenaunt / or the marshall upon the pain aforesaid.

Also that every captain in like wise present and show his prisoner unto the
tresourer of the wars to thentent the king may be answered of his part /
upon pain of forfayture of the same prisoner unto the king.

Also that the Marshall from.viij. days to.viij. during ye king army do
certyfye ye tresourer of the wars of all such certyfycates, as shall be
brought i by ye capitaynes or any other unto him as well of his own as of other
all manner prisoners / taken by any man in ye host certyfyed unto him / upon
pain of rennyng in the kings indignacion and to forfayte the double of the
value to the king / of the said prisoner or prisoners so counceyled / And
like as every captain and souldyoure is bound to bring in and certyfye his
prisoner under ye form above rehearsed* so in the same wise and under
semblable penalties they and every of them shall bring in and certyfye all
other prays gooddes and catayles by them won by the war.

For payinge of thryddes.
Also that every man pay his thryddes to his captain lord and master of all
manner winning by war / and that as well those that be not in sold / but
logynge or hostynge under the Baner or penon of their captain upon pain to
lose his part of his foresaid winning to his captain and his body to be in
ward of the marshall unto ye time he have agreed with his foresaid master.
And also that every captain pay unto the king as well the thrydde part of
his own wynnynges of the war / as the thrydde of the thryddes whereof each of
his retynue shall be answering unto him / of which thryddes / and thryddes of
thyrdes / every captain shall be accomptable before the treasourer of the
kings wars / upon pain of forfayture of the said wynnynges unto the king.

For geuynge of saufconduytes or congyes and for brekynge of them.
Also yt no man give no saufco^duyt to prisoner ne to no other / nor license no
emnye to come nor to go out of the host / ne into ye host upon pain of
forfayture al his goods to ye king and his body to be emprysoned at ye kings
will except the king his lieutenau^t or ye marshall / if he have special
co^myssion so to do. And that no man be so hardy to break the kings
saufconduyt / his lieutenaunt or his said marshall having such auctorite
upon pain to be hanged and drawn and his goods and enherytaunces to be
forfayted to the king.

For geuynge of saufgardes.
Also that no man grant no saufgarde by writing nor otherwise to no noble
person / ne for the appatysshynge of any country except the king / upon
pain of emprysonement and his body to be punysshed at ye kings will / Nor
that no man grant no saufgarde to no vitayler / except the marshall and
provost of the kings host upon pain above said.

For them that bear not a bond. or a cross of saint George.
Also that every man going in ostynge or battle of what estate condycyon or
nacyon he be of ye kings party and host* except he be a busshop or offycer
of arms / bear a cross of saint George* suffysaunt and large upon the pain
that if he be wounded or slain in the defaute thereof he that so wounds or
sleeth him / shall bear no pain therefore / And if he for any cause pass the
bonds of the field that then he bear openly a cross / of saint george with
his capitaynes conysaunce / upon pain to be emprysoned and punysshed at the
kings will.

And that no souldyour bear no conysaunce but the kings and his capitaynes /
upon pain of death / and that none (...)

For making of roodes.
Also that no man make no roodes by day nor by (...) but by license and
knowledge of the king* or (...) of the wards / so yt the cheiftaynes may (...)
what way they draw them to the intent they (...) have socoure and help if
need be / upon pain of (...) herein offend. their bodies and goods (...).

(...) without license.
Also that none assaure be made to Castle / town* (...) or fortrasse by
archers nor by none other co^m^^^^ without the will and presence of a captain
there unto appointed by the king or his lieutenaunt upon pain of
emprysonement. And if any assaute be made by chance or adventure then as soon
as the king his lieutenaunt of the marshall send for to cease to the sade
assaute that then no man be so hardy to assaute after And if any man do it he
shall be corrected by emprysonement of his body. and ^ose all the goods gotten at
the said assaute*

For the withdrawn of men's servants from their masters
Also that no man be so hardy to take or withdraw a servant from other the
which is in covenant with / (...) by his master upon (...) to the time he
have agreed with (...) after the ward of the cour^^

(...)
Also that no man be so hardy to (...) or logynge where that any woman lies in
childbed ^her to rob ne pyll of no goods the which longs ^ to her
refresshyng ne for to make none affraye where (...) she and her child might be
in any disease or (...) upon pain he that in such wise offends shall (...)
his goods half to him that accuses and half to (...) marshall and him self
to be deed but if the (...) grace and pardone

(...)
Also yt no man be so hardy to take no children (...) ch^ge of (...) but if he
be a lords sone or (...) shypfull gentylmannes or rich man's sone or (...)
pains* And that as soon as he has brought him (...) to the host or into the
garyson where he is abydyng ^ bring him to his lord* master or captain
upon (...) of losing horse and harneys and his part of the same child
reserving to his lord master or capitayn his duete so that they be not
consentaunt unto the said (...) And also that the said lord master (...)
tayne bring him unto the king within.viij. days.

(...) forasmoche as our said soueraygne lord for ye inward love tender zele
and entyer affeceyon which he bears naturelly to his subgiettes being of his
said host and army would be lothest and most displeasau^t to se or
understand any of them to do ye offense whereby he should deserve the lest
punysshement by the said ordynaunces provided. His highness therefore desires
and tenderly prays his said subgiettes to consydre and understand that his
good speed in his said journey / the honor of his Royalme and the well and
surety of the same his subgiettes stondeth upon ye obseruacion of the said
statutes / wherefore though it be to the grettest heaviness and displeasure /
yet must he of necessytye* when the case it requires se the said statutes
executed / and the offenders punysshed.

In consyderacion whereof he wylleth and straytly charge his said subgiettes
to have them self in so good awayte that in no wise they offend the said
statutes / and to thentent they have no cause to excuse them of their offenses
by pretense of ignorance of the said ordenau^ces / his highness has over and
above the open proclamacyon of the said statutes commanded and ordained by
wey of Emprynte diverse and many several books co^conteygnynge the same
statutes to be made* and delivered to the Capitaynes of his host chargynge
them as they will avoid his great displeasure to cause the same twyes or ones
at ye lest in every weke holy to be read in the presence of their retynue.

Here ends certain Statutes and ordenaunces of war made ordained Enacted
and establysshed by the most noble victoryous and most christian Prince our
most drade soueraygne lord king Henry the.viij king of England and of
France / and lord of Irlande / by the advise of his noble and discrete
counsel. For the well suertie good Rule and sauffegarde of his honorable
lords capitaynes and other his humble subgiettes And also for such of them of
his said Realm of France that hereafter woll become his true subgettes being
in his most Royal host against his ancient Enemies of France.

Emprynted at the high Commandment of our Soueraygne lord the King Henry
the.viij. By Richard Pynson / prynter unto his noble grace The year of our
lord.M.CCCCC. and.xiij.




