This is the ordinance for the conservation and keeping of the Queens Majesty's
swannes and sygnettes, and of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and of her
Commons (...) the Counties of Lincoln, Northampton, Rutland, Huntington, and
Cambridge, and the liberties (...) fr^^^chyse of the same; And for the
conservation of fyshe and foul, with the assisting of all ^^ner of nets
within the said Counties and liberties of the same.
FIRST it is ordained and statuted, that every person having any Swannes, shall
begin yearly to mark or cause to be marked the same upon the Monday next after
Trinity Sunday, and no person before, but after as the company may, so that the
Master of the Queen's game of Swannes, or his deputies be there present, and if
any person or persons take upon him or them in marking to the contrary, to
forfeyte to the Queen. xl. s.

Item it is ordained, that no person nor persons being Swanheards nor other,
shall go on marking without the master of the Queen's game of Swannes or his
deputy be present, with vi. or iiii. of the company of Swanheardes, upon
pain to forfeyte to the Queen's grace. xl. s.

Item it is ordained, that no person take up no signet nor signets unmarked,
nor make no sale of them. (...)the Queen's Swanherde or his deputy with. iiii.
other Swanherdes next adjoining be present or h^^^ knowledge of the same, upon
pain to forfeyt to the Queen's grace. xl. s.

^ Item it is ordained that the Swanherde of the duchy of Lancaster within the
said counties, nor within the lib^rt^es and fraunches of the same, nor no other
person for him nor by him, shall make no sale nor (...) Swannes, nor mark them
within the said duchy, without the Queen's Swanherde or his deputy (...)
present upon pain to forfeyt to the Queen's grace. xl. s. And in like wise it
is ordained that (...) Queen's Swanherde of the foresaid counties nor his
deputy, shall not enter into the said duchy to (...) any Swannes or signets,
nor them to mark without the Swanherde of the duchy be present, then pain to
forfeyte to the Queen's grace. xl. s.

^ Item it is ordained, that if any Swannes or signets be found without the
said duchy double marked or put out of right mark, that then it shall be
seized for the Queen, and to be delivered to the master of the Queen's game of
Swannes or to his deputy, and so to remain to it be proved by. iiii. or vi.
sufficient Swanherdes, to whom the said Swannes or signets belong or
appertain, so that the knowledge of the same be had by the said Swanherds
after the said delivery before the sessions of Swannes than (...) to be kept
within the county, where as it shall hap the said Swans or signets to be
seized and delivered in form aforesaid. And if so be the property of the same
Swannes or signets can not be known by the said sessions, that then the Queen
to be assured of the value of the same Swannes and signettes.

Item it is ordained that if any person or persons wylfully put any Swannes
from their nestes. wheresoever they breed, or else take up and destroy or bear
away the eggs or egg of the said Swannes, to forsait for every default and
presented in the sessions of Swannes to the Queen's grace. xiii.s. iiii.d.

Item it is ordained that no man shall make sale of no white swannes, nor make
delyuery of them without the master of the game or his deputy be present, with
iii. o vi. swanheardes next adjoining under pain of xl. s. whereof shall be to
the fynder, vi.s. viii.d. and the residue to the Queen.

Item it is ordained that no person or persons hunt in fene time or in any
haunt of Swannes with dogs, from the feast of Easter to the sunday after
Triuitie sunday, upon pain for every time so doing. vi.s. viii. d.

Item it is ordained that if any person set any snares or any manner of
inginnes to take Bittors or Swannes betwixt the feast of Easter and Lammas, he
or they to forfeit for every time so setting any such ingins vi. s. viii. d.

Item it is ordained, that no person nor persons shall lay no net nor nets,
or dragge with net nor nets within the common stremes, waters nor maryshes upon
the day time, from the feast of the Inuen^ion of the holy cross, unto the
feast of Lammas, upon pain as often as they be found in fault and presented in
the sessions of swannes before the Queen's Justices. xx.s. to forfeit to the
Queens grace.

Item it is ordained, that every swanherde intending to keep any swannes or
signettes, that they ^^^l keep them in a pen or pit within. xx. foot of the
common streme, or else within xx. foot of the Queen's ^^gh way, so that the
Queen's subjects passing by may have the sight of the said swannes, upon pain
(...) xl. s.

Item it is ordained, that there shall be nor forfeyt of white swannes nor gray
swannes no signets but (...) to the Queen's grace. as well within the fraunches
and liberties as without: and as often as any (...) sease and deliver the said
swannes to any other person, but only to the master of the game or to the
Queen's use, he to forfait to the Queen's grace. vi.s.viii.d.

Item it is ordained, that no manner of person nor persons shall lay nor set
nets named tramels, nor n^ttes called drayes, nor dray with no net from the
xvi. day next before the feast of saint Mark the Euan^^list. unto the xvi day
next ensuing the same feast. That is to wit, within the common stremes, waters,
s^^^es and marshes in the county of Lincoln, Northampton, Rutland,
Huntyngton, and Cambridge, no^ within the I Will of Ely, upon pain of. xl.s.

Item it is ordained, that no man shall take no gray swannes nor white swannes
flying, but that he shall within iiii. days next after the said taking,
deliver it or them to the master of the Queen's swannes (...) to his deputy to
the Queen's use, and the taker to huaue for his taking. viii.d.

Item it is ordained, that no manner of person of what estate, degree, or
condition be be, having any game of swannes of his own, shall be no swanheard
nor keeper of none other men's swannes, upon pain (...) xl. s.

Item it is ordained, that no swanherde nor fisher, nor fowler, shall not vex
nor trouble another ^^^^nherde, fysher nor fowler, by way of action, or
otherwise, but only before the Queen's Justices of her sessions of swannes, upon
pain of forfaiting to the Queen's grace. xiii.s. iiii.d.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's, Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


