Anno regni Regis Henrici.viii. Quinto.
Statuta
The king our souerreyne lord Henry the.viii. after the conquest by the grace
of god king of England and of France / and lord of Irlande / at his
Patlyame^t holde^ at westmester / the.xxiii. day of Ianuarii after the last
Porrogacion. In the.v. year of his most noble Reygne to the honor of god and
holy Church / and for the Common wealth and profit of this his Royalme / by
the assente of the Lords spiritual and temporal: and the Commons in this
present Parlyame^t assembled: and by auctoryte of the same has do to be
ordained made and enacted certain Statutes / and ordynaunces in manner and
form following.

Hec rosa virtutis de celo missa sereno. Eternu^ florens regia sceptra feret.
royal English blazon or coat of arms with Tudor rose, supported by angels,a
dragon and a dog, between two portcullises

Anno regni Regis Henrici.viii. Quinto.
An act concerning Mynystracyon of Justice to the kings subiectis of his
City of Turney.
Capitulo. Primo
WHere as the King our Soueraygne Lord greatly desirynge to recouere ye
Realm of France his very true Patrymonye and inherytaunce and to reduce the
same to his obeysaunce. And for the same purpose and intent lately made
Preparations of great Royal Armies as well by see as by land to his right
great and merueylous costs and charge / And sythen that by his great wisdom
and singular polyce has now reduced the Cities and towns of Tyrrewyn / and
Turney to dew obeysaunce by reason whereof now shall follow and ensue great
Amyte Famylyarite and entercours in byeng and sellyng of marchau^dyses wares
and otherwise between ye Cyteze^s and inhabytau^tes of ye said cities Towns
and Precinctes of the same / and the kings Natural subiectis inhabytaunces in
this his Realm of England / Therefore the king our souereygne lord willing
and entendynge that true and indyfferent Justice shall be mynystred in all matters
and causes as well to Cytezens and inhabytauntes dwelling and inhabytynge in
the same Cities / Towns / and ye precinctes of the same / As to his natural
subiectis dwelling within this his Realm of England / And to the same intent
the king our souereygne Lord has deputed and ordained in ye said City and
town of turney and in the Bayllywyke and precinct of the same diverse
officers and Mynysters / and among other two of them called Notaryes otherwise
called Graffers to accept take and record the knolege of all contractes
bargaynes conuencyons pactis and agrementes made and to be made within the
said City and town of Turney bayllywyke and precinct of ye same by all
manner of persons that will and shall resort and come before them to make
knowledge of the same / which Notaryes or Graffers shall present and deliver in
writing all such knolege as shall be so taken under their Notarye signs unto an
other offycer of the same City and town / which our said soueraygne Lord
has there made and deputed to accept and take of them the same which
offycer for ye more affyrmau^ce thereof shall set thereto the Seal of our
souereygne lord made and left in the keeping of the same Offycer for the same
ente^te. The king our soueragne Lord by thassent of his lords Spu^all and
temporal / and the Commons in this present Parlyament assembled and by
Auctoryte of the same has ordained and enacted that upon every writing
oblygatorie and knowledge to be made of all contractes bargaynes conue^tions
pactes and agrementes / sygned and Sealed in form above rehearsed / by any of
ye kings subjects inhabyted in this Realm of England to any Cytezen or
inhabytaunte within ye said City and town of Turney Bayllywyke or precyncte
of the same or by any Cytezen or inhabytaunt within the same City / Town /
Bayllywyke or precinct to an other of the same or else by any cytezen or
inhabytaunte of the same City / Town Bayllywyke or precinct to any of the
kings subjects Inhabyted within the Realm of England / or by any of the
kings subjects inhabyted in ye Realm of England / to another of the same
subiectis showed and exhybyted to the Chaunceller of England / for ye time
being the same Chaunceller have full auctoryte and power upon the sight of ye
same to se^de a Sargeaunte of Arms or another offycer to the person so
bounden to require and command the parsone so bounden to perfourms the
contents of every such writing oblygatorye and knowledge / and if the same
persons so bounden deny so to do and obiecte or alege any cause why he should
not so do / then the same Sergeau^t or offycer immedyatly shall bring the
same parsone so bounden before the Chau^celler of England to answer to the
premysses. And if the person so bounden and brought before the said Chaunceller
obiecte or alege any matter or cause reasonable why he should not perform the
Contents of the same writing oblygatorye and knowledge that then he shall be
adiuged to bring in suffycyent Gage and plegge to the very value of the
contents of the same writing obligatorye into the kings Court of Chauncerye
or else to remain in ward / And then the said Chau^celler by his wisdom and
discrecion shall prefixe and assign unto him a conuenyent peremptory day to
prove his obieccion and aligacion / and if the pertie so bounden prove not his
obieccion and allegacion before the said Chau^celler to be true before or at
the said day prefixed / that then the said pertie so bounden without delay
shall perform the Contents of the said oblygacyon and knowledge then not
performed or else to forfayte the said Gages and plegges to the party to
whom yt said oblygacyon or knowledge was made / And in likewise upon all
recognysaunces to be made before the king in his Chauncery or in his Benche or
in any other the kings Court of record within the Realm of England / And
also upon all wrytynges oblygatorye to be made and knoleged before the Mayre of
the Staple of calyce of all debtes contractes and bargaynes by any of the said
Cytizens or inhabytauntes of the said City or town of Turney or Baylywyke or
precinct of the same to any of the kings subjects / and the same knolege or
writing obligatorie be then certified to the Baylyff of the same City and
Town by the Chau^celler of England under the kings great Seal of England /
that then the Baylye of the same City and Town for the time being or his
deputy have full auctoryte and power to se^de and shall send a Sergeau^t or
other offycer of the same City and Town to the person so boundem to require
and command the same person so bounden to parfourme the Contents of the
same knolege and writing oblygatorye / And if the pertie so bounden deny so
to do and obiecte and alege any cause why he should not so do That then the
said Sergeaunt or offycer immedyatly shall bring ye person so bounden before
the Baylye of the said City and Town for the time being to answer to the
premysses / And if ye parsone so bounden and brought before the said Bayllye
obiecte and alege any matter or cause reasonable why he should not perform the
Contents of the same writing oblygatorie and knolege / that then he shall be
adiuged to bring suffycyant gayge and plegges to ye very value of the
Contents of the same writing oblygatorie or knowledge into the Court before
the same bailey or his deputy or else to remain in ward / And then the said
Baylye or his deputy by his wisdom and discrecyon shall prefixe and assygne
unto him a co^uenyent peremtorye day to prove his obieccion and allegacion and
if the pertie so bounden prove not his obieccio^ and allegacyon before ye said
Baylye or his deputy to be true before or at the said day prefyxte / that
the^ the said pertie so bounden without delay shall perform the contents of
ye said writing oblygatorye and knowledge then not parfourmed or else to
forfayte ye said Gayges and plegges to the pertie to whom ye said oblygacyo^ or
knowledge was made / This act to endure during the kings pleasure.

An act for true making of clothes in deuon^ called white straytes.
Ca.ii.
PRayen the Commons and Inhabytauntes cloth makers and buyers of the same within
the Cou^tie of Deuonshyre / yt where diverse and many clothes called white
straytes be and have be contynually made within ye said Cou^tie to the great
profit of the kings subjects there the which clothes were wont to be well
and suffycyently made and bear their bread yerde broad and half querter Raw
and.xv. yerdes of lenghte / and that no man in times paste has used to make
them / but that the maker thereof has set his special mark upon every of
the said clothes so by him or them made / whereby every man may know their own
clothes from other me^nes by reason of their said several marks / So it is yt
now adays the said clothes be not suffycie^tly made ne bear their length and
bread according as they should do ne marked with every man's own mark /
Whereof great inconuenyence does daily Ensue / and increase to then
pouerysshynge and hurtynge as well of the kings subjects buyers and sellers of
the same / as merchants strangers / Wherefore the premises consyderyd that
hit may be therefore / enacted by the king our soueraygne Lord / by the assent
of the Lords spyrituall and temporal and the common in this present
Parlyament assembled / and by the auctoryte of the same / That from the fest of
Penthecoste next coming no person make no such clothes called white
Straytes to selle without that it be whene he is raw ready to be toked of the
bread of a yard and half quarter / and of length.xv. yardes / And that no
person make no such clothes / but if he set his specy all mark upon
eueryche of ye said clothes so by him or them made / And that no person use no
mark on his clothes such as any other person does and has used before him
upon pain of a forfayture of every of the said clothes the one half to the
king / and the other half to him that so seassyeth the said clothes so made
or marked contrary to the form and effect before expressyd. And this Act to
endure unto the next Parlyament.

An act concerning white wolleyn clothes of.v. marks and under may be carried
over the sees unshorn.
Ca.iii.
WHere in this present Parlyame^t before the first prorogacion thereof it was
ordained and enacted / that no wolleyne Clothe above ye price of iiii. marks
should be conuayed over the sea vnrowed / vnbarbed / and unshorn upon certain
penalties in the same Act expressed more at large / Which Act put in
execucyon shall not only turn to the abatementes of ye kings customs / but
also grow to the utter undoing of his subjects cloth makers and merchants
conuayers of ye said clothes / For asmoche as wolle is risen of a far gretter
price than it was at the making of the said act / For where a clothe was then
comynally sold at.iiii. marks is now sold for. v marks. And also by force
of the said act the merchants sulde be bound to dress every white cloth
above ye value of.iiii. marks on thyssyde the sea after they have bought them
/ which white clothe so dressyd when they be brought in to the perties beyond
the sea and thereby ye buyers of them dyed and put in colors / then they must be
newly dressyd / barbed / shoren / and rowed / And so they shall be thereby the
less in substance of them self / and the worse to the seal and sold for
less price by.x. or.xii. s^. a peace beyond the sea then they should be if they
were undressed. Wherefore be it ordained and enacted by like auctoryte that
every white wolleyn clothe sold at.v. marks and under may be carried and
conveyed into perties beyond the sea there to be sold at ye pleasure of ye
buyers of the said Clothe vnbarbed / unshorn / and vnrowed any act or acts to
the contrary made natwithstandyng / And over this be it ordained and enacted by
the said auctoryte / yt if any person or persons co^uey or cause to be co^ueyd
into ye perties beyond ye see any white wolleyn Cloth vnrowed / vnbarbed / and
unshorn above the value of.v. marks in other form then a fore is said /
That then the person or persons so of fendynge shall forfayte the value of
the said Cloth or clothes so carried or conveyed in to the perties beyond the sea / The one moyte of the same forfayture to be to our said soueraygne lord
the king / And the other moyte to every person / which woll or shall sewe by
byll writ Informacion or other wise ayenste any person for the same / And yt
ye defendau^t in any plee upon any such acco^n be not admytted to wage his law
nor any proteccion or esson^ for any such defendau^t be allowed in ye same.

An act for advodynge disceytes in worstedes.
Ca.iiii.
PRayen the Commons in this present Parlyame^t assembled that where as
worstedes which ben truly made shorn dyed and calendred as of old time has been accustomed to be made shorn dyed and Calendred have been one of the
goodlyest marchaundyse and grettest Co^modytie for this Realm / and not only
worn wtin this Realm / But also much worn and used in other Realms / And
so it is that now of late diverse strangers beyond the sea have taken upon
them to dry Calendre worstedes with gommes oils and presses so yt a cource
piece of worsted not being past the value of.xxvi. s^. viii. d. Is and shall be
made by their said gommes oils / and presses to show like to the value of.xl.
s^. or better / And if the same worsted so dry calendred takes any wete
incontinent it wolle show spotte and show foul / And ever after continue
stylle soul and wollnat endure to the great disceyte and hurt of the werers
thereof and loss of ye said Co^modite / and for ye said disceytes and falsnes
the said dry calendryng is shurned and abhorred in ye perties beyond ye see /
So yt no person done shall use in those perties any such worstedes to dry
calendre / And also now of late the said Strangers called dry calenders arne
common into this Realm and here with in ye same use ye said dry cale^dryng of
worsted and of ye great hurt of ye said common well and Co^modyte of this Realm
a foresaid / wherefore be it enacted ordained and establyshed by the assent of
ye lords spu^all and temporal / and the Commons in this present parlyament
assembled and by auctoryte of ye same yt no person ne persons wtin this said
Ryalme hereafter do take upon him or them to dry calendre any worsted within
this said Realm upon pain to forfayte for every worsted that is so dry
calendred one.C. s^. And over yt where as the said old calendryng of worstedes
called wete calendrynge have been used well and substancially in times paste in
the City of Norwych and yet is by persons having conyng in ye same / Be it
therefore furthermore enacted or deyned and establisshed by ye auctorite
aforesaid yt no person ne persons hereafter do take upon him or them to were
calendre any worsted / but only such persons as have been bound apprentyses to
other persons of ye same craft or occupaco^n of wete cale^dre of worstedes by
the space of.vii. years or be co^nyng in the same / and their co^nyng approved
and admytted by ye Mayre of the said city of Norwyche for the time being and
ye two Masters of ye said craft and occupacyon yerly to be chosen wtin the
said city of Norwyche / or in the Cou^tie of Norff of the craft of wete
cale^dryng upon pain of every such person or persons / which hereafter shall
do the contrary to forfayte for every piece so cale^dred against ye ordynau^ces
and puruyau^ces aforesaid.C. s^. The one moyte of which penaltes and
forfaytours above specyfied and of every of them to be to ye king our
soueraygne lord / And the other moyte thereof to be to the Masters of the said
occupacyon of wete calendryng / for the time being / And that it shall be laufull
to ye Masters of ye said occupacyon for ye time being / and their successors
to show for ye one moyte of all such penalties hereafter to be forfayted
against every such person or persons as hereafter shall do ye contrary to ye
form and effect of this estatute by accio^ of debt by writ at the Common
law or by byll or playnt after ye Custom of such City / port / or town /
where shall happon any such forfayture to be or fall / or by informacion in
the kings Eschequer / And yt no proteccion or essoine ne no wagere of law for
the defes in any such accion playnt or informacion be alloweable before any
manner of Justices / where any such suit or Informacion shall be used for the
said forfayture / And this Act to endure to the next Parlyament.

An act cocernynge Iurys in London^.
Ca. v.
WHere in this present Parlyament holden at Westmester the.iiii. day of
February in the.iii. year of the reygne of our soueraygne lord the king and
proroged unto the.iiii. day of November in the.iiii. year of the reygne of
our soueraygne lord ye king and adiourned unto Westmester aforesaid / for
asmoche as after issuis Joined in accions and suettes co^mensed taken or
dependyng i^ ye kings Courts before him self in his Benche and before his
Justices of the common Benche / And also in his Eschequer at the kings suete
or at ye suit of the pertie tryable in the city of London as well ye king as ye
perties suffered great delay many times for defaute of apparens of the Iuryes
enpanelyd to try the said issues / and many times for lack of Jurors not
having lands and ten^tes of the yerly value of.xl. s. It was the said.iiii.
day of November ordained and enacted by the auctoryte of this present
Parlyament / that the Sheryffes of London for the time being should have full
auctoryte and power to return in panelles or Arrayes of all accions and suetes
then dependynge or that should depend in any of the said Courts or Eschequer
persons being cytezens having goods to the value of.C. mark or above to
try the issue Joined i^ every such accion or suit / And that ye persons so
returned having goods to the value of.C. mark or above should be sworn and
do in all such Iuryes i^lyke wise in every thing as other persons should do
having lands ten^tes of ye yearly value of.xl. s. over all charges / And that
ye Sheryffes of the said city for ye time being should return upon the
first distress in every such accion or suit upon every of the Jurors
enpaneled to try the issues thereof.xx. d. And upon the second distress upon
every of the same Jurors.xl. d. And upon every distress after that upon every
of the same Jurors the double / till a full Jury in every such Accion and
sure should appear and be sworn to try the issue Joined in ye same / And that
ye Sheryffes that should make any return upon such distresses contrary to
the form aforesaid should forfayte for every such defaute.x. li. The one
half thereof to be to the king / And the other half to the pertie that will
sewe therefore / And that the defendauntes in any such accion should not be
admytted to wage his law nor proteccion therein for him allowed which estatute
was oonly made for the good Expedycyon of Justice for to have quycke appearance
of Jurors cyteze^s of London at Saint Marteynes ye grant with in the said
city / where all Iuryes were and ben bounden oonly to appear to try the issues
Joined of all things tryable in London by processes of Nisiprius out of the
said Courts and in none other place according to their Ancient liberty
pryuilege and custom / wherefore for more plain declaration of the same good
estatute be it ordained and establysshed by the auctorite of this present
Parlyament that the said Act be expowned interpretated and taken / that ye
Sheryffes for the time being be bounden to Return at every first distress
of Nisiprius to be had at the said saint Marteyns in every such accion or suit
upon every of the Jurors impanelled to try the issues thereof.xx. d. And upon
the second distress of Nisiprius upon every of the same Jurors.xl. d. And
upon every distress of Nisiprius after that every of the same Jurors the
double / till a full Jury in every such accion and suit shall appear and be
sworn to try the issue Joined in the same / And that no Sheryffe of the said
city or other / any thing forfayte by force or color of ye said estatute for
every return to be made / except only upon Retournes to be made contrary to
the form declaracion interpretation and exposycion of this Estatute / that is
to say / upon writtes of distresses before Justices or Justice of Nisiprius
within the said city / And that upon all other wryttes and processes that be
and shall be awarded out of ye said courts or eschequer It shall be laufull to the
Sheryffes for the time being to make their Retournes according to the order of
the law as the Sheryffes of London were wont to do before the making of the
said Estatute without any loss or forfayture.

An act concerning Surgeons to be discharged of questes and other things.
Ca. vi.
SHeweth-vnto your discrete wysdomes your humble Orators / The wardens and
fesshype of the craft and Mynysteri of Surgyons enfraunchy sed in the City of
London / not passing in nombre.xii. persons / That where as they and their
predecessors from the time that no mind is to ye contrary as well in this
noble city of London / As i^ all other Cities and Boroughes within this
Reyalme or else wherefor the contynuall service and attendaunce that they
deyly and nyghtly at all hours and times give to the kings lege people / for
the releue of the same according to their science have been exempt and
discharged from all officers and besynes / wherein they should use or bear any
manner of Armoure or wepyn / and with like pryuylege have been entreated as
Harowdes of Arms as well in Batayles and feldes as other places / there for to
stand vnherneysed and vnwepenned according to the law of Arms because they
be persons yt never used Feattes of war nor ought to use / but oonly ye
besynes and exercise of their science to the help and comforthe of the kings
lyege people in the time of their need / And in ye foresaid city of London
from ye time of their first Incorperacion when they have been many moo in
nombre than they be now were never called nor charged to be on queste / watch
nor other office whereby they should use or occupy any Armor or defe^cible gere
of war / where thorugh they should be unready and let to practyse their Cure
of men being in perell. Therefore for that they be so small nombre of the said
felyshyppe of the craft and Mystery of Surgyons i^ regard of ye great
multitude of pacyentes that be and daily chance and infortune happens and
encreasethe in the foresaid City of London / And that many of the kings
lyege people suddenly wounded and hurt for defaute of help in time to them to
be showed perysshe / And so diverse have done as euyde^cly is known by occasyon
that your said Supplyauntes have been compelled to attend upon shuche
Co^stableshyp / watches and Iuryes as a foresaid. Be it enacted and
establysshed by the king our Soueraygne lord and the lords spiritual and
temporal / and by the Commons in this present Parlyament assembled and by
actoryte of the same / That from hensforth your said supplyauntes be discharged
and not chargeable of Co^stablyshyppe / watch and all manner of office berynge
and Armor / And also of all Enquestes and Iuryes within the city of London /
And also that this Act in all thing do extend to all Barboures Surgyons
admytted and aproued to exercise the said mysterye of Surgyons acccordynge to
ye form of ye statute lately made in that behalf / So that they excede ne be
at one time above the nombre of.xii. parsones.

An act for Strangers for byeng of Lether in open market.
Cap^. vii.
IN the most humble wise shown and complayneth unto your hyghnes your pore
and daily Oratoures the Felyshyppe and broderhed of the blessed Trinite at the
black Friars in your City of London of the craft of Cordewayners strangers
/ that where at your last Parlyament holden at westminster in ye third year of
your most noble Reygne among other things it was accordyd and enacted by an
Act made and granted unto the wardens and felyshyppe of ye Coriours to have
search of Ledder for certain causes i^ the said Act largely named and
expressed / That no stranger Alyn^ not borne within your Realm of England /
Irlande / Wales / Calyce / or the marchese of ye same dwelling within any
Fraunchesed place or places within the precinct of ye said City of London and
suburbs as in the Fraunchese of saint Katheryns / saint Martyns in the Town
of Westmester / and in the borouhe of Southwerke should bye or cause to be
bought to his or to their use any ledder or wares in any secret place / but
oonly i^ ye open market where it should be seen assailed sealed abled good and
suffycyently tanned and coryed / And also that the wardens of ye coryours their
successors and assygnes should have search in the craft and broderhed of the
Trinite aforesaid as well in Frau^chysed places as in any other place for all
manner of such ledder or ware in suffycie^tly Tanned sealed and coryed as often
as they should think conuenyent / And the same ledder so found insuffycyent to
be forfeyted with other pains i^ the content of the said Act lemytte and
expressed sithe the making of which statute many and the most pertye of all
your said poor oratoures be fall i^ great decay ad poverty by the means of
which statute the said craft of Coryours wrongfully daily compelle your said
pore Orators strangers borne under the domynyon of the emperor / and the
prince of Castle to by their ledder and wares of them and of no person else
after their own price without any right or conscience In asmoche that be force
of ye above named Act your poor orators strangers may bye no read ledder
as they were wont to do before ye making of the said statute / but it must
be coryed / And so if the said ledder be unlawfully dressed or coryed all ye
fault return i^ your said pore orators / where as a fore time they bought
both read ledder and other and saw that it should be suffyciently coryed and
dressed orells to be forfeyted / Wherefore your said Orators may not please and
serve your lords states and comynaltie / of this your Realm as they were
wont to do in times paste before the making of the said Act for as it is
openly known the said warden and craft of Coryours daily sell the best
Ledder in gross to merchants strangers Italyans and other persons / so
that your poor orators be compelled to take and bye of them unlawful ledder
in retale or elleys in gross with ouerchargeable price for lack of a dew
order and prouysion inco^syderacion whereof and for the most conforte and relefe
of the said broderhed and felyshype of the blessed Trynyte / It woll please
your said hygnes and the lords Spiritual and temporalles / and the Commons in
this your present Parlyament assembled that it may be therefore ordained enacted
and establysshed / by auctoryte of the same that from hensforth it be laufull
to all manner of person or persons estran^gers being in the felysshyppe of
the blessed Trinite a four named and to all manner other persons borne under
the domynyon of the Emperor and the prince of Castle to by all manner of read
ledder or other ledder coryed or not coryed i^ open market and Fayres within
this your Realm of england suffycyently wrought assayed and sealed with all
laufull search in all places Fraunchysed or Vnfraunchysed as they have done and
occupied in times paste before The making of the above said Act in ye third
year of your reygne without any let interrupcion and trouble by any person
or persons according to the old vsaunce and custom / The said Act of
coryours statute and ordinance or any other act or acts grauntes statutes or
ordynaunces to the contrary made or to be made notwithstanding.

Provided always that this present act do not extend to any other parsone but
such as be of the said brotherhed / and to all other persons borne under the
Emperor and the king of castle domynyon.

Provided also that this act shall not extend to give any person borne out
of ye kings obeysau^ce liberty to bye any ledder vntanned nor vnsuffycie^tly
tanned.

Provided furthermore that no person borne out of ye kings obeysaunce by
color of this act shall have auctoryte to bye any ledder i^ any secret
place / but oonly in open markettes and Fayres.

Provided also yt no person by color of this Act have auctoryte to bye or
selle any ledder within the City of London / but if either the bier or the
seller be a freman af the said City according to the ancient customs and
liberties of the said City and according to diverse estatutes in that case
made and puruayed except oonly in saint Bartylmewes fair.

Provided also that this Act shall not extend to take away or mynysshe any
power or auctoryte given by the said former estatute unto ye wardens of the
felyshyppe of Coryours and to their successors for dew search by them and
their deputies to be made in any place or upon any parsone for ledder
vnsuffyciently dressed / wrought tanned or unsealed nor in ye execution of such
penalties as be contained in the said former act and statute for the
punysshementes of such defautes as shall be by the said search founden.

Provided also that no parsone borne out of the kings obeysaunce have none
auctoryte by reason of this act to begin any new markettes within saint
Martens the grant of London or in any other. Fraunchysed place / but only
shall bye in such markettes as have been of old time accustomed.

An act concerning the manner and form of Suit for the kings most gracyous
Letters of general pardon.
Cap^. viii.
WHere hit has pleased ye kings hyghnes of his mere mocyon and most habundant
grace to grant to every of his Subgectes his general pardon / by his letters
patentes to be opteyned of upon and concerning all and synguler Artycles
contained and specyfied in a bylle sygned with his most gracyous hand
delivered and remaining in ye Custody of his Chaunceller of England for the
warraunt for ye same. Be hit enacted by our said Sovereign lord ye king with
ye asse^t of ye lords espirituell and te^porall / and the Commons in this
present Parlyament assembled / and by thauctoryte of the same that all and as
many / and every of the kings Subjects the which at any time hereafter will
Sue for any of the said Pardons shall have the auantage avail and benefyte of
the same Pardon in all and every of the kings Courts to him or them to be
allowed without writ or writtes of allowaunce thereupon to be made or Sued /
the same parson or parsons payinge oonly such fees as well of sealynge / as
other duyties in the kings Chau^cery / And all other ye kings Courts as
shall be orderyd assygned lymytted and appointed by our said Sovereign lord or
by such of his most honorable cou^ceyle / as his hyghnes Shall thereunto name /
And no more neither Other fees to be Payede for the premysses.

Finis Anno Quinto.
Here follows the Table of Anno Quinto.
Tabula
First an Act concerning Minystracyon of Justice to the kings subjects of
his City of Turney.Capitulo. Primo. An act for true making of clothes in
deuon^ called white straytes.Ca.ii. An act concerning white woollen clothes
of.v. marks and under may be carried over the sees unshorn.Cap^.iii. An act
for avoiding disceytes in worstedys.Ca.iiii. An act concerning Iuries in
london.Ca. v. An act concerning Surgeons to be discharged of questes and
other things.Capitulo. vi. An act for Strangers for byinge of lether in open
market.Cap^. vii. An act concerning the manner and form of Suit for the
kings most gracyous Letters of general pardon.Cap^. viii.
Explicit Tabula.

