depiction of swan The Kings Mark.



The order for Swannes both by the Statutes, and by the ancient Orders and
Customs used within the Realm of England.
FIRST, Ye shall enquire, if there be any person, that does possess any
Swanne, and has not compounded with the Kings Majesty for his Mark (that is
to say) Six shillinges eight pence, for his Mark, during his life: If you
know any such, you shall present them, that all such Swannes and Cignets, may
be seized for the King.

2 Also, you shall enquire, if any person does possess any Swanne, or Ciguet,
that may not dispend the clear yearly value of five Marks of Freehold,
except Heir apparent to the Crown: then you shall present him. 22. Edward. 4.

3 Also: If any person or persons, do drive away any Swanne, or Swannes,
breeding, or providing to breed; be it upon his own ^round, or any other
man's ground: he, or they, so offending, shall ^uffer one years imprisonment,
and fine at the Kings pleasure, Thirsteene shillinges four pence, 11. Henry.
7.

4 If there be found any Wears upon the Rivers, not having any Grates before
them; It is lawful for every Owner, Swan-maisters, or Swan-herdes, to pull up,
or cut down the Birth-net, or Gyune of the said Wear, or Wears.

5 If any person, or persons, be found carrying any Swan-hooke, and the same
person being noe Swan-herd, nor accompanied with two Swan-herdes: every such
person shall pay to the King, Thirteen shillinges four pence, (that is to
say) Three shillinges four pence to him that will inform; and the rest to the
King.

6 The ancient Custom of this Realm has and does allow to every Owner of
such Ground where any such Swanne shall heirie, to take one Land-bird; and for
the same, the Kings Majesty must have of him that has the Land-bird, Twelve
pence, Be it upon his own Ground, or any other.

7 It is ordained, that if any person, or persons, do convey away, or steal
away the Egg, or Eggs, of any Swannes, and the same being duly proved by
two sufficient witnesses, that then every such offender shall pay to the King
xiij. s. iiij. d. for every Egg so taken out of the Nest of any Swanne.

8 It is ordained, that every Owner that has any Swannes, shall pay every
year yearly for every Swan-marke, Four pence to the Master of the Game for
his Fee, and his Dinner and Supper free on the Upping days: And if the said
Master of the Game fail of the Four pence, then he shall distraine the Game
of every such Owner, that so does fail of payment.

9 If there be any person, or persons, that has Swannes, that do heirie upon
any of their several Waters, and after come to the common River, they shall
pay a Land-bird to the King, and be obedient to all Swanne Laws: for diverse
such persons do use collusion, to defraude the King of his right.

10 It is ordained, that every person, having any Swannes, shall begin
yearly to mark, upon the first of August, and no person before; but after, as
conveniently may be, so that the Master of the Kings Gain, or his Deputy, be
present. And if any take upon him, or them, to mark any Swanne or Cignet, in
other manner, to forfeite to the Kings Majesty for every Swanne so marked,
Forty shillinges.

11 It is ordained, that no person, or persons, being Owners, or Deputies, or
Servants to them, or other, shall go on marking without the Master of the
Game, or his Deputy be present, with other Swanherdes next adjoining, upon
pains to forfeite to the Kings Majesty, Forty shillinges.

12 It is ordained, that no person shall hunt any Duckes, or any other Chase in
the Water, or near the haunt of Swannes in Fencetime, with any Dog or
Spannyles: viz. from the Feast of Easter to Lammas: upon pain for every time
so found in hunting, to forfeite Sire shillinges eight pence.

13 It is ordained, that it any person does set any Snares, or any manner of
Nets, Lime, or Engines, to take Bittorns or Swans, from the Feast of Easter,
to the Sunday after Lammas day; He or they to forfeite to the Kings Majesty
for every time so setting, Sire shillinges eight pence.

14 It is ordained, that no person take up any Cignet unmarked, or make any
sale of them, but that the Kings Swan-herd, or his Deputy be present, with
other Swan-herdes next adjoining, or have knowledge of the same: upon pain to
forfeite to the Kings Majesty Forty shillinges.

15 It is ordained, that the Swan-herdes of the Duchy of Lancaster shall up
no Swanne, or make any sale of them, without the Master of the Swannes or his
Deputy be present: upon pain to forfeite to the Kings Majesty Forty
shillinges.

16 And in like manner, the Kings Swan-herd shall not enter into the Liberty
of the Duchy, without the Duchies Swan-herd be there present: upon the like
pain, to forfeite Forty shillinges.

17 It is ordained, That if any Swannes, or Cignets, be found double marked,
they shall be seized to the Kings use, till it be proved to whom the same
Swannes, or Cignets do belong: And if it cannot be proved to whom they do
belong, that then they be seized for the King, and his Grace to be answered to
the value of them.

18 It is ordained, that no person make sale of any White Swannes, nor make
delivery of them, without the Master of the Game be present, or his Deputy,
with other Swan-herdes next adjoining; upon pain to forfeite Forty
shillings: whereof, vi. s. viii. d. to him that will inform; and the rest, to
the Kings Majesty.

19 It is ordained, That no person shall lay Leaves, set any Nets, or Dragge,
within the common Streams or Rivers upon the day time, from the Feast of the
Invention of the Cross, unto the Feast of Lammas: upon pain so often as they be
found so offending, to forfeite Twenty shillinges.

20 It is ordained, That if the Master of the Swannes, or his Deputy, do
seize, or take up any Swannes, as strayes, for the Kings Majesty, that he
shall keep them in a Pit within 20. foot of the Kings Stream, or within
20. foot of the Common Highway, that the Kings subjects may have a sight of
the said Swannes so seized, upon pain of Forty shillinges.

21 It is ordained, That if any person do raze out, counterfeite, or alter the
Mark of any Swanne, to the hindering or loss of any man's Game, and any such
offendour duly proved before the Kings Majesty's Commissioners of Swannes,
shall suffer one years Imprisonment, and pay iii. l. vi. s. viii. d. to the
King.

22 It is ordained, That the Commons (that is to say) Dinner and Supper, shall
not exceed above xii. d. a mau at the most: It there be any Game found where
the Dinner or Supper is holden, upon that River, the Owner being absent, and
none there for him, the Master of the Game is to lay out viii. d. for him, and
be is to distraine the Game of him that fails the payment of it.

23 It is ordained, That there shall be no forfeyture of any White Swanne, or
Cignet, but only to the Kings Grace, as well within the Franchise and
Liberties, as without. And if any do deliver the Swanne, or Cignet so seized,
to any person, but only to the Master of the Kings Game, or to his Deputy,
to the Kings use; He is to forfeite vi. s. viii. d. and the Swannes to be
restored unto the Master of the Game.

24 It is ordained, That no person shall take any Gray Swannes or Cignets, or
White Swannes flying, but that he shall within four days next after, deliver
it, or them, to the Master of the Kings Game, and the Taker to have for his
pains viii. d. And if he fail, and bring him not, he forfeites xl. s. to the
King.

25 It is ordained, That no person, having any Game of his own, shall be
Swan-herd for himself, nor keeper of any other man's Swannes: upon pain to
forfeite to the Kings Majesty, Forty shillinges.

26 It is ordained, That no Swan-herd, Fisher, or Fowler, shall vex any other
Swan-herd, Fisher, or Fowler, by way of Action, but only before the Kings
Majesty's Justices of Sessions of Swannes: upon pain of forfeyting to the
Kings Grace, Forty shillinges.

27 The Master of the Kings Game, shall not take away any unmarked Swanne
coupled with any other man's Swanne, for breaking of the Brood: and when they
do Heirie, the one part of the Cignets to the King, and the other to the Owner
of the marked Swanne.

28 Also, any man whatsoever he be, that kills any Swanne with Dog, or
Spannyles, shall forfeite to the King, Forty shillinges; the Owner of the
Dog to pay it, whether he be there, or no. Also, the Master of the Swannes,
is to have for every White Swanne and Gray vpping, a Pennie^ and for every
Cignet, it. d.

29 It is ordained, That if any Heirie be leyed with one Swanne, the Swanne and
the Cignets shall be feazed for the King, till due proof be had whose they
are, and whose was the Swanne, that is away; Be it Cobbe or Pen.

30 Lastly, If there be any other Misdemeanour, or Offense committed or done by
any Owner of any Game, Swan-herd, or other person whatsoever, contrary to any
Law, ancient Custom, or usage heretofore used and allowed, and not before
herein particularly mentioned or expressed, you shall present the same Offense,
that reformation may be had, and the Offenders punished, according to the
quantity and quality of the several Offenses.

FINIS.
God save the King.

