A HEAVENLY TREASVRE OF CONFORTABLE MEDITATIONS AND PRAYERS WRITTEN BY S.
AVGVSTIN, BISHOP OF HYPPON In three several treatises of his Meditations,
Soliloquies, and Manual.

Faithfully translated into English by the R. F. ANTONY BATT Monk, of the holy
order of S BENNET of the Congregation of England.

AT S. OMERS, For JOHN HEIGHAM Anno 1624.

TO THE MOST ILlustrious Lord and our most Reverend Father in Christ the Lord
GABRIEL GIFFORD de S. Maria Archbishop, and Duke of Rhemes, first Peer of
France etc. our good and gracious Lord.
THis little book of the greatest Doctor of the Church of God, faithfullye
translated into the English language for the confort of our afflicted
Catholics, runs of its own accord into your gracious patronage: first in
regard of the author, who having been the tongue of holy church to preach,
dispute, and define with power, and efficacy against the rebellious
heretics, and schismatickes of his time, seems to exact that his works
should be dedicated only to such a patron, as comes nearest unto him in those
sacred functions; and certainly the world can witness, that no Bishop of this
age has so powerfully, so learnedly, so constantly, am^ast so many factious
insurrections, before so great, and glorious auditories, in many of the
chiefest cittyes of France, and especially in that abridgement of the world,
and Royal seat of the Monarchy of France, Paris, impugned, and confuted the
furious and fiery heresies of Caluinisme, then your grace has done. Whereupon
the most Christian King, the eldest son of the Church, and glorious Lilly of
the Princes of the world, with manifest show of a feelinge judgment of
virtue, and true zeal of Catholic faith, has worthily chosen your grace to
be chief Pastor of his Peers, and Metropolitan of that holy church of
Rhemes, which as in times past it deserved to be called, so under your graces
government, it will still deserve to be accounted, the Mistress of
Ecclesiastical discipline in France.

Secondly in regard of the Translator, who being a poor monk, and unworthy
member of that little monastery of S. Laurence in Dieulewart, in which your
Lordship received the habit of S. Bennet, and exercised, with not able
humility all the duties of an humble, and an obserua^t religious, and
afterward all the parts of an exemplar, and provident superior, could not
persuade himself to seek abroad any other patron of his poor labors,
having one so excellent at home, whose glory; and greatness might ennoble, and
beautify the work, which the Translatours rude and unpolished language could
not so perfectly express to the reader, as the worth thereof does deserve.

And though so small a labor may seem a very unproportionable gift to be
offered to so Illustrious a Prelat, yet the offerours ability stretchinge to
noe greater a present, will in your graces courteous acceptance, supply that
want of proportion, especially since he had a kind of necessity imposed upon
him by dutiful affection, and by command of obedience to testify by this
little endeavor the common joy, and gladness of al his brethren the English
Benedictins in this your Lordships so wonderful, though worthily deserved
promotion. Perhaps it will be counted a slight observation, yet may it be
pardonned me, if in demonstration of joy, I pour forth what my affection
bids me, though in exacter judgment I should have concealed it, that the
order of S. Bennet gave the first Bishop, and first English Bishop unto our
nation before ever it had any; and now again has giueu the first consecrated
English Bishop, that the nation has had after so long an interruption, as
heresy has made in that dignity. For in the beginning of our conversion from
Paganism to Christianisme, and for many ages after, scarce had England any
Bishop, that was not a Benedictin: that being a prerogative willingly granted
by the whole nation unto the order which first planted, and watered, and
cultiuated the true faith of our Savior Christ amongst them, and continued in
those glorious labors, neuergiuing them over by interruptio^, as a late
author would have it believed, contrary to the truth of history which it
seems he did not well examine; for even in the most troublesome times of the
church of England both of ancient, and later memory, the monks of S. Bennet
have showed themselves most zealous in defense of the faith, and therefore
balling John Bale, no great friend of Priests not r^gulars, in his book of the
writers of England, rayleth at a learned Benedictin as the first, and most
zealous, and eloquent unpugner of W^clif^n Oxford: and a better author, as
being a worthy Confessor M. D. Pitz in a book of the same title, numbreth a
copious catalogue of learned preachers, and writers of the same order, who
successively from age to age, employed their endeavors to desend, and
illustrate the faith, which their first Fathers had brought into England: and
he might have learned out of M. D. Sanders no small number of Abbots, and Monks
of the order to have stood for the same with loss of their lives: and himself
might have remembered the famous, and Reverend Abbot Fecknam so much tossed, and
torinoyled in the late Q. Elizabeth's days, for his constancy in retaining of
his faith, and refusal of the oath of Suprem. against which he writ, and in
which constancy he gloriously died in prison: whose Chaplain, and fellow monk
D. Sebert Buckley, not many years after the death of his Lord, received from
beyond seas, a fresh supply of Monastical Benedictin preachers, sent to
continue their ancient mission by authority of the sea Apostolic from the
Popes of glorious memory Clement the eight, and Paul the fifth, as appears by
the motus proprius of the holy Father Paul the fifth, dated the 24. of December.
1612. Pont. suian. 8. And we may put your grace for a witness though
domestical, yet now, as being a Bishop, impartial, who have known many
Confessors of the order, and can restifie of one especially, who though blind
in body, yet clear sighted in mind, in the church of West-minster publicly,
and stoutely confuted in an afternoon sermon, aprecedent railing sermon which
D. Horn by appointment of the Council sounded in the ears of the people, to
disgrace the profession of Monks, and Catholic Religion. So that there never
has been any interruption of Benedictin preachets, and teachers in England,
and we trust never will be till the worlds end; of which confidence of ours we
esteem a very probable argument, the memory and love unto the order of S.
Bennet, so deeply ingrafted in the hearts of English men, that no emulation by
never so extraordinary diligence can root it out; and we think no small
conjecture thereof may be taken from this admirable promotion of your Lordship,
of which we may say what Mardocheus said unto Hester: Et quis nouit vtrum
idcirco ad regnumveneris, vt in tali tempore parareris? Who can tell but that
your grace is therefore by Gods providence raised to this Ecclesiastical
Kingdom, that in these times you might be ready to erect, and fortisie your
brethren the Benedictins, as a man gracious with both Monarchs, with the Lily
of France, for your fruitful labors in the souls of his subjects, with the
Lion of England, for your acknowledged faith, and loyalty to his personal
right, and succession.

But enough of the causes of dedication: a word or two by your graces leave of
the reasons, why this work is translated. Taking delight in reading of those
heavenly conceits of S. Augustine, I purposed for the private intertaineme^t of
that time, which obedience left unto my choice, to put them into English as
carefully as I could, and then exhibiting my labor to my superiors, as an
account how I spent my leisure, they thought good to publishe it, although it
had before been translated, which I never knew; for the translator M. Rogers,
instead of giving the devout reader the true works of S. Augustine, took upon
him presumptuously to mangle, and maime them in all such places, as the holy
Doctor had writ directly contrary to Protestanticall doctrine, forcing him to
speak like an heretic in all points, of prayer unto Saints, merits of good
works, suffrages for the faithful departed, and such other, as ordinarily do
occur in spiritual exercises: in which S. Augustine most plainly, and
clearelye speaking as a true Romain catholic, this saucie controller M.
Rogers, either peruerteth his words to Puritanisme, or else leaves them out,
even whole chapters, as if he were more illuminated with the grace of God, and
knowledge of truth, then that glorious Doctor, esteemed, even by our
adversaries, the learned master, that ever the Church had since the
Apostles. And where S. Augustine, in the fervor of his devotion, with most
eloquent, and wary terms, represents unto his soul, and the readers
thoughts, the doleful spectacle of our Saviors passion this impious heretic
leaves all that out, or else wickedlie transformeth it, censuring it as
escapes, and ouersights, when it is most evident that they were written by
Saint Augustine with full advertisement of a far deeper, and carefuller
judgment, then ever can be in the braymes of an heretic. In one thing yet
is the man to be commended, that he does not this by stelth, and silently, as
most of that faction do, but openly, and plainly professing his fact in his
prefaces, and yielding particular account thereof; but no other reason saving
the credit of his heresy. But most abominablie in the first preface does he
belie the English Catholics at home, imposing upon them their translating,
and printinge of diverse lewed legends of knights errants, as Amadis, Palmerin,
and the like, as if they had been published by crafty papists, as he calls
them, to pervert Protestants, whom they could not co^sute with disputations:
whereas the world knows, the translators of those books to have been professed
Protestants, and some of them Poursuiuants, and damnable Apostata's, as Antony
Monday, and the like, sworn officers, and helhoundes to hunt out poor
afflicted Catholics and bring them to the miseries of imprisonments, and
premuniries. And both Rogers, and Ascam his author whom he cites, were not of
so little reading, but in their conscience they knew, that all such books are
forbidden very strictly to be read in the Catholic church by any of her
faithful children, and condemned by the rules of the expurgatorie Index,
appointed by order of the great Council of Trent, and drawn out by most
indicious, and godly divines to direct Catholics how to avoid the venini, and
poison of all pernicious books, which Index, it is a wonder how these men dare
presume to find fault with, because it blotteth out many improbable words, and
doctrines in late Authors, where as they presume, by their own confession, to
blott out all words, and doctrines contrary to their false belief, even in
the very ancient, and greatest Doctors of the Church; whose writings that
index, for the reverence due unto them, even in those poincts wherein, as men,
some of them have missed, has left untouched, and vnco^trolled. All which I
have presumed to say in this speech unto your Lordship, for the better
instruction of all Catholic readers, who in reading this preface, I doubt not
but will rejoice with me, and glorify God for the great honor, and blessings
both temporal, and spiritual powered forth abondantly upon your grace,
notwithstanding the resistance made by envy, and emulation; and that in your
bannishment in a strange country; though indeed France is not a strange
country unto the Giffords, whose noble family has its original stock, and
florisheth yet at this day in little Britanie, and other parts of France, and
from thence sent forth its branches into the greater Britany, with such
prosperous success, that it gave to England the Dukes of Buckingam, and
remains as yet a principal branch of that house; so that it may seem France
has made estimation of your grace, not only provoked thereunto by your
learning, and virtues, but even by the secret instinct of nature, gladly
embracing the good which sprung first from its own soil.

I have added certain verses, and a devout consideration of Blessed S. Peter
Damian Cardinal of Ostia, and monk of our order, a man in those days so
profitablie, and fervently employed by the churches commaundment for his
admirable zeal, and powerful eloquence in reducing Schismatickes, and
Sectaries of Italy, that your grace may seem to have placed him before your
eyes, as a pattern of your actions, and the government of your Diocese. The
verses were heretofore namelesse in many Latin editions of these works, but now
adjudged by the learned to be S. Peter Damians. The consideration also, taken
out of the same Saints works, seemed to me, for the profit thereof, to be a fit
end, and conclusion of this my translation, as a point most necessary to
remain always in the memory of the faithful reader.

All this I offer unto your grace, by the commaundment of my Superiors, and
mine own desire, in the name of all English Benedictins, whose prayers unto
almighty God shall never be wanting for the long life, health, and prosperous
direction of your gracious Lordshippe in all virtue, and happiness. From my
Cell in Dieulewart, your Lordshipps beloved monastery, where by the leave of
obedience I mean to spend the remainder of my life, and remain always.

Your graces poor b^ads-man B. ANTONY BATT unworthy monk of S^. Bennet.

APPROBATIO.
HAE S. Augustini Meditationes, Soliloquia and Manuale in Anglicum sermonem
fideliter translata, vtiliter ad piorum vsum praelo excudentur. Actum Duaci 18.
Martij 1622.

Georgius Coluenerius S. Th. Doctor, and Regins, ordinariusque Professor, and
in academia Duacena librorum censor.

Ego F. Rudesindus Barlo Presbyter, and monachus S. Benedicti, Sacrae
Theologiae Doctor, and Professor, and Congregationis Angliae Benedictinorum
Praeses, and missionis Hispanicae ordinis eiusdem Vicarius Generalis, habita
Theologorum congregationis nostrae censura, facultatem concedo, vt imprimatur
libellus Meditationum, Soliloquiorum, and Manualis Sancti Augustini, a R. P.
ANTONIO BATT Congregationis nostrae Presbytero, and Monacho, in Anglicum Ideoma
traductus. In quorum fidem has literas nostras manu nostra subscriptas, and
nostri officij figillo munitas, dedimus. In conuentu nostro Sancti Gregorij
Magni Anglorum Apostoli Duaceno. 27. Decembris 1621.

F. RVDESINDVS BARLO qui supra. Ex mandato adm. R. P. Praesidis nostri, F.
CLEMENS REYNER Secret.

THE MEDITATIONS OF THE MOST GLORIOUS AND HOLY FATHER S. AVGVSTIN, BISHOP OF
HYPPON: Confessor, and Doctor of Christ's Church.
A Prayer unto almighty God for the amendment of our life and manners. CHAPT. I.
O Lord my God grant unto my heart to desire thee, by desiring to seek thee,
by seeking to find thee, by findinge to love thee, by loving to purchase
pardonne for my sins committed heretofore, and being pardonned to commit
them noe mo^e. Grant, o Lord my God, repentance unto my heart, sorrow unto my
soul a fountain of tears unto mine eyes, abundance of alms unto my hands.
O my king, extinguishe in me the heat of unlawful lust, and kindle in me
the fire of thy love. O my redeemer, expel from me the spirit of pride and
arrogancy, and mercifully grant me the treasure of thy humility. O my
Savior, rem^ue from me all anger and testiness, and graciously give me the
shield of patience. O my Creator, root out of me all bitterness of affection,
and bestow upon me the sweetness of a mild disposition. Give me (most
merciful Father) a firm faith, a fittinge hope, a never failinge charity. O
my gouerner turn from me all vanirie, inconstancy of mind, instabilitie of
heart, scurrilitie of speech, loftines in my looks, inordinate appetite of
eating, reuilinge of my neighbors and brethren, the vice of detraction. The
itche of curiosity, the desire of riches, the pillinge and polinge of such as
are mighty, the affectation of vain glory: the evil of hypocrisy, the
poison of flattery, the despising of such as are in misery and need, the
oppressinge of such as are weak and impouerished, the heat of avarice, the
ruste of envy, the death of blasphemy. O my maker, cut off in me indiscrete
rashness, stubbernes, unquietness, idleness, drousines, slouthfullnes, dulnes of
mind, blindness of heart, stiffenes in opinion, cruelty in my manners and
conditions, disobedience to that which is profitable, repugnance to good
counsel, excess of speaking, pillinge of poor men, wronging of weak men,
false surmises against those that are innocent, negligence toward those under
my charge, cruelty toward those with whom I live, impiety toward my
friends and familiars, hard dealinge toward my neighbors. O my God my
mercy, I beseech thee by thy beloved Son, grant me the works of mercy,
the exercises of piety; to take pity on the afflicted, to give counsel to
such as err, and are deceived, to succor such as are in misery, to help
those that are needy, to solace those that are sad, to ease those that are
oppressed, to help the helpless, to comfort the comfortless, to forgive my
debtors, to pardonne those that have offended me, to love those which do hate
me, to render good for evil, to despise noe man, but rather to reverence all
men: to imitate such as are good, to take heed of such as are evil: to
embrace virtue, to reject vice, patience in adversity, continence in
prosperity, wariness in my speech, a door of circumspection to my lips, to
tread under foot by contempt all things temporal, to desire greatly those
that are eternal.

Man's acknowledging his misery, his his commendation likewise of Gods mercy.
CHAPT. II.
Behold, o my maker, I have damanded of thee many things, and those not
small, albeit I have deserved nothing at all. I confess, alas, I confess,
that I do not only not deserve these gifts and graces, which I have
demanded, but great and grievous torments upon me to be inflicted.
Notwithstanding, publicans, harlotts, and thieves do embolden me, who on a
soddaine being delivered out of the jaws of their ghostly adversary, are
received into the bosom of the true shephearde. For thou o God, the maker of
all things, albeit in all thy works thou art full of admiration, yet art thou
most to be admired in thy works of mercy and compassion. Whence by a certain
servant of thine thou have said of thy self, his mercies are above all his
other works. And as it were speakinge of one, we hope thou have said of all
thy people: I will not take a way my mercy from him. For thou disdainest noe
man, despisest noe man, hate noe man: unless peraduensure such a one, as
being as it were besides himself, shall hate thee.

Thou therefore not only forebearest to st^k when thou art angry, but likewise
give gifts and graces to those that have provoked thee, if they shall cease
from living wickedly. O my God, the ho^e of my health, and my refuge, I
unhappy creature, I have provoked thee, I have sinned against thee, I have
incensed thine anger, deserved thy displeasure I have sinned, and thou
suffer^st me; I have done amiss, and yet thou endurest me. I^ I repent, thou
do pardonne me; if I return, thou receiuest me; moreover, whilst I delay to
do (...), thou expectest me. Thou call me wanderinge, thou inui^est me
resistinge, thou tariest for me lingering, thou instructest me being simple,
thou comfortest me being sorrowefull; thou raisest me from ruin, thou
repairest me after I am fallen Thou give when I demand of thee, thou
vouchsafest to be found, when I seek thee, and when I knock, thou openest
unto me.

Behold, o Lord God of my salvation, what to object I know not, what answer
to make I am ignorant. There is noe place of refuge, to which I may fly from
thee: there is noe place so secret, in which I may remain secret from thee.
Thou have showed me the way of living well, thou have given me the knowledge
of walkinge as I ought, thou have threatened to punish me with the pains of
hell, thou have promised to reward me with the joys of heaven.

Now therefore (o Father of mercy, and God of al comfort) pierce my flesh with
thy fear, to the end that those things. which thou do threaten, I may
escape by fearinge thee, and give me again the joy of thy salvation, that
those things which thou do promise, I may receive by louinge thee. O Lord
my force, my strength my God, my refuge, and my deliverer, tell me, what I
ought to think of thee, teach me with what words I am to call upon thee,
make known unto me, which way I may please thee. One thing (doutlesse) I
know, with which thou art appeased, and an other which thou do not despise:
verily an afflicted or troubled spirit is to thee a sacrifice acceptable, so
is likewise a heart that is contrite and humble. O my God and mine aid,
enriche me with these gifts, barricade me with these bulwarks against mine
ennimie, grant me this refreshinge against the flames of my vicious
inclinations, set open this pious place of refuge, to which I may fly from the
tumults of mine inordinate affections.

Grant o Lord (thou strength of my salvation that I be not of the number of
those, who for a ^ime believe, and in time of temptation do depart and leave
thee: cover my head in the day of battle, my hope in the day of affliction,
and my safegarde in time of tribulation.

Behold o Lord (my light and my life) I have asked those things which I want,
I have made known those things which I fear: nevertheless my conscience
torme^teth me, the secrets of my heart do reprehende me, and what love
affords, fear disperseth: zeal encourages me, dread daunteth me: mine
actions cause me to fear, but thy pity gives me cause of hope: thy mercy
emboldeneth me, but my malice withholds me. And to speak the truth, there
occure to my memory many sinful imaginations which reprehende the boldness of
my presuminge affections.

Man's complainte, who for his disobedience is not heard of God. CHAPT. III.
HE therefore which deserves anger, with what face can he demand favor? he
which meriteth to be punished, how can he be so foole-hardie, as to ask to
be rewarded; he incenseth the judge, who neglectinge to make satisfaction for
his offense, makes mean to obtain a recompense: that malefactor mocketh and
derideth his king and Lord, that carnestly requiteth that price and honou^e,
which he nouer deserved. That foolish son likewise preuoketh to anger the
sweet affection of his father. who after reproaches offered before
repentance, does usurp and lay title to his inheritance.

What is this (o Father tha^ I recompt of myself? I have des^rued death, yet
beg for life. I have moved my king to anger, whose aid not withstanding I
impudentlie implore I hau^ d^spi^ed my judge whom rashely I demand to be my
helper. I have insolentlie refus^d to hea^e him^a a father, whom now I
presume to choose for my d^ fender. Woe is me, for not coming so soon as I
ought: Alas, alas how little ha^^ do I make? Woe is me, for that I run now
after wounds be received, disdatning to take heed of the darts, before I was
wounded I neglected to beware of the weapons before hand, yet now I am
troubled through the apprehension of death at hand; I have infl^cted wound^
upon wound, for that I, have not feared to add sin upon sin. I have
made my former scarrs to fester with new sores, for that I have renewed my
former faults by new iniquities, and those whom the divine salve had made
sound, my phreneticall itching has again unbound. The skin, which being
grown over my wounds, had hidden my malady (by reason of the corruption
breakinge forth) has grown to putrify because mine iniquity being
re^^era^ed, has euacuated and bereaved me of mercy, which before was
granted: for that I know it is written: In what hour soever a just man shall
sin, all his good deeds shall be forgotten. If the righteousness of a good
man is abolished when h^^^lleth into sin, by how much more is the penance of
a sinner defaced, if he return to the same?

O how often have I as a dog, returned to that which I had vomitted up
before, and as a sow have wallowed agains in the mire? I confess, that it is
impossible for me to remember how many simple and ignorant persons by my
means have sinned, how many that were desirous to cease from sin, I have
persuaded, how many, that have with-stoode me, I have constrained; to how
many that were willing, I have consented; to how many that walked in the right
way, I have prepared a ginne; to how many that sought the right way, I have
uncovered the pit, that they might fall in: and that I might not be deteried
from committing still the like, I easily put those past out of my mind. But
thou in the interim (being a ^ust judge) markinge and sealinge up mine
offenses as it were in a bag, have considered all my ways, and have numbered
all my foot stepps. Thou have all this while held thy peace, thou have been
silent, thou have been patient Woe is me, for that thou will speak at length,
as a woman in her travail.

The dread of the judge coming to judgment. CHAPT. IV.
O God of Gods, o Lord in mercy surmountinge the malice of men: I know thou will not be always silent; then I mean, when a flaminge fire shall burn
before thee, and a terrible tempest shall shoure down round about thee, when
thou shall call both heaven and earth to judge, and discern thy people. And
lo in the presence of so many millions of people, al mine iniquities shall be
revealed, before so many troops of Angels, al mine abominations shall be
desplaied: not only of mine actions, but likewise of my words, and
cogitations. There shall I poor wretch stand to be judged, by so many as have
gone before me in doing good: I shall by so many accusers be thought worthy of
hell, as have given me example of living well. I shall be convinced by so many
witnesses, as have admonished me by their wholesome speeches, and by their
godly, and pious conversation, have carried themselves worthy of imitation.

O my Lord, I know not what to say, I know not what to answer: And albeit I
am as yet free from that terrible danger, nevertheless my conscience does
afflict me, the hidden secrets of my heart do torment me, covetousness does
press me, pride does accuse me, envy does consume me, concupiscence does
inflame me, lust does moleste me, gluttony does disgrace me, dronkennes does
convince me, detraction does rent me, ambition does supplante me, extorsion
does check me, discord does distract me, anger does disturb me, leuitie does
undo me, drousines does oppress me, hyprocrisie does deceive me, flattery
does subdue me, favor does e^toll me, backbitinge does disquiet me.

Behold o my deliverer, who have delivered me out of the hands of cruel
people Behold with whom I have lived from the day of my birthe, with whom I
have studied, and with whom I have kept promise. Those ve^ie studies which
here ^ofore I aff^cted, do condemn me: which in ime^ part I praised, do
dispraise me. These are the friends to whom I have assen^ed; the teachers,
whom I have obeyed; the ma^sters, whom I have served; the consellers with
whom; I have believed; the citizens with whom I have inhabited; the fam^har
acquaintance to whom I have consented. Woe is me o my king and my God, for
that my abode hear is prolonged. Woe is me o my light, for that I have lived
with those that live in darkness. And seeing holy David said so much, how
much more may I be able to say. My soul has dwelt too long in a strange
land?

O my God my force and my fortress, noe man shall be justified in thy sight. My
hope is not in the sons of men Whom would thou find justified if thou
should judge severely, setting mercy aside? Neither is there any thing
whereof a just man may vaunt, or which can bring him to glory, unless thou
prevent him before hand (being of him self unjust) with thy mercy and pity.
I therefore (o my Saujour) believe what I have heard, that it is thy goodness
that does draw me to repentance, thy hony-sweete lips have toulde it me.
Noeman can come to me unless my Father, who has sent me draw him. Seeinge
therefore it has pleased thee to instruct me, and by instruction, have
vouchsafed mercifully to inform me. I beseech thee with all the forces of my
heart and mind, o almighty father, together with thy most beloved son: I
beseech thee likewise o most sweet son, together with the most gracious
hohe Ghost, vouchsafe to draw me, that I may run after thee by virtue of the
sweet smell of thy pre^ious ointme^ts.

The help of God the father is desired, by the merits of God the son. CHAPT.
V.
Unto thee I cry (o my God) unto thee I call, for that thou art nighe to all
those that cry and call upon thee in the truth. Thou art the truth, reach me I
beseech thee for thy mercies sake, teach me, o sacred truth, to call upon
thee in the truth, and for that I know not how this ought to be done. I
humbly desire thee (o blessed truth) that thou will vouchsafe to teach me:
because wisdom without thee is mere ignorance, but the knowledge of thee is
an absolute science. Instruct me (o divine wisdom) and teach me thy law,
because I assure my self that man shall be happy, whom thou shall vouchsafe to
instruct and ^each in thy law.

I desire to implore thy assistance, which I beseech thee let be done in the
truth. What is it to implore the assistance of the truth in the truth,
sauinge only the assistance of the father in the son? Thy word therefore (o
holy Father) is the truth, the truth being likewise the beginning of thy
words. For this is the beginning of thy words, that in the beginning was
the Word. In that beginning I adore thee, who art the best beginning. In
that word of truth, I crave thy aid, o most absolute truth.

In which word of truth, may it please thee (who art the self same truth)
to direct and instruct me in the truth: for what is more sweet, then to call
upon the father, in the name of his only begotten son, to move the father
to mercy by remembrance of his child, to appease the kings sury, by naminge
his dearest progeny? By these means are fellons delivered out of prison, thus
they that lie fettered, are freed from their irons, thus they that are
condemned, obtain not only to be quit and absolved, but likewise with
unexpected favors to he rewarded, to wit, by making known to the Princes
thus incensed, the love of their child so much beloved: in this manner
likewise do servants escape the punishment of their masters, when they have
offended, whilst the sweetness of their children, does make intercession for
them, that they may be pardonned.

After the same manner, I beseech thee o father omnipotent by the love of thy
omnipotent son, deliver my soul out of prison, to the end it may more freely
confess thy name. I beseech thee by thy coeternall and only son, deliver
me from the irons and fetters of sin, and by the intercession of thy most
dear child sittinge at thy right hand, vouchsafe to restore me to life,
being by him appeased, albeit my meritts do adiudge me to be condemned.

Certainly I know noe other mediator, whom I may send unto thee, but him
only, who is the sacrifice offered for the reconciliation of our sins, who
sits at thy right hand, making intercession for us. Lo this is my
advocate with thee o God the father Lo this is that high Priest, who needs
not to be purged with an others blood, for that he shines being sprinkled
with his own. Lo this is that sacred host, so pleasinge and full of
perfection offered and accepted so a^sauoure of sweetness. Lo this is that
lamb without blemish, who before those that sheared him, hea^d his peace, for
that being buffeted, spit upon, and reviled, he did not so much as open his
mouth. Thus he that was free from sin, took upon him the burden of our
sins, and by his own wounds, cured out soars.

Here man does represent to God the Father, the passion of his son. CHAPT. VI
Behold (o pitiful father) thy most pitiful son, suffering such pitiful
things for me. See o most merciful king, who it is that suffers. Is not
this o my Lord, thy most innocent son whom thou d^dstgiue, thereby to deliver
thy servant? Is not this he, o author of life, who was led as a sheep to the
slaughter, and being made obedient unto thee even unto death, feared not to
undergo that kind of death, which of all others is most cruel, and
painful? May it please thee (who art the only dispenser, and disposer of our
safety and salvation) to remember, that this is he, whom, albe ^it thou have
begotten by thine own virtue and divinity, thou would have
notwithstanding to be pertaker of mine infumitie. This verily is thy diuini^e,
who took upon it my humani^ie ascended the tree of the cross, and in the
flesh which it had assumed sustained great torments.

O my Lord God, vouch safe to ast the eyes of thy majesty, upon the work of
thine unspeakeable mercy. Behold thy sweet son stretched forth at lenght
on the cross. Look upon his innocent hands, gushing for the streams of
innocent blood, and being pacified, remit the misdeedes, which my hande^ have
committed. Consider his naked side, pierced through with a cruel lance, and
cleanse me in that sacred fontaine, which I do believe to have flowed from
thence. See his undefiled feet (who never stood in the way of sinners, but
always walked in thy law) fastened with long and boisterous nails: and
graciously make perfect my paces in thy paths, making me to hate and abhor all
the ways of iniquity. Remove from me the way of iniquitte, and mercifully
make me to chose the way of verity. I beseech thee, o king of Saints, by
thy faincte of Saints, by this my redeemer, make me to run the way of thy
comma^dements, that I may be united to him in spirit, who disdained not to be
clothed with my flesh.

Do thou not (mark o merciful father) the head of this thy young and
dearest son (being bowed down on his snowewhite shoulder) resolved into a
death of inestimable value? Look upon the humanity of thy beloved child,
most meek creator, and take compassion of the weakness of thy weak creature.
His naked breast grows white, his bloody side looks read, his
outstretched bowels become dry, his comely eyes grow dim, his kingly
countenance waxes pale, his long arms grow cold and stiff, his thighs
(in whitenes like unto Alablaster) hang down, the water of his blessed
blood, does bathe his pierced feet.

Behold (o glorious father) the mangled members of thy most gracious son,
and courteously call to mind, what my substance is. Regard the punishment of
God made man, and release the misery of man by thee formed. Consider the
torments of the Redeemer, and pardonne the offense of him, that was redeemed.
This is he, o my Lord, whom thou have stricken for the sins of thy people,
albeit he be thy well beloved, in whom thou have been well pleased; this is
that innocent, in whom noe fraud was ever found, and yet was he reckoned and
reputed amongst the wicked.

Here man does acknowledge himself to have been the cause of Christ's passion.
CHAPT. VII.
WHat have thou done (most sweet child) that thou should thus be judged?
What have thou done most louinge youth, that thou should be so cruelly
handled? What was thy sin, what was thy fault, what was the cause of thy
death, what was the occasion of thy comdemnation? I am the stripe that has
caused thy pain, I am the fault, for which thou were slain, I am the default
for which thou did die, the mischeife for which thou were treated so
cruelly. I am the black and blewe strokes of thy passion, I am the travail
of thy tormentinge.

O wonderful manner of proceeding, in a matter of judgment and correction! o
unspeakable disposition, in a mystery unknown! The unjust does sin, and the
just is punished The guilty does amiss, and the guildesse is corrected. The
ungodly does offend, and the godly is condemned. What the wicked does deserve,
the good does suffer. The debt contracted by the servant, is discharged by the
master: what man does do, is endured by God. How low, o son of God, how low
has thy humility descended? how much has thy charity been enflamed? how
far has thy pity proceeded? how fa^r has thy kindness increased? how far
has thy love extended? how far has thy compassion ar^iu^d?

For it is I that have done amiss, and thou art condemned I have committed
the offense, and thou art punished. I have done the fault, and thou art
tormented. I have been proud, and thou art humbled. I have been high minded,
and thou art abased. I have been disobedient, and thou being obedient, have
suffered the pain of my disobedience. I have been given to glouttonie and
excess, and thou art afflicted with abstine^ce. An inordinate heat, has
violentlye drawn me to unlawful concupiscence, and true charity has led
thee to the cross. I have presumed to do that which was forbiden me, and thou
have taken the punishment upon thee. I am delighted in eating, and thou art
tormented on the tree of thy passion I abound with pleasures, and thou art
pierced with nails. I taste the sweetness of the apple, and thou the bitterness
of the gall My mother hue does laugh with me, and thy mother the B. Virgin
Marie, does lament with thee

Behold o king of glory behold my wickednesle, and thereby may plainly be
seen thy goodness. Behold mine injustice, and thereby is ma^^e manifest thy
righteousness: What shall I give thee, o my king, and my God' what shall I give
thee for all the benefits, which thou have bestowed upon me? Verily nothing can
be found in man's heart, that can counterpoise so great a desert. Can any
thing possibly by the wit of man be imagined, to which the mercy of God may
fittly be compared? Neither is it the part of a creature, to attempt to make
full amends for the assistance he has received of his creator.

How beit there is something, o son of God, by reason of thy admirable
disposinge of all things, there is something, in which my frailty may healpe
me somthinge: to wit, if my soul growinge compunct through thy visitation,
do crucify the flesh, together with the vices and sinful affections of the
same. So that when this is granted by thee, from that time forewarde, the
soul does begin to suffer with thee, for that thou likewise have vouchsafed to
die for mine iniquity. And thus by the victory of the inward man, it
becomes strong and fortified against the exterior, having thee for
captain, and leader. In so much that having vanquished and overcome all
internal persequution, it fears not for thy love, to expose it self to a
sword or iauelin. This the smallnes of my condition, if it be found pleasinge
unto thy goodness, will (accordings to my mean forces) be like to my creators
greatness.

This heavenly remedy of thine, o good Jesus, this counterpoison or
preservative of thy charity, I beseech thee by thy ancient and accustomed
mercies, power into my wounds, to the end, that all contagion of sin being
cast forth, it may restore me to my former health, that having tasted of the
pleasant liquor of thy sweetness, I may utterly contemn all worldly vanities,
and fear none of its adversities: and having likewise in my remembrance that
eternal excellency, I may always disdain the blastes of such honor as is
tra^sito^ie.

Let nothing (I beseech thee) be sweet, nothing pleasing, nothing precious
unto me without thee: let nothing, be it never so fair and beautiful, like
and content me but thee. I ett all things (I pray thee) without thee, seem
unto me base and filthy. Let whatsoever is offensive to thee, be displeasing
to me, and the fulfilling of thy will and pleasure, my continual desire. Let
it greiue me to be glad without thee, and let it be my solace to be sad for
thee. Let thy holy name, be my recreation, and the memory of thee, my
consolation. Let my tears in searching out day and night thy justifications,
be my bread; let the law of thy mouth be my riches and treasure, to be
preferred before thousands of gold and silver. To obey thee, let be unto me
amiable and delightful, and to resist thee, hateful and detestable.

I humbly beg of thee (o my hope) by all thy mercies, that thou will be
pleased to pardon me mine iniquities. Open mine cares to thy commandments,
and for thy holy name I beseech thee, permit not my heart to fall into words
of malice, to same excuses when I have done amiss. I desire thee likewise by
thy wonderful humility, that the foot or affection of pride, may not approach
unto me, and that the hand or actions of sinful men, may not move and allure
me to swerve from thee.

Here man for his reconciliation, does propose to God the Father, the passion
of his son. CHAPT. VIII.
Behold (o almighty God) the Father of my lord, dispose mercifully of me, and
take pity upon me, because whatsoever I have found most precious, I have
devoutly offered unto thee; whatsoever I have known most dear, I have humbly
presented unto thee. I have reserved nothing unto my self, but have exposed
all to thy majesty, I can add nothing else, for that I have sent my whole hope
in embassage unto thee. I have sent thy beloved son as my advocate unto thee,
I have sent thy glorious only begotten, as a mediator between thee and me. I
have (I say) sent one to make intercession, by whose means I trust to obtain
pardon. I have directed thy Word with my words, whom I have affirmed to have
been sent for my misdeedes; and have recounted unto thee, the passion of thy
most sacred son, which I do believe to have been suffered for my redemption
I do believe that his deity sent by thee, has vouchsafed to be clothed with
my humanity, in which he thought it not strange to endure buffets, bonds,
spittinges, derision, and mockinge, yea to take patiently the cross, the
nails, and the lances percinge.

This humanity, whilome subject to the cryinge of infancy, wrapped in the
swadlinge clothes of childhoode, troubled with the trauailles of youth, made
lean with tastinge, wearied with watchinge, tired with trauailinge, after that
cruelly treated with whipps, torn with torments, reputed as dead, endowed with
the glory of his resurrection, he has carried with him unto the heavenly
felicity and placed the same at the r^ght hand of thy Majesty. This is that,
which does implore thy mercy to pardon mine iniquity.

Here beh^ulde (o holy Father the son whom thou have begotten, and the
servant, whom thou have redeemed See here the Creator, and despise not his
creature. G^atiously embrace the shepherd, and mercifully look upon the
sheep, which upon his own shoulders he has brought back unto the fold.
This is that most faithful shepherd, who heresofore with much and many
labors, sought the sheep that was lost, wanderinge over the craggie hills,
and dangerous dales. Who liauing at length found this one sheep that had been
lost, being now almost dead, and fainting for want of food, with iov he laid
it on his own shou^ders, and bindinge it fast unto him with cordial cords of
affection, he drew it out of the pit of perdition; and lastly holding it fast
with the embracements of his mercy (that it might not again get away) he
brought it back to the ninety nine, that had never gone astray.

Behold o Lord, thou who a^t my king, and God of all power, behold the good
shepherd does yield thee an account of that, which thou have committed to his
charge. he has by thy ordinance undertaken to save man, whom he has repaired
and rendered unto thee free from all spott of sin. Behold thy most dearly
beloved son has reconciled unto thee, the creature which thou did create
of clay, which had departed far from thee Behold the mild sheapphearde, does
bring again to thy flock, the sheep, which the violent theife had driven a
way. He represents the servant before thy face, that did run away through
the guilt of his own conscience to the end, that he, who by his own merits
deserved punishment, may by the satisfaction of this (so good a Lord) obtain
pardon, and that he to whom hell was due for his sins and iniquity, may hope
in short time, by means of so good a guide, to be recalled to the country
of hauenly felicity.

I have been able of my self to offend thee, but of my self I cannot
appease thee. My God is become mine aid, to wit, thy beloved son, making
himself partaker of my humanity, that he might cure mine infirmity: to the
end, that by the same thing from whence arose the cause of offense, he might
offer unto thee a sacrifice of praise: and by this might make me acceptable to
thy mercy, that sittinge at thy right hand, he might always show himself
to be of the same nature and substance with me. Behold this is my hope, this
is my confidence.

If thou do (as worthily thou may) contemn me in respect of my sin, at
least look mercifully upon me for the love of thy beloved son. For thy
sons sake, pardon me his servant. Look upon the Sacrament of his flesh and
remit my fleshes guiltines. Let my sins (I beseech thee) be blotted out of
thy sight (be they never so vilde) as often as thou do see those wide open
wounds of thy blessed child. Wash a way (I beseech thee) the spotts of
pollution and filthiness where with I am defiled, as often as thou do behold
the precious blood flowing from his sacred side And for that flesh has caused
thee to be angry le^t flesh (...) wise (I most humbl requ^st thee) move thee
unto mercy: that as flesh has se^uced me to sin, so flesh may reduce me to
p^rdon.

True it is, that much is due to my impiety, but much more to his pity. Great
certainly is my wickedness, but far greater is his worthiness. For by how much
higher God is then man in greatness and exceliencie, by so much lower is man's
malice to his goodness in quality and quatitie.

For what has man done and committed, which the son of God being made man,
has not redeemed? What pride could swell to be so great, which so great
humi^i^y did not abate and defea^e? What power of death could grow to have so
supereminent power and dominion, as that Christ had not power to destroy and
p^ll it down by the pain of his passion? Verily (o my God if the demerits of
man sinning, and the meritts of his cr^ator redeeming him, were weighed
together in a balance that is just and even, far greater distance and
difference would be found between them, then is between the East and West,
or between the lowest hell, and the highest h^auen.

Now therefore (o most excellent creator of light) now mercifully pardo) me my
sins, for the unspeakable labors of thy beloved son. Let my wickedness (I
beseech thee) be now forgiven by means of his pity, my perverseness, through
his modesty. my fiercenes through his meekenes and mercy Let his humility,
now win my hautines; his sufferance, mine impatie^ce; his benignity mine
vncourteousnes; his obedience, my disobedience, his tranquillity, mine
vnquietne; his sweetness, my bitterness; his mildnes, my hastines, his charity,
mine ungentleness.

A prayer to desire the assistance of the Holy Ghost. CHAPT. IX.
VOuchsafe now, o true love of the divinity, o sacred communication of the
almighty Father, and his most blessed son; O Holy Ghost the almighti
advocate, the most meek and merciful comforter of those that mourn, and are
in misery, vouchsafe now to flow and descend into the secret rooms of my
heart by the powerful virtue; and dwellinge and abidinge in me, make joyful
by the shininge of thy bright illumination, all the darksome dens of my
neglected mansion: fruitful likewise I beseech thee (by visitting me with the
abundance of the heavenly dew of thy grace infused whatsoever thou shall
find in me, through long neglect to be grown corrupt or withered. Wound
with the darte of thy love, the secret places of mine inward man, and entringe
in, set on fire with thy wholesome flames, the internal parts of my dull
affection: consume likewise whatsoever is amiss in all the parts and powers
of my body and soul within, by enlightninge me with the fire of sacred
devotion.

Give me to drink of the fountain of thy pleasure, that I may not desire to
taste of the poisoned sweetness of any worldly creature. Judge me (o Lord) and
discern my cause from unjust people, teach me to fulfill thy will, for thou
art my God. Because I believe, that in whom soever thou do vouchsafe to make
thine habitation, in him thou do build a house, for God the Father, and the
Son.

That man doubtless is blessed, who shall be thought worthy to have thee for his
guest, for that by thee, the Father and the son, will with him make their
mansion. Come now, come most kind comforter of a sorrowefull soul, come most
ready helper in tribulation and time of trouble. Come o cleanser of sins, o
healer of wounds. Come o strength of such as are frail, o releife of such as
fall. Come o instructor of the simple and lowly, destroyer of the proud and
hautie. Come o pitiful Father of the fatherless, mild judge of widows.
Come o hope of the needy, refresher of the fainte and sickly Come. o bright
star of those that sail, o haven of those that by shipwreck fail on the
sea. Come o singular commendation of all men living, the only salvation of the
faithful departing. Come o most holy Spirit, come and take pity upon me
Unite me unto thee, and graciously grant me, that according to the multitude
of thy mercies, my smalnes may be pleasing to thy greatness, and my weakness to
thy force, through our Savior Jesus Christ, who together with the Father in
thy unity, lives and reigns for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer for one serving God, and thinkinge humbly of himself. CHAPT. X.
I know (o Lord) I know and confess, that I am not worthy to be beloved of
thee, yet certainly thou art not unworthy to be beloved of me. I am unworthy
(I confess) to serve thee, but thou art not unworthy worthy of my service,
saying thou have created me. Grant me therefore (o Lord) to do that whereof
thou art worthy, and I shall be worthy of that, whereof I am now unworthy. Make
me (by what means thou will) to cease from iniquity, that (according as I am
bound) I may be able to serve thee, Grant me so to keep, govern, and end
my life, that I may sleep in peace, and rest in thee. Give me grace, at my
dyinge day, to sleep with repose, to repose with security, to be secure for
all eternity. Amen.

A Prayer to the Holy Trinity. CHAPT. XI.
WIth my whole heart and mouth I confess thee, God the Father unbegotten,
thee the Son only begotten, thee the Holy Ghost giver of comfort and
consolation: the holy and undivided Trinity, to thee be glory for all
eternity.

The acknowledginge of God almighty, and of his majesty. CHAPT. XII.
O Holy Trinity, one virtue and inseperable majesty, one God, and God
almighty, I confess unto thee, I that am the last and least of thy servants,
and a poor member of thy church. I confess unto thee, and honor thee with a
sacrifice of praise (as is my duty,) according to the small knowledge and
ability, which thou have given me. And for that I have noe exterior gifts to
offer unto thee, I therefore, from an unfeigned faith and undefiled conscience,
do willing^ly and joyfully offer unto thee, those vows of praise, which by
the gift of thy grace are found within me.

I therefore with my whole heart believe, and call upon thee. I confess the
Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, three in persons, and one in substance,
to be the true God, omnipotent, of one nature or essence, simple, spiritual,
invisible and incompre^ensible; having nothing higher or lower, or greater then
thy self, but being perfect without deformity, great without quantity, good
without quality, eternal without time, life without death, strong without
infirmity, true without falsehood, every where present without situation, wholly
every where without location, filling all things without extension, occurring
every where without contradiction, going beyond all things without motion,
stayinge in all things without station, creatinge all things having want of
nothing, governing all things without travail or perturbation, giving
beginning to all things, thy self being without beginning, making all things
mutable, thy self being without mutation.

In greatness infinite, in virtue omnipotent, in goodness superexcellent in
wisdom inestimable, in thy counsels terrible, just in thy judgments, most
secrett in thy cogitations, true in thy words, holy in thy works, abundant
in mercies. Most patient toward offenders, most pitiful toward penitent
sinners, being still the same eternal, and everlasting, immortal, and
immutable, whom the largenes of places does not enlarge, nor the litlenes make
less, nor any places of receipt whatsoever, do any way straighten and press
together.

Neither does thy will alter thee, nor freindshipp corrupt thee, or doleful
things trouble thee, or joyful things move thee. Whom neither forgettfullnes
does make to forgett, nor remembrance to remember any thing. To whom things
past, and things to come are always present. To whom beginning never gave
beginning, nor time augmentation, neither shall any hap or chance, ever give
ending: but thou art he, who live for ever and ever before all ages, and in
all ages, and through out all ages. To thee therefore, is due perpetual
praise, and eternal glory, most sovereign power, and singular dignity, and
everlasting kingdom, and dominion, world without end duringe all eternity.
Amen.

After what manner it pleased God the Father, to succoure mankind. Of the
incarnation of the divine Word and thanks for the same. CHAPT. XIII.
HItherto (o God almighty the beholder and searcher of my heart) I have
confessed the omnipotency of thy majesty, and the majesty of thy omnipotency:
but now, after what manner thou have vouchsafed to help mankind toward the
end of the world, as I believe with the heart for my justification, so I
confess with my mouth before thee, thereby to attain salvation.

Certain it is, we cannot any where find it written of thee, that thou (o God
the Father) have at any time been sent alone, but of thy son thus writteth
thy Apostle: But when the fulness of time was come, God sent his so^re When he
says, he sent, he sufficiently declares, that he came at that time, sent
into this world, when being borne of blessed Marie, ever a Virgin, he appeared
in our flesh true and perfect man.

But what is that which the chief evangelist affirms of him, He was in the
world, and the world was made by him. Doutlesse he was sent thither by taking
upon him our humanity, where he always has been, and is remaining by his
divinity. Which Mission I verily believe with my whole heart, and confess with
my mouth, to have been the work of the whole holy Trinity.

Now how greatly have thou loved us (o holy and loving Father,) how greatly
have thou loved us (o pit^ifull Creator,) who have not spared even thine only
son, but have given him, for us sinners? He has been obedient unto thee unto
death, even the death of the cross, and taking our hand writing or obligation
(wherein we stood bound a^ slaves to the devil by sin (and fastninge the
same to the cross, he has crucified sin, and vanquished death: he I say)
who only remained free amongst those that were dead, having power to give his
life for us, and for us to take it again.

He therefore is both a conqueror, and an oblation offered for obtaining the
conquest, and for this cause a conqueror, because an oblation for us: he has
been a Priest and a sacrifice. In him therefore (and not without just cause)
have I settled my whole hope, hoping that by him thou will cure all my
maladies, who sits at thy right hand, and makes intercession for us.

My maladies and miseries (o Lord are great and many, many and great, for
that I know and confess, that the Prince of this world has many things to
lay to my charge but for his sake that sitieth at thy right hand our Redeemer,
in who^ the Devil could never find any iniquity, deliver me I beseech
thee. Justify me by him, who never committed any sin, neither was there
deceit at any time found in his mouth.

By him being our head, in whom was never seen the least spott of wickedness,
deliver me, that am a small and infirm member of his. Free me (I beseech
thee) from my finnes, vices, faults, and negligences; replenishe me with thy
sacred virtues and perfections, and make me complete in good manners and
conditions. Make me for thy blessed names sake, to persevere all the days of my
life in good works acceptable to thee, according as thy holy will shall
teach, and direct me.

Of the confidence which a Christian soul ought to have in Jesus Christ, and
in his passion. CHAPT. XIV.
WEre it not that thy divine Word (o God) had been made flesh, and dwelt in
us, I should verily despair by reason of my manifold sins and infinite
negligences. But now I dare not despair; because, if when we were thine
enemies, we have been reconciled by the death of thy son, how much more
(being thus brought in favor again) are we by him made assured of salvation?
For my whole hope and undoubted confidence, is in his precious blood, which he
has powered forth for us, and for our good.

In him I breath and take comfort, and trusting in his bounty, I desire to
come to thee, not having any justice or deserte of mine own, but only that,
which proceeds from our Lord Jesus Christ thy only son. Wherefore I give
thee thanks, o God the most mild and merciful lover of mankind, who by thy
son Jesus Christ our Lord, have powerfully made us, when as yet we had noe
being, and have by him wonderfully delivered and recovered, us when we were
past recovery through sin.

I thank thy pity, and render thee many praises from the very bottom of my
heart, who (through the unspeakable love wherewith of thy mere goodness thou have
loved us being wretched creatures, and unworthy of any good thing) have sent
for our common good the same only begotten son of thine from thy bosom, to
save us sinners being then the children of perdition.

I give thee thanks for his sacred incarnation and nativity, and for his
glorious mother (the blessed virgin Marie) of whom he vouchsafed to take flesh
for us, and for our salvation; that as he was true God of God, so likewise he
might be true man of man. I give thee thanks for his cross and passion, for
his death and resurrection, for his ascension into heaven, and for the rhrone
of his majesty at thy right hand. For he having (for forty days together)
appeared unto his disciples after his resurrection, ascendinge in their sight
above all the heavens, and sittinge at thy right hand, powered forth the holy
Ghost, (according to his promise) upon the children of adoption.

I give thee thanks for that most sacred effusion of his most precious blood,
by which we have been red^emed: as likewise for that most holy and liuel^
mystery of his body and blood, wherewith we are daily in thy Church sedd
and inebriated, walhed, and sanctified, and made pertakers of his soue aigne
Good. I give thee thanks for thy admirable and unspeakable charity, through
which, (by thine only and beloved son) thou have in this manner loved and
releiued us being altogether unworthy.

So greatly have thou loved the world, as that, thou have given thine only
begotten son, to the end, that every one, which beleiueth in him, might not
perish, but have life everlasting: which life everlasting consists in this,
that (by a pure and perfect faith and works answerable to the same) we know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent.

Of the surpassing great charity of the eternal Father toward mankind. CHAPT.
XV.
O Infinite mercy, o inestimable charity thou have given thy son, to deliver
thy servant, God has been made man, that man might be freed from the power of
the Devil, when he was utterly undone. How kind a lover of men has thy
son our Lord God, showed himself to be, who thought it not enough to have
debased himself so low as to have taken human flesh for us of the
immaculate virgin Marie, unless he had likewise sustained the torments of his
passion, pouring forth his blood for us, and for our salvation.

Our good God has come, being moved thereunto through his goodness and mercy,
he has come, he has come to seeks and save that which was lost, and cast
away. He has sought the sheep that was lost; he has sought and found it, and
as a merciful Lord, and unspeakable loving shepherd, he has on his own
shoulders brought it back to the foldes of his flock.

O charity, o pity! Who ever heard the like? who is not astonished at this so
feeling an affection of his mercy? who is not through admiration, almost
stricken into an ecstasy? who is not moved with gladness, through this thy
excessive charity, wherewith thou have loved us? Thou have sent thy son, in
the likeness of flesh subject to sin, that he might convince sinno of sin,
and that we might become just in him. For he is the true immaculate lamb, who
has taken away the sins of the world, who by dyinge has destroyed our
death, and by risinge again has raised us to life.

But what recompense can we give thee (o good God) for these so great
benefits of thy mercy? What praises, or thanks giuinge? Albeit we had the
knowledge and power of the blessed Angels, yet could we not make any requital
answerable to thy so great love and goodness; yea, if all our members were
turned into tongues, yet would our poor ability be no way sufficient, to
render thee those praises, which thou have deserved. So that thine inestimable
charity, which thou have showed toward us, being altogether unworthy,
proceeding from thy mere goodness and mercy, does surpass all the knowledge and
learning that either is or may be. For that thy son our God, has not taken
the nature and essence of Angels, but the ^eede of Abraham, becoming like
unto us in every thing, setting aside only sin.

Taking therefore upon him the nature and essence of man, not of Angels, and
glorifying the same with the stole of his sacred resuriection and immortality,
he has carried it above all the heavens, above all the quiers of Angels, above
the Cherubins and Seraphins, placing the same at the right hand of thy
majesty: the Angels praise it, the Dominations adore it, and all the Virtues
of heaven stand trembling, in beholdinge him that is placed above the^, God and
man.

This verily is my whole hope and confidence. Because in him, to wit, in our
Lord Jesus Christ, each one of us has a part, each one of us has flesh and
blood. Where therefore a part of me does reign, there I trust to reign my
self; where my flesh is glorified, there I assure my self to be likewise in
glory: where my flesh has rule and dominion, there I suppose to rule my self.
Although I am a sinner, yet I do not despair to be partaker of this grace and
favor. And albert my sins do hinder me, yet my substance does require the
same: although my faults do exclude me, yet the participation of the same
nature does not repel me. For God is not so cruel, as that he can forgett
man, and not remember him, whom he carries about him, and whom for my sake he
seeks to bring to salvation.

Verily our Lord God is very mild and merciful, and loves his flesh,
members, and bowels. That flesh of ours loves us, which is in Jesus Christ
our most sweet, gracious and loving Lord God, in whom we have already risen,
and ascended into heaven, and do already sit in glory with the celestial
spirits. In him we have the prerogative of our blood, for that we are his
members and flesh, and he likewise is our head: by whom our whole body is
composed, according as it is written Bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh,
and two shall be in one flesh: And noe man at any time hates his own flesh, but
cherishes and loves it. This is a great mystery, but I (says the Apostle)
speak it of Christ, and of his Church.

Of the two fold nature of Christ, who pittieth us, and prays for us. CHAPT.
XVI.
I Render thanks therefore to thine infinite mercy (o my Lord God) with my
mouth ha^^e, and all the force I have for all thy benefits, by which thou have
vouchsafed so wonderfully to releive us when we were undone, and this by
means of thy son our Sauious and Redeemer, who has died for our sins, and
has risen again for our justification and living now for ever, sits at thy
right hand and makes intercession for us; and together with thee takes pity
of us, for that he is God of thee God the Father) being coeternall and
consubstantiall to thee in all things, whence it proceeds that he is able to
save us for evermore.

How be it, as he is a man, (in which respect he is inferior to thee) all
power is given him in heaven and in earth, that at the name of Jesus, every
knee should bow of things in heaven, on earth, and under the earth, and that
every tongue should acknowledge and confess, (o God and Father almighty) that
our Lord Jesus Christ is sittinge with thee in thy glory. It is he indeed,
whom thou have appointed to be the judge of the quick and dead: for thou thy
self iudgest noe man, but have left all judgment unto thy son, in whose
bosom are enclosed all the treasures of wisdom and learning.

He himself is witness and judge, judge and witness, from whom noe sinnful
conscience shall be able to escape: because all things are open and evident to
his eyes. He truly, that was judged unjustly, will judge the world with equity,
and the people with indifferency. I therefore everlastingly bless thy holy
name (o almighty and merciful Lord) and with my whole heart glorify the same,
in respect of that unspeakable, and wounderfull conjunction of the divine, and
human nature in one person, to the end that God should not be one, and man an
other, but one and the same God and man, man and God. And albeit the divine
Word, by reason of the wonderful love he had to man, has vouchsafed to
become flesh, yet neither of the two natures have been transformed into an
other substance, neither has a fourth person, been added to the mystery of
the Trinity: Because the substance of the Word of God and of man, has been
united, but not mingled together; to the end, that that which had been taken
from us, might attain unto God, and that which had never been before, might
remain the same with that, which had been for ever.

O mystery worthy of admiration, o exchange past explication, o maruailous
benignity of the divine bounty, for ever to be admired, and for ever to be
beloved! We were altogether unworthy to be termed servants, and behold we are
made the sons of God: the heirs truly of God, and coheires of Christ. From
whom happens this unto us, and who has raised us to so great a dignity?

Now therefore, I beseech thee o God most merciful Father, by this thine
inestimable pity, bounty and charity, that thou will make us worthy of the
great and ample promises of thy same son Jesus Christ our Lord. Make known
unto us thy son, and confirm this, which thou have wrought in us: Accomplish
that which thou have begun, to the end we may be found worthy, to attiue to
the full and perfect grace of thy endless mercy. Make us by virtue of the holy
Ghost, to understand and discern, and with due honor always to reverence
this great mystery of thy mercy, which has been made manifest in flesh, has
been justified in spirit, has appeared to the Angels, has been preached
to the Gentiles, has been believed in the world, and lastly has been
assumpted in glory.

Of the great thanks giving which man ought to render to God for the benefitt
of his Redemption. CHAPT. XVI.
O How much are we bound unto thee (o Lord our God) being redeemed with so
great a gift? being succored by so glorious a benefitt? O how much ought
thou of us wretches to be feared, loved, blessed, praised, honored and
glorified, who have in this manner loved, saved, sanctified, and exalted us?
Verily we owe unto thee all our ability, all our life, all our learning. But
who has any thing, that is not thine? Thou therefore o Lord our God, from whom
all good things do proceed, for thine own and for thy holy names sake,
bestow upon us thy graces and benefitts, that by them we may worthily serve
thee, and in verity please thee, and may daily render due praises unto thee,
for so many and so great graces and favors proceeding from thy mercy.

We truly have noe other mean whereby to serve and please thee, but only the
gifts, which we receive from thy lib^raliti^^ for every good and perfect
gift, is from above, descending down from the Father of lights, with whom
there is noe variation, or shadow of change. O Lord our God, who art a
merciful and good God, a God of all power, a God of unspeakable, and
incomprehensible nature, God the instructor of all things, and the Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, who for our common good, have sent from thy bosom, our
most sweet Lord thy beloved son, to take upon him our life, that he might
give us his, and might be perfect God of thee his Father, and perfect man by
reason of his mother whole God, and whole man, one and the same Christ, eternal
and temporal, immortal and mortal, creator and created, strong and enfeebled,
conqueror and conquered, nourisher and nourished, sheep and shepherd, dying
temporallie, and living with thee eternally: who promising the liberties of
everlasting life to those that loved him, used these words unto his disciples:
Whatsoever you shall ask my Father in my name, he will give it you.

By this high Priest, true Bishop, and good shepherd, who has, offered
himself as a sacrifice unto thee, laying down his life for his flock: I
beseech thee by him, who sits at thy right hand, and makes intercession for
us, being our Redeemer and advocate, yea by thine own mercifulness and
goodness I humblye crave of thee, o God most merciful, mild, and benign
lover of mankind, that thou together with thy same son and holy Ghost (for
that you all three being but of one and the same nature, are to be esteemed
but one and the same giver) wilt give me grace to praise and glorify thee in
all things with great contritio^ of heart, and many tears, with much fear
and trembling. But for that our corrupt body, is as a clogg or burden to the
soul, prick forward (I beseech thee) my lasines with thy spurs, and make me
promptly to persevere day and night in fulfillinge thy commandments, and in
soundinge forth thy praises. Grant that my heart may wax hoate within my
bosom, and that I may be as it were set on fire by means of my meditation.

And because thine only begotten son God has said: Noe man comes to me,
unless my Father, who has sent me, draw him, and noe man comes to the
Father, but by me: I humbly pray and beseech thee, draw me unto him
continually, that he at length may bring me thither to thee, where he sittethe
at thy right hand: where there is everlasting life enduring hapy, for ever,
where there is perfect love void of all fear: where there is one eternal
day, and one desire of all: where there is most sovereign and certain
assurednes, and assured quietness, and quiet ioyfullnes, and joyful happiness,
and happy euerlastingnes, and everlasting blessedness, and blessed seeing and
praising of thee, being likewise endless: where thou with him, and he with
thee, in communion of the holy Ghost, live and raignest God eternally and
euerlastingely, throughout all ages, times, and generations. Amen.

A most devout prayer to our Savior Jesus Christ. CHAPT. XVIII.
O Christ my God and hope, thou love of mankind.
The light, way, life and praise, of those to life assigned.
Behold thy bonds, and wounds, thy cross, death, and thy grave.
All which thou did eudure, us sinners for to save.
Three days being past, from death thou did arise again,
And thy sadd freindes made gladd, who doubtful did remain.
The fourth day to heaven thou ascendedst where before.
Thou did, do, and shall live, and reign for evermore.
Thou art my living and true God, my reverend Father, my loving Lord, my great
king, my good shepherd, my most holy helper, my most fair beloved, my bread
of life, my Priest for eternity, my guide to the heavenly country, my true
light, my most sacred sweetness, my direct way, my chief knowledge, my pure
simplicity, my peaceable amity, my sure guatdian, my best portion, my
perpetual safety, my immense mercy, my most strong patience, my immaculate
sacrifice, my sacred redemption, my firm hope, my perfect charity, my true
resurrection, my life everlasting, my most happy vision and rejoicing, which
shall never have ending I humbly desire, beg, and beseech thee, that I may
walk by thee, attain to thee, and repose in thee, who art the way, the truth,
and the life, without which noe man can come to the Father. Thou truly art my
desire my most sweet and gracious Lord.

O brightness of the heavenly Fathers glory who sit above the Cherubins, and
beholdest the bottomless pits, being the true light, the enlightening light, the
never failing light, on whom the Angels desire to look. Behold my heart is in
thy presence, dissolve the darkness thereof, that it may be wholly replenished
with the light of thy love. Bestow thy self upon me (o my God) give me thy
selte. Behold (o Lord) I do love thee and if it be to little, make me to love
thee more I cannot guess how much love is sufficient to love thee withal,
that my life may run forewarde in desire of being embraced of thee, never
staying until it attain to remain hidden in the secret favor of thy divine
majesty: yet this I know, o Lord, that it goes not well with me, both within
and without me as often as I am without thee; for that I esteem all manner of
riches and abundance besides thee, to be mere want and poverty. Because thou
only art that good, which cannot be changed into better or worse: thou art he
alone, who simply art alone, to whom it is not one thing to live, and an other
thing to live happily, for that thou art thine own happiness:

Howebeit we that are thy creatures (to whom it is one thing to live, and
another thing to live happily) ought to attribute both our whole life and
living happily to thy only grace and bounty. We therefore have always need
of thee, but thou never of us, for albeit we were not at all, yet nothing
would be wanting to that good, which thou art: We therefore have need (o Lord
our God) at all times to adhere to thee, that by thy countinuall aid, we may
be able to live soberly, justly and religiously.

True it is, we are drawn downwarde by the burden of our human f^ailtie: but
by the gift of thy grace we are inflamed, and are carried upward, we burn, go
foward, we mount upward and making ascents in our hearts, we sing a graduall
song, we are set on fire through the good fire of thy love, and go foreward.
But what makes me now to soar up to the peace of Jerusalem? Because I
rejoice at those things, which are toulde me. We shall go into the house of
our Lord. Our good desire gets us a place there, to the end we affect
nothing else but to remain there for ever.

Seeing therefore we have noe permane^t city during the time of this life, but
expect one here after, (because as long as we live in this world, we are as
strangers and pilgrims in a foreign country, in respect of thee o Lord) for
that our city and habitation is in heaven: for this cause I am accustomed
(being guided by thy grace) to enter into the secrett closett of my hait, where
I sing sonnetts of chaste love unto thee my king, and my God, groaning forth
most greuious sighs in the place of this my pilgrimage, where the dittie of my
so^ges are thy iustifications.

And calling Jerusalem to mind, I do dilate the senses and affections of my
heart in thinking thereof, in thinking I say) of Jerusalem my country, of
Jerusalem my mother, and of thee the ruler, the beautifier, the father, the
defender, the patro^ the governor, the pastor: the chaste and durable
delights, the constant joy, and all the good thereof, yea far more then can
either be spoken or imagined, because thou art the only sovereign, and true
good: neither will I attend to any other thing, until it shall please thee
(my God and my mercy) to set me at liberty from the deformity of this my
corrupt body, and being brought by thee in to the peace of this my most dear
mother (whither the first fruits of my sou^e are sent already) I may be
conformed and confirmed in the same for all eternity.

The distinction and difference between that wisdom which is Gods house, and
that which is divine. CHAPT. XIX.
THis (o God) is that house of thine, which is not built of any earthly or
heavenly substance that is corporal, but is altogether spiritual, and by
participation eternal: for that it shall never grow to ruin or decay, in
respect that thou have erected it for all eternity, thou have given a
commandment, and it shall not pass away, howbeit it is not coeternall to
thee o God, seeing that by creation it has taken ^s beginning.

The first thing therefore created is wisdom: yett not that wisdom, which
is altogether coeternal and coequall to God the Father, by which at first all
things were made, and in whom at the beginning, heaven and earth were made:
but that wisdom, which was created spiritual (to wit Nature) by
contemplation of the light, is become light. For that wisdom likewise (albeit
created) is termed wisdom. Nevertheless there is as great difference between
that supreme wisdom, which is the creator, and that, which is created, as is
between the light, which does enlighten, and that which is enlightened, or as
is between justice justifying (which thou o God art) and justice, which
arises from our justification. For we likewise (according to the testimony
of the Apostle) are termed the justice of God the Father, in thee his son our
Lord.

Sithence therefore a certain kind of wisdom was created before all other
things, to wit, that of thy chaste city (Jerusalem) our mother, which is
above, and is free, and to endure for ever in the heavens; for this reason it
has been created a reasonable and understanding soul: But in what heavens?
cuen in those which do praise thee, which are the heavens of heavens, because
this is the heaven of heaven prepared for our Lord, And albeit we do not find
any time before this wisdom, which was before the creation of time (being
indeed the first of al other creatures) yett thou, o eternal God the creator
of all things, art before it, from whom it has taken its beginning, though
not beginning of time (because as yet time was not begun) yett of his condition
and being: whereupon it has its being and beginning: in that sort from thee,
o Lord our God, as that it is plainly an other thing and altogether different
from thee, albert we find not any time either in it, or before it. Verilye it
is able at all times to see and contemplate thy face, neither does it at any
time look aside from the same. Whence it proceeds that it remains steadfast
without either chance or change. Nevertheless it is of it self subject to
mutabilitie, by which it would become dark and cold, were it not that being
by great love united to thee, it did shine, and grow hot by thee, as it were
by the sun at midde-day.

Finally it is conjoined to thee the true, and truly eternal God with that
chaste love, as that, albeit it be not coeternall with thee, yett it cannot be
severed and separated from thee by any variation and mutation of time, but
does rest in the most true contemplation of thee alone. For that thou (o Lord)
do show thy self to this thy house loving thee, (like as thou have
commanded) neither does it need any thing else. Hence it is, that it does not
swerve, or go aside either from thee, or from it self, but remains always
stable in the same state, by perpetually saying thee, the true light, by
continually loving thee, the chaste love thereof.

O high and happy creature, most happy of all others, by being allwaies
adherent to thy happiness! O happy and excessiuely happy house, who has thee,
for her everlasting Lord, and light. Neither do I find any thing, which I
think I may more fitly, call caelum caeli Domino, the heaven of heaven
prepared for our Lord, then this thy co^templatiue house, being thy delight
without defect, and without affection of departing unto any other thing, being
a pure mind most concordantly one, the established peace of the blessed
Spiritts.

But these celestial things are above in heaven, hence let that soul (whose
pilgrimage seems over long in this life) try and see, if now it thirsts or not to come to thee, if now her tears are her food, if now or not she
demand and desire this one only thing, that she may dwell in thine house all
the days of her life. And who, but thou (o Lord) art her life? And what are
her days, but thine eternity? Like as thy years which shall never have end.

Here therefore let that soul which is able, consider, and comprehend, how
much thine eternity does exceed all times, seeing thy house, which has never been estranged and separated from thee, albeit it be not coeternall to thee,
yett by adhering perpetually, and continually to thee, it is free from all
mutation of time, and being from time to time absorpt with the most chaste
delight of thy love, it has never made show of mutabilitie, by reason of thee
whose presence it has enjoyed perpetually, to whom it is conjoined in all
affection, and amity. To conclude it is free from all variation, and ampliation
of time, having neither time to come, which it may expect, nor time past, which
it can remember.

Here man desires, that this house of God, will pray for him. CHAPT. XX.
O Bright and beautiful house of God, I have loved thy beauty, and the place
of the habitatio^ of the glory of my Lord God, the possessor and builder of
thee. Let my pilgrimage day and night sigh after thee, let my heart long after
thee, let my mind think of thee, let my soul desire to attain to the
blessed felowshipp of thy felicity; I say to him, that has made thee, that he
vouchsafe to possess me in thee, because he has made both me and thee.

Nay rather do thou speak to him, do thou entreat him to make me worthy to
be pertaker of thy glory; For albeit I do not presume to demand by mine own
meritt, to be admitted into thy wonderful beauty, yett I do not despair to
obtain the same, by the meritt of his sacred blood, who has redeemed me.
Only let thy meritts help me, let thy most holy and pure prayers (which
cannot but be effectual in the sight of God) succoure my sinfulnes.

I have gone astray (I confess) as a lost sheep, and my abode here has been
too too long, being cast far from the face of my Lord God, into the darkness of
this exile. Where remaining expelled from the joys of heaven, I do daily
bewail with my self the calamities of this my captivity, making great
lementation, and in mournful manner, sounding forth a doleful ditty, when I
remember thee (o mother Jerusalem) whilst the feet of mine affections stand at
the entrance of thy gates (o holy and comely Syon) not being yet admitted to
behold thine inner parts wide open: but I hope one day to be brought unto
thee, on the shoulders of my shepherd, who has built thee, that I may dance
with thee, through that unspeakable pleasure, wherewith they rejoice, who are
with thee in the presence of God, and our Savior; who in his flesh through the
effusion of his blood, has made peace and pacified all things in heaven, and
in earth.

For he is our peace, vinting both in one who joining together two opposite
walls, has promised to bestow upon us in the same manner and measure the
fullnes of thy felicity, which consists in the fruition of himself for all
eternity: saying, They shall be equal to the Angels of God in heaven* O
Jerusalem the ever happy house of God, next after the love of Christ, be thou
my joy and comfort, let the sweet remembrance of thy blessed name, be a
solace to the sorrows and heaviness of mind.

Of the manifold m^series, with which man's life is replenished. CHAP. XXI.
VEril^e o Lord, I am wonderful werie of this life, and pain full pilgrimage.
This life is a miserable life, a frail life, an uncertain life, a laborious
life, an unclean life, a life mystres of miscreants queen of such (...) are
proud, full of misery, and (...), not worthy to be termed a life* yea rather
a death, in which we die by sundry so^^es of death almost each moment of time, by
the diverse defects of change and alteration.

The time therefore, which we live in this world, how can we truly call it a
life? whom humore^ puff up, whom pains pull down, whom hea^es do parch,
who^ the air makes sick, whom resting makes fat, and fasting makes lean,
whom delights make dissolute, whom sorrows do^ consume, whom pensiveness
does oppress, whom security makes dull, whom riches lift up and make
stately, who^ poverty does abase and make lowly, who^ youth makes to be
magnified, old age to be crooked, whom sickness weakeneth, and sadness
afflicts. And close as it were at the heels of all these evils, does
furious death come after, closing up the end of all the delights of this
miserable life in that fashion, as that being ended, it is as if it had never been begun. And albeit this living death and dying life, be replenished with
these, and many more miseries; ^et (alas) it entrappeth very many, by her
flattering allu^ements, and noe less number by her false promises of
preferments.

And although it be so apparently false and bitter, as that the blind lovers
thereof cannot but see and perceive it, yet by reason of the golden cup which
it holds in her hand, it causes an infinite number of fools to drink and
to be wholly drunk therewith. They therefore are happy (although not many) who
refuse her familiarity, who contemn her delights transitory, who abandon
her company, least at length they run to ruin and perdition, together with
her, that deceived them.

Of the happiness of that life, which God has prepared for those that love him.
CHAPT. XXII.
O Thou thrice happy life, which God has prepared for those that love him, a
living life, a blessed life, a secure life, a peaceable life, a beautiful
life, a clean life, a chaste life, a holy life, a life void of death, free
from sorrow, a life without blemish, without heaviness, without vexation,
without corruption, without perturbation, without variation, and mutation, a
life full of all beauty, and dignity: where there is noe adversary to
impugn us, noe occasion of sin to allure us, where charity reigns in
perfection, having noe fear of any evil approaching where there is one only
day which is eternal, and one only mind and meaning of al, where God face to
face is seen apparently, and with this bread of life, the soul is satisfied
abundantly. O blessed life it pleases me much to think of thy brightness and
excellency, my heart is not a little delighted, when I mind those good
things, which are in thee.

The more I think of thee, the more I love thee, for that I am wonderfully
recreated through the vehement desire, and sweet remembrance of thee. It
pleases me therefore to lift up to thee the eyes of my heart, to direct to thee
the state of my mind, to frame toward thee the affection of a freinde.
Verilye it delights me to speak of thee, to hear of thee, to write of thee,
to confer of thee, to read something daily of thy glory and beatitude, and
often in my heart to think upon what I have read: that so under the sweet
shadow of thy vital air, I may in some sort be free from the hea^es,
dangers, and sweates of this sraile and brick life, and being free, may a
little rest my weary head, falling as it wear a sleep in thy blessed bosom.

For this cause, I am accustomed, to enter into the pleasant feildes of the
holy scriptures, where I gather the most green and wholesome herbs of sacred
sentences by writing them. I eat them by reading* I chewe them by frequent
meditation, and at lenght I do swallowe them down into the stomach of my
memory by recollection, tha^ by this means having tasted of thy sweetness,
I may the less feel this most miserable life's bitterness.

O life most happy, o kingedome truly blessed, void of death, never to have
ending: where time without succession of ages is still the same: where one
continual day without interchange of night, knows neither time past nor to
come: where the victorious soldier, being united to those harmonious quires of
Angels, does singe to God without* intermission, a Canticle of the, Canticles
of Syon; Having his head adorned with an eternal croune.
By Christ the eternal king, in token of renoune.


O would to God* (my sins being pardonned, and the burden of my frail flesh
being forth with laid aside) I might enter into thy joys, there to find
everlasting repose, and might be admitted within the walls of thy City,
there from the hands of our Lord to receive a crown of glory, to the end I
might be placed to singe as one of that most sacred quire, that with those most
blessed spirits, I might help to sound forth the praises of my maker, that in
presence I might contemplate the face of Christ my Lord and Savior, and might
for evermore behold that supreme, unspeakable, and incomprehensible brightness
and splendor: and thus being from the fare of death set at liberty, I might
rejoice for ever through the gift of perpetual immortality.

Of the happiness of a holy soul departing out of this world. CHAPT. XXIII.
Happy is that soul, which being set at liberty from this earthly body,
does freely mount up to the heavenly country, She is at rest and security,
fea^ing neither death nor adversary, because she does incessantly see our
Lord shining in beauty, whom thee has served, and loved, and to whom at
length she has joyfully and happily arrived. Such shall be the greatn^^s of
this her glory and ^elicitie, as that noe time shall diminish it, neither
shall any aduer^arie be ever able to be^aue ^er of it. The daughters of Syon
have seen her, and esteemed her most hap^ie The Queens likewise and
concu^ines have commended her saying. What (...) she that ascends up from
the desert, flowing with delights, leaning upon her beloved? What is she,
that comes, rising up as the dawning of the day, fair as the moo^e, chosen
as the sun, terrible as the forefront of an army set in battle array?

O how joyfully she issues forth, how she hastne^h, how she runs, when
(as one astonished) she hears her well beloved saving unto her. As^^se, make
have my love* my dove, my beautiful one, and come For winter is now past, the
rain is gone and departed: the flowers have appeared in our land: the time of
pruning is come: the voice of the turtle dove is heard in our land: the figg
tree has brought forth her green figs: the flourishing vineyardes have given
their savor.

Arise my love, my beautiful one and come. My dove in the holes of the rock,
in the hollow places of the wall; show me thy face, let thy voice sound in
mine ears, for thy voice is sweet, and thy face comely. Come (o my chosen) my
fairest one, and my dove, come mine immaculate, and my spouse, and I will place
my throne in thee, because I have desired thy beauty. Come that thou may
rejoice with mine Angels in my presence, whose company I have promised thee
long since. Come at length after so many dangers, and travails; enter into,
the joy of thy Lord, which none shall ever be able to take from thee.

A Prayer to the Saints, to succor us in our dangers and necessities. CHAPT.
XXIV.
Happy are you (o blessed Saints of God) who have already passed over the sea
of this mortality, and have deserved to arrive at the port of perpetual
rest, peace and security: It is you that are without fear, and free from
tempests, rejoicing for evermore in that haven of happiness. O you that are
void of care for your selves (by your charity I beseech you) have a care of
us; you that are assured of your immmortall glory, be mindful of our manifold
misery. For his sake I beseech you, who has chosen you, who has made you
such as you are, by beholding whose beauty you are satisfied, by whose
immortality you are become immortal, and as it were deified, by whose blessed
sight you are for ever blessed, be you always mindful of us, and help us
miserable wretches, who remain as yett in the sea of this wretched world;
tossed to and fro with continual storms and tempests.

O you most fair gates, raised by God to that height of glory, help us lying
here beneath like the vild paueme^t of this vale of misery. Lend us your
hand, and lift us upon our feet, wholly grouelinge on the ground, to the end,
that being cured of our infirmity, we may be made strong to encounter our
ghostly ennimy I beseech vou to pray continually, and without ceasing to make
intercession for us, wretched and careless sinners, that by your prayers we
may be admitted into your sacred society, without which we cannot possibly be
saved: Because we are exceeding frail, and men void of all force and
ability, or rather beasts subject to our own flesh and sensuality; in whom
there appears searce any token of virtue.

Nevertheless making profession of Christianity* we are carried and vpheld by
the wood of Christ's cross, sailing by help of the same as in a shipp through
this great and spacious sea; where there is an innumerable multitude of things
that creep, where there are living creatures both small and great* where there
is a most fe^rce and cruel Dragon, always ready to devour us, where there
are those ghastly gulfes S^ylla and Charybdis, and other innumerable pe^illous
places, in which those that are doubtful in the faith and take not heed* do
suffer shipwreck and are drowned. Pray therefore, o ye holy Saints, pray to our
Lord for us; o all you troops and assemblies of the blessed, pray for us, that
being aided by your meritts and intercession, we may deserve to attain our
ship and merchandise being in safety) to the haven of perpetual happiness,
and quietness, of continual peace, and security which shall never cease.

The souls desire to attain to the heavenly city Jerusalem. CHAPT. XXV.
O Mother Jerusalem, thou sacred city of God, thou dearest spouse of Christ,
my heart does love thee, and my mind does exceedingly long after thy beauty. O
how gli^^ering, how glorious, how generous art thou. Thou art altogether fair,
and there is noe spott in thee. Triumph and be gladd (o fair daughter of the
Prince) for that the king, (even he that surpasses all the children of men in
beauties excellency) has desired thy favor, and has been enamoured of thy
beauty.

But what is thy beloved more then an other beloved (o thou that art most
beautiful) My beloved is white and ruddie, chosen of thousands. As the apple
tree among the trees of the woods, so is my beloved amongst the sonns of me^.
Behold I sit joyful under the shadow of him, whom I have desired, and his
fruit is sweet unto my throat. My beloved has putt his hand through the
hole, and my belly has trembled at his touch ( C ^nt. 5.) In the night season
in my bed I have sought him, whom my soul loves, I have sought and found
him, I do hold him, and will not let him go, until he bring me into his
house, and into his bedd-cha^ber, o my most gloriouse mother. For there thou
willt grant me to suck of thy breasts more perfectly and abundantly, and I
shall be in that manner satisfied with unspeakable plenty, as that I shall not
hunger or thirst any more during all eternity.

O how happy will my soul be, yea happy everlastingly, if I shall merit to
be hold thy glory, thy felicity, thy beauty, thy gates and walls, thy
streets, and manifold mansions, thy most noble citizens, and thy most
puissant king, sitting in his magnificence. Because thy walls are built of
pretions stones, thy gates are composed of the rarest pearls, thy streets
paued with most pure gold, in which Alleluia is joyfully and continually
song to God. Thy mansions (which are many) are founded upon four square
stones, built of Saphires, and covered over with tyles of gold, into which
none do enter, but such as are cleansed, none do dwell that are defiled.

Thou art beautiful and pleasant in thy delights (o Jerusalem our mother.)
None of those things are suffered or seen in thee, which we suffer and see in
this vale of misery. In thee there is never any darkness, or night, or any
change of time The light that shines in thee, proceeds neither stom lamps,
or candles, nor from the moon, nor from the brightness of the stars, but God
of God, the light of light (even Christ) the sunnne of justice gives light in
thee. The white and immacultate lamb, is thy most clear and beautiful light;
The sun, and brightness, yea thy whole happiness does consist in the
conte^plation of this thy king, surpassing all others in fairenes. Even the
king of kings himself in the midst of thee keeps continual residence,
compassed about with his servants.

There are the quires of Angels singing hymns, there are the companies of the
heavenly citizens. There is celebrated the sweet solemnity and feast of all
such as return from this sorrowful pilgrimage unto thy most joyful rest.
There is the forseeing assembly of the Prophets. There is the mystical number
of the twelve Apostles. There is the invincible army of innumerable Martyrs.
There is the reverend company of holy Confessors. There are the true and
perfect Monks. There are the sacred Virgins, and other holy woeme^, who have
overcome all worldly pleasure, and likewise the weakness of their own nature.
There are those blessed boys and girls, who have surmounted their tender
years by their mature manners. There are the sheep and little lambs, who
(as from a wolf have now escaped from the intangling snare of the pleasures of
this life. All these rejoice and triumph in their proper places, differing
each one from an other in degree of glory, but being all alike in excess of
gladness.

There charity reigns in full perfection, because God is all in all unto
them, besides whom they desire nothing: whom they eternally do behold, and by
continually beholding him, do continually burn in his love: whom they
always do love, and by loving do praise, and by praising do love: their
whole exercise and all they have to do, being nothing else but to praise God
everlastingly, without any difficulty.

Happy were I, yea happy indeed for all eternity, if after the separation
of my soul from this my body, I might be admitted to hear those Canticles of
celestial melody, which are sung in the praise of the everlasting King, by
the citizens and troops of Saints of that heavenly country. Happy I say,
yea exceeding and excessiuelie happy were I, if I (poor unworthy wretch)
might be thought worthy to sing, and in my turn to intone those celestial
Canticles; if I might be near unto my king, my God and my captain, and might
behold him in glory, even as he vouchsafed to promise us, when he said. O
Father my will, and desire is, that those, which thou have given me, be with
me, that they may see my glory, which I had with thee, before the creatio of
the world: And in an other place: He that ministers unto me, let him follow
me, and where I am, there likewise shall my minister be: And again: He that
loves me, shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will show my
self unto him.

A hymn of the glory of Paradyce, composed by the blessed Peter Damian
Cardinal of Ostia, taken out of the sayings of S. Augustine. CHAPT. XXVI.
Unto the spring of endless life,
My fainting soul does thirst,
Full saine the clo^sture of her flesh.
With speed she wishes burst.
She sekes, she sues, she strives exilde,
Her country to obtain,
Wailing that nothing here she. finds,
But misery and pain.
Contemplating the glory which finds,
She, when she sinned, lost,
Her woes increase, her grief the more,
To think how dear they cost.
For who can utter, with what joy
That happy peace delights;
Where Palaces stand stately reard,
With living margarites?
With gold the lofty turretts shine,
And chambers glitter bright,
And all the frame with only gemms,
And precious stones is dight.
The streets, the city out, are pau'd
With gold, as Crystal, cleen;
Where dirt nor rays, nor du^ge annoyes,
Nor any filthe is seen.
Stormy winter, scortching summer,
Come never there to braule:
Rose-flowers spring continually,
With Spring continual.
Lillies still white, and saffron, ruddie*
And balsame sweating grows:
Meades always green, corn always grown,
And honey in rivers flows.
Sweet spices breath out fragrant smells,
Rich liquors, and perfumes;
Fair orchards ouershaded stand
With fruit, that nere consumes.
Noe varyng course of Sun or Moon,
Or Starr, comes there in sight:
The Lamb is to that happy city
A never setting Light.
Nor Night, nor Moine, nor Time is there
But a continual day,
Where Saints in glory shine like Su^nes,
And glittering beams display.
In triumph crowned, together they.
With ^oy coniub^la^e.
And the battles of their vanquished foe.
Secured now, relate
Purged clean from either blot^, or spott,
They grudg of flesh fe^le none:
For flesh made now spiritual,
With the Spir ^t g^ees in one.
Abounding with untroubled peace,
Noe scandalls them annoy:
Who freed from mutabilitie,
Their center reinioy.
Where now they present see that Truth,
Which mortal ey^s nere saw;
And from the everlasting Spring,
A living sweetness draw
Where ere they go they still retain
The same unaltered state,
Fair, ^iuely, cheerful, subject to
Noe change of Chance* or ^ate.
Whose health, no sickness does decay
Whose youth, noe age does wait;
Whose being without passing is,
For Passing now is past.
They spring, they bloome, they flouri^s;h stilo
From all corruption free;
Mortallitie is swallowed up.
By Immotallitie.
Who knowing him, who all does know*
Can ignorant not be;
Who in each others patent breasts
All inmost secrets see.
The same they will the same they nill,
One mind's the same of all:
Though' cording to their seu^rall pains
Their guerdon's several.
Thus what is an others, Charity
By love so makes her own;
That what is propert'euerie one
To all is common grown.
Where ere the bodie's'th' Eagles there
Are duly congregated:
And with it are those blessed Souls
And Angels recreated.
One bread both country Citizens
Does feed: one bread they crave,
Still hungtie, and yet always full,
Still wi^^ing what they have.
Whom noe satiety does cloy,
Whom hunger does not bite;
With appetite they ever eat,
And still have appetite.
There the melodious-singing Voice
New harmonies concents
Their ears are lulled with sweetest sounds
Of rarest instruments.
To him, by whom they conquered have,
Due praises there they sing.
O happy Soul, who present do
Behold so great a king:
And from thy lofty throne suruiew'
The under- wheeling globes,
The Sun, the Moon, and all the heavens
In star bespangled robes.
O Christ (the Palm of Warriers)
Vouchsafe me of thy pity,
To make me when I end my war*
A free man of this city.
Grant me, among these citizens,
Thy bounties to partake.
Mean while assist me with thy aid,
A happy fight to make.
That warring ou^ my time, the rest
In quiett I may spend,
And for my guerdon thee enjoy.
For ever without end.
Amen.
The continual praise of the soul, through the contemplation of God. CHAPT.
XXVII.
MY soul bless thou our Lord, and all things that are within me, his holy
name. My soul bless thou our Lord, and forgett not all his benefitt^. Bless
ye our Lord all his works, in every place of his dominion, my soul bless
thou our Lord Let us praise God whom the Angels extol, the Dominations
adore, in whos^ presence the powers do tremble, to whom the Cherubins and
Seraphins with a loud voice do incessantly sing, Holy, holy, holy. Let us
join our voices to the voices of the holy Angels, and with them to the
uttermost of our poor power, praise this our common Lord and maker. It is they
indeed, that prai^e ou^ Lord purely and incessantlye, who are wholly given to
the contemplation of his Divinity, not beholding him as it were in a mirror,
or in obscurity, but face to face and apparently

But who is able to imagine or express, in what manner that innumerable
multitude of blessed Angels and Saints do carry themselves in almighty Gods
presence? What everlasting content they receive by seeinge God? what joy
without defect? What delightful heat of burning affection without any
affliction? What a desire they have of the sight of God joined with fulness; and
a fulness joined with desire: in whom neither desire causes pain, not fulness
loathinge? How by adheringe to the chief beatitude they are become blessed?
How by being united to the true ^ight they are become light? How by continual
contemplation of the immutable Trinity* they are now noe more subject to
mu^abilitie?

But when shall we be able to comprehend the greatness of the dignity of
Angels, sit^ence we cannot find out the nature even of ou^ own soul? What
kind of creature i^ this, who having power to give life to the body, cannot (as
it would) contain it selte in thinking of such things only as are holy? What
kind of creature is this, that i^ so strong. so weak, of so little, so
great, that searches into the secretts of God that are hidden, and soareth up
to the comtemplation of those things that are in heaven? and by subtilitie of
understanding, is kdowen to have found out the knowledge of so many arts and
s^^ences for the commodity of man?

What kind of creature is this, that knows so much of all other things, and
yett is altogether ignorant of the manner of its own beginning. For albeit
certain doubtful things have been written by some concerning the original
thereof, yet^ we find, that it is a certane intellectual spirit, made by the
power of God the creator, living everlastingly, if it be considered in its
own manner: giving life to the mortal body, which it does sustain, subject
to mutation, subject to oblivion, sometimes fearful, at other times joyful.

Lo here a thing most worthy of admiration. O God the creator of al things,
who is incomprehensible and unspeakable, we read, speak* and write (without
any ambiguity) things surpassing high, and wonderful: but those things which
we say of the Anglls and soule^ of men* we cannot so manistly prove and
confirm. But let my mind omit to think on these things, and pass beyond
what soever is created: let it run, and ascend* and fl^e, and soar above
them all, lookinge steadfastly with the eyes of faith (as much as is possible)
on him that has created all things For this cause, I will make (as it were)
steps or stayres in my heart, and by them I will ascend unto my soul, and
from my soul unto my understanding, and from thence unto God, who remains
above over my head.

What soever likewise is seen visiblie, whatsoever likewise is imagined
spiritually, let be removed fare off with a strong hand, from the sight of my
heart and mind: that my sole understanding walking in all purity and
simplicity, may speedily come to the Creator himself of Angels, souls, and
all other things. Happy is that soul that leaves these things that are
here beneath, and loves those above; who placing the seat of her habitation
in things hard and difficile, does from the high rocks contemplate the sun
of justice with the eyes of an Eagle. Because there is nothing so fair and
pleasing, as with the view of the understanding and hearts affection to look
upon Jesus alone, and after a manner unspeakable, invisible to see him, that
is muisible and by this means to taste a more sweet delight then that of this
life, and to behold a brightness more clear* then that which we see here, for
that the light of this present life, which is enclosed in a ce^taine place, and
by the int^rruption of the night is changed and ended after a certain space,
being common to us with worms and beasts, in comparison of that high and
heavenly light, is rather to be tea^med night, then light.

What it is after a certain manner, to see and comprehend God and what opinion
we ought to have of him. CHAPT. XXVIII.
ALthough God the most supreme and unchangeable essence, the true and never
failinge light, the light of Angels cannot be scene by any mortal man during
the time of this life (this being the only reward and gu^rdon reserved by
God for the Saints in heaven yett nevertheless to believe, and vnde^stand, to
feel, and fervently to affect the same, is after a c^r^aine manner to see and
comprehend him* Let our voice therefore be heard above the Ang^lls, and let
man contemplate God with all attention, and with the best words he can, singe
praises unto him. Because it is a thing very meet, (which justice it self
does seem to require) that the creature do praise his creator: yea the motive
that moved him to create us was noe other, but that we should praise him,
albeit he needs not our praise or commendation

And and ede God is a virtue that cannot be comprehended, needing nothing, of
himself sufficient. Our Lord God is great, and great is his power, and of his
wisedomehere i^ noe n^mber Our Lord God is great, and exceeding worthy to be
praised. Let our soul therefore love him, our tongue talk of him* our hand
write of him. and in these sacred exercises let the mind of every faithful
Christian wholly employ it self That man certainly that is full of good
desires, whose delight is in heavenly meditation, may daily be refreshed with
the most sweet and dainty dishes of this ^elestiall contemplation: to the end
that being filled with this supernal food, he may cry with a loud voice, and
with the whole force and affection of his heart: with spiritual joy and most
ardent desire, speaking unto God after this manner.

A Prayer showing the manifold properties and attributes of God. CHAPT. XXIX.
O God most high, most good, omnipotent, most merciful, most just, most secret,
most present, most fair and most foable, stable and incomprehensible, seeing
all things yet invisible, changing al things yet immutable, immortal, without
place prefixed, without limitt, without circumference, altogether infinite,
inestimable, ineffable, inscrutable, without motion of himself mouinge all
things, unsearchable, unspeakable, dreadefull and terrible, to be honored
and feared, reverenced, and respected: never new, never old, mak^ng all things
new, and making proud men old, even when they wot not of it, always doing,
allwaies r^stinge, heapinge up without having need, bearinge all things
without being burdened, filling al things without being included; creatinge,
protectinge, nourishing, and doing good to all things: seeking^, albeit
nothing is wanting unto thee, louinge without being afflicted, iealou^, yet
restinge assured It repents thee, and yet thou art not gre^ued, thou art
angry, and yett art quiet, alteringe what thou have done, but not thy
determination. Thou take what thou do^t not find; having never lost any
thing. Thou re^oycest in gain, although thou were never needy. Albeit thou
were never cou^tous, yett thou exactest usury. To whom we remain allwaies
indebted, even when we give more then is required.

But who is there, that has any thing, not thine? Thou paiest debtes being
indebted to noe man, and forgiuest debtes, thereby losing nothing. Who alone
give life to all things, who have created all things, who art every where,
and wholly every where, who may be felt, but can not be seen, who art nowhere wanting, and yet art far distant from the thoughts of wicked men. Who
art not there absent, where thou art far distant, because where thou art
absent by grace, thou art present by r^uenge. Who do touch all things, but
not all a like. For some thou do touch, thereby only giving them a being,
without giving them either life, feelinge, or reason; Others thou do touch,
thereby giuinge them being and life, yet without either feelinge or reason.
Others again thou do touch, thereby giuinge them being* life, and feeling,
yet without the use of reason. And lastly thou do touch others, giuinge them
being, life, feeling, and reason. And albeit thou art never contrary to thy
self, yet nevertheless thou do touch things of a contrary nature after a
contrary manner; who at all times art every where present, and yet can
hardly be found. Whom we follow standing still, and cannot over take. Who
do contain all things, fill all things* enuiron al things, surmounte all
things, and sustain all things.

Neither do thou sustain on one side, to be surmounted on another: neither
do thou fill on one side, to be enuironned on an other: but by enui^onninge
thou do fill, and by filling thou do enuiron, surmountinge by sustayning,
and sustaining by surmounting. Who teach the hearts of the faithful without
sound of words. Who reachest from one end to an other forcibly, and disposest
all things sweetly. Who art not extended by places, nor changed by times*
Neither does thou com^ and go, but dwell in that inaccessible light, which
neither is, not can be seen by any mortal wight.

And thus remaining quiett in thy self, thou do enu^^on the whole world
every where, being absolutely who^e every where: Thou can not, be cu^t or
clea^t, because thou art truly one, nor divided into pa^t^s, because thou do
wholly rule, sill, beautify and possess every thing contained in the whole
world So great is the unmeasurable depth of this imme^se mystery, as that
the haite of man cannot conceive it, nor tongue of Orator declare it, neither
are all the huge sermons, and ample volumes of innumera^le libraries able to
express it. If so many books were written, as with them even the whole
world might be filled, yett thy marua^lous knowledge could not be unfolded,
because thou art altogether unspeakable, and noe way to be desc^ibed, either
in words or writtinge, who art the fountain of divine brightness and the Sun
of eternal happiness.

For thou art great without quantity, and therefore infinitely great, thou art
good without qualiti^, and therefore truly and cheifelie good: neither is any
one good, but thou alone, whose very will is as the deed done, whose pleasure
is reputed for power. Who have created all things of nothing by thine one
word, making them voluntarily of thine own accord. Who have all creatures
in thy possession, having noe need of the^, and do rule and govern then
without any wearines neither is there any thing whatsoever (either in things
above, or things beneath, that can disturb the settled order of thine Empire.
Who art in a^l places without situation of pl^ce, and art every where present
without situation and motion. Who art not the author of any evil; neither art
thou able to do evil, although thou art able to do all things. It never
repents thee of any thing, which thou have done, neither art thou at any
time moved with any perturbatio^ of mind, neither would it be any loss unto
thee, although the whole world should run to ruin.

Thou do not approve or command to be done, any sinful or abominable
actio^: neither do thou ever lie, because thou art the eternal ver^tie. By
whose only goodness we are created, by whose justice we are chasti^ed, by whose
mercy we are redeemed For neither any of the celestial orbs, or the element
of fire, or the globe of the earth, or any other sensible creature, ought to be
adored with divine honor, which is only due to thy divine power: who art that
which thou art truly and really, not any way subject to mutabilitie. To whom
cheifely does belong that which the Grecians do call On, the Latins Ens:
which is as much as if they should say; That thou art now the same, which thou
were heretofore, and shall be still the same both now, and evermore.

These and many other things, has our holy mother the Church taught me, of
whom (by help of thy grace and favor) I am become a member. She indeed has
taught me, that thou (who art the one only true God) art neither corporal nor
passible. And that noe part of thy substance or nature, is either made or
composed, or able by any means to be violated or changed: wherefore it is most
certain, that thou can not be perceived by corporal eyes, neither was it
ever possible for any mortal creature, to behold thee in thy proper essence
and nature.

Hence it appears painely, that we (after this life is ended) shall by the
same means see thee, by which the Angels do now behold thee; although
indeed even they themselves, cannot comprehe^d thee, as thou art. In
conclusion the omnipotent Trinity, is not entirely known, to any other,
saving to thee alone.

Of the unity, and plurality of persons in God. CHAPT. XXX.
But thou (o God) who art one in divinity, multiplied by plurality of
persons, can not by any number be nombred, and therefore not able by any
measure to be measured;or by any balances or weightes to be balanced or
weighed. Neither do we prete^de or take upon us, to declare the original and
first beninning of this sovereign goodnes^, which thou art, from whom, by
whom, and in whom all things have their being; only in respect of the
participation which we have with the same, we speak all the good thereof which
we can. For thy divine essence has allwaies been, and is at this present
void of matter, but not of form, to wit, of form not formed, but the former
of forms; the which albeit thou do putt (as it were a seal) to each several
thing, yett doubtless thou do make them different from thy self, noe
alteration of increase or diminution hapninge unto thee by the same. For
whatsoever is in the nature of creatures, is thy creature.

O God one only Trinitte and a three fold Unity, whose omnipotency does
possess, rule, and fill all things which it has created, nevertheless we
do not say that thou do fill all things, as if they did contain thee,
seeing they are rather contained in thee; neither do we say, that thou do
fill them all particularly: neither is it lawful to think, that every
creature according to the greatness of his capacity does contain thee, that
is the greatest more, and the least less, sithence thou art in them all, or
they all in thee. Whose omnipotency comprehends all things whatsoever,
neither can any man find means to escape thy power; so that he, with whom
thou art not appeased, will not be able to get away when thou art offended: as
it is written Neither from the East, neither from the West, neither from the
desert mountains, because God is judge And in an other place. Whither shall I
go from thy spirit, and whither shall I fly from thy face?

Wherefore the immensitie, of thy divine greatness is such, as that we may
perceive that thou art within all things, but not included, without all
things, but not excluded. Thou therefore art within all things, to the end
thou may contain them; and thou art without all things, that by the
immensitie of thy enuironninge greatness thou mavest include them. By this
therefore, that thou art within all things, it a pea^eth that thou art their
creator, and by this that thou are without all things, it is manifest that
thou art their governor. And least all things which thou have created should
be without thee, thou art within them: and to the end all things might be
included in thee thou art without them, not by any local greatness, but by thy
powerful presence: who art eu^ry where present and al things are present to
thee* although these things a^e known to some, ^ett not to all. Wherefore the
inseparable unity of thy nature, cannot admit persons, tha^ may be separate;
for a^ thou art Trinity in unity, and unity in Trinity; so likewise thou can
not admit separation of persons.

True it is that those persons are sometimes named severally and alone by
th^mselues, that by this thou mighst give us to understand (o divine Trinity)
that thou art inseparable in persons, that thou might declare, that thou
have no name in any of the three persons, which may not be referred unto
another, according to the rule of Relation. For as the Father is referred to
the son, and the son to the Father: even so the holy Ghost is most t^u^ie
referred to the Father and the Son. Wherefore those names which do either
signify thy substance, or person, or power, or essence, (or whatsoever is
properly called God) do equally agree to all three persons; as for example,
God* great, omnipotent, eternal, and all things else, which are said of thee
our God

There is not therefore any name of nature, so peculiare to thee alone (o God
the Father) as that it cannot be applied either ^o the Son, or the holy
Ghost. We say o Father) that thou art naturally God; in like manner the Son
is naturally God, and the holy Ghost is naturally God: and yett there are not
three Gods, but naturally one only God the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost.

Thou therefore (o sacred Trinity) are God inseparable in persons, and
ought spirituallie to be understood, a^lthough thou have some names, which
are separable or distinct in words, because in names which signify thy
nature, thou do not by any means admit the plural number. And indeed this
is a plain proof that the persons in the sacred Trinity (which is one
only true God) cannot be divided, because the name of every person, has
respect unto another person: If I name the Father, I show the Son; if I
mention the Son, I make mention of the Father; if I speak of the holy Ghost,
it is of necessity to be understood* that he is the holy Ghost of some other
persons, to wit, of the Father and the son. This truly is the true faith,
proceedinge from found doctrine This is certainly the Catholic, and
certain true belief, which God by his grace has taught me, in the bosom of
our holy mother the Church.

A Prayer to the sacred Trinity. CHAPT. XXXI.
MY faith therefore (o Lord) which for the attaining of my salvation, thou have
given me, does call and cry for help unto thee. Because a faithful soul does
live by faith, layinge hold on that now by hope, which it shall here after
have in effect My chaste conscience (o my God) does cry unto thee, as also
the sweet love of my faith and belief, which thou have brought to the
knowledge of the true light, the darkness of ignorance being by thee putt to
flight; the which likewise thou have withdrawn from the worlde^ fond
bitterness, making i^ pleasant and swee^e unto me, by (...) upon me the chari^ie
of thy swe^tnes The clear voice and unfeigned affection of my faith and belief
(o blessed Tri^^tie) does cry for help unto the^; (...) which (...) has
pleased thee to illuminate from time to time with the light of thy grace
nourish^ng it even from mine in^ancie; and causing(...) to ^ncrease, have by
the documents of our ^oly mother the church, settled and confirmed the same in
me.

To (...) cry, o happy, bl^ssed, and one only glorious Trinity the Father,
the Sonn^, and the holy Ghost; God Lord, comforter, charity, grace,
communication* ^he bege^ter, h^ begotten, that begets again* The true light,
proceeding from the true light, the true enlightening. The fountain, the
floude, the watering. From one all things, by one all things* in one all
things From whom, by whom, in whom, all things The living life, the life
proceedinge from the living life, the giver of life to the living One from
himself, one from an other, one from both. Being from himself, being from an
other being from both. The Father being true, the Son being the truth, the
holy Ghost being likewise the truth. Wh^refore the Father the Son, and the
holy Ghost is one only essence, one virtue, one goodness, one only happiness
From whom, by whom, and in whom, all things are happy, what things so^uer
are happy.

That God is the true and sovereign life. CHAPT. XXXII.
O God the true and sovereign l^fe, from whom, by whom, and in whom, all
things do live, what things soever do truly and happily live. O God, the
true and sovereign bounti^ and beauty, from whom, by whom, and in whom, all
things are good and beautiful, what things soever are good and beautiful O
God, whose fai^he does raise vs^* whose hope does releive us, whose charity
does unite us., O God, who commaundest that we should ask thee, and openest
to him, that does knock and call unto thee. O God, from whom to be auerted, is
to fall; to whom to be conu^^ed, is to rise; in whom to remain is to be
immovable. O God, whom noe man loses, unless he be deceived; whio^ noe man
seeks, unless he b^ admonished; whom noe man finds unless he be
undefiled. O God, to know whom, is to live; to serve whom, is to reign; to
praife whom, is the ^oules joy and salvation.

I praise, bl^sse, and adore thee with my lips, and heart, and with all the
force I have, rendering thanks to thy mercy and bounty, for all the
benefitts, which I have receiu^d from thee* and singing unto thee the hymn of
thy glory holy, holy, holy. To thee I cry (o blessed Trinity) beseeching thee,
that thou will vouchsafe to come into me, and make men temple fit to receive
thy majesty. I beseech the Father by the Son* I beseech the Son by the
Father, I beseech the holy Ghost by the Father and the Son, that all my
sins and imperfections may be removed far from me, and all holy virtues may
be planted in me.

O God of infinite power and might, of whom, by whom, and in whom all things
visible, and invisible were created, who do enuiron thy works without, and
replenishe them within: who do cover them above, and sustain them beneath,
protect me the work of thy hands hoping in thee, and having my whole
confidence in thy only mercy. Preserve me (I beseech thee) here and every
where, now and ever, within and without, before and behind* above and
beneathe, and on every side, that noe place in me may be found open to the
assaults* and snares of mine enemies.

Thou art God almighty, the keeper and defender of all those that trust in
thee; without whom no man is secure, no man is free from danger. Thou art God,
and there is noe other God but thee, either in heaven above, or on the earth
beneathe, who do great and maruailous things unknown and inscrutable, in
number infinite and innumerable.

To thee therefore does truly belong all glory, power, and praise. To thee all
the holy Angels, the heavens, and vniu^rsall powers do singe songs of
thanksgiving, sounding forth thy praises without ceasinge* as creatures to
their creator, as servants to their master, as soldiers to theme Prince and
gouuernoure. Finally every creature, and eueric spirit does magnify and
extol thee, o sacred and inseparable Trinity.

The praises of Angels and men. CHAPT. XXXIII.
TO thee all holy and humbl^ men of hearty, to thee the spiritts and souls of
the just, to thee all the celestial cit^ize^s, and every order of the
heavenly hierarchy do singe and sound forth praise and honor
eu^rlastinglie in most humble manner fallinge down, and adoring thee. Those
celestial citizens (o Lord do praise thee with much honor, and
magnificencie, Man likewise does ext^ll thy power, containinge in himself a
great part of each other creature. I my self also, albeit a poor and
miserable sinner, do desire to praise thee with great devotion, and do with
tha^ I could love thee with most ardent affection.

O my God, my life, my strength and my praise, give me gra^e to praise thee.
Give light unto my heart, and word unto my mouth, that my heart may think of
thy glory, and my tongue may all the day long singe and sound forth thy
praises* But because thy praise is not seemly in my mouth that am a sinner
and a man of unclean lips, cleanse my heart (I bese^ che thee) from all
vncleanlineffe of iniqnitie, sanctify me within and without (o sanctifier
omnipotent) and make me worthy to praise thee. Receive graciously, and take in
good part this sacrifice of my lips, which I offer thee with my whole heart
and affection, and grant that it may be acceptable in thy sight, and ascend
unto thee, as an odore of sweetness. Let thy holy remembrance, and thy most
blessed sweetness possess my whole soul, drawinge it up to the love of things
invisible Let my soul pass from things visible to invisible, from earthly
to celestial, from things temporal to eternal* let it mount up by
contemplation, and behold thee, whose sight is so full of admiration.

O eternal truth, and true charity, and charitable eternity* thou art my
God; to thee I sigh day and night, thou art my whole study, my desire is how I
may come to thee; because he that knows the truth, knows eternity. Thou (o
truth) art ruler over al things, whom we shall apparently see, after that this
blind and mortal life is ended: in which we are demanded. Where is thy God?
yea I my self do demand. My God, where art thou? Me think I find my self
somewhat comforted in thee, when with words of exultation and confession I do
power forth my soul upon thee, as one rejoices at some banquet, or upon a
holy day. Nevertheless my soul is yet pensive, for that it falls down,
and becomes as an infinite deep pit, or rather perceives it self to be
such a one as yett. To whom my faith (which in the night season thou have
kindled before my feet) making answer says: Why art thou sadd, o my soul,
and why do thou trouble me? Put thy trust in God, whose word is a light
unto my feet: hope and persevere in him, until the night be past (the mother
of such as sin) until Gods anger be past, whose children in times past we
have been; because we were heretofore darkness; until this violent inundation
of waters be past, until the day appear, and the shadows are departed, till
then the residue of sin remains in our body, grown dead through
iniquity.

Wherefore (o my soul) put thy trust in our Lord, in the morninge I will
preisent my self before him, and meditate upon him, and for evermore will
confess unto him. In the morninge I will present my self before him, and by
contemplation will behold him, who is the health of my countenance and my God,
who will revive our dead bodies by means of the holy Ghost dwellinge in us,
to the end, that from hence forth we may become light, and the children of the
light and of the day, not of the night, neither of darkness, being as yett saved
by hope. True it is, that heretofore we were darkness, but now we are become
light in thee our God; nevertheless as yet by faith, not by seeing thee face to
face. Because that hope which is seen, is not hope.

Those immortal troops of holy Angels (o Lord) do incessantly praise
thee, and the celestial virtues do glorify thy name, who have noe need to
read this, which I have written of thee, thereby to know thee, the sacred and
undivided Trinity Because they always do behold thy face, in which without
the sillables of times they do read, what thy eternal will would have to be
do^ne; they do read, choose, and love thee* yea they do read everlastingly:
and that which they read, neu^r passes away. By choosinge and louinge thee*
they do read the immutabilitie of thy counsel, neither shall their book at
any time be shutt or folded together, for that thou thy self art this book of
theirs* and shall be for ever.

O how ^urpassinge happy are those heauenlieve ^tues, who are able to praise
thee so holilie and purelie, with such excessive sweetness, and unspeakable
joy? from thence they take occasion of praise, from whence they rejoice, that
is by beholdinge thee everlastingly, by which they are made able to rejoice
and to praise thee: But we that are ouercharged with the burden of our frail
flesh, who are likewise placed a far of in the pilgrimage of this life, from
the light of thy countenance, and lastly are distracted and disquieted through
diversity of worldly businesses, cannot praise thee worthily as we ought* how
be it we praise thee by faith, not by seeing thee face to face; contrariwise
those Angelical spirits by seeing thee face to face, not by faith. Our flesh
is the cause of this, by means whereof we praise thee in a far meaner degree
then they. But albeit we praise thee after a diverse manner* yet thou art one
and the same God creator of all things; to whom sacrifice of praise is offered
in heaven and on earth, and by help of thy mercy, we hope hereafter to be
made pertaker of their company.

Grant o Lord in the interim (during the time of my abode in this frail
flesh) that my heart and tongue may praise thee, and let all my bones say: O
Lord who is like unto the Thou art God almighty, whom we worship and adore,
three in persons, and one in substance of deity, the Father unbegotten, the
Son the only begotten of the Father, the holy Ghost proeedinge from them
both and remaining in them both, the ^acred and undivided Trinity, one only
God almighty. Who when we were not, have powerfully made by our offenses, have
lost and undone us, and when we were wonderfully recovered us by thy pity
and goodness. Suffer v^ not (I beseech thee) to be vngreatefull for so great
benenefitts, and unworthy of so mani^olde mercies.

I humbly crave, pray, and beseech thee, increase our faith, enlarge our hope,
augment our charity. Make us by this thy grace, to be alwaie; firm in faith,
and fruitful in good works, that by an upright and perfect faith, and works
worthy of the same, we may by thy mercy attain to life everlasting; that
there contemplating thy glory as it is, we may adore thy majesty, and may all
of us say together, whom thou have made worthy to behold this thy bliss.
Glory be to the Father, who has created us, glory be to the Son, who has
redeemed us, glory be to the holy Ghost, who has sanctified us, glory to
the most high, and undivided Trinity, whose works are inseparable, whose
Empire is everlasting and perpetual. All glory and songs of praise are
befittinge thee, all worshipp, benediction, love and thanks giving is due to
thee; To thee our God be ascribed all honor, strenght, and fortitude, for ever
and ever. Amen.

Here man does lament, for that when he thinks of God he is not moved to
compunction, seeinge the very Angels tremble and quake when they behold him.
CHAPT. XXXIV.
Forgive me o Lord, forgive me o good God, forgive me, and be merciful unto
me, pardon mine ignorance, and my manifold imperfections Reject me not for my
ouermuche boldenes, in that I being but a servant, and would to God a good
one, and not all together bad and unprofitable as I am, yea in this respect
very badd, for that I presume to praise, bless and adore thee our God
almighty, terrible, and exceedingly to be feared, without contrition of heart,
and a fountain of tears, without that reverence and fear, which is fittinge.
For if the Angels praising and adoring thee (albeit replenished with
unspeakable joy) do tremble and quake: how much more ought I so to do when I
stand before thee, singing praises, or offering sacrifice unto thee? whence is
it, that my heart does not pante, and my contenance grow pale? and why do I
not tremble in my whole body, that by that means I might weep and wail in
thy presence incessantly? I would do so if it lay in my power, but I cannot
do, as I desire. And for this cause I cannot but have thee in high regard,
as often as I behold thee with the eyes of my faith so terrible, and
wo^derfullie to be feared.

But who can do this (or any good thing else) without the assistance of thy
grace? because our whole succoure and safety does wholly proceed from thy
great mercle. Miserable wretch that I am, how is it that my soul is become
so sottishe and void of sense, that it is not exceedingly affraide, when it
stands before God, and sings praises in his presence? Miserable wretch
that I am, how is my heart so hardened, that my eyes do not without ceasinge,
flow forth floudes of tears, whiles the servant talks with his Lord, man
with God, a creature with his creator, one that is made of stime, with him that
has made all things of nothing?

Behold (o Lord) I do make manifest unto thee what I am, and what I think of
my self in the secrett of my heart* I do openly make known in the ears of
my brethren. Thou art rich in mercy, and lib^rall in bestowinge rewards*
give me of thy goods, that by them I may be able to serve thee: because we can
neither serve nor please thee, except it be by help of those gifts, which we
receive from thee. Pierce (I beseech thee) my flesh with thy fear, let my
heart rejoice, that it may fear thy name. O would to God my sinful soul did
fear thee in that manner as that holy man did, who said: I have allwaies
feared God as it were floudes of water flowing over my head.

O God thou giver of all good things, give me (I beseech thee) a fountain of
tears, duringe the time of my prayers, and praises which I singe to thee
accompanied with purity of heart, and mirthe of mind, that loving thee
perfectly, and praising thee worthily I may (with the palate of my heart)
pereciue, taste, and feel how pleasant and sweet thou our Lord art, as it is
written: Taste and see, because our Lord is sweet. Blessed is that man that
trusts in him blessed is that people, that knows how to praise him, blessed
is that man* whose help is from God, who has so disposed the ascents of his
heart in this doleful vale of misery, that by them he may ascend up to the
place of eternal felicity. Happy are the clean in heart, for they shall see
God, happy are they (o Lord) that dwell in thy house, they shall praise thee
for ever and ever.

A Prayer greatly mouinge the heart to devotion, and to the love of God. CHAPT.
XXXV.
O Jesus our redemption, love, and desire, God of God, give ^are to me thy poor
unworthy servant. To thee I c^ll and cry, with a loud voice, with my whole
heart. To thee I call, calling thee into my soul, enter into the same, and
make it fitting for thee, that thou may possess it without wrinkle or
blemishe of iniquity: because reason requires, that a clean dwellinge,
should be prepared for so clean a Lord to dwell in. Sanctify me therefore (I
beseech thee) thy vessel which thou have made, cleanse me from malice, fill
me, and preserve me full of thy grace, that here and for all eternity, I may
be made a fit habitation for thy divine majesty.

O most sweet, most powerful, most loving, most dear, most powerful, most
desired, most inestimable, most amiable and most beautiful Lord: thou art more
sweet then honey, more white then either milk or snow, more pleasant to the
taste then nectar, or delitious wine, more precious then gold or precious
stones, and more dear to me then all the riches and honors of this world.
What do I say, o my God, my only hope, and my surpassing great mercy? What
do I say, my happy and secure sweetness? What do I say in saying these
things? Verily I say what I am able, not what I ought.

Would to God I were able to singe such hymns of praises, as do the quires
of blessed Angels. O how willingly would I bestow my self wholly in singing
and setting forth thy praises? O how deuoutelie in the midst of thy Church,
would I pronounce those Canticles of celestial melody, to the praise and
glory of thy holy name? But because I cannot do this, shall I therefore hold
my peace? Woe be to those that have not thee in their mouth, because thou art
he, that openest the mouths of such as are mute, and make the tongues of
infants to be eloque^t. Woe be to those whose talk is not of thee, because
those that are talkatiue and full of words, are to be esteemed as men
speecheles, if their talk does not tend to the extollinge of thy praises.

But who is able to praise thee worthily* o unspeakable virtue, and wisdom of
the Father? Seeing therefore I want words, by which I might be able
sufficiently to express thee (o divine word of all power and knowledge) I
will in the interim say what I can, until thou vouchsafe to call me unto thee,
where I shall be able to speak what appertains both to thee and me. Wherefore I
humbly beseech thee that thou will not so much consider what I say, as what I
desire to say. Verily I greatly desire to speak that of thee, which is
fittinge and meet, in respect that all praise, thankesgiuinge, and glory is
due unto thee.

Thou know therefore o God (from whom the very secrets of our hearts cannot
be concealed) that thou art more dear and acceptable to me then heaven and
earth, and all things els^, that are therein: for I love thee above heaven
and earth, and all other things contained in them, yea so great love is due
to thy holy name, as that in comparison thereof, noe transitory thing does
deserve the fame.

I do love thee o my God very much, and do desire to love thee still more
and more. Give me grace that I may always love thee according to the greatness
of my affection, and according to the greatness of my obligation, that thou
only may be my whole intention, and my whole meditation. Let me think of
thee in the day time without ceasinge: Let me dream of thee in the night
season; Let my soul talk to thee, let my mind discourse with thee. Let my
heart be beautified by the light of thy holy sight, that having thee for my
conductor and captain. I may march forewarde from virtue to venue, and at
length may behold thee, the God of Gods in Sion.

During the time of this life. I do see thee obscurelie as it were through a
mrtroure or looking glass, but then I shall behold thee apparentlie face to
face, where I shall know thee* like as I am known of thee. Blessed are the
clean in heart, for they shall see God. Blessed are they (o Lord) that dwell
in thy house, they shall prai^e thee world without end.

I beseech thee therefore (o Lord) by thy manifold mercies, by which we are
delivered from eternal death, mollify my stony hard heart, (harder then
either stone or iron) with thy most sacred and powerful unction, and make me
at all times to become a living sacrifice in thy sight by the fire of
compunctio^. Make me to have always in thy sight a humble and contrite heart,
joined with abundance of tears. Make me in all my desires as one wholly dead
to this wretched world, and through the greatness of the fear and love of thee,
to forgett all things transitory; in so much, as that I may neither greiue,
nor grow gladd at any temporal thing, being free from the fear and love of
whatsoever passes away with time, being neither depraved through flattery,
nor dismayed through adversity.

And for that the love of thee is forcible like unto death, grant (I beseech
thee) that the fiery and sweet force of thy love, may wholly withdraw my
mind from all things under heaven, that I may adhere to thee alone, being
fedd with the only memory af thy sweetness. Let the most odo^iferous smell of
thee (o Lord) descend, let it descend I beseech thee, let it descend, and
with it let the mellifluous love of thee enter into my heart. Let the
admirable and unspeakable fragrant sauoure of thee come unto me, causinge in me
an eternal desire and affection, and producinge in my heart fountains of
water, flowinge into life everlasting.

Thou (o Lord) art infinitely good, and therefore infinitely to be loved and
praised of those, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood. O most
liberal lover of men, most louinge Lord, and most just judge, to whom the
Father has committed all judgment, thou perceiuest in the most wise judgment
of thy righteousness, whether this be just and reasonable or not, that the
children of this world, of the night and darkness, do love and seek after
riches, and honors that are transitory and cannot long continue, with a far
greater desire earnestnes and study, then we thy servants do love and seek
after thee our God, by whom we have been made and redeemed.

For if one man loves an other with so great affection, as that the one can
scarcely endure the other to be wanting; if the wife be conjoined to her
husband with that feruoure of mind, as that through the greatness of her love,
she can take noe repose, being not able without great grief to sustain the
absence of her beloved husband: with what affection, desire, and feruoure of
mind, ought that soul, (who^ thou have espoused and linked unto thee by faith
and thy manifold mercies) to love thee the true God, the most beautiful
spouse, who have after that wonderful manner loved and saved us, who have
done so many, so great, and such unspeakable things for us.

But although the transitory things of this world^, have their particular
loves and delights, yet is the delight and content which they yeilde, far
inferior to that which proceeds from thee* o Lord our God. In thee the just
man is d^lighted, because thy love is sweet and peaceable, thou being
accustomed to replenishe those hearts, which thou do possess, with
unspeakable delight, sweetness, and quietness. Contrariwise, the love of the
world and of the flesh, causes a thousand woes, not permittinge the souls,
into which it enters to be at any repose, but continually vexes them with
suspicions, with diverse doubts, and perturbations. Thou therefore (o Lord) art
the delight of good and just men, and truly not without reason; for that in
thee is true repose, and a life free from molestation. He that enters into
thee (o good God) enters into the joy of his Lord, and shall not be any more
afraied; but shall find himself happily placed in a most happy habitation
saying: This is my rest for evermore, here I will dwell, because I have chosen
the same. And Again. Our Lord guides me, and I shall want nothing, he has
placed me in a place of pasture.

O sweet Christ, o good lesu, fill my heart perpetually with thy unquenchable
charity, with the continual remembrance of thee, so that being become as a
fiery flame, I may wholly burn through the sweetness of thy love, which love in
me let be so great, as that whole fountains and flouddes of water may never
be able to quench it Make me (most sweet Lord) to love thee, and for thy love
to lay a side the heavy and vnsuportable burden of all earthly and carnal
conscupiscences, which do molest and press down my wretched soul: to the
end, that being freed from them, and runninge after thee in the sweet smell of
thy odoriferous ointments, I may at length (having thee for my guide) be able
to attain to the vision and fruition of thy beau^ie, and by the same to
remain truly satisfied eternally. For two several loves, the one good, the
other ^uill, the one sweet, the other bitter, cannot in one heart possibly
dwell together. And therefore if any one does love any thing besides thee, thy
charity in him (o God) is not the love of sweetness, and the sweetness of love,
for thou art that love that afflicts not but delights, that love that for
ever remains chaste and sincere, that love always burns, and never
consumes.

O sweet Christ, o good Jesus, my love, my love, and my God* inflme me wholly
with thy fire, with the love of thee, with thy sweetness and delecta^ion, with
thy mirth and exultation, with thy pleasure, and desire, which is holy and
good, chaste clean, quiet, and secure, to the end, that being wholly replenished
with the sweetness of thy love, being wholly inflamed with the fire of thy
charity. I may love thee my God with all my heart, force and strength, having
thee at all times and in all places, in my heart, in my mouth, and before mine
cees: so that noe receptacle may be found in me, to receive the counterfayted
love of things transitory.

Hear, o my God, hear o light of mine eyes, hear and grant what I demand
of thee, to the end thou may hear me. O most meek and merciful Lord,
refuse not to hear me by reason of my sins, but for thy goodness sake,
receive the prayers of me thy unworthy servant, and grant me the effect of my
peticion and desire* by the intercession, prayer and request of the glorious
virgin Marie thy mother, and my Lady, and of all the Saints of thy heavenly
City Amen.

A most devout Prayer, demanding Grace of God to praise him as we ought.
CHAPT. XXXVI.
O Christ our Lord, the divine word of the Father, whose coming into the
world was to save sinners: I beseech thee by the bowels of thine infinite
mercy, amend my life, make better mine actions, compose my manners, take from
me whatsoever is hurtful to me, and displeasinge to thee, and give me that,
which thou know is pleasinge to thee, and profitable for me Who is there,
that can cleanse man from sin, conceived in the same, sauinge thou alone?
Thou ar^ God almighty of infinite mercy, who iustifiest the wicked, and raysest
to life those, that through sin were dead, who changest sinners from that
which they were before, vpholdinge them, that they fall not any more. Remove
from me therefore (I beseech thee) whatsoever in me is displeasinge unto thee.

Thy eyes I know do plainly see mine imperfections to be very many.
Wherefore may it please thee to stretche forth toward me the hand of thy
mercy, and with the same remove from me, whatsoever is offensive in me to the
eyes of thy divine Majesty. My health, o Lord, and my sickness do depend of
thy power: preserve (I beseech thee) the one, and cure the other. Cure me, o
Lord, and I shall be cured, save me, and I shall be saved: thou art he, that do
cure those things that are diseased, keepinge them in health after they are
healed: thou art he, that with the very beck and nod of thy head, do
repair those things that are ruined and decayed. For if it be thy pleasure to
sow in my heart the good seed^ of virtues, it is necessary that first with the
hand of thy pity, thou pluck up the thorns of mine iniquities.

Most sweet, benign, louinge* dear, desired, beloved, and most beautiful
Lord, power into my heart (I most hartlie beseech thee) the abundance of thy
sweetness and charity, that I may neither desire, nor as much as think upon
any worldly or carnal delectation, but may love thee alone, having thee only
in my mouth, and in my affection. Write in my breaste with thy finger, the
sweet remembrance of thy honey sweet name, by noe forgetfulness ever to be
blotted out of the same. Write in the tables of my heart, thy most holy will,
and thy iustifications; that always and in all places I may have thee and thy
precepts before mine eie^ who art a Lord of infinite sweetness. Inflame my
mind with that sacred fire of thine, which thou ha^t sent into the world, and
do greatly desire that it should be kindled, to the end, that with tears I
may daily offer unto thee, the sacrifice of a humble and contrite heart

O sweet Christ and louinge Jesus, give me as I desire (as I desire with my
whole heart) give me thy love, which is chaste and holy, that it may replenishe,
preserve, and wholly possess me. Give me likewise (I beseech thee) in token of
thy love, a fountain of tears, trickling down from mine eyes, that they may
bear witness of thy tender affection toward me* let them speak and declare,
how much my soul does love thee, seeing it cannot contain it self from
tears, by reason of the surpassing great sweetness, surpassinge great
charity.

I remember (o loving Lord) that good woman Anne, who came to the tabernacle to
desire a son: of whom the holy scripture relates, that after her tears and
prayers to this effect offered, she remained as one assured to obtain, what
she had desired. Now when I call to mind this her so great virtue, and
constancy, in not doubtinge to receive what she demanded. I cannot but be
greatly greiued, and ashamed1* For if a woman did thus weep, and persevere in
weeping, which did only seek to obtain a son: in what manner ought my
soul to lament, and to continue in lamentation, which does seek and love God*
and desires to attain unto him? how ought that soul to lament and weep,
which does seek God day and night? which refuses to love any other thing
sauinge Christ alone? Verily we might very well wonder and be astonished* if
the tears of such a soul were not her continual food.

Wherefore (I bese^che the) take pitti^ of me; and be merciful unto me,
because the sorrows of my heart are exceeding many. Imparte unto me thy
celestial comfort* and despite not my sinful soul, for which thou have
suffered a death so cruel. Bestow upon me the guifte of tears, proceeding
from an internal affection, and love toward thee, which may break the bands
of mine iniquities, and always fill my soul with celestial gladness

Although I durst not demand to be pertaker of that unspeakable reward
which thou have ordained for true and perfect monks and religious men (for
that I am altogether unable to follow the footestepps of their angelical
conversation) yet at least let me obtain some place or other in thy kingdom,
among the devout and blessed women.

The wonderful devotion of an other devout woman does likewise come into my
mind, who with great love sought thee lying in thy grave, who (after thy
disciples were gone) went not away from thy tomb, but ^att still, sorrowful
and lamenting, and for a long time together, very bitterly weeping: and rising
up from the place where she had sitten, with watchful eyes, and many tears,
she diligently sought thee again and again in every corner of thy sepulcher
(from which thou were departed being risen) to see, if peradventure she might
any where see and find thee, whom she sought with so great affection.
Doubtless she had entered and sought thee in the sepulcher diverse times before,
and yett all was not enoughe in respect of her ardent love, for that
perseuera^ce is the perfection of every good action* And because above others
she loved thee, and with love lamented thee, and with lamentation sought thee,
and in seeking continued constantly: for this cause before all others she
deserved to find thee, to see thee, and to speak unto thee: Neither was she
only thought worthy of this one favor alone, but besides this, was made the
messenger and Apostle (unto the Apostles themselves) of thy glorious
Resurrection, thou gently bidding and commanding her saying: Go, tell my
brethren that they go into Galilee, there they shall see me.

If therefore this woman did in this manner weep, and persevere in weeping, who
sought thee, as one she thought to be dead, albeit thou were living, who
touched thee with the hand of her faith; how greatly ought that soul to
lament, and persist in lamentation, who beleiueth with the heart, and
acknowledges thee with the mouth to be her Reedemer, and to rule and reign
both in heaven and every where? how greatly ought that soul to groan and
weep, who with the whole heart loves thee, and with the whole heart desires
to see thee?

O thou-that art the only hope, and succoure of such as are in misery, to
whom we never pray without hope of mercy; for thine own sake, and for thy
holy names sake, grant me this grace I beseech thee; that as often as I
think speak, write, read, or talk of thee, as often as I meditate of thee,
and as often as I stand before thee, to offer praises, prayers, and sacrifice
unto thee; so often let me with tears abundantly and sweerely weep in thy
sight, that my tears may be my food day and night.

Thou truly (o king of glory, and master of all virtues) have taught us by
thy word and example, to lament and weep saying: blessed are they that
mourn, for they shall be comforted. Thou thy self did lament the death of
thy disceased freinde, and with many tears did bewail the city, that in
few years after was to come to ruin. I beseech thee (o good Jesus) by those
most precious tears of thine, and by all thy mercies, by which thou have in
that wonderful manner releiued our miseries, grant me the gift and grace of
tears, which my soul does much desire and covet: because without thy gift I
cannot obtain it, it being the Holy Ghost, that does effect the same, whose
property is to mollify the hard hearts of sinners, and to move them to
compunction.

Grant me the gift and grace* of tears, like as in times past thou have
done to our forefathers, whose footestepps I ought to imitate, that I may
during the whole course of my life lament (as they did) both day and night. By
their meritts and intercession* who have pleased and deuoutely served thee,
take compassion of me thy unworthy servant being in great misery, and grant
me the gift and grace of tears I beseech thee. Grant that the water of
tears may flow from mine eyes, as from a floude, that night and day they may
be unto me in steed of food.

O my God, let me become as a pleasing and acceptable oblation to be sacrificed
in thy sight by the fire of compunction, and as a most grateful sacrifice,
let me be accepted of thee in the odoure of sweetne^. O most loving Lord, let
me become as a fair and flowing fountain, in which let this sacrifice be
daily washed from the filthe of sin. For albeit by the assistance of thy
grace, I have offered my self wholly unto thee* yet nevertheless I do daily
offend in many thinge^* through my exceeding great frailty.

Grant me therefore, most blessed and beloved God, the gift and grace of
tears, especially through the sweetness of thy love, and the remembrance of
thy manifold mercies: prepare this banquet in thy ^ight for me thy unworthy
servant, and grant me this prerogative, that as often as I will, I may be fedd
and refreshed with it. Afforde me this favor, for thy mercy and goodness sake I
beseech thee, that I may so drink, and become drunk by drinkinge of this
most excellent cupp of tears, that my soul may only* thirst and grow dry
through the love of thee, forgetting all worldly vanity and misery.

Hear, o my God, hear o light of mine eyes, hear and grant what I demand
of thee. O most meek and merciful Lord, refuse not to hear me by reason of
my sins, but for thy goodness sake, receive the prayers of me thy unworthy
servant, and grant me the effect of my peticion and desire; by the prayers and
intercession of our blessed Lady the glorious Virgin Marie, and of all the
Saints of thy heavenly City* Amen.

A Prayer greatly stirring up the minds to compunction, if it be said in
silence with attention. CHAPT. XXXVII.
O Lord Jesus, o merciful Jesus, o good Jesus, who have vouchsafed to die for our
sins, and have risen again for our justification: I beseech thee by thy
glorious resurr^ction, raise me up from the sepulcher of sin, and grant me
daily a part in this first resurrection, that in the last likewise, I may be
thought worthy to receive a portion. O most sweet, most benign, most loving,
most dear, most inestimable, most desired, most amiable, and most beautiful
Lord, who have ascended into heaven in glorious and triumphant manner, and as a
puissant Prince, sit at the right hand of God the Father, draw me up unto
thee, that I may run after thee, being allured by the sent of thy ointments
so sweetly smelling; that I may run without ceasing, thou drawing and
conducting me running; draw the mouth of my thirsty soul (I beseech thee) to
those rivers above of everlasting satietie: nay rather lead me to the
fountain of life (my God and my life) that there I may drink according to my
capacity, in such sort as that I may be able to live eternally. For thou
with thy sacred and blessed mouth have affirmed: If any one thirst, let him
come to me, and he shall drink and be satisfied.

O fountain of life, grant that my thirsty soul may always drink of thee:
that according to thy holy and true promis^* waters of life may flow from my
belly. O fountain of life, fill my mind with the stream of thy delight:
make my heart drunk with the sober drunkenness of thy love, that I may forget
all things that are vain and worldly, and may continually have thee in my
memory, even as it is written: I have been mindful of God, and have been
delighted. Give me thy holy spirit, whom those waters did signify which thou
did promise to bestow vpoz those that do^ thirst after thee.

Grant, (I beseech thee) that I may tend and aspire thither with my whole
desire and affection, whither we believe thou did ascend the fo^^th day
after thy Resurrection; that I may be detained i^ this vale of misery in body
only, being in thought and desire continually with thee: to the end my heart
may remain there* where thou art my desired, incomparable, and most beloved
treasure. For in the great deluge of this life, where we are ^ossed to and
from with continual tempests, finding ^oe firm standing or assured place,
where the dove may fix her foot for never so small a space: here I say in
this wretched world, noe certain peace or assured rest is to be expected, for
that where soever we are, wars and dissensio^s do molest us, our enemies on
all sides do assault us, out wardly are fightes, inwardlye tears.

And for that we consist of a two-folde substance, partly of earth, partly of
heaven, our body which is subject to corruption, is a clogg to the soul, not
suffering it to soar up to celestial contemplation. Wherefore my mind being
my compagnion and freinde, cominge as one wearied on the way, lies sick and
diseased, being rent and ma^gled by those vanities, through which it has
passed: it is exceeding hungry and thirsty* and I have nothing to set before
it, because I am poor and needy.

Thou therefore o Lord my God, who art rich in goodness, and give in
abundance the dainties and delicacies of celestial fulness, give meat to my
mind being wearied, recollect it being distracted, restore it to health
being rent and mangled. Behold (o Lord) how it stand^th at thy door knocking:
I beseech thee by the bowels of thy compassion, in which thou have vouchsafed
to visit us, coming down unto us from heaven, open the hand of thy pity, to
my afflicted mind knockinge, and calling unto thee: command likewise by thy
accustomed courtesy, that it may enter and be brought in unto thee, that it
may rest and repose in thee, and lastly by thee may be refreshed and fedd, who
art the living and heavenly bread: with which being filled and strength being
recovered, let it ascend to the things above it, and being lifted up with the
winge of holy desire from this vale of tears and lamentation, let it soar up
to the heavenly kingdom.

Let my soul (I beseech thee o Lord) take the wings of an Eagle and fly
without failing, let it fly without ceasing until it come to the beauty of
thy house, and unto the place of thy glorious habitation, that there in the
place of thy pasture (which is enuiro^ned with pleasant rivers) it may be fedd
with the food of thy internal consolation, sitting at the same table, on
which those heavenly citizens are wont to take their refection. Grant that
my heart may rest in thee, o my God, my heart (I say) which is as aspatious sea
tossed too and froo with continual floudes.

Thou therefore (o Lord) who have commanded the winds and sea, after which a
great calm did ensue, come and walk upon the waves of my heart, to the end
that all things within me may be still and quiet, that so I may embrace thee
the only good thing which I desire to possess, and may contemplate thee the
gratfull light of mine eyes, being freede from the dark mist of troublesome
thoughts. Let my mind (o Lord) fly and retire it self under the shadow of
thy wings, from the inordinate heat of worldly cogitations, that sittinge
there in the temperate air of thy refreshing. it may joyfully sing, saying: I
will sleep and repose in the peace of this one thing (that is of God alone.)
O Lord my God, let my soul sleep (I beseech thee) by abandonning whatsoever
is amiss: let it sleep by hating wickedness, and by louinge justice. For what
thing is there, that can or ought to be more pleasing and delightful unto us,
then amidst the darkness and manifold bitterness of this present life, to desire
divine sweetness, and to sighe after eternal happiness, there to fix the mind,
where it is most certain true joys are to be found?

O most sweet, most louinge, most benign, most charitable, most inestimable,
most desired, most beloved, and most beautiful Lord, when shall I see thee?
When shall I be presented before thee? When shall I be satisfied by beholding
thy beauty? When will thou deliue^ me out of this obscure prison, that I may
freely confess thy holy name? that from hence forth I may be free from all
affliction? When shall I be admitted into that admirable and beautiful house
of thine, where the voice of joy and exultation, does refounde in the
tabernacles of just men? They (o Lord) that dwell in thy house, are happy,
because they shall praise thee everlastingly: They are happy and truly happy
indeed, who^ thou have chosen* and taken up to be heirs of that celestial
beatitude. Behold o Lord thy Saints do flourishe in thy sight as a l^llie, for
that they are filled with the plenty of thy house, thou giuinge them to drink
of the river of thy dilightful sweetness: because thou art the fountain of
life, and in thy light they do see light, so that they the illuminated light,
(by means of thee the illuminating light) do shine like unto the sun in thy
sight.

O Lord of all virtues, how wonderful, how beautiful, how grateful are the
lodgings of thy heavenly mansion, my sinful soul does exceedingly covet to
enter into them. O Lord I have loved the beauty of thy house, and the place of
the habitation of thy glory. I have desired of our Lord one thing, and I will
ask it of him again and again, to wit^, that I may dwell in the house of our
Lord, all my life long. Like as the heart longs for the fountains of waters
(when he i^ pursued) so does my soul long after thee my God; When shall I
come and appear before thee? When shall I see my God, whom my soul does so
much thirst to behold? When shall I see him in the land of the living? for in
this land of the dyinge, it is impossible with mortal eyes to behold him.

What shall I therefore do, poor wretch that I am, being subject to death and
corruption? What course shall I take? As long as we are in this corruptible
body, we are in respect of thee as strangers and pilgrims in a foreign
country, not having here any city or certain dwellinge, but do seek for
one in time to come, because ou^ habitation is in heaven. Alas I esteem my
self wretched, by reason of my over long slay in this world. I have dwelt
with the inhabitants of Cedar, too long has my soul remained here.

Who will give me wings like unto a dove, that I may fly, and be at rest?
Nothing can be to me so pleasant and good, as to be with my Lord. It is good
for me to adhere to my God. Give me grace therefore* I beseech thee) that as
long as I live, I may adhere to thee, as it is written. He that adhereth to
our Lord, becomes one spirit with him. Give me (I beseech thee) the wings
of contemplation, by which I may be able to fly up unto thee into heaven And
for that every thing that is eui^l, does draw us downewarde to sin, up
hold my mind, that it fall not down to the bottom of the obscure valley of
perdition; uphold my mind, least by the interposition of the shadow of
earthly things, it be separated from thee the son of justice and by the
dark cloud of secular conversation, it be hindered from looking and lifting
up it self to celestial contemplation.

For this cause I do endeavor to ascend up to those joys of peace, and to
the deligthfull and quiet state of true light, Uphold my heart with thy holy
hand, for that without thy help it cannot ascend. I do hasten thither, where
surpassing great peace reigns, and where continual quietness shines. Guide
and conduct my soul, and according to thy holy will draw it unto thee, to the
end that under thy conducte, it may ascend unto that region of plenty, where
thou do feed Israel everlastingly with the food of thy verity, that there
(be it but in thought only, and for never so short a time* it may touch
thee the supreme wisdom, remaininge above all things, ouer-going all
things, and gouerninge all things.

But many things there be, which trouble my soul, and hinder it, that it
cannot soar up unto thee. Cause them all o Lord by thy commandment, to cease
and be silent. Let my soul it self, be silente, let it pass beyond all
things (all things I mean created) let it mount above it self, and come to
thee. Let it fix the eyes of its says on thee alone the creator of all
things, let it aspire to thee, let it attend to thee, let it meditate on
thee, l^tt it contemplate on thee, let it set thee before its eyes, and
think upon thee in its heart, who art the true and sovereign good thing, and
that joy which shall never have end. For albeit the contemplations, are many
wherewith a devout soul is by thee wonderfully fedd and refreshed, yet is my
soul in none of them all so much delighted and conforted as in thee, and as
when it does meditate and contemplate on thee only.

O how great (o Lord) is the abounda^ce of thy sweetened how marueilouslie do
thou inspire and visit the hearts of such as love thee! how wonderful is the
delight of thy love, which they feel and enjoy, who affect and seek nothing
but thee, who desire not so much as to think of any other thing saving only
thee! Happy are they, whose hope i^ in thee alone, who wholly addict themselves
to prayer and contemplation Happy is he, that passes his life in
solitariness and silence, taking continual heed night and day to the
custody of his senses: that even in this life during the time of his abode in
this frail flesh, he may be able in some sort to taste of thy unspeakable
sweetness.

I beseech thee o Lord by those most precious wounds of thine, which on the
cross thou have suffered for the redemption of mankind, from which has
gushed forth that most precious blood, by which we are redeemed; wound my
sinful soul, for whom likewise thou have vouchsafed to dye, wound it with
the fiery and forcible darte of thy surpassing great charity. Because the
word of God is powerful and effectual, and more peircing then a two edged
sword.

Thou therefore, o Lord, who as a chosen arrowe and most sharp sword, art able
to pierce and pass though the hard target of man's heart, pierce my heart
with the darte of thy love, that my soul may say, I am wounded with thy
charity, so that from the wound of this thy charity tears may trickle
down day and night in great quantity. Strike, o Lord, strike (I most humbly
beseech thee) my hard hatred soul, with the pious and powerful spear of thy
love, yea pierce it to the very bottom with thy omn^pote^t virtue.

Cause likewise a floude of water to flow from my head, and a fountain^ of
tears continually to trickle down from mine eyes, through the exceeding
great affection and desire of beholdinge thy fairness; in such sort, as that
I may weep continually, receiving noe comfort duringe this present life,
until I shall be thought worthy to behold thee in thy heau^nlie house, my
beloved and most beautiful spouse, my God and my Lord; that seeing there thy
glorious, admirable, and most f^ire face, replenished with all sweetness, I may
together with that elected company, fall prostrate and adore thy Majesty, and
being at length filled with the celestial and unspeakable joy of that
eternal delectation, I may with those that love thee cry out, saying. Behold
I now see, what I coueted, I now enjoy that, for which I hoped, I now have
that which I desired: because I am now joined to him in heaven whom whilst I
lived on earth, with my whole strength I loved, with my whole love I affected,
and to whom with my whole affection I was united, him do I praise, bless and
adore; who lives and reigns God both now and ever more. Amen.

A Prayer to be said in time of tribulation. CHAPT. XXXVIII.
TAke pittie^o Lord, take pity, o merciful Savior of me a most miserable
sinner, doing things worthy of blame, and worthily suffering for the same,
being by thee daily afflicted, for that continually I am found to have
offended. If I ponder the evil which I daily commit* that which I endure is
nothing in comparison of it, that which I have done being much more greiuous
then mine affliction. Thou art just, o Lord, and right is thy iudgment^, all
thy iudgement^ are just and true; Thou o Lord our God ar^ just and full of
goodness, neither is there in thee any wickednes^ because when we offend, thou
do not unjustly and cruelly afflict us, who when we were not, have
powerfullie made us; and when for our sin we were guilty of damnation, thou
have by thy wonderful mercy and goodness, set us in state of salvation. I
know (o Lord God and am assured, that our life is not governed by the
unadvised influence and concurrence of secondarie causes, but is wholly
disposed and ordered by thy almighty providence. Thou therefore take care of
all things, but especially of such as serve thee, who putt their whole
confidence in thy only mercy. Wherefore I humbly pray and beseech thee,
that thou will not deal with me according to mine iniquities, by which I have
deserved thine anger, but according to thy manifold mercies, which surmounte
the sins of the whole world together* Thou o Lord, who do punish me
outwardly, give me always an invincible patience inwardly, to the end I may
never cease to praise thee. Take pity of me, o Lord, take pity of me, and
help me, like as thou know to be expedient for me both in soul^ and body,
thou (I say) who know all things, and art able to do all things
whatsoever who lives and reigns, for ever and ever, Amen.

A very devout Prayer to God the Son. CHAPT. XXXIX.
O Lord Jesus Christ, the son of the living God, who with thy hands stretched
forth on the Cross, have drunk the cupp of thy passion for the redemption of
all mankind, succou^e me this day I beseech thee. Behold, o Lord, I that am
needy do come to thee that art wealthy. I that am full of misery do
approache to thee replenished with mercy, suffer m^ not therefore to depart
void, or as one worthy to be despised. I begin hungry, let me not end
empty. I approache as one hunger-starued, let me not depart unfed. And if I
sighe before I eat, grant that I may eat at least after I have sighed

First therefore most sweet Jesus, before the magnificence of thy sweetness, I
confess against me mine injustice. Behold o Lord, for that I was conceived
and borne in sin, and thou have washed and sanctified me from the same, and
(...) this, have defiled my self with greater offenses: because those sins
wherein I was borne, were of necessity, but those in which I afterward lay
wallowing were voluntary. This notwithstanding, thou being not unmindful of
thy mercy and goodness, have drawn me from my fathers house, and from the
tabernacles of sinner, inspiring me with thy grace, to follow thee in the
company of those that seek thy face, who walk the direct way that leads to
felic^tie, living amiddst the (...) of cha^itie, and sitting at table with
thee in the parloure of most profounde poverty.

But I ungrateful and forgetful of so many benefits received have after my
entrance into Religion, committed many sins and abominations, and where I
ought to have corrected my faults by doing satisfaction, there have I added
sin upon sin. These therefore (o Lord) are the faults, by which I have
dishonored thee, and defiled my self, who thou have created according to
thine own image and similitude) to wit, pride, vain glory, and many other
sins almost infinite, by which my unhappy soul is troubled and afflicted,
rent and destroyed.

Behold, o Lord, mine iniquities have overwhelmed mine head, being unto me as
a greiuous burden unsupportable to be endured: in so much, that if thou (whose
property is to pardonne, and to show mercy) do not lift me up with the
right hand of thy majesty, I shall woefullie sink down into the gulf of
eternal misery. Behold o Lord God, and see because thou art holy; behold I
say how my ghostly ennimie does insulte over me, saying: God has forsaken
him, I will pursue and take him, because there is none that can deliver him.

How long (o Lord) will thou thus leave me: Tu^ne back and deliver my soul,
o sau^ me for thy mercies sake. Take pity of me thy son, whom thou have
begotten in the great grief of thy passion, and do not so attend to my
wickedness, that thou forgett thy goodness. What Father is there, who seeing his
son in danger, does not endeavor to set him free? or what son is there,
whom his Father does refuse to correct with the staff of his pity?

Wherefore o Lord and Father, albeit I am a sinner, yet I do not cease to be
thy son, because thou have made me, and new made me again, like as I have
sinned, so correct and amend me, and being by the staff of thy fatherly
pity corrected and amended, commit me to the care and custody of thy only
begotten son Jesus Christ our Lord. Is it possible for a woman to forget the
child of her own womb? And albeit she should forget it, yet thou (o most
louinge Father) have promised not to forget the same.

Behold I cry, and thou do not hear me, I am afflicted with grief, and
thou do not comfort me. What shall I say, or do, being in this extreme
misery? Alas I am altogether comfortles, and which is worse, am chased forth
of thy presence. Wretch that I am, from how great good into how great
evil am I fallen? Whither did I attempt to go, and whither am I come? Where
am I, and where am I not? how is it, that I that did sighe after heaven, do
now sighe through so great tribulation? I have sought comfort, and have
found affliction. And truly it is better for me, not to be, then to be without
thee, o sweet Jesus. It is better not to live, then to live without thee, the
only true life.

Where are now (o Lord Jesus) thine accustomed mercies? Will thou be displeased
with me always? Be appeased I beseech thee, and take pity of me, and turn
not away thy louinge face from me, who to redeem me, have not turned away thy
face from those that did ^^ocke and spit upon thee. I confess that I have
sinned, and my conscience does adiudge me worthy of damnation, neither is my
penance sufficient to make satisfaction, nevertheless it is a thing
infallible, that thy mercy does surmount all offense whatsoever, be it never
so abominable.

Wherefore (o most merciful Lord) I beseech thee do not write any malicious
bitterness against me, neither enter into judgment with thy servant, but
according to the multitude of thy mercies, blot out mine iniquities. Woe be to
me at the day of judgment, when the books of our consciences shall be opened
(wherein our actions are registered) when of me it shall openly be proclaimed:
See here the man, and his deeds committed. What shall I do, o Lord my God,
at that dreadful day, when the heavens shall reveal mine iniquity, and the
earth shall bear witness against me? Verily I shall be mute and able to say
nothing, but holding down mine head through shame and confusion, I shall
stand before thee shaking and blushing.

Alas what shall I say? I will call and cry unto thee o Lord my God. Why am I
consumed being silent? Nevertheless if I speak, my grief will not cease: and
if I hold my peace, I shall inwardly be tormented with unspeakable
bitterness. Weep o my soul, and make lamentation as a young married woman for
the death of her new married husband, weep and bewail thy misery, for
that thy bridegroom (which is Christ) has forsaken thee.

O anger of the almighty, rushe not upon me, because thou can not be
contained in me; verily there is nothing in me, that is able to sustain thee.
Take pity of me, loast I despair of thy mercy, that by despairing of my
self, I may find comfort in thee. And albeit I have done that, for which
thou may justly condemn me, yet thou have not lost thy accustomed property
of showing mercy and pity. Thou o Lord, do not desire the death of
sinners, neither do thou take pleasure in the perdition of those that die*
nay rather that those that were dead might (...), thou thy self have died,
and thy death has been the death of that death that was due to sinners. And
if thou dying, they have ^iued, gra^nt o Lord (I beseech thee) that thou
living, I may not die Let thy heavenly hand help me, and deliver me from the
hands of those that hate me, l^ast they insult, and rejoice over me, saying,
we have deuouted him.

How is it possible (o good Jesus) that ever any one can despai^e of thy
mercy, who when we were thine enemies, have redeemed us with thy precious
blood, and have reconciled us to God? Behold o Lord, protected with the
shadow of thy mercy. I run (craving pardon) to the throne of thy glory,
calling and knocking, until thou take pity of me. For if thou have called us
to pardon, even when we did not seek it, by how much more shall we obtain
pardon, if we ask it? Remember not thy justice (o most sweet Jesus) toward
me a sinner but be mindeful of thy meeknes toward me thy creature. Remember
not thine anger toward me guilty, but be mindful of thy mercy, toward me
in misery. Forgett my pride, provoking thee to displeasure, and weigh my
wretchedness, imploring thy favor. For what does thy sacred name Jesus
signify, saving only a Savior? Wherefore, o Savior Jesus, be thou my
succoure and protection, and say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.

I do presume very much of thy divine bounty, because thou thy self do
teach us to ask, seek, and knock at the door of thy mercy. Wherefore I do
ask, seek and knock at thy door, as by thy words thou have admonished me to
do. Thou therefore, o Lord, that willest me to ask, grant that I may receive.
Thou that do counsel me to seek, grant me likewise to find Thou that do
teach me to knock, open unto me knockinge at the door of thy mercy. Recover me
being diseased, repair me being crased, raise me being dead.

Vouchsafe likewise so to direct and govern all my senses, thoughts, and
actions in that which is pleasing unto thee, that from hence forth I may
faithfully serve thee, I may live and give my self wholly unto thee. I know,
o Lord, that by reason thou have made me, I do owe my self unto thee, and by
reason thou have redeemed me, and have been made man for me, I do owe (if I
had it to give thee) much more then my self unto thee, by how much greater then
me thou art, who have given thy self for me. Behold I hau nothing else to give
thee, neither can I give thee this without thee: take me therefore and draw me
unto thee, that I may be thine by imitation and affection, like as I am by
condition, and creation. Who live and raignest world without end. Amen.

A profitable Prayer. CHAPT. XL.
O Lord God almighty, who art Trinity in unity, who art always in all
things, and were before all things, and wilt be in all things everlastingly,
one blessed God during all eternity. To thee (this day and all the days of my
life) I commend my soul, my body, my seeing, hearing, taste, smelling and
touching, all my cogitations, affections, words, and actions; all things
that I have without and within me: my sense, and understanding, my memory,
faith, and belief, and my constancy in well doing: all these I commend into
the hands of thy powerful protection, to the end, that all the nights and
days, hours and moments of my life, thou will vouchsafe to preserve them.

Hear me, o sacred Trinity, and preserve me from all evil, from all
scandal, from all offense mortal, from all the deceiptes and vexations of the
devil, and of mine ennimies visible and invisible, by the prayers of the
Patriarchs, by the meritts of the Prophets, by the suffrages of the Apostles,
by the constancy of Martyrs, by the faith of Co^fessors, by the chastity of
Virgins, and by the intercession of al those Saints and holy men, that have
pleased and faithfully served thee since the world began, root out of my
heart all vain glorious ostentation, and increase in me the spirit of
compunction, appease my pride, and make perfect my humility. Stir me up to
tears and contrition, and mollify my heart being as hard as a stone.

Deliver me, o Lord, and my soul from all the snares of my ghostly enemy,
and preserve me in the performance of that, which is most pleasing unto thee.
Teach me to do thy will, o Lord, because thou art my God. Give me (o Lord) a
perfect sense and intelligence, wher^by I may be able to know and acknowledge
thy maruailous great kindness. Grant that my petitions may be such, as that
they may be pleasing to thee, and profitable to my self. ^raunt me tears
proceeding from my whole affection, which may be able to dissolve the bands of
my sins.

Hear me, o my Lord and my God. Hear me, o light of mine eyes. Hear what I
demand, and grant that thou may hear what I demand. If thou despise
me, I shall perish and be consumed, if thou respect me, I shall be received. If
thou examine my righteousness, I shall be found to be as a dead man, stinking
through rottennes: but if thou behold me with the eye of thy mercy, thou will thereby raise me (being through sin like a corrupt carkase) from the
sepulcher of mine iniquity. Whatsoever o Lord thou hate in me, expel and
^oote out of me, and plant in me the spirit of chastity and continency, to
the end that whatsoever I shall demand of thee, in my demand I may not
offend thee.

Take from me that which is hurtful, and give me that which is profitable.
Give me a medicine o Lord, by which the soars of my soul may be healed.
Bellowe upon me, o Lord, thy fear, compunction of heart, humility of mind,
and a conscience free from all sin. Grant me grace o Lord, that I may
alwares be able to live in charity with my brethren, not forgetting mine own
sins, not prying into those of other men. Pardon my soul, Pardon my sins,
Pardon mine offenses, Pardon mine abominations. Visit me being weakened, cure
me being diseased, refresh me being wea^ied, raise me being dead.

Give me (o Lord) a heart, that may fear thee, a mind that may love thee, a
sense that may conceive thee, ears, that may hear thee, eyes, that may see
thee. Take pity (o God) take pity of me, and behold me from the sacred
seat^ of thy sacred majesty, and illuminate the darkness of my harre with the
bright beams of thy light. Give me (o Lord) discretion to be able to discern
between good and cuill, and endue me with an understanding, that is always
watchful. I humbly crave pardon of all my sins, I humbly crave it o Lord) of
thee, from whom, and by whom, I hope to findefauoure in time of necessity.

O Marie mother of God, mother of Jesus Christ our Lord, thou sacred and
unspotted virgin, vouchsafe to make intercession for me unto him, who made thee
a worthy temple for himself to dwell in. O S. Michael, S. Gabriel, S. Raphael,
o holy quires of Angels, and Archangells, of Patriarchs and prophets, of
Apostles and Evangelists, of Martyrs and Confessors, of Priests, and Levites,
of Monks and Virgins, and of all such as have lived righteously, I presume to
beleeche you (even for his sake, by whom you have been elected, and by whose
contemplation, you are she much delighted) that you will be pleased to pray for
me a poor sinner unto him our God, that I may be delivered from the furious
^awes of the infernal feinde, and from that death, which shall never have end.
Vouchsafe o Lord according to thy meekenes and unspeakable mercy, to make me
partaker of eternal felicity.

Grant (o Lord Jesus) that Priests may live in concord and amity, and that
Kings and Princes, ruling as they ought to do, may be united in peace and
tranquillity. I humbly crave grace (o Lord) for the whole Catholic Church
for men and women, for Religious persons, and for secular people, for all
Christian magistrates, and for all that believe in thee, and labor for thy
holy love, that they may persevere in doing well, all the days of their lives.
Grant o Lord and king eternal to Virgins, chastity; to Religious persons
that have dedicated themselves unto thee, the gift of continency; to married
folks, holiness: to such as are truly sorrowful for their sins,
forgiveness; to widows and orphans succor, protection to those that are
poor; to pilgrims a safe return; comfort, to such as mourn; to the
faithful departed, the repose of heaven, to mariners and such as sail on the
sea, their desired port or haven; to those that have attained to perfection,
grace to persevere; to beginners and proficients in virtue grace to do better;
to sinners and to such as offend (as to me poor wretch) that they may
speedily amend.

O most mild and merciful Lord and Savior, the son of the living God, the
worlds redeemer, amongst all men, and in all things, I confess my self to
be a miserable sinner; nevertheless I beseech thee most sweet and sovereign
father, that thou will not cast me as an abject out of thy favor. Yea rather o
Lord, thou King of Kings, who have determined and decreede the length of each
man's life, grant me a devout desire to amend mine; Stir up my sluggishe
soul, to the end that at all times, and in all things, it may seek, desire,
love, and fear thee, who in all places art three and one, and putt in practice
that which is pleasing unto thee.

Especially I beseech thee, o holy father who art blessed and glorious ^or
ever, that thou will mercifully preserve all those that in their prayers, are
mindful of me, and have commended themselves to mine, albeit little worth and
of noe valewe: those likewise that have showed toward me, any deed of
charity or pity, or are joined to me in blood and affinity, as well those
that are dead, as those that yet live in this mortal body, to the end (that
thou guiding and assisting them) they may not perish everlastingly. In
general I beseech thee, o Lord, to aid and succoure all Christians that are
yet living, and on those that are dead, to bestow absolution, and life
everlasting.

Finally (o Lord) I most humbly and heartily beseech thee, (who art (...) and
(...) the beginning and the ending) that when the time is come that I must die,
thou will be a mild and merciful judge, and a perpetual protector to me
against the accusations and snares of the devil my ancient adversary,
admitting me, for ever into the societ^e of the holy Angels, and of all thy
Saints in thy heavenly city, where thou art blessed and praised during all
eternity. Amen.

A devout Prayer in memory of Christ's passion. CHAPT. XLI.
O Lord Jesus Christ, my redemption, mercy and salvation, I praise thee, and
give thee thanks, albeit far inferior to thy benefits, albeit wholly void
of devotion and fervor, albeit lean and without the desired fatnes of that
most sweet affection, which thou do require, nevertheless my soul does
render thee thanks such as they are, which although they are not such as I
know I am bound to offer, yet they are according to my best endeavor. O hope
of my heart, o strength of my soul, may it please thy omnipotent worthiness to
accomplish, what my wonderful great weakness does attempt to perform,
because thou art my life, and the scope of mine intention. And albeit I have
not hitherto deserved to love thee so much as I know is due, yet at least I
desire to love thee, so much as I ought to do.

Thou see my conscience o my light, for that my whole desire (o Lord) is in
thy sight, and whatsoever my conscience does attempt to do that is praise
worthy, I acknowledge that it proceeds wholly from thee. If that (o Lord) be
good which thou do inspire, (yea it is good indeed, because it is to love
thee) grant that I may do that, which thou do cause me to desire. Grant
that I may love thee, as much as thou do require.

Behold I offer thee praises and thanksgiving, let not this gift of thine
be unprofitable unto me (o Lord) which thou have begun, and grant me that,
which thou have caused me to desire, by preventing me with thy gracious
inspiration. Transform (most sweet Savior) my repiditie, into a most fervent
love of thee. For the only things that I desire to attain unto (most loving
Lord) by this my prayer and memory of thy passion, is that I may be able to
love thee with a most ardent affection.

Thy goodness (o Lord) has created me, thy mercy after my creation has
cleansed me from original sin, thy patience after baptism has hitherto
sustained nourished, and expected me, being defiled with many other sins.
Thou, o good Lord, do expect when I will grow better: and my soul (that it
may be able to do penance and to iiue well) does expect the inspiration of
thy gracious favor.

O my God, who have created me, who do patiently sustain, and lovingly
maintain me, I hunger and thirst after thee, I desire, sighe, and covet to
come to thee. And as a poor distressed child deprived of the presence of his
tender hearted father, does with sighs and sobbes incessantlye embrace in his
heart the image and semblance of his favor: so fares it with me, as often
as I call to mind thy bitter Passion (which albeit it be not as much as I
ought, yet it is as much as I am able (when I call to mind likewise the
buffetts and whipps by thee sustained, the greiuous wounds by thee endured,
when I remember in what cruel manner thou have been crucified, and killed, in
what manner thou have (by thy dear freindes) been embaulmed and buried; as
often likewise as thy glorious Resurrection, and and admirable Ascension, do
occure to mine imagination.

All these things I believe most firmly, lamenting with tears, the
calamities of my exile in this vale of misery: my only hope is the comfort
of thy coming, my chief desire is to behold thee face to face in thy
heavenly habitation. I cannot but greiue, for that I have not scene the Lord of
Angels, debasing himself to converse and live amongst men, that by that
means he might exalt men to Angelical conversation, when God did die who was
offended, that man might live, who had offended: I cannot but greiue, for that
I have not deserved to be present, and to be astonished through admiration of a
work of so wonderful and unspeakable compassion.

How is it, o my soul. that the sword of most sharp sorrow does not pierce
thee to the heart, seeing thou could not be present to see the side of thy
Savior wounded with a spear, seeing thou could not be present to see the
feet and hands of thy maker to be fastened with nails, nor the blood of thy
redeemer to be spilt on the ground in that dreadefull manner? Why art thou not
drunk with the bitterness of tears, seeing he was made to drink of the
bitterness of gall? Why do thou not take compassion of the most chaste Virgin
Marie, his most worthy mother, and thy most worthy Lady?

O my most merciful Lady, what fountains of tears may I affirm to have
flowed from thy most chaste eyes, when thou beheldst thy only son (albeit
free from all offense) to be bound, whipped, and slain in thy presence? In what
mournful manner may I imagine thy doleful countenance at that time to be
blubbered all over with weeping, when thou beheldst this thy innocent son,
thy God and thy Lord to be stretched out upon the cross, and that sacred
flesh framed of thy flesh, to be by those bloody bouche^s so cruelly rent
in pieces. With what unspeakable grief may I well think thy poor heart at
that time to be tormented, when thou did hear those words pronounced: Woman
behold thy son; And the disciple: Behold thy mother? When thou did accept
the disciple instead of his master, and the servant in lieue of his Lord?

O that I had been worthy with S. Joseph to have taken my Lord down from the
Cross, to have embaulmed and buried him, to have followed or accompanied him
to his sepulcher, that I might have do^ne some little service at so great a
funeral. O that I had with the three blessed Mary's, been stricken into
amazednes through the bright vision of the Angels, and had heard news of our
Lords Resurrection* news of my consolation, news so much expected, and
desired. O that I had heard (I say) from the mouth of the Angel: do you not
fear, you seek Jesus, that was crucified, he is not here.

O most courteous, most sweet, and most gracious Jesus, when will thou cure me
of my sorrow and pensiuenes, for that I have not seen the incorruption of of
thy blessed flesh? For that I have not kissed the places where thou were
wounded, the places which the na^les had pei^ced? For that I have not bedewed
with tears of joy, the scarrs of thy true body? O admirable, inestimable and
incomparable Lord and Savior, when will thou comfort and cure me of the
grief which I endure? Because my sorrow will never cease to afflict me, as
long as I liuet o Lord) separated from thee.

Take pity of me, o Lord, take pity of my soul Thou have departed, o Lord,
without bidding me farewell. Beginning to mount up into heaven, thou have
blessed thy freindes there assembled, and I was not present to see it. Lifting
up thy hands, thou have been received by a cloud into heaven, and I was not
present to behold it. The Angels have promised that thou would return,
and I did not hear it.

What shall I say? What shall I do? Whither shall I go? Where shall I seek
him* and when shall I find him? Of whom shall I ask for him? Who will tell my
beloved, how much I love him? The delight of my heart is changed into
desolation, my laughter in lame^tation. My flesh and my heart, have failed me,
o God of my heart, and mine inheritance everlastingly. My soul has refused
all other comfort and consolation (o God my sweet delight) saving that which
proceeds from thee alone. For what have I in heaven, or what do I desire
upon earth saving thee alone? I covet after thee, my trust is in thee, I seek
after thee. My heart has said to thee: I have sought thy face, thy face (o
Lord) will I seek, turn not a way thy face from me.

O most gracious lover of men, thou art the protector of the poor, thou art a
friend to such as are deprived of father and mother. O most assured Advocate,
take pity of me a poor distressed orphant, I am as a poor fatherless
child, and my soul is as a woman bereaved of her husband. Vouchsafe
graciously to behold the tears of my distressed orphancie and widowhoode,
which I offer unto thee, until thou return, o my God.

May it please thee therefore, may it please thee, o Lord, to manifest thy self
to me, and I shall be comforted. Grant that I may see thee, and I shall
obtain what I desire. Make manifest thy glory, and my joy will be accomplished.
My soul has thirsted after thee, so has likewise my flesh exceedingly. My
soul has thirsted after God the living fountain, when shall I come, and be
presented before the face of my Lord? When will thou come o my comforter, for
whom I will wish, and earnestly wait for?

O that I might once behold my delight which I do so much desire! O how
truly shall I be satisfied, when thy glory shall appear, which I do greatly
hunger to behold? When shall I become drunk through the plenty of thy
heavenly habitation, for which I sighe so often? When will thou make me to
drink of the river of thy pleasure, which I so gre^tely thirst and desire? In
the interim o Lord, let my tears be my continual food, until it be said
unto me: Behold thy God; until it be said unto my soul: Behold thy
bridegroom. In the interim* feed me with my sobbs and weepinges, nourishe me
with my sorrows and lamentations. Peradventure my redeemer will come and visit
me, because he is full of mercy: yea, he will not be long in coming, because
he is full of pity: To him be glory during all eternity* Amen.

The end of the Meditations of S. Augustine.
A TABLE OF THE Meditations of S. Augustine, Bishop of Hyppon.
A Prayer unto almighty God for the amendment of our life and manners. Chapt.
I. Man's acknowledging his misery, his commendation likewise of Gods mercy,
Chapt. II. Man's complainte* who for his disobedience is not heard of God.
Chapt. III. The dread of the judge coming to judgment. Chapt. IV. The healpe
of God the Father is desired, by the mentts of God the son. Chapt. V. H^ere
man does represent to God the Father, the passion of his son, Chapt. VI.
Here man does acknowledge himself to have been the cause of Christ's passion,
Chapt. VII. Here man for his reconciliation does propose to God the Father,
the passion of his son, Chapt. VIII. A Prayer to desire the assistance of the
holy Ghost, Chapt. IX. A Prayer for one serving God, and thinking humbly of
himself* Chapt X. A Prayer to the holy Trinity* Chapt. XI. The acknowledging
of God almighty, and of his Majesty, Chapt. XII. After what manner it pleased
God the Father to succoure mankind: of the incarnation of the divine Word,
and thanks for the same, Chapt. XIII. Of the confidence which a Christian soul
ought to have in lesus Christ, and in his Passion* Chapt. XIV. Of the
surpassing great charity of the eternal Father toward mankind, Chapt. XV.
Of the two-folde nature of Christ, who pittieth us, and prays for us, Chapt.
XVI. Of the great thanks giving, which man ought to render to God for the
benefit of his redemption* Chapt. XVII. A devout Prayer to our Savior Jesus
Christ, Chapt. XVIII. The distinction and difference between that wisdom
which is Gods house, and that which is divine, Chapt. XIX. Here man desires
that this house of God will likewise pr^y for him, Chap. XX. Of the manifold
miseries, with which man's life is replenished, Chapt. XXI. Of the happiness of
that life, which God has prepared for those that love him, Chapt. XXII. Of the
happiness of a holy soul departing out of this world* Chapt. XXIII. A Prayer
to the Saints to succoure us in our necessities* Chapt. XXIV. The souls
desire to attain to the heavenly City Jerusalem Chapt. XXV. A hymn of the
glory of Paradise composed by the blessed S. Peter Damian Cardinal of Ostia,
monk of the holy order of S. Benne^, taken out of the sayings of S. Augustine,
Chapt XXVI. The continual praise of the soul through the contemplation of
God. Chapt* XXVII. What it is after a certain manner to see and comprehend
God: and what opinion we ought to have of him, Chapt. XXVIII. A Prayer showing
the manifold properties, and attributes of God, Chapt. XXIX. Of the unity and
plurality of persons in God, Chapt XXX. A Prayer to the sacred Trinity.
Chapt. XXXI. That God is the true and sovereign life, Chapt. XXXII. The
praises of Angels and men, Chapt. XXXIII. Here man does lament, for that when
he thinks of God, he is not moved to compunction, seeing the very Angels
tremble and quake, when they behold him* Chapt. XXXIV. A Prayer greatly
moving the heart to devotion, and to the love of God. Chapt. XXXV. A most
devout prayer demanding grace of God to praise him as we ought, Chapt XXXVI.
A Prayer greatly stirring up the mind to compunction, if it be said in
silence with attention* Chapt. XXXVII. A Prayer to be said in time of
tribulation, Chapt. XXXVIII. A very devout prayer to God the son, Chapt
XXXIX. A profitable Prayer* Chapt. XL. A devout Prayer in memory of Christ's
passion, Chapt. XLI.
FINIS.
THE BOOK OF S. AVGVSTIN, BISHOPP OF HYPPON,

Commonly called his Soliloquies, that is, the secret discourses and
conferences of his soul with God.

AT S. OMERS, For JOHN HEIGHAM. Anno 1624.

THE BOOK OF S. AVGVSTIN, BISHOPP OF HYPPON.
Commonly called his Soliloquies* that is* the secret discourses and
conferences of his soul with God.
Of the unspeakable sweetness of God. CHAPT. I.
O Lord the strength of my soul, grant me grace (I beseech thee) that like as
thou know me* I may know thee. O my comforter, manifest thy self unto me.
O light of mine eyes, grant that I may see thee. Come o joy of my spirit. Let
me see thee, o delight of my heart. O life of my soul, give me grace to love
thee. O Lord my God my chief delight, and sweetest solace, vouchsafe to
appear unto me, for thou art my life, and all the glory of my soul. O desire
of my heart, let me find thee. O love of my soul, let me touch thee, O
heavenly bridegroom my chief delight both without and within me, let me
embrace thee. Let me possess thee, o everlasting bliss, let me possess thee
in the middst of my hatte, blessed life, and sovereign sweetness of my soul.
Let me love thee, o Lord my fortitude, my force, my refuge and my deliverer Let
me love thee o my God, my helper* my strong fortress* and my sw^ete hope in
all time of distress. Let me embrace thee the only true good* let me ^nioy
thee the only best thing.

Open mine ears by virtue of thy word, more peircing the^ a two edged sword,
to the end I may hear thy voice Let the greatness of thy voice be heard as a
thunder from above; Let the sea roar and the fulness thereof* let the earth be
moved, and all things in them contained. Enlighten mine eyes* o
incomprehensible light, send forth thy lightning, and dazell the^, that they
may not behold vanity. Encre^se thy lightning* and dazell and trouble them in
that manner, as that fountains of water may appear, and the foundations of
the whole world may be discovered.

O light invisible, give me that sight, that may see thee. O sauoure of life,
create in me a new smell, which may make me run after thee, in the odoure of
thy ointments. Cure my taste, that it may taste, know and discern, how grea^e
the multitude of thy sweetness is, o Lord, which thou have kept in store for
the^ that are replenished with thy love. Give me a heart (o Lord) that may
think on thee: a mind, that may love thee: a memory, that may muse on thee:
an understanding that may know thee: a will, that may always be strongly
united to thee, the chiefest and most delightful good. Grant that I may
always wisely and discreetely love thee.

O life, to whom all things live, that life which gives me life: that life
which is my life: that life, by which I live, without which I die; that life,
by which I am raised and revived, without which I perish and am consumed: that
life, by which I am comforted, without which I am afflicted O living life,
sweet, and worthy to be beloved, always to be remembered, tell me (I pray
thee) where art thou? Where may I find thee, to the end I may leave my self,
and live in thee? Be near unto me in my mind, near in my heart, near i^ my
mouth, near in my hearing* near to succoure me in time of affliction:
because I languishe through thy love: because I die, whenever I am without
thee, and am raised again to life by thinking on thee. Thy smell recreateth
me, thy remembrance heals me. Then shall I be satisfied and never before,
when thy glory (o life of my soul) shall appear.

My soul greatly desires, and almost faints, through the remembrance of
thee, when shall I come (o my delight) and be presented before thee? Why do
thou hide away thy face, o my joy, by which I rejoice? Where art thou hidden o
beautiful Lord, Whom I so much desire? I smell the sweet sauoure of thee; I
live, and am delighted in thee, and yet I do not see thee. I hear thy voice
and am revived. But why do thou hide thy face from me?

Peradventure thou will say: Man cannot see me and live. Let me therefore die o
Lord, that I may see thee, let me see thee that I may die to the world. I do
not desire to live, but to die, for that my desire is to be dissolved, and to
be with Christ. I desire to die, that I may see Christ; I refuse to liu^, to
the end I may live with Christ. O Lord Jesus receive my spirit, o my life
receive my soul. O my delight draw my heart unto thee. O my delightful
food, let me feed on thee. O my head, vouchsafe to direct me, o light of
mine eyes, enlighten me. O my melodious music, tune and order me. O my sweet
smell, revive me. O divine Word, recreate me. O my praise, make glad the
soul of thy servant Enter into it, o my joy, that it may rejoice in thee.
Enter into it, o sovereign sweetness, that it may taste and sauoure those
things, that are sweet. O eternal light, shine upon it* that it may
understand, know and love thee. For this i^ the cause, why it does not love
thee (if it does not love thee) because it does not know thee: and the cause
why it does not know thee, is for that it does not understand thee* And the
cause, why it does not understand thee, is for that it does not comprehend
thy light, and the light shines in darkness, and the darkn^s comprehends it
not.

O light of my m^nde, o bright truth, o true charity, who enlightnest every
man coming into this wor^d^e, coming I say into the wor'd, but not louinge
the world, because he that loves the world, becomes the ennimy of God.
Expel the darkness which covers the face of the depth of my mind, that by
understanding, it may see thee; that by saying, it may know thee, and by
knowing, may love thee* For whosoever knows thee, loves thee, and forgets
himself: he loves thee more then himself: he leaves himself and comes to
thee, that he may be delighted in thee.

Hence it proceeds o Lord, that I do not love thee so much as I ought,
because I do not perfectly know thee, but because I know thee but a little,
I love thee but a little, and because I love thee but a little* I am but a
little delighted in thee. Leaving thee therefore the true internal joy by
loving things external, aslong as I want thee only, I seek after false
freindshipps in those things that are without me. And by this means I have
applied my heart to things that are vain, which with all affection and love I
ought to have bestowed on thee alone. And so by loving vanity, I my self am
become vain.

Hence it proceeds likewise o Lord, that I do not rejoice in thee, neither
do I adhere to thee. Because I delight in things temporal, thou in things
spiritual, my whole mind, thoughts and words are entangled in things
transitory, but thou o Lord, dwell in things that endure for all
eternity, thou thy self being eternity. Thy habitation is in heaven, mine on
the earth. Thou love those things that are above, I those that are here
beneathe. Thou those that are heavenly* I those that are earthly* And when will
these things agree together, that are so opposite one to an other?

Of the misery and frailty of man. CHAPT. II.
Wretch that I am, when will my crowkednes be made correspondent to thy
righteousness? Thou o Lord love solitarines, I to be in the company of
others. Thou love silence, and I talkinge and discourse. Thou love verity*
and I vanity. Thou love cleanlines, and I follow mine own filthiness.

What need I say more o Lord? Thou art truly good, I wicked. Thou art
righteous, I unrighteous: thou art holy, I wretched* thou arti ust, I unjust;
thou art light* and I am blind: thou art life, and I am dead* Thou art
phisique, and I am sick. Thou art mirthe, and I am melancholy* Thou art the
supreme verity, and I am altogether vanity, like as every man living. What
shall I then say o my Creator? Hear me o Creator. I am thy creature, I have
been forelorne, and gone astray; I am thy creature, and am like to die. I am
of thy making, and am come to nothing I am a piece of earth framed by thee.

Thy hands o Lord have made me and fashioned me: those hands* I say* which
with nails were fastened to the cross for me. Look I beseech thee o Lord,
upon the wounds of thy hands, and contemn not me the work of thy hands.
Behold o Lord my God, thou have written me in thy hands, read that
handewriting, and save me. Behold I sigh to thee being thy creature, recreate
me being my Creator. Behold, I (whom thou have made) do cry unto thee, thou
that art life, revive me. Behold I look toward thee being a piece of clay
framed by thee; thou art my maker, repair me.

Pardon me o Lord, for that the days of my life are short, and as it were
nothing. What is man, that he durst speak to God that made him? Pardon me
talking unto thee. Pardon thy servant presuming to speak unto so great a
Lord. Necessi^ie has noe law. My grief compels me to speak: the mise^ie
which I sustain constrains me to cry unto the. Being therefore sick, I
cry unto the physician* being blind, I hasten unto the ^ight: being dead, I
sighe after life. Thou art my physician o Jesus of Nazareth, thou art my light,
thou art my life. O Son of David take pity upon me, o fountain of mercy,
be merciful unto me. Hear what thy sick patient says unto thee. O light*
which passest by, expect him that is blind: lend him thy hand, that he may
come unto thee, and in thy light may see light. O living life, recall me that
am dead, to life.

What am I, that do speak unto thee? Woe be to me o Lord, pardon me o Lord I
am an unhappy man; A man (I say) borne of a woman, living but a short time,
replenished with many miseries: a man (I say) become like unto vanity,
compared and very well likened unto senseless brute beasts. Again, what am
I? An obscure bottomless pit, a clodd of clay, the son of anger, and
perdition: begotten in filthiness, living in wretchedness, and being to die in
great anguish and distress.

O wretch, what am I? O miserable man* what shall I be? A vessel of ordure and
filthiness, a receptacle of rottennes, full of stenche and loathsomenes: blind,
needy, naked, subject to manifold necessities; subject to misery and
mortality, knowing neither my beginning, nor my dyinge day. Whose days and
life pass and vanish away as the shadow of the Moon; And as the blossoms of
a tree grow and suddenly wither away, so does the life of man now flowrishe,
and forthwith grow to decay. My life (I say) is a life frail and brittle, a
life, which by how much the more it increases, by so much the more it
decreaseth: by how much the more it hastneth on, by so much the more it
draws near to death, a life deceiptful, like unto a shadow.

One while I am merry and glad, and presently after sorrowefull and sad.
Sometime sound, and then suddenly sick, now a live, and in a short time
after I shall be dead; sometimes I make a show as if I were happy, yet still in
misery; sometimes I laughe, and suddenly after I lament. And all things are
so subject to mutation, as that nothing can be truly said to remain stable
in the same state, one only hour of time. Sometimes fear afflicts us, at
other times some sudden chance affrighteth us: sometimes hunger, vexes us, at
other times thirst tormenteth us: sometimes heat parcheth us, at other times
cold pincheth us: sometimes sickness; molesteth us, at other times sadness
d^i^cteth us.

After these follows death before he is expected, bereauing wretched men by
a thousand means daily of their lives, and taking them on a sudden before
they be prepared. One dies of a fever, an other through sorrow, one
faints and falls down dead through hunger, an other through thirst: one
is drowned, an other hanged: one is burned, an other with the teethe of wild
beasts, is torn in pceces and devoured. One is slain with the sword, an
other poisoned, an other dies being by some soddaine accident only
affrighted. And yet a greater misery then all these, is, that albeit nothing
is more certain then death, yet man knows not the time of his death; and
when he thinks to stand most firm, he is overthrown, and all his hopes
come to nothing. Because man knows not when, nor where, nor how he shall
die, although it be a thing assured, that he must die.

Behold o Lord how great man's misery is, in which I am, and yet I am void
of fear: Behold how great the calamity is, which I sustain, and yet I am
void of sorrow, and do not cry to thee. I will cry unto thee, o Lord,
before I pass out of this life, to the end my passage may be nothing else, but
to remain perpetually with thee. I will therefore make known and discover my
wretchedness. I will confess and will not be ashamed to disclose my vildenes.
Help me, o my force, by whom I am vphelde; succoure me o my strength, by whom
I sustained; come o light, by which I see; appear o glory, by which I
rejoice, apppeare o life, in which I may live, eternally blessed, cuen thou o
Lord my God.

Of the admirable light of God. CHAPT. III.
O Light, which old Tobias being blind, did see, when he taught his son the
way of life. That light, which Isaac (albeit his corporal eyes failled him)
saw within him, when outwardlye he foretold to this son things that were
to come. That invisible light (I say) that seethe plainly the unspeakable
depthe of man's heart. That light which lacob did see, when he prophesied of
fu^u^e events to his children, according to that, which thou did inwardly
dictate unto him Behold (o Lord) darkness does ouershadowe the face of the
bottomless depth of my mind, thou art light. Behold an obscure mist does
ouerwhelme the waters of my heart thou art the truth.

O Word, by which all things were made, and without which was made nothing.
That Word, which is before all things, and before which, there was nothing.
That Word, which governs all things, without which all things are nothing
That Word, which in the beginning have said; Let light be made, and it was
done. Say likewise to me, let light be made, and let it be done, and let me
see the light, and know whatsoever is not light, because without thee, darkness
will be unto me as light, and light as darkness. And so without thy light
there is noe verity; there is nothing else but error and vanity: there is
confusion, and noe discretion, there is ignorance, and noe knowledge;
blindenes, and noe seeing: going astray, and noe walking in the right way:
death, and noe life.

Of the mortality of man's nature. CHAPT. IV.
Behold o Lord, where light is absent, there death is present: nay death is
not there present, because death is meerelie nothing. For by death we tend
to nothing, whilst by sin we fear to do nothing. And truly o Lord, this
justly happens unto us, for we receive according to our actions, whiles (like
a flowinge river) we run, and come to nothing: because without thee, there
is made nothing, and we by doing nothing, come to be nothing: For without thee
we are nothing, by whom all things are made, without whom there is made
nothing.

O Lord God, thou divine Word, by whom all things are made, without who^ is
made nothing. Woe is me poor wretch so often blinded and deprived of sight,
for that I want thee, being the true light. Woe is me poor wretch so often
wounded, for that I want thee the sovereign salve, by which we are cured. Woe
is me poor wretch so often deceived, for that I want thee, being the truth
by which we are directed. Woe is me poor wretch so often going astray, for
that I want thee, who art the true way. Woe is me poor wretch so often
dead, for that I want thee, who art the life by who^ we are revived. Woe is me
poor wretch so often brought to nothing, because thou art the divine Word,
by whom all things are made, and I want thee, without whom nothing is made.

O Lord God, thou divine Word, who art the light, by whom light was made, who
art the way, the truth and the life, in whom there is nether darkness, error,
vanity, nor death. Thou art the light, without which darkness blinds us; thou
art the way, without which error deceives us; thou art the verity, without
which vanity allureth and deludeth us, thou art the life, without which death
vanquisheth us. Say the word (o Lord) let light be made, that I may see the
light, and eschew darkness; that I may see the way, and shun error; that I
may see the verity, and auoid^ vanity; that I may see life, and escape death.

Enlighten me o Lord and my light, my light and salvation, whom I will fear:
my Lord, whom I will praise: my God, whom I will honor: my Father, whom I will
love; my bridegroom, to whom and for whom only I will live. Enlighten me o
Lord and my light, enlighten me (I say) thy poor blind servant, sitting in
darkness and in the shadow of death, and guide my feet into the way of peace,
by which I may enter into the place of thy glorious tabernacle, even into the
house of God, with words of exultation and confession. For true confession is
the way, by which we arrive unto thee the true way, by which we leave wandering
out of the true way, and return, unto thee the true way, even the true way of
life.

What it is to become nothing. CHAPT. V.
I will therefore make known and confess my misery unto thee, o father Lord
of heaven and earth. Because I am become wretched, and as one turned to
nothing, and I knew it not: because I wanted thee, who art the truth. My
sins wounded me, and I felt it not, because I wanted thee, that art my life.
They brought me to nothing, because I wanted thee, who art the Word, by whom
all things are made, without whom nothing is made; Being therefore without
thee, I became nothing, because that is nothing, that brings us to nothing.
All things that were made, were made by thy Word: But how were they made? God
beheld all things he had made, and they were exceeding good. All things
therefore that are made, are made by the Word, and all things that are made by
the Word, are exceeding good. Why are they good? Because all things are made
by the Word, and without it is made nothing, for that there is nothing good,
which proceeds not from God the supreme good.

Contrary wise, that is evil, which contains in it self noe good, and this
evil is a mere nothing, for that evil is nothing else, but the want of good,
even as blindenes is nothing else, but the want of sight Evil therefore is a
mere nothing, because it is made without the Word, without which, there is
made nothing. And that is to be accounted evil, which wants that good, by
which all things whasoeuer are made. But those things that are not, are not
made by him, and consequently they are nothing. This therefore is the cause,
why those things are evil, which are not made, because all things,
whatsoever are made, are made by the Word, and all things that are made by
the Word, are good. And sithence all things that are made, are made by the
Word, those things, that are evil, are not made by him.

It remains therefore, that all things, that are not made, are not good,
because all things, that are made, are good: whence it follows, that those
things are evil, which are not made, and consequently are nothing, because
without the Word there is made nothing. Evil therefore is nothing, because it
is not made. What is it then, if it be not made? Surely nothing else but the
privation, and want of that good, by which good is made. Wherefore to be without
the Word is evil, which cannot properly be fared to be, because without the
Word there is nothing.

But what is it to be separated from the Word? If you desire to know this,
hear first what the Word is. The divine word says of himself, I am the
way, the truth, and the life. To be separated therefore from the Word, is to be
without the way, the truth, and the life, and therefore to be without him, is to
be nothing, and consequentlye evil, because it is separated from the Word, by
which all things were made exceeding good. To be separated therefore from the
Word, by which all things were made, is nothing else, but to cease to be, and
return to nothing, because without the word there is nothing; wherefore as
often as thou do swerve from that which is good, thou do separate thy self
from the Word (which is the true good) and so thou becommest nothing, because
thou art without the Word, without which there is made nothing.

Behold (o Lord) thou have enlightened me, to the end, I might behold thee, by
which means* I have seen and known my self: being now assured, that as
often as I have been separated from thee, I have become nothing, because I have
forgotten thee the only true good, and so by that means have become evil.
Poor wretch that I am, how came it to pass, that I did not know ear this
time, that forsaking thee, I became nothing? But why do I demand that
question? For how could I desire to know thee, if I was nothing? We know
full well, that evil is nothing, and that which is nothing has noe being,
that likewise which is not good, has noe being, because it is nothing. If
therefore I was nothing, when I was without thee, I was as nothing, and like
unto an image or idol, which is nothing: which has cares and hears not;
nostrills and smells not, which has eyes, and sees not, which has a mouth,
and speaks not: which has hands, and handeleth not; which has feet and
walks not, and finally has the form and shape of the members of a man,
without the use and feeling of them.

Of the miserable estate of the soul being in sin. CHAPT. VI.
AS long therefore as I was without thee, I was not, for that I was nothing, and
therefore I was blind, deaf, and insensible, because I did neither discern
what was good, not shun that which was evil: neither did I feel the grief
of the wounds which I received, nor see the darkness, in which I lived: and the
reason was, for that I was without thee the true light, enlightening every man
coming into this world. They have wounded me (alas) and I have not greiued;
they have violently drawn me, and I have not felt it: because I was nothing,
for that I was without life, to wit the divine Word, by which were made all
things.

For this cause o Lord, and my light, mine enemies have done to me whatsoever
they would, yea they have stricken and stripped me, they have defiled and
depraved me, they have wounded, and killed me, because I departed from thee,
and became as nothing without thee. Woe is me o Lord and my life, who have made
me, woe is me my light, who have directed me. O Lord my God defender of my
life, take pity of me, and raise me from death for thou art my hope, my
strenght, my force, and my comfort in time of adversity, behold mine
ennimies, and deliver me.

Let those that hate me, fly before me, and let me live in thee by thee. For
they (o Lord) beheld me, and seeing me without thee, they have despised me.
They have divided among them, the garments of virtues, with which thou had
adorned me, they have made as it were their high ^ode way, passing to and fro
over me, and treading me under their feet, they have defiled thy holy temple,
leaving me desolate, and oppressed with grief. I went after them being blind
and naked, and entangled in the ropes of sins: they drew me round about
after them from one sin into an other, and from one filthiness into an other,
and I went (as one driven) before the^, having not the force to withstand them
I was a slave, and slavery was pleasing unto me. I was blind, and blindness
was delightful unto me; I was bound, neither did I abhor my bands; I
thought sour to be sweet, and sweet to be sower. I was wretched and in
misery, and I knew it not:

And the reason was, because I was without the Word without which was made
nothing, by which al things are preserved, and without which all things
return to nothing. For as by him al things were made, and without him was
made nothing: even so by him al things are preserved, that are contained
either in heaven, or in earth, or in the sea, or in the bottomless depthe.
Neither would one part stick to an other in a stone, or in any other thing
created, if they were not preserved by the Word, by which al things were
framed.

Let me therefore stick and adhere to thee o divine Word; for that as often as
I have wandered away from thee, I should have withered away in my self, if
thou (who did first create me) had not recreated me. I have sinned, and
thou have visited me. I have fallen, and thou have raised me. I have been
ignorant, and thou have taught me. I have been blind, and thou have enlightened
me.

Of the manifold benefits of almighty God. CHAPT. VII.
O My God, grant that I unworthy wretch may see, how much I am bound to love
thee. Grant that I may see, how I am bound to praise thee Grant that I may
see, how much I am bound to please thee.

Thunder (o Lord) from above with a great and strong voice, into the
internal care of my heart; teach me and save me, and I will praise thee: who
when I was nothing, have created me; who, when I I was in darkness, have
enlightened me; who, when I was dead, have raised me; who with all manner of
good things from my very youth, have fed and refreshed me; nourishing me with
thy greatest guiftes and graces, being a poor unprofitable worm stinking
through the abomination of mine iniquities.

Open unto me (o key of David) who openest, and noe man shuts against him,
to whom thou openest: who shuts, and noe man opens to him, against whom
thou shuttest: open unto me, the door of thy light, that I may enter in and
see, and know, and with my whole heart confess unto thee, for that thy mercy
toward me is great, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest hell.

O Lord our God, how wonderful and worthy to be praised is thy name in the
whole world! What is man (o Lord) that thou art mindful of him, or the son
of man, that thou visitest him? O Lord the hope of good men, and their town
of defense. O God the life of my soul, by which I live, without which I die. O
light of mine eyes, by which I see, without which I am blind. O joy of mine
heart, and comfort of my soul, grant that I may love thee with all my heart,
and with all my mind, and with all the force and strenght that I have, because
thou have loved me first.

And whence happens this unto me, o Creator of heau^n, earth and of the
bottomless depthe, who need not my goods? Whence happens this unto me,
that thou should in this sort love me? O divine wisdom, who openest the
mouths of those that are dumb. O divine Word, by which all things were
made. Open my mouth, give me words of thanksgiuinge, that I may rehearse all
the benefitts, which thou have bestowed upon me from the beginning.

Behold I confess therefore, to have received my being from thee; because
thou have created me, and have preordained to create me, and to number me
among thy creatures from all eternity, yea from the beginning, and before
thou made any thing, before thou did extend the heavens, before the
bottomeles depthes had their being, before the world was fram d, before the
mountains or hills were founded, before rivers flowed: before thou did make
any of those things, which thou have made by thy word, thou did foresee by
the infallible providence of thy truth, that I should be thy creature,
preordaining so of me by thy divine pleasure.

What has caused thee to do this for me (o most loving Lord) most glorious
God, most merciful Father, most powerful and for ever most pitiful creator?
What meritts of mine, what grace did deserve the same? that it should please
thy divine majesty so graciously to create me?

Thou have created me, when I had noe being, and of nothing thou have made me
something: But what something? Surely not water, nor fire, not a foul, or a
fish, not a serpent, or any brute beast, not a stone, or a peace of timber,
not of those kind of creatures, which have nothing else but their being, no^
of those, which be, and grow only. Not of that sort which be, grow, and
have feeling only; but surpassing all these, it has pleased thee to make me
of the number of those, which be only, for that I am; and of the number of
those, which be, and grow only, for that I am, and do grow; and of the
number of those, which be, do grow, and have feeling, because I am* do
grow, and have feeling, yea thou have created me almost equal to the Angels,
because I have received from thee common with them, the gift of reason, whereby
to know thee.

Nevertheless I have said (almost equal) for that they already have the
happy knowledge of thee, by seeing thee as thou art, but I by hope only.
They, by beholding thee apparantlie face to face. I ob^curelie as it were in a
looking glass: They plainly and perfectly, but I partly only.

Of the future dignity of man. CHAPT. VIII.
WHen that therefore which is perfect is arrived, that which is partly only
shall be disanulled, which will be, when we shall be admitted to behold thy face
apparentlie. What will then hinder us to be almost equal to the Angels? whom
thou (o Lord) at that time wilt crown with a crown of hope, which is adorned
with glory and renown: whom thou with unspeakable favors wilt grace as thy
friends, yea we shall be in all things like, and equal to the Angels. Thy
truth does likewise testify the same, saying; They are equal to the Angels,
and are the sons of God. What are they but the sons of God, if they are
equal to the Angels? They shall without doubt be the sons of God, because
the son of man is become the son of God.

Through this consideration I durst boldlye affirm, that man is not only
almost equal to the Angels, noe not equal only, but higher in dignity and
surpassing the Angels, because man is God, and God is man, not an Angel.
Wherefore I durst auouche, that man is the most excellent of all creatures:
because the Word, which in the beginning was God with God; the Word, by which
God said: let light be made, and light was made, to wit, the Angelical
nature; the Word, by which God in the beginning created all things, the same
Word has become flesh, and dwelt in us, and we have seen the glory of it.
Lo this is the glory, by which I glory, whenever I glory, as I ought. Lo
this is the joy, by which I rejoice, whenever I rejoice as I should, even
thou o Lord my God, the life, and only glory of my soul.

I confess therefore unto thee (o Lord my God) that thou have created me, in a
manner equal to the Angels, in that thou have created me capable of reason:
for that by means of thy divine Word, I am in possibility to become equal
to the Angels, that by means of thy only begotten Word, I may be adopted to
be thy son (o Lord) to be thy son I say, by the means and merits of thy
beloved son lesus Christ, in whom thou have been well pleased, being thy
only son, and hear, and our only Lord and redeemer, enligthner, and
comforter: being our advocate with thee, and the light of our eyes; who is our
life, our Savior, and our only hope, who has loved us more then himself, by
whom we have an assured trust and confidence, and access to come to thee,
because he has given them power to be the sons of God, that believe in his
name.

I will for ever o Lord, praise thy holy name, who by creating me according to
thine own image and likeness, have made me capable of so great glory, as to
be the son of God.

The trees, stones, and all things else whatsoever, that are mou^d, or grow,
in the air, or in the sea, or on the earth, have not this priu^ledge and
prerogative; because thou have not given them power by means of thy Word, to
be the sons of God, for that they are dep^iued of reason, because this power
does depend of the reason, by which we know God. But he has given this power
to men, whom he has created reasonable according to his own image and
likeness. And I (o Lord) like as by thy grace I am a man, so likewise by thy
grace, I am in possibility to be thy son, which is a prerogative which they
cannot attain unto.

Whence proceeds this so great a good unto me o Lord, the most sovereign
truth, and true sovereignty, the origina^l and beginning of all creatures?
What is the cause hereof o Lord, that I should be able to become thy son,
and they cannot? Thou art the cause (o Lord) who remainest for ever, who have
created as well the one as the other. Thou have created both men and beasts,
the stones, and the green grass growing on the ground. There were not any
precedent meritts or precedent grace, because thou have created all things,
being moved there unto by thy only goodness. All creatures before their
creation were equal in meritts, for that they were all void of merits.

What then has caused, thy goodness to be more liberal toward me thy
creature, whom thou have endewed with reason, then toward all others that are
void of the same? Why am not I like unto all them, or all they like unto me,
or I alone like unto them? What merits of mine, what grace or goodness was there
in me to deserve the same? to wit, that thou should make me capable to be
the son of God, which prerogative thou have granted to none of them? Be it
far, o Lord, from mine imagination, that I should think this to proceed
from any merits of mine. Thy only grace and goodness has been the cause of
this, to the end I might be pertaker of the sweetness thereof.

I beseech thee therefore by that grace, by the which thou have created me,
that thou will give me grace, to the end I may be grateful for this grace
received from thee.

Of Gods omnipotent power. CHAPT. IX.
THy omnipotent hand (o God) being still one and the same, has created
Angels in heaven, and worms on the earth, not being more excellent in the
creation of the first, then of the later. For as noe other hand could create
an Angel: so noe other could create a worm. As noe other could create
heaven: so noe other could create the least leaf of a tree. As noe other
could create the body, so noe other could cause so much as one hair of the
head to be either white, or black. But the omnipotent hand of thy majesty
creates all things with a like facility. Neither is it more possible unto it
to create a worm, then an Angel, nor more inpossible to enlarge the heavens
then a leaf: it is not more easy unto it to make a hair, then a body: nor
more hard to lay the foundation of the earth upon the waters, then the
foundation of the waters upon the earth. But all things, whatsoever it
would, it has made (as it would) in heaven, and in earth, in the sea, and
in the bottomeles depthes, making me likewise amongst all other things, even
as it would, could, and knew how.

Veriely thy hand (o Lord) could have made me a stone, or a bird, or a
serpent, or some brute beast; knowing full well how to do it, yet would not,
by reason of thy great goodness. The cause therefore, why I am not a stone, or a
tree, or some brute beast, is, for that thy goodness has otherwise ordained,
neither were there any precedent merits of mine, that might claim the same.

Of the incomprehensible praise of God. CHAPT. X.
WHat has caused thee (o Lord) to be so good and gracious unto me, and how
shall I be able worthily to praise thee? For as thou have made me without me,
according as it has pleased thee, so likewise thou art praised without me,
even as it pleases thee. Thou (o Lord) art thine own praise. Let thy works
praise thee, o Lord, according to the multitude of thy greatenes, albeit thy
praise be incomprehensible. It cannot be conceived in thought, nor expressed
with words, nor perceived by the hearing, because these are transitory and
fleeting, but thy praise is eternal and everlasting.

The thought has his beginning and likewise his ending, the voice yield ^th
forth a sound, and the sound suddenly passes away: the ear hears, and
the hearing quickly cease without making any long stay: but thy praise
endures perpetually.

Who then can worthily praise thee? or what man is able to expr^sse thy praise,
seeing thy praise is not transitory, but durable for all eternity? That man
praises thee, that beleiueth thee to be thine own praise That man praises
thee, that acknowledges that he is unable to express thy praise. In thee (o
Lord) is our praise (who art that praise that endures always) in thee shall
my soul be praised.

We (o Lord) do not praise thee, but thou thy self, praysest thy self, both
by thy self, and in thy self, and we likewise have praise in thee. Then have
we true praise, when we receive praise from thee, when the light aproueth the
light, because thou, that art the true light, give true praise. As often
therefore as we seek praise and commendation from any other saving from thee,
so often we loose thy praise, beca^use that praise passes away, but thine
endures for all eternity. If we seek transitory praise, we loose that which
endures always: If therefore we desire to obtain that praise which is
everlasting, let us not love that which is transitory and fleeting.

O Lord my God the eternal praise, from whom proceeds all praise, and
without whom there is noe praise. I am not able to praise thee without thee;
let me possess thee, and I will praise thee. For what am I (o Lord) of my
self, that I should praise thee? Verily I am nothing else but dust, and
ashes, a dead dog turned into carrion, a worm, and mere corruption. What am
I (o Lord God most powerful, the breathe and life of every living creature)
that I should praise thee, whose dwelling is eternity?

Shall darkness praise the light, or death life? Thou art the light, I am
darkness: thou art life, I am death. Shall vanity praise verity? Thou art
verity, and I am a man wholly addicted to vanity. How then shall I be able (o
Lord) to praise thee? Shall my misery praise thee? Shall that which stinketh,
praise that which is sweet? Shall man's mortality (which is to day, and is
gone to morrow) praise thee? Shall man presume to praise thee being but
rottennes and corruption, and the son of man, being but a worm? Shall he
presume to praise thee, that is begotten, borne, and brought up in sin and
iniquity? Verily thy praise does not seem fair and commendable in the mouth
of him, whose life is abominable.

Let thy incomprehensible power therefore (o Lord my God) praise thee, let thy
boundless wisdom, and unspeakable goodness praise thee. Let thy supereminent
clemency, and superabundant mercy praise thee. Let thy ouerlasting virtue and
divinity praise thee. Let thy most omnipotent power, and thy surpassing great
liberality and love (by which thou have created us) praise thee, o Lord God
the very life of my soul.

Of the hope, which we ought to have in God. CHAPT. XI.
But I (o Lord) that am thy creature, being placed under the shadow of thy
wings, will put my trust in thy goodness, by which thou have created me. Permit
not that to perish through my malice. which it has pleased thee to make
through thy great goodness. Permit not that to perish through my misery, which
that have vouchsafed to create through thy surpassing great mercy. For what
profit is there in my creation, if I shall descend into corruption?

Have thou (o God) in vain created all the children of men? Thou o Lord have
created me, govern that which thou have created. Despise not I beseech thee
the works of thy hands. Thou have made me of nothing; if thou (o Lord) do
not govern me, I shall again return to nothing. For like as, when I was
nothing of my self, thou have made me of nothing, so, it thou do not govern
me, I shall again of my self return to nothing.

Help me (o Lord) and my life, that I may not perish through my wickedness. If
thou (o Lord) had not created me, I were nothing, now (for that thou have
created me) I am something. If thou do not govern me, I shall cease to be
something, and return to nothing. For neither my merits, nor any special
grace in me, have compelled thee to create me, but thy gracious goodness and
mercy. Let the same love of thine (o Lord my God) which has heretofore
enforced thee to create me, enforce thee now likewise to govern me. For what
does it profit me, that thy charity has constrained thee to create me, if I
perish in my misery, and thy right hand do not rule me?

Let this thy clemency (o Lord my God) enforce thee to save that which is
created, which has enforced thee to create that which was uncreated. Let that
charity cause thee to save me, which has caused thee to create me; being it
is no less now, then it was then, thou thy self being that charity, who art
still the same.

Thy hand (o Lord) is not grown short that it cannot help me, neither thy
ear become short, that it cannot hear me; but my sins have made a division
between me* and thee, between darkness and light, between the image of death,
and life, between vanity and verity, between this life of mine, which
changes as the moon, and that of thine, which is still the fame.

Of the snares of concupiscence. CHAPT. XII.
THese are the shadows of darkness, with which I am overwhelmed in the
bottomeles dongeon of this obscure prison, in which I lie prostrate groueling
on the ground, until the day appear, and the shadows be departed, and light
be made in the firmament of thy virtue.

Let the voice of our Lord with power and magnificence pronounce saying: Let
light be made, and let the darkness be dispersed, let the dry land likewise
appear, and let the earth bring forth green herbs, producing the seed and
good fruit of the justice of thy kingdom.

O Lord my father and God, the life, by which all things live; and without
which all things are to be accounted as dead, permit me not to linger in
lewd thoughts, and deliver me from proud and lofty looks, Take from me all
carnal concupiscence, and suffer me not to be of a bold and boasting mind,
but possess my heart, that it may always think of thee.

Enlighten the eyes of mine understanding that they may see thee, and not be
exalted in thy presence o glory everlasting) but let them think humbly, not
looking over curiously on those wonderful things, that are above them. Let
them look upon those things, that are on the right hand, and not upon those
on the left, that are displeasing unto thee. Let thy eie-lidds likewise guide
my footestepps, for that thy eie-lidds look into the actions and thoughts of
the sons of men.

Break and bruise my unlawful lust with thy sweetenes, which thou have
reserved for those that fear thee, to the end I may with an eternal desire
covet thee; least my internal taste (being through vanities entseed and
deceived) esteem bitter to be sweet, and sweet to be bitter, darkness, to be
light, and light to be darkness, that I may escape free from such a multitude
of snares (wherewith all the world is replenished) which our ghostly ennimic
has placed in the way of this life that we are to walk in, thereby to ensnare
the souls of such as sin. Which he that saw it, omitted not to tell us of,
saying: Whatsoever is in the world, is either the concupiscence of the eyes,
concupiscence of the flesh, or pride of life.

Behold o Lord my God, the whole world is full of the snares of
concupiscences, which my ghostly ennimies have prepared to intrappe me in, and
who shall be able to avoid them? Verily he, from whom thou shall take away the
concupiscence of the eyes, least the concupiscence of the eyes do entrappe
him, from whom thou shall take away the concupiscence of the flesh, least the
concupiscence of the flesh entice him, and from whom thou shall take away a
bold and boasting mind, least pride of life, do craftily deceive him. O how
happy is he, to who^ thou shall afforde this ^auoure, because such a one shall
pass without danger!

Wherefore I beseech thee for thine own sake (o my Redeemer) that thou will
help me, that I may not fall in the sight of mine adversaries, being taken in
the snares, which they have prepared to entrap my feet, thereby to overthrow
my soul: but deliver me (o strength of my salvation) least thine ennimies,
which hate thee, have me in derision.

Arise o Lord my God (thou that art my fortitude) and let thine ennimies be
dispersed, let those that hate thee, fly before thee: yea like as wax melts
away before the face of the fire, even so let sinners consume in thy sight:
But let me remain safe, being hidden in the secret place of thy presence,
where abounding with all good things, I may rejoice in the company of thy
children.

Listen o Lord God unto the cry of thy children (who art a father to the
fatherless, and a mother to such as are in distress) and stretch for the thy
wings, that we may fly under them from the face of our adversary. O tower of
the fortress of Israel, who wilt neither slumber nor sleep garding and
defending Israel, for that the ennimie does neither slumber not sleep, that
opposes Israel.

Of the miseries of man, and the manifold benefits of almighty God. CHAPT.
XIII.
O Light, not seen by any other light, o brightness, not beheld by any other
brightness; That light that darkneth all other light, that brightness, that
makes dim all external brightness,

O light from which all light is derived, o brightness, from which all brightness
does proceed; that brightness, in comparison of which, all brightness is but
dimnes, all light but darkness. That light, in whose presence, all dimnes is
turned into brightness, all darkness into light.

O supreme light, by noe cloud enclouded, by noe mist diminished, by noe
darkness darkened, by noe obstacle enclosed, by noe shadow severed and divided.

O light, which enlightnest all things wholly, together, severally, and for
ever, let me be absorpt by thee into the botto^lesse depth of thy brightness,
that on every side I may see thee in thee, and me in thee, and all things
under thee.

Forsake me not (o Lord I beseech thee) least the darkness of my ignorance and
sin increase. Verily without thee all things are darkness, and sin unto
me, because nothing is good without thee, the true, sole, and sovereign good.
I confess and acknowledge, o Lord my God, that wheresoever I am without thee,
it fares not well with me, neither without nor within me, because without thee
(o my God) I esteem plenty to be poverty. I shall then be content and not
before, to wit when thy glory shall appear.

Give me grace likewise, o Lord, who art my only felicity, that I may
confess my misery unto thee; I confess therefore, that as long as the
multiplicitie of temporal affairs did disperse and divide me (following my
sensuality) from one thing into many, to wit, from the supreme and only
good, that is from the unity of thy goodness; so long I had painful plenty
and plentiful poverty, poursuing many things, and finding content in none,
for that I found not thee with in me, the assured, singular, inseparable and
sole good, which having now gotten, I am noe more subject to need: which
having obtained I am now no more payned and greiued, which having now in
possession, my whole desire is satisfied.

This is a misery (me think) above other miseries to be lamented, to see how
my miserable soul does forsake and abandon thee, in whose company she is
always rich and glad, and adhereth to the world, with whom she is always
poor and fadde. The world cries unto us saying, I fade, and thou (o Lord)
call unto us, saying, I feed; and yet notwithstanding such is my perverse
misery, that it makes choice rather to follow him that fades, then him that
feeds me.

This is my infirmity and disease. Cure the same (o Physician of our souls)
to the end I may with my whole heart acknowledge unto thee (o Savior of my
soul) the manifold benefits, with which thou have nourished me from my tender
youth, until these my old and last decrepit years.

For thine own sake (o Lord) I beseech thee, not to forsake me: when I was
nothing, thou have created me, when I was consumed through sin, thou have
redeemed me, when I was past recovery, and dead through mine iniquity, thou
have come down from heaven unto me, taking upon thee my mortality: thou I say
being a king and Lord so puissant, have descended from heaven unto thy slave,
and servant, rendering thy self captive to reserve him a live: yea thou thy
self have died, and by dying have overcome death, to the end thou might
restore me to life, exalting me to my former dignity, by debasing thy self to
so great poverty. When I was utterly undone, being gone astray, and sold to
sin, thou have come into the world for my redemption, and have loved me so
dearly, as that thou have given thine own blood for a ransom for me: thou
have loved me (o Lord) more then thy self, in that thou have vouchsafed to die
for me.

Thou have therefore in this maruailous manner, and with so dear a price,
recalled me from banishement, redeemed me from servitude, delivered me from
punishment, named me after thine own name, signed me with thine own blood, to
the end I might always carry about me a memorial of thee, never suffering it
to depart from my heart, who to redeem me, did not depart from the cross.

With the same sacred oil with which thou were anointed, thou have anointed
me in baptism, to the end that from thy name (Christ) I might be called a
Christian.

Behold thou have written me in thy hands, that thou may still be mindful
of me, yet with this prouiso, that I be likewise still mindful of thee. Thus
therefore, and after an unspeakable manner has thy grace and mercy always
prevented me.

Thou have likewise (o my deliverer) delivered me many times from many and
marvelous mighty dangers. When I have gone out of the way, thou have directed
me; when I have been ignorant, thou have instructed me; when I have sinned,
thou have corrected me; when I have been sorrowful, thou have gladded me; when
I have been in despair, thou have comforted me; when I have fallen, thou have
raised me; when I have stood, thou have vpheld me; when I have travailed, thou
have conducted me; when I have arrived, thou have entertained me; when I have
slept, thou have guarded me; when I have called, thou have heard me.

How God does continually look into the actions and intentions of men. CHAPT.
XIV.
THese, and many other benefits thou have bestowed upon me. (o God the life of
my soul) of which to speak, think and thank thee, it ought at all times to
be a thing sweet and pleasing unto me, to the end that with all my heart and
with all my soul, and with all my mind, and with all my strength, and with
all the powers of my soul and body, I might alwaie^ raise and love thee, for
all the benefit^ which I have received from thee (o Lord my God) who art the
blessed sweetness of those that delight in thee.

How be it thy eyes do see the manyfolde imperfections that are in me. Thy
eyes, I say, are more shining the^ the sun, seeing on every side all the
ways of men (yea penetratinge the bottom of the bottomless depthe) so that
in all places, and perpetually, they do behold those that live well, and
those that live wickedly. For fithence thou do govern all things, filling
each one of them, being at all times, and in all places wholly present, taking
care likewise of all things, which thou have created; (because thou do hate
none of those things which thou have framed) thou do consider all my
footestepps and paths so narrowelie, watching night and day over my custody,
marking all my ways so diligently, and looking upon me perpetually, even as
if thou were forgetful of all other creatures contained in heaven or earth,
and had care of noe other saving of me only.

Thy eye* sight likewise is neither augmented by looking upon one thing only
(it being immutable) neither is it diminished by beholding diverse things and
innumerable. Because thou do see many things at once (albeit differ^^^ one
from an other) as plainly and pe^^ectly, as if thou did look but upon one
only. Thou therefore do behold all things at once, after the same manner,
as if thou did behold but one only, and all things severally, as if they
were but one only; that is, without division, variation, or diminishing.

Whence it follows, that thou being always one at all times, do without
time behold me wholly at once, and continually, even as if thou had no other
thing to think upon, guarding and protecting me in that manner, as if thou
were mindful of me only, and forgetful of al others. Because thou art
always present, and ready to come unto me, as often as I am ready to
entertain thee.

Whither soever I go, thou (o Lord) do not forsake me, unless I first
forsake thee, and whersoeuer I am, thou art there with me, because thou art
every where, to the end that whither soever I go, I might find thee, by whom
I am preserved in my being, least I should perish without thee, for that
without ^hee, I should presently return to nothing.

Veri^ie I confess, that what thing or things soever I undertake to do, I
am to do it in thy sight; and that which I undertake to do whatsoever it be,
thou do behold more plainly, then I which am to do it: because thou art
present with me at the doing of every thing, continually marking all my
thoughts, intentions, delights, and actions.

The desires and imaginations of my mind, whatsoever they be, are at al times
known and apparent unto thee. Thou (o Lord) know from whence the spirit or
soul of man proceeds, where it abides, and whither it goes, for that thou
art he that does search into the souls of all men, who know best, (being
the internal judge) whether the root, that brings for the fair leaves, be
sweet or or sower, looking likewise narrowly into the very pithe or heart of
the root: neither do thou look into the intention only, but go further,
and by the infallible truth of thy light do gather, number, see, and seek
out the innermost pithe of the root thereof, to the end thou may render to
every man, not only according to his works, and intention, but also
according to the internal heart of the root, which is hidden, from whence the
intention of him that works has his beginning.

Thou (o Lord) do behold, thy ears do hear, and thy eyes do see and
consider what mine intention is, when I undertake any thing whatsoever I have
in my imagination, and in whatsoever I do take delectation, thou (I say) do
mark, consider, note, and write the same in thy book, be it good or evil,
that at the day of judgment (when these thy books shall be opened, and men are
to be judged according to the things in them con^ained) that which is good may
by thee be rewarded, and that which is evil punished.

This is that, peradventure, whereof thou have forewarned us saying: I will
consider the things, that lastly will happen unto them. And that likewise (o
Lord) which is written of thee. He considers the end of every man: for that
in all our doings, thou do more narrowely mark the end and scope of the
intention, for which they are done, then the mere act of him that does them.

Now when I ponder this diligently in my mind (o Lord my God who art terrible
to behold, and of invincible fortitude) I cannot but be marvelously affraied
and ashamed, considering the great necessity we have to live justly and up,
rightly, we being to do all our actions in the sight of him that is to be our
judge, who sees all things apparentlie.

That man without the asistance of Gods grace, is able to do nothing of
himself. CHAPT. XV.
O God most powerful and potent over the spiritts or souls of all flesh, whose
eyes behold all the ways of the children of Adam, from the day of their
birthe, until the day of their death, to the end, thou may render to every
man, according to his actions, be they good or evil, teach me (I beseech
thee) how to confess unto thee my poverty; because I have heretofore vaunted
that I was rich and needed nothing, not knowing that I was poor, blind,
naked, wretched, and in misery, for that I thought my self to be something,
when I was nothing. I said with my self, I shall become a wise man, and I
became a fool. I thought my self to be prudent and discreet, and I was
deceived, for that I now perceive that it is a gift gratis by thee given,
without whom we can do nothing, because, unless thou (o Lord) guarde the
cittye, he watches but in vain, that guardeth the same.

Thus (o Lord) by leaving, me and proving me, thou have taught me to know my
self, not in respect of thee, that thou might know me, but in respect of me,
that I might know my self, because (as I have already said) I thought my
self to be something of my self; neither did I perceive that it was thou that
did govern me, until thou did for a while forsake me: whereupon I
forthwith fell, by which I did see and know, that it was thou that did
govern me, and that my fall happened through mine own fault, and my arising
again to grace, by the means only of thy grace.

Thou have opened mine eyes (o divine light) thou have awakened and enlightened
me, so that now I see that man's life is a temptation upon earth; neither has
frail flesh, or any mortal man living, just occasion to glory of himself
before thee, or to presume of his justification, sithence all the good we have,
be it little or great, proceeds wholly and freely from thee, neither can we
attribute any thing justly to our selves, saving only our iniquity.

Whereof then shall any mortal man glory? shall he glory of his iniquity?
This is not glory, but mere misery. Shall he therefore glory of his goodness?
shall he glory of that which is an others? because all goodness and glory is
thine (o Lord) and belongs to thee. He therefore, that usurps that glory to
himself that is due to thee, is a thief and a robber, and like unto the
devil, who desired to bereave thee of thy glory. For he that desires to be
praised in respect of the gift which thou have given him, and does not seek
thy glory therein, but his own; albeit in respect of thy gift he be praised
of men, yet by thee he is thought worthy of blame, for that with that gift
which thou have given him, he has not sought thy glory, but his own. But he
that is praised of men, being by thee thought worthy of blame, will not be
defended by men, when thou shall judge him, nor freede by them, when thou shall
condemn him.

Thou therefore (o Lord) who did form me in my mothers womb, permit me not
to fall into that reproachful infamy, as to be vpbraieded as one that would
bereave thee of thy glory. To thee is due all glory, who art the author of
all goodness, but to us, shame and misery, who according to our deserts, are
worthy of all wretchedness, were it not that thou do take pity upon us.

Thou (o Lord) art pitiful indeed, full of compassion toward all men, and
hating nothing of those things, which thou have made, bestowing upon us many
benefits* and enriching us with thy greatest gifts: because thou do favor
those that are friendlesse, making the^ to abou^de with the riches of thy
goodness.

Behold now (o Lord) we are thy poor distressed children, we are thy little
flock, open thy gates unto us, to the end, that those that are poor may feed
and be filled abundantly, and those that se^ke thee, may praise thee
eternally.

I know (o Lord) and confess (because thou have instructed me) that they
only that acknowledge themselves to be poor and needy, and confess unto thee
their poverty, shall be enriched by thee, in so much, that they that imagine
themselves rich (being indeed poor and needy) are not to expect any
spiritual gift, or grace from thee.

Wherefore (o Lord my God) I do acknowledge and confess unto thee my poverty,
rendering unto thee all glory (all being thine and due unto thee) because all
the good that is done by me, proceeds wholly from thee.

I confess (o Lord) (like as thou have taught me) that I am nothing else, but
mere vanity, the shadow of death, a dark bottomless dungeon, a void and
unprofitable plot of ground, bringing forth nothing without thy blessing, the
natural fruit thereof being confusion, sin, and eternal death and
damnation. All the good that ever, I had heretofore, I had it from thee, all the
good I have likewise at this present, is wholly thine, and proceeds from the
hands of thy liberality.

When I have stood upright, it has been by thy assistance: when I have
fallen, it has been through mine own negligence: when I was fallen likewise,
I should for ever have remained in the mire, if thou had not raised me: and
being blind, I should for ever, have been blind, if thou had not enlightened
me. When I was fallen I should never have risen, if thou had not with thy
hand raised me; yea after thou have raised me, I should have fallen again
immediately, if thou had not vphelde me. I should likewise have perished
many times, and been utterly undone, if thou had not governed me.

Thus (o Lord) and in this manner has thy grace and mercy prevented me from
time to time and continually, delivering me from all mishapps, that might have
befallen me; preserving me from perils. that are past, delivering me out of
those that are present, and strengthening me against those that are to come:
cutting in in sunder before me the snares of sin, removing likewise all
causes and occasions of the same; for if thou had not afforded me this
favor, I should have committed all sorts of sins whatsoever. Because I
know (o Lord) that there is noe sin committed by one man, which an other
could not likewise do the same, if man's Creator, by whom he was made; did not
assist him.

Thou therefore have caused and commanded me to abstain from iniquity, giving
me thy grace, that I might believe in thee. For thou (o Lord) did direct me
to do that which was to thy glory, and mine own salvation, giving me grace
and understanding, that I might avoid adultery, or all other sin.

Of the di^^ell, and his manifold temptations. CHAPT. XVI.
THe tempter was absent, and thou have been the cause that he was absent, time
and place have been wanting, and this has happned through thy fatherly
disposition. The tempter was present, having opportunity of place and time,
but thou have kept me from consenting unto him. The tempter came to te^pte me,
in his own deformed and ougly form, and thou have given me courage to contemn
him. The tempter came as an armed soldier with great puissance and power, and
thou have fortified me, and enfeebled him, to the end, he might not vanquishe
me. The tempter came, being transformed into an Angel of light, and to the end
he might not deceive me, thou have rebuked him, and given me light that I might
know him.

This is that feirce and fiery Dragon, the old serpent, which is commonly
called the Devil and Satan, having seven heads and ten horns, whom thou have
created to be deluded in the wide and spacious sea of this tempestuous world,
in which there are infinite multitudes of creatures that creep, and of beasts
both small and great (that is diverse sorts of devils) who day and night do
nothing else but range about seeking whom they many devour, if thou deliver us
not from their power.

This is that old Dragon, who in Paradise had his beginning, who with his tail
casts down to the ground, the third part of the stars of heaven, who
poisonneth the waters of the world with his venime, that men may die by
drinking of them, who trampleth upon gold, as if it were durte, or mire,
having a confidence that the river Jordan (that is righteous, and religious
men) will flow likewise into his mouth: being of that wonderful strength and
power, as that he fears noe man whatsoever. And who then shall defend us
from his biting and stinging? Who but (thee o Lord can keep us from being
devoured by him, who have broken the heads of the great Dragon?

Stretche forth (o Lord we beseech thee) the wings of thy mercy over us,
that we may fly under them from the face of this Dragon, that does persecute
us, and save us from his horns with the shield of thy defense. Because the
only thing that he does, and has always desired, is to devour the souls,
which thou have created.

Wherefore (o Lord our God) we cry to thee, beseeching thee to deliver us from
our daily adversary, who whether we sleep or wake, eat or drink, or
whatsoever we do else, cease not by all means, day and night, by his
deceiptes and cunning devises, sometimes openly, sometimes secretlye, to shoot
his poisoned arrows at us, that he may kill and murder* our souls. And yet
(o Lord) behold our madness, for that albeit we see this Dragon coming against
us with open mouth, ready to devour us, yett we sleep, and play the wantons
lasciuiouslie in our lasines, as if we were secure in his presence, that
desires nothing else, but to destroy us. Our ennimie always watches without
sleep, that he may slay our souls, and we will not awake from sleep, that we
may save our selves.

Behold, he has laid infinite snares before our feet, and has filled all
our ways with many pitfalls and ginnes, thereby to entrapppe our souls, and
who shall be able to escape them? He has laid snares in riches, he has laid
snares in poverty, he has laid snares in meat, in drink, in recreation, in
sleep, and in watching: he has laid snares in our words, and in our works,
and in all our ways.

Wherefore we beseech thee (o Lord) to deliver us, from the snares of these
Huntsmen, and from sharp and bitter words; that we may confess unto thee
saying: Blessed be our Lord, who has not given us as a prey unto their
teethe. Our soul ^^scaped, even as a sparrowe out of the snare of the fouler.
The snare is broken, and we are delivered.

That God is the light of the just. CHAPT. XVII.
ENlighten mine eyes (o my Lord and my light) that I may see light, and walk
in thy light, and escape from falling into his snares. For who is able to
escape those his manifold snares, unless he see them? And who is able to see
them, if thou with thy light do not enlighten him? Because he (being the
father of darkness) does hide his snares in darkness, that all those may be
taken in them that are in darkness, to wit, the children of darkness, who are
deprived of thy light, in which whosoever walks shall not fear. Because
whosoever walks in the day time, stumbleth not, but he that walks in the
night season, falls, and hurts himself, because the light is not in him.

Thou (o Lord) art the light, thou art the light of the children of light, thou
art the day, that knows noe sunn-setting, in which thy children do walk
without st^^bling, and without which all they that walk, are in darkness, for
that they want thee, the light of the world, to direct them.

Behold we daily see, that the farther of any one is from thee the true light,
the more he is overwhelmed with the darkness of sin, and the more he is in
darkness, the less he sees the snares, that are set in his way, and
consequently knows them the less, by which means he is drawn, and falls
more frequentlie into them, and yet knows not that he is fallen, which is a
thing, that above others should cause us to detest sin. For he that knows
not that he is fallen, is by so much the less careful to arise, by how much
the more he thinks himself to stand.

Now therefore (o Lord my God) who art the light of my mind, enlighten mine
eyes, that I may see, and know, to the end I may not fall in the sight of mine
adversaries. For our adversary the Devil labors utterly to destroy us,
whom we desire, thou will cause to be consumed before our face, ever as wax is
consumed before the face of the fire.

Because he (o Lord) is the first and last robber, who conspired to bereave
thee of thy glory: who being swollen and puffed up with pride, burst and fell
on his face, whom thou have thrown down headlong from thy holy hill, and from
amidst those fiery stones, amongst which he walked.

And now (o Lord my God, and my life) since the time he has fallen, he cease
not to persecute thy children. And through the hatred he has against thee (o
king of infinite puissance) he desires to destroy this creature of thine, whom
thy omnipotent goodness has created according to thine own image, to possess
that glory, which he has lost by his pride and insolency.

But thou o Lord (that art our force and fortress,) bruise and crushe him in
pieces, that he may not devour us thy lambs: and enlighten us with thy grace,
that we may see the snares which he has laid to entrappe us, and may escape
to thee, o joi of israel.

All these things thou know (o Lord) better then we, who know his
enmity and despite against us, and his obdurate obstinacy. Neither do I say
this, as one that would inform thee (for that thou see all things, so
that our least thoughts are not hidden from thee) but before the feet of thy
majesty (o eternal Judge) I complain against mine adversary, to the end,
thou may damn him, and save us thy children, whose force does depe^de of
thee.

Verily this mine adversary (o Lord) is wily, turning and winding diverse
ways, so that the wilines of his ways, and the form of his countenance, is
very hardly known, unless thou illuminate our understanding. For sometimes he
is here, sometimes there, sometimes he transformeth himself into a wolf,
sometimes into darkness, sometimes into light, using diversity of temptations,
according to qualities, places, and times, and according to the variation of
things.

For to deceive those that are sad, he seems to be sad, to mock those that
are merry: to delude spiritual men, he changes himself into an Angel of
light; to subdue those that be feirce, he becomes mild like a lamb; and to
devour those that are mild, he becomes feirce like a wolf.

All these temptations he puts in practice, according to the like-lihoode he
has, that they will take effect, to the end he may terrify some with fear by
night, others with the arrowe that flies by day, others with ghosts and ghastly
vsions walking in darkness, others through fear of invasions, others with
diabolical temptations, that happen at noone day.

Who then is able to know these things, and to find out his fallacies? Who
is able to describe the form of his attire, and the hideous order of his
teethe? Behold he hadeth his arrows in the quiver, and covers his snares
under the form of light, in so much that it is a thing almost impossible to
perceive them, unless we receive light from thee o Lord (who art our hope) by
which we may see all things.

Neither does he hide his subtle snares in the works of the flesh only,
which are easiely perceived, nor in vices only, but also in Religious acts
themselves, making vices to seem virtues, and changing himself into an Angel
of light.

These and many other abominable enterprises does this son of Belial (Satan
the devil) endeavor to practice against us, lying in wait sometimes like a
Lion, sometimes like a Dragon, openly and secretly, within and without, by day
and by night, to bereave us of our souls. But thou (o Lord) who sauest those
that trust in thee, deliver us from him (we beseech thee) that he may greiue
to see us delivered, and thou (for the same) may by us be praised, o Lord
our God.

A further acknowledging of the benefits of God. CHAPT. XVIII.
I Therefore the son of thy handemaide, having alreaddy committed, and commended
my self into the hands of thy mercy, will now with my whole heart confess
unto thee (o Lord my deliverer) and call to mind all the benefits, which thou
have bestowed upon me, during my whole life, even from mine infancy. Because I
know that ingratitude does very much displease thee, being the root of all
spiritual evil, and a wind that does blaste and burn up whatsoever is good,
hindering the fountain of thy divine goodness from flowing into us: by means
whereof our evil actions that were forgiven and forgotten, are again
remembered, and our good works become dead, and are noe more obtained.

Wherefore o Lord my deliverer, I will give thee thanks, least I be found to
be ungrateful unto thee, for that thou have delivered me. As often as that
infernal Dragon has swallowed me down, thou (o Lord) have drawn me
violently out of his mouth. As often as I have sinned, and he was ready to
devour me, thou (o Lord my God) have preserved me. When I offended thee by
breaking thy commandments, he stood ready to hale me away to hell, if thou
had not hindered him. I did offend thee, and thou did defend me. I did not
respect thee, yet thou did protect me. I departed from thee, seeking to join
my self to mine adversary, and thou did affright him, to the end he should
not entertain me.

These benefits (o Lord my God) thou did bestow upon me, and I knew it not.
Truly thou have diverse times dealt in this merciful manner with me,
deliueringe me out of the jaws of the Devil, snatching me out of the mouth
of the Lion, yea thou have often times saved me, from fallinge into the pit of
eternal damnation, I little thinking whither I was going. Verily I have
descended to the very gates, and thou have kept me from entering in. I drew
nigh to the doors of death, and by means of thee, they have not been shutt
upon me.

Thou have delivered me many times (o my Savior) from corporal death after
the like manner. When greuious sicknesses did afflict me, when diverse dangers
did affright me, thou (o Lord) did still assist, and mercifully save me,
delivering me both by sea and land, from fire and sword, and from all
adversity.

Thou ^ruly (o Lord) did know full well, that if then I had chanced to dye,
my soul had gone to hell, and I should have been damned everlastingly. But
thy mercy and grace (o Lord my God) has prevented me, saving me from the death
both of soul and body. These and many other benefits thou have bestowed upon
me, and I was blind and did not perceive it, until thou did enlighten me.

Now therefore (o Lord my God) the light of my soul, my life by which I live,
the light of mine eyes, by which I see: behold thou have enlightened me, and I
do know thee; because I do live by thee, for which I do heartily thank
thee, offering thee praises according to my poor ability, although they are
small and of little value, and nothing answerable to the manifold benefitts
which I have received from thee. Because thou art my only God, my kind
creator, who love our souls, and hate nothing that thou have made.

Behold I (o Lord the chief of al those sinners, that thou have saved, will
confess and acknowledge the manifold benefits which I have received from
thee, to the e^d I may stir up others to do the like, and be a witness of thy
wonderful mercy: because thou have delivered me from the lowest hell, not
once, or twice, or thrice only, but an hundred, yea a thousand times. I
always went on toward hell, and thou did bring me back again
continually, so that, if thou would, thou might a thousand times have
justly damned me. Yet thou would, not, because thou do love our souls,
and in hope that we will amend and do penance, thou do as it were wink at
our wickedness, o Lord our God of much mercy in all thy ways.

Now therefore (o Lord my God) I do see and perceive these things, by means
of the light, which thou have given me, and my soul does as it were faint by
thinking of thy maruailous great mercy toward me; for that thou have
delivered my soul from the deepest hell, and have restored me to life. I was
wholly dead, and thou have wholly raised me.

Wherefore sithence that my whole life does depend wholly of thee, I do wholly
offer my whole self unto thee. Let my whole spirit, my whole heart, my whole
body, yea my whole life live to thee my sweet life; because thou have wholly
delivered me, that thou might wholly possess me, thou have wholly saved me,
that thou might wholly have me.

^et me therefore love thee o Lord, my strength, let me love thee, my
unspeakable joy and solace: and let my whole life (which was dead through my
misery and is raised again through thy mercy) be esteemed from hence for the
not mine, but thine, who art a mild, and merciful God, and of much mercy,
toward all those that love thy holy name.

Wherefore (o Lord my God) who do sanctify me, thou in thy law have
commanded, that I should love thee with all my heart, with all my soul, with
all my mind, with all the strength and forces of my body, and with all the
internal affections of my mind, each hour and moment, in which I enjoy the
benefit of thy mercy: because I should continually perish, if thou did not
continually govern me; I should continually dye, if thou did not
continually receive me, so that every moment thou do oblige me unto thee,
by bestowing every moment many benefits upon me.

As therefore there is noe hour or minute, in which I do not receive some
benefitt or other from thee: so there ought to be not moment, in which I have
not thee before mine eyes, and in my memory; and in which I do not with all
my strength love thee.

But this is a thing that surpasses my ability, unless thou of thy
liberality bestow it upon me. From whom every good and perfect gift has
his beginning, descending from the Father of lights: with whom there is noe
mutation, or shadow of alteration.

Verily this prerogative of loving thee, proceeds not from the desire or
endeavor of any mortal man, but is given to him, on whom it pleases thee to
take compassion. This gift is thine (o Lord) who art the giver of all good.
Thou commaundest that we should love thee, grant us grace to do that which
thou do command, and command whatsoever it shall please thee.

Of the vehemency of love or charity. CHAPT. XIX.
O My God I do love thee, desiring* to love thee more and more continually,
because thou art indeed more sweet then any honey, more nourishing then any
milk, more bright then any light. Wherefore thou art to me more dear, then
gold, or silver, or any precious stone whatsoever. For whatsoever I did whilst
I lived in the world, did but displease me, inrespect of thy sweetness, and the
beauty of thy beloved house.

O fire, that do always burn, and art never extinguished; O love that art
always hoate, and never growest cold, inflame me with the fire of thy love.
Let me I say be set on fire by thee, to the end, I may wholly love thee. For he
that loves any thing besides thee, or which he loves not for thee, loves
thee by that means with less vehemency.

I will love thee (o Lord) because thou have loved me first. But how shall I be
able to express the tokens of thy surpassing great love toward me, by reason
of thy innumerable benefits, with which thou have nourished me from my very
infancy?

For in the benefit of creation, when in the beginning thou did create me of
nothing, by making me according to thine own image, thou have honored and
exalted me above other creatures which thou have made, ennobling me with the
light of thy counte^ance, with which thou have signed and sealed the entrance
of my heart; by which likewise thou have made me different from senseless
creatures and brute beasts, and in dignity almost equal to the Angels.

All this seemed little to thy diui^^e Majesty, for that thou have not ceased
to chearishe me daily ever since, with many singular and surpassing great
presents of thy magnificence, yea thou have fedd and fostered me, as if I were
thy little child and only darling, giving me suck from the breasts of thy
divine consolation.

Verily thou have caused all creatures to serve and obey me, to the end, I
might wholly employ my self in the service of thee.

How God has made all things subject to the service of man. CHAPT. XX
THou (o Lord) have made all things subject to man, that man should be wholly
subject to thee alone. And to the end thou mighest oblige man to be wholly
thine, thou have made him ruler over every thing.

All exterior things thou have created for the body; the body for the soul,
and the soul for thee: to the end that the soul might have nothing else to
do, but to love and delight in thee, having thee as her solace, and inferior
things at her service

For whatsoever is contained within the compass of heaven, is inferior to the
soul of man, which was created, to enjoy the most sovereign and supreme
good, by whose possession it might become blessed. To whom, if it shall adhere,
by forsakiuge the familiarity and freindshipp of all things here beneath
(being all subject to mutabilitie) it shall without doubt hereafter behold
most cearely the face of that supreme Majesty and eternal immortality,
whose sight it now desires so earn stly. It shall then I say) enjoy those
most excellent guiftes and graces in heaven, in comparison of whom whatsoever
is here seen, is to be esteemed as nothing.

Those are the things, which neither ^ie has seen, not ear has heard,
neither have they ever entered into the heart of man, which God has prepared
for those that love him. These thou will bestow (o Lord) upon the soul of
man. Yea even in this life, thou do daily make glad the souls of thy
servants, being the lover of souls.

But why do I wonder at this (o Lord my God) seeing by doing this, thou do
honor thine own image and similitude, according to which our souls are
created? For which our body likewise, although it be subject to corruption, and
of noe reputation, yet that it might see, thou have given it the light of the
firmament, by means of thy servants, the son and moon, who without being
ever weary do continually day and night by virtue of thy commaundment, serve
and obey thy children.

Moreover, thou have bestowed upon the body, the purity of the ayr^, that it
might breathe; variety of soundes, that it might hear; sundry sweet
sauoures, that it might smell diversity of meats, that it might taste; gross
and corpulent bodies, that it might feel.

Thou have ordained laboring beasts, in his necessities to serve and aid
him, the fowls, of the air, the fishes of the sea, and the fruits of the
earth, to feed and refreshe him. Thou have caused the earth to bring for the
medicines for ^ache several malady. Finally thou have prepared several
salues for several sores, variety of remedies for diversity of infirmities:
because thou art merciful and mild, and being the potter by whom we were
framed, thou know the brickle stuff whereof we are formed, because we all
are as a piece of potters clay in thy hand.

How by the consideration of benefits temporal, we may gather the greatness of
those that are celestial. CHAPT. XXI.
Give me grace (o Lord to see the greatness of thy mercy, give me yet greater
light and understanding I beseech thee, that I may perceive it more plainly.
For by the lesser benefits (o holy Lord God, our good Creator) we grow to
understand thy greater; and by those which we visibly see here, we come to the
knowledge of those that are invisible in heaven.

For if thou (o God do bestow upon our base and corruptible body, so great
and innumerable benefits, from the firmament and air, from the earth and sea,
from the light and darkness, from heat and shadow, from dew and rain, from
winds and shewers, from fowls and fishes, from beasts and trees, from
variety of herbs and plants, and of al other of thy earthely creatures,
serving us successively in their turns, that by them tho^ may solace the
sorrows of this our wearisome life; what manner of benefits are those (I pray
thee) how great (I say) and innumerable shall those comfortes and commodities
be, which thou have prepared for those that love thee in that heavenly country,
where apparently face to face we shall see and behold thee? If thou do so
much for us now in this earthly prison, what will thou do for us hereafter in
the palace, of thy heavenly habitation?

Great certainly and innumerable are these thy works (o Lord and king of
heaven.) For seeing all these things are exceeding good and delightful, which
thou have imparted to good and bad men in common, what manner of things will
those be, which thou have reserved for the good alone? If the gifts, which
thou do now give unto thy freindes and foes together, be so innumerable and
many: how great and innumerable, how sweet and delightful will those be,
which thou will bestow hereafter upon thy friends only? If thou do give us
so great comfortes on this sorrowful day of weepings how great will thou
give us on the festival day of the wedding? If so great delights are
contained in this earthly prison, how great are contained in the country of
heaven?

There was never yet any eye (o God) without thee, that has seen the
pleasures, which thou have prepared for those that love thee. Because the
immensitie of thy sweetness (which thou have reseru^^ for those that fear thee)
is answerable unto the immensitie of thy magnificence.

Wherefore (o Lord my God) like as thou art great and immense, there being
neither end of thy greatness, or number of thy wisdom, or measure of thy
bounteousnes: so likewise, there is neither end or number, nor measure of thy
recompense, but like as thou art great, so is likewise thy reward and
recompense: because thou thy self art their reward and recompense, that fight
for thee according to thy holy ordinance.

That the sweetness of God, does take away the present bitterness of the World.
CHAPT. XXII.
TH^se (o Lord God, the sanctifier of thy Saints) are those great benefits of
thine, with which thou have abundantly supplied and replenished the wantes of
thy children: because thou are the hope of those that are in desperation, their
comfort that are in affliction, thou art a crown of confidence adorned with
glory, prepared for those that overcome.

Thou art the eternal food and fullnes of thy hungry servants, to be
distributed to those that hunger after righteousness. Thou art the everlasting
comfort, who bestowest thy self on them only, that despise all worldly
comfort, in hope of that endless comfort, which they shall have of thee.
Because those that are comforted eere, are unworthy to be comforted by thee
hereafter. But they are by thee comforted, who are here for thee afflicted;
and they that are partakers of thy passions, are likewise partakers of thy
consolations. Certainly noe man can be comforted in both worlds, or rejoice
here in this life, and in the next likewise: but of necessity he must loose
the one, that will get the other.

When I consider these things (o Lord my comforter) my soul refuses to be
comforted in this life, to the end it may be thought worthy of thy eternal
comfortes: because according to reason, it seems that he is worthy to loose
thee, that takes more delight in any other thing, then in thee.

Wherefore (o souueraigne truth) by thine own self I beseech thee, permit me
not to take pleasure in any vanity. But let all transitory things seem
bitter unto me, that thou alone may seem sweet unto my soul, who art that
inestimable sweetness, that makes bitter things to be sweet.

Thy sweetness made the stones of the stream, seem sweet unto Saint Stephan,
with which he was stoned. Thy sweetness made the burning gridiron seem sweet
unto Saint Laurence, on which he was broyled. By means of thy sweetness, the
Apostles went joyfully from the sight of the council, for that they were
thought worthy to suffer reproache for thy name. Saint Andrewe went with joy
and alacrity toward the Cross, because he went with have toward thy
sweetness. The Princes of the Apostles likewise (Saint Peter and Saint Paul)
with this thy sweetness were replenished, so that to obtain it, the one of them
made choice to be crucified, the other without fear to loose his head. Saint
Bartholomewe to buy it, gave his own skin: and Saint John to taste of it,
without fear, drunk up a cup of poison.

Noe sooner had Saint Peter tasted of this sweetness, but forthwith forgetting
all inferior things, he cried out as one inebriated and overcome with joy,
saying: Lord, it is good for us to be here, let us make here three
tabernacles, let us remain here in divine contemplation, because we want noe
other thing. It is sufficient for us (said he, to see thee, it is sufficient
to be satisfied with so great sweetness. He had noe sooner tasted one only
drop of that heavenly sweetenes; but he immediatelye forgott all other
sweetenes. What would he have said (think you) if he had tasted of the
immense sweetenes of thy divinity, which thou have kept in store for those
that love thee?

That Virgin likewise had tasted of this thy unspeakable sweetenes, of whom we
read, that she went to the prison, in that pleasant and merry manner, as if
she had been invited to some banquet or supper. He likewise (I suppose) had
tasted of this sweetness, who said: How great (o Lord) is the multitude of thy
sweetness, which thou have laid up in store for those that fear thee! Who
likewise did put us in mind of it saying: Taste, and see, because our Lord is
sweet.

This (o Lord God) is that happiness, which we do hope thou will bestow upon
us: for which we fight for thee continually, for which we mortify our selves
for the^ daily, to the end we may live with thee in that happy life of thine,
which shall last everlastingly.

That our whole hope, and the desire of our heart ought to be in God. CHAPT.
XXIII.
But thou o Lord, the expectation of Israel, the desire after which our hart^
does sighe every day, make have, and do not stay. Arise, make have, and come,
and deliver us out of this prison, to confess unto thy name, that we may glory
and be delighted in thy light. Open thine ears to the doleful clamours of thy
dristressed children, who cry to thee, saying: O our Father, give us this day
our daily bread; in the strength of which, we may walk day and night, until
we attain unto thy holy mountain Oreb.

O God my Father and force, when shall I (that am the least of all thy family)
come and appear before thy face, to the end, that as I do now praise thee
during the time of this mortality, I may from thence for the praise thee
everlastingly?

O how great shall I esteem my happiness, if I shall at length be admitted to
behold thy brightness? Who will obtain this favor for me, that I may be
admitted to behold thee? I know (o Lord) I! know and confess, that I am
unworthy to enter into thy house; nevertheless I beseech thee afforde me this
favor for thy glory, and confound not thy servant, that trusts in thee.
But who is able to enter into thy sanctuary to consider thy power, if thou (o
Lord) do not open unto him the door? Or who can open it, if thou shutt it?

Verily noe man is able to erect that, which thou do throw down: neither is
any one able to free him, whom thou do putt in prison. If thou withholde the
waters, all things become dry and withered: again if thou let them loose,
they will ouerwhelme the world. If thou should cause all things which thou
have created to return to nothing, who durst condradict thee? Finally there
is noe end of the goodness of thy mercy, by which thou have created all things,
that it has pleased thee.

Thou (o maker of the world) have made us, vouchsafe likewise to govern us.
Thou have created us, despise us not, because we are thy workmanship.
Certainly (o Lord our God) we that are little worms composed of durte and
clay, cannot enter into thy eternity, unless thou lead us in, who have
created all things of nothing.

That our Salvation is from God. CHAPT. XXIV.
I therefore, that am the work of thy hands, will confess unto thee in thy
fear, for that I will not put my confidence in my bow, neither is my sword
the thing that shall save me, but thy right hand, and thy arm, and the light
of thy countenance.

Certainly I should despair, were it not that thou art my hope, that have
created me, whose property is never to forsake those that hope in thee.
Because thou art our Lord God, full of sweetness and patience, mercifully
disposing all things. For whether we sin or sin not, we are still thy
creatures, and thou do still esteeme^ and make accounte of us? Verily al of
us are as the leaf of a tree, and every man living is merely vanity, so
that our life (whilst we live in this world) is as a puff of wind.

If we therefore thy pothre pupills chance to fall, be not offened, because
thou o Lord our God know the brickle substance, whereof we were made. Will thou therefore (o God of inestimable fortitude) show thy power against a lease,
that with every pusse of wind is carried hither and thither, or will thou
persecute a little stuble or straw? Will thou o eternal king of Israel) damn
a dog? Will thou damn a flea? We hau^ heard o Lord of thy mercy, that thou
art neither the author of death, neither do thou rejoice at the damnation of
those that die.

Wherefore I besee^n thee o Lord, that thou will not permit that, which thou
have not made, to have the upper hand of me thy creature, whom thou have made.
For if thou do grieve at our damnation, what does hinder thee o Lord (that
can do any thing) from rejoicing always at our salvation? Thou (o Lord)
can save me if thou will, but I of my self, although I desire it, cannot do
it.

The multitude of my miseries is ^oe great, that albeit I have a will to do
well, yet I want power to perform. I cannot desire what is good, v^lesse it be
thy will likewise; neither have I power to perform what I do desire, unless
thy power strengthen me; sometimes I am unwilling to do that good which I have
power to perform, were it not, that thy will must be done in earth, as it is
in heaven.

Moreover I know not what I am willing or able to perform* unless thou
illuminate me with thy wisdom. Yea although I know what to do, and am
willing and able to do the same, yet my wisdom (for that it is imperfect and
vain) does leave it undone, if I be not aided by thy true wisdom.

All things therefore do depend of thy will, neither is any man able to
withstand the same, who art Lord of all things, and have power over every
particular creature, effecting both in heaven and earth, in the sea, and in
bottomless depthes, whatsoever seems good to thy divine pleasure. Let thy
sacred will therefore be fulfilled in us, who do call upon thy holy name to
the end, that this noble work of thine, which thou have created for thy
glory, do not perish everlastingly. For what man is there borne of a woman,
that is able to live and escape death and damnation, if thou alone, (who art
the living way of all life, by whom all things live and have their being) do
not deliver him?

How without the assistance of Gods grace, man's will is unable to do well.
CHAPT. XXV.
I have already acknowledged unto thee o Lord my God (who art the praise of my
life, and the force of my salvation) that I did heretofore trust in my own
virtue and strength, which indeed was not strength, but rather presumption.
For as long as I did run on after that fashion, I always found my self
there most frail and subject to fall, where I thought my self most firm, so
that (by running thus) I found my self rather behind then before, for that
the thing was still further from me, which I thought to overtake by mine own
endeavor. And in this manner thou have in diverse things made trial of my
force.

Now I know o Lord (because thou have enlightened mine understanding) that
whatsoever I thought my self best able to do, I have always been least able
to perform. I oftentimes said, I will do this, or that, and yet in fine I
did neither of them. When I was willing to do any thing, I found my self
unable, and when I was able, I found my self unwilling, because I did presume
of mine own forces.

But now (o Lord my God, father of heaven and earth) I confess unto thee,
that noe man ought to vaunt in thy presence, as if he wear strong through his
own puissance: because the presumption of all flesh is vain and foolish.

Verily it lies not in man's power to desire what he is able to do, or to be
able to do, what he does desire, or to know what he ought to desire, or is
able to do, but rather the footestepps of men are guided by thy divine
providence, the footesteps (I say) of those who acknowledge that they are
guided by thee and not of themselves.

Wherefore we humbly beseech thee by the bowels of thy mercy (o Lord) that
thou will save what thou have created, because thou art able to save us, if
thou art willing, on whose only will does depe^de the merit of our salvation.

Of the ancient benefits of almighty God. CHAPT. XXVI.
REmember (^ Lord I beseech thee) thy mercy showed toward us of old time,
through which thou have prevented us with the blessings of thy sweetness, even
from the beginning. For thou (o Lord and my hope) from the very time that I
was a suckling (yea before I was borne) have provided and prepared the ways,
that I should walk in, and by them attain to the glory of thy heavenly
habitation. Thou have known me before thou did form me in my mothers
b^llie, and before I issued forth of the womb of my mother, thou have
preordained of me, whatsoever seemed good to thy divine pleasure.

I know not (o Lord) what things are written of me in thy book, in the
secret of thy consistory, which make^h me to fear exceedingly: but thou
know them all particularly, because that which I expect by succession of
days and times a thousand years hence to be fulfilled, in the sight of thy
eternity is already accomplished, and that which is to come, is already
done. But I for that I know not these things (living here as it were in a
dark and obscure night) cannot but fear and tremble, whilst I see sondrie
dangers on every side assaulting me, troops of ennimies poursuing me, and the
infinite miseries of this life enuironning me.

And were it not that the aid of thy grace does succoure me in these my
manifold tribulations, I should soon fall into desperation. But I have a
great hope and confidence (o my God) in thee, who art a Prince of unspeakable
pity, and the consideration of thy infinite mercies, are noe small comfort
unto me in my miseries.

The former tokens likewise of thy love and mercy, showed toward me before
my nativity, but appearing now especially, do put me in hope for the time to
come, to receive more ample and greater favors from the hands of thy
bountiful libe^alitie* which thou do reserve for thy friends and those that
love thee to the end, that my hope may rejoice in thee (o Lord my God) with a
sacred and lively cherefulnes, with which thou do continually comfort my
young and tender years.

Of the Angels appointed to be the guardians of man. CHAPT. XXVII.
Thou have loved me (o my only love) before I loved thee, and have created me
according to thine own likeness, making me Lord and ruler over all thy other
creatures. Which dignity I then possess, when I know thee, for whom thou have
made me.

Moreover thou causest those heavenly spirits for my sake to become
messengers, to whom thou have given commandment to protect and guarde me in
all my actions, that I hurt not my foot against a stone.

These are the watchmen that keep^ continual sentinel upon the walls of thy
city new Jerusalem, guarding the mountains likewise that are round about
it, keeping watch by night over thy flock, least that old serpent our
adversary the devil, as a Lion should kill and destroy our souls (if there
were none to desende them) who as a roaring Lion continually rangeth about,
seeking whom he may devour.

These are the citizens of our mother above, the blessed and celestial city
Jerusalem, who art sent to serve and attend on those, that are preordained by
God to inherit the kingdom of heaven, that they may deliver them from their
ennimies, and guarde them in all their ways, that they may comfort and
admonish them, and in the presence of thy glorious Majesty, may offer up the
prayers of thy children. Undoubtedly they do love their fellow citizens
expecting by them the reparation of their ruins.

Wherefore at all times, and in all places, with great ca^e and diligence they
are present, and ready to assist us, succou^ing* and supplying our necessities,
passing incessantly to and fro betwixt thee (o Lord) and us, relatinge our
groans and sighs unto thee, to the end they may obtain, for us favor and
courtesy, and may bring to us the desired blessing of thy grace and mercy.

In all our ways they walk with us, entering in and going for the with us,
considering with great attention how religiously and laudably we behave our
selves in the midst of a perverse nation, with what care and diligence we
seek thy kingdom and the justice thereof, with how great fear and trembling
we serve thee, and with how great joy and mirthe of ^harte we sing unto thee.

When we labor, they aid us; when we, rest they protect us: when we fight,
they encourage us: when we conquerre, they crown us: when we rejoice (if our
joy be of thee) they rejoice with us: when we suffer (if our sufferings be for
thee) they suffer together with us.

Great is the care which they have of us, and great is the effect of their
love toward us: All which respect and lou^ they show us, in respect of the
unspeakable love, with which thou have loved us. Verily they love those, that
thou love, they preserve those that thou preseruest, and forsake those that
thou forsakest, neither can they endure those that committ sin, because thou
they self do hate those that commit sin, and wilt destroy all those that
delight in lying.

As often as we do well, the Angels are glad, and the devils are sad. But
when we do ill, we make the devil merry, and deprive the holy Angels of
their^ joy. Because they rejoice to see a sinner do penna^ce when he has
sinned: whereas contrary wise, the devil rejoices to see a just man
irrepentant when he has offended.

Wherefore (o father I beseech thee) afford^ them this favor, that they may
always rejoice in respect of us, to the end that both thou by them may
perpetually be praised in us, and we with them may be made one fold in the
kingdom of heaven: that so we may together praise thy holy name, o creator
of men and Angels.

When I call these things to memory, I confess (o Lord) that I have great
cause to praise and magnify thee, for that these thy benefits are very
great, with which thou have honored us, by causing thy Angels (who are
spirits) to serve and attend us.

Verily thou had bestowed upon us before, whatsoever is contained within the
compass of heaven, and yet thou did imagine all things that are under heaven
to be a gift of small estimation, if thou should not likewise add those
that are above the heavens.

Let all thy Angels (o Lord) for! this thy goodness praise thee, let al thy
works acknowledge and confess the same unto thee, and let all thy Saints
extol thee everlastingly. Thou have honored us exceedingly (o Lord God our
honor) enriching and adorning us with manifold guiftes and favors: so
that thy name is admired in the universal world. What is man then that thou
do thus exalt him, or for what cause do thou place thine affection upon
him?

True it is, that thou (o ancient truth) have said: My delights are to be
with the children of men. But why (o Lord) or for what reason? Is man any thing
else but corruption? or the son of man any thing else, but a worm? Is not
every man living in this vale of misery, either inclined, or wholly addicted to
vanity? Whence is it then that thou do vouchsafe so gr^ciouslie to look
upon him, and to bring him and make him sit with thee in judgment at the day
of doom?

Of the profounde Predestination and foreknowledge of almighty God. CHAPT.
XXVIII.
O Most profounde depth, o infinite wisdom, that have created all things,
vouchsafe to teach and instruct me, who have poised the mountains and hills
in a pair of weightes, and the huge and heavy lump of the whole earth in a
pair of balances, lifting it up with three fingers only: lift up likewise
unto thee with the same three fingers (I beseech thee) the heavy lump of my
mortallitie, that I may see and understand how wonderfully thou art to be
admired in the universal world.

O most ancient light, who before all light did shine and give light on the
holy hills of thy ancient eternity, to whom all things, before their
creation, were known most apparently.

O light, that hate all spot of sin, for that thou art most pure and
clean, what pleasure have thou to converse with man? What has light to do
with darkness? Where are thy delights in man? Where have thou prepared for thy
self in me a sanctuary, fitting so great a Majesty, in which thou may
find pleasure and delight at thy coming?

Verily we ought to provide for thee a clean habitation, who art that virtue
that make all things clean, who of such as are unclean in heart, can not
so much as be seen, much less can thou be contained in them. Where then
can there be found in man, a temple so free from filthe, as that it may be
thought worthy to receive thee, who rulest the whole earth? Who is able to
cleanse him that is conceived in uncleanness, saving thou alone, who art only
free from bleamishe? who can be cleansed by one tha^ is defiled?

For according to the law, which thou have given to our forefathers (speaking
unto them out of the fire burninge the mountain, and out of the dark and
mistie cloud) whatsoever he touches that is unclean, shall be esteemed
unclean. All of us therefore being noe better then filthy rags, taking our
beginning^ from a loathsome mass of filthy corruption, do carry in our
foreheades, the stain of our uncleanness, which we cannot conceal by any
means, especially from thee, that see all things.

We therefore cannot be clean and free from sin, unless thou cleanse us, who
art only clean and free from the same* For thou art not accustomed to
cleanse all the children of men, but those only, that it pleases thee to
dwell in, whom thou by the unsearchable profounde secrets of the
incomprehensible just (yet secret) judgments of thy wisdom, without any
desert of theirs, have predestined before the beginning of the world, have
called out of the world, have justified in the world, meaning likewise to
magnify them after the end of the world. Nevertheless thou do not impart
this inestimable favor to every one, which makes the carnal and worldly
wisemen to pine away through admiration.

As for me, I confess (o Lord) that when I enter into consideration of this, I
cannot but tremble and be astonished at the greatness of the riches of thy
wisdom and knowledge, unto which I cannot attain, neither unto the
incomprehensible judgments of thy justice: sithence that of the same lump of
clay, thou do form some vessels unto glory, others unto everlasting
contumely.

Those therefore, that thou have chosen for thy self among so many to be thy
temple and sanctuary, those thou do wash clear by pouring upon them the
pure water of thy holy Spirit, whose names and number thou know (who only
art able to number the innumerable multitude of the stars, calling them all by
their names, who likewise are written in the book of life, and cannot possibly
perish: toward whose good, all things do cooperate, even their very
sins: For if they chance to fall, they take noe hurt, because thou do
uphold them with thy hand preserving all their bones, so that noe one of them
is broken.

Contrariewise the death of sinners is the worst of all others, of those
sinners (I say) whom, according to the bottomless depthe of thy hidden (yet
always just) judgments, thou have foreknowen should be damned, even before
heaven and earth were created: the number of whose names and enormious actions,
remain registered with thee, who have numbered the very sand of the sea, and
measur^d the profonditie of the bottomless depthe, whom thou have left in their
uncleanness; all things likewise do cooperate toward their damnation, and
their very prayers are turned into sin, so that albeit the^ have soared up
to the heavens, and their head had ouched the clouds, although they have
built their nest amongst the stars of heaven, yet finally they shall be cast
down as a dunghill, to eternal damnation.

Of those that at first are good, and after Wards become bad: and contrary
Wise of those that at first are bad, and after Wards become good. CHAPT. XXIX.
Great are these thy judgments, o Lord God, o judge most just and mighty,
whose judgments are equity it self, whose doings are profounde and
unsearchable, which when I consider, all my bones do tremble: because man (a
long as he lives in this world) is not assured that he shall be saved, to the
end, that during the whole course of our life, we might devoutly and chastely
with fear ferue thee and with trembling rejoice before th^e; that our service
might not be without fear, nor our joy without trembling* that he that is yet
in battle might not boast before the victory, that no mortal man might
vaunt before thee, but should rather stand in thy presence with great fear
and dread, seeing man knows not before his last day, whether he be worthy of
love or hatred, vntill^ which time all things are kept secret, and as it were
undetermined.

For we (o Lord) have seeene many ourselves, and heard of many more by the
relation of our forefathers (which is a thing which I cannot call to mind and
declare, without great trembling and much fear) who at first have soared up as
it were to the skies, and built their nest among the stars, but afterward
they have tumbled down headlong, and their souls have been amazed at the
evils that have happened unto them.

We have s^ene stars that have fallen from heaven by force of the Dragons
tail striking them. We have likewise seen (o Lord) those that lay groucling
on the ground, to have been highly exalted by means of thy helpinge hand.
We have beheld the living to die, and the dead raised to life again, and
those that walked amongst the children of God amidst the fiery stones, like
durte to have come to nothing. We have seen light changed into darkness, and
light proceedinge out of darkness, because publicans and harlotts, go before
the inhabitants in the kingdom of heaven: but the children of the kingdom,
are cast forth into exterior darkness.

But what is the cause of all these things? unless, for that they presume by
their own endeuoures to ascend unto that hill, unto which, he that first
attempted to ascend, went up an Angel, and came down a devil.

As for those, that thou have predestined, thou have likewise called them,
and sanctified them, and cleansed them, that they may be a habitation fitting
for thy majesty to dwell in, with whom and in whom are thy sacred and pure
delights; in whom thou do take pleasure, making glad their young and tender
years, dwelling in their memory, and so making the^ thy sanctuary, which
is a great setting forth of our dignity, and a singular commendation of our
humanitic.

That a faithful soul is the sanctuary of God. CHAPT. XXX.
Our soul which thou (o Lord) have created not of thine own substance, but by
thy word, not of any elementarie substance, but of nothing (which is
reasonnable intellectual, spiritual, always living, always in motion, whom
thou have signed and marked with the light of thy countenance, and consecrated
by the virtue of holy baptism) has been made capable of thy Majesty in that
manner, as that it can be satisfied and filled by thee only, and by nothing
else whatsoever.

When it has thee, the desire thereof is satisfied, so that there remains
noe outward thing that may be desired. As long therefore as it affects any
outward thing, it is a manifest proof, that it has not thee within, who
being gotten and obtained, noe other ought to be desired. For seeing thou art
the supreme and total good, there remains nothing else that it can desire,
because it possesses thee the sole sufficient good. But if it desires not the
s^le sufficient good, it follows that it desires something, that is not the
supreme good, and consequently not God, but some creature.

When therefore it desires some creature, it has continual hunger, for
albeit it obtains the creature, that it desires, yet nevertheless it
remains empty and void, because there is nothing, that can fill it besides
thee, according to whose image it was created.

But thou (o Lord) do fill those that desire nothing else but thee, making
them worthy of thee, that is, making them holy, blessed, pure, and the friends
of God, who esteem all things, as dung, that they may gain thee alone. This
is that happiness, which thou have imparted unto man, this is the honor, with
which amongst all other creatures, and above all other creatures, thou have
honored him, to the end that thy name might be admired in the whole world.

Behold o Lord my God, most high, most good, and most omnipotent, I have
found the place where thou do dwell, to wit, in the soul, (which thou have
created, according to thine own image and similitude,) which does seek and
desire thee only, because thou do not dwell in that soul, which does not
seek and desire thee.

How God cannot be found, either by the exterior or interior senses. CHAPT.
XXXI.
I Have wandered to and fro (o my God) like a lost sheep, seeking thee without,
who art within. I have likewise labored exceedingly, seeking thee without me,
and thou (if I truly desire thee) dwell within me. I have walked about the
streets and high ways of the city of this world, seeking thee, but could
not find thee, because I sought thee amiss thinking to find that outwardly,
which is within me. I seut all my exterior senses as messengers to seek thee,
but could not find thee, because I took not the true course in seeking thee.

Now I plainly perceive (o my light, my God, who have enlightened me) that I
sought thee amiss by them, for that thou art within, and yet they know not,
which way thou have entered in. For mine eyes say: if he be void of color, he
has not entered in by us. The cares say: he made noe noise at his entrance, he
has not entered by us. The nose says: if he gave noe smell, he came not by
me. The taste says: if he have noe taste, he entered not in by me. The feeling
likewise affirms: if he be not a solid body subject to touching, it is in
vain to demand of me any such question.

None of these things therefore are found in thee (o my God) For when I seek
my God* I do not seek comelines of body, or seemelines of time, or brightness
of light, or melodious tunes, or sweet sounding Music, or the odoriferous
smells of flowers, and ointments, or of aromaticall spices. I do not s^eke
honey, or manna that are delightful to the taste, nor any other thing, that is
amiable to be touched or embraced: finally when I seek my God, I do not
seek any thing subject to these exterior senses aforesaid.

God forbid, I should imagine any of those things to be my creator, which are
comprehended after the same manner by the senses of sensles and brutishe
creatures. And yet notwithstanding, when I seek my God, I^ seek a certain
light surpassing all other light, which the eye cannot see. I seek a certain
voice surmounting an other voices, which the care cannot hear. I seek a
certain smell, excelling all other smells, which the nose cannot smell. I seek
a certain sweetness, more delightful then any other sweetness, which the taste
cannot perceive. I seek a certain touching or embracing, more pleasing then
any other touching or embracing, which is altogether unknown to the feeling.

This light shines, where the place does no^ contain it: this voice sounds,
where the air does not hinder it: this sweet savior smells, where the
wind does not disperse it: the pleasantnes of this divine dishe is tasted,
where there is noe eating: this embracing is felt, where there is noe
separation.

This is my God, neither is there any other like unto him. This is that which I
seek, when I seek my God. This is the thing I love, when I love my God. Too
too late have I loved thee, o beauty most old and new, too too late (I say)
have I loved thee; Thou truly did remain within me, and yet I remained
without, seeking thee; so that I became deformed by being overmuch affected to
those fair things which thou have created. Thou was present with me, and I
was not present with thee. Those things debarred me from thee, which could
not subsist but by thee.

I went to ^uerie thing seeking thee, and by means of them loosing my self. I
asked the earth, if it were my God, and it answered noe; the like did all
other things contained in ^it* I asked the sea, and the bottomless depthes, and
all manne, of creatures contained in them, and they answered. We are not thy
God, seek him above us. I asked the blowing air, who together with all the
inhabitants thereof answered, Anaximines is deceived, I am not thy God. I asked
the same question of the firmament, of the sun, moon, and stars; who gave
me the same answer. I asked again of all these aforesaid that stood round
about me. You have told me, that you are not my God, at least say something of
him: and they all cried out with a loud voice:, It is he that has made us.

After this I asked the wide and spacious world. Tell me, if thou be my God,
or not? Who answered with a strong voice: I am not thy God, but a creature
created by him: he whom thou seek in me, has created me, seek him above
me, who at this present does govern me, and heretofore has made me.

This demand and conference made with other creatures, is a deep
consideration of them, and their answer is the testimony which they give of
God, for that they all affirm, that God has made them: Because as the Apostle
says, the invisible things of God, are understood and seen, by those things
that are done, of the creatures of the world.

After this I returned unto my self, and entering into my self, I used with my
self this discourse: Who art thou? And I answered unto my self: I am a mortal
man, endewed with reason: And I began to examine, what this was, saying: Whence
(o Lord my God) has this creature his beginning? whence (I say) unless from
thee? Thou have made me, and not I my self. Who art thou then? Who art thou,
by* whom I and all other things do live, and have their being? Who art thou?
Thou (o Lord my God) art the true and only God, omnipotent and eternal,
infinite and incomprehensible: who live everlastingly, and nothing dies in
thee, because thou art immortal, dwelling in a place that shall continue
world without end, admirable in the eyes of the Angels, unspeakable,
unsearchable, and not to be named.

Thou art the living and true God, terrible and powerful, not knowing
beginning or end, the beginning and end of all things; who art before the
beginning and original of all generations, worlds, ages and times. Thou art
my God, the Lord of all things, which thou have created. Thou know the
causes of all things that are stable, thou know the immutable beginnings of
all things that are mutable, thou know the eternal reasons of all things
reasonnable, vnreasonnable and te^porall.

Tell me then (o my God) thy poor unworthy servant, thou that art full of
mercy, tell me that am full of misery, for thy mercies sake, tell me I
beseech thee. Whence had man his beginning, but from thee? Was there ever any
man that could vaunt to have been the author of his own creation? Is it not
from thee alone, that we have our life and being? Art not thou the chief
being, from whom eue^ie thing has his beginning? For whatsoever is, is from
thee, because without thee there is nothing. Art not thou the fountain of
life, from whom flows all life? Because wha^soeuer lives, lives by thee,
for that nothing lives without thee.

Thou therefore (o Lord) have made all things. Shall I then demand who made
me? Thou have made me (o Lord) without whom nothing was made. Thou art my
Creator, I am thy creature.

I give thee thanks (o Lord my God by Whom I, and all other things do live)
for that thou have created me. I give thee thanks (o my maker) for that thy
hands have made me, and fashioned me. I give thee thanks (o my light) for
that thou have enlightened me, by which means I have found both thee and my
self. Where I have found my self, there I have known my self; where I have
found thee, there I have known thee: and where I have known thee, there thou
have enlightened me. I give thee thanks (o my light) for that thou have
enlightened me.

But what is that which I have said, I have known thee? Art not thou an
incomprehensible and infinite God, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who
dwell alone in immortality, and in that light, which noe man can attain
unto: which noe man has ever seen, or can possibly see? Art not thou a
hidden God, and of unsearchable majesty, who ^onely art able to know and
contemplate the greatness and wonderfulnes of thine own excellency? Who then
has known, that which he has never seen? Because thou have said in thy
truth: Man shall not see me, and live. Thy Apostle likewise has said by thy
truth: Noe man has ever seen God Who then has known that, which he has
not seen? Thy truth in like manner has affirmed: Noe one has known the
son, but the Father; neither has any one known the Father, but the son.
Thy sole Trinity therefore is wholly known to thy self alone, which surpasses
all understanding.

How durst I then (that am a man like unto vanity) affirm, that I have know^^
th^e? For who has known thee, besides thy self? Because thou only art God
almighty, most worthy to be praised, most glorious, most high, and above all
others to be exalted, who in the sacred and divine scriptures art said to be
superessentiall: For that thou art known to be superessentially and
superintelligibly above all essence intelligible, intellectual or sensible,
and above every name that is named either in this world, or in the next;
because by thy superessentiall and hidden divinity, thou do inaccessibly and
vnsearcheably, dwell in thy self above all reason, understanding and essence,
where there is inaccessible light, and unsearchable, incomprehensible and
unspeakable brightness, unto which no brightness is able to arrive: because it
is thought to exceed the bounds of all human contemplation, unseen, beyond
human reason and understanding, and so high, that noe man can attain unto
it: most free likewise from mutation, and not to be imparted to any one: Which
neither was, nor can possibly at any time be seen, by either Angels or men.

This is thy heaven (o Lord) thy heaven that is carved and garnished, that
hidden and superessentiall brightness, surpassing ^ll understanding and reason,
of whom it is said: The heaven of heaven belonging to our Lord. The heaven of
heaven, in conparison of which, all the other heavens, are but as it were the
earth, for that it is exala^d after a most admirable manner above all the other
heavens. Yea in respect of this the heaven called ^aelum Empyreum is but as it
were the earth; for this is the heaven of heaven belonging to our Lord,
because it is known to noe other but to our Lord. Into which noe man has ever
ascended, but he, that has descended from heaven: for that noe man has known
the Father, but the Son, and the holy Ghost proceeding from both of them.
Neither has any one known the Son, but the Father, and the holy Ghost
proceeding from both of them.

Certainly the Trinity is wholly known to thee only, o holy Trinity, o
Trinity most admirable, most unspeakable, most unsearchable, most
inaccessible, most incomprehensible, superintelligible, and superessentiall,
superessentiallie surmounting all human sense, all reason, al understanding,
all wisdom, all essence or being, even of the very Saints in heaven: so that
it is impossible even with Angels eyes, to express, imagine, understand, or
know the same

How then have I known thee, o Lord God most high above all the earth and
heavens, who art not perfectly known of the Cherubins and Seraphins
themselves? so that their face is covered with the wings of their
co^te^plat^o^s, whilst in praise of him that sits upon the high and lofty
throne, they cry out with a loud voice, saying. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of
hosts. All the earth is full of thy glory.

The Prophet was afraied and said; Woe be to me, for that I have been silent,
because I am a man of unclean lips. My heart likewise has been affrayed,
and said. Woe be to me, for that I have not been silent, because I am a man
of unclean lips. I cannot deny, but that I have affirmed, that I have known
thee. Nevertheless, woe be to those, who speak not of thee, because without
thy aid and assistance, those that speak much would become speechelesse.

Wherefore (o Lord my God) I will not be silent, because thou have made me, and
enlightened me, by which means I have found my self, and known thee. But how
have I known thee? I have known thee in thy self, I have known thee, not as
thou art to thy self, but as thou art to me: not without thee, but in thee,
because thou art the light, which have enlightened me. For even as thou art
only known to thy self, as thou art to thy self: so thou art known to me,
according as by thy grace thou art to me.

But what art thou to me? Tell me (o merciful Lord) thy poor and wretched
servant, tell me for thy mercies sake I beseech thee, what art thou to me? Say
unto my soul, I am thy salvation: hide not away thy face from me, least I dye.
Suffer me (albeit I am but earth and ashes) to speak unto thy mercy, suffer
me (I say) to speak unto thy mercy, because thy mercy is great toward me. I
will therefore presume to speak unto my Lord, albeit I am but dust and ashes.
Tell me (o merciful Lord) thy poor and wretched servant, tell me for thy
mercies sake I beseech thee, what art thou to me? Whereupon thou have thundered
with a great voice from above into the internal ear of my heart, and have
cured my deafnes, so that I have heard thy voice: thou have likewise
enlightened my blindness, and I have seen thy light, and known thee to be my
God.

For this cause I affirmed, that I have known thee. I have known thee to be
my God. I have known thee to be the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom
thou have sent.

There was a time, when I did not know thee. Woe be to that time, when I did
not know thee: woe be to that blindness, when I did not see thee: woe be to
that deafnes, when I did not hear thee: when I became blind, deae, and
deformed, by overmuch affectinge those fair things which thou have framed.

Thou (o Lord) were with me, and I was not with thee, because those things did
keep me away from thee, which had noe being, but in thee. Thou have enlightened
me, o light of the world, and I have seen thee and loved thee: Because noe
man loves thee, but he that seethe thee, and noe man seethe thee, but he that
loves thee.

Too late have I loved thee (o beauty most old and new) to to late have I
loved thee. Woe be to that time when I have not loved thee.

A profession of the true faith. CHAPT. XXXII.
I Give thee thanks, o my light, who have enlightened me, and I have known
thee. But how have I known thee? I have known thee to be the only living and
true God, and my creator. I have known thee to be the maker of heaven and
earth, of all things visible and invisible, to be true God, omnipotent,
immortal, and invisible, having neither bounds, nor limits, eternal,
inaccessible, incomprehensible, unsearchable, immutable, unspeakably great,
yea infinite, the beginning of all visible and invisible creatures, by whom all
things are made, by whom all the elements are preserved and maintained. Whose
majesty, like as it had never beginning, so it shall never, have ending.

I have known thee to be one only true God, the everlasting Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, three persons indeed, yet but one only simple essence, and
indivisible nature: the Father from none, the Son from the Father alone, the
holy Ghost proceeding equally from the Father and the Son: being always
without beginning, or ending* one only God in three persons, true God
almighty, the sole beginning of all things, the creator of all things visible
and invisible, spiritual and temporal. Who by thy omnipotent power in the
beginning when time first began, did create of nothing both creatures at
once the spiritual and corporal, to wit Angels and creatures of the world,
and after that man, consisting of a body and soul, as one common to both of
them

I have known thee, and confess thee to be true God the Father unbegotten,
the son begotten of the Father, the holy Ghost the comforter, neither
begotten, neither unbegotten, the sacred and inseperable Trinity, in three
persons, coequall, consubstantiall, and coeternall, Trinity in unity, and
unity in Trinity, which I believe in my heart for my justification, and
confess with my mouth for the attaining of salvation.

I have known thee Jesus Christ our Lord the only begotten son of God, to
be true God, the creator, savior and redeemer of me, and all mankind, whom I
confess to have been borne of the father before all worlds God of God, light
of light, very God, of very God, not made but begotten, consubstantiall and
coeternall to the father and the holy Ghost, by whom all things were made from
the beginning, firmly believing; and unfeignedly confessing thee Jesus Christ
the only begotten son of the father to be true God* by the common consent of
the whole Trinity, taking flesh upon thee for the salvation of man, and by
the cooperation of the holy Ghost conceived of thy blessed mother Marie ever a
Virgin, being made true man of a reasonnable soul, and human flesh
subsisting. Who al be it thou art the only begotten son of God, and
consequently impassible and immortal according to thy divinity: yet by reason
of the unspeakable love, wherewith thou have loved us, thou the same son of
God, have become passible and mortal according to thy humanity.

Thou (I say) o only Son of God, for man's salvation have vouchsafed to
endure a most bitter death and passion, to the end thou might deliver us
from death everlasting. Thou likewise (o author of light) have descended into
hell, where our forefathers did sit in darkness, and have returned from thence
on the third day as a glorious conqueror, resuming again thy sacred body,
which for our sins had remained dead in the sepulcher, and reviving it the
third day according to the scripture, that thou might place it in glory at
the right hand of God the father. For having delivered those from captivity,
whom the ancient foe and ennimie of mankind has detained as prisoners in ^imbo
Patrum, thou the true son of God, have ascended above all the heavens with
the substance of our flesh, that is with a soul and human flesh, taken of
the glorious Virgin: mounting above all the orders of Angels, where thou
sit at the right hand of God the Father, where there is the fountain of
life, and that light unto which noe creature can attain, where there is the
peace of God, which passes all understanding.

We adore thee Jesus Christ, believing thee to be there, confessinge God to be
thy Father: from whence we expect thee to come at the end of the world to
judge both the quick and the dead, and to render to all men, whether good or
evil, a reward or punishment, according to their actions done in this
life, like as every one shall be deemed worthy either of perpetual peace or
pain. For all men, that have received a human soul, shall arise at that day
in the same flesh, which they had here; being by the voice of thy divine
power summoned to appear; to the end, that every man (his soul and body
being reunited in one) may according to his meritts, receive either glory or
damnation.

Thou (o Lord Jesus Christ) art our life, and our resurrection: whom we expect,
as our Savior to come and save us, who wilt reform the body of our baseness,
making it conformable to the body of thy brightness.

I have known thee true God, and one holy Spirit of the Father and the Son,
proceeding equally from both of them, consubstantiall and coeternall to the
Father and the Son, being our comforter and advocate: who in likeness of a
dove have descended upon the same God, our Lord Jesus Christ, appearing
likewise in tongues of fire upon the Apostles. Who also by the gift of thy
grace have taught all the Saints and elect of God from the beginning, openning
in like manner the mouths of the Prophets, to the end they might declare the
wonderful things of thy heavenly kingdom: who together with the Father and
the Son art adored and glorified of all the Saints of God. Amongst whom I
likewise the son of thy hande-maide, do with my whole heart glorify thy name,
because thou have enlightened me. For thou art the true light, the light that
tells the truth, the truth, the fire of God, and the master and directour of
our souls, who by thy sacred unction do teach us all truth.

Thou art the Spirit of truth, without whose aid it is impossible to please
God: because thou thy self art God of God, and light of light, proceeding
after an unspeakable manner from the Father of lights, and from his son
Jesus Christ our Lord, with whom thou art glorified, and do reign together
with them superessentiallie, being consubstantiall, coequall and coeternal with
them in the essence of one Trinity.

I have known thee one living and true God, the Father, the Son and the holy
Ghost, three indeed in persons, but one in essence: whom I confess, adore,
and glorify with my whole heart as the true and only God, holy, immortal,
invisible, immutable, inaccessible, unsearchable, one light, one sun, one
bread* one life, one good, one beginning and one end, one creator of heaven
and earth: by whom all things do live, are preserved, guided, governed, and
revived, in heaven, in earth, and under the earth: besides whom there is noe
God either is heaven or earth.

Thus o Lord God I have known thee (who know me) thus I have known thee. I
have known thee o my light, by thy faith, which thou have inspired into me, o
Lord my God the light of ^^ineeies, the hope of the universal world, the joy
that makes glad my young and tender years, and the good that sustaineth my
old age.

All my bones rejoice in thee (o Lord) saying: O Lord who is like unto thee)
Who is like unto thee o Lord amongst the Gods? For that the hands of men have
not made thee, but contrariwise, it is thou that have made the hands of men.
The idols of the Gentills are silver and gold, the workmanship of the hands
of men: but the maker of men is not such an one. All the Gods of the Gentiles
are devils, but our Lord has made the heavens; he therefore is the true God.
Let those Gods, which have not made heaven and earth, perish, and be cast
forth of heaven and earth: and let heaven and earth praise that God, which
has created heaven and earth.

The acknowledging of our own baseness. CHAPT. XXXIII.
WHo is like unto thee (o Lord even among the Gods? Who (I say) is like unto
thee? Thou art great in sancti^ie, terrible, and worthy to be praised, doing
things that deserve to be admired.

Too too late have I known thee (o true light) too too late have I known
thee. And the cause was, for that there was a great and dark cloud before
mine eyes, that delighted in vanity, which hindered me from beholding the sun
of justice, and the light of all verity. I was wrapped in darkness, being the
child of darkness, because I knew not the light. I was blind^, and loved
blindness, and walked through one darkness into an other.

Who has delivered me from thence, where I remained as a blind man, sitting
in darkness, and in the shadow of death? Who has taken me by the hand, and
lead me forth of the same? Who is he, that has thus enlightened me? I sought
him not, and he sought me; I called him not, and he called me. But who is he?
Thou art he (o Lord my God) being most merciful and pitiful, yea the Father
of mercies, and God of all comfort.

Thou (o Lord my God most holy) art he that have done the same, whom I
confess with my whole heart, rendering thanks to thy holy name. I did not seek
thee, thou have sought me. I did not call upon thee, thou have called me, yea
thou have called me by thine own name.

Thou have thundered from heaven with a great voice into the internal ear of
my heart, saying: Let light be made, and light was made: whereupon that great
and dark cloud, which had covered mine eyes, departed and was dissolved,
whereby I have seen thy light, and known thy voice: And I said* Trulieo
Lord, thou art my God, who have delivered me out of darkness, and from the
shadow of death, calling me into thy admirable light, so that now I see.

Thanks be to thee (o Lord) who have enlightened me. And I looked back, and
beheld the darkness, wherein I had lived, and the deep dark dongeon, wherein I
had remained, which made me with fear and trembling to cry out, saying: Woe
is me, woe is me, in respect of the darkness in which I have remained; woe is
me, in respect of my former blindness, in which I could not see the light of
heaven. Woe is me, woe is me, in respect of my former ignorance, when I did not
know thee o Lord. Thanks therefore be to thee o my enlightner and deliverer,
for that thou have enlightened me, and I have known thee.

Too too late have I known thee, o ancient verity, too too late have I known
thee, o eternal truth. Thou remained^s;t in light, and I in darkness; and I
knew thee not, because I could not be enlightened without thee, for that there
is noe light besides thee.

A consideration of Gods divine Majesty. CHAPT. XXXIV.
O God the holy of holies, the God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, of inestimable
Majesty, whose wonderful greatness cannot be uttered or imagined: before whom
the Angelical Powers do shake for feate, whom all the Dominations, and
Thrones do adore, in whose presence all the Virtues do tremble, whose power
and wisdom is infinite: who have laid the foundation of the world upon
nothing, and gathered together the sea in the air as it were in a bottle.

O most mighty, most holy, and most powerful God, the God of the Spirits of
souls of all mortal creatures, from whose sight heaven and earth do fly
away for fear, to whom all the elements do obey at a beck, let all thy
creatures adore and glorify thee. Amongst whom I unworthy wretch the son of
thy hand maid do bow down the neck of my heart under the feet of thy
supreme Majesty (being taught so to do by the faith, which thou have given
me) rendering thanks unto thee, for that thou have vouchsafed by thy mercy to
enlighten me.

O light most true, sacred and delightful, most worthy of praise, and most
admirable, which enlightneth every man coming into this world, yet the eyes
of the Angels themselves. Behold now I see, for which I thank thee. Behold
now I see thee light of heaven; a heavenly bright beam proceeding from the
face of thy brightness, does shine upon the eyes of my mind, which makes all
my bones to rejoice.

O that this light were perfect in me, increase it in me, o author of light, I
beseech thee Increase (I say) I beseech thee, that light that shines in me.
Let it be augmented I beseech thee, let it be augmented by thee. What is this,
that I feel? What fire is this, that makes ho^te my heart? What light is this
that enlightneth my heart?

O fire which do always burn, and ar^ never extinguished, enflamme me O
light, which do alwai^s shine, and art never darkened, enlighten me. O that I
were made ho^te by thee. O sacred fire, how sweetly do thou heat, how
secretly do thou shine, how desiredlie do thou burn? Woe be to those,
that are not made hoate by thee, woe be to those, that are not enlightened by
thee. O true light enlightening all the world, whose brightness does replenishe
all the world* Woe be to those blind eyes, which do not see thee, who art the
sun, that give light both to heaven and earth. Woe be to those dim eyes,
which cannot see thee. Woe be to those eyes, that are turned away from seeing
verity. Woe be to those eyes that are not turned away from seeing vanity.

Verily those eyes, that are accustomed to darkness, cannot behold the bright
beams of thy supreme righteousness, neither do they know what to think of
the light, whose dwelling is in darkness. They see, love, and approve the
darkness, so that walking from one darkness into an other they stumble, and
tumble they know not whither. Doubtless they are wretched, that know not what
they loose, but they are more wretched, that know what they loose, who fall
with their eyes open, and descend alive into perdition.

O light most blessed, who can not be seen of those eyes, that are never so
little defiled; Blessed are the clean in heart, for they shall see God.
Cleanse me o cleansing virtue, cure mine eyes, to the end, that with sound and
clear eyes I may be able to behold thee, whom sore and sickly eyes cannot
possibly see. Remove from mine eyes (I beseech thee o inaccessible beauty) the
scales of my former blindness, by the beams of thy brightness, that I may be
able steadfastly to behold thee, and in thy light may see light.

Behold, o my light, now I see, for which I thank thee. Let this my light o
Lord (I beseech thee) be increased by thee. Open mine eyes, that I may see the
wonderful things of thy law who, art wonderful in thy Saints. I give thee
thanks o my light, for that I now see, albeit obscurely as it were in a mirror
or looking glass: but when shall I see thee apparantlie face to face?

O when will that day of joy and mirthe arrive, in which I shall enter into the
place of thy tabernacle so much to be admired, even into the house of God, to
the end I may see him face to face, that seethe me, that so my desire may be
accomplished.

Of the desire and thirst of the soul after God. CHAPT. XXXV.
LIke as the heart or stagge desires the fountains of water (when he is
poursued) even so my soul longs after thee o God. My soul has thirsted
after thee my God the living fountain; when shall I come, and appear before
thy face? O fountain of life, o vein of living waters, when shall I come to
the waters of thy sweetness from this deserte, craggie and dry country, that I
may see thy virtue and glory, and quench my thirst with the waters of thy
mercy?

I thirst o Lord, thou that art the fountain of life, give me to drink. I
thirst o Lord, I thirst after thee the living God. O when shall I come good
Lord, and appear before thy face? And shall I then at length indeed see that
day, that day (I say) of joy and gladness, that day, which our Lord himself
has made, that we might rejoice and be glad in it?

O famous, and fair day, having neither evening, nor Sunsetting, in which I
shall hear the voice of praise, mirthe, and thanks-giuinge; in which I shall
hear said: Enter into the joy of thy Lord. Enter into the everlasting joy,
into the house of thy Lord God, where there are great, and unsearchable, and
wonderful things, which cannot be numbered. Enter into that joy, which is free
from heaviness, which contains everlasting glad^^^ where all goodness does
abound, and no ^euill can be found. Where there shall be whatsoever thou love,
and nothing that thou loathest. There is that vital life, which is sweet and
lovely, which likewise shall endure everlastingly. Where there shall be noe foe
to impugn us, not allurement to entice us, but sovereign and certain
assurednes, assured quietness, and quiet ioyfullnes, joyful happiness, happy
euerlastingnes, and everlasting blessendes; where there is the blessed
Trinity, and unity of Trinity, and deity of unity, and the blessed sight of
the deity, which is the joy of thy Lord God.

O joy surmounting all joy, o joy exceeding all joy, besides which there is noe
true joy; when shall I enter into thee, that I may see my God, that dwells in
thee? I will go thither, and see that great sight. What is it, that does
detain me? Woe is me, for that my abode in this life has been over long. How
long (alas) shall I hear it said, where is thy God? how long shall I hear it
said, stay a while, expect yet a while*

Now therefore, what do I expect? do we not (o Lord my God) expect our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, who will reform the body of our humility, making
it like to his bright and glorious body. We expect our Lord* when he will
return from the marriages, that he may vouchsafe to admit us to his marriage.

Come o Lord, and do not stay. Come o Lord Jesus Christ, and ^^sit us in
peace: come and deliver us, that lie fettered and bound in the prison of this
mortal body; that with a perfect heart, we may rejoice before thee. Come o
sweet Savior. Tho^ that of the Gentiles art so much desired, come, and show
us thy face, and we shall be saved. Come o my light, and my Redeemer, deliver my
soul forth of prison, to praise and magnify thy holy name.

How long shall I poor wretched man, be tossed to and fro in the floudes of
this my mortality, crying unto thee (o Lord) and yet thou do not hear me?
Hear me o Lord, crying unto thee out of this great sea of misery, and bring
me to the haven of heavenly felicity.

happy are they, who being delivered from the danger of this tempestuous sea,
have deserved to attain unto thee o God, the port of peace and security.
Those truly are truly happy, who have arrived from this sorrowful sea, to
the shore of saftie, from this place of banishment to the heavenly country,
from the prison of this mortality, to the palace of perpetual felicity: who
having obtained the reward of everlasting glory, by means of the manifold
miseries, which here they sustained, do now for evermore rejoice with must
happy mirth, being now blessed by enioyeing that rest, which they so much
desired.

Without doubt they are blessed yea more then a thousand times blessed, who
being now fre from al misery have deserved to attain to the kingdom of all
brightness and beauty, being likewse secure of this their never fading and
never failing glory. O eternal kingdom. o kingdom as long to continue as
eternity it self: where there is light everlasting, and the peace of God,
which passes all understanding: in which kingdom the souls of the Sain^s do
repose, their heads being ouershadowed with perpetual gladness, who shall be
euelastinglie replenished with such excessive joy and mitth of mind, as that
neither grief nor groans, shall eue^ be heard in those their confines. O
how glorious is that kingdom, in which all thy Saints reign with thee (o
Lord) being clothed with light as with a garment, each one of them having on
his head, a crown adorned with precious stones? O kingdom of everlasting
bliss, where thou (o Lord) being the hope of the Saints, and the crown of
their glory, art apparantlie face to face seen of them, making them on all
parts to rejoice in thy peace, which surpasses all understanding.

There there is infinite joy, mirthe without sadness, health without sickness,
way without wearines, light without darkness, life without death, all manner of
goodness free from all manner of wickedness. Where youth never grows old,
where life knows noe end, where beauty never fades, where charity never
fails, where health never decays, where joy never decreaseth, where grief
is never felt, where groaning is never heard, where sorrow is never seen or
perceived, where all manner of mirth is always enjoyed, where noe evil is
feared: because the sovereign and supreme good is there possessed, which is
to contemplate the face of the Lord of all virtues, world without end.

Happy therefore are they, who being escaped from the shipwreck of this present
life, have deserved to attain to so great gladness. But unhappy (alas) and
unfortunate we, who sail through the te^pestuous storms, and dangerous gulfes
of this great sea, being ignorant whether we shall ever be able to arrive at
the happy haven of heavenly felicity. Unhappy I say, are we* whose life is
in exile, whose life is in peril, and whose end is doubtful, not knowing what
our end will be, for that all things are held in suspe^ce until our last
day. We remain, as yet tossed to and fro in ^he troublesome floudes of this
tempestuous sea, sighing and seeking to attain to thee (o Lord) the haven of
this sea?

O our country; o secure country, albeit a far of, yet we see thee, from
this sorrowful sea we salute thee, from this vale of misery we sighe after
thee, endeavoring even with tears, that by one means or an other we may
attain unto thee.

O Christ the hope of all mankind, God of God, our defense and safety, whose
light (like a beam of the star of the sea) does enlighten our eyes amidst
the foggie mists of this tempestuous sea, that thereby we may be guided to thee
the haven of security. Guide (o Lord) this our shipp with thy right hand,
with the stern of thy cross, that we perish not in the floudes, that the
tempest of water do not drown us, that the deep gulfes do not devour us:
but with the crook of thy cross, draw us out of this sea unto thee our only
comfort and solace, whom we behold a far off standing on the shore of that
heavenly country, with tears of tender love ready to receive us, shining as
the morning star, and as the sun of justice.

Behold (o Christ) we call and cry unto thee from this place of exile, as
poor captives by thee redeemed, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious
blood. Hear us (o God our Savior) the hope of all those that dwell in the
uttermost parts of the world* or far distant in in the sea, where soever.

Behold we sail in a troublesome and tempestuous sea, thou (o Lord) who
stand on the shore, see the manifold dangers in which we are: for thy
names sake, save us we beseech thee. Grant us grace (o Lord) so to sail,
and in sailing so to keep the midway between Scilla and Charybdis, that
both those perilous gulfes being avoided, we may with safe ship and
merchandise, securely arrive at the haven of heavenly happiness.

A further discourse of the country and kingdom of heaven. CHAPT. XXXVI.
WHen therefore we shall attain unto thee, the fountain of heavenly wisdom,
to thee the light everlasting, to thee the brightness which shall ever shine:
(not seeing thee then as we do now obscurely as it were in a mirroure or
looking glass, but apparently face to face) then will our desire in things
that are good, be fully contented and satisfied, for that there will be noe
other external thing at that time that may be desired, saving thee (o Lord)
the supreme and chiefest good. Who wilt be the reward of the blessed, the
crown or diadem of their beauty, and the everlasting joy, which shall
enuiron their heads, giving them peace both without and within, by means of
thy peace, which passes all understanding. There we shall see thee, love thee,
and pray se thee.

We shall see light in thy light, for that with thee is the fountain of life,
and in thy light we shall see light. But what light? Surely, surpassing great
light, spiritual light, inccorruptible and incomprehensible light, infaileable
and unquenchable light, a light unto which noe man can approache or attain,
light uncreated, true, and divine, which enlightneth the eyes of the Angels,
which makes the youth of the Saints for to rejoice and be glad, which is
the light of lights, and fountain of life, even thou thy self o Lord my God.
For thou art the light, in whose light we shall see light; that is to say, we
shall see thee in thy self, in the brightness of thy countenance, when we shall
behold thee face to face.

Now what other thing is it, to behold thee face to face, but (according as
the Apostle says) to know thee, even as I am known, to know thy truth,
and thy glory? To know thy face therefore is nothing else, but to know the
power of the Father, the wisdom of the Son, the mercy of the holy Ghost,
the essence of the most high Trinity, being undivided, and one only.
Wherefore to behold the face of the living God, is the chiefest good, the joy
of the Angels, and of all the Saints, the recompense of eternal life, the
glory of the blessed spirits the everlasting gladness, the crown of
comelines, the reward of happiness, the richest rest, the beauty of peace, the
internal and external delectation, the paradise of God, the celestial
Jerusalem, the happy life, the fulness of felicity, the delight of eternity,
the peace of God, which passes all understanding.

Man's whole bliss therefore, and beatitude does consist in beholding the face
of his God, to see him that has made heaven and earth, to see him that has
made him, that has saved him, that has glorified him. He shall see him by
knowing him, he shall love him by affectinge him, he shall praise him by
possessinge him. For he shall be the inheritance of his people, of his people
the Saints and blessed, of his people whom he has redeemed. He shall be the
possession of their beatitude, he shall be the reward and recompense of that,
which they have so long expected. Even as he promised, when he said; I will
be thy surpassinge great reward. For that it is meet, that so great a
reward, should be given by so great a Lord.

Truly (o Lord my God) thou art surpassing great above all the Gods* and thy
reward likewise is surpassing great. Neither art thou great, and thy reward
little, but as thou art great, so in like manner is thy recompense, for that
betwixt thee and it, there is noe difference.

Thou thy self art surpassing great indeade, thou thy self art a reward
surpassing great, thou thy self art the crowner and the crown, the promisser
and the promise, the giver and the gift, the rewarder and the reward of
eternal happiness. Thou therefore (o my God) art the crowner and the crown, the
diadem of my hope, which is adorned with glory; thou art the light that
gladdeth, the light that renews, the brightness that beautifieth, thou art my
great hope, the internal love and delight of the blessed, even he, whom they
have still so much desired.

Thy sight therefore (o Lord) is our whole reward, our whole recompense, and
all the joy, which we expect. For this is life everlasting, this (I say) is thy
wisdom. This is life everlasting, that we know thee ^^^onely true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

When therefore we shall behold thee the only God, the true God, the living
God, who art, omnipotent, simple invisible, infinite, and incomprehensible:
when likewise we shall see our Lord Jesus Christ thy only begotten son, being
consubstantiall and coeternall with thee, whom in the virtue of the holy Ghost
thou have sent into the world for our salvation: Finally when we shall
contemplate thee, the God which art only holy, three in persons, and one in
essence, besides whom there is noe other; then we shall obtain that which we
now seek for, to wit eternal life, everlasting glory, which thou have
prepared for those that love thee, which thou have reserved for those that
fear thee, which thou will bestow upon those that seek thee, upon those I
say, which seek thy face continually.

Wherefore o my Lord God, who have fashioned me within the womb of my mother
(who have recommended me to the protection of thy divine power) permit me not
any more to be distracted from one thing into many, but draw me from external
things unto my self; and from my self unto thee, to the end, that my heart
may always say unto thee. My face has sought thee, thy face will I seek o
Lord, thy face o Lord of all power and fortitude, in whose only sight does
consist the whole glory, and everlasting beatitude of the blessed. Because to
see the face of God is life everlasting, and the endless glory of the Saints
in heaven.

Let my heart therefore rejoice, that it may fear thy name, let their heart
rejoice, that seek our Lord, but mnch more theires, that find him. For if it
be a pleasure to seek him, what a joy will it be to find him? Wherefore I will
always seek thy face with affection and devotion, that by that means I may
peradventure at length deserve to have the door and gate of righteousness opened
unto me, that I may enter into the joy of my Lord. This is the door of our
Lord, the just shall euter in thereat.

A Prayer to the holy Trinity. CHAPT. XXXVII.
O You three coequall and coeternall persons, one only true God, the Father,
the Son, and the holy Ghost, who dwell in eternity alone, in that, light,
unto which noe man can attain. Who by thy power have laid the world^
foundation, and by thy wisdom do govern the same. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord
God of hosts. Terrible and powerfuli, just and merciful, worthy to be admired,
praised and beloved. One God, three persons, one essence, one power, our
wisdom, one goodness, one only Trinity void of separation. Open the doors
of thy righteousness unto me (o Lord) crying unto thee, to the end that being
entered in, I may praise thee with words of thanksgiving.

Behold o supreme house-holder, I stand knockinge at thy door as a poor
beggar, command that thy door may be opened unto me, who have said: Knock,
and it shall be opened unto you. The affections of my groa^ing heart, and the
crying of my weeping eyes, do knock at thy door, o Father of mercies. Thou
know my desire, and my groaning is not hidden from thee. Hide not then thy
face from me any longer, neither do thou forsake me in thine anger.

O Father of mercies, hear the lamentable complainte of me thy poor orpha^t,
and stretche forth thy helping hand, that it may draw me out of the deep
waters, out of the lake of misery, and out of the duste and dreggs of
iniquity, that I perish not before the eyes of thy mercy, and in presence of
thy infinite patience: but let me escape unto thee o Lord my God, that I may
behold the riches of thy kingedome, and always see thy face, and singe
praises unto thy holy name.

Thou o Lord, who do things worthy of admiration, who through, the
remembrance of thee, make my heart merry, who have enlightened my youth,
despise not now my old age, I beseech thee: but cause my bones, and gray
hairs to become joyful and youthful, like unto the bones and hoary feathers
of an Eagle.

The end of S. Augustins Soliloquies, that is of the secret discourses and
conferences of his soul with God.
OF THE SOLILOQVIES OF S. AVGVSTIN, BISHOP OF HIPPON.
OF the unspeakable sweetness of God. Chapt. I. Of the misery and frailty of
man. Chapt. II. Of the admirable light of God. Chapt. III. Of the mortality of
man's nature. Chapt. IV. What it is to become nothing. Chapt. V. Of the
miserable estate of the soul, being in sin. Chapt. VI. Of the manifold
benefits of almighty God Chapt. VII. Of the future dignity of man. Chapt.
VIII. Of Gods omnipotent power. Chapt. IX. Of the incomprehensible praise of
God. Chapt. X. Of the hope which we ought to have in God. Chapt. XI. Of the
snares of concupiscences. Chapt. XII. Of the miseries of man, and the manifold
benefits of almighty God. Chapt. XIII How God does continually look into the
actions and intentions of men. Chapt. XIV. That man without the assistance of
Gods grace, is able to do nothing of himself. Chapt. XV. Of the devil, and
his manifold temptatations. Chapt XVI. That God is the light of the just.
Chapt. XVII. A further acknowledging of the benefits of God. Chapt. XVIII. Of
the vehemency of love or charity. Chapt. XIX. How God has made all things
subject to the service of man. Chapt. XX. How by the consideration of benefits
temporal, we may gather the greatness of those that are celestial. Chapt. XXI.
That the sweetness of God does take away the present bitterness of the world.
Chapt. XXII. That our whole hope, and the desire of our heart ought to be in
God. Chapt. XXIII. That our salvation is from God. Chapt. XXIV. How without the
assistance of Gods grace, man's will is unable to do well. Chapt. XXV. Of the
ancient benefits of almighty God. Chapt. XXVI. Of the Angels appointed to be
the guardians of men. Chapt. XXVII. Of the profounde predestination and
foreknowledg of almighty God, Chapt. XXVIII. Of those that at first are good,
and afterward become bad: and contrariwise of those that at first are bad,
and afterward become good, Chapt. XXIX. That a faithful soul is the
sanctuary of God. Chapt. XXX. That God cannot be found either by the
exterior or interior senses, Chapt. XXXI. A profession of the true faith,
Chapt. XXXII. The acknowledging of our own baseness, Chapt. XXXIII. A
consideration of Gods divine Majesty. Chapt XXXIV. Of the desire and thirst of
the soul after God. Chap. XXXV. A further discouse of the country and kingdom
of heaven. Chapt. XXXVI. A Prayer to the holy Trinity, Chapt. XXXVII.
THE MANVEL OF S. AVGVSTIN, BISHOPP OF HYPPON, OTHERWISE TERMED

A little book treating of the comtemplation of Christ, or the word of God.

Stirring up our weak and drousi^ memory, to the desire of heavenly
felicity.

AT S. OMERS, For JOHN HEIGHAM. Anno 1624.

THE MANVEL OF S. AVGVSTIN, BISHOPP OF HYPPON, OTHERWISE TERMED A little book
treating of the contemplation of Christ, or the word of God.
Stirring up our weak and drousie memory, to the desire of heavenly
felicity.
THE PREFACE.
Seeing we live amidst a multitude of snares and ginnes, we easily grow cold
in the love of heavenly things. Wherefore we stand in need of continual
succoure and aid, that as often as we fall and fail in our duty toward
God, we may (as men awakened) have recourse to him, the sovereign and supreme
good. For this cause I have compiled and composed this little work, not
through any presumptious opinion I have of my self but through the great love
of my God, and the desire I have to advance his praise; to the end I might
always have about me some small Manuel of short sentences concerning my God,
drawn out of the worthiest words and writings of holy Fathers; by the fire
of reading whereof, I might (as often as I grow cold) be inflamed with
affection toward him.

Now therefore assist me (o my God) whom I seek, and love, whom likewise with
my heart and mouth, and with all my force, I praise and adore. My soul (which
is wholly devoted to thee, and inflamed with thy love, sighing and searching
earnestly after thee, desiring to see thee only) takes delight in nothing
else, but to speak, hear, write, and confer of thee, and frequentlye to
meditate of thy glory, to the end that the sweet remembrance of thee, may be
some mitigation amidst so many storms of affliction.

To thee therefore I call (o most desired Lord) to thee I cry with a loud
voice, even with my whole heart. And when I call upon thee, I call upon thee
remaining within me, for that I were mere nothing, if thou were not in me,
neither were thou in me, unless I were in thee. Doubtless thou art in me,
because thou remainest in my memory, by which I have known thee, and in which
I do find thee, as often as I am mindful of thee, and ame delighted in thee
or from thee; from whom, by whom, and in whom all things have their beginning
conservation, and being.

Of the wonderful essence of God. CHAPT. I*
THou (O Lord) do fill heaven and earth, carrying all things without burden,
filling all things without inclusion. Always doing, always resting.
Gathering things together, and yet not needy. Seeking, albeit nothing is
wanting unto thee, loving, without being afflicted, jealous, yet resting
assured. It repents thee, and yet thou art not grieved* thou art angry, and
yet art appeased. Thou do alter what thou have done, without altering thy
determination. Thou take what thou do find, having never lost any thing.
Thou reioycest in gain, although thou were never needy: and albeit thou were
never covetous, yet thou exactest usury. Thou give more then is demanded,
to him, that thou act not indebted; and yet to make thee indebted, more
continually is given thee then by thee is required. And yet who is there, that
has any thing not thine? Thou payest debtes, being indebted to noe man, and
forgiuest debtes, thereby loosing nothing. Who art every where, and wholly
every where. Who may be felt, but can not be seen.

Woe art nowhere wanting, and yet art far distant from the thoughts of
wicked men. Who art not there absent, where thou art far distant, because
where thou art absent by grace, thou art present by revenge. Who art every
where present and yet can hardly be found. Whom we follow standing still,
and cannot overtake. Who do contain all things, fill all things, enuiron
all things, surmounte all things, and sustain all things.

Who teach the hearts of the faithful without sound of words. Who art not
extended by places, nor changed by times, neither do thou come and go. Whose
dwellinge is in that inaccessible light, which neither is, nor can be seen by
any mortal wight. Remaininge quiet in thy self, thou do on every side
enuiron the whole world. Thou can not be cut or cleft, because thou art
truly one, nor divided into parts, because thou do who* lie fill, beatifie
and possess whatsoever is contained in the whole world.

Of the unspeakable knowledge of God. CHAPT. II.
IF so many books were written, as with them even the whole world might be
filled, yet thy unspeakable knowledge could not be unfolded. And for that
thou art unspeakable, thou can not by any mean be described or defined,
either with words or writing, who art the fountain of divine brightness, and
the sun of eternal happiness.

Thou art great without quantity, and therefore infinitely great, thou art
good without quality, and therefore truly and chiefly good; neither is any one
good but thou alone, whose very will is as the deed done, whose pleasure is
reputed for power. Who have created all things of nothing by thine only
word, making the^ voluntarily of thine own accord. Who have all creatures in
thy possession, having noe need of them, and do rule and govern the^
without either trouble or labor, neither is there any thing whatsoever
(either in things above, or things beneathe) that can disturb or alter, the
settled order of thine Empire. Who art in all places without place, and art
every where present without situation, or motion. Who art not the author of
any evil, neither art thou able to do evil; who art able to do whatsoever
thou will, neither does it repent thee after thou have done it. By whose only
goodness we are created, by whose justice we are chastised, by whose mercy we
are redeemed. Whose omnipote^t power does govern, rule, and replenish all
things, which it has created.

Nevertheless we do not say, that thou do fill all things, as if they did
contain thee, seeing they are rather contained in thee: neither do we say,
that thou do fill them all particularly: neither is it lawful to think
that every creature, according to the greatness of his capacity does contain
thee, that is, the greatest more, and the least less, sithence thou art in
them all, or they all in thee. Whose omnipotency comprehends all things
whatsoever, neither can any one find means to escape thy power: so that he
with whom thou art not appeased, will not be able to get away, when thou art
offended.

Of the desire of the soul thinking of God. CHAPT. III.
Wherefore I inuit thee (o most merciful God) to come into my soul, which
thou have made ready to receive thee by means of those holy desires with
which thou have inspired the same. Enter into it I beseech thee, and make it
fitting for thee, that thou may possess it, which thou have created and
redeemed, that as a seal, I may always have thee fixed upon my soul.

Forsake me not (o most merciful Lord, I beseech thee) calling upon thee, for
that thou have called me, before I called upon thee, and have sought me, to the
end, that I thy poor servant should seek thee, by seeking should find
thee, and being found should love thee, I have sought thee (o Lord) and have
found thee, and do desire to love thee. Increase my desire, and grant me
that which I do desire, for that, unless thou give me thy self, I thy poor
servant cannot be satisfied, albeit thou should give me whatsoever thou
have created. Give me thy self therefore, o my God, give me thy self.

Behold I love thee, and if it be but a little, I will love thee more. Verily
(o Lord) I do love thee, I do desire thee exceedingly, I am much delighted
with the sweet remembrance of thee. For during the time that my mind does
sigh after thee, whilst it meditateth of thy unspeakable mercy, the burden
of my flesh is less burdensome unto me, the hurly burly of my cares and
cogitations do then cease, the weight of my mortality and manifold miseries
does not according to its wonted manner dull me, all things are quiet and at
peace. My heart burns, my mind reio^ceth, my memory flourishes, my
understanding shines, yea my whole soul is as it were ravished, with the love
of things that are heavenly, being inflamed with a desire of seeing thee.

Let my soul therefore take as it were the wings of an Eagle, and fly, and
not fail, let it fly until it come to the beauty of thy house, and to the
throne of thy glory, that there in the place of thy pasture (which is
enuironned with pleasant rivers) it may be fedd with the food of thine
internal consolation, sitting at the same table, on which those heavenly
cit^izens are wont to take their refection. Be thou (o Lord) our joy and
exultation, who art our hope, salvation, and redemption. Be thou our mirthe and
gladness, who art our future happiness. Let my soul always seek thee, and
grant, that it may not fainte in seeking thee.

Of the miserable estate of that soul, that does neither love nor seek our
Lord Jesus Christ. CHAPT. IV.
WOe be to that unhappy soul, which does neither seek nor love Jesus Christ
our Lord, for that it remains withered and wretched. He that loves not thee
(o God) lives but in vain. He that desires to love (o Lord) but not for
thee, is as it were a mere nothing, and not worthy of any estimation. He that
lives not to thee, is already dead. He that knows not thee, is a fool.

To thee therefore (o most merciful Lord) I commend and commit my self, from
whom I have received my being, life and wisdom; In thee is my hope, trust,
and confidence, by whom I hope to arise, live, and obtain everlasting rest,
and quietness. I desire, love, and adore thee, with whom I shall remain,
reign, and be happy, during all eternity. That soul doubtless loves the
world, which does not seek and love thee; it is a servant to sin; a slave
to all manner of iniquity, being never at rest, never in security.

Grant (o sweet Savior) that my soul may always serve thee. Let my
pilgrimage here upon earth continually sigh after thee, let my heart be
enflamed with the love of thee. Let my soul (o my God) repose in thee, let it
contemplate thee in excess of mind, let it with ioyfullnes singe and sound
forth thy praises, and let this be my comfort during the time of this my
banishment.

Let my mind fly under the shadow of thy wings, from the heat of worldly
cogitations. Let my heart pause and repose in thee, my heart (I say) which is
like unto a spacious and tempestuous sea.

O God the most rich and bountiful giver of the divine dainty dishes of
heavenly plenty, refreshe it being weary, recall it being gone astray,
deliver it being in captivity, and being by sin as it were broken in pieces,
restore it to the estate of its former innocence.

Behold it stands at thy door, knocking and calling unto thee. I beseech
thee (o Lord) by the bowels of thy mercy, in which thou have visited us
coming down from heaven, command thy gate to be opened unto my poor
wretched soul, knocking at the same, to the end it may freely enter in, and
repose in thee, and be fed by thee the bread of heaven: for thou art the
bread and fountain of life, thou art the light of everlasting felicity; thou
art all things, by which the righteous do live, that love thee.

Of the desire of the soul. CHAPT. V.
O God the light of those hearts that see thee, the life of those souls that
love thee, and the strength of those thoughts that seek thee, grant me
grace, that by love I may always* adhere unto thee. Come I beseech thee into
my heart, and make it drunk with the plenty of thy pleasure, to the end, I
may forget all temporal things whatsoever.

Verily I am ashamed and grieved to endure such things as are done in the
world* Whatsoever I see in this vale of misery is displeasing unto me,
whatsoever I hear of things transitory, is burdensome unto me. Help me (o
Lord my God) and make my heart glad, come unto me, that I may see thee.

But (alas) the house of my soul is over little to entertain thee, until
thou enter into it and enlarge it: It is ruinous and ready to fall, wherefore I
beseech thee to repair it. It has many things (I confess and know)
contained in it, which are displeasing in thy sight, but who will cleanse it,
or to whom besides thee, shall I cry to do it? Cleanse me (o Lord) from my
secret sins, and be merciful unto thy servant in respect of other men's
sins committed by my means.

Grant me grace (o sweet Christ, o good Jesus) grant me grace I beseech thee,
to lay aside the burden of all carnal love, and worldly desires through the
love and desire of thee. Let my soul have dominion over my body, reason over
my soul, thy grace over reason, and make me in all things subject to thy most
holy will both without and within.

Afforde me this favor I beseech thee, that my heart, and tongue, and all my
bones may praise and magnify thee. Dilate my mind, and lift up the eyes of my
heart, that (albeit for never so short a time) my soul may attain unto thee
the eternal wisdom, abiding above all things. Free me (I beseech thee) from
the bands, with which I am bound, that forsaking all things transitory, I
may adhere and attend unto thee only.

Of the souls felicity, being delivered out of the prison of this earthly
body. CHAPT. VI.
HAppy is that soul, which being freed from this earthly prison, does freely
mount up into heaven, which beholds thee (o sweet Lord) apparantlie face to
face, being now noe more affraied of death or of any worldly misery, but
reioycinge through the immortality of everlasting glory. It lives in repose
and security, fearing now neither death no^ ennimie. It enjoys thee being a
merciful Lord, whom it has long sought, and always loved, and being joined
in fellowship with the quires of Angels, it sings for ever mellifluous
sonnets of perpetual gladness, in praise and commendation of thy glory, o
Christ our King, o good Jesus. Verily it becomes as it were drunk through
the abundance of thy heavenly habitation, because thou do cause it to
drink of the river of thy unspeakable delectation.

O how happy is the heavenly company of celestial citizens, how glorious is
the solemni^ie of all those that return unto thee (o Lord) from the toiles and
travails of this our pilgrimage, to the pleasantnes of all beauty, to the
beauty of all brightness, and to the dignity of all excellency, where thy
citizens, o Lord do continually see thee? Nothing at all is there heard,
that may molest the mind; What sacred Canticles? what diversity of
instruments? what delightful ditties? what sweet sounds of heavenly harmony
are there heard incessantly? There the mellifluous organ, there the most
sweet melody of Angels, do sound forth Hymns, and admirable Canticles of
Canticles euelastingly, which are song by the celestial citizens to thy
praise and glory.

Noe spitefulnes or bitterness of affection, is found in that heavenly region;
for that neither malice nor malicious men, have there any abiding. Noe
adversary is there to impugn us, nor occasion of sin to entice us. There is
noe want or poverty in that place, noe shame or disgrace, noe brawling, noe up
braiding, noe blaming, noe fearefullnes, noe disquietnes, noe pain, noe
doubtfullnes, noe violence, noe variance: but contrariwise surpassing great
peace, perfect charity, singing and praising of God everlastingly, perpetual
repose joined with security, and joy in the holy Ghost during all eternity.

O how fortunate shall I be, if after this life, I shall be admitted to hear the
most pleasant and sweet songs of those heavenly citizens; if I shall be
admitted (I say) to hear those mellifluous meeters of poetry, made to
express the praises, and honor due to the most sacred Trinity. O how much
more happy shall I be, then I can imagine, if I my self likewise shall be
thought worthy to sing a song to our Lord Jesus Christ, even one of the sweet
songs of Syon.

Of the joy of Paradise. CHAPT. VII.
O Living life, o everlasting life, and everlastingly happy. Where there is
joy without grief, rest without labor* dignity without fear, riches
without sickness, plenty without want, life without death, eternity without
corruption, felicity without affliction: where all good things are
comprehended in perfect charity, where the Saints see God and one an other
apparantlie: where where there is perfect knowledge in all things, and of all
things, where the supreme goodness of God is beheld, and the light, that
enlightneth all things is by the Saints glorified: where Gods majesty is
seen present, and with this food of life the mind of the beholders does
remain satisfied and content.

They always see God, and by seeing long to see him, they desire it without
loathsomnes: where the true sun of justice does refreshe them all, by the
wonderful light of his unspeakable beauty, and does in that manner enlighten
all the c^ttizens of that celestial country, as that they (being but a light
enlightened by God, who is the light that enlightneth them) do shine more
bright then the sun, and all the stars of heaven. Who adhering unto God, who
is immortal, are by this means made immortal and incorruptible, according as
our Lord and Savior has promised, saying. O Father my will and desire is.,
that those which thou have given me, may be present with me where I am, to the
end they may see my glory, that all may be one, that as thou o Father art in
me, and I in thee, even so they may be one in us.

Of the kingdom of heaven. CHAPT. VIII.
THe kingedome of heaven is a most happy kingdom, free from death, void of
end, where time without succession of ages is still the same, where one
continual day without interchaunge of night, knows neither time past, nor to
come, where the valiant soldier after many travails sustained, and victory
obtained, is, with unspeakable gifts rewarded, a crown of endless bliss
being set upon his head.

O would to God (the multitude of my sins being forgiven me) it might please
his divine bounty to bidd me (of al Christ's servants the most unworthy) to lay
aside the burden of this my incorruptible body, to the end I might enter into
the endless joys of his heavenly city, there to find rest for all eternity,
that I might be placed to singe amongst the most sacred quires of those
celestial citizens, that with those most blessed spirits I might help to
sound forth the praises of my maker, and might in presence behold the face of
my God and Savior, that I might be exemp^ from all fear of death and worldly
misery, and might securely rejoice through the incorruption of perpetual
immortality, that I might be free from all blindness of ignorance, being united
unto him that knows all things.

I should little esteem all things transitory, and should scarce vouchsafe
to cast mine eye, or to think upon this vale of tears any more, where our
life is subject to affliction, subject to corruption, where our life is
replenished with all manner of bitterness, being the mistres of miscreants, and
handmaide unto hell it self: whom humors puff up, whom pains pull down,
whom heates do pearche, whom the air makes sick, whom feasting makes fatt,
and fasting makes lean, whom delights make dissolute, whom sorrows do
consume, whom pensiuenes does oppress, whom security makes dull, whom riches
lift up, and make stately, whom poverty does abase and make lowly, whom youth
makes to be magnified, old age to be crooked, whom sickness weakeneth, and
sadness afflicts. Where the devil lies in wait to deceive us, the world
flattereth us; where the flesh is delighted, the soul is blinded, and man on
every side is troubled and disquieted. And close as it were at the heels of
all these evils, does furious death come after, closinge up the end of the
delights of this miserable life in that fashion, as that being ended, they are
as if they had never been begun.

How God visits and comfort that soul, which with sighs and tears
lamenteth his absence. CHAP. IX.
But what praises or thanksgiving are we able (o God) to render unto thee, who
ceasest not to comfort us with the wonderful visitation of thy grace, even
amidst the manifold miseries of this our mortality? For behold, whiles I
fear what my end will be, whiles I enter into consideration of my sins and
iniquities, whiles I am affrayed of thy judgments, whiles I think of the
hour of my death, whiles I shiuer and shake through the horror of hell,
being ignorant how strictly and severely my actions will be examined by thee, as
also not knowing what the end of them will be.

Whiles with my self (I say) I consider secretly in my heart these and many
other such like things, thou (o Lord my God) according to thy wonted goodness,
do come, and comfort me poor wretch, being wholly overwhelmed with
heaviness, lifting up my sad and sorrowful soul (amidst my manifold wailinges
and weepinges, and profound sighs and lamentations) above the high tops of
the hills even unto the bedds of sweet and fiagrant spices, placing me in a
place of pasture, near unto the little brooks of sweet and pleasant waters,
preparing there in my presence a sumptuous banquet abounding with all
varieties, which may refresh my wearied spirit, and make glad my sorrowful
heart At length being made strong again by these dainties and delicacies, I
grow to forget my manifold miseries, for that I repose in thee the true peace,
being elevated above all earthly highness.

Of the sweetness of divine love. CHAPT. X.
I Do love thee, o my God, I do love thee, and do desire to love thee more
and more. Grant me grace o Lord my God, who in beauty do surpass the
children of men, that I may desire and love thee according to the greatness of
mine affection, and according to the greatness of mine obligation. Thou art
infinite (o Lord) and therefore art infinitely to be loved, especially of us,
whom thou have so wonderfully respected, and saved, for whom thou have done
so great things, and such as are worthy to be admired.

O love, which do always burn, and art never extinguished, o sweet Christ,
o good Jesus, my charity, and my God, inflame me wholly with thy fire, with the
love of thee, with thy sweetness, with the delight, and desire of thee, with thy
charity, with thy mirthe, and gladness, with thy mercy and gentleness, with thy
pleasure and affection, which is holy and good, chaste and clean: to the end,
that being wholly replenished with the sweetness of thy love, being wholly made
hot with the flame of thy charity, I may love the^ my Lord (of surpassing
great sweetness and beauty) with all my heart, with all my soul, with all my
strength, and with all mine intention, with much cordial contrition, and with
many tears of devotion, with much reverence and trembling; having thee in my
heart, and in my mouth, and before mine eyes always, and every where: so that
noe place may be found in me for the false love of any creature.

Of the preparation of our Redemption. CHAPT. XI.
I Beseech thee most fair Jesus, by that most sacred sheddinge of thy precious
blood, with which we are redeemed, give me contrition of heart, and a
fountain of tears, especially whiles I offer unto thee prayers and
petitions; whiles I sing Psalms of praise and thanksgiving: as often as I
call to mind, or speak of the mystery of our redemption, being an evident
token of thy infinite mercy and compassion. As often as I stand at thy holy
altar, (albeit unworthy of so great an honor) desiring to offer unto thee
that wonderful and celestial sacrifice and oblation worthy of all reverence
and devotion; which thou o Lord my God the immaculate Priest, have instituted
and appointed to be offered in remembrance of thy charity, that is, of the
death and passion, which thou have suffered for our delivery, and for the
daily reparation of ou^ fragilitie. Confirm my mind with the sweetness of thy
presence, during the time of so great mysteries, let it feel thy assistance,
and be filled with gladness.

O fire, which do always shine, o love, which do always burn, o sweet
Christ, o good Jesus, the eternal, and never failing light, the bread of life,
who do feed us, with thy self, without hurt to thy self, who art daily
eaten, and yet art always whole without being broken.

I beseech thee (o Lord) to shine upon me, and to inflame me: Enlighten and
sanctify me thy vessel, cleanse me from malice, fill me, and preserve me full
of thy grace, that to the good of my soul, I may eat the food of thy flesh,
to the end, that by eating thee, I may live of thee, I may live by thee, I may
come to thee, and repose in thee.

Of the joy, which the soul receiu^th by receiving Christ. CHAPT. XII.
O Lord the sweetness of love, and the love of sweetness: Be thou my food, and
let all my bowelles be filled with the delitious drink of thy love; to the
end, that all my words and cogitations may be good, and tending to
edification. Make me (o Lord and my love) to increase in thee, that thou may
be eaten by me worthily, who art more sweet then honey, more white then snow,
the food of such as grow great in virtue?

Thou art my life, by which I live, my hope, to which I adhere, my glory, which
I desire to obtain. Possess thou my heart, govern mine intention, direct mine
understanding, lift up my love, eleuate my mind, and draw the mouth of my
soul, thirsting after thee, to the waters of life everlasting.

Let all tumultuous thoughts and carnal cogitations (I beseech thee) hold
their peace: Let all fantasies of the earth and waters, of the air and
heavens keep silence. Let all dreams, and imaginary revelations, all tongues
and tokens, keep silence; briefly, let all things hold their peace that are
done in this vale of misery, being all of them short, and soon passing away.

Let my soul in like sort be silent, and not speak a word, let it leave it
self, by not thinking of it self, but of thee (o my God) for that thou art my
true and only hope, and my whole confidence. Because a part of each one of
us, as the blood, and flesh, is found in thee, o Lord our God, in thee (I say)
o most sweet, most gracious, and most mild Jesus. Where therefore part of me
does reign, there I believe likewise to have dominion, and where my blood does
dominere, there I trust to have principality and power. Where my flesh is
glorified, there I know my self to be renowned.

Although I am a sinner, yet I do not despair to be pertaker of this grace
and favor: although my sins do hinder it, yet my substance does require
it. Although my faults and defectes do exclude me, yet my human nature
which is common to me with Christ, does not repel me.

That the Word incarnate, is the cause of our hope. CHAPT. XIII.
Doubtless God is not so cruel, as not to love his own flesh, members, and
bowels. I should certainly despair by reason of the manifold sins, and
vices, faults and negligences, which I have committed, and do daily, and
continually, commit in thought, word and deed, and by all manner of means
by which human frailty is able to offend, were it not that thy divine Word
(o my God) had been made flesh, and dwelt in us. But now I dare not despair,
because he being obedient unto thee until death, even the death of the
Cross, has taken our handewrittinge or obligation (wherein we stood bound
as slaves to the Devil by sin) and fastening it to the Cross, has crucified
both sin and death. In him I securely breathe, who sits at thy right hand,
and makes intercession for us.

Trusting therefore in his bounty, I desire to come to thee, in whom we are
already risen again from the dead, and are revived; with whom we have
already ascended into heaven, and sit with him in glory in that happy
region. To thee therefore (o heavenly Father) be all praise, glory, honor, and
thanks-giuinge.

HOw the more we are addicted to divine contemplation, the greater delight we
take therein. CHAT. XIV.
How sweet is the remembrance of thee unto us, (o most loving Lord) who have
so dearly loved and saved us, who have so wonderfully revived and exalted
us. The more I meditare of thee, (o most merciful Lord) the more sweet and
amiable thou art unto me. And for that thy goodness does exceedingly delight
me; I purpose as long as I live in the place of this pilgrimage, to desire and
contemplate without ceasing thy wonderful love and unspeakable beauty, with
apure intention, and with a most sweet and louinge affection. Because I am
wounded with the darte of thy charity, I am wonderfully enflamed with the
desire of thee, coue^ing to come to thee, to see thee.

Wherefore I will stand upon my guarde, and will singe in spirit with
watchful eyes* yea I will singe with my mind, and with all my forces: I will
praise thee my creator and redeemer, I will pe^rce the heavens by devotion and
feruoure, and will remain with thee by a fervent desire: that being detained
in this present misery with my body only, I may in thought and affection be
continually with thee, to the end my heart may be there, where thou art, my
desired, incomparable, and most beloved treasure.

But alas (o Lord) my heart is not sufficient to conte^plate the glory of thy
great goodness and pity, for that thou art a God of infinite meekenes and
mercy: verily thy praise, thy beauty, thy virtue, thy glory, thy
magnificence, thy majesty, and thy charity, does far surpass the capacity
of any mortal memory. For even as the brightness of thy glory is inestimable,
so likewise the largenes of thy charity is unspeakable, whereby thou do
adopt those to be thy children, and unite them unto thee by love and affection,
whom thou have created of nothing.

How for Christ's sake we ought to wish for tribulations in this life. CHAT. XV.
O My soul, if it were necessary daily to suffer torments, yea to endure hell
it self for a long time together, that we might see Christ in (...) glory,
and be joined in fellowship with the Saints in his heavenly city, were it not
meet (think thou) to sustain all manner of misery, that we might be made
pertakes of so great a good, and of so great felicity?

Let the devils therefore endeavor (as much as they will) to entrap me, and by
tentatious to deceive me, let long fasting weaken my body, and course
clothing subdue my flesh, let travail trouble me, and watching dry me up to
nothing, let others exclaim against me, let this or that man disquiet and
molest me, let cold make me crooked, let my conscience murmr against me, let
heat scorche me, let my body be grieved, my breast enflamed, my stomach
puffed up with wind, my countenance wanne and withered: let me be wholly
afflicted with sickness, let my life consume away in sadness, and my years in
sighs and sorrowfullnes, let rottennes enter into my bones, and flow as water
out of my flesh, to the end I may find rest in the day of adversity, and
ascend to those celestial soldiers, that have obtained the victory.

O how great will be the glory and joy of the just and Saints in heaven,
sithence the face of each one of them shall shine as bright as the sun? at
such time as our Lord shall begin to number his chosen people in the kingdom
of his Father, each one distinctly in his order, and shall render to every
one the rewards which he promised, according as by their actions in this life
they have deserved: for ^arthly things giving the^ celestial, for transitory
eternal, for small and little, most ample and immeasurable.

There shall be without all doubt store of happiness and felicity, when our
Lord shall lead his Saints to the sight of his Fathers glory, making the to
sit on seats celestial, to the end that God may be all in all.

By what means the kingdom of heaven may be purchased and gotten. CHAPT. XVI.
O Happy joy, and joyful happiness, to see the Saints, to be with the
Saints, and to be a Saint, to see and enjoy God world without end, and
longer to, if longer could be imagined. Let us carefully consider these
things, and fervently desire them, to the end, we may speedily be joined to
the company of the Saints in heaven.

If thou demand how this may be done, by what merits or succoure, hearken,
and thou shall hear. This thing lies in the power of the doer, because the
kingdom of heaven suffers violence. The kingdom of heaven (o man) asks
noe other price but thy self, it is as much worth as thou art Give thy self
therefore, and thou shall have it. Why art thou troubled and discontent at the
price? Christ gave himself, that he might purchase thee, as a kingdom unto
God the Father. Give thou thy self in the same manner, to the end thou might
be his kingdom, and let not sin reign in this thy body, which is subject
to corruption; but rather let the spirit govern, for the attaining of life
everlasting.

What heaven is, and what happiness is contained therein. CHAPT. XVII.
LEt us return (o my soul) to the heavenly city, in which we are written
and enrolled as citizens of the same. Let us (as citizens of the saints and
Gods house-holde servants, yea as Gods heirs and coheires of Christ) consider
the felicity of this our famous city, to the uttermost of our possibility:
Let us cry out with the Prophet; O how glorious things are said of thee, o
City of God, in thee is the dwellinge of all those, that are truly glad.
Because thou art built as a place to meet and make merry, for such as God of
his infinity mercy, dot^^ vouchsafe to take unto himself out of this vale of
misery.

In thee there is noe old age, nor misery ensuing of the same, in thee there
is noe one lame or mamed, crumpe shouldered, or deformed: seeing all concur
into a perfect man, into the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ.

What can be imagined more happy then this life, where there is noe fear of
poverty, nor feeblenes of infirmity, where noe man is wronged, noe man is
displeased, noe man does envy at an others good. Where there is noe greedines
of gain, noe appetite of eating or drinking; where there is noe inordinate
desire of honor or ambition, noe dread of devil, or of diuellishe
temptation, noe horroure of hell or of hellishe damnation. Where there is noe
death either of body or soul, but a delightful life, endless and immortal.

Noe evil affections or dissentio^s shall be found there, but all things shall
accord and agree together, because all the Saints of that heavenly region,
shall be of one mind and affection. Where there is nothing but peace and
gladness, repose and quietness. Where there is perpetual brightness, not that
which now is, but by so much more bright, by how much more blessed; because
that city (even as it is written) shall need neither sun nor moon, but
God almighty shall enlighten the same, and the lamp thereof is the lamb.
Where the Saints shall shine as the stars for all eternity, and those that
teach many, shall in brightness resemble the clearenes of the sky.

Wherefore in that place there shall be noe night, noe darkness, noe concourse of
clouds, noe austeritie of cold or heat, but that temperature of all things,
which neither eye has seen, nor ear has heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of any man, saving of those, who are found worthy to enjoy the same,
whose names are written in the book of life.

But a greater content then this will be, to be joined in fellowship with the
quires of Angels, and Archangells, and of all the heavenly virtues, to
behold the Patriarchs and Prophets, to see the Apostles, and all the other
Saints, and among the rest, our parents, kinsfolk, and acquaintance.

These things without doubt are very glorious; but yet it is more glorious to
behold the face of God there present, and the brightness proceeding from the
same, which is infinitely great. Finally to see God in himself, to see him
and enjoy him in our selves will be a prerogative of glory surpassing all the
rest in excellency, because we shall see him everlastingly.

How man can make noe other requital unto God for the benefits received from
him, but only by louinge him. CHAP. XVIII.
THe soul of man (being famous and renowned by being created according to the
image and likeness of God) has in it self means from God, by which it is
always admonished either to remain with him, or to return unto him, if at
any time by sinful affections or defects it be sperated from him. Neither
has it means only, by which it may be able to desire and hope for mercy and
pardon (when it has offended) but likewise by which it may presume to aspire
to the marriage of the divine Word, yea to enter into a league of friendship
with God almighty, and with the king of Angels to draw the sweet yoke of
charity.

Love causes all this, if by the will the soul make it self like unto God,
to who^ by nature it is already likened, that is by loving him like as it
beloved. For it is love aloue of all the motions, senses, and affections of the
soul, in which a creature may be answearable and make requital to his
creator, although in a far inferior degree and measure.

Where love does arrive, it carries away with it all the other affections, and
as a conqueroure makes them captive. Love is sufficient of it self, it is
pleasing of it self and for it self. It is the merit, the reward, the cause,
the fruit and the help of it self, for by love we are united to God. Love
causes two spirits to become one, making the same will, and the same nill in
both of them. Love teaches us first of all how to behave our selves, secondly
to esteem of all things present, as if they were not, thirdly to contemplate
celestial and internal things, with a pure and clean heart. By love first
of all honest things are laudably done in the world, afterward the honest
things of the world grow to be contemned, and lastly the very secrets of God
are by it seen and considered.

How God requires something in us like unto himself. CHAPT. XIX.
GOd the Father is charity, so is God the Son, the holy Ghost is the love
that proceeds from both of them. This charity and love requires something in
us like unto it, to wit charity, by which we may be joined and united unto
God, as it were by affinity of blood. Love makes noe difference of persons,
neither does it know how to behave it self with reverence.

He that loves, goes boldly unto God of himself alone, and talks
familiarlie with him, fearing and doubting nothing. He that loves not, lives
but in vain. But he that loves has his eyes always fixed on God, whom he
loves whom he desires, on whom he thinks, in whom he is delighted, by whom
he is fedd; and refreshed. Such a man, that is endewed with such devotion, does
so singe and read, and in all his actions does carry himself with that care
and circumspection, as if God were present before his eyes, as indeed he is.
He prays with that feruoure and devotion, as if he were assumpted up into
heaven, and presented before the Majesty of God that sits on his throne,
where thousands, of thousands do serve him, and ten hundred thousand, do
attend upon him.

Love causes the soul which it visits, through love to awaken when it
sleeps. It admonishes and mollifieth it, wounding it as it were to the very
heart. Love enlightneth those things that are dark, it opens those that are
shut, the things that are cold it makes hot, it mitigateth the mind, that
is froward, angry, and impatient, it chaseth away vice and iniquity, it
represseth all desire of carnalitie, it amendeth our manners and bad customs,
and reformeth the spirit, making it to change its fashions. Finally it
bridleth the motions of our youth, and our light actions.

All this does love, when it is present: but as soon as it depatteth, the soul
begins forthwith in that manner to become fainte and feeble, even as if you
should wri^hdrawe the fire from a boiling cauldron or kettle.

Of the great confidence which the soul has, that loves God. CHAP. XX.
Love without doubt is a greater thing then can be well expressed, by which
the soul goes boldly unto God of it self alone, and adhereth constantly
unto him: it quessioneth and consulteth with him upon every occasion. The soul
that loves God; can think or speak of nothing else beside, because it does
contemn, and in a manner abhor all other things whatsoever. The love of God
does change it into himself in that wonderful fashion, as that whatsoever it
thinks or speaks of, does as it were taste and smell of affection.

He therefore that desires to attain to the knowledge of God, let him love. In
vain he attempteth to read or meditate, to preach or pray, that loves not.
The love of God begets the love of the soul., and makes it to attend to it
self, God loves us to noe other end, but that we should love him again. When
he loves. he desires nothing else, but to be beloved. knowing, that those that
love him, are by love made blessed.

The soul that loves, addicteth it self wholly to the love of God (all proper
affections being laid aside) to the end, that by loving him again, it may
make some requital for the love received from him. And yet, when it has powered
forth it self wholly in affection, what is it, in respect of the fountain of
love, from whence it had his beginning.

True it is that noe true comparison can be made between the lover and the
beloved, between the soul and God, between the Creator and the thing
created; and yet if it love God to the uttermost of its power, there remains
nothing, that it can do more. Let not that soul which loves, be affraied,
let that soul fear that loves not God. The soul that loves, is led with
promises, drawn with desires, it keeps secret its own merits, it shuts
the eyes to all worldly honor, and opens them to the divine pleasure,
relying wholly in Christ's protection, and doing all things with a confidence in
him.

Through love, the soul leaves and estrangeth it self from the corporal
senses, to the end, that feeling God, it may not feel it self. This happens,
when the soul (being allured through Gods unspeakable sweetness) does as it
were st^ale it self from it self, or rather is carried, and slideth away from
it self, to the end it may enjoy God with much gladness. Neither is there any
thing so sweet, were it not so short.

Love makes us familiar with God, familiarity causes blodnes. blodnes taste,
and taste hunger The soul which is touched with the love of God, is able to
think, or desire noe other thing, but cries out incessantly with sighs,
saying: Even as the heart or stagge desires the fountains of water (when he
is pursued) even so my soul longs after thee, o God.

What God has done for man. CHAPT. XXI.
Almighty God through his great love toward man, came unto man, yea he came
into man, and became a man. Through love almighty God being invisible in
himself, became visible like unto his servants. Through love he was wounded
for our sins.

In the wounds of my Savior, is a safe and secure place of repose for those
that are sick, and for sinners. In them I dwell securely, for that the bowels
of his mercy are apparent by the wounds of his body. Out of the bowels of my
Lord, I take unto my self, whatsoever on my part is wantinge unto me, because
they flow with mercy, neither are there holes wanting, by which they gush
forth unto me. Through the holes of his body, the secrets of his heart are
seen by me. The sacred mystery of his compassion and pity does appear
plainly unto me; The bowels of our Lords mercy are apparently seen, in which
he has visited us coming down from heaven.

The wounds of Christ Jesus are full of mercy, full of pity, full of sweetness
and charity. It is they that peirced his hands, and his feet, and his side
with a lance. Through these holes and clefts may I taste, how sweet my Lord God
is, for that indeed he is sweet and mild, and of much mercy, toward all
those that in the truth call upon him toward all those that seek him, but
especially toward those that love him. Briefly in the wounds of our Lord and
Savior Christ Jesus, an infinite ransom, a multitude of sweetness, fulness of
grace, and perfection of all virtues, is bestowed upon him.

Of the remembrance of the wounds of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. CHAPT.
XXII.
WHen any unclean cogitation does a^saulte me, I am wont to have recourse to
the wounds of Christ, as to a present remedy. If at any time my rebellious
flesh does chance to throw me down, through the remembrance of the wounds of
my Lord, I arise again. When the devil seeks to entrap me, I forthwith fly
to the bowels of my Lords mercy and he presently departs from me If the
heat of unlawful lust, does at any time cause any inordinate motion in my
flesh; through the remembrance of the wounds of our Lord the son of God, it
is immediately mitigated.

In all adversities I do not find a more sovereign remedy, then are the
wounds, which Christ suffered for me. In them I sleep securely, and repose
assuredly. Christ has died for us; and therefore in death nothing can be
found so bitter and unpleasing, which is not sweetened and cured by Christ's
death and passion.

My whole hope is in the death of my Lord. His death is my merit, succoure,
and salvation, it is my life and resurrection; our Lords mercy, and compassion
is the merit, which I rely upon. I am not void of merit, aslonge as I have the
Lord of mercies on my part; and sit hence the mercies of our Lord are many. I
my self am likewise rich in merits By how much the more powerful he is to
save me, by so much the greater is my security.

How the remembrance of Christ's, wounds, is an approved remedy against all
afflictions. CHAPT. XXIII.
I Have exceedingly sinned, and I know mine offenses to be many which I have
committed, and yet I do not despair* because where sins have abounded,
there grace has superabounded. He that despaireth of obtaining pardon for his
sins, denies God to be merciful. He does almighty God a great injury,
that mistrusteth of his mercy. As much as lies in him, he denies God to have
charity, truth and power, in which three notwithstanding does depend my whole
confidence, that is, in the charity of his adoption, in the truth of his
promise, and in the power of his redemption.

Now therefore let my foolish imagination murmr as much as it will, saying:
Who art thou that speak after this fashion? how wonderful great (I pray
thee) is the glory of heaven, by what merits then do^t thou hope to obtain the
same? To whom I will answer confidently, saying: I know to whom I have
committed my self: for that through his surpassing great charity, he has
adopted me to be his son: because he is true in his promise, and able to
perform the same, and may do whatsoever it pleases him.

I cannot be terrified with the multitude of my sins, if the death of my
Lord come into my mind, because my sins cannot o^ercome him. The nails and
lance do tell me, that I am truly reconciled to Christ, if I love him.
Longinus with his lance has opened Christ's side for me, into which I have
entered, and do rest there securely. He that fears, let him love, because
love chaseth forth fear.

Verily the whole world does not afforde such a powerful and present
medicine against the heat of dishonest pleasure, as is the death of my
redeemer. He stretches for the his arms on the Cross, and spreads out his
hands, as one ready to embrace sinners. I purpose to live, and desire to die,
between the arms of Christ that has saved me. There I will sing securely: I
will extol thee o Lord, for that thou have received me, and have not permitted
mine enemies to triumph over me. Our Savior at his death bowed down his
head, that he might give the kiss of peace to his beloved. So often do we
kiss God, as we are egged forwards through his love to do good.

A devout Meditation of the soul, stirring us up to the love of Christ.
CHAPT. XXIV.
O My soul, who art famous by being framed according to the likeness of God,
being bought with Christ's own blood, espoused unto him by faith, endowed with
the holy Ghost, adorned with virtues, esteemed equal with the Angels, love
him, of whom thou art so much loved, attend to him, that attends to thee,
and seek him that seeks thee. Love this thy lover, of whom thou art beloved,
with whose love thou art prevented, who is the fountain fro^whence thy love
proceeded. He is thy merit and reward, he is the fruit, the use, and end of
thy love. Be careful to please him, that is careful to please thee, think on
him, that thinks of thee, be pure with him, that surpasses in purity, be
holy with him, that excels all others in sanctity.

According as thou shall carry thy self toward God in thy conversation, in
the same manner will he carry himself toward thee again. He therefore being
courteous, mild, and full of mercy and compassion, does exact of thee, that
thou likewise be courteous, mild, sweet, humble, and merciful toward all
men.

Love him (o my soul) who has delivered thee from the lake of misery, and
from the mire of sin and iniquity. Choose him for thy friend especially,
who alone will faithfully adhere unto thee, when all other things and
friends shall be taken from thee.

On the day of thy burial, when thou shall be abandoned by all thy friends,
he will not leave thee, but will defend thee from those roaring and infernali
fiendes ready to devour thee: yea he will conduct thee through that unknown
region, and bring thee into the streets of heavenly Syon, and will place thee
there with his Angels before the face of his Majesty, where thou shall hear
that Angelical song: Holy, holy, holy, etc. The Canticle of joy, the voice of
mirthe and (...), thanksgiving, praise, and perpetual Alleluia, is song
there everlastingly. There, there is a heap of happiness, supereminent glory,
superaboundant gladness, and all manner of goodness.

O my soul sighe vehemently, and desire earnestly, that thou may attain
to that celestial city, of which so glorious things are said, and in which
is the dwelling place of all those that are truly glad. By love thou may
mount up thither: because nothing is hard, nothing is impossible to an
unfeigned lover. The soul that loves, ascends very often, and runs up and
down familiarlie in the streets of the heavenly Jerusalem, visiting the
Patriarchs and Prophets, saluting the Apostles, admiring the armies of
Martyrs and Confessores, and considering the quires of Virgins. Heaven and
earth, and all things in them contained, do continually exhort me to love
my Lord God.

How nothing can satisfy the soul, besides God the supreme good. CHAT. XXV.
IT is impossible that the heart of man should remain constant and stable, if
it be not settled in the desire of things eternal, but being more mutable then
mutabilitie it self, it passes from one thing to an other, seeking repose
where it is not: for in these frail and transitory things (in which the
affections thereof are held captive) it cannot content it self and live at
quiet, because it is of so great dignity, as that nothing but the chief
good is able to suffice it: it is likewise of that freedom, as that it cannot
be constrained to commit any sin.

Wherefore the proper will of every man, is the cause of his damnation, or
salvation: neither can any thing be offered more grateful, then a good will
unto almighty God. A good will does draw down God unto us, and direct us up
unto him. By a good will we love God, and choose God, we run to God, and come
to God, and enjoy God. O how good a thing is a good will, by which we are
renewed, and made like unto the image and likeness of God.

So pleasinge is a good will unto him, that he will not dwell in that heart,
in which a good will is wantinge: A good will does cause the blessed Trinity
(being of unspeakable Majesty) to come unto it. For God the son does
enlighten the same, with the knowledge of the verity. The holy Ghost does
inflame it, with the desire of virtue. God the Father does preserve in it, what
he has created, least it should be lost, and miscarrie.

What the knowledge of verity is. CHAPT. XXVI.
But what is the knowledge of verity? First of all, it is to know thy self,
and that thou study to be such an one as thou ought to be, correcting and
amending in thy self, whatsoever thou shall perceive to be blame worthy.
Secondly to know and love God, that has created thee, for in this consists
man's whole felicity.

Behold therefore the unspeakable greatness of Gods charity toward us. He
has created us of nothing, and given us whatsoever we have. But because we
have loved the gift more then the giver, the creature more then the Creator,
we have fallen into the snare of the devil by sin, and so have been made
slaves unto him. Nevertheless God being moved with mercy, has sent his son
to redeem his servants, he has likewise sent the holy Ghost to adopt those
that were slaves and bondmen, to be his children. He has given us his son
as the price of our redemption, he has given us the holy Ghost as a privilege
of his love and affection; finally he reserueth himself, as the inheritance of
our adoption.

Thus God (as one most loving and full of compassion) through the affection
and love which he did bear to man, imparted unto him, not only his riches,
but himself likewise, to the end he might recover man, not for any benefit he
hoped to reap thereby, but for man's good, and commodity: in so much that God
himself was borne of men, that men might be borne of him again.

What man is there, (albeit his heart were as hard as a stone) whom the love
of God thus preventing him does not mollify and soften? especially such
vehement love, that for man's sake he has vouchsafed to become a man? Who can
possibly think man worthy of hatred, whose nature and similitude he sees in
the humanity of God? Verily he hates God, that hates man, and so whatsoever
he does, he does but in vain. For God became man for the love of man, that he
that is our Creator, might be likewise our redeemer, to the end, man might be
redeemed by one of his own nature

God likewise has appeared in the likeness of man, that he might the more
familiarlie be beloved of man, and that both the senses of man might be made
blessed and delighted in him; that is, the eye of the soul in his divinity,
and the eye of the body in his humanity: that so our human nature by him
created, might within or without find food in the same, and be refreshed.

What the sending of the holy Ghost does effect in us. CHAPT. XXVII.
Our Savior therefore has been borne unto us, he has likewise ben crucified,
and has died for us, that by his death he might destroy ours. And for that
his sacred, flesh (as a cluster of grapes) was carried to the press of the
Cross, and by the pressing of his passion, the sweet wine of his divinity
began to run: the holy, Ghost was sent to make ready the vessels of men's
hearts, that the new wine might be put into new vessels. First that men's hearts
might be made clean, that the wine might not be spilt and corrupted that was
put into them: and lastly that they might be hoopt and bound fast, that the
wine that was putt into them might not be lost: That they might be cleansed
from the joy of iniquity, and fortified against the joy of vanity. For that
which is good, could not come, unless that, which is evil were first gone.
The joy of iniquity does corrupt, and the joy of vanity, does spill and power
out. The joy of iniquity does mar the vessel, and the joy of vanity does
fill it full of holes. The joy of iniquity is when sin is loved, and the joy
of vanity is when things tra^sitorie are affected.

Purge thy self therefore from all wickedness, that thou may be made a
vessel apt to contain goodness. Power forth all bitterness, that thou may
be filled with sweetness. The holy Ghost is joy and love. Expel from thee the
Spirit of the devil, and the spirit of this world, that thou may receive
the spirit of God. The spirit of the devil does cause the joy of iniquity,
and the spirit of the world does cause the joy of vanity. And both these joys
are amiss, for that the one of them is wicked, and the other an occasion of
wickedness.

These evil spirits therefore being expelled, the spirit of God will come, and
enter into the tabernacle of our heart, caussing a good joy, and a good love
therein, by which is expelled the love of the world, and the love of sin.
The love of the world allureth and deceives: the love of sin defiles and
leads unto death: But conrrarily the love of God enlightneth the mind,
cleanses the conscience, rejoices the soul, and shows God apparently unto
us.

After what manner, he that loves God, carries himself. CHAPT. XXVIII.
HE, in whom the love of God makes abode, is always thinking when he shall
come to God, when he shall leave the world, when he shall be free from the
corruption of the flesh, having his heart and affection fixed on heavenly
things, that by that means he may find true peace and tranquillity of
mind. When he sits, when he walks when he rests, or when he works,
his heart departs not from God. He exhorts all men to the love of God, and
comm^ndeth the same to every one, declaring unto them by his heart, words and
actios, how sweet the love of God is, and how wicked the love of the world,
and how full of bitterness. He laugeth at the glory of the world, reproves
those that are over careful in things temporal, showing them what a
foolishnes it is, to trust in things that are not durable. He wondereth at
their blindness, that affect these things so inordinately, and maruaileth
what should be the cause, that all men do not forsake them, seeing they are all
transitory and soon pass away. He thinks that sweet to all men, which is
sweet to him, that grateful to all men which he he loves, that vniuer^allie
known, which he knows. He oftentimes meditateth of God, and by meditating of
him, is sweetly refr^shed. gatheringe by so much the more profit by it, by
how the more often he does it. For that which is always sweet to be loved and
praised, is likewise sweet to be considered.

Of true quietness of heart. CHAPT. XXIX.
THis without doubt is true quietness of heart, when by desire it is wholly fixed
on the love of God. Neither does it covet any thing else, but is delighted
through a certain sweetness, which it finds in that, which it does possess,
and by being delighted, does exceedingly rejoice. But if it chance to be never
so little distracted from thence through some vain cogitation, or worldly
occasion, it forthwith hastneth with all the speed it can to return thither
again, esteeming the stay which it makes else where, to be worse then any
banishment whatsoever. For as there is noe moment, in which man does not enjoy
the benefit of Gods mercy: so there ought to be noe moment, in which he has
not God present in his memory.

And therefore he is guilty of noe small sin, who talking with God in prayer,
is suddenly distracted from his sight, as it were from the eyes of one that
does neither see, nor hear him. Which happens, when any one follows his
evil, and importunate cogitations, and prefers some base and ab^ect
creature (that occurreth to his imagination ^ before him that created him: that
is to say, by musinge and thinking more thereof then of God, whom he ought
co^tinuallie to remember as his Creator, to adore as his redeemer, to expect as
his Savior, and to dread as his judge full of fear and terroure

How every thing that hinders the soul from the sight of God, ought to be
avoided and detested. CHAPT. XXX
O Thou that love the world, look whither thou art going: This way in which
thou walkst, is naught, and leads to ruin.

Ely therefore (o man) fly a little from all earthly occupations, and hide thy
self a while from thy tumultuous cogitations. Cast away now all care and
solli^itude, lay aside all dissension and discord, attend a while unto God,
and repose in him at least for some short time. Enter into the closet of thy
soul. exclude from thence all things besides God, and such things as aid
thee to seek him; which done shut the door against them, that thou may the
better seek him. Then with thy whole heart say unto God Thy face (o Lord) is
that which I desire, thy face is that which I seek for.

Now therefore (o Lord my God) teach my heart where, and how it may seek thee,
where and how it may find thee. If thou (o Lord) art not here present, where
shall I seek thee absent? But if thou be every where, why do I not seek thee
here? Certainly this is the reason, for that thou dwell in that light,
unto which noe man can attain, how then shall I attain to that light, unto
which noe man can attain? Or who shall conduct me, and bring me into the same,
that I may see thee therein?

Moreover by what signs or semblance shall I seek thee? I have never seen
thee (o Lord my God) I have never known thy face. What shall he do (o Lord
most high) what shall he do, that lives in exile so far distant from
thee? What shall thy servant do that la^guisheth through thy love, being cast
a far of (as one fo^lorne) out of thy sight?

Behold he exceedingly desires to see thee, and thy face i^ very far
distant from him. He desires to come unto thee, and the place of thy abode is
of that surpassing heigh^, as that noe man is able to mount up unto it. He
longs to find, thee* but knows not thy residence: he coueteth to seek
thee, but knows not thy countenance.

How the sight of God has been lost by means of our sin: and misery has
succeeded in place of the same. CHAPT. XXXI.
THou o Lord, art my God and my Lord, and ye^ I have never beheld thee; thou
have created and redeemed me, and bestowed almost infinite benefits upon me and
ye^ I have not hitherto either seen or known thee. Finally I was made to
behold thee, and yet I have not hitherto permed that, for which I was created.

O how much is man's misfortune to be lamented, seeing he has lost that for
which he was created! O cruel and hard hap! Alas what has he lost, and
what has he found? What has departed, and what has remained? He has lost
felicity, unto which he was created, and found mis^ry, unto which he was not
ordained. That has departed, without which nothing is happy, and that has
remained, which of itself is nothing but mere misery. Man heerefore did ear
the bread of Angels, which now he would gladly eat if he could get it; but
now he eats the bread of anguishe, being then ignorant of it.

How long (o Lord) will thou forget us, how long will thou turn away thy
face from us? when will thou vouchsafe to look upon us, and hear us? When
will thou illuminate our eyes, and show us thy countenance? When will thou
show thy self favorable unto us? Look upon us (o Lord) and hear us,
enlighten us, and show thy self favorable unto us. Return unto us, that it
may go well with us, because without thee, it ^areth amiss with us.

Call us unto thee (o Lord I beseech thee) and help us to come unto thee. My
heart is grown bitter through o^ermuch desolation, sweeten it therefore with
thy consolation. I have b^gunne to seek thee as one hungry, permit me not to
depart away empty. I approache unto thee as one hu^ger-starued, let me not go
away vnfedd. Being poor and needy I present my self before thee, who art
wealthy, being in misery I cast my self at the feet of thy mercy, humbly
craving, that I may not be sent away as an abject without receiving something.
I am become crooked (o Lord) so that I am not able to see any other things
but those that are here beneathe in this vale of misery; raise me and hold
me upright, that I may look upward, and atte^de unto things that are
heavenly. Mine iniquities have gone over mine head, they have over whelmed
me, and as a heavy burden do oppress me. Deliver me, and unload me, least
the infernal pit of hell shut his mouth upon me.

Teach me to seek thee, and show thy self unto me, when I seek thee: for
that I cannot seek thee unless thou teach me, neither ca^ I find thee
unless thou vouchsafe to show thy self unto me. Grant me grace therefore,
that I may seek thee by desiring thee, and desire thee by seeking thee. Grant
that I may find thee by loving thee, and love thee by finding thee.

Of the goodness of God. CHAPT. XXXII.
I Confess o Lord, and give thee hearty thanks, for that it has pleased thee
to create me according to thine own image, to the end, that being mindful of
thee. I might co^tinuallie think of thee, and love thee But (alas) my soul is
so defaced through the corruption of vice, it is so darkened through the
smoke of sin, as that it cannot accomplish that for which it was created,
unless thou renew and reform the same.

Wherefore I beseech thee (o Lord) seeing thou have given understanding of
faith, grant that I may likewise understand (as much as is expedient) that
thou art according as we believe, and the self ^ame thing that we believe;
and verily we believe thee to be of that surpassing perfection and feature,
that nothing can possibly be imagined either greater or better.

What art thou then o Lord my God. (then whom nothing greater or better can be
imagined) but that sovereign and supreme good, which being of it self alone,
has made all other things of nothing? What good therefore is wanting to the
chiefest good, from whom all good things do proceed?

Thou therefore art just, true, and blessed, and all other things the more they
are in these like unto thee, the greater is their excellency. But sithence
thou art so exceeding just, how is it, that thou art so favorable toward
those that offend? Is it not for that thy mercy is incomprehensible? This is
a thing kept secret in that inaccessible light, in which thou do dwell.
There without doubt in the most profounde and secret depth of thy bounty, is a
hidden fountain, from whence flows that floude of thy unspeakable mercy.
For albeit thou art wholly and perfectly just, yet nevertheless thou art
likewise merciful toward the wicked, for that thou art also wholly and
perfectly good. For if thou were merciful toward none that commit wickedness,
it were an argument that thy goodness were the less: because he that is good
both to the good and bad, is better then him, that is good only to the good:
he likewise is better, who is good to the wicked by pardonning, and punishing
them, then he that should punish them only. Thou therefore art merciful,
because thou art wholly and perfectly good.

Of the pleasant fruition of almighty God. CHAPT. XXXIII.
O Infinite goodness, who surpassest all human sense, let thy mercy descend
down upon me, which proceeds from thee in so great plenty. Let that flow
into me, which flows from thee. Pardon me by thy mildnes, least thou punish
me by thy justice. Stir up thy self now (o my soul) apply thy whole wit,
and imagination, and conceive as much as thou can, how great a good God is.
For if all good things in particular are delightful and pleasinge, consider
with attention how delightful that good thing is, which contains in it the
delight of al good things: neither is it like to that delight which is found
in things created, but as far different as the creator does differ from his
creature.

If then the life created be so pleasing, how pleasing is the life that
created the same? If that health which is made be so delightful, how
delightful is that, from whence all health has his original? If wisdom be
amiable by the speculation or knowledge of things that are known, how amiable
is that wisdom, which has framed and formed all things of nothing? Finally
if the pleasures proceeding from pleasant things be so manifold and great,
how unspeakable great pleasure is there in him, who ^ath made all pleasant
things?

He therefore that shall enjoy this so great a good, what shall he have, yea
what shall he not have? Verily he shall have whatsoever he is willing, and
what he is unwilling to have, shall be far from him. For there he shall
enjoy those delights of soul and body, which neither the eye has seen, nor
the ear has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man.

That the chief good is to be desired. CHAPT. XXXIV.
WHy do thou then wander up and down o vain man in things transitorye
seekinge pleasures and content for thy soul and body? Love that one good
thing, in whom are all good things, and it is sufficient. Desire that singular
and sole good, which is all good, and it is enoughe.

Tell me (o my flesh) what do thou love? What do thou desire (o my soul)
In heaven thou shall find whatsoever thou do love, there thou shall find
whatsoever thou do desire. If thou desire beauty or comelines of person,
there the righteous shall shine like unto the sun. If nimblenes, or strength,
or freedom of body (such as nothing can hurt or hinder) they shall be like
the Angels of God: because that which is sown a natural body, shall arise a
spiritual body, to wit, in power not in nature. If a long and healthful
life, there shall be healthful eternity, and eternal health: because the just
shall live for ever, and the health of the just is from our Lord.

If fulness, they shall be satisfied, when the glory of God shall appear. If
drunkenness, they shall be made drunk with the plenty of Gods house. If
music does delight thee, there the Angels shall sing praises to God
everlastingly. If pure and chaste pleasure does please thee, there our Lord
shall make them to drink of the river of his delight. If thou wish for
wisdom, the very wisdom of God shall show himself (being the true
wisdom) unto them. If thou affect amity or friendship, they shall love God
more then themselves, and one another even as themselves: and God shall love
them more then they themselves, because they shall love him, themselves, and
one an other by him, and he shall love himself and them by himself.

If thou love peace and concord; they shall be all of one will, because they
shall have noe other will, but the sovereign will of God. If thou desire rule
and dignities, they shall be omnipotent of their will, even as God is of his:
For even as God shall be able to do whatsoever he will by himself, so shall
they be able to do whatsoever they will by him: for like as they shall desire
nothing but what he shall be willing to do; so he shall be willing to do
whatsoever they will have him, and what he will have to be done, must of
necessity be put in execution.

If thou aspire to honor and riches? God shall place his good and faithful
servants, over much riches: Moreover they shall be called the sons of God, yea
very Gods: and shall be the heirs of God, and coheires with Christ. If thou
seek security, they shall be so assured never to loose it of their own
accord, as they shall be assured that God, who so dearly loves them, will not
forcibly take it from them, as they shall be assured, that there is nothing of
sufficient power, to separate God and them one from an other. With what words
then can so great a joy be expressed, where so great a good is possessed?

Of the mutual charity of the Saints in heaven. CHAPT. XXXV.
O Heart of man, poor, and experienced in crosses and calamities, yea
overwhelmed with miseries, how greatly would thou rejoice, if thou did
abound with all these aforesaid felicities! Demand of the most secret
corners and closets of thy heart, whether they could contain the gladness, which
would proceed from so great happiness. Certainly if an other, whom thou did
love as well as thy self, should enjoy the same happiness, thy joy would be
twice more then before, because thou would rejoice noe less for him, then
for thy self. But if two or three, or many more should obtain the same
felicity, thou would rejoice as much for each one of them as for thy self,
if thou did love each one of them as thy self.

How unspeakable great joy will there be then, in that perfect charity of
innumerable blessed Angels and men, where noe man shall love an other less
then himself? For every one of them shall rejoice as much for each one of the
rest, as for himself. If therefore the heart of man shall hardly be able to
contain the joy which it shall conceive at his own proper good, how will it
be capable of so infinite many and great joys?

Moreover seeing by how much the more every one loves an other, by so much
the more he rejoices at the others good: therefore as in that blessed felicity
every one without comparison, shall love God more then himself and all others
that are with him, so he shall beyond all estimation, far more rejoice at
the felicity of God, then at his own, and all others that are with him. And
albeit they shall love God with their whole heart, mind, and soul; yet all
these art not sufficient to declare the dignity of that love, which God will
show toward them: Verily although they shall rejoice with their whole heart,
mind, and soul; yet all these are not enough to contain the fullnes of joy,
which he will imparte unto them.

Of the full and perfect joy of life everlasting. CHAPT. XXXVI.
O My God, and my Lord, my hope, and the joy of my heart, tell my soul (I
beseech thee) if this be the joy, of which thou have spoken unto us by thy
Son saying. Ask, and you shall have, that your joy may be full. Because I
have found a certain joy altogether full, yea more then full. In so much that
the heart being full, the mind being full, the soul being full, and every
part of man being full, there shall remain, yet an other joy much more
excellent then the former. All that whole joy therefore shall not enter into
those that rejoice, but al they that wholly rejoice, shall enter into the joy
of their Lord.

Tell me o Lord, tell me thy poor unworthy servant in wardly in my heart, if
this be the joy into which thy servants shall enter, those I mean, that shall
enter into the joy of their Lord. But certainly that joy, in which thy elect
shall rejoice, neither eye has seen, nor care has heard, neither has it
entered into the heart of man. I have not therefore as yet conceived or spoken
how much thy elect shall rejoice. Doubtless they shall rejoice as much as they
shall love thee; and they shall love thee (o Lord) as much as they shall know
thee. And how much shall they love thee? Verily neither eye has seen, nor
ear has heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man in this life,
how much they shall know and love thee in the next life.

Give me grace (o my God) to know and love thee, to the end I may rejoice in
thee. And albeit during the time of this mortal life I cannot love thee fully,
yet let me profit and go forewarde by louinge thee more and more daily, that
so at length I may love thee perfectly. Let thy knowledge here increase in me,
that there it may be accomplished, that here my joy may be great in hope, and
there perfect in deed.

I beseech thee o good God, let me at length receive that which thou have
promised, to wit, that my joy may be fully accomplished. In the interim, let my
mind mediate of it, let my tongue talk of it, let my heart affect it, let my
mouth speak of it, let my soul hunger for it, let my body thirst after it,
let my whole substa^xsce, desire it, until I enter into the joy of my Lord,
there to remain for all eternity. Amen.

The end of S. Augustin's Manuel.
A WONDERFVL AND worthy saying of blessed S. Peter Damian Monk of the holy
order of S. Bennet, Cardinal of Ostia, concerning the day of death.
LEt us imagine how the time being now come, in which the sinful soul is to be
separated from the bands of the body, with how grievous fear it is terrified,
with how great anguishe of an afflicted conscience it is tormented. It
remembers the things forbidden, which it has committed, it beholds the
commaundments of God* which through negligence and contempt it has omitted It
grieueth that the time, which i^ had to do penance, has been so vainly
employed, it groaneth that the immutable moment of severe revenge is so near
at hand, not possibly to be avoided. It would feign stay, it is forced to
depart. It would feign recover that which it has lost, and cannot be heard.
It looks backward upon the course of its whole life past, and esteems it to
be but as it were one only little peace, it looks forewarde, and sees
infinite worlds of time, which shall never have end. It lamenteth therefore for
having lost the joys of all eternity, which it might have gained so quickly
It weepeth likewise, that for so short pleasure of the alluring flesh, it is
bereaved of the unspeakable sweetness of everlasting happiness. It blusheth to
see, that for that substance sake, which is to be m^ate for worms it has
neglected that, which should have bin placed amongst the quires of Angels

At length it lifts up the eyes of its mind, and considering the glory of
the immortal riches of heaven, it is ashamed, that for the love of the
begge^^e of this present life, it has lost that glory. Again when it looks
downewarde upon the vale of this world, as upon a miste, and contrariwise
seeing above it the brightness of that eternal light, it plainly perceives,
that which it loved was but darkness, and night. if it could obtain the
favor to have some little ^ime allotted to do penance and satisfaction, how
austere would it be in life and conversation? how many and how great matters
would it promise to perform? How strictly would it bind it self to piety and
devotion? In the mean season, whilst the eiesight fails, whilst the heart
pants, whilst the throat (the voice being lost) does draw breath with
difficulty, whilst the teeth by little and little grow black, and as it were
rusty, whilst the countenance grows pale, and all the members of the body
become stiff through cold, whilst these things (I say) and other such like
happen, as certain signs of death approaching, all its works and wordess
present themselves before it, yea its very thoughts are not wanting, and all
these give bitter testimony against it, as against the author of them. All its
sins and iniquity, are laid as it were in heaps before its eyes, and
those, which it is unwilling to see, it is forced to behold, whither it will
or not.

Moreover on the one side of it* it beholds a terrible troop of dreadful
devils, on the other side, a multitude of heavenly Angels. The soul that
lies in the midst, quickly perceives, to which of these companies it
appertains; For if there be seen in it the signs and tokens of goodness, it
is conforted by the comfortable speeches of the Angels, and by the sweetness of
their harmonious mellody, it is allured to come forth of the body.
Contrariwise, if the darkness, of its des^rts, and the d^ formity of its
filthine, do adiudge it to the left hand, it (...) forthwith strooken with
intolerable fear, it is troubled through the force of the sudden violence,
that is used; it is thrown down beadlonge, and assaulted, and poor soul, is
forciblie plucked out of the prison of the flesh, that it may be d^ own to
eternal torments with unspeakable bitterness.

Now after it is departed out of the body, who is able to e^ press, how many
armed troops of wicked spirits do ly in wai^e to entrappe it? how many bands
of frouning fie^des (being ready with cruel torments to afflict it) do beset
the way, to hinder its passage? And to the end it may not be able to escape and
pass through them, whole legions of them being gathered together (after the
manner of soldiers) do assault the same.

Wherefore to consider these and such like things by frequent meditation, is a
sovereign mean to contemn the enticing allurements of sin, to abandon the
world, and to subdue the unlawful motions of the flesh, and finally does
cause and conserve in us a continual desire of attaining to perfection, which
God of his mercy grant us. Amen.

A Table of the Manuel of S. Augustine Bishop of Hyppon.
OF the wonderful essence of God. Chapt. I. Of the vnsp^ akeable knowledge of
God. Chapt II. Of the desire of the soul thinking on God Chapt. III. Of the
miserable estate of that soul, that does neither love nor seek our Lord Jesus
Christ, Chapt. IV. Of the desire of the soul, Chapt. V. Of the souls f^licity
being deliue^ed out of the prison of this earthly body. Chapt. VI Of the joy of
Paradise Chapt. VII. Of the kingdom of heaven. Chapt. VIII. How God visits,
and comfort that soul, which with sighs and tear lamenteth his absence.
Chapt IX. Of the sweetness of divine love, Chapt. X. Of the preparation of our
Redemption, Chapt. XI. Of the joy which the soul receives by receiving
Christ. Chapt. XII. That the Word incarnate is the cause of our hope. Chapt.
XIII. How the more we are addicted to divine contemplation, the greater delight
we take therein. Chapt. XIV. How for Christ's sake we ought to wish for
tribulations in this life. Chapt. XV. By what means the kingdom of heaven may
be purchased and gotten Ch XVI. What heaven is, and what happiness is contained
therein. Chapt XVII. How man can make noe other requital unto God for the
benefits received from him, but only by loving him. Chapt. XVIII. How he
requires something in us like unto himself. Chapt. XIX. Of the grea^e
confidence which the soul has that loves God Chapt XX. What God has done
for man. Chapt XXI Of the remembrance of the wounds of our Lord, and Savior
lesus Christ Chapt. XXII. How the remembrance of Christ's wounds is an approved
remedy against all afflictions. Chapt. XXIII. A devout Meditation of the
soul, stirring us up to the love of Christ. Chapt. XXIV. How nothing can
satisfy the soul besides God the supreme good. Chapt XXV. What the knowledge
of verity is* Chapt. XXVI. What the sending of the holy Ghost does effect in
us. Chapt XXVII. After what manner he that loves God, carries himself. Chapt.
XXVIII. Of true quietness of heart. Chapt. XXIX. How every thing that hinders
the soul from the sight of God, ought to be avoided, and detested. Chapt XXX.
How the sight of God has been lost by means of our sin: and misery has
succeeded in place of the same. Chapt. XXXI. Of the goodness of God. Chapt
XXXII. Of the pleasant fruition of almighty God. Chapt. XXXIII. That the chief
good is to be desired. Chapt XXXIV. Of the mutual charity of the Saints in
heaven. Chapt. XXXV. Of the full and perfect joy of life everlasting. Chapt.
XXXVI.
FINIS.

