Statutes and ordynances for the war.

LONDINI.

Anno. M.D.XLIIII.

F(...)tion of (...) most necessary (...) as of peace, being the kings (...)
most dread sovereign lord HENRY (...) eight by the grace of god king of
England, France, and Irelande, defender of the faith, and of the church of
England and also of Irela^de in earth the supreme head, provoked by the
manyfolde injuries committed by the french king, both in his confederation
with the Turk, and by his private displesures and wrongs done to his highness,
against the common weal of Christendom, to invade the realm of France this
summer in his most royal person, his majesty myndinge due order to be
observed and kept emonges all sorts of men of his highness most royal and
puissaunt army, as well capitaines, soldiers, as others, in such wise as
apperteyneth both toward god and the world: has devised and commanded to
be set furthe certain ordynaunces and statutes for the war, as hereafter
ensues, not doubting but all his majesty's most loving and obedient
subjects, for the discharge of their most bounden duties toward his
highness, woll embrace and obey the same accordyngly.

(...) or condition (...) obeisant unto the said Henry (...) general, upon
pain of drawing, hanging and quarteryng, or other punishementes, at the
discretion of the lieutenant. And over that, every man aforesaid, the said
lieutenant only except, be obeysant unto the marshall of the army, for the
time being, upon such pains as shall be lymytted by the lieutenant. And also
that every of them obey, and duly keep all such proclamations ordinances and
statutes, as now be and hereafter shall be, on the behalf of our said sovereign
lord made and proclaimed, upon the peynes within the said proclamations
ordynances and statutes, or any of them comprehended.

ALSO that no man be so hardy, For holy church.
irreuerently to touch either the holy sacrament of goddis body, or the box
or the vessel, which the same is in, upon pain to be drawn and hanged
therefore. And also that no man be so hardy to burn or cut any images. Also
that no manner man, without sufficient authority or commandment, take of any
place, person, town, or country, having saufgarde of the said lieutenant, any
manner goods or vitayles, without the agreement and will of the wardeynes of
the same places or persons, upon pain to be imprisoned, and his life at the
said lieutenantes will.

ALSO that no man presume to go before the batayl, For herbigage.
but that every man keep him self in due order under the baner or penon of his
lord master or captain, except herbigers, the names of whom shall be
delivered and taken to the marshall by their said lords masters or
capytaynes, upon the pain, that he that so offends, shall be put from his
horse and harneys, both to be committed unto the ward of the marshall, unto
the time the offendour has made his fine with the said marshall, and found
suertie, (...) ^ger, take any (...) the marshall of the lodginges, or his (...)
having his authority. And that no sou^ (...) lodgyng, without it be delivered
by his lords (...) ^nes herbiger, upon pain of imprisonement, and to (...)
fine at the kings pleasure. And that after the time that the herbage or
lodgyng is appointed and delivered, that no man be so hardy him self to
dislodge, ne to disaray for any thing that may fall, without commandment of
him that is auctorysed thereunto, upon pain of horse and harneys to be put in
arrest of the marshal, till the time he has made fine with him, and their
bodies to be at the kings pleasure.

For m^sters.
ALSO when it shall please the kings majesty, his lieutenant or lieutenantes,
to command musters to be taken of his host, it is ordained, that no
captain presume or attempt to have or to show other men in his musters, than
those that be with him self retained and attendant in and for the same voyage,
without fraud gyle or dissimulation, upon pain to be holden false and
reproved, and his body to be imprisoned and punyshed at the kings pleasure.
And if any person be twyse or two times thereof convicted and found faulty:
than to dye for it. And that in likewise no man come ne appear in or at any
muster under any capytaine, except he be (as before is said) retained with him
for that voyage, upon pain of imprisonement at the kings will.

ALSO the commissioners when they shall take the musters, shall cause the
capytaynes or pety capitaynes, with their retinues, to be sworn, that they
shall be good and true to the king our sovereign lord: And that they shall to
their powers keep his cries and ordinances, and serve him truly against all
his ennemies, no person reserved.

Also they shall swear, whether that the horse and harneys (...) the company:
(...) diligently inquire and see, that (...) ^ynge unto the musters, have all
his har^ (...), as apperteineth, for him, without any gyle, (...) especial at
the first muster, that every archer have his bow and arrows hole, that is to
wit, in arrows.xxx. or.xxviii. headed and hole in a shefe at the lest. And
for the more surety in this case, the said commissioners to cause every
soldier to swear, that his harneys, bow, and arrows be his own, or his
masters or capitaines. And also that no man, that ones mustred, and was
admytted for an archer, alter or change him self into any other condition,
without the kings special license, upon peyn of imprisonment at the kings
pleasure.

ALSO it is ordained, that every captain petycapitaine, That the capitaynes
make payment to their soldiers of their ^ges.
and all other having under them retynue of any soldier or soldiers at the
kings wages, shall pay to their retinue of soldier or soldiers the wages
rateably as is allowed unto them by the king our sovereign lord, or the
treasourer of his wars, without diminisshyng or defalkyng any part thereof,
during the time that they shall receive wages for them: This payment to be made
unto the said retinues by their capytaines or petycapitaines of soldier or
soldiers within.vi. days next and immediately after that the said capitaines
petycaptaines or other, shall have received their wages of the king or of the
treasourer of the wars, or of their lords and masters, upon the penalty
that he which offends therein, shall forfayte to the king all his goods and
cattalles, and his body to prison at the kings pleasure: except he be resonably
let in that behalf, whereof he shall within the same.vi. days duly
certifye the said treasourer of the wars. And also it shall be lefull for
every man, fyndyng him grieved in this behalf, to complain him unto the
treasourer of the wars, (...) so departs, to be arrested (...) the
marshall, and his life to be at the kinge^ (...) also to lose all his profit
and gain of that day^ (...) to his lord or master the thyrdes of his profyt.
And (...) lord of the stale, the surplus of the same profittes of the same
day. Also that no lord nor captain license any servant or soldier of his
to depart from the stale without knowledge and license of the chief captains
of the stale.

For them that make themselves capitaines to withdraw men from the host.
Also that no man by reysyng of banner or penon, of any arms image or other
token, or by any other mean, assemble people to withdraw them out of the
host, to go to any other place, without the kings authority, upon pain to
be drawn hanged and quartred: And that no man follow ne ensue any such person
out of the host, upon peine to be hanged, and as well the reysers of the said
baner or penon and assembelair of people, as the folowers, to be reputed
traitors, and to forfaite unto the king al their lands goods and cattals for
ever.

^
Also that no man make any unlawful assembles of the kingis people, or make any
bands conspiracies routes or couenticles, or reyse or engender murmeyours or
grudginges against the king, or any person of his host, whereby might ensue
murder division dissension sedition stering or comocion of the people in the
host, two parties taking or bands making, upon like pains.

For keeping of watch and w^d.
Also that every man be obeysaunte to his captain and pety captain, and
truly keep his watch and his ward stale and forrey, and to do all that
belongs to a soldiour to do, upon pain that his horse and harneys shall be
put in the ward of the mershal, unto the time that he, that so offends,
shall agree with his captain according to the order of the court.

That no
Also that every captain keep duly his watch ward (...) and to abide upon
his (...) and time to him limytted, (...) the come.
w^ (...) any way, onles it be by the assigneme^t (...) him, by whom the
said watch ward and stale (...) made and appointed, upon pain that his
body shall be imprisoned, and his person and goods to stand at the kings
pleasure. Also that every captain have day and night watch within his
lodginge, upon pain of losinge iiii. days wages.

Also it is ordained, that for or upon any tydinges rumors up rows, or for
any scrye that shall or may come rise or grow in the host, no man shall
disaraye or move him self out of order of the battle that he shall be set in,
or depart out of arraye, without leave and license of his chefetayne, upon
pain that he so offending, shall be put from his horse and harneys into the
ward of the mershal, there to remain until he shall have made fine with the
mershal, and find surety, that he shall not herafter offend in the like,
which if he shall do, then his body to be at the kings pleasure.

ALSO that no person presume or attempt to make or cause, For unlawful es^ries.
or procure to be made any outrageous escry in the host either by day or by
night, upon pain that he that shall be found the begynner thereof, to lose his
goods and life, and the rest to be imprisoned, and their bodies to be punyshed
at the kings pleasure. And he that certifieth, who is the beginner, shall
have.xl.s. for his labor of the Marshall.

ALSO that every captain, keeping the host, that shall fortune to have
soldiers of his retinue, to be discharged, or to depart out of his company,
or to be dead, be it naturally, or by murdre or slaughter, within.x. days
next and immediately ensuyng his said dyschargyng, departing, or death, shall
certify by byll his name, with the day (...) o^ garrison (...) commandment, ^
that (...) ^rat in all goodly haste, upon point (...) the king all his goods
and cattals, and his (...) at the kings pleasure. And that no Captain, (...)
captain, into the place of any of his soldier or soldiers, as above is
said, discharged, departed, or dead, in any wise take an other, except it be
by the sight and allowance of the Tresourer of the wars, upon pain of
imprysonment of his body, and further punysshed at the kings pleasure.

For rob^bing of marchantes coming to the market and rauisshyng of women and
also mur^g.
ALSO that no man rob no vittailer ne merchant, ne none other person coming
unto the market with vittaile or other merchandise, for the refresshing of the
host, or retourning from the same, upon the peine of death. And that no man of
the kings host, rob any other of the same, of horse meat or man's meat,
upon pain of imprisonment, and his body to be punyshed at the kings
pleasure, ne of any other goods, upon pain of death. Also that no man murdre
or rob any person, except he be the kings ennemie, ne rauishe any woman,
upon pain of death.

For escries made by enemies in the host.
ALSO if any escrie fall in the host by ennemies, after the army be lodged,
that every captain of the kings ward, draw him to the king. And capitaines
of the other ward, draw them to the chieftain of the ward where he is
lodged, leuyng his lodging sufficiently kept, except the ennemies fall in that
side, where he is lodged: and then in this case, the said captain shall
abide there him self and all his men, and to send word to the chieftaine of
the ward, upon pain of imprisonment, and further to be punyshed at the kings
pleasure.

For res^styng of Justice.
ALSO if any man be adjudged to the death by the kings meiesties marshall, or
any other judge ordinary, or any (...) the condempnate be (...) (...) ^sistau^t
shall have like pains (...) ^mpned was adjudged unto: and all the (...)
adherentes fautours and abbettours to be be^. And if it be any other crime or
offense capital then treason: that then the resistour in such case shall suffer
like pains and punishme^tes as the principal adjudged should have sustained
and suffered. And al other the resistours adherentes fautours and ayders to be
punished at the kings pleasure.

Also that every man shall obey the kingis sexiantes porters of places, For
them that break the kings arrest.
and al other officers having authority to arrest, assigned by the kings
Majesty, or the mershal, or by any other officers of authority: And that no
man presume to break their arrestes, upon pain of imprisonment, and his body
to be at the kings pleasure, his gracis lieutenau^t or lieutenauntes. And if
the prisoner, disobeying the said arrest, mayme any of the said officers: then
he so offending to suffer pains of death: and if he greuousely wound or
hurt any of them, then to be imprisoned and punished at the kings pleasure.

Also that every lord captain and peticapitayne, For good (...) to be kept.
having any retinue great or small, forsee good rule and gyding of his people
at his peril and charge, as he will answer for them to the king for the
contrary. And that every soldier obey his captain and petycapitayne: and
likewise every captain and petycapitayne obey his superior captain or
ruler, upon pain as shall be limited by his said superior captain or ruler.

Also that after the watch shall be set, unto the time it be dischardged in the
morning, no manner of man make any shouti^g or blowing of horns or whisteling
or great noise, but if it be trumpettes by a special commandment, upon pain
of imprisonment, and further to be punyshed at the (...) other then he is borne
to (...) c^fficers of arms, wherethorough (...) might fall in the host, upon
pain to be p^ (...) kings pleasure, and to be reproched for the sa^

Also that no capitayn having any carriage appointed him, shall have any mo
soldiers of and in the kings wages tattende upon his carriage, then for
every cart.ii. soldiers, and for every horse charged aparte with carriage,
one soldier, upon pain the captain to lose his months wages, and the
soldier to be imprisoned at the kings pleasure.

Also every horseman at the first blaste of the trumpette shall sadle or cause
to be sadled his horse, at the second to brydell, at the third to leap on
his horse back, to wait on the king, or his lord or captain. And that every
manne wait upon the standarde of his own lord or captain, and not to
depart therefro, ne to meddle with none other companyes in riding nor going,
but such as be commanded as harbergers or other carriars, as is above rehearsed
in the article of harbergage, upon pain of imprisonement, and further to be
punyshed at the kings pleasure.

For d^sing cardyng, and all manner of games.
Also that no man play at dise cards tables closhe, hand out, or any other
game, whereby they shall waste their money, or cause debates to arise by the
same, except such as shall be lycenced by the kings majesty, or his
lieutenant, by byll assigned: and if any so be found or convicted of playing
at any of these games, that for the first time he or they shall be committed to
ward, there to remain.viii. days, and to lose all such money as he or they
play for, the one half to the provost of the marshall, and the other half to
him that so fyndeth them playinge. And if any of the said army be found twyse
playinge, he shall be committed to the prouostes ward, there to remayn one
month: and to forfaite one months wages: the one half to the (...) ^o ^un^
(...) to take no profit of that pa^ (...) if any be so found the third time
play^ (...) committed to ward, there to abide the kyn^ ^easure, and to have
further punition as shall please the king.

Also that no man bring with him any woman over the sea, For borde^ keeping in
the host.
upon pain of forfayture of their goods to the marshall, and their bodies to
be imprisoned, there to remain at the kings pleasure, and that no manne
hold any woman within his lodging beyond the sea, upon pain of
imprysonment and loss of a months wages. And that no common woman presume to
com within the kingis host, or nygh the same by the space of three miles, upon
pain if any so be taken, to be brent upon the right cheke at the first time,
and if any be taken within the host, or within three mile of the same, after
she or they have be so brent: than she or they to be put into ward of the
prouoste marshall, there to remain in prison, as long as shall please the
marshall, and to have further punition, as by him shall be thought convenient.

Also that no man make debate strife or contention for any hatred or malice of
time passed, ne for time to come, For debate making.
whereby any man be slain, upon pain of him or them that be causers or
partners of the murder, to be hanged therefore, or if it happen any man escry
his own name or his capitaines lord or master, to make arisyng of the
people, by the which any affray might fall in the host: he that in such wise
escryeth, shall be drawn and hanged therefore to the death.

Also that no man debate strive or contend for arms, For ebateretours.
prisoners lodgings, or for any old cause malice or quarrel, or other thing,
whereby any riot contention or debate may grow in the host, upon pain of
imprisonment, and (...) upon pain (...) him grieved for any matter or cause
(...) show his greuance to his captain, and (...) the marshal, and right
shall be ministrid to him a(...)

(...) them (...) give (...) reproach
Also that no man give reproach to none other bycau^e the country that he is of,
that is to say, be he frenchman, englysheman, or welsheman, Irysheman, or any
other country, whense so ever he be of, nor that no man say no villainy to other
for any cause, through the which villayne saying may fall sodayn manslaughter,
reysyng of people, discention debate or division in the host, upon pain all
such barrettours to be imprisoned for as long as it shall please the king.

For them that ^uocke
Also that no man presume to cry hauoke upon peyn of death to the begynner
thereof, and all the rest folowers or partakers thereof, to be imprisoned, and
their bodies to be punyshed at the kings pleasure.

For (...) ^yng
Also that no man, without commandment special of the king, or of his head
officer, burn wylfully any town or house, upon pain of death, except the
kings enemies be within it, and can not be no otherwise taken.

For (...)
Also the kings majesty strayghtly commands and charge, that if it
happen that his host tarry by the space of three days or above, in oone place
or ground, be it at siege or otherwise, that than every man shall keep clean
his lodgyng, not suffering any carrayn tylth or other unwholesome or infec^ue
stinking thing to be in or nere the same his lodgyng, but furthwith to bury the
same deep in the earth, upon pain to be punyshed at the discretion of the
marshal.

For masters of vytayle.
Also if any man find or take any wine or other vitaile, he that so fyndeth or
takes, may reserve for him self and his, as much thereof as him needs. And
that he shall save the ^menant to other of the said host, without any waste or
d^l^tion, upon pain to be imprisoned for as long as (...) and his body to be
(...) punyshed at the kings pleasures (...)an take any horse or horses, (...)
going to ploughe in countreies won and pacified.
ox or oxen (...)ey won and pacified, from any man going to plough, or any
other labourer, but it be the provost and his company, and the purueyours of
thordinance, which shall have sufficient commission in that behalf, upon
pain of death. AND that the said prouoste company and pourueyours of the
said ordinance, see true contentation according to the sessyng of the
provost mershall, had in that behalf, upon pain for his or their first
defaulte, to be committed to ward, and forfaite to the king his or their
months wages, and the second time to forfayte to the king his other mouable
goods, and their bodies to be in prison, during the kings pleasure, if the
defaut be found in any of them: And if the default be found in any other
person that owe to pay and discharge the said prouostes company and purueiours
against the said countries and people so won and pacified, than they that so
offend, to have like punyshement that the prouoste company or purueyours of
ordynance should have had in that behalf. And that it be lefull to the master
of the ordynance, to send for pyoners into any country won or pacified, where
he shall think necessary. And that the purueiours certify the provost
mershall, what number of horse and oxen wolle serve him, and that by his advise
the said purueyour draw to such quarter as shall be thought most necessary by
the said provost, taking of him his byll, to the intent that he send none
other men into the quarter, that the said purueyour shall take his horse or
oxen in.

Also if any country or lordeshyp be won, For keeping of the country.
either by free will offered unto the kings obeisance, or otherwise, that no
man presume to rob nor pyll, or to take them prisoners (...) ^ob^ (...) him
upon the same pain, (...) ^yll obey, ^y^ (...) the ^e of ^ce.
dear a cross of saint Geog^ (...)

And if any of the retinue of the ordinance (...) any of their own company, or
make any debate o^ (...) or have any demand or question among them self, that
tha^ it be reformed judged and punished by the master of the ordinance, and
such as he shall call to him. Always provided if any man find him self
grieved after any fynall sentence, that he be at his appele before the marshall
at all seasons, and for all causes made between any of them, and any other
person of the army, that than they or any of them abide the judgment of the
marshall and his court.

^or taking ^t priso^ers.
Also it is ordained and enacted, that al kings and kings sons, dukes and
dukes eldest sons, lieutenantes general, great constable, or any of the
chief marshals of France, or of any other regions or provinces, or any of the
blood ryall, bearyng arms royals, that shall happen to be taken by any person
of the kings army, shall stand only prisoner to the king our soueraygne
lord: And that no man take upon him to deliver or put to raunsom any such
king prince or any other personage in this act before rehearsed, upon pain of
death. And that the taker of any such person shall bring him immediately to
the king, and shall have for his taking such sufficient reward, as shall
accord with reason.

Also be it at bataile deed of arms or other places, where prisoners may
laufully be taken, he that first may have his faith, shall have him for his
prisoner: so that he take from him all his weapons, and shall not need to
abide upon him to the end of the iourneye, and none other man shall take him
for his prisoner: But if so be that the said prisoner be found with weapon
ready to iubarde, in which case his ransom shall be equally divided between
them, (...) that first has so borne (...) him to prisoner, but if it so be,
that (...) ^ed and found standing at his defense, an (...) comes and takes
the faith of the said prisoner, ^n the smyter down shall have the one half,
and the taker of the faith the other half, with the keeping of the said prisoner,
making suertie to his partner for the other half.

Also if any man has taken a prisoner, and the victory had upon their enemies
in bataile skyrmisshe chase or any otherwise, any other man for any cause kill
the said person, he that so does slaye the prisoner, shall dye for it.

Also that no man presume to rau^sum or sell his prisoner without special
license of his captain that indentith with the king under his lettre and
seal, For them that ransom their prisoners and selle them without leave
of their lords or capitaynes.
upon pain to forfaite his part in the prisoner unto his captain, and he to
be under arrest of the mershall, until the time he has agreed with his
captain. In like wise that no captain raunsum or sell his prisoner without
special license of the king, or his treasourer of the wars, upon pain of
forfaiture of the same prisoner unto the king. And that no man bie no such
prisoners, upon pain to lose the money that he shall pay for him, and the
prisoner to be arrested to the capitain before said. Also the captain upon
notice had of the said prisoner, and license asked by his soldier, shall not
without cause reasonable showed unto the mershall, let the said soldier to
take his best advantage of the said prisoner: how be it that if the captain
woll give as much for the said prisoner as an other, he shall have the
prisoner and preferment.

Also if any man take any prisoner, the which has (...) sworn and had
billet, or any man which owes ligeau^ unto our liege lord the king, that is
to wir, English welche Irishe, or any other of such condition: that then as
(...) of the king or of the mershal for (...)

Also if any man take any prisoner, such (...) ^meth into the host, he shall
bring his prisoner unto (...) ^pitayne or master, upon pain of losing of his
part to (...) forsaide captain or master: and then his said captain, if
he be within the host, shall certify the mershall within two days: And if he
be without the host in garrison orels where, he shall certify the said
mershall as soon as he conveniently may, and declare his name and hauiour in
writing as nigh as he can after his knowledge, so that he be not led or conveyed
any other way, upon pain to lose his part to him that shall do first the
mershall to have witting thereof, and his body to be imprisoned and punished at
the kings pleasure: And that every man do keep or do to be kept his prisoner,
that he goo not nor ride not at large in the host no in lodginges, but if
ward be had upon him, upon pain of losinge of the same prisoner, reseruinge
to his lord or master his thirdes of the hole, if he be not party of the
defaulte, and the second part to him that first shall accuse him, and the
third part to the mershall: and also more over his body in arrest at the
kings pleasure. Also that he suffer not his prisoner to go out of the kings
host for his rau^sum, ne for none other cause, without salueconducte of the
king or of the mershal, upon the pain aforesaid. Also that every captain in
like wise bring his prisoner unto the treasourer of the wars, upon pain of
forfaiture of the same prisoner unto the kings use.

Also that the mershal from eight days to.viii. days, during the kings
army, do certify the treasourer of the wars of all such certificates as
shall be brought in by the capitaynes, or any other unto him, as well of his own
as of other, al manner prisoners taken by any man in the host certified (...)
^nde to (...) under form above rehearsed to (...) and under semblable
penalties, they and (...) shall bring in and certify all other prays ^des
and cattalles by them won by the war.

Also that every man pay his thirdes to his captain lord and master, of al
manner of winninges by war, For paying of thirdes.
And that as well those that be not in wages, but lodging or hostyng under the
banner or penon of their captain, upon pain to lose his part of his
foresaid winnyng to his captain, and his body to be in ward of the
mershall, unto the time he has agreed with his foresaid master. And also that
every captain pay unto the king as well the third part of his own wynnynges
of the war, as the third of the thirdes, whereof each of his retinue shall be
answering unto him, of which thirdes, and thirdes of thirdes every capytaine
shall be accoumptable before the treasourer of the kings wars, upon pain of
forfaiture of the said wynnynges unto the king.

Also that no man give no salueconduct to prisoner, For giving of safeconductes
or co^gres, and for breking of them.
ne to none other, nor license none enmy to come nor to go out of the host, ne
into the host, upon peine of forfeyture of all his goods to the king, and
his body to be imprysonned at the kings will: except the king his lieutenaunt
or lieutenauntes, or the mershall, if he have special commission so to do. And
that no man presume to break the kings salueconducte, his lieutenauntes or
his said mershall having such authority, upon pain to be hanged and drawn,
and his goods and inheritaunces to be forfeyted to the king.

Also that no man grant no saluegarde by writing no: For giving of sauegardes.
otherwise to no noble person, ne for the apatishyng of any country, except
the king, upon pain of imprysonment (...) of the kings (...) upon pain (...)

(...) them (...) bear (...) a bond (...) a cross of sayncte George.
Also that every man going in hos(...) what estate condition or nation he be, of
the (...) and host, except he be a bishop or officer of (...) a cross of
saint George, sufficient and large, upon the peine that if he be wounded or
slain in the defaulte thereof, he that so wounds or sleeth him, shall bear
no pain therefore. And if he for any cause pass the bonds of the field, that
then he bear openly a cross of saint George, upon pain to be imprisoned and
punyshed at the kings pleasure. And that no soldiour bear no cognizance but
the kings and his capitaines, upon pain of death. And that none ennemy bear
the said sign of saint George, but if he be prisoner and inward of his
master, upon pain of death.

For maki^g of (...)
Also that no man make any roodis by day or by night, but by license and
knowledge of the king, or of the chiefteynes of the ward, so that the
chiefteynes may know what way they draw them, to the intent they may have
socour and help if need be, upon pain of them that herein offend, their body
and goods to be at the kings pleasure.

For assault making without license.
Also that none assaute be made to castle town strength or fortress by
archers or by any other co^moners, without the will and presence of a captain
thereunto appointed by the king, upon pain of imprisonment. And if any assaute
be made by chance or adventure, then as soon as the king or the mershall send
for to cease the said assaute, that then no man presume to assaute after
monition given to the contrary, and the offendour to be punished by
imprisonment of his body, and loss of all the goods gotten at the said
assault.

For withdrawynge
Also that no man presume to take or withdraw any servant from any other, the
which is in covenant with him (...) over the (...)

(...) presume to go into the chamber or lod^ (...) any no man lies in
childebed, For (...) that (...) childe^
her to rob or (...) any goods, the which longs unto her refreshing, or
for to make any affraye, where through she and her child might be in any
desease or despair, upon pain of forfayture of all his goods, the one half
to him that accuses him, and the other half to the mershal, and him self to
suffer peynes of death, onles the kings majesty pardon him. For children
within the age of.xiiii years.


Also that no man presume to take any chlydren within the age of.xiiii. years,
but if he be a lords son, or else a worshypfull gentle man's, or a rich
man's son, or a capitaynes. And that as soon as he has brought him into the
host or into the garrison where he is abiding, he bring him to his lord
master or captain, upon pain of losing his horse harneys and his part of
the same child, reseruyng to his lord master or captain his duty, so that
they be not consentaunt unto the said defaute: And also that the said lord
master or captain bring him unto the king within.viii. days.

Also for so much as our said sovereign lord, for the inward love tender
zeal and entter affection, which he bears naturally to all his subjects
being of his said host and army, would be lothest and most displeasaunt to
hear or understand any of them to do that offense, whereby he should deserve
the least punishments by the said ordinances provided: his highness therefore
desires and tenderly prays his said subjects, to considre and understand,
that his good speed in his said journey, the honor of his realm, and the
weal and surety of the same his subjects, stands upon the observation of
the said statutes. Wherefore though it be to the greatest heaviness and
displeasure, yet must he of (...) to excuse the of their offenses (...)ce of
the said ordynaunces, his highness (...) above the open proclamation of the said
statutes, (...) and ordained by way of imprint, diverse and many (...) books,
conteynyng the same statutes, to be made and delivered unto the capitaynes of
his host, chargyng them, as they woll avoyde his great displeasure, to cause
the same twyse or ones at the least in every weke holly to be read in the
presence of their retynue.

IMPRINTED at London in Fsetestrete by Thomas Bartheset printer to the kings
highness, the.XX. day of June, the year of our Lord. M. D. XLIIII.

CVM PRIVILEGIO AD IMPRIMENDVM SOLVM.


