A LITTLE Pamphlet of Saint Augustine entitled the Ladder of Paradise. Very
worthy and needful to be read of every Christian that is willing to tread the
steps which lead to Heaven.

Imprinted at London for Edward Aggas, dwelling in Paul's church yard at the
sign of ye red Dragon* and are there to be sold.

NEC TEMERE NEC TIMIDE


To the right worshipful Lady, the L. Fane true felicity with the increace
of God his most excellent blessings.
IT is not rare but usual, to see gifts brought unto a rich man and many
presents, given to him that lacks not, verifying that in things earthly,
which properly is spoken of the mind. To him that has it shall be given and
he shall have abundance, even so the abundance of Gods good gifts, the
humblenes of mind, the love of virtue, and zeal of serving God, which I have
hard and seen in your Ladyship has long since given me great desire by
writing somvvhat to ad some good thing unto the heap of those good virtues.
But finding in my self nothing, vvhervvith to answer my desire, as being
void of learning or vvisdome worthy to be heard: I became clearly resolved
to follow any purpose no further, and to end with prayer unto God, that he
would bless his gifts in you to the encreace of an hundredth fold: yet
spending some time as my leisure did serve me in turning the leaves of that
anncient father AVGVSTIN, I sound this little Pamphlet, an apt pecco (as me
thought) for that purpose, and a I evvell worthy to be worn, not about the
neck: but about the heart of the greatest Lord or Lady in this world, namely a
^^^aier of stayres or a ladder of pure gold, so artificially wrought, that
who so lists to go there on: shall be sure to come safely up into the
presence chamber of Gods ever lasting glory, and in so small room this I uell
is co^triued, that it may well be placed in the least of all the christian
hearts, yea and the less the heart is: the more aptly it may be hidden therein,
which also for the antiquity is, a boue eleven hundredth year old, and for
excelencie the little work does so praise it self that a far better pen the^
mine adding somevvhat to the praise thereof should rather blemish then beutisie
it by saying^ much less, or much worse then the same does say for it self,
having therefore (as I have said) nothing in me to further the love of virtue
and zeal of christianity which God has given you, I have thus obtained this
old father saint AUGUSTINE to do it for me, whom if it shall please your
ladyship to hear with good affection atte^tiuely: the pain shall sure be much
les the^ the profit, and you shall not fail to reap great fruit with small
travail, yea the labor shall soo^e be gone and the profit long remain. Now
what so ever therefore in this little treatis is spoken: I humbly beseech your
ladyship allvvay to remember. It is not I: but the ancient and excellent father
Saint AUGUSTINE that speaks. It is he that says, reading, meditation, Cap. 1.
prayer and contemplation are the steps of that ladder that leads to heaven.
It is he that expounding the words of Christ says, seek by reading: and ye
shall find by meditation, Cap. 2.
knock by praying: and it shall be opened unto you by contemplation. It is he
that says, reading does as it were apply substa^ciall meat unto the mouth,
meditation does chovve it and break it, Ibidem.
prater obtains the sweetness of it: contemplation is the svvetnes it self.
Cap. 11.
It is Saint AUGUSTINE that says, reading with out meditation is saples, and
meditation with out reading is erronius. And lest some fond body should
imagi^, that this reding which he so often speaks of, should be the reading
of any other thing but of Scripture only, and that with these Cap. 1.
words: reading (says he) is a looking upon the scripture with a diligent
entention of the mind, and in the tenth chapter, he says these four Cap. 10.
steps are so linked together, that they which go before without them which
follow: can profit little or no thing and they which follow without them that
go before: do profit seldo^e or never. To conclude, the whole sum and
effect thereof: is nothing else but that the reading of Scripture, the meditation
upon the Scripture, prayer to obtain the understanding of Scripture, and
contemplatio^ in the sweetness of Gods promises contained in the Scripture is
the only gate of Heaven, and the way to attain eternal life. For the
co^firmatio^ vvherof: it were no hard matter for a man of mean knowledge to
co^pile a huge volume, and to bring many hundred places out of the ancient
fathers. VVherin they plainly and directly confirm the same, that by these
steps only, and none other way: a man must go to heaven. But most of all it
ought to move us that God him self by his own word has ratified this to be
the only way to Heaven, and that for all men, with out any exception. For
who can have Deuteronomy. 17. ver. 18. 19.
greater privilege then a King? or greater occasion to surceasse from the
continual exercise of this reading, meditation, prayer and co^templation?

And is it not expressly set down by Gods commandment, that a King ought to
have the book of Gods laws by hi^, and ought to read therein all the days of
his life? who should sooner be exempt from this diligent excersise of
Scripture then a Soldier or Captain, and Jos. 1. ver. 8
that duri^g the vvarres? But does not God him self speak unto the noble
Conqueror and captai^, Joshua in the first e^tre of his vvarres, and straightly
charge him saying? Let not the book of this Josu. 1. ver. 8.
law depart out of thy mouth, but occupy thy mind therein day and night.
Where mark these precise terms, Book, mouth, mind, day, night. For who
sees not that upon every of these words much might be said if brevity would
suffer it. When or at what time should any intermission from the exercise of
Scripture be granted to any man, if it be convenient for a noble man
travailing by the way in his journey to read the Scriptures? And did Act. 8.
ver. 30.
not the noble Lord Tresurer of the great Queen Cand ace travailing by the
way, sit in his Chariot treading of Esayas the Prophet? and was not the end
thereof salvation of his soul?. Is it not also vvritte^ by Saint Luke for Act.
19. ver. 11.
an everlasting commendation unto those that were the noblest of birth among
them of Thessalonica, because (when Paul had preached) they serched the
Scriptures, and that daily to see whether it were so or not? And by that
means they were brought unto the faith of Christ. Yea and not noble men
only, but Ladies also by name are apoi^ted of God to tread these steps, and
they shall never come to heaven other wise then by reading the scriptures, by
meditation of the scriptures, by prayer to understand them, and contemplation
in the svvetnes of them. And therefore Saint John vvriteth 2. Joh. 1. ver. 1.
one of his epistles unto a Lady, that Ladies also having the word of God so
especially dyrected unto them, might endeavor themselves with the greter
dylige^ce to read it and certe^ly know themselves not to be excluded from the
exercise thereof.

The vvisdome of GOD in the last chapter of the Proverbs, discribing and ^ro.
30.
as it were painting out the properties, not of a mean vvoma^: but of a noble
man's wife and a virtuous Lady, among other excellent qualities that such a
vvoma^ ought to have. He says. She ope^eth her mouth with vvisdo^e, and in
her tung is the law of grace. But lest I should pass the competent bounds of
an Epistle: I vvil breefly note the Book, the Chapter and the Verse of diverse
other places, where God him self by his holy word plainly teaches that all
men, yea, men, women and children, ought to be diligently exercised in the
word of God, as the only way to eternal life and the Ladder of Heaven.

Deuteronomy. 6. ver. 6. 7. Deuteronomy. 8. ver. 3. Deuteronomy. 11. ver. 18, 19. 20. Deuteronomy. 31. ver
11. 12. Iosu. 8 ver. 35. 1. Reg. 22. ver. 5. 2. Reg. 23. ver. 2. 2. Esd. 8.
ver. 3. 18. ibi. 9. ver. 2. 3. Psa. 1. ver. 3. Psa. 19. ver. 7. Psa. 36. ver
31. 32. Psa. 119. Pro. 1. ver 1. 2. 3. 4. Pro. 2. ver. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9. Pro.
4. ver. 20, 21. 22. Pro. 6. ver 23. ibi. 7. ver. 1, 2, 3. ibi. 8. ver. 9. ibi.
28. ver. 9. Esaias. 8. ver. 19. 20. Esaias. 29. ver. 19. Esa. 34. ver. 16. Esaias.
48. ver. 16. Esa. 59. ver. 21. Eccle. 24. all. Eccle. 39. ver. 1. Mat. 4. Mar.
12. ver. 24. Lu. 16 ver. 29. Iho. 5. ver. 39. 47. Iho. 8. ver. 43. Iho. 15.
ver. 3. 7. Act. 11. ver. 1. 14. Act. 13. ve. 26. 46. Act. 26. ver. 2. 3. Romans
10. ver. 8. 17. Romans 15. ver. 4. 1. Cor. 10. ver. 11. 2. Cor. 1. ver. 13. Ephe.
3. ver. 1. Thesa. 4. ver. 18. Phil. 2. ver. 16. Collo. 3. ver. 16. 2. Timothe.
3 ver. 15. 16. Ia. 1. ver. 18. 20. 1. Pet. 1. ver 23. 1. Pet. 2. ver. 8. 2.
Pet. ver 19. 1. Ioh. 2. ver. 12. 13. 14. Jude. ver. 17. Apoc. 1. ver. 3.

The very name of Gods word ought to strike into our hearts, great reverence
tovvard it, great desire to have it, great haste to hear it, great love to read
it and like care to keep it. If a King or a Queen should write unto us, lord
how would we shore up our ears? what haste should we make to hear the
contents? Behold God him self has directed his letters to every one of us,
his own spirit is his Secretary, his Prophets and Apostles are Purciuants
and messengers that bring them unto us. Intolerable is the contempt of God
that sen death the^, if we do not humbly read them, hear them and diligently
mark and observe the special points, and contents of them. The dredful words
of God do follow such contempt, as it is vvritte^.

O turn you unto my correction, lo I vvil express my mind unto you, and make
you understand my words. Seeing then that I have called and you refused it, I
have stretched out my hand and no man regarded it, but all my counsel ye have
despised, and set my corrections at naught: therefore shall I also laugh in your
destruction etc. What promise can be sweeter, then to have God express his
mind unto us, and make us understand his word? What terror can be greater
then to have God laugh and rejoice in our destruction. From which dredful
destruction, I beseech almighty God deliver us, and stay us upon the steps of
his holy word, til we come into his happy kingdom.

Your La. ever to command. T. VV.

Suorum quisque Vulnerum remediu^ex diuinis Scripturis eligat. Chrisost. in
act. Cap 13. Ho. 29. Let every man choose out of the divine Scriptures, the
remedy of his own vvou^des. These are the words of S. John Chrisostom,
vvriting upon the 13. Chapter of the acts the 29. Homely.
FINIS.
To the Reader.
IAm not ignorant that as well this, as many other books which are numbered,
reputed and printed among the works of Augustine Bishop of Hippo are thought
of ma^y not to be his, wherein as I mean not to contend, but regarding more the
matter the^ the man, and also finding the same among the rest of his works not
only in the later editions but in the prints of such old ti^e as hardly ca^ be
red but of those which are used to read antiquities, whereof I my self have one
to show. I thought it good there fore (leaving the censure to such as are
learned) to make no question thereof, specially seeing this Ladder of Paradise
long be fore the time of Augustine was set up by Christ Jesus for his chosen
and elected children to ascend into those mantions which he has prepared for
them, not only in the kingdom, but also in the house of God his father.

to Paradise.
Cap. 1.
WHen upon a certain day being occupied with the bodily labor of my hands: I
had begun to think upon the exercise of that spiritual man, four spiritual
steps sudenly offered the^ self unto my mind, as I thought thereon, namely
reading, meditation, prayer and co^templation. This is the Ladder of those that
be religious, by which they are lifted up from the earth in to Heaven. This
lader is parted in to few steps, not withstanding it is of unmeasurable and
incredible greatness, whose lower part resting upon the earth, the upper end
perceth the clouds and sercheth out the secrets of Heaven.

These degrees as they are in names and number diverse: so are they distinct in
order and woorthines, if any man do diligently behold their properties, and
their several offices, what they woork concerning us, how they differ and have
the pre-eminence one of a another, what soever labor or study he shall spend
therein, they shall repute the same but short, and easy in comparion of the
great Reading not of fables but of scripture.
profit and swetnes thereof.

Reading is a looking upon the Scripture with a diligent intention of the
mind. Meditation is a studious action of the mind, searching out by drift of
proper reason, the knowledge of hidden Prayer is not to saints but to God.
truth. Prayer is a devout bending of the heart unto God, for the putting away
those things that are evil, and obtaining those things that are good.
Contemplation is a certain lifting up of the mind depending upon God, tasting
the Joys of everlasting sweetness.

The description of the offices of the four degrees or steps. Cap. 2.
THe description of the four degrees, then being set forth, There rests yt
we behold their offices. Readi^g seeks, Meditation finds, Prayer
requesteth, Conte^plation takes the taste, Christ's words expounded by S.
Augusttin. Match. 7. ver. 7. 8.
whereof the Lord him self says: seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you. Seek by reading and you shall find by meditation.

Knock by praying. and it shall be opened unto you by contemplation. Reding
does as it were apply substa^tiall meat unto the mouth, Mediation does chaw
it and break it, Prayer obtayneth the sweetness of it. Contemplation is the
sweetness it self which delights and refreshes. Reading is in the skin,
Meditacion is the fat, Prayer is the motion of the desire, Contemplatio^ is the
pleasure of the sweetness obtained, which thing that yet it may more manifestly
appear among many: I will set down one example. In reading I heard. Blessed are
the pure in heart for they shall see God. Behold here a short word but sweet
and manifold in sense, and gives unto the feeding of the soul as it were of
a Grape, which after the soul has diligently vewed, it says within it self:
I will return unto my heart, and I will prove if parhaps I can understand and
find out this puritis.

This thing no dout is precious, and worthy to be destred, whose possessors
are called blessed, unto which the sight of God, which is eternal life is
promised, which is so greatly commended with so many testimonies of ye holy
scripture.

The heart then desirous to have this thing yet more fully to be unfolded:
begins to chaw and to break this grape, and puts it into the press
whilst it sturreth up reason to search whether it be so, and how this precious
purity so worthy to be desired, may be attained.

The office of meditation. Cap. 3.
THen diligent meditation drawing near, she tarieth not without, she has
nothing to do in the out side of the letter, she sets fast her foot, she
perceth the inward parts, she seeks out every corner attentively, she
considers that he said not, blessed are the clean in body: but ye pure in
mind, because it suffiseth not to have innocent hands from evil acts, except
we be also purified in mind from wicked thoughts, which thing is confirmed by
the authority of the Prophet, saying. Who shall go up into the h^l of the
Lord? who shall rest in his holy place? he that is innocent of his hands and
of a clean heart, And does again consider how greatly the same Prophet does
wish for this clenes of heart, prau^g thus. Create O Lord a new heart within me.
And again. If I have beheld iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me. And
think how carful blessed Job was in this watch, who said. I have made a
covenant with mine eyes, that I would not once think upon a Virgin. Behold how
this holy man restrained him self, which closed up his eyes lest he should
behold vanity, lest parhap he should rashly behold that which he might after
against bis will desire After meditation has bandled such things touching the
purity of the heart: then she begins to muse upon the reward, how glorious
and delectable a thing it is to see the desired face of the Lord, The fare of
Christ can not be hid as when his Mother sought him nor his body upon earth
with out the glory thereof.
that excellent face, in favor far passing the children of men, not now abject
and vile, not having now the countenance in which his mother clothed him, but
having on the long garment of immortality, crowned with the diadem with which
his Father crowned him in the day of his resurrection, and glory in the day
which the Lord has made. Meditation thinks, how in that sight there shall be
the fulness whereof the Prophet speaks. We shall be satisfied when thy glory
shall appeer. Do thou not see what abundance of licour has flowed out of a
little Grape? how great a fire is grown out of this one spark? how far this
little lamp (Blessed are the pure in heart for they shall see God) is stretched
out in this meditation. But how far think you might the same be extended, if
some man should come in place which had good experience of such mattere? for I
perceive that a very deep well it is, but I being unskillful in these matters,
have scarcely found the bucket to draw out very few things. The soul being
enflamed with these burning torches, and mortified with these desires, the
alabastar of the sweet ointment being broken: it begins sweetly to savor,
not as by taste: but as it were by smelling at the nose. Hereof the Soul does
gather, how sweet a thing it were to feel the fruit of this meditacion. the
meditation whereof she finds to be so pleasant. But what shall the soul do?
she burns with desire to obtain, yet she finds not with her self how it may
be had, and the more she sercheth: the more she thirsts, and while she
applies meditation thereunto: she does but encreace the pain, because the
soul feels not the sweetness which meditation does not give her, but shows
her to be in purity of the heart, for it lies not in him that reads or
meditateth to feel this sweetness: except it be given him from above, for to
read and to meditate is a thing common both to good and evil men, for the very
philosophers of the heathen did find out by drift of reason, wherein the effect
of the true good thing did consist. But because when they knew God: they did
not glorify him as GOD, but presuming of their own strength said, our own
tung will we magnify, our own lips be of our selves, they were not worthy to
feel ye things they could see, but waxed full of vanities in their
imaginations, and their wisdom was consumed. For that wisdom, humain study of
learning (but not the spirit of wisdom) had given them, which spirit only
gives true wisdom, I mean the sweet knowledge, which when it is in any man
as an inestimable sweetness, it does comfort and refresh him. And of this
wisdom it is said. VVisdome shall not enter in to a froward soul. This comes
of God only, even like as the Lord has granted the office of baptising unto
many, but the power and authority in baptism, of remitting sins, he has
reserved unto him felf alone. Whereupon John No man can remit sin. God has
referred it to hiself alone.
in steed of naming Christ, by that property, as by way of distinguishment,
pointing to him (...) says This is he which baptiseth in the holy Ghost And
so of bun we may say, this is he that gives the true taste of wisdom, that
makes the pleasant sauored science of the soul, for speech is given to many,
but wisdom unto few, which ye Lord deuideth unto whom he will, and after what
sort it pleases him.

The office of prayer. Cap. 4.
NOw ye soul seeing yt she can not by her self attain the desired sweetness of
knowledge and experience and the more she approaches unto highness of heart, so
much the more God is lifted abooue her reach, she humbles her self and flies
unto prayer, saying. O Lord thou which may not be see but of clean hearts. I
have sought by reading, I have searched Every christian soul may say I have
sought by re ading.
by meditating, how the true purity of heart might be obtained, yt by the means
thereof I might in part know thee. I sought thy countenance (O Lord) even thy
face did I seek. I have long me ditated in my heart, and in my meditation, the
fire and longing to know thee, is more and more kindled. Whilst thou Lord
do break unto me the bread of In breaking the bread of holy scripture
Christ is known. Lu. 24. ver. 30.
holy Scripture, and in breaking of bread: thou art the sooner known, and the
more I know thee: ye more I desire to know thee, not now in the bark of the
letter: but in the feeling of experience. Neither do I ask this (O Lord) for
my merits: but for thy mercies sake. For I confess Not for merits sake
that I am an unworthy and sinful soul, not withstanding the whelps do eat
ye cru^mes that fall from the table of their Lords. Give me (o Lord) ye ernest
of the enherita^ce to come, at the least one drop of the heavenly rain, that I
might cool my thirst, for I burn in love of thee.

The office of contemplation. Cap. 5.
WIth these and such like enflamed speeches, the soul kindles her desire as
she utters her affection, with these allurements the soul caleth to her self,
the Bridegroom Now the Lord whose eyes are set upon the righteous, and his ears
not only open unto their prayers: but hastily interrupting the middle course
of the prayer, and speedely being compassed with the dew of heavenly grace, he
meteth with the destring soul. And being anointed with the best ointme^t, he
recreateth ye weary soul, he refreshes the hungry and makes fat the lean
soul, causes her to forget all worldly things, and being vnmindeful of him
self, by fortifying the soul, makes her alive, and by making her drunck:
causes her to be sober, and like as in certain carnal duties, the
concupiscence is so overcome, that it loses the use of reason, and is become
as it were altogether carnal. So for good cause in this heavenly
contemplation, the carnal mocions are so consumed and swalowed up of the
soul, that the flesh does contrary the spirit in no thing, and the man is
made as it were altogether spiritual.

Signs of the holy Ghost coming unto the soul. Cap. 6.
O Lord how do thou appeer when thou woorkest these thing? and what token
is there of thy coming? Be sighs and tears witnesses and messengers of this
joy and consolation? If it be so, this is a new kind of speech by a contrary
meaning, and a signification out of use. For what fellowship has consolation
with sorrowful sighs? or joy wc tears? If these yet ought to be called tears,
and not rather an over running abundance of inward dew powered upon the soul,
and a token both of the inward and outward purging. That like as in the
baptism of child^en, by the outward washing, is signified and figured the
inward washing of the soul: so hear the inward purging goes before the
outward clensing. O happy tears by which the inward blemishes of the soul are
purged, by which ye kindlings of sin are quenched. Blessed are you that so
mourn, because you shall laugh. In tears O soul acknowledge thy bridegroom,
embrace thy long desired one. Now make thy self drunk in the river of pleasure,
suck Milk and Hunny out of the breast of his consolation.

These are the pure gifts and pleasures which thy Bridegroom has sent thee,
namely, mourning and tears. With these tears he brings drink unto thee by
measure, these tears are thy food night and day, even the bread that makes
strong the heart of man, which are sweeter the^ the honye or the honey comb.

O Lord if these tears be so exceeding sweet with the desire and remembrance
of thee: how sweet shall the joy be which shall be taken by ye manifest sight of
thee? If it be so sweet a thing to weep for thee: how sweet shall it be to
rejoice of thee? But what do we go about to set forth openly the secret
speeches of the soul? why go we about with usual words to express ye
spiritual affections? Those which have not the experience thereof, understand
not any such matters, whom the anointing it self teaches in ye book of
experience, or else ye outward letter profits nothing to him that reads.
Little good savor has the reading of the outward letter, except from the harta
man take the exposicion and inward sense.

In what estate the soul remains whilst the feruencie of the holy Ghost
departs. Cap. 7.
O Soul we have greatly prolonged this talk, for it was good for us to be
here with Peeter and John, to behold the glory of the Bridegroom, and long to
remain with him. But I would there were made here, not three nor two several
Tabernacles, but one, in which we might all dwell together, and Joy together.
But as the Bridegroom says. Let me go, for now the mornig rises. Now thou
have received the visitation and light of grace which thou did desire.
Therefore the blessing being given Genesis 32. ver. 26.
thee, the sinow of thy thigh being mortified, and thy name being changed
16. ver. 25. 2^
from Jacob to Israel, now for a while goes aside ye bridegroom long desired,
and soon departed, he withdraws himself as well from the vision as from the
sweetness of contemplation, yet does he still remain present towching ye
government, the glory and the unite.

A reason given why the feruentnesse of the holy ghost does for a time leave
the soul. Cap. 8.
But fear not O spouse, despair not, neither think thy self to be contemned,
though for a while ye bride gro^e hide his face from thee, all these things
woork together for thy profit, and thou make a gain, both of his coming
and of his departure, he comes for thy profit, and he also departs for thy
profit, he co^eth to give thee comfort, and departs to make thee vigilant,
lest the greatness of thy consolation should puff thee up, lest if the
bridegroom should always abide with thee: you should begin to contemn thy
fellows, and should now attribute this continual visitation, not to grace:
but to nature, for this grace, the bridegroom gives to whom he will and when
it pleases him, the possession thereof is not gotten by any right of
enheritance. It is a common sayi^g, over much familiarity breeds contempt.
The bridegrom therefore departs from thee, least being over much conversant:
he might be contemned, and that being absent: he might be the more desired,
and being desired: the more greedily sought for, and being long sought for:
he might be at the last more tha^kfully found. Furthermore, what is this
present life? what is it in respect of the glory to come which shall be showed
upon us? surely it is a life like a dark riddell in which we understand but a
small part, for here we have no continuing City but we seek for one to come,
let us not then take our banishment for our country, nor the ernest penny for
the whole price. The Bridegroom comes and departs again. Sometime bringing
consolation, sometime turning our whole estate into weakness. A little while he
suffers us to taste how sweet he is, and before we can fully feel it: he
withdraws himself and as it were flickring over us with his wings spread a
broad, be^ proueketh us to fly, as if he should say: behold you have somewhat
tasted how sweet I am, but if you will be fully satisfied with this my sweetness:
run after me into yt sweet savor of mine ointments, lifting up your hearts
where I am on Cant. 1. ver. 23.
the right hand of my Father, where you shall see me not in a glass or in a
riddel, but face to face, and where your heart shall fully rejoice and no man
shall take away your joy from you.

The care and diligence of the soul, left she should be forsaken of God. Cap.
9.
But take thou heed O Spouse how the Bridegroom turns away him self, he goes
not far of, and although thou see not him, yet does he see thee, being full of
eyes both behind and before, thou can never be hidden from him. He Apo. 5.
ver. 6.
has also about thee his spirits, being messengers and as it were most sharp
sighted Spies, that they may look how thou behauest thy self in ye abse^ce of
the Bridegroom, and accuse thee before him, if they may espy any token of
wantonness and scurrilitie. For this Bridegroom is ielous, lest parhap thou
should accept some other loouer. For if you go about to please any other, he
forsakes thee and joins him self to other yu^g ones.

This Bridgroom is a dainty fellow, he is both noble and rich, and of passing
beauty abooue all the children of men, and therefore he disdaineth to have any
other but a beawtifull Spouse. Yea if he see in thee but one spot or wrinkle:
he straight turns away his eyes, for he can abide no uncleanness. Be chaste
therefore, be shamefast and humble, that so thou may be worthy often to be
visited of thy Bridegroom. I fear lest this speech has holden us over long.
But the matter both barren and sweet has driven me thereunto, which I have not
voluntarily prolonged, but have been drawn against my will, with I know not
what sweetness thereof.

The office and effect of every stall or step by repetiton. Cap. 10.
THat these things then which have been spoken more at large, may the better
be seen when they are united and joined together: let us collect by rehersall
the sum of the things before spoken, as in the former examples it may appear
to have been noted, how the forsaid steps hold together, and how they go one
before another, as from time to time the one being cause of the other. For
reading, as it were the foundation, does first offer it self, and when she
has Reading the foundation.
given us the substance or matter: she sends us to Meditacion, now
Meditation very diligently enquireth what we ought to desire and as it were
deluing or digging, does find and show where as the tresure is. But when by
her self she is not able to obtain it: she sends us unto Prayer, Prayer
lifts up her self with all her force when she has found the desired tresure,
the sweetness of Conte^plation. This Contemplatio^ commig to, does fully reward
ye labor of those three before na^ed, while she makes the thirsty soul
drnnken with the dew of heavenly sweetness. Reading then pertains to outward
exercise. Meditation to the inward understanding. Prayer to the desire of the
mind. Contemplation is above all feeling of humain reason. The first step is
of those that do begin. The second of those that do go forward. The third of
those that are devout. The He that will not set his foot upon ye first Step
shall never come up to the last.
fourth of those which are blessed or happy. These four steps are so linckt
together, and do so by course serve one an others turn yt they which go before
with out them that follow can proffit little or nothing, and they which follow
without them that go before do proffit seldom or never. For what does it
vauntage to spend the time in continual reading, or by reading to run through
the Acts and writings of holy men, except by chawing and feeding upon the
same: we drink down the ioice thereof, and by swalowing thereof, we send it
into the inner most part of the bart, that of those things we may have
diligent consideration of our own estate, and endeavor our selves to do ye
woorks of them whose acts we often desire to read. But how can we consider of
these things, or how can we beware least by meditating, some false and vain
things, should pass the bounds, constituted by those holy Fathers, except
first we be instructed about such matters, either by reading or by hearing. For
hearing does after a certain manner pertain to reading. Whereof Hearing is
included in reading.
we use to say that we have not only read those books which we our selves
do read unto our selves or to other: but also those which we have heard of our
Masters.

Further what does it profit if by Meditation a man do see what things ought
to be done, except by the help of prayer and the grace of God, we may be made
able to obtain ye same, For every good gift (says Saint James) and every
perfect Jam. 1. 17.
gift descends from above from Without whom we can do nothing says S.
Augustine, and also Christ him self. Joh. 6. v. 5
the father of light. Without whom we can do nothing, but be in us does woork
our woorks, yet not altogether with out us, for we are woorkers with God, as
the Apostle says, God surely will have us pray unto him, and that we do open
unto him, coming and tarying at the boore, the bosom of our will, and that we
consent unto him.

This consent he required of the woman God by his grace makes us freely to
chose that which is good.
of Samaria, when he said, call thy husband I will pour grace into thee apply
you free choice. He required prayer of her, when he said. If thou knew the
Joh. 4. v. 10
gift of God and who it is that says unto thee, give me drink: parhpas thou
would have desired of him the water of life. The woman when she heard this
being instructed as it were of reading: she thought in her heart that it would
be good and profitable for her to have this water. She then being kindled with
a desire to obtain it: turned her self unto Joh. 4. v. 15.
prayer saying. O Lord give me this water that I may thirst no more, neither at
any time come hither again to draw any water.

Behold the hearing of the word of the Lord and Meditation following there
upon, have proucked her unto prayer. For how could she be carefully bent un to
prayer: except Meditation had first kindled her. And what should Meditation
going before have profited her? except prayer following had obtained those
things, which Meditacion did show woorshy to be desired. Therefore that
Meditation may be fruteful: it behooves yt the devotion of Prayer do follow,
whose fruit and as it were the effect, is the sweetness of Contemplation.

All these steps or degrees are declared to be joined together that they are
inseparable. Cap. 11.
BY these we maygather that Meditation without reading is erroneous.
reading without Meditacion is saples. Meditacion without reding is erronius.
Prayer without Meditation is neither hot nor cold. Meditacio^ without Prayer
is fruteles. Prayer with devotion is it that obtains Conte^plation. The
obtaining of Contemplation without Prayer, is either rare or miraculous.

For GOD of whose power there is neither number nor end, and whose mercy is a
booue all his woorks, so^etime of stones may raise up sons unto Abraham.
While he compels those which be hard hearted and unwilling, quietly to agree
and to be willing.

And so like the prodigal son as the common saying is. He draws the Or by
the borne, when he powers in him self not being required. Which thing
although sometime we read to have happened unto some, as unto Paul and
certain other, yet ought we not to presume of such divine things, but rather
to do that which is our duty, that is to say, to read and to meditate in the
law of God, to pray and to love him, that it may please him to behold our
imperfection, and to help our infirmity, which things he techeth us to do,
saying Ask and ye shall receive, seek and Mat. 7. v. 7*
ye shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you. For now the Kingdom
Mat. 11. 12.
of heaven suffers violence, and those that be violent pluck it unto them.

Behold whether the properties of the forsaid steps, may be made perfect with
convenient distinctions, how fast they cleue one to the other, and what every
one of them does woork in us.

Blessed is the man whose mind being void of others affairs, does always
desire on these steps to be conversant, which selling all that he has, does
buy that feeld in which this desired treasure lies hid. For behold and see
how sweet the Lord is.

He that in the first degree is exercised, in the second circumspect, in the
third devout, in the fourth lifted up above him self: by these ascencio^s which
he has disposed in his heart, he does rise from virtue to virtue, until the
Lord of Lords appeer in Sion. Blessed is he to who^ it is granted to remain,
but even Psa. 84. v. 7
a little while upon this highest step, for he may truly say. behold I feel
the grace of the Lord, behold with Peeter and John I do contemplate. Behold
with Jacob I do often take delight in the embrasing of Rachell, but let this
person take good heed to him self, least after this Contemplation by which he
has been lifted up to the heavens, by any inordinate hap he ^all unto ye depth
of bell, and least after the sight of God he be converted unto the wanton
actions of the world, and the entising pleasures of the flesh, for when the
weak sight of man's mind is not able long to sustain the brightness of the true
light: let him softly and orderly descend unto some one of the three steps by
which he had ascended, and by course let him stay, now upon one, now upon
another, some time upon ye third as he lists him self to chose, and as time
and place shall require. And look how much the higher he mou^leth abooue the
first step: so much the nearer he draws unto God. But alas how frail and
miserable is the condition of man, behold by discourse of reason, and by the
Testimonies of the holy scripture we plainly see ye in these ^oure steps, the
perfection of a good life is contained, and in these spiritual good things a
man's exercise ought to be contained. But who is he that does it and we will
praise him. To will is present with many, but to perform it: with few, and I pray
God that we may be of those few.

Four causes do withdraw us from these four steps. Cap. 12.
THere are yet four Causes which withdraw us often from these four steps;
that is to say, inevitable necessity, of honest action the utility, humayne
infirmity: and worldly vanity.

The first is excusable. The second is tolerable, The third miserable. And the
fourth damnable. For it had been better for them whom such cause pulls away
from their holy purpose, not to know the glory of God then to tourn backwarde
after they have known it. What excuse can he make of his offense? for justly
the Lord may say unto him.

What could I more have done for thee then I have door? thou had no being
and I created thee, thou did commit sin and made thy self the servant
of the Devil and I redeemed thee, thou did run at randon over the world
with the wicked, and I elected thee, I gave thee grace in my sight and would
have dwelt with thee, but thou haste despised me, thou haste thrown behind
thee (not only my words) but my self also, and have walked after thine own
lusts.

But o good, sweet, and pitiful GOD, a delectable friend, aprudent counceller,
a mighty helper, how vain and brainles is he that casts thee away, which
drives from his heart so mylde and meek a guest? O how unhappy and hurtful a
change is this, to cast away his creator, to take in froward and noisome
thoughts, and to deliver up ye secret place of his heart, even the priuye closet
of the holy ghost, which now erewhile was filled with celestial Joys, so
suddenly to be trodden under foot with unclean thoughts and wicked sins,
even yet therein the very steps of the bridegroom are warm and now presently
are intromitted and let in the adulterous desires, a foul absurd disorder,
that the ears which even now have heard the words which are not lawful for a
man to utter, so soon to be inclined to the hearing of slanders and fables,
that the eyes which even now were baptized with holy tears, suddenly to be
turned unto the beholding of vanities, that the tongue which even now did sing
the pleasant song of the holy bride bed, which reconciled Cau. 1. v. 12.
with his enflamed eloquence of persuasion, the bride with the bridegroom and
brought her into the Wine seller: should again be converted unto vain
speeches, to filthy jesting, to the practicing of decelt, and unto slanders.
Far be it from us (o Lord) but if it happen by humane infirmity that we slip
in to any such offense, let us not therefore despair: but let us run again
unto the pitiful Physician which raises the poor from the earth, and
lifts up the needy from the du^ghill, and he that wills not the death of a
sinner: shall again cure and heal us.

It is now time to conclude this Epistle. Let us therefore pray unto God
prese^^ly to mittigate the impediments which do witholde us from his
Contemplation, and hereafter to take them clean away from us, whom we desire
to lead us by the forsaid steps from virtue to virtue, til we may see the God
of Gods in Sio^, where the elected (not by drops nor by course) shall taste ye
sweetness of divine Contemplation: but shall have the Joy of being filled
without seasing with the River of Pleasure, which no man shall take from them,
and shall enjoy unchangeable Peace, even Peace in it self.

The end of S. Augustine Bishop of Hippo, his Ladder to Paradise.


