The order for Swannes.
FIRST ye shall inquire if there be any person that does possess any Swan,
and has not compounded with the Queens Majesty for his mark. That is to
say, six shillings eight pence for his mark during his life. If you know any
such you shall present them, that all such Swannes and Cignets may be seized
for the Queen.

2 Also you shall inquire if any person do possess any Swan or Cignet, that
may not dispend the clear yearly value of five Marks of freehold (except
heir apparent to the crown) then you shall present him. 22. Ed. 4.

3 Also if any person or persons do drive away any Swan or Swannes breeding
or providing to breed, be it upon his own ground or any other man's ground,
he or they so offending shall suffer one years imprisonment, and fine at the
Queens pleasure, thirteen shillings four pence. 11. Hen. 7.

4 Item, if there be found any Weres upon the rivers not having any grates
before them, it is lawful for every owner, Swanmaister or Swanheard, to pull up
or cut down the birth, net or gin of the said Were or Weres.

5 Item, if any person or persons be found carrieng any Swanhooke, and the same
person being no Swanheard, nor accompanied with two Swanheards: every such
person shall pay to the Queen thirteen shillings four pence, that is to
say, three shillings four pence to him that will inform, and the rest to the
Queen.

6 Item, the ancient custom of this Realm has and does allow to every owner
of such ground, where any such Swan shall heirie, to take one ^^rd, and for the
same the Queens Majesty must have of him that has the land bird twelve pence.

^ Item, it is ordained that if any person or persons do conuaie away or
steal away the Egg or Eggs of any Swan, and the same duly proved two
sufficient witnesses, that then every such offender shall pay to the Queen
thirteen shillinges four pence for every Egg so taken out of ^aest of any
Swan.

8 Item, it is ordained every owner that has any Swannes shall pay four pence
yearly to the master of the game for his fee, and his dinner and ^^^per free
on the vpping day. And if the said master of the game fail of the four
pence, then he shall distraine the game of every such owner that so (...)
fail of payment.

9 Item, if there be any person or persons that has Swannes that both heirie
upon their several waters, and after comes to the common ri^er they shall
pay a land bird to the Queen, and be obedient to all Swan laws; for diverse
such persons do use it for collusion to defraud the Queen (...) right.

10 Item, it is ordained that every person having any Swannes, shall begin
yearlie to mark upon the first of August, and no person before, but (...), as
the company may, so that the master of the Queens game or his deputy be
present. And if any take upon him or them to mark any n^^^nes or Cignets, to
forfeit to the Queens Majesty for every Swanne forty shillings.

11 Item, it is ordained that no person or persons being owners or Swanheards,
or other, shall go on marking without the master of the game be ^^^sent, with
other Swanheards next adioining, upon pain to forfeit to the Queens Majesty
forty shillings.

12 Item, it is ordained that no person shall hunt any duckes or any other
chase in the water or near the haunt of Swannes in fence time, with a^^ogs or
spaniels from the feast of Easter to Lammas, upon pain to every time so found
in hunting to forfeit six shillings eight pence.

13 Item, it is ordained that if any person do set any snares or any manner of
nets, lime or engines to take Bittorns or Swannes from the feast of Easter to
the sunday after Lammas day, he or they to forfeit to the Queens Majesty for
every time so setting six shillings right pence.

14 Item, it is ordained that no person take up any Cignet unmarked, or make
any sale of them, but that the Queens Swanheard or his deputy be present with
other Swanheards next adioining, or have knowledge of the same, upon pain to
forfeit to the Queen forty shillings.

15 Item, it is ordained that the Swanheard of the Duchy of Lancaster shall up
no Swanne, or make any sale of them, without the master of the ^wannes or his
deputy be present, upon pain to forfeit to the Queens Majesty forty
shillings.

16 And in like manner the Queens Swanheard shall not enter into the liberties
of the Duchy without the Queens Swanheard be there preent, upon the like
pain to forfeit forty shillings.

17 Item, it is ordained that if any Swans or Cignets be found double marked,
they shall be seized to the Queens use, till it be proved to whom the same
Swans or Cignets do belong. And if it cannot be proved to whom they do
belong, that then they be seized for the Queen, and her Grace (...) be
answered the value of them.

18 Item, it is ordained that no person make sale of any white Swans, nor make
delivery of them without them the master of the game be present or his
deputy with other Swanheards next adioining, upon pain to forfeit forty
shillings, whereof six shillings eight pence to him that will inform, (...) the
rest to the Queens Majesty.

19 Item, it is ordained that no person shall lay leapes, set any nets or drag
within the common streams or rivers vpn the day time, from the (...) of the
Invention of the Cross, unto the feast of Lammas, upon pain so often as they be
found so offending to forfeit twenty shillings.

20 Item, it is ordained that if the master of the Swans or his deputy do
sease or take up any Swannes as straies for the Queens Majesty, that he shall
keep them in a pit within twenty foot of the Queens stream, or within
twenty foot of the common high way, that the Queens sub^^^s may have a
sight of the said Swannes so seized, upon pain of forty shillings.

21 Item, it is ordained that if any person do raze out, counterfeit or alter
the mark of any Swan, to the hindering or loss of any man's game, (...) any
such offender duly proved before the Queens Majesty's Commissioners of
Swannes, shall suffer one whole years imprisonment, and (...) three pound six
shillings and eight pence to the Queen.

22 Item, it is ordained that the commons, that is to say, dinner and supper,
shall not exceed above six pence or eight pence at the most, and if any game be
found on that river where such dinner or supper is had, and the owner of the
same game absent nor any for him, the master of the game or his deputy to
lay six pence or eight pence for every such owner, and to be allowed again
of every game, whose owner is absent.

23 Item, it is ordained that there shall be no forfeiture of any white Swanne
or Cignet but only to the Queens Grace, as well within the fran^^^ses and
liberties as without, and if any do deliver the Swan or Cignet to any person
so seized, but only to the master of the Queens game, (...) his deputy to
the Queens use, he to forfeit six shillings eight pence, and the Swannes to be
restored to the master of the game.

24 Item, it is ordained that no person shall take any graie Swannes or Cignets
or white Swannes flieng, but that he shall within four days next after
deliver it or them to the master of the Queens game, and the taker have for
his pains in taking the said Swan eight pence.

25 Item, it is ordained that every person having any game of his own, shall
not be Swanheard for himself, nor keeper of any other man's ^^annes, upon pain
to forfeit to the Queens Majesty forty shillings.

26 Item, it is ordained that no Swanheard, fisher or fouler, shall ^er any
other swanheard, fisher or fouler by way of action, but only before the
Queens Majesty's Justices of Sessions of Swannes, upon pain of forfeiting to
the Queens Grace forty shillings.

27 Item, the master of the Queens game shall not take away any unmarked Swan
coupled with an other man's Swanne for breaking of the (...), and when they do
heirie the one part of the Cignets to the Queen, and the other to the owner of
the marked Swan.

28 Item, it is ordained that if any heirie be led withone Swan, the Swan and
the Cignets shall be seized for the Queen, till due proof be had ^^ose they
are, and whose was the Swan that is away, be it Cob or Pen.

God save the Queen.
Printed by Henry Denham. 1584.


