Anno primo etsecu^do Philippi and Mariae. Acts made at a Parliament begone and
holden at Westminster, the.xii day of Noue^ber, in the first and second year of
the reign of our sovereign Lord and Lady, Philippe and Marye by the grace of
God, king and Queen of England, France Naples Jerusalem, and Irelande,
defendours of the faith, princes of Spain and Sicile, Archdukes of Austria,
Dukes of Millaine, Burgondie and Brabant, counties of Haspurge Flaunders, and
Tyrol, and there continued and kept until the dissolution of the same, being
the.xvi. days of January then next ensuing, were enacted as follows.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

The Table,
AN act touching letters patentes* and other wrytynges to be signed by the
Queen's Majesty. Ca. i. An act for the reformation of excess in apparel. Ca.
ii An act against seditious words and rumors. Cap. iii. An act for the
punishment of certain persons calling them selves Egiptians. Cap. iiii. An
act to restrain carrying of corn, victuals, and wood, over the Sea. Cap. v.
An act for the reniuing of three statutes, made for the punishment of
heresies. Cap. vi. An act that persons dwelling in the country shall not sell
diverse wares in cities and towns corporate by retayle. Cap. vii. An act
repealing al statutes, articles, and provisions, made against the sea
apostolyke of Rome, since the twenty year of king Henrye theyght, and also
for the establisheme^t of al spyrytual, and ecclesiastical possessions, and
hereditamentes conveyed to the laytye. Cap. viii. An act for the punishment of
traiterous words against the queen's majesty. Cap. ix An act whereby certain
offenses be made treasons, and also for the government of the kings and
Queen's Majesty's issue. Cap. x An act for the punishmente of bunginge in of
counterfeyte coin of forrayne realms, being curraunte within this realm, Ca.
xi An act touching the impoundinge of distresses. Ca. xii. An act appoyntynge
in order to Justices of peace, touching the vail meant of prisoners. Cap. xiii.
An act for the making of russels satens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of
Naples in Norwyche. Cap. xiiii. An act to confyrme the liberties of the lord
Marchers in Wales. Cap. xv. An act for the continuance of certain statutes.
Cap. xvi An act touching leases hereafter to be made by certain spyrytuall
persons. Cap. xvii
An act touching letters patentes and other wrytynges to besigned by the
Queen's Majesty.
The first Chapter.
WHere in the Parliamente begone and holden at Westminster, the second day of
Apryll, in the first year of the reign of our most dread and gracious
Souetaygne Lady the Queens Majesty, and there continued and kept til the
dissolution of the same being the fifth day of May, then next folowinge, one
act was made touching tharticles of her highness most noble marriage. In ye
which act amongeste other things it was enacted, ordered, and established by
the auctority of the said parliament that all and singular gifts, grauntes,
letters patentes, exchanges, co^ firmations, leases, and other writings,
which after the said marriage and during the same should pass and be made, of
any benefices, offices, lands, revenues and fruits, or of any of them,
should be intite led and made in the names of our Sovereign Lord the king,
and of her most excellent highness, whether his Majesty should be present
within the realms and dominions of her hyghnes, or wtin any of them, or
absent. And that the same gifts, grauntes, letters patentes, eschaunges,
confirmations, leases, and other writings, so set forth and made, should be
sealed, and firmed with the sign manuel of her highness, and the same so signed
and sealed with the great seal of this realm or with such seal as has been
accustomed, should be by thauctoritie of the said parliament, demed, adjudged,
declared, and pronounced, to be as good perfect, and of like force, strength,
and effect in the law, to all intentes, constructions, and purposes, against
our said Sovereign Lord and Lady, the king and the Queens malestyes, and her
hyghnes heirs and successors, as if her mayestye had been at the time of the
making thereof, sole and unmarried, and that all gifts grauntes, letters
patentes, eschaunces, confirmatio^s leases and other wrytynges, which after
the said marriage, and during the time of the same, should pass and be made
of the said benefices, offices lands, revenues, and fruits, or of any of
the^ whereunto the sign manual of her hyghnes, should not be set made, or
put shall be by thaucthorytye of the said parlyament, from to time demed,
adjudged, aceepted, taken, and decreed, to be of no force, ne effect but
utterly frustrate and void in the law, to all intentes constructions and
purposes the said marjage pranye law, usage or custom, to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding, as by the said act more at large does appear.

Sithence the making of which Statut, and the solmntsation of the said marriage
the queens most excellent majesty has been greatly molested grieved, and
troubled ^^ often signing of letters patentes, gifts, grauntes, eschaunges,
leases, and other wrytynges, concerning and touching benefices, offices,
andes, revenues, and fruits, made and granted by and from but said soueraygne
lord the king and her highness, to sundry of their most loving subjects, to
whom also it has been, and is, no small charge to attend, vnty ssuche time as
they may procure and obtain the sign manuell of her highness, unto their said
letters patentes, gifts, grauntes, ef^chaunges, confirmations; and leases,
without whith sign the fame are utterly void by force of the said statute,
to the great danger, loss, and utter undoing of diverse persons, that have
lately boughte purchased or obtained of our said sovereign Lord and Lady, the
king and Queen's majesty's, diverse lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes
to their great costs and charges.

For remedy whereof be it enacted by the authority of this present parliamente,
that the said braunthe or article touching or concerning only the signing of
letters patentes, gifts grauntes, eschaunges, confirmations leases or of other
writings, for any lands, benefices, offices, revenues, friutes, or other
hereditame^tes, shall be from henceforth clearly repelled and made frustrate
and void, to alintentes and purposes.

And be it further enacted by authority of this present parliamet, that al and
singular letters patentes touching or concernyuge any gift, grant
eschaungs, confirmation lease or other writing the which sithence the said
marriage has passed, and be made of any benefices offices manoures lands
tenementes revenues fruytes, lybertyes or other hereditamentes or of any of
them, in the names of our most dread Soueraygne Lord and lady, the king
and the Queen's majesty's (the waraunte or writing, or warauntes or wrytynges
whereof being signed with her hyghnes sign manuel, in such form order and
degree, as the same heretofore have been accustomed to be signed, when her
highness was sole and unmarried) shall be by authority of this present parliament,
of the same like force, strength and effect in the law, to al intentes
constructions and purposes, as if the same were or had been signed by her
highness ligne manuel and as if her majesty had been at the time of the making
there of sole and unmarried, and as they were before the making of the said
act. The said estatute, or any branch, or article therein contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An act for the reformation of excess in apparel.
The second Chapter.
BE it enacted by thauctoritie of this present parliament that no person borne
within this realm, or the dominions of the same, other then the son and heir
apparaunt of a knight, or other then such as may dispend xx.li. by the year in
lands, offices, fees, or other yerelye revenues for term of life, or be worth
in goods two. C.li. shall after the first day of Apryll next coming, wear
any manet of fylke in, or upon his hatte, bonet, nyghtcappe, gyrdle, seabberde,
hose, shoes, or spnrre leathers, upon pain of three months imprysonment, and
forfeytures of.x.li. for every days wearing contrary to the tenor of this act.

And be it further enacted by thaucthorytie aforesaid, that Justices of
Assizes, in their circuities, Justices of peace in their sessions sheriffs in
their turns, Stewardes in letes and law days, Majors, shieriffes, and
Baylyffes of cities Boroughes, and towns corporate in their courts, shall and
may inquire, here and determyne from time to time, al and every the said
offenses, committed, or done within the limittes of their several jurisdictions
and aucthorities, and where any such forfeytures shall happen to be found
within the precinct of any city, bourough, town corporate, let or law
day, then the Mayor, sherif, and Bayliffes of the said cities, boroughes, and
towns, and owner of the said let or law days, to have the one moytye of
the said forfeytures, and the other moytie to be to any subject of this realm
that will sue for the same in any court of record by action information, byll,
or otherwise, in which no wager of law protection, or assoigne shall be allowed.
And where such forfeyture shall be found out of any city, boroughe, town,
let, or law day, that the moytie of al such forfeitures, shall be to the king
and Queen's majesty's, and the heirs of the Queen, and the other moytie thereof to
any of their subjects, that will sue for the same by byll, playnt, action,
information, or otherwise in any court of record as is aforesaid, in which no
wager of law, protection, or essoygne shall be admytted or allowed. And that al
and every such person and persons, as have auc toritye by virtue of this act,
to hear and determine the premysses may upon the conviction of every such
offender award process unto the shyryf of any shyre within this realm, for the
apprehension of the said offender, which being apprehended, shall be committed
by the shyrefe unto the jail of the said shyre there to remain without
bail or maynpryse until the said offendoure has paid the forfey ture
wherein he is so convicted.

And be it further enacted by the aucthorytye aforesaid, that if any person or
persons of what estate condition or degree soever he or they be, after the
said first day of April next coming, knowing any servant or servants of
his or theyrs to offend contrary to this act, do not put the same out of
his or their service, but shall keep in his or their service the same
offendoure or offenders by the space of xiiii. days next after such knowledge
had; or else being so put out of his or their service shall retain the same
offendour or offenders to his or their service again within one year next
ensuing the time of committing of any such offense, the same person or
persons, so keeping or retayninge again in or to his or their service, any
such servant or servants offending contrary to the tenoure of this act, as
is aforesaid, shall for every his or their offense forfeyt, c.li. of lawful
money of England, the moytye whereof to be to the king and Queen's majesty's
use, and the heirs and successors of the queen, and the other moytie to him
that wyllsue for the same in any court of record, by action, byl plaint
information or otherwise, wherein no wager of law essoygne or protection shall be
admitted or allowed.

Provided always and be it enacted that this act, or any thing therein
contained, shall not extend to any person veynge of, or above the degree of a
knights son or daughter, or veynge wife to any of them, nor to such as have
been, be, or shall be Maioure, Baylife, Alderman or head officer in any city,
boroghe, or town corporate, or to the wife of any of them, nor to any of the
kings or Queens servants in ordinary wages attendaunt, and wearynge the
kings or Queen's ordinary liueries, but that they and every of them, may use
and wear as they or any of them might lawfully use and wear before the making
of this act.

Provided also that no person shall be compelled by this act, to put away his
prentise or hyreb servant before the end of the term before agreed between
them, nor that any master shall forfeyt or lose any pame or forfeyture for the
keeping of his prentise or hired servant after his offense, contrary to this
act, unto thend of the term before agreed between them. Any thing above said
to the contrary norwythstandynge.

Provided also, that women may wear in their eappes, hattes, gyrdles, and
hoodes, as they or any of them might use and wear lawfully before the
making of this act.

An act against seditious words and rumors.
The third Chapter.
WHoreis is contained as well in the Statute of Westminster. the fyr^^e, as in the
Statute made at Gloucester the second year of the raygne of king Rychard the
second, that no man should be so hardye to contryue, speak, or tell any
false news, lies, or other suthe like false things of Prelates, Dukes,
Earls, Baronnes, and other Nobles and Pears of the realm, or of the
Chauncelloure, Treasurer, cierk of the prmye seal, Steward of the kings
household, Justices of the one hauche or of the other, or of any of the great
officers of this realm. And that every such offender should ve taken and
imprisoned, until suchtime as he had brought him or them forth which did
speak the same. And where also at a parsiamente holoen at Cambridge in
the.xli. ye are of the reygne of the said king Richard, it was also enacted,
that where any such offender as is aforesaid should be taken and
imprifoned, and could not find him of whom he heard those news which he
spoke, as is aforesaid, that then the same speaker should be puntshed by the
adnise of the counsel, as by the same acts amongst other more plainly do
and may appear.

Be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present parliamente, that all and every
the said former acts and Statutes shall be and remain in their full force
strength and effect to all intentes, constructions and purposes. And surther
that Justices of the peace in every Shire City, and town corporate, within
the limittes of their several commissions, shall by auctoritye of this present
act, have full power to examine, he are and determine the causes abouesayde, in
the said two first acts specified, and to put the said two first statutes and
every braunthe in them contained in due execution that from henceforth
condign punishment be not deferred from such offenders.

And for as much as diverse and sundry malicions and evil dysposed persons
maliciously, seditiousely, rebelliouslye, and vnnaturaliye contrary to the
duery of their sidelities and allegiaunces have now of late not only ymagined,
invented practiced, spoeken and spredde abroad diverse and sundry lalse,
seditious and sciaunderous news. rumors, sayings, and tales against our most
dread Sovereign lord and king, and against our most natural Soueraygne
lady and Queen, and against either of them, of whom we are forbidden to
think euyliand much more to speak evil, which offense foundeth and is as well
to the great dishonor reproach and sclaunder of their most excellent matesties,
as also to the great sclasider of this their realm, and other their dominions,
but also have devised, made written printed published and let forth diverse
heinous, seditious and sclaunderous writings rymes ballades, letters papers
and books, intending and practicing thereby to move and stir seditions
discozde discention and rebellion within this realm, to the great peril and
danger of the same. Forauoy dinge whereof, be it enacted by thauctoritie of
this present Parliament, that if any person or persons, after the, xx. day of
February next ensuing, and after open Proclamation made of this Act, shall
maliciously, of his or their ymanination, speak any false seditions, and
slanderous news, rumors sayings, or tales of our said Sovereign lord and
king, or of out said most natural Soueraignelady and queen, that then all and
every such person and persons so offendyng, being thereof convicted or at
tainted, in form hereaster, in this act expressed, shall for every first of
fence, in some market place within the shyre, city or Borough, where or near
unto the place where the said words were, or shall be so spoken, be set openly
upon the pylory, by the Sheriff or his ministers, if it shall fortune to be
without any city or town corporate. And if it happen to be within such city
or town corporate, then by the pryncipal officer or officers of such city or
town corporate, or his or their ministers, and there to have both his ears
cut of, unless he pay one hundredth pounds to the Kysnge and queen's highness
use within one month next after judgment given of his said offense, and also
shall suffer imprisonmente by the space of three months after such his or
their execution.

And it is likewise enacted by thauctoritye aforesaid, that al and every person
and persons, which after the said day, and after Proclamation made of this
act, shall malicioufly speak any false seditious and slaunderons news,
rumors, or tales to the flaunder and reproach of our said Soueraygne lord the
kyuge, or of our said most natural Soueraygne lady the queen, of the
speaking or reportynge of any other, that then all and every such person or
persons so speaking and reportyng, being thereof conuicte or attaynted, in form
hereafter in this act expressed, shall for every such offense in some market
place within the shyre, city, boroughe, or town, where or nere unto the place
where the said words were or shall be so spoken and reported, be set openly upon
the pyllorye by the shyrif or his ministers, if it shall fortune to be without
any city or town corporate, and if it shall happen to be within any city or
to wne corporate, then by the principal officer or officers of such city or
town corporate or his or their ministers, and there to have one of his ears
cut of, unless he pay one. C. marks to the kings and queens hyghnes use,
within one month next after judgment given of his said offense and also
shall suffer imprysonmente by the space of one month after his or their
execution.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any person or
persons shall after the said day, and after Proclamation made as is
aforesaid, maliciously devise, writ, print, or set forth any manner of book
time, ballade, letter, or writing, containing any false matter, clause or
senfence of sclaunder reproach and dishonor of the king and queen's majesty's,
or of other of them, or to the encotaging, sturring or moving of any
insurrection or rebellion, within this realm, or any dominions belonging to
the same. Or whosoever shall maliciouslye procure any such book, time,
hallade letter, or writing, written, prynted, or set forth (and the said.
offense not being punishable by the Statute made in the.xx.ii. year of the
reign of king Edward the third, concerning treasons, or declaratis of treason)
that then and in every such case the offender and offenders therein after his or
their conviction or attaynder, shall for his or their first offense, in some
market place within the shyre, city, or borow, where the said offense is or
shall be committed or done by the shyreffe or his ministers, if it shall fortune
to be without any city or town corporate, and if within such city or town
corporate, then by the pryncypall officer or officers of such city or town
corporate or by his or their ministers, have his and their right hand stricken
of.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid. that if anys person or
persons, being once lawfully convicted of any of thoffe^ces aforesaid now
provided to be punished by the execution of losses of care, ears or hand as is
aforesaid, do after wards estsones offend in any of the offenses aforesaid,
that then he or they so offendynge shall suffer imprisonment during his or
their lives, without bail or maynpryse, and forfeyt and lose to the king and
queen's majesty's al his and their goods and cattels.

And be it also enacted by thauctority aforesaid, that all Justices of over and
determiner, within the limittes of their commission Justices of assise in their
several circuites, Justices of jail delyuerye, and Justices of peace, as well
within the liberties as without, within the limittes of their several
co^missions in their general sessions, or other sessions, which they or two
of them whereof one of them to be of the Quormm, may and shall apppoynt at
their pleasure, where and when need shall requier and shall by virtue hereof,
have full power and auctoruie to inquier, here and determine al and every
thoffences aforesaid, as in cases and trial of felony. And that the party
indieted and artained, shall have advantage of al manner of chalenges to the
Iutie (peremptorye challenge only except) as in trial of selony.

And also that every Justice of peace within the limittes of his commssion
shall have full power and auctorytie to commit any person being vehemently
suspected of any of the said offenses to ward, there to remain without bail
or mainpryse, until he shall be deliue red according to this act.

Provided always and be it enacted by thauctorytye aforsayde that no manar of
person or persons shall be molested, or impeehed for any of the offenses,
concerning speaking or reporting as is aforsayde oneles he or they be thereof
accufed and convicted within three months, next after his or their said
offense so committed or done.

And in case any person shall be imprisoned foranye of the said offenres,
concerning speaking or reportynge, and not thereof conuycte, within three
months, next after the offense supposed to be by him done and committed that
then the persou so imprisoned shable set at lyberty and (...) le^gee deteyned
inpryson.

Provided also, and be it enacted by authority aforsaid, that eve ryesuche
Masour, Maiours, Baylyffes, and other head offycer and officers of cytyes,
borowes, and towns corporate which have or hereafter shall have iurysdictyon
and auctorycye, within the several limittes of thyroffyce or offices, to hold
and keep sessyons as instice or justices of ye peace shall, and may by
authority hereof, as well arrest and commite to ward, all and every person and
persons being vehemently suspected of any of the offenses aforesaid, as also
to proceed to the execution, he aryng and determining of every the said
offenses, and to see, and make due execution thereof, according to the purporte,
meaning and effect of this present act. Any thingein the same act
heretofore made to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, that the said Justice of peace, as well within liberties as
without, the which shall for any the offenses aforesaid, commit any person or
persons to ward, as is aforesaid, shall within ten days next after such
committinge, with one other Justice whereof one of them to be of the Quorum,
direct their precepte to the Sheriff or Sherifes of the county where thoffence
shall be committed, or to other ordinary officer, if it be within any city, or
town corporate, where the Sheriff can not intromit, commaundinge him or them
by the same impanei and return, as they shall assign, xxiiii. good and
lawful men of his or their bayliwike or bayliwikes to en quyre of the said
offenses or offenses the which any such person or persons shall be so imprisoned
for. And thervpo^ within one month after the date of the said precept to
proceed and determine, as above is expressed. Every one of the same Justices,
upon pain of.x.li. to be paid to the king and Queen's hyghnesses, as often as
they shall be founden in defaulte of any the same.

Provided also, and be it enacted, that this act shall be proclaimed in all the
shyres within this realm, before the.xii. day of Februarye next coming to
the intent that al persons may have notice thereof and avoid the peril and
danger that might ensue by offendynge against the same. And this act to be
only in force, until the end of the next parlyament, and no longer.

Promded always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that none of
the pears of this realm shall be arrested or imprisoned for any of the said
offenses, but only by order or commandment. given from the king and queen's
privy counsel, or of the heirs of the Queen, and that the said pears, and
every of them, that shall bereafter fortune to be indicted of any thoffences
aforesaid, shall be tried by their pears, as before has been accustomed in
cases of treason or fellonye.

An act for the punishment of certain persons calling them selves Egiptians.
The.iiii. Chapter.
WHere in a parliament holden at Westminster in the.xxij year of the reygne of
our late Sovereign lord king Henry theyght (for the avoiding and banyshyng
out of this realm of certain outlandish people, calling them selves
Egiptians, using no crast nor feate of marchaundises for to live by, but going
from place to place in great companyes using great, suttel, and crafty means
to desceaue the kings Subjects, bearing them in hand, that they by palmistry
could tell men's and women's fortune, and so many times by craft and subteltie
disceyue the people of their money, and committed diverse great and heinous
fellonyes and robberies, to the great hurt and disceyte of the people). It was
amongeste other things then enacted, that from the time of the making of the
fayde act, no such persons should be suffered to come within this the
kings realm, upon pain of forfeyture to the king al their goods and
cattels, and then to be commanded to avoid the realm within.xv. days next
after the commandment, upon pain of imprisonment, and such persons calling
them selves Egiptians, as then were within this Realm, should depart
within.xvi. days next after proclamation of the said act upon pain of
imprisonment and forfeyture of all their goods and cattels with diverse other
clauses and articles contained in the said act, as by the said act more at
large it appears. For as much as diverse of the said company and such other
like persons not fearing the penalty of the said Statute, have enterprised
to come over again into this realm, vsyng their old occustomed deuylishe and
noughty practices and devises, with such abominable living as is not in auye
Christian realm to be permitted, named, or known, and be not duly punyshed
for the same, to the peryllous and euylexa^ple of our soueraygne lord and
lady the king and the Queens Majesty's most loving subjects and to the
utter and extreme undoing of diverse and many of them as evidently does
appear.

For reformation whereof be it ordained and enacted by the king and queen our
soueraygne Lord and Lady, the Lords spyrytuall and temporal, and the
commo^s in this present parltame^t assembled and by thauctoritie of the same,
that if any person or persons after the last day of January next coming, do
willingly transport, bring and convey into this realm of England or Wales,
any such persons calling them selfs or commonly called Egiptians, that then
he or they so transportyng, bringing or conueying in, any such persons,
contrary to the true meaning of this act, shall forfeite and loose for every
time so offending.xl. pounds of lawful money of England.

And be it further enacted by thaucthority aforesaid, that if any of the said
persons called Egiptians, which shall be transported and conveyed into this
realm of England or Wales, as is aforesaid, do continue and remain within
the same, by the space of one monethe, that then he or they so offendynge,
shall by virtue of this act, bedemed and indged a fellon and fellons, and
shall therefore suffer pains of death, loss of lands and goods, as in cases
of felony, by the order of the common law of this realm, and shall upon the
trial of them, or any of them, therein, be tried in the county, and by
thinhabitauntes of the county or place, where they or he shall be apprehended or
taken, and not per medietatem linguae and shall lose the benefit and privilege
of sanctuary and clergy.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if the Egiptians or
other persons commonly calling them selves Egiptians and every of them now
being within this realm of England or Wales, do not depart out of the same
within.xx. days next after proclamation of this present act shall be made,
that then he or they which shall not depart within the said time, according
to the true meaning of this act, shall forfeyte and lose all his and their
goods and cattels, and that then it shall be lawful to al and every the king
and the Queen's subjects to sease the same, the one moytie thereof to be to the
use of our soueraygne lord and lady the king and the queen and the other moytie
thereof to be to the use of him or them that shall so sease the same.

And be it also enacted by thauctority aforesaid, that if the Egiptians and
other persons commonly called Egiptians, and every of them now being within
this realm of England or Wales, do not depart out, and from the same,
within.xl. days next after proclamation shall be made of this act, that then he
or they, which shall not depart, and anoyd within the said time of.xl. days
according to the true meaning of this act, shall be indged and demed according
to the laws of this realm of England a fellon and fellons, and shall suffer
therefore pains of death, loss of lands and goods as in other cases of
felony and shall be tried as is aforesaid, and without having any benefit or
prinilege of sanctuary and clergy.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any person
after the first day of January next coming, shall sue for the ^hteyning of any
license, letter, or pasporte, for any of the said persons called Egiptians,
to abide or continue, within this realm of England or Wales, contrary to the
tenor of this act, that then every such person so suing, shall forfeyt and
lose for the same forty pounds, of lawefull money of England, and that every
such lycense, letter and pasport, shall be by virtue of this act, void, to al
intentes and purposes, the one moytie of all which sums of money to be
forfeited, as is beforesaid, shall be to the king and Queen our Soueraygne Lord
and Lady, and the other moyte thereof to be to him or them, that will sue for
the same, in any court of record, by action of dect, byll, playnte, or
information, wherein any essoigne, wager of law, nor protectyon, shall be
admitted and allowed.

Provided always and be it enacted by thaucth oritie aforesaid, that this
present act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend, nor be
hurtful to any of the said persons, commonly called Egyptians which within
the said time of twenty days next after the said proclamation to be made, as
is beforesayde, shall leave that noughtye idle, and ungodly life, and company,
and be placed in the service of some honest and able inhabitaunte or
mhabytauntes, within this realm, or that shall honestlye exercise him self in
some law full work or occupation, but that he or they so continuing in
service or other lawful work or occupation, shall duringe such time as he or
they shall so continue, be discharged of all pains, and forfeitures contained
in this act.

Provided also and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this act
shall not in any wise extend to any child or children, being not above the age
of.xiii. years, nor to any of the said persons, being now in prison so that
he or they so being in prison, do depart out of this realm, within.xiiii.
days next after his or their delivery out of prison, nor shall extend to
charge any manner of person or persons, as accessory to any offense or
offenses, contained or specified in this estatute.

An act to restrain carrying of corn, victuals, and wodde over the Sea.
The.v. Chapter.
WHere as sundry good estatutes and laws has been made within this realm in
the tiine of the Queens highness most noble progenitors that none should
tra^sport, carye or conueye out of this Realm into any place in the parties
beyond the seas any corn butter chese, or other victual (except only for
the vitalyng or the town of Callys, Hames, and Guysnes, and the marches of the
same, upon diverse great pains and for faytures in the same contained, that
norwithstandyng many and sundre covetous and insatiable persenes, sekyng their
only sucres, and gaynes, has, and daily does carry and conueigh innumerable
quanticie as well of corn, chese butter, and other victual, as of wod out of
this realm, into the parties beyond the seas. By reason whereof the said
corn, vyctual and wood are grown unto a wonderful dear the, and extreme
pryces, to the great detriment of the Common wealth of this your highness realm
and your faithful fubiectes of the same.

For remeby whereof, it may please your highness that it may be enacted, and be
it enacted by your highness by thassent of the lords spiritual and temporal,
and the commons in this present parliament assembled, and by thauctoritie of
the same, that no manner of person or persons, after the.xx. day of January
next coming shall carye and transport out of this realm by any Ship, Craier,
or other bessell, whatsoever, into any place in the parties beyond the seas, or
into the realm of Scotland, any wheat, rye, barleye, or other corn or grain
growing within this Realm, or any malt made within the same, or any bear,
butter, chese, heringe, or wodde, except only to and for the victualing and
furniture of the to wnes of Callyes, Hames, and Guysnes, and to the town of
Barwicke and the marches of the same, with out sufficient and laweful
authority so to do, upon the pains and penalties hereafter eusuyng, that is
to say, thowner and owners of the said ships and other vessels, to forfeyte
the said ships, crayers and other vessels, with all their apparels, to them
and every of them belongyng, wherein the said corn, butter, chese, herryng,
victual, or wodde, shalve so transported and carried, and the owners and owner
of the said corn, butter, chese, hearing, and wodde to forfeyte the double
value of the same so carried, and conveyed, and the master and mareners of
every of the said ships craiers, and vessels for every such offense, to
forfeyte all their goods, and to be imprisoned, by the space of one whole
year without bail or maynepryse.

And be it further cuacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, after the said twenty day of January do carry and conueye away by
Boot, Crayer, or other vessel, or otherwpse any wheat, tie, bareley, malte,
or other corn or crayne, or any bear, butter chese, herryng, or wodde to any
Ship or vessett being on the Seas, or within any Haven, creke, or other
place of the bordre of this Realm to be transported, carried, and conveyed into
any place in the parties beyond the Seas, or into the realm of Scotland,
without sufficient authority so to do, that then every owner of the said
vietualls corn, and other things abouesayd so tronsported or carried and the
owner and owners of enery such bote or Vessel and the bore men and mareners
of the same shall loose forteyte, and suffer all such forfaytures, pains, and
penalties as is above rehearsed, the one moytie of al, and every which
forsayture or forfaitures, to be to the king and Queen's hyghnes, their heirs
and successors, and tho there moytie to him or them, that will sue for the same
by byl, information, attion of debte, or otherwise in any of the king and
Queens hyghnes courts of record, in which actyon, byll, or suite, the
defendaunte shall not wage his law nor have any essoygne or protectyon to him
allowed.

And be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if any person or persons
shall obtain of the king and Queens majesty's, there heirs or succe ssours,
or of any of them, any license to eary and transport any corn, victual, or
wodde, into any parries beyond these as, that if he or they, to whom any such
license, shall be geaunted, or any other, to whom such person or persoues,
having such license, shall give, grant or sell his or their said license unto,
shall carry, and conucy or cause to be carried and conveyed any more
corn.victual. or wood then shall be contained in his or their said license
shall forfeyte the treble value of the said corn, victual, or wood so carried
and trasported, without sufficient authority, and shall suffer imprisonment
for one whole year in the common jail, where he shall be apprehended, there to
remain without bail or mainepryse.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no manner of person
or persons, after the said.xx. day of January, that shall obtain, or have any
such license for transportynge and carrying any corn victual or wodde, into
any parties beyond the seas, shall ship lade, and fraught the same, or any
part thereof, at sondrye places within this realm, but at one place certain,
upon pain of forferture of the said corn, victual and wodde, and al his
goods and cattels thoue moytie thereof to the king and Queen's inaiesties,
their heirs and successors, and the other moytie to him or them that will sue
for the same by action of debte.byl, playnt information or otherwise, wherein
no wager of law, essoygne or protection shall be to him or them allowed.

And for the better execution of this act, be it further enacted by the
authority asoresaid, that all and singular Justices of peace, as well within
the liberties as without, within their several aucthorities and commyssions at
any time, with in three years next after such offenses committed, shall have
full power and authority to enquire as well by the oaths of twelve laweful
men, as also to hear and examine the master, maistres, and mareners of the
said ships, crayers, and other vessels, and al, and every other person and
persons, of all, and synguler the offenders against this present act, and to
here and determine the same offenses, as they may, and ought to here and
determine any other trespasses, or offenses.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesnyde, that at all
time and times hereafter, when the common price of corn within this Realm is,
that wheat shall not excede the price of vl.s. viii.d. the quarter, and
rye.iiii.s. the quarter, and bareley.iii. shillings the quarter, it shall be
laweful to every person and porsons to carry and transport over the sea, to any
place beyond the seas at their pleasure of the said kinds of corn, so that
it be not to the king and queen's enemies.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thautthoritie aforesaid, that this
act, ne any thing therein contained, shall extend to any person or persons
for the necessary victeling of any ship, ships, or other vessels, but that
they. and cuery of them, may victaile the said ships and vessels, as they
might have done before the making of this present act. This act or any
thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that this
act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be prejudicial or hurtefull
unto the Lord great admiral of England, for the time being or to the king
and Queen's Majesty's furisdiction of the Admiraltie, but that the said Lord
Admiral, or his deputy, or deputyes, may, and shall exercise.use. and execute
al kind of iurysdyctyon, belongyng to the sea according to his or their
co^missions, as they might lawefully have. done heretofore. This act, or any
thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

An act for the reviving of three Estatutes made for the punishment of
heresies.
The.vi. Chapter.
FOr the eschuing and auoydinge of errons and herefyes, which of late have
risen, grown, and much increased within this Realm, for that the Ordynaryes
have wanted authority to proceed against those, that were infected therewith,
Be it therefore ordained and enacted by the authority of this present
parlyamente, that the Statute made in the fyfte year of the reign of king
Richard the second, concerning the arresting and apprehension of erronyous and
heretical preachers, and one other Statute, made in the second year of the
reign of king Henry the fourth, concerning repressynge of heresies, and
punishment of heretics, and also one other Estatute made in the Second year
of the raygne of king Henrye the fyfre, concerning the suppression of heresye
and lollardye, and cuerye Article, Branch, and sentence conteygned in the
same thres several acts, and every of them, shall from the twenty day of
January next coming, be revived, and be in full force, strength, and effect, to
all intenses, constructions and purposes, for ever.

The tenor of the act, made in the fyst year of king Rychard, is as
follows. Chapter.v.
ITem forasmuch as it is openly known, that there be diverse evil persons
within the realm going from cou^tie to county, and from town to town, in
certain habites, under dyssimulation of great holiness, and with out the
license of the ordinaries of the places, or other sufficient authority:
preaching daily, not only in churches and churchyardes, but also in markets,
faires, and other open places where a great congregation of people is, diverse
sermones containing heresies, and notorious errors, to the great embleamishing
of the christen faith, and destruction of the Laws, and of the estate of holy
Church, to the great pericle of the souls of the people, and of all the
realm of England, as more plainelye is found, and sufficientlye prouyd, before
the reverent father in God the Archbishop of Canterburye, and the Bishops,
and other prelates, masters of divinity, and doctors, of Canon and of
civil, and a great part of the clergy of the said realm, specially
assembled for this cause, which persons do also preach diverse matters of
slander, to engender discord and dissension betwixt diverse estates, of the
said realm, as well spiritual as temporal in exciting of the people to the
great peril of all the realm, which preachers cited or sommoned before the
ordinaries of the places, there to answer of that where of they be impeched,
will not obey to there summons and commandments, nor care not for their
monycyons nor sensures of the holy Church, but expressly despise the^. And
moreover, by their subtle and ingenious words, do draw the people to here
their Sermons, and do maintain them in their errors by strong hand, and by
great routes. It is ordained and assented in this present Parliament that the
kings commissions be made and directed to ye Sheryffes and other ministers of
our sovereign Lord the king or other sufficient persons learned, and
according to the certificatio^s of the prelates thereof to be made in the
Chauncery, from time to time to arrest all such preachers, and also their
fautours, mainteners and abbettours, and to hold them in arrest and strong
prison, ^ii they will instify them, according to the law and reason of holy
Church. And ye king will and commands, that the Chauncellor make such
commissions at all times, that he by the prelates, or any of them shall be
certyfyed, and thereof required, as is aforesaid.

The tenor of the second act, made in the second year of king Henry the.iii.
is as follows. Cha.xv.
ITem where as it is showed to our Soueraygne Lord the king, on the behalf of
the prelates and Clergy of his realm of England in this present Parlyamente,
that although the catholyke faith builded upon Christ and by his Apostles, and
the holy church sufficientlye determined, declared, and approved, has been
hither to by good and holy, and most noble progenitors of our sovereign Lord
the king in the said Realm, emongeste all the realms of the world, most
deuoutlye obsetued, and the Church of England, by his said most noble
progenitors and ancestors, to the honor of God, and the whole Realm
aforesaid, laudably endowed, and in her rightes and liberties sustained,
without that that the same faith, or the said Church was hurt or greuouslye
oppressed, or else perturbed by any perverse doctrine, or wicked heretical or
crronious opinions, yet never the less diverse false and perverse people, of a
certain new sect of the says, of the Sacraments of the Church, and the
aucthorytie of the same, damnably thinking and against the law of god, and of
the church, vsurpyng the office of preaching do pecuersly and maliciouslye, in
dyurrse places within the said realm, under the color of dissimuled holiness,
preach and teach these days openly and privily, diverse new doctrines, and
wicked heretical and erroneous opinions contrary to the same faith; and
blessed determinations of the holy Church. And of such sect and wicked
doctrine and opinions, they make unlawful couenticles, and coufederacies,
they hold and exercise schools, they make and write books, they do wickedly
instruct and infourme people, and as much as they may excite and stir them
to sedition and insurrection and makes great strife and division among the
people, and other enormities horrible to be heard, daily do perpetrate and
commit, in subuercion of the said catholyke faith, and doctrine of the holy
church, in diminucion of Gods honor, and also in destruction of the estate,
ryghtes, and liberties of the said church of England, by which sect and
wicked and falfe preachynges, doctrynes, and opinions of the said false and
perverse people, not only most greatest peril of the souls, but also many
more other hurtes, slanders, and peryls (which God prohibit) might come to
this Realm unless it be the more ple^tifully and spedely helped by the kings
majesty in this behalf, namely where as the diocesans of the said realm
cannot by their jurisdiction spiritual without aid of the said royal
Majesty, sufficiently, correct the said false and perverse people, nor
refrain their malice, because the said false and perverse people do go from
Dyoces to Dyoces, and will not appear before the said Diocesans, but the same
Diocelans, and their jurisdiction spiritual, and the kayes of the church, with
the censures of the same, do utterly contempne and despise, and so there
wicked preachinges and doctrines, does from day to day continue and
eretcise, to the hatrede of fight and reason, and utter destruction order and
good rule. Upon which no welties and excesses above rehearsed. The Prelates and
Cleargye aforesaid, and also the commons of the said realm, being in the same
parliament, praying our sovereign Lord the king, yt his roial highness would
vouchesafe in the said parliamente, to pronide a conuenyente remedy, the same
our soueraygne Lord the king, gratioufly considetyng the premyffes, and also
the lawdable steps of his said most noble progentiours and ancestors, for
the conservation of the said catholyke faith, and sustentation of Gods
honor, and also the safeguard of the estate, ryghtes, and lyberties of the
said Church of England, to the laud of God, and merit of our said
soueraygne Lord the king, and prosperity and honor of al his said realm,
and for the eschewynge of such dissentions, divisions, hurtes, slanders, and
peryles, in time to come, and that this wicked sect, preachynges, doctrynes
and opinions, should from henceforth cease, and be utterly destrayed, by
thassent of the states, and other discrete men of the Realm, being in the
said parlyament, hathgraunted, stablyshed, and ordained from henceforth,
fermely to be ovserned, that none within ye said realm or any other dominions,
subjects to his royal majesty, presu^e to preach openly or privily without
the license of the Dyocesan of the same place, first required and obtained,
curates in their own churches, and persons hitherto priuileged, and other of
the canon law, granted only except. Nor that none from hence for the any
thing preach, hold teach, or instruct, openly or privily, or make or writts
any book contrary to the catholyke faith or determination of the holy church
nor of such, fecte and wicked doctrines and opinions, shall make any
conuenticles, or in any wise hold or evercyse Schools. And also that none from
henceforth in any wise favor such preacher, or maker of any such, and like
conuenticles or holding or exercysyng Schools, or making or writing such
books, or so teaching informynge, or exciting the people nor any of them
maintain, or in anywise sustain. And that al, and singular having such
books or any wrytynges of such wicked doctrine and opinions, shall really with
effect deliver, or cause to be delivered al such books and writtnges to the
Dyocesan of the same place, within.xi. days from the time of the proelamation
of this or viuaunce and statute. And if any person or persons, of what so
euerkynd, estate, or condition that he or they be from henceforth do or attempt
against the roial ordinance and statute aforesaid in the premises or in any
of them or such books in the form aforesaid do not deliver, then the diocesan
of the same place in his dioces such person or persons in this behalf
defamed, or evidently suspected and every of the^ may by the authority of the
said ordinarye and Statute, cause to be arrested, and under saufe custody in
his prisones to be detained, till he or they of the articles laid to him or
them in this behalf, do canonically purge him or them self, or else such
wicked sect preachynges, doctrynes, and heretical and erroneous opinions, do
abjure, according as the laws of the church, does require, so that the said
dyocesan by him self, or his commissaries, do openly and iudicially proceed
against such periones so arrested, and remaining under his saufe custodye to
all effect of the law, and determine that same busynes, according to the
Canonical decrees, within three months after the said arrest any lawful
impediment ceassing. And if any person in any case above expressed, be before
the diocesan of that place, or his commyssaryes canonically convict, then the
same diocesan may do to be kept in his prison the said person so convict, for
the manner of his defaulte, and after the quality of the offense, according and
as long as to his discretion shall seem expedient, and moreover to put the same
person to the secular court, except in cases where he according to the
canonical decree ought to be left, to pay to our sovereign lord the king,
his pecunier fine, according as the same fine shall seem competent to the
diocesan, for the manner and quality of the offense, in which case the same
dyocesan, shall be bound to certifye the king of the same fine in his escheker,
by his Lettre Patentes, sealed with his seal, to the effect that such fine
by the kings authority, may be required and levied to his use of the goods
of the same person so conuycte. And if any person within the said realm and
dominions upon the said wicked preachynges, doctrynes, opinions, schools, and
heretycall and erroneous informations, or any of them be before the diocesan of
the same place, or his commissaries sentencially conuyct and the same wicked
sect, preachinges, doctrines, and opinions, schools, and informations, do
refuse duly to abjure, or by the dyocesan of the same place or his
commyssaryes, after the abiuration made by the lame person pronounced, fall in
to relapse, so yt according to the holy canons, he ought to be left to
these culer court, whereupon credence shall be given to the dyocesan of the same
place, or to his commissaryes, in this behalf, then the sheryffe of the
county of the same place, and Mayor and sheryffes or sheryffe, or Mayor and
Baylyffes of the City, Town, and borow of the same countye next to the same
diocesan, or the said Commissaryes, shall be personailye present in preferryng
of such sentences, when they by the same diocesan, or his commissaries shall be
required, and they ye same persons and every of them after such sentence
promulgate, shall receive, and them before the people in an high place do to
be brent: that such punyshmente may strike in fear to the minds of other,
whereby no such wicked doctrine and heretical, and erroneous opinions, nor their
abbettours and fautours in the said realm and dominions against the catholic
faith, christen law and determination of the holy church (which god prohibit)
be fusteined, or in any wise suffered, in which al and singular the premises,
concerning the said ordinance and statute, the sheriffs, majors, and
bailiffes of the said counties, cities, boroughes, and towns, shall be tendynge,
aydynge. and supportyng to the said diocesans and their commissaries.

The tenor of the third act, made in the second year of kygne Henry the fifth,
is as follows. Cap. vii.
ITem forasmuch as great rumors, congregations, and insurrections here in the
realm of England by diverse of the kings liege people, as well by them which were
of the sect of heresies commonly called lolardry, as by other of their
confederatie, excitation, and abbetment, now of late were made to the intent to
adnul, destroy, and subuerte the christen faith, and the law of god and holy
church within this same realm of England, and also to destroy the same our
sovereign lord the king, and all other manner of estates of the same realm of
England, as well spiritual as temporal, and also al manner of policy and finally
the laws of the land. The same our sovereign lord the king, to the honor of
god, and in conservation and fortification of the christen faith, and also in
sak ation of his royal estate, and of thestate of al his realm, willing
against the malice of such heretics and lolardes to provide a more open remedy
and punishment then has been had and used in the case hereto fore, so that for
fear of the same laws and punishment, such heresies and lolardries may the
rather cease in time to come, by the advice and assent aforesaid, at the prayer
of the said commons, has ordained and established, that first the
chaunceloure, treasurer, Justices of the one benche and of the other. Justices of
peace, shirifes, mayors, and baylifs of cities and towns, and al other
officers, having governance of people, which now be, or hereafter for the
time shall be, shall make anothe in taking of their charges and occupations, to
put their hole power and diligence, to put out, and do to be put out, cease and
destroy al manner of heresies and errors, commonly called lolardryes, within the
places where they exercise their offices and occupations from time to time,
with all their power, and that they assist the ordinaryes and their comissaries,
and them favor and maintain as often as they or any of them to that shall be
required by the same ordinaries or their comissaries, so that when the said
officers and ministers travail or ride to arrest any lolard, or to make
assistence at the instance and request of the ordinaries or their commissaries
by virtue of this statute that the same ordinaries and commissaries shall pay
for their costs reasonable. And that the kings services to the which the same
officers be first sworn, be preferred before al other statutes for the
liberty of holy church, and the ministers of the same, and in especial for
the correction and punishment of the heretics and lolardes before this time
made and not repelled being in their force. And also that al persons convict of
heresy, of what estate, condition or degree that they be by the said ordinaries
or other co^missaries left to the seculer power. according to the laws of holp
church, shall lose and forfeyte all their lands and tenementes, which they
have in fee simple in the manner as follows, that is to say, that the king
have all the lands and tenementes, which the said conuictes have in fee
simple and holden of him immediately as forfeyte, and that the other lords, of
whom the lands and tenements of such conuictes be holden immediately, after
that the king is so seaced and answered of the year the day, and the wast,
have livery out of the kings hands of the lands and teneme^tes aforesaid of
them so holden, as it has been used in the case of attainder of feloni, except
the lands and tenementes, which be holden of the ordinaries or their
co^missaries, before whom any such persons impeched of heresy be co^uict,
which lands and tenementes, intierly shall remain to the king as forfayt. And
moreover that al ye goods and cattels of these persons so co^uicted, be forfeit
to our soueraygne lord the king, so that no person convict of heresy, and
left to the seculer power after the laws of holy church, shall forfeyt his
lands before that he be dead. And if any such person so co^uict be enfeffed be
it by fine by deed or without deed, in lands or tenementes, rentes or services
in fee or otherwise, or has any other possessions or catels by gift or grant
of any person or persons to another use the^ to thuse of such co^uictes, that
the same lands nor tenements, rentes nor services, nor such other
possessions, nor catels shall be forfeit to our soueraign lord the king in no
wise. And moreover that the justices of the kings bench, and justices of peace,
and justices of assise, have full power to enquire of al the^ which hold any
errors or heresies, as lolardes, and which be their mainteyners, receivers,
favorers and susteners, common writers of such books, as well of ye sermons, as
of their scoles, conuenticles, congregatio^s and confederaties. And that this
clause be put in comissions of the justices of the peace. And if any persons be
indicted of any points aforesaid the said justices shall have power to award
against the^ a capias, and the shiref shall be bound to arrest the person or
persons so endicted as soon as he may them find by him or by his officers. And
forasmuch as the cognizance of heresy, errors and lolardries, belongs to the
judges of holy church, and not to the seculer Judges, such persons iudicted
shall be delivered to the ordinaries of ye places or to their commissaryes, by
indentures betwixt them to be made within.x. days after their arrest, orsoner
if it may be, thereof to be acquit or convict by the laws of holy church, in
case that these persons be not indicted of another thing, whereof the
cognysaunce belongs to the seculer judges and officers, in which case, after
that, that they be acquyte or delivered before the seculer Judges of such
things to the seculer Judges helongyng, they shall be sent in safegarde to the
said ordynaryes, or their commissaryes, and to them delivered by indentures as
before, to be acquit or conuyct of such lollardryes, errors, or heresies, as
is aforesaid, after the laws of holy church, and that within the term
aforesaid.

Provided always that the said endictementes be not taken in evidence but for
information before the spyrytuall Judges against such persons so endicted,
but that the ordinaries commence their process against such persons endicted
in the same manner as though no endictmeut were, having no regard to such
endictmentes.

And if any be endicted of heresye, error, or lolardrye, and taken by the
Sheriff or other officer, he shall be let to maynpryce within the said ten
days by good suertye, for whom the said shyreffes or other officers will
answer, so that the said person or persons which were so endicted, be
ready to be delivered to the said ordynaries or to their commissaries, before
the end of the said ten days, if he may by any means for sickness. And
every ordynarye shall have sufficient commissaries, or commissary dwelling in
every county in a place notable, so that if any such person so endicted be
taken, that the said commissaries or commissarie, may be warned in the notable
place where he dwells by the shyreffe, or some of his officers, to come to
the kings iayle in the same county, there to receive the same person so
endicted by indentures as before. And that in the inqueste in this case to he
taken, the shyreffes and other officers, to whom it belongs shall do to be
empanelled good and sufficient persons, not suspected nor procured, that is to
say, that every of them which shall be so empanelled in such inquest, have
within the realm of England. C.s. of lands, tenementes, or of rent by year,
upon pain to lose to the kings use.x.li. and they which shall be empanelled in
such inquestes in Males, every of them shall have to ye value of.xl.s. by year.
And if any such person be arreste, be it by the ordinary, or by the kings
officers or ministers, and escape or break the prison, before that he be acquit
before the ordinarye, the goods and tattelles which he had the day of such
arreste, shall be forfeyte to the king, and his lands and tenementes, which he
had the same day seized also into the kings hands, the king shall have the
profytes thereof from the said day, until he be yielded to the prison from
which he escaped. And that the foresaid Justices have full power to inquire of
al such escapes, breakyng of prison, and also of lands and tenementes, goods
and cattels of such persons so endicted.

Provided also that if any such person endicted do not return to the said
prison and dies not conuicte it shall be lawful to his heirs to enter into ye
lands and tenementes of their auncestre. without any other pursuyt making to
the king for this cause, and then al they which have libertyes and fraunchises
royal in England, as in the countye of Chester, the countye and liberty of
Durham, and other like, and also al ye Lords, which have jurisdiction and
frauchisies royal in Wales, where the kings wryttes do not run, have power to
execute and put in due execution these articles in all points by the^ or by
their officers, in like mauer as the Justices and other the kings officers
before declared should do.

An act that persons dwellinge in the country shall not sell diverse wares in
eities or towns corporate by retayle.
The.vii. Chapter.
WHere before this time the aunnent tities, horughes to wnes corporat, and
maiket to wnes within this realm of England, have been very populous, and
chiefly inhabited with march auntes, artificers, and handye crafts men, during
which time ye children in the said cities, borowes, towns, corporat, and
market towns were ciuilly brought up, and instructed, and also in the said
cities borowes and towns corporate, kept in good order and obeysaunce, and
the whabiters of the same well set on work, and kept from ydlenes. By reason
whereof the said cytyes, borowes and towns corporate, did then prosper in
riches and great wealth, and were as then not only able to serve and furnysh
the kings and queen's majesty's and othere their noble progenytours kings of
this realm, as well with great numbers of good able persons, and well furnyshed
meet for the wars, as also then charged, and yet chargeable with great fee
farms, quindemes, taxes, and diverse other paymentes to the king and Queen's
majesty's, which at this present they be not able to pay and bear, but to
their utter undoing, being few in number to pay and bear the same, but also
the same cytyes, boroughes, and towns corporat, are like to come very shortly
to utter dystruction tuyue, and decay, by reason whereof the occupyers, lynnen
drapers woollen drapers, haberdashars, and grocers, dwelling in the countries
out of the said cities, boroughes, to wnes corporate, and market towns, do
not only occupy the art and mystery of the said sciences, in the places where
they dwell and inhabit, but also come un to the said cities, boroughes, towns
corporate and market towns, and there sell their wares, and take away the
releif of the inhabitautes of the said cities, borowes, to wnes corporate, and
market towns, to the great decay, and utter undoing of the inhabitauntes of
the same, if sped y reformation therein be not had in time convenient. For
remedy whereof, and for the better amendment of the said cities, boroughes,
towns corporate, and markette towns, and to the end the same cities,
boroughes, and towns corporate, may be the better able to pay the said fee
farms, and also to bear the other ordinary charges within the same cities,
boroughes, and towns corporare, and to furnyshe the king and queens
maiestyes, with numbres of able persons, like as they heretofore have done in
times paite, in times of war.

Be it therefore enacted by our soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king and Queen,
the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present parlyament
assembled, and by thauctorytye of the same, that any person or persons which do
now inhabit and dwell or here after shall inhabit or dwell in the country any
where or countye, with in this realm of England, or of any of the said cities,
boroughes, towns corporate, or market towns. from and after ye feast of S.
Michael tharchangel next coming, shall not sell or cause to be fold by
retayle, any woollen cloth, linen cloth, haberdashe wares grocery wares,
marcery wares, at or within any of the said cities. boroughes, towns
corporat, or market towns, or wtin ye suburbs or lybertyes of the said
cities, boroughes, towns corporat, and market towns within the said realm
of England (excpet it be in open fayres) upon pain to forfeyt and lose for
every time so offendyng the sum of.vi.s.viii.d. and the whole wares so sold,
proffered and offered to be sold, contrary to the form, entente and effect of
this present act, as above is said, the one moyte of all which forfeytures
to be to the use of our said soueraygne lord and lady the king and queens
majesty's, and the other half to him or them that shall sease and sue for the
same in any of the king and queens courts of record, by byll plant, action
of debt, insormation or otherwise, wherein no essoyne, proteccion or wager of
law shall be allowed.

Provided always, that this act shall not in any wise extend, nor be hurtful to
any person or persons, that bring any of the said woollen cloth, linen cloth,
haberdashe grocerye, mercery, ware or wares to any of the said cities,
boroughes, towns corporate, or markette towns to be sold, or cause to be
sold, by whole sale, in gross and not by retayle, but they and every of them
may laufully sell the same in as large and ample manner, form, and condition by
whole sale in gross and not by retayle, as they and every of them might have
done at any time or times, before the making of this act. Any thing herein
to the contrary not withstandyng.

Provided always that this present act shall not extend to any person or
persons, ye now dwelor inhabyte in the country, or herafter shall dwell or
inhabit out of any of the said cities, borowes, to wnes corporate, or markete
towns, but that theye, and cuerye of them at any time hereafter, when they or
any of them shall be free of any the guyldes, and liberties, of any the said
cities, borowes, to wnes corporat, or market towns, and dwell or inhabit wichin
any of the same cities, borowes, towns coruorate, or markette towns, that
they and every of them so veyng free, shall and may sell or cause to be sold
any of the wares aforesaid, by retayle in as ample and large manner as they and
enerye of them might have done, being free of the said cities, borowes, and
towns aforesaid, before the making of this act. Any clause or article in this
act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritye aforesaid that it shall be
laweful to al persons, to sell or cause to besolde by retayle or otherwise,
al manner of cloth, lynnen or woollen of their own making in every city,
boronghe, town corporat and market town within the realm, as frelye and
franklye as they might have done before the making of this act. Any thing in
the same contained to the contrary hereof not withstandyng.

Provided always that this act or any thing therein contained shall not be
prciudirial or hurtefull to the liberties, and prtuileges of the universities
of Cambridge and Oxford, or either of them. Any thing in this act heretofore
mentioned to the contrary notwythstandynge.

An art repealynge all Statutes, articles, and provisions made against the Sea
Apostolic of Rome, since the.xx. year of king Henry the eyghte, and also for
the establishment of all spiritual and ecclesiastical possessions and
heredicamentes conveyed to the laytie.
The eight Chapter.
WHere as since the.xx. year of king Henry theyghte of famous memory, father
unto your majesty, our most natural soueraygne, and gracious Lady and
Queen, much salse and erroneous doctrine, has been taught, preached, and
written partly by diverse the hatural borne subjects of this realm and partly
being brought in he there from fondrye other forreyne countries has been
sown and spread abroad within the same. By reason whereof al well the
spirituality as the temporaltie of your highness realms and dominions have
fwerned from the obedience of the sea Apostolyke, and declyned from the unity
of Christ's church, and so have continued until such time as your majesty
beyngfyrst raised up by God, and set in the seat Royal over us. and then by
his divine and gracious providence knit in marriage with the most noble and
bertuous prince, the king our sovereign lord your husband the Popes holiness
and the Sea apostolic sent hither unto your majesty's (as unto persons
vndefried, and by gods goodness preserved from the common infection aforesaid)
and to the whole realnie, the most renerende father in God, the Lord
Cardinal Poole, Legate de latere, to call us home again into the right way,
from whence we have all this long while wandered and strayed abroad. And we
after sundry long, and grievous plagues and calamities, seeing by the goodness
of God our own exrours, have knowledged the same unto the said most
reverend father, and by him have been, and are the rather at the contemplation
of your majesty's, received and embraced into the unity and bosom of Christ's
church, and upon our humble submission and promise made for a declaration of
our repentance. to repeal and abrogate such acts and statutes as had been
made in parlyament since the said.xx. year of the said king Henrye the right,
against the supremacy of the Sea apostolic, as in our submission exhibited to
the said most reverend father in God, by your majesty's appears. The renor
whereof ensues.

We the lords spititual and remporall, and the commons astembled in this
present parlyament, representyng the whole body of the realm of England, and
the dominions of the same, in the name of our selves perticulerly and also of
the said body universally in this our supplication directed to your majesty's
with most humble suyte that it may by your graces intercession and mean be
exhibited to the most renerende father in God, the sorde cardynall Poole
legate. sent spetiallye hither from our most holy father pope July the
third, and the Sea apostolyke of Rome, do declare our selves very fory and
repentaunte, of the feisme and disobedience, committed in this realm and
dominions aforesaid against ye said Sea of apostolic either by making,
agreing, or executing any laws, ordinances, or command mentes against the
suprentacye of the said sea, or other wise doing or speaking, that might
impugn the fame: offering our selves, and promising by this our supplication,
that for a token and knowledge of our said repentance, we be and shall be
always ready under and with thauctorities of your majesty's, to the utter most
of our poweres, to do that shall lie in us, for the abrogation and repealyng of
the said laws and ordinances in this present parlyament as well for our
selves as for the whole body, whom we represente, whereupon we most humblye
desyer your maiestyes as personages undefiled in offense of his body toward
the said Sea, which nevertheless god by his prouydence, has made subject to
you, so to set forth this our most humble suyte, that we may obtain from the
Sea apostolic, by the said most reverend father, as well perticuserly, as
generally, absolution, release, and discharge, from all danger of such
censures, and sentences, as by the laws of the church we be fallen into. And
that we may as children repentaunte, be received into the bosom and unity of
Christ's church, so as this noble realm with all the members thereof, may in
this unity, and periecte obedience to the Sea apostolyke, and Popes, for the
time veynge, serve god and your majesty's, to the furtherance and aduaimceme^t
of his honor and glory. We are at the intercession of your maiestyes by
thauctoritie of our holy father Pope July the third, and of the Sea
apostolic, assoiled, discharged, and delivered from excommunication,
interdictions and other censures ecclesiastical, which has hanged over our
heads for our said defaultes since the time of the said schism mentioned
in our supplication. The which time the said lord Legate and we do all
declare, recognyse, and mean by this act to be only since the.xx. year of
the reign of your most noble father king Henry the eight. It may now like
your majesty's, that for the accomplishment of our promise made in the said
supplication, that is, to repeal all laws and statutes made contrary to the
said supremacy and Sea apostolyke, during the said scisme, the which is to be
understand, since the.xx. year of the raygne of the said late king Henry
theyght, and so the said lord Legate does accept and recognize the same.

Where in the parliament begone and holden at Westminster in the.xxi. year of
the raygne of the late king of most famous memory king Henry theyght, one act
was then and there made against pluralities of benefices, for taking of
farms by spyritual men and for none residence, in the which act amongeste
other things it was ordained and enacted that if any person or persons, at any
time after the first day of Apryll in the year of our Lord God a thousand
five hundred and thyrtye contrary to the same act, should procure and obtain
at the court of Rome, or else where any license or lycences, union,
tolleration, or dispensatyon, to receive or take any more benefices with cure,
then was limited and appointed by the same act, or else at any time after the
said day should put inexecution any such license, tolleration, or
dispensation, before that time obtained contrary to the said act, that then
every such person or persons so after the said day, suyng for him self, or
receauynge, and taking such benefice by force of such license or lycences,
union, tolleration, or dispensation, that is to say, the same person or
persons only, and no another, should for every such defaulte, incur the
danger, pain and penalty of, xx.li. sterling. and should also loose the whole
profits of every such benefice or benefices, as he receaueth, or takes by
force of any such license or licenses, union, tolleration, or dispensation. And
where also in the said act it was ordained and enacted, that if any person or
persons did procure, or obtain at the court of Rome, or else where any
manner of license or dispensation to be no^e reside^ce at their dignities,
prebend, or benefices, contrary to the said act, that then every such person
or persons putting in execution any such dispensation, or license for him
self from the say^de first day of Apryll, in the said year of our Lord
God, a M. syue hundred and thirtye, would run and incur in the peualtye
damage, and pain of.xx.li. ster. for every time so doing to be forfeyted and
recovered, as by the said act is declared. And yet such license or dispensation
so procured, or to be put in execution, to be boyde and of none effect, as
by the same act more playnelye it does and may appear.

Be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present parlyament, that as much only
of the said aete, as concerns the articles and clauses aforesaid, and al and
every the words and sentences contained in the said act, concernyngs the said
articles and clauses, and every of them shall from henceforth be repealed,
adnulled, revoked adnihilated, and utterly made void for ever. Any thing in
the said act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And where also at the session of the same parliament holden upon prorogation,
in the.xxiii. year of the raygne of the said late king Henry theyght, one
act entitled: the act that no person shall be cyted out of the diocese where he
or she dwells, except in certain caces And where also at the said
parliament, in the session holde^ at Westminster upon prorogation the.xxiiii.
year of the raygne of the said late king Henry theyght, one act was made that
appeals in such cases as has been used to be puriued to the sea of Rome,
should not from he free forth be had nor used but within this realm. And
where also at the said parliament holden at Westminster, in the.xxi. year of
the raygne of the said late king Henry the eighte, and there continued by
diners prorogations vnty the.xxiiii. day of Apryll, in the xxvii. year of his
reign, one act was made concerning restrayntes of paymentes of annaties, and
first fruits of archebyshopryckes, and byshopryckes of the Sea of Rome. And
where at a Session of the said parlyament, holden in the.xxv. year of the
raygne of the said late king, there was also one act made, entitled, the
submission of the clergy to the kings matestyes, and one other art entitled,
one act restraining, the said paymentes of annaces, or lyrste fruits to the
bishop of Rome, and of the electyng and cousecratyng of the arch bishops and
bishops within this reaime. And one other act was then and there made
entitled: an act concerning the exoneration of the kings subjects, from
exactyons and impos^^tons before that time paid to the Sea of Rome, and for
having licenses and dispensations within this realm, without suynge further
for the same.

Be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present parliamente, that the said
several acts made for the restraynt of paymente of the fayde annates, and
first fruits, and all other the said acts made in the said.xxiiii. and.xxv.
years of the raygne of the said late king, and every of them, and al and
every branch, article, matter, and sentence in them, and every of them
contained, shall be by auctorytye of this present parliament from hence forth
utterly void, made frustrate and repealed, to al intentes, constructions and
purposes.

And be it further enacted by thauctority of this present parliament, that al
and every these acts following. That is to say, one act made at the session
of the said parliament holden upon prorogation at West. in the.xxvi. year of
the raygne of the said late king Henry theyght, entitled an act, concerning
the kings highness to be supreme head of the church of England, and to have
auctorytye to reform and redress al errors, heresies, and abuses in the same
And one other act made in the same session of the same parliamente entitled,
an act for nomination and consecration of Suffraganes within this realm. And
one other act made in the.xxvii. year of the reign of the said late king
Henry the eighte, entitled, an act whereby the king should have power to
nominate.xxxii. persons of his Clergy and Lay fee for the making of
Ecclesticall laws. An also one other act, made at the parliamente holden at
Westminster in the.xxviii. year of the raygne of the said late king Henry the
eyghte entitled, an act extinguishinge the auctorytye of the Bishop of Rome.
And one other act made in the same parlyament, entitled, an act for the
release of such as then had obtained pretended licenses, and dispensations
from the Sea of Rome. And also all that part of the act, made in the
said.xxviii. year of the said king, entitled, an act for the
establishemente of the Succession of the imperial crown of the realm, that
concerns a prohibition to marry within the degrees expressed in the said
act. And also one other act made at the parliamente holden at Westminster, in
the xxxi. year of the raygue of the said late king Henrye the eyghte,
entitled, an act auctorysynge the kings hyghnes to make bysshoppes by his
letters patentes. And one other act made in the session of the same parliament
begone in the said.xxx. year, holden upon prorogation, the.xxxii. year of the
reign of the said king Henry the eyghte, entitled, and act concerning
precontractes of martyages, and touching degrees of consangumitie. And one
other act made in the parliament holden at Westminster, in the.xxxv. year of
the reygne of the said late king Henry theyght, entitled, an act for the
ratificatyon of the kings majesty's style, shall henceforth be repealed, made
frustrate, void, and of none effect. And where also at the fayd parlyame^t
holden at Westminster in the.xxxv. year of ye reign of the said late king
Henry theyght, one othere act was made entyteled: an act concerning the
stablishment of the succession of the said king in the imperial crown of this
realm. In the which act there is a form of a corporal oath devised and sete
forth, that every subject of this realm should be bound to take against the
power, authority and iurisdictyon of the sea of Rome. Be it enacted by
thaucthoritie of this prefent parlyament that so much of the said act as
touches the said oath against the supremacy, and al oaths thereupon had, made,
and given shall be from henceforth utterly void repealed and of none effect. And
where also one other act was made in the xxxvii. year of the reign of the said
late king Henrye theyght entytuled an act that doctors of the cyuyl law, being
married might exrecise ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Be it enacted by
thauctoritie of this present parlyament, that the said act last before
mentioned, and all and every branch, article, sentence and matter, conceyned
in the same, shall from henseforth be repealed, and utterly made void, and of
none effect.

And where one other act was made at the first year of the parliament, holden
at Westminster, in the first year of the rain of king Edward the syxt,
entitled an act for the repeal of certain Statutes, concerning treasons,
fellonies. etc In the which act amongst other things there is contained
certain prouysyons, pains, penal ties, and forfeytures for and against such,
as should by open preachynges, expres words, sayings, writing, pryntynge
ouert deed, oracte affirm, or set forth that the king of this realm, for time
being, is not or ought not to be supreme head in earth, of ye churches of
England and Ireland, ne of any of them, or that the bishop of Rome or any
other person or persons, other then the king of England for the time being,
is or ought to be supreme head of ye same churches, or any of them, as in the
same act last before rehearsed, and at large is contained and may appear. Be
it enacted by auctority of this present parlyament, that these clauses before
rehearsed, and other of the said act, conceruyng the supremacy, and all and
every branch, article, words, and sentence in the same sou^dyng, or tendyng
to the derogatyon of the supremacy of the popes holiness, or the sea of Rome,
and al pains, penalties, and forfeytures, made against them that should by any
means set forth, or extol the said supremacy shall be from henceforth utterly
void and of none effect.

And be it further enacted by thauctoryty aforesaid, that al clanses,
sentences, and articles of every other statute, or act of Parlyment made
sithence the said.xx. year of the raygne of king Henry theyght, against the
supreme authority of the Popes holiness, or Sea apostolic of Rome, or
containing any other matter of the same affect only, that is repealed in any of
the Statutes aforesaid, shall be also by authority hereof from henceforth
utterly void, frustrate and of none effect.

And where we your most humble subjects, the lords spyrytual and temporal,
and commons in this present parliamente assembled, have exhibited to your
majesty's one other supplycation in form following.

We the lords spyritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
parliament assembled representinge the whole body of this realm, reduced and
received by your majesty's intercession to the unity of Christ's church, and
the obedience of the Sea apostolic of Rome, and the Popes holiness governing
the same, make most humble suite unto your majesty's, to be likewise means and
intercessors that all occasions of contention, hatred, grudge, suspicion, and
trouble both outwardly and inwardly in men's consciences, which might arise
amongst us, by reason of disobedience, may by authority of the Popes holiness,
and by ministration of the same unto us, by the most reverend father in god,
the lord Cardinal Poole, by dispensation toleration or permission respectively,
as the case shall require, be abolyshed and taken away, and by authority
sufficient these articles following, and generally all others, when any
occasion shall so require may be provided for, and confyrmed.

First that al byshoprickes, cathedral Churches, hospitales, colleges,
schools, and other such foundations now continuing, made by auctoritye of
parlyament, or otherwise established, according to the order of the laws of
this realm, sithence this schism may be confirmed and continued for ever.

Item that marriages made infra gradus prohibites consanguinitatis, affinitatis
cognationis spiritualis, or which might be made void propter impedimentum
public^e bonestatis iustitiae, or for any other cause prohibited by the canons
only may be confirmed, and children borne of those marriages declared
legittimate, so as those marriages were made according to the laws of the
realm for the time being, and be not directelye against the laws of God,
nor in such case as the Sea apostolyke has not used to dispense withal.

That institutions of benefices, and other promotions ecclesiastical and
dispensations made according to the form of the act of parliament, may be
likewise confyrmed.

That all judicial processes, made before any ordinaries of this realm, or
before any delegates upon any apeales, according to thorder of the laws of the
realm, may be likewise ratified and confirmed And finallye where certain
acts and statutes have been made in the time of the late scisme, concerning
the lands, and hereditamentes of Archbysshopryckes, and Bysshopryckes, the
suppression, and dissolution of monasteries, Abbeyes, pryoryes, chauntries,
colleges, and al other the goods and cattels of religious houses. Since yt
which time, the right and dominion of certain lands, and hereditamentes,
goods, and catteles, belonging to the same, be dyspersed abroad, and come to
the hands, and possessions of diverse and sundry persons, who by gift,
purchase, exchange, and other means according to the order of the laws and
statutes of this Realm, for the time being have the same. For the avoiding
of all scruples that might grow by any thoccasions aforesaid, or by any other
ways, or means, whatsoever: It may please your majesty's, to be
intercessours, and mediators, to the said most reverend father, Cardynall
Pole, that all such causes, and quarrels as by pretense of yt said scyme, or
by any other occation, or mean whatsoever, might be moved by the Popes
holiness, or Sea Apostolyke, or by any other jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, may
be utterly removed, and taken away so as all persons having sufficient
conueyaunce of the said lands, and hereditamentes, goods and cattels, as is
aforesaid, by the common laws acts, or Statutes of this realm, may without
scruple of conscience, enjoy them without impechmente or trouble by pretense
of any general counsel, Canons, or Ecclessastical laws, and clear from al
dangers of the censures of the Church.

And comformably hereunto, the Bysshoppes and Clergy of the prouynce of
Catorbury have presented to your majesty's a supplication, in this tenor that
follows.

Nos Episcopi and clerus Cantuariensis prouinciae in hac Synodo more nostro
solito, dum Regni parliamentu^ celebratur, congregati, cum omni debita
humilitate and reuerentia, exponimus Maiestatibus uestris, quod licet
Ecclesiarum, quibus in Episcopos, Decanos, Archidiaconos, rectores, and
uicarios praefecti sumus, and animaru^, quae and nobis curae nostrae subiectae
sunt and earundem bonorum iurisdictionum, and iurium, ex sacrorum Canonum
dispositione, defensores, and curatores constituti sumus and prop teria ipsarum
bona iurisdictionis, and iura in pernicioso huius Regni prae terito scismate
deperdita and amissa, omni studio, and totis nostris uiribus recuperare and ad
pristinum Ecclesiarum ius reuocare, iuris remedijs niti deberemus: Nichilominus
tamen habito prius per nos super hac re maturo Consilio, et deliberatione
ingenue fatemur; nos optime cognossere, quam haec bonorum Ecclesiasticorum
difficilis and quasi impossibilis esset recupe ratio propter multiplices ac
pene inextricabiles super hijs habitos contrac(...) sitiones and quod si ea
tentaretur, quies et tranquillitas Regni facile pertutbaretur, and unitas
Eeclesiae Catholicae, quae iam pietate, and aucthoritate Maiestatum uestrum hoc
in regno introducta est, cum maxima difficultate suum debitu^ progressive, and
sinem sortiri posset. Ideo nos bonum and quietem publicam priuatis
commoditatibus, and salutem tot animaru^ praetioso Christi sanguine redemptarum
terrenis bonis anteponentes, and non quae nostra, sed quae Jesus Christi sunt
quaerentes, Maiestates uestras enixe rogamus, eiusque humiliter supplicamus, ut
reuerendissimo in Christo patri, domino Reginaldo Cardinali Polo, ad ipsas, and
uniuersum hoc Anglie regnum sanctissimi domini nostri, Domini Iulij, Papae
tertij, and Apostolicae sedis de latere legato, haec nomine nostro insinuari,
and apud eum intercedere dignentur, ut in hiis bonis Ecclesiastisis in part,
uel in to to arbitrio suo iuxta facultates sibi ab eodem sanctissimo domino
uostro Papa concessas eorundem bonorum detentoribus elargiendes et relaxandis
publicum bonum priuato pacem et tranquillitatem dissidijs, and per tur
bationibus, atque animarum salutem bonis terrenis prefer, and anteponere
uelit. Nos enim in omnibus quae ab ipso legato statuta, et ordinata circa haec
bona fuerint exnunc, prout extunc, et econtra consensum nostrum prestamus, imo
etiam ut in premissis se difficilem aut restrictum red dear non uelit,
maiestates uestrae nostro nomine eum hortari, and rogare dignabuntur. In super
maiestatibus uestris supplicamus ut pro sua pietate efficere dignentur, ut ea
quae adiurisdictionem nostram et libertatem Ecclesiasticam pertinent, sine
quibus debitum nostri pastoralis officij et curae animarum nobis commissae
exercere non possumus, uobis superiorum temporum iniuria ablata restituantur,
et ea nobis, et Ecclesij perpetuo illesa et salua permaneant, et ut omnes
leges, quae hanc nostram iurisdictionem, and libertatem Ecclesiasticam tollunt,
seu quouis modo impediunt, abrogentur ad honorum dei, et maiestatum uestrarum,
et uniuersi huius Regni Spirituale, et temporale, commodum, and salutem, certam
spem etiam habentes, Maiestates uestras, pro sua singulari in ipsum deum
pietate proque multis et in signibus ab ipsius dei bonitate acceptis beneficijs
necessitatibus, and in commodis huius sui Regni Ecclesiarum maxim curam
ammarum habentium nunquam defuturas esse, sed prout opus fuerit, consulsuras
atque prouisuras.


Forasmuch as the said most reverend father, the Lord Legate, at the
intercession of your majesty's has by thauctoritie of the Sea Apostolic,
sufficiently dispensed in the matters specifyed in the said several
supplications, as in his said letters of dispensatyon is contained more at
large. The tenor whereof ensues.

Reginaldus miseratione d uina Sanctae Mariae in Cosmodin Sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae, Diaconis, Cardinalis Polus nuncupatus, ad Serenissimos Philippum and
Mariam, Angliae, Reges, fidei defensores, et umuersum Angliae regnum,
Sanctissimi Domini nostri Papae, et seeds Apostolicae de la tere legatus eisdem
Serenissimis Philippo et Mariae Regibus salutem in Domino sempiternam. Cum
supremum co^silium istius Regni parliame^tu^ nuncupatum Maiestatibus uestris,
per suos supplices libellos exposuisset quod perniciocissimo scismate, in hoc
regno alias uigente, quod nunc dei misericordia, and maiestatum uestrarum
pietate extinctum est, aucthoritatem ipsius parlame^ti, non nulli Episcopatus
diuisi, and ex his aliquae infe riores Ecclesiae, in cathedrales erestae, et
scolae, atque hospitalia fundata nec non plurimae dispensationes et
beneficiorum prouisiones factae fueru^t ac multae personae quibus persuasum
fuerat, luris Canonici dispositiones hoc in Regno amplius locum non habere,
inter se in gradibus consanguinitatis uel affinitatis de iure prohibitis, and
alijs impedimentis Canonicis sibi obstantibus matrimonia, per uerba de presenti
co^traxerunt, et multis actus iudiciarij, and processus, tam in primis, quam
ulterioribus instantijs super rebus spiritualibus, and Ecclesiasticis coram
iudicibus tam Ordinarijs quam delegatis, qui aucthoritate laicali procedebant,
habiti and seruati, ad super eis etia^se^te^tiae latae, et promulgatae fueru^t,
et bona ecclesiastica per diuersas eiusdem regni personas occupata, et
apprehe^sa fuerunt. Quae quidem licet ex sacrorum Canonum institutis irrita
declarari possent, tamensi ad alium statum, quam in quo nunc sunt,
reuocarentur, publica pax and quis uniuersi regni turbaretur, et maxima
confusio orietur, persertim si dictorum bonorum possessoresmolestarentur, et
proptere amaiestatibus uestris humiliter supplicauerint, ut apud nos
intercedere digne^tur, ut premissarum rerum firmitari, et stabilitati, et simul
huius Regni quieti, et tranquillitati de benignitate Apostolica prouidere
uelimus. Cunque Episcopi quoque deinde, ac reliquus prouinciae Catuariensis
Clerus totu^ fere corpus Ecclesiasticorum regni representus, ad quos haec
bonorum Ecclesiasticorum causa maxim pertin et, exposuerint, quod haec bona
adius ecclesiarum reuocare no^ possu^t, quin pax vniuersalis, and quies huius
regni turbetur, et causa fidei atque unitatis Ecclesiae, iam tota omnium
consensu hoc in regno in troducta, in maximum periculum adducatur, et propte
reaipsi quoque supplicauerint, ut apud nos intercedere uelint, ut in his bonis
Ecclesiasticis possessoribus relaxandus restricti et difficilis esse nollemus,
maiestatis autem uestrae, ad quas maxim spectat prouidere ut regnu^ ipsaru^
potestari regimini et curae commissum in pace et tranquillitate co^seruetur.
His supplicationibus et postulatis cognitis et mature consideratis iudicauerit
ea omnia, et maxim illa, quae in bonoru^ ecclesiastitorum causa petuntur, pro
causa fidei et pro pace publica, per nos de bear sine ulla dilatione concedi,
et que^admodu^ rogatae fuerunt, apud nos intercedere dignatae fuerint, pro ut
in supplicationibus per idem supremu^ co^siliu^, et episcopos ac clerum
praefatu^ maiestatibus uestris porrectis, atque in libello intercessiones per
easdem maiestates uestras nobis simul cum alijs supplicationibus exhibito,
latius apparet. Id circo nos qui ad maiestates uestras et hoc uobilissimum
uestrum regnum a Sanctissimo Domino nostro Iulio Papa tertio ipsius et sedis
Apostolicae de latere legati missi sumus, ut regnu^ istud, quod iam diu ab
ecclesiae Catholicae unitate separatu^ fuerat. Deo et Ecclesia Christi, eiusque
in terris uicario reconciliaremus: et ut ea omnia quae ad pace^ et
tranquillitatem huius regni pertinere^t, omni studio procuraremus, post qua^
dei benignitate, et maiestatem uestraru^ pietate, per authoritate^ eiusdem
Sanctissimi Domini nostri Papae, cuius uices hic sustinemus, reconciliatio iam
facta est, ut paci et tranquillitati regni praefati consulamus, atque ut unitas
ecclesiae, ex qua salus tot animarum praecioso Christi sanguine redemptarum
dependet, hoc in regno iam introducta corrobaretur, and salua permaneat, cum
utriusque rei stabilitatem in eo maxim consistere, si horum Ecclesiasticorum
bonorum possessoribus mo lestia nulla in feratur quo nimus ea teneant, tot et
tam grauia testimonia nobis fidem faciant, et maiestatum uestrarum intercessio,
quaepro unitate Ecclesiae, et sedis Apostolicae auctoritate hoc in regno
instauranda tam studiose, et tam pia elaborarunt, eam quam par est auctoritatem
apud nos habeat, et ut uniuersum hoc regnum sedis Apostolicae maternam uere
indulgentia^, et charitatem erga se agnoscat, et re ipsa experiatur: quoscunque
ad quos infra scripta pertinent, a quibusuis excommunicationis, suspensio nis,
et interdicti, alijsque ecclesiasticis se^tensiis, se^suris et paenis a iure
uel ab homine quauis occasion uel causa latis, si quibus quomodo libet
innodati existunt, ad effectum presentium dum taxat consequendum harum serie
absoluentes, et absolutos fore censentes, aucthoritate Apostolica, per litteras
Sanctissimi domini nostri, domini Iulij Papae tertij nobis concessa, and qua
fungimur in haec part, tenore praesentium dispensamus, quod omnes et singulae
Cathedralium Ecclesiarum erectiones, hospitalium, et scolaru^, fundationes
tempore praeteriti scismatis, licet de facto et nullituratte^tatae ineo statu,
in quo nunc sunt, perpetuo firmae et stabilis parmaneant, illisque Apostolicae
firmitatis robur adijcimus, ita ut non ea aucthoritate, qua prius, sed ea quam
nunc eis tribuimus, factae ab omnibus censeantur, and cu^ omnibus et singulis
personis regni predicti, quae in aliquo consanguinitatis uel assinitatis gradu
etiam multiplici, uel cognationis spiritualie, seu publicae honestatis
iusticiae impedimento de iure positiuo introductis, and in quibus sanctissimus
dominus noster Papa dispensare consueuit matrimonia scienter uel ignorantur de
facto contraxerint ut alique impedimen torum premissorum, non obstante in eorum
matrimonijs, sic contractis libere and licite remanere, seu illa de
nouocontrahere possint, missericorditer in domino dispensamus, prolem
susceptam, suscipiendam ligitimam, de cernentes, ita tamen ut qui scienter et
malitiose contraxerint, a sententia exco^municationis, et ab incestus seu
sacrilegij reatu, absolutione^ a suo ordinario, uel curato, quibus id faciendi
facultatem consedimus, obtineant, ac omnes Ecclesiasticas seculares, seu
quorumuis ordinu^ regulares personas quae aliquas impetrationes,
dispensationes, concessiones, gratias et indulta tam Ordines, quam beneficia
Ecclesiastica, seu alias spirituales materias praetensa aucthoritate
supremitatis Ecclesiae Anglicanae licet nulliter et de facto obtinuerint, et ad
cor reuersae Ecclesia unitati restitutae fuerint, in suis Ordinibus, and
beneficijs per nos ipsos, seu a nobis ad id deputatos, misericorditer
recipiemus, pro ut iam multae receptae fueru^t, secunque super his opportune in
Domino dispensabimus: Ac omnes processus inquibusuis instantijs coram quibusuis
iudicibus, tam ordinariis quam diligatis etia^ laicis super materijs
spiritualibus habitos and formatos, and sente^tias super eis latas, licet
nulliter et de facto, quo ad nullitatem ex defectu iurisdictionis praefato
tantum in surgentem sanamus, illosque, et illas authority Apostolica
confirmamus: Ac quibusuis huius regni personis, ad quaru^ ma nus bona
Ecclesiastica ex quocunque contractu seu titulo onoroso uel lucra tiuo iam
deuenerint, illaque tenuerint, seu etiam teneant, omnes, and quos cumque
fructus ex eiusde^ bonis, licet indebite perceptos, in tote^ remittimus and
relaxamus. Volentes ad decernentes, quod dictorum bonorum Ecclesi asticorum tam
mobilium quam immobilium possessores presatino^ possint in presenti nec in
posterum, seu per consiliorum generalium, uel prouincialium dispositiones, seu
decretales Romanorum pontificum Epistolas, seu aliam quamcunque censura^
ecclesiastica^ in dictis bonis seu eorunde^ possessione molestari, inquietari,
uel perturbari, nec eis aliquae se^surae uel paenae ecclesiasticae propter
huiusmodi detentionem, seu non restitutione^ irrogari uel insligi, and sic per
quoscunque iudices, and auditores sublata eis qua suis aliter iudicandi et
interpretandi facultate, et auctoritate iudicari et diffinire debere, and
quicquid secus attemptari contigerit, irritum et inane fore decernimus, non
obstantibus praemissis defectibus, and quibusui: Apostolicis, ac in
prouincialibus, et sinodalibus concilijs editis, specialibus uel generablibus
constitionis, and ordinationibus, caeterisque contrarijs quibuscunque.
Admonemus tamen cu^ diuiso Episcopatum, and erectio Cathedralium Ecclesiarum
sint de maioribus causis, quae summo pontifici sunt reseruatae recurrendum esse
ad suam sa^ctitatem, and ab easuppliciter postu andum, ut haec confirmare, seu
de nouo facere dignetur. Et licet omnes res mobiles Ecclesiarum indistincte
ijs, qui eos tenent lelaxauerimus, eos tamen admonitos esse uolumus, ut aut
oculos habentes diutni iudicij seueritatem contra Balthasarem Regem Babilonis,
qui uasa sacra non a se, sed a patre e templo ablata in prophanos usus
conuertit ea proprijs Ecclesiis si extant, uel aliis restituant. Hortantes
etiam, and per uisera misericordiae Jesus Christi obtestantes eos omnes, quos
haecres tangit, ut salutis suae non omnino immemores, hoc saltem efficiant, ut
ex bonis Ecclesiaslicis, maxim ijs, quae ratione personatuum et uicariatuum
populi ministrorum sustentatio fuerint spesi aliter destinata, seu alijs
Cathedralibus, and alijs quae nunc extant, inferioribus Ecclesijs curam anima
rum exercentibus ita prouideatur, ut earu^ pastores, personae et uicarii
co^mode, and honoste iuxta eorum qualitatem, and statum sustentari possint, and
curam animarum laudibiliter exercere, and onera incu^bentia congrue supportare
Datum Lambeth prope Londinum VVintonien^. Diocese. Anno Natiuitatis domini
Millesimo, quingentesimo, quinquagesimo quarto Nono Call. Ianuarij Pontif.
Sactissimi in Christo patris, and Domini nostri, Donini, Inlij diuina
prouidentia Papae tertij. Anno quinto.

Reginaldus Cardinalis Polus Legatus


We the said lords spiritual and temporal, and commons in this present
parlyament assembled, rendering most humble thanks to you: majesty's, by whose
intercession and means we have obtained the said dyspensations of the popes
holiness by the said most reverend father in god, his legare, most humbly
besecheth the same, that it may be ordained as follows.

And therefore be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present parliament that
al, and smguler articles and clauses contained in the said dispensatio^ as well
touching the establyshment of Byshopryckes, and cathedral churches, as also
the confirmation of marriages in degrees prohybited by the canons of the
church, the legittimation of children, and the catification of process, and
of sentences in matters ecclesiastical, touching the iuualiditie of them for
want of jurisdiction, and the in stitutions and distitituons. of. and in
benefices and promotions eccle siasticall, dispensations, and graces, given by
such order, as the public laws of the realm then approved, and all other
things before contained in the said letters of dispensations, shall remain
and be reputed and taken, to al intentes and co^structions in the laws of this
realm, lawefull, good, and effectual to be alleged and pleaded in all courts
ecclesiastical and temporal, for good and sufficient matter, either for the
playntyfe or defendaunt, without any allegation, or objection, to be made
against the validity of them, by pretense of any general counsel, canon, or
decree, to the contrary made, or to be made in that behalf.

And where as diverse and sondrye late Monasteryes, Pryoryes, Commaundryes,
Nonneryes, Deaueries, Prebendes, Colleges, Hospitales, Houses of friars,
Chauntryes, and other religyous and eccle siasticall houses and places, and the
manours, graunges, mesuages, lands, tenementes, rectoryes, tithes, pentions,
portions, vycareges, churches, chapels, aduousoues, nominations, patronages,
annuities rentes, reuertions, seruyces, and other possessions, and
hereditamentes to the said late monasteries, priories, nonneries. commaundryes,
deaneryes, chauntryes, prebendes, houses of friars, colleges, Hospytalles, and
other religious and ecclesiastical houses and places and to fondry
Archebyshopryckes, and Byshopryckes within this Realm, late appertaynyng and
belongyng, came as well to the hands and possession of the said king of
famous memory Henrye eyghte, father unto your majesty, our said sovereign
Lady, by dyssolution, gift grant, surrendre, attaynder, or otherwise, as
also to the hands and possession of diverse and sondrye other persons, and
bodies polytyke and corporate, by sundry means, conueyaunces, and assuraunces,
according to the order of the laws and statutes of this realm.

And where also diverse manours, lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes percell
of the possessions of Archbysshoprickes and byshoprykes, and many and sondrye
late deaneryes, colleges, chauntryes, rectories, Prebendes, Free Chappells,
Gnyldes, and Fraternytyes, manours, houses, Graunges, lands, Tenementes,
rent^es, Services and other Ecclesiastical possessions, and heredytamentes,
goods, and cattels to the said Archbysshopryckes, Bysshopryckes, deaneries,
colleges, chaunteryes, free chapels, rectories guyldes, and fraternities late
appertayning and belonging or appointing, to and for the fyndyng of pryestes
obyttes, lyghtes or other like purpose, came as well to the hands and
possession of the late noble king Edward the sixr brother unto your majesty
soueraygne Lady, by virtue of an act of parliament thereof made, or otherwise,
as also to the hands and possession of diverse and sundry other persons and
bodies polytyke and corporate by fondry means, conueyaunces, and assuraunces,
according to the order of the laws of this realine: a great number of which
said late monasteries, priories, nonneries, commaundres, deancryes, colleges,
hospytales, prebendes, chaunteryes, free chappeles, guyldes, and fraternities,
and the mannours, graunges, mesuages, lands, tenementes rentes, reuertions,
services, tithes, pentions, portions vica reges, churches, chapels, aduousons,
nominations, patronages, an nuities, and hereditaments, goods, and cattels, to
the said monaste ties, pryories, nonneries, commaundries, deaneries, colleges,
hospitalles chauntries, fre chapels, guyldes, fraternities, and other
ecclesiastical houses, Archbysshoprickes, and Byshoprickes belonging as well
for great sommes of money, as for other good, and reasonable causes, and
considerations, have beue conveyed and assured to diverse the subjects, and
bodies politic of this realm, as well by the said king Henry theight, the said
king Edward the sixte, and by your highness our soueraygne Lady, and jointly
by both your majesty's, as also by diverse the owners of the said
ecclesiastical possessions, which said conueyaunces, and assuraunces by their
sondrye letters patentes, and other wrytinges, more plainly do and may
appear. Forasmuch as the said most reverend father has also by the said
dispensations, removed and taken away al matter of empeachment, trouble, and
danger, which by occasion of any general counsel, canon, or degree
ecclesiastical might touch and disquite the possessions of such goods
moveable, lands, tenementes, possessions and hereditamentes, as were of late
belonging to any of the said Archbysshopryckes, Byshoprikes, monasteryes,
pryoryes, nonneries commaundries deaneryes, colleges, chauntryes, prebendes,
rectories, hospitales, houses of friars, or other religious and ecclesiastical
houses, and places of what nature name, kind, or quality soever they be of.
Yet for that the title of al lands, possessions, and hereditamentes in this
your majesty's realm and dominions, is grounded in the laws, statutes and
customs, of the same, and by your high iurysoiction, authority royal, and
crown imperial, and in your courts only to be impleaded, ordered, tried, and
judged, and none otherwise and understanding, that the whole full and most
gracious intentes mind and determination of your most excellent majesty's be,
that al and every person and persons, bodies polytyke, and corporate, their
heirs, successors, and assigns, and every of them, shall have, keep,
retain and enjoy al, and every their estates ryghtes, possessions, and
interestes, that they and every of them now has, or hereafter shall have,
of, and in all and every the mannours, graunges, mesuages lands, tenementes,
tithes, pencions, portions, aduousons, nominations, patronages, annuities,
rentes, reuersions, scruices, hundredes wapentakes, liberties, fraunchises, and
other the possessions, and he reditamentes of the said monasteries, abbeyes,
proryes, nonneries commaundries, deaneries, colleges, prebendes, hospitales,
houses of friars, chauntryes, rectoryes, vycareges, churches, chappelles, arch
bysshopryckes, and Bysshoprikes, and other religious or ecclesiastical houses
and places or of any of them within this realm, or the domynions of the same
by such laws and statutes, as were in force before the first day of this
present Parlyament, and by other lawefull conueyaunce to them thereof made.

That it may be therefore enacted by thaucthoritie of this present parliament,
that as well your majesty sovereign Lady, your heirs and successors, as
also all, and every other person and persons bodies polytyke and corporate,
their heirs, successors, and assygnes now having, or that hereafter shall
have, hold or enjoy any of the seytes of the said late monasteries, and
other the religious or ecclesiastycall houses or places, and all the said
manours graunges, mesuages lands, tenementes, tithes, pentions, portions,
glebelandes, aduousonnes nominations, patronages, annuities, rentes,
reuersyons, seruyces hundredes wapentakes liberties, fraunchises, profytes,
commodities, and other the possessions and hereditame^tes of the said late
monasteries abbeyes, pryories, nonueries, commaundries, deaneries, colleges,
prebe^des, hospitals, houses of friars, rectories, vicareges chau^teris
churches, chapels, archbishoprikes, bisshoprikes and other religious and
ecclesiastical houses and places, or of any of the^ of what name, nature or
kind soever they be, shall have, hold, possede, retain keep and enjoy all
and every the said scites, mannours, graunges, mesuages, lands, tenemenees
possessions, profyttes, commodities, and other hereditamentes, according to
such interestes and estates, as they and every of them now have, or hold, or
hereafter shall have or hold of and in the same by the dew order and course of
the laws and statutes of this realm, which now be, or were standinge in
force before the first day of this present Parliament, in manner and form, as
they should have done, if this act had never been had ne made This act or
any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Saving to you our said sovereign Lady, your heirs and successors, and
every of them, and to all and every other perion and persons subjects of
this realm, and bodies politic and corporate, and to their heirs and
successors, and to the heirs and successors of al, and every of them, other
then such, whose right, title, or intereste is bounden, or taken away,
undone, or extinct by any act of Parliament heretofore made, or otherwise al
such right, title, claim, possession, interestes, rentes, annuities,
commodities, commons offices, fees, leases liueries, lyuynges, pentions
portions, dettes, duties, and other proffytes, which they, or any of them
lawfully have, or of right ought to have, or might to have had, in of or to
any of the premysses or in, of or to any part or percell thereof, in such
like manner and form and condition, to all intentes, respects, constructions,
and purposes, as if this act had never been had ne made.

And that it may be further enacted by authority aforesaid, that al, and
every article, clause, sentence, and prouiso, contained, or specyfyed in any
act, or acts of Parliament, concerning, or touching the assurance, or
conueiaunce of any the said monasteries priories, nonneryes, co^maundris,
deaneries, prebendes, colleges, chauntryes, hospitals, houses, of friars,
rectories, vicarages, Churches, Chappeles Archbyshoprickes, and Byshoprickes,
and other religyous and ecclesiastical houses, and places, or any of them, or
in anyewise concerning any manuours, lands, tenementes, proffites, commodities
hereditamentes, or other the things, before specified to the said king Henrye
theyght, or king Edward the syxte, or either of them, or any other person or
persons, or body politic or corporate, and every of them and all, and every
writing, deed, and instrument, concerning the assurance of any the same,
shall stand, remain, and be in as good force, effect, and strength, and
shall be pleaded, and taken advantage of, to al intentes, constructions, and
purposes, as the same should, might, or could have been by the laws and
statutes of this realm in case this present act had never been had ne made.

And that al fe offamentes, fynes, surrenders, forfaytures, assuraunces,
conueyaunces, estates, and interestes, in any wise conveyed, had or made to our
said late soucraygne lord king Henrye theyght or to our said late sovereign
Lord king Edward the sixte, or either of them, or to any other person or
perso^es, bodies polityke or corporate or to any of them by deed or deeds, act
or acts of Parlyamente, or otherwise of any the scites, mannours, lands,
tenementes, possessions profits, commodites, or hereditamentes of any the
said Archebysshoprikes, Byshoprikes, late monasteryes, priories, nonneries,
commaundries, deaneries, houses, of friars, colleges, chaunteryes, hospitalles,
prebendes, fre chapels, or of any mannours, lands, tenementes reuertions,
services, tithes, pentyons, portyons, annuities, or of any other
hereditamentes, of by or from any ecclesiastycall or spiritual person or
persons, or by, or from any spiritual or ecclesiastical corporation, or body
politic shall be as good and auailable in the law, to al intentes,
constructions, and purposes, as they were by the laws and statutes of this
realm standing in force before the first day of this present parliament. And
that the same may, and shall be pleaded, aleged and taken advantage of, in such
sort, and to such effect, as they should could, or might have been by the
laws and statutes of this Realm, standing in force before the said first day
of this present Parliament: And that all, and every clause and article, of
sauinge contained in all and every the said acts and statutes, shall stand,
remain, and be in such force, strength, and effect, as they were before the
said first day of this present parliament. Any thing contained in this
present act to the concrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And that it may be in like manner enacted by authority aforesaid that
whosoever shall by any process, obtained out of any ecclesiastical court
within this realm, or without, or by pretense of any spyrytuail jurisdiction,
or other wise, contrary to the laws of this realm inqui et or molest any
person or persons, or body politic, for any of the said manours, lands,
tenementes, hereditamentes, or things above speryfyed, contrary to the words,
sentences, and meaning of this act shall incur the danger of the act of
preminere, made in the xvi. year of king Richard the second, and shall suffer
and ineurre the forfeytures and pains, contained in the same.

Provided always, that it shall and may be leafull to any person or persons,
body politic and corporate, to sue in any competente, ecclesiastical or
spiritual court within this realm, for tithes, ryghtes, and duties, that they
or any of them shall pretend to have, of or out of any the said manours,
lands, tenementes, and other the premysses and to have, full and perfect
remedy for the fame, in such manner and form, as they or any of them, might,
or ought to have done, or had by the laws and Statutes of this realm, before
the making of this Act, and as though this act had never ben had or made.

And that it may be further provided and enacted, by thauetoritie aforesaid,
that albeit the title or style of supremacye, or supreme head of the church of
England and of Irelande, or either of them never was, ne could be justly, or
lawefully attributed or knowledged to any king, or Soueraygne gouernoure of
this realm, nor in any wise could, or might, rightfully, justly, or lawfully,
by any king or soueraign governor of this realm, be claimed chale^ged, or
used. Yet forasmuch as the said title and style, sythens the third day of
November, in the.xxvi. year of the raygne of the said king Henrye the
eyghte, has been used, and is mentioned and contained in diverse and sondrye
wrytes, letters patentes, records, exemplyfycatyons, coute rolls, charters,
deeds, instruments, euydences, books and wrytynges. It shall be lawefull, as well
to, and for your Maiestyes and your Soueraygne ladies heirs and Successoures,
as to, and for every other person, and persons, and bodies politic and
corporate* as altime and times here after, to have, retain, and keep the said
wrytes, letters patentes, records, exemplifications, court rolls Charters,
deeds instruments, evidences, books, and vorytynges, and them to show,
exhibit, use, allege, and plead, in all times and places requpsyte, or
nedeful, without any danger penaltye, loss, for feyture, trouble, vexation,
or impeachment for the same, any thing in this act, or in any other act or
acts, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And where your highness Soueraygne Lady, since your coming to the crown of
this realm, of a good and Christian conscience, omytted to write the said
Style of Supremacye, specyfyed in one Act made in the parliament holden at
Westminster by prorogation in the xxxv. year of the raygne of your late father
king Henrye theyghte, as well in gifts, grauntes, letters patentes, as in
commyssyons, and other wrytynges, and also other have in their wrytynges done
the same as well in your time as before. And forasmuch as notwithstanding any
law made concerning the said Style of Supremacye, it was in the free choice,
liberty, and pleasure of the king of this realm, and of your hyghnes,
whether ye would express the same in the said Style or not.

Be it therefore declared and enacted by authority of this present
parlyament, that all grauntes, letters, patentes, commissions indytementes,
records, and wrytinges, made in your our Soueraygne Ladies name, or in the
names of yours Soueraygne Lord and Lady, or any other, wherein the said Style
of Supremacye is omytted is, and shall be, to all intentes and purposes, as good
and effectual, as if the same had been therein expressed, and may be detained,
kept, pleaded, and alleged, without any danger, pain, penalty, or
forfayture to ensue to any person or persons, or body politic, for or
concerning the omission of the same Style, or any part thereof, in any such
wrytinges, and that no person ne persons, shall be impeached, molested, or da^p
nyfyed, for or by reason of any such omyssyon.

And where in an act of parliament made since the said.xx. year of king
Henrye theyghte, all Bulls, dispensations, and wrytynges which were before
that time optained fyom the Sea of Rome, should be void, avolyshed, and
extinguished, with a clause, nevertheless that the matter of them, by virtue of
letters patentes from the king then being should, and might be alleged,
pleeded, and allowed, as if the same had not been so abolisbed or
extinguyshed. Forasmuch as the said act is here before amongst other
repealed and made void.

Be it therefore euacted by authority of this present parlyamente that all
Bulls, dispensations, and pryuyleges, obtained before thee said.xx. year, or
at any time sythence, or which shall hereafter be optemed of the Sea of Rome,
not conteininge matter contrary or pretudicial to the authority, dygnytye,
or prehemynence Royal, or imperyall of the realm, or to the laws of this
realm, now being in force, and not in this parliament repealed, may be put
in executyon, used and alleged in any court within this Realm, or else where
whether the same remain yet hole, or can appear to have been can celled, in
this vayleable and effectual manner, to all intentes, and purposes, as if the
said Act had never been had or made. Any obiectyon by pretense of
extinguyshment, or cancellyng of the said Bulls, dyspensations, or privileges,
or of any other matter or cause, by the pretense of the laws of this realm,
whatsoever in any wise notwythstandyng.

And where as by dissolution of monasteries, and other religious houses,
certain paryshe churches and chappeles which were before exempte, from the
jurisdiction of the Archbyshope and bishop of the diocese, and by special
exemption and priuelege from Rome, were under the government and order of the
Abbotes, and Prioures of those religious houses, which said churches by color
of the said exemptions, be now of special grant from King Henry, and king
Edward, under the rule and government, and jurisdiction of te^porall and lay
men, who can no more enjoy, that suprmacye, over those particular churches,
then the king might over the hole realm

Be it therefore enacted, that all Archbyshoppes, and byshopes in their dioces,
and all other spiritual person and persons, having jurisdiction, and their
ministeres and officers, and no lay person, or persons in every Church and
place, within the precinct of ye same being rempte, or not exempte, may
freely, and without impediment execute their spiritual jurisdiction in all
points and articles, as though no such exemption or grant had never been made.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that this act extend not to take away, or
oiminyshe the preuileges, of the university of Cambrydge and Oxforde, ne the
privileges, or prerogatives granted heretofore to the churches of Westminster,
and Wyndesore, ne the Tower of London, ne prejudicial, to such temporal
Lords and possessioners in this realm, as by ancient custo^e have emoyed
probate of Testamentes, of their tenauntes or other.

And forasmuch, as after this reconsiliation, and unity of this noble realm,
to the body of Christ's church, it is to be trusted, that by the abundance of
gods marcy, and grace, devotion shall encrese and grow in the hearts of many
the Subieces of this realm, with desire to give and bestow their worldly
possessions, for the resuscitatyng of almose, prayer, and example of good life
in this realm, to the intent such godly motions and purposes should be advanced.

Be it therefore enacted by aucthoritye of this present parlyame^t that it
shall be lawefull to such as shall be sessed of any mauours, lands tene mentes,
personages tithes, pencions, portions, or other hereditame^tes, whatsoever in
fee simple, in posession, reuertio^, or remaynder, in their own ryghtes, not
veyng copy hold, may thereof make feoffamentes, grauntes, or any other
assuraunces, or by his last will and Testament, in writing, may be queath and
give in fe simple, al and every the said manours, lands, tenementes
personages, tithes pentions, portions, or other hereditamentes, to any
spyrituall body polytike, or corporate in this realm or dominions of the same,
now erected or founded, or hereafter to be erected or founded: without any
license of mortmayne there in to be optayned: or any writ of ad quod dampnum
to be sued out for the same, the acts de terri ad manion mortuam non ponendis
or any other act or statute, heretofore had or made in in any wise
notwithstanding.

Saving to the Lords of the fee, all rentes, services dew, or going out of any
of the said land or renements, or hereditaments, so to be amortized, as is
aforesaid.

Provided always, that this clause of this act, for giving the liber tie of, or
for the amortezyng of lands or tenementes, shall cotynue for, and during the
space of.xx. years next, and immediatelye following, and no longer.

And forasmuch as we your majesty's humble and obedient subjects, the lords
spiritual and temporal, and commons in this present Parlyament assembled,
nether by the making, or delivering of either the supplycations aforesaid, nor
by any clause, article or sentence thereof, or of any other clause article or
sentence of this or any other Statute, or any of the preambles of the same,
made, or agreed upon in this session of this present parliament, by any manner
of inter pretation, co^struction, implication or other wise intend to derogate
empaire, or diminish any of the prerogatives, liberties, fraunchisies
preheminences, or iurisdictyons of your Croune Imperyall of this realm, and
other the dominions to the same belonging, we do most humbly beseech your
maiestyes, that it may be declared, and ordained, and be it enacted and
declared by authority of this present parliament, that neither the making,
exhibityng, or insertynge in this present statute, or in the preambles of the
same, of the supplicatyons or promys aforesaid, or either of them; nor any
other thing or things, words, sentences, clauses, or articles, in the
preambles or body of the arts, aforesaid, shall be construed understood or
expounded to derogat, diminishe or take away any the liberties, privileges,
prerogatives, preheminences, authorities, or iurisdictyons or any part or
pertel thereof, which were in your imperial croune of this realm or did belong
to your said imperial croune the twenty year, of the reign of yours the
Queen's majesty's most noble father, or any other your most noble
progenitors, before the said twentye year, and the popes holiness, and Sea
Apostolyke, to be restored, and to have and enjoy such authority,
prehemynence, and inrisdictyon as his holiness, used, and exercised, or might
lawfully have used and excercised by authority of his supremacy, the said
twenty year of the regine of the king your father, within this your realm
of Engnde, and other your Dominions, without diminution, or enlargeme^t of the
same and none other. And the Eclesiasticall jurisdiction of the Archebishoppes,
Bishops, and ordinaties, to be in the same state, for process of suites,
punishment of crimes, and execution of censures of the church, with knowledge
of causes belongyng to the same, and as large in these points, as the said
jurisdiction was the said.xx. eyare.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauethoritie aforesaid, that in and
upon every such gifts and deuyses, to be made to such spiritual
corporations, or persons as is aforesaid, the donor feoffer, or divisor
thereof may reserve to him, and to his heirs for ever, a tenure in frank
almaine, or a tenure by divine service: and to have al remedies and actions,
for and upon the said gifts, or deuyses, and tenures in like manner and sorme,
as was used before the estatute of Westminster third (commonly called) Quia
emptores terrarum. The said estatute or any other law or custom now being
to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it enacted, that all and every person and persons,
and bodies politic and corporate which now have or here after shall have any
estate of enheritaunce, frehold, term, or intrest, of in, or to any portion,
pention, tithes, glebelandes, or other ecclesyasticall or spiritual profytte;
which by this act, and letters of dispensation rehearsed in the same, be
permitted and suffered to remain and continue in lay men's possessions, shall
and may have like remedy for the recouerye of the same, and every part
thereof as they and every of them might have had before the first day of this
present Parlyament, Any thing in this act conte^yned to the contrary in
anywise notwithstanding.

An act for the punishment of traitorous words against the Queen's Majesty.
The.ix. Chapter.
FOrasmuch as now of late diverse noughty sedicyous malicious, and heretical
persons, not having the fere of god before their eyes, but in a deuilishe sort,
contrary to the duty of their allegiau^ce, have congregated the^ selves
together in conuenticles, in diverse and sundry profane places within this
city of London esteming the^ selfs to be in the true faith, where in deed they
are in errous and here sies, and out of the true trade of Christ's catholyke
religyon, and in the same places at several times, using their fantastical
and scysmaticall seruyces, lately taken away, and abolyshed by authority of
parlyament, have of their most malicious and cankerde stomakes, prayed against
the Queen's majesty, that God would turn her heart from Idoltrye to the true
faith, or else to shorten her days, or take her quickly out of the way,
which prayer was never hard nor read to have been used by any good Chrystyan
manne, against any Prince though he were a pagan, and infidele, and much
less against any christian Prince, and especially so virtuous a Princes, as
our soueraygne Lady that now is known to be, whose faith is and always has
been most true and catholyque, and consonaunt and agreing with Christ's
catholic Church, throughout the world dyspersed.

For reformation whereof, be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present
parliament, that every such person and persons, which since the beginning of
this present parliament, have by express words and sayings, prayed,
required, or desired, as is aforesaid, or hereafter shall pray, by express
words or sayings, that God should shortenne her days, or take her out of
the way (whose life almighty God long preserve) or any such like malicious
prayer, amountinge to the same effect, their procurers and abbettours therein,
shall be taken, reputed and judged traitors, and every such prayinge,
requiringe, or desyryng shall be indged, taken, and reputed high treason, and the
offenders therein, their procurers and abbettours, being thereof lawfully
conuycte, according to the laws of this Realm, shall have, suffer and
forfeyte, as in cases of high treason.

Provided always and be it enacted, that if any person or persons shall be
indycted for any the offenses aforesaid, done and perpetrated during this
session of this present parlyament, and upon his or their arraygnment, shall
show him or them selves penytente for there offense, and submit him or them
selves to the king and Queen's mercy, and humbly desire the same, before such
Justices or commissioners before whom he or they shall be arraygued, that then no
judgment or conviction or attayndour of treason, shall be given against any
such person or persons, so being penytent, and submyttynge them selves, as is
aforesaid. And in every such case, the Justices or commissioners before who^
such person or persons shall be arraigned, shall have authority by virtue of
this act, to prescribe, adiudge, and appoynte, such corporal punishment,
other then death, to such offender and offe^ders as to them by their discretion
shall seem conuenyente, and upon that penance prescribed and done, to be
discharged of the said treason, comprised in that indictment.

An act whereby certain offenses be made treasons, and also for the
government of the kings and Queen's Majesty's issue.
The.x. Chapter.
FOr as much as the great mercy and clemency heretofore declared by the Queens
hyghnes, in releasing the penal laws, made by her progenitors, has given
occasion to many cankarde and traiterous hearts to ymagyne, practyse, and
attempt things stirryng ye people to disobedience, and rebellyon against her
hyghnes common polecy, and duetye of subjects, require that some law be
eftsons establyshed to restrain the malice of such wicked and evil doors,
whereby they may be prehibited to blow abroad such shame full slanders and
lies, as they daily inuente and yinagine of her highness and the kings
majesty her most lawefull husband, which when they be hard can not be but
odible, and detested of all good me^ consyderyng they touch their maiestyes
upon whom depends the whole unity and universal wealth of this realine.

In consideratydn whereof be it ordained and enacted by the king and the queen's
majesty's, with thassent of the lords spyrituall and temporal, and of the
commons in this present parsyament assebled and by the auctorytye of the same,
that if any person or persons after the first day of February next to com
during the marriage between the king and the queen's majesty's, do compass or
imagine to deprive the kings majesty, that now is, from the having and
inioyning jointly together with the queen's highness the style, honor, and
kynglye name of ye realms and dominions unto our said soueraygne Lady the
queen's hyghnes apertaining, or to destroy the king that now is, during the
said matrimonye, or to destroy the queen's majesty that now is, or the heirs
of her body begotten, being kings or Queens of this Realm, or to leuye
war wythyn this Realm of England, or within any of the marches of the same,
against the kings majesty, that now is, during the said marriage or against
the queen's majesty that now is or any of her said heirs, being kings or
queen's of this Realm, or to depose the queen's majesty that now is, or the
heirs of her body begotten, being kings or queens of this realm, from the
Imperyall croune of the realms and dominions above said. And ye saine
compasses, or imaginations or any of the^ maliciously, advisedly, and directly,
shall, or do utter by open preaching, express words, or sayings or if any
person or persons after the said first day of February by preching express
words or sayings, shall maliciously, aduifedly, and directlye, say publyshe,
declare, maintain or hold opinion, that the kings majesty, that now is
during the said matrimony, ought not to have or enjoy ioyntlye together with
the queens majesty, the style, honor, and kyngly name of this realm, or
that any person or persons, being neither the king or the queen's majesty's that
now are during the said matrimony betweue them, ought to have or enjoy the
style, honor, and kyngelye name of this realm, or that the Queens majesty,
that now is, during her life, is not, or of right ought not to be queen of
this realm, or after her death, that the heirs of her hyghnes body being
kings or queen's of this realm of right ought not to be kings or queen's of
this realm, or to have and enjoy the same or that any person or persons,
other then the queen's majesty, that now is during her life, ought to be Queen
of this realm, or after her death other then the heirs of her body being
kings or queens of this realm, as long as any of her said heirs of her
body begotten shall be in life, of right ought to have and enjoy the imperial
crown of this realm. That then every such offendoour, being thereof duly
connicted, or attainted by the laws of this realm, their abbettours
procurers, and counsailoures, and all, and every their comforters, knowing
the said offenses, or any of them to be done, and being thereof convicted
or attaynted, as is abouesayde, for his or their such offense, shall forfeyte
and lose to the queens hyghnes, her heirs and successors, all his and their
goods, and cattels, and the whole issues and proffytes of his and their
lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, sor term of the life of every
such offendoure or offenders, and also shall have, and suffer, duringe his
and their lives perpetual imprisonment.

Provided always and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and
every ecclesiastical person being convicted or attaynted in form aforesaid,
for every surhe his offense, shall be deprived by the ordinary from his promotion
spiritual or ecclesiastical, in such like manner and form, that it shall be
laweful for every patron, founder or geuer thereof, to present, after such
deprivation had, some one other to the same, as though the said offendoure
or offendoures, were deceassed. And if any person or persons being hereafter
convicted or at taynted of any of the said offenses, in fonrme aforesaid
committed shall after his or their conviction, or attainder, estsones commit
or perpetrate any of the said offenses, in form aforesaid. That then every
such second offense or offenses shall be demed, and adjudged high treason, and
the offendoure or offendoures therein, their abbettoures procurers, and
councelloures, and all and every their aydours and conforters, knowing the said
offenses, or any of them to be done, being thereof convicted or attainted,
according to the laws and Statutes of this realm, shall be judged and demed
high traytoures, and shall suffer pains of death, and lose and forfeyte all
their goods, and cattels lands, and tenementes, to the queens majesty, her
heirs and successors, as in cases of high treason, by the laws of this
realm at this day, of right ought to be lost and forfeyted.

And be it further enacted by the said authority, ye if any person or
persons at any time after the said first day of February next to come during
the said marriage, compass, or ymagine the death of the kings majesty, that
now is, and the same maliciousely, advisedly and directly shall utter and
attempt by any writing, pryntynge, ouert deed or act, or if any person or
persons at any time after the said first day of February next coming, shall
maliciously, aduisedlye, and dyrectlye by writing, prynting, ouert deed, or
act, affirm that the kings majesty, that now is, during the said
matrimony, ought not to have or enjoy jointly togethers with the Queen's
hyghnes, the style, honor and kyngly name of this realm, or that any person
or persons, being neither the king, or the Queen's majesty, that now is,
during the said matrimony between them ought to have and enjoy the style
honor, and kinglye name of this realm. Or if any person or persons after
the said day by any writing, prynting, ouert deed, or act, maliciousely,
advisedly, and directly, do affirm that the Queen's majesty that now is,
during her life is not, or ought not to be queen of this realm, or after her
death, that the heirs of her hyghnes body being kings or Queen's of this
realm, of right ought not to have and enjoy the imperial Crown of this
Realm, or that any person or persons other then the Queen's majesty that
now is, during her life or after her death, other then the heirs of her body
begotten, being kings or queen's of this realm, as long as any of her said
heirs of her body shall be in life, of right ought to have and enjoy the
imperyall crown of this realm. That then every such offense and offenses
shall be adjudged high treason, and the offender and offenders therein, their
abbettours, procurers, and councellers, and all and every their aydours, and
comforters, knowinge the said offenses, or any of them to be done, being
thereof convicted, or attaynted by the laws and statutes of this realm, shall
be demed and adjudged high traytoures, and shall suffer pains of death, and
loose and forfeyte al their goods and cattels, lands, and tenementes to the
Queen's majesty, her heites and successors as in cases of high treason, as is
abouesayde.

And albeit we the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this
present parliament assembled, have fyrme hope and confidence in the goodness of
Almighty God, that like as he has hither to mir aculousiye preserved the
Queen's majesty from many great and imminent periles and dangers, even so he
will of his infinite goodness give her highness strength, the rather by our
continual prayers to pass well the danger of deliverance of child wherewith
it has pleased him (to all our great comfortes) to bless her. Yet
forasmuch as all things of this world be uncertain, and having before our
eyes the dolorous experience of the inconstaut government duringe the time of
the reygne of the late king Edward the syxte, do playnelye se the manifold
inconuenienees, great dangers, and perils, that may ensue to this hole
realm, if foresyghte be not used to prevent evil chances, if they should
happen. For the eschewing whereof, we the Lords spiritual and temporal, and
the commons in this present parliament assembled for and in consideration of a
most special trust and confidence, that we have and repose in the kings
majesty, for and concerning the good and politic government, order, and
administration of this realm in the time of the young years of the issue or
issues of her majesty's body to be borne, if it should please God to call the
queen's hyghnes out of this present life during the tender years of such issue
or issues (which God forbyde) according to such order and manner as hereafter in
this present act, his hyghnes most gracious pleasure is should be declared and
set fourth have made our most humble suite by thasie^t of ye queen's highness
that his majesty would vouchsafe to accept and take upon him the rule order,
educatyon, and government of the said issue or issues to be borne, as is
aforesaid, upon which our suit being of his said majesty most graciously
accepted. It has pleased his highness not only to declare, that like as for ye
first part his majesty verily trusts that almighty God, who has hitherto
preserved the queen's majesty to give this realm so good an hope of certain
succession in the blud roial of ye same realm, will assist her highness with his
graces and benedictio^s to see the fruit of her body well brought forth live,
and able to govern, whereof nether all this realm ne all the world besides
should or could receive more comfort, then his majesty should and would. Yet if
such chance should happen, his majesty at our humble desires is pleased and
contented, not alonely to except and take up o^ him ye cure and charg of the
education, rule, order, and government of such issues, as of this most happy
marriage shall be borne between the queen's highness and him, but also during the
time of such government would by always and means study, travail and employe
himself to advance the weal, both public and private of this realm, and
dominions there unto belongyng, according to the said trust in his majesty
reposed, with no less good will and affectyon, then ythys hyghnes had byne
naturally borne amongst us.

In consyderatyon whereof be it enacted by the king and the queens most
excellent maiestyes, by thassent of the Lords spirytuall and temporal, and
the commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by thauctoritie of the
same, that if it shall so please God, to call the queen's majesty out of this
present life, which god forbydde, before the issue of her body, inheritable to
the Crown of this realm if it be male shall accomplish the age of.xviii.
years, or if it be female, before it shall be of the age of.xv. years, and not
married after ye age of consent, and before the said age of.xv. years. That
then and unme diatly after, and from the deceasse of our said Soueraygne Lady
yt queen, the kings majesty yt now is, shall have the rule, order, education
and government of the person of such issue, or issues, and the rule, order and
government (under such issue, or issues) of this realm, and the dominions to
the same belonging, until the same issue or issues, inheritable to the
imperyall Crown of this Realm, if it be male, shall accomplish the fall age
of eightene years and if it be female, until such issue female, shall be
accomplish the age of fyuetene years, and be married after the age of consent
and before the said age offyuetene years, if the said issue or issues, and
our said sovereign Lord the king, shall so long live together, and that
duringe, and by all the time of such government, all, and every the pactes,
couenau^tes, articles, and agrementes, mentioned and comyrysed in the
treatises, and act of Parliament, and every of them made, and concluded, for
and concerning the honorable marriage, had and consummate, between the King and
Queen's Majesty's, which on the behalf of his Majesty, been to be observed,
performed and kept, shall after the deceasse of the Queen's Majesty, during
the time of the said government, remain, continue, and be in as good, and full
force strength, and effect, to all intentes, and purposes, as they were at any
time, during the said Marriage, or now been, as if they were newly by apt
words, terms, and sentences, inserted and rehearsed in this present Act, and
newely made and enacted, to stand, remain continue, and to be observed, and
kept, during the time of the said gouernmente, and shall be by his Majesty,
duringe the said time inuiolablye observed performed, maintained, and
vpholden, in such sort, and in as full large, and ample manner, to all
respects, as they should and ought to be, during the time of the said marriage,
or after, and his highness, and the Queen's most excellent Majesty, are pleased
and contented, that it be enacted by this present Parliament that nothing
shall be done permitted, or assented unto by his Majesty to the contrary.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, during the time that our said sovereign lord the king that now
is, shall, and ought to have the order, rule, education, and government of such
issue or issues, being king or Queen of this realm, according to theordre and
provision aforesaid malyciously, advisedly, and directly, by writing,
prynting, ouert deed or act do compass, attempt, and go about to destroy
the person of our said soueraynge lord, or do depryue, or remove his said
hyghnes from the order, rule, education, and government of the same issue or
issues, being king or Queen of this realm, contrary to the tenoure, entente,
and true meaning of this present act, that then every such person or persons
so offendyng, their procurers and abettours, being there of lawfully conuicte
or attaynted by the laws of this realm, shall be demed and adjudged high
Traitors: And that all and every such offense and offenses, shall be demed and
adjudged high treason. And the offendour and offenders therein, their
procurers, counsaylours, and abbettours, shall incur the dangers,
forfeytures, and penalties of high treason.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid that al trials hereafter
to be had, awarded, or made, for any treason, shall be had, and used only,
according to the due order and course of the common laws of this realm, and
not otherwise. Saving to every person and persons, bodies polytyke and
corporate, their heirs, and successoures other then the offenders, and their
heirs and such person and persons, as claim to any of their uses, all such
ryghtes, tytles, interestes, possessions, leasses, rentes, reuertions, offices,
and other profytes, which they or any of them shall have at the day of the
committynge such treasones, or at any time before, in as large and ample manner,
as if this act had never been had or made.

Provided always, and be it declared and enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid,
that conceylement, or keeping secret of any high treason, be demed and taken
only, misprisyon of treason and the offenders therein to forfeyt, and suffer,
as in cases of misprision of treason has heretofore been used. Any thing
above mentioned, to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, that if it shall fortune hereafter any of the pears of this
realm, to be indicted of any of the offenses made treason or mysprisyon of
treason by this act, that then the same pears, or pear, so being indycted,
shall be put to answer unto every such endytement, before the high steward
of England for the time being and to have his and their trial by his and
their pears, and to receive and have such like judgment upon the same trial
of his or their pears, or making open confession of the same offense, or
offenses as is used in other cases of high treason.

And it is further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that no person or
persons shall in any wise be impeached for any of the offenses abouesayd,
committed only by open preaching or words, unless the offender of offenders
be therefore indicted within six months, next after the same open preaching or
words. Any thing contained in this act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid that upon the
arraygment of any person, which hereafter shall for tune to be arraygned for
any treason, mentioned in this act, all and every such person and persons, or
two of the^ at the least, as shall hereafter write, declare, confess, or
depose any thing or things against the person to be arraygned, shall, if they
be then living and within the realm be brought forth in person before the
party arraygned, if he require the same, and obiecte, and say openly in his
herynge what they or any of them can against him, for or concerning any the
treasones, contained in the indictment, where upon the party shall be so
arraygned, unless the party arraygned for any such treason, shall willingly
confess the same at the time of his or their arraignement.

Provided never thelesse, and be it enacted by ye thauchoritie aforesaid that
in all cases of hight treason, concerning coin curraunt within this realm, or
for counterfeytyng ye king or Queen's sygnet pryuie seal, great seal, or sign
manuel, such manner of trial and none other be observed and kept as heretofore
has been used by ye common laws of this realm. Any law statute, or any
other thing or things to the contrary notwithstanding.

Pronyded always, that the counselors, procurers, co^forters, and abbettonrs
for his or their first offe^re shall suffer like punishment penalty, and
forfeyture, as is contained in this act against ye pryncipal offenders, for
their first offense and none other, And that the councillors, procurers
comforters, and abbettoures, for his or their second offense shall sustain
like punishment, penalty, and forfeytur as is contained in this act against
the principal offendour or offendoures for their second offense, and none other.

And act for the punishment of brynging in of couterfeyte coin of forrayne
realms, being curraunte within this realm.
The.xi. Chapter,
WHere diverse and sondrye coins of gold and silver of other realms, not
being of the propre coin of this realm of England, and yet by the
sufferaunce and consent of the king and queen our Soueraygne Lord and Lady, be
curraunt in paime^t within this realm, many ill disposed persons for their own
corrupt lucre and aduau^tage, have now of late brought into this realm, from
the parties of beyond the sea, great quantity of forged and counter fayte
money, like to the said coin of other forreyne realms, and have uttered the
same here by marchaundising, and otherwise to diverse of the subjects of this
realm, to their greeat deceit hurt and damage because the said ill dysposed
persons hane perceived and understood, that there was not, nor yet is any
sufficient law or statute made or provided for the condygne punishment of the
offenders in that behalf.

Wherefore be it enacted and establyshed by the auc thorytye of this present
Parliament, that if any person or perso^es, after ye twentye day of January
next coming, shall bring from the parties of beyond the sea into this realm,
or into any the dominions of the same any such false and counterfeyte coin or
money, being courrau^t within this realm as is aforesaid, knowing the same
coin or money to be false and counterfeite, to the intent to utter, or make
paime^t with the same within this realm or any the dominions of the same, by
marchaundisyng, or otherwise, yt all and every such person or persons so offen
^yng, as is aforesaid, their counsailours, procurours, aydours, and abbettours
in that behalf shall be demed and judged to be offenders in high treason, and
shall suffer after lawefull conviction or attaynder thereof, such pains of
death, loss and forfaiture, of lands, goods, and cattelles, as other
offendoures shall do, in cases of high treason.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all, and every
person and persons, that shall at any time after the said.xx. day of January,
be accused or impeched of any of the offenses, contained and provided for in
this estatute, or of any other offense or offenses, concerning the impayrynge
counterfeytyng, or forgyng of any coin curraunte within this realm, shall and
may be endicted, arreyned, tried, convicted, or atteynted by such like
evidence, and in such manner and form as has been used and accustomed within
this realm, at any time before the tyrste year of the raygne of our late sone
raygne lord king Edward the sixth. Any statute, custom law, or usage to the
contrary there of in any wise notwithstanding.

An act for the impounding of disters.
The.xii. Chapyter.
FOr the auoydyng of grievous vexations, exactions, troubles, and disorder in
taking of destresses and im poundynge of cartel, be it enacted by aucthorytye
of this present Parlyment, that from, and after the first dai of Apryl next
coming, no distress of catel shall be driven out of ye hundred, rape,
wapentake, or lath, where such distresses is, or shall be taken, except it be to
a pound, ouert within the said shire, not above three miles distau^t, from the
place where the said distress is taken, and that no cattle, or other goods
distreined, or taken by way of distress, for any manner of cause: at one time
shall be impou^ded in several places, whereby the owner or owners of such
dystresse shall be constrained to sue several repleuis for the delivery of the
said distress, so taken at one time, upon pain every person offendyng
contrary to this act shall forefeyt to the party grieved for every such offense a
hundred shillinges and treble damages.

And further be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that after the said fist
day of Apryll, no person or persons shall take for keeping inpounde,
impounding, or pondage of any manner of distress, above the sum of.iiii.
pence for any one whole distress, that shall be so impounded, and where less
has been used, there to take less, upon the pain of five pound to be paid to
the party grieved, over and besides such money as he shall take above the some of
four pence. Any usage or prescription to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And for the more spedier delivery of cattle, taken by way of distress, it
is further enacted by the said authority, that every Shiriffe, of shires,
being no cities nor towns made shyres, shall at his first county day, or
within two months next after he has receaned his patente of his office of
shiriswike, shall depute, appoint and proclayme in the shyre town within his
baylyweke, four deputies at the least, dwelling not above twelve miles one
distaunt from another, which said deputies so appointed and proclaimed, shall
have authority in the sheryffes name to make repleuis and delyueraunce of such
distresses, in such manner and form, as the sheryffe, may or ought to do, upon
pain that every Sheriff, for every month that he shall lack such deputy, or
deputies, shall forfayte for every such offense five pounds, the one half
of whyoh forfaitures shall be to the king and Queen's highness, her heirs and
successors, the other half to him that will sue for the same by byll, playnt,
information, or action of debt, in any the king and queen's courts of record,
in which no essoygne protection, nor wager of law shall be admytted.

An act appoynting in order to justices of peace touching the baylemente of
prisoners.
The.xiii. Chapter.
WHere in the parliament holde^ at Westminster, in the.iii. year of the reign
of the noble prince, king Henrye the seventh, it was among other things
ordained and enacted, that no prisoner arrested for felony, should be letten to
bail or mainpryse, by any one Justice of peace, but by the hole Justices, or
at least by two of the^, whereof one to be of ye Quorum Since the making of
which estatute, one Justice of peace in the name of him self and one other of
the Justices his co^pagnyon not making the said Justice party nor priuye unto
the cease wherefore the prisoner should be bayled, has often times by sinister
labor and means, set at large the greatest, and notablest offenders, such as
be not replinisable by the laws of this realm, and yet the rather to hyde
their affections in that behalf have sygnyfyed the cause of their apprehension
to be put only for suspicion of felony, whereby ye said offenders has
escaped vnponished, and do daily, to the high dysplesure of almighty God, the
great peril of the king and Queen's true subjects, and encoragement of al
thieves and euylldoers. For reformation whereof, be it ordained and enacted by
the king and Queen's majesty's, the lords spiritual and temporal, and the
commons in this present parliament assembled, and by authority of the same
that from, and after the first day of Apryll next cominyng no Justice or
Justices of peace, shall let to bail or mainepryce any such person or
persons, which for any offense or offenses, by them or any of them committed
be declared not to be repleuised or bailed or be forbidden to be repleued, or
bailed, by the estatute of Westmin, prymer, made in the parliamente holden in
the third year of the reygne of king Edward the first. And furthermore, that
any person or persons arrested for manslaughter or felony, or supection of
manslaughter or felony, being bayleable by the law, shall not after the said
first day of Apryll, be let to bail or maynepryse, by any Justices of
peace, if it be not in open Sessions, except it be by two Justices of peace at
the least, whereof one to be of the Quorum, and the same justices to be present
together, at the time of the said bailmente or mainprise, which bailement or
mainpryse they shall certifye in writing, subscrybed, or sygned with their own
hands, at the next general jail delivery, to be holden within the county,
where the said person or person shall be arrested or suspected. And that the said
Justices, or one of them being of the Quorum, when any such prisoner is
brought before them, for any manslaughter or felonye, before auye baylement or
maynepryce, shall take the examination of the said prisoner, and information of
them that brynges him, of the fact, and cyrcumstaunces thereof, and the same
or as much thereof, as shall be material to prove the felony, shall put in
wrytinges before they make the same bailement, which said examination together,
with the said baylement, the said Justices shall certify at the next general
goal delyuery to be holden within the limits of their commissyon, and that
every Coroner, upon any inquisition before him found, where by any person or
persons shall be indicte for murder, or man slaughter or as accessory or
accessaryes to the same, before the murder or manslaughter committed, shall put
in writing the effect of the euydence given to the Iurye before him, being
material, and as well the said Justices, as the said Coroner, shall have
authority by this act to bind al such by recognisaunce, or obligation, as do
declare any thing material, to prove the said murdre or manslaughter, offenses,
or fellonies, or to be accessory, or accessaries to the same, as is before said
to appear at the next general jail delivery, to be bolden within the County,
city, or town corporat, where the trial thereof shall be, then and there to give
evidence against the party so indicted at the time of his trial and shall
certify as well the same evidence, as such bond and bonds in writing, as he
shall take together with the inquisition orindictment before him taken and
found, at, or before the time of his said trial thereof, to be had or made,
and likewise, the said Justices shall certifye all and every such bond,
taken before them, in like manner as before is said of baylementes and
examination. And in case any Justice of peace, or Quorum, or Coroner shall
after the said first day of apryll, offend in any thing contrary to the true
intent, and meaning of this present act: That then the Justices of jail
delyuerye of the Shire, city, to wue, or place, where such offense shall
happen to be committed, upon due proof thereof, by examination before them shall
for every such offense, set such fine on every of the same Justices of peace
and Coroner, as the same Justices of jail delivery shall think mete, and
shall estrete the same as other fynes and amerciamentes assessed before
Justices of jail delivery ought to be.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that
Justices of peace, and Coroners within the city of London and the county of
Middelsex, and in other cities, boroughes, and towns corporat within this
realm and Wales, shall within their several jurisdictions, have auctorytie to
let to bail, fellons and prisoners in such manner and form, as they have been
heretofore accustomed, this act or any thing therein contained, to the
contrary notwithstanding. And also shall take examinations and bonds, as is
aforesaid, upon every baylement by them or any of them to be made, and shall
certify every such baylementes, bonds, and examinations, by them or any of
them, taken or made at the next jail delivery to be holde^ within the shyre,
city, borough, or town, where their several jurisdictions extends, upon
like pain and forfeyture, as is before limited in this present act.

And be it also enacted by the auctorytye aforesaid, that no writers of Habeas
corpus, or Certiorary, shall be hereafter granted to remove any prisoner out of
any jail, or to remove any recognisaunce, except the same writtes be signed
with the proper hands of the chief Justice, or in his absence, one of the
Justices of the court, out of which the same writtes shall be awarded, or
made, upon pain that he that writes any such writtes, not being signed as
is aforesaid, to forfayte to our said soueraygne lord the king and the
queen, for every such writ and writtes five pounds.

An act for the makyuge of russell sattens, sattens reuerses. and fustian of
Naples in Norwiche.
The.xiiii. Chapter.
WHere of late years passed russelles, called russels sattens and sattens
reuerses, have been practiced to be made beyond the seas of the wolles bredde
in the countye of Norfolk, and by reason thereof so great quantytie of the
said russelles sattens, sattens reuerses, have been brought into this Realm,
sold and worn as well in every part of this Realm, as in the parts beyond
the seas, that thereby the mysteries of worstedes making and weauynge, whereby
merchants and inhabitauntes of the City of Norwiche, have here tofore been
well maynteyned and relieved, is now at this present almost wholly decayed and
brought out of estimation, and very little worn, either within this realm,
or in any other forreyne realms, to the great hynderaunce, and decay of the
said city, and Citezens of the same City. For remedy whereof Thomas Marsham,
Maiour of the city of Norwiche John Corbet Esquier, Austen Steward, Robert
Leche, Robert Rugge, John Ball, and Alexander Mather, aldermen of the said
city, Thomas Whale, Thomas Pecke, Raphe Marsham, Robert Henry, John Sutton,
Richard Tomson, Cytezins and merchants of the said City, at their great
coasts and charges, as well in bringynge of certain strangers from the parts
be yonde the seas into the said city, as also in making of Lombes, and all
other pronision for the same, and also have called unto them eyghte persons of
the most discrete and worthy men of the misterye of Worstede weuinge, within
the said city, that is to say, John Cook, James Lyn. John Cross, Simon
Petit, John Marshall, Roger Lecke Edmunde Barker, and Edmunde Selers, being
the number of.xxi. persons, which have not only made Russels Sattens, and
Sattens Reuerses, and fustian of Naples within the said city of Norwiche of
Norfolk wolles, but also have learned and taught other citizens and
inhabitauntes of the said city to make the same, in such good and perfect
manner, that much better Russels Sattens, Sattens reuerses, and fustian of
Naples, and such like, and for easyer pryces, be now at this present wrought
and made within the said city, then heretofore has been, or now be made in
any of the parties beyond the seas, whereby the said city and inhabitauntes
thereof may and be in like again to be relieved and bronghte to the old
estate, to the great advancement of the commodytyes of this realm, and
enrichynge the same, if some good and polytyke laws and ordynaunces were made
for the good continuance of the true making of the said Russeles Sattens,
Sattens Reuerces, and Fustyan of Naples, and such like.

In consideration whereof be it enacted by the assent of the king and queens
hyghnes the Lords spyrytuall and temporal, and the commons of this present
Parlyament assembled, and by thauctoritie of the same, that the said russels
sattens, and sattens reuerses, and fustian of Naples hereafter to be made only
within the said city, may from henceforth bear the name, and be called by
the name of Norwiche sattens, and Norwiche fustians, and that the mayor and the
before mentioned citezens of the same city, which before this time has been at
the costs and charges of the bringing of the said strangers into the same
city, for the making of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses and
fustians of Naples, and such the before mentioned eight persons, that they have
called unto them shall be a fellowship of them selfs and shall yearly the third
day of Februarye choose of their fellows, four wardens within the guilde hall
of the said city, or any other common and convenient place in the same
City, and the same wardens so being choosen, shall stand and be wardens of
the same fellowship during one whole year, next ensuing the said election and
that the same wardeynes after the said election shall come before the mayor of
the said city for the time being, yearly the mondaye next after the said
third day of Februarye, and before the said mayor shall be sworn diligently
to view search, and see all the russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian
of Naples, then made or that shall be made within the said city, during the
said year. And such of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and
fustian of Naples, as shall apeare and be demed by them to be lawfully truly
and workmanly wrought shall seal with a seal of lead, bearyng the arms of
the city of Norwiche, whereby it may be known to the merchant or buyer of
them that the same be allowed and truly made.

And that also it may be enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
wardens and fellowship shall be a body corporate, and to be named and be
enabled by this act to sue, and be sued and to give, and to take by the name
of wardeynes and felowshyppe of the mysterye of russel sattens, sattens
reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche making within the said city of Norwiche.
And if any defaulte at any time shall be found in any of the said russels
sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche, or in any of them by the
said wardeynes, that the same default shall be reformed and the offendour or
offendoures therein to be punished according to such rules and ordinances, as
hereafter from time to time shall be made within the said city by the mayor of
the said city for the time being, and by the said four wardeynes, and the
felowshyppe of the said occupation or misterye, or the greatest number of the
said felowshyppe for, and concerning the same, and that the same defaultes
from time to time, as occasyon shall serve shall be inquired of, and tried before
the mayor of the said city of Norwiche for the time being, by the oaths of
twelve honest men of the foresaid felowshyppe. And that the said four
wardeynes so chosen and sworn, shall have full power and auctoritye, to do
execute, present, and reform all and singular thing and things, of, for,
and concerning the said mystery, making workyng and occupiynge of the said
russels sattens, sattens reuerses and fustian of Norwich with in the said
city in such manner and form as in or by the said ordynances shall be
expressed and declared, and that at all times hereafter and from time to time
it shall be lawful to the Mayor of the said city for the time being, and to the
before named fellowship and wardeyns of the same mystery, and the more part of
them, and to their successors, to make and ordeyne from time to time rules,
laws and ordinances mete and necessary for the good order and governance of
the said mystery, and for the true and well making of the said russels sattens,
sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche, and the same ordinances so made to
be at all times obeyed by all thinhabitaunce of the said city, or suburbs of
the same, and to be put in due execution by the said mayor and wardens, and
their successors for the time being, in such manner and form as by the said
ordinance shall be ordained and declared. And that such as now be and ye
hereafter shall be makers of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and
fustian of Norwich, and every of the^ within the said city shall not from
henceforth occupy ye said mystery and making of the said russels sattens,
sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche, nor any of them within the said
city by them selves, or by any other, before he or they so occupiyng the
said mystery within the said city be made free of the said city, and
admitted to be of the said fellow ship by the mayor of the said city, and
wardeyns and felowshyppe of the said mystery for the time being. And that no
person do occupy by him self or any other for him out of the said city, the
said misterye of making of russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustians of
Naples, or of any of them, before he or they so occupiyng the same, have been
prentice to the said misterye by the term of seven years, or else admitted
by the said mayor and fellowship or the more part of them, upon pain of
forfeyture of the same russels satte^s, sattens reuerses, and fustian of
Norwich by the^ or any of them to be made contrary to the form of this act.

Provided always and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that the said
mayor and wardens for the time being, shall not take any sum of money, or
reward to their own proper uses, for the admytting of any person or persons,
to occupy the said mysterye upon pain of forfeyture of treble the value of the
reward or sum of money so by them or any of them to be taken.

Provided also, that it shall be lawful to the said wardenes, and to every of
them for the time being, by always and means and at al lawful times,
dinge^tly from time to time, to make search by dew and ordynary ways, for all
manner of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche,
that shall happen to be found by them defective, for lack of good and true
workmanshyp. And that it shall be lawful to the said wardeynes and every of the^
for the time being, by virtue of this act, to sease and take the said russels
sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian, and bring and present the same clothes
so seized and taken, to the Mayor of the said city for the time being, and
unto his successors, to the intent that twelve honest, lawful, and expert men of
the said mystery, and fellowship being sworn before the said Mayor, may by
virtue of their oaths, make inquiry, and present the manner of the said
defaultes before the said Mayor, for the time being according to such good and
holsom or dinances and rules, as shall be ordained and made for the conservation
and good continuance of the said occupation and mystery, and the true making
and working of the said russels sattens sattens reuerses, and fustians of
Norwich. And that al and every person and persons, that shall occupy, use, and
exercise the said misterye, or making of the said russels sattens, sattens
reuerses, and fustians of Norwiche, or any of them, contrary to the form,
tenor plain meaning, and intent of this act, and of the rules and ordiaunces,
that at any time hereafter by authority of this act shall be ordained and made
for the continuance of the true and perfect making of the said russels satte^s
sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwich, shall forfeyt and lose for every time
so offending, or making any russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of
Norwiche, contrary to the meaning, tenor and effect of the said act, rules,
and ordinances, concerning the same, such fines, emerciamentes, and pains as
shall be adjudged, assessed, and affered by twelve expert men of the said
fellowship upon their oaths, the same twelve persons to besworne before the said
Mayor and wardens to enquire and make true verdict, and presentment of such
defaultes, the one half of al which forfeyture to be to the Mayor of the said
city for the time being, and his successors, and the other moitie to the said
wardens for the time being, and their successors, by action of det, vil, plaint
or information, in any court of record, in which action, vil, plaint or
information no wager of law protection, invention, or foreign Ple, shall be
allowed. And in case it shall fortune hereafter, that any of the said russels
sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwich shall lack of such lengthes
and bredes, or of the true and ensuing making or sorting of the yarne as shall be
appointed, and set forth by the said rules and ordinances, and the same so to
be found defective by verdicte of twelve men of the said fellowship before the
said Mayor and wardeins, and their successors: That then the said russels
sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustians of Naples, and every of them so found
defective, to be cut in two pieces, and to pay such fine or fines as shall be
offered and affered by the said twelve expert men by virtue of their oaths, the
one moytye of which fine or fines to be to the Mayor of the said city for the
time being, and to his successors and the other moytie to the wardeynes of the
said fellowship for the time being, and to their successors.

Provided always and be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if
any wardeyne or wardeines for the time being of the said mystery or occupation
of making russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of Naples, shall at
any time hereafter seal, or cause to be sealed any russels sattens, sattens
reuerses, or fustians of Naples, that shall not be well sufficient and truly
wrought, and made according to the true intent and meaning of this present act,
shall forfeyt and loose for every piece so sealed, being not well sufficient and
truly wrought and made, the whole value of every such piece so sealed, the one
half of which forfeytures to be to the king and Queens majesty's, her
heirs and successors, and the other moytye thereof to be to such person and
persons as shall sue for the same by byll, action, or information, in any of
the kings courts of record, in which byll, action, or information no
essoygne protection, or wager of law shall be allowed.

An act to confyrme the liberties of the lord Marchers in Wales.
The.xv. Chapter.
HVmbly besechen your excellent majesty's, your true and faithful Subjects,
the lord Marchers both spyrytuall and temporal, within your hyghnes dominion
of Wales, that where as in the parliament holden at Westminster. the xxvii. year of
the raygne of king Henry theyght, father unto you our natural Soueraygne
lady, amongst other things one act was made and established for laws and
instice to be ministered in the said dominion of Wales, inlyke form as it is
in this realm of England, in the which act one article is, that for that the
lords Marchers before the parliament had used to put their tenauntes within
the lordships Marchers, under common maynpryce and suerty of apparaunce, and
have had the forfeytures thereof, which for ever from and after the feast of al
saints then next ensuyng the said parliament should utterly sease, and be
determined. It was enacted that after the said feast of all saynctes, every lay
and temporal person then being a lord Marcher, should have the moitye or
half of every forfeyture of all and every common mainpryce, recognisance for
the peace or apparaunce, forfeyted by any of their tenauntes inhabitinge
within any of their lordships marchers, and they to be paid the same moytie or
half by the hands of the shyriffe of every of the countyes where such
forfeyture shall be, if the shyryff can leuye the same, and the same shyriffe to
account to our said late soueraygne lord the king for the other half or
moytie, in such excheker as they can be acco^tant. And further it was enacted
by the authority aforesaid, that all and every lay, and temporal person or
persons, then being lords marchers and having any lordshyps marchers, or
lordships royal should from and after the said feast of al sayuctes, have all
such myses and profytes of their tenantes, as they have had or used to have at
the first entrye into their lands in times past. And also should have hold
and keep, with in the precinct of their lordeshippes, courts Baron, courts
let, and lawdayes, and all and every thing to the said courts belonging, and
also should have within the precinct of their said lordships, or lawdaye wayf,
strayf, infangthefe, outfangthefe, treasure trouie, deodandes, goods and
cattels of fellons, and of persons condemned or outlawed of felony or
murder, put in exigente for fellonye or murder, and also wrecke de mer,
wharfage, and customs of strangers, as they have had in time paste, as
though such privileges granted unto them by point of charter, any thing in
that act to the contrary notwithstanding, as in the said act of parliament
more at large it may appear.

And forasmuch as bishops, and other ecclesiastical persons being lords
marchers, having the like liberties, casualties, profittes, and commodities,
within their iordshyps marchers, and lordships royal, with in the said
dominion, or principality of Wales, were not provided for by the express
letter of the said statute, in like sort as the lay and temporal lords
marchers were, but rather of purpose as it should seem forgotten and left out
of the said act, against all reason and good equity: And forasmuch also, as
the heirs and successoures of the lay and temporal lords marchers, then
being were not provided for, by the limitation and express words of the said
act, as well as their auncesters and predecessors were, as reason would they
should have been.

It may please your majesty's of your most gracious favor and benignity at
the humble suit and supplication of your said faithful subjects the lords
marchers that now are, in the said dominion of Wales, both spiritual and
temporal, to grant that it may by thasse^t of the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, be ordained,
established, and enacted, by thauctoritie of this present parliament, that
as well your said spiritual and ecclesiastical subjects, lords marchers, now
having lordshippes marthers, or lordships royal in Wales aforesaid, and their
successors, and the successoures of every of them, as also the heirs and
successoures of the lords temporal marchers, that then were or now be, and
the heirs or successors of every of them being, or which hereafter shall
belordes marchers within their lordships marchers, and lorshyppes royal in the
dominion or principality of Wales, shall have and enjoy to them and to their
heirs and successors, respectively and seuerallye for ever the moytie and half
of every forfeyture, of al and every common mainprice recognisa^ce for the
peace or apparaunce forfeyted by any their tenantes inhabiting wtin any of
their lordships marchers, or lordships royal, and they to be paid the same
moytie or half by the hands of the shyriffe of the county, for the time
being, after such form and sort as the said lay or temporal lords marchers
have been or ought to have been paid the same, by force of the said Statute.

And further, shall have all such mises, and profits of their tenauntes, as
the lords marchers, spiritual or temporal, respectively, or seuerallye had
or used to have at their first entry into their lands in times past before the
making of the said act or statute. And also shall have, hold and keep within
the precinct of their said lordships, al such courts baron courts let, and
lawdayes, and al and every thing and things, to the same courts belonging,
and also shall have within the precinct of their said several lordshippes, or
lawdayes, all such waif, straif, in fang thief, outfang thief, treasure
trouis, deodamdes, goods, and cattels of fellons, and of persons condem^ned or
outlawed of fellonye or murder, put in exigent for felony or murder, and
also al such wreck demer, wharfage, and customs of strangers, as the lords
Marchers, spyrytuall and temporal, respectively, and seuerallye had and used
in times past, before the making of the said statute.

An act for the continuance of certain statutes. Cap.xvi.
Where in the parliament begone and holden at London the, iii. day of November.
in the.xxi. year of the reign of our most dread souerain lord of most famous
memory, king Henry theight, and from thence adiourned to Westminster. and there
holden and continued by diverse prorogations, unto the dissolution thereof, one
act was made and established for the restraint of carriage, and conueying of
horses, and mares out of this realm, and also one other act was there made for
the true windinge of wolles, and one other act was there made, to restrain
killing of wain linges, bullocks, stieres, and heifers, being under thage
of.ii. years which said several acts were then made to endure and continue to
the next parliament, as by the said several acts more plainly appears. And
where also in the said parliament, one other act was made and established for
attaintes to be sued for the punishment of perjury, upon untrue verdites, which
acts last before rehearsed, were then made and ordained, to continue and endure
to the last day of the next parliament as by the same act more plainly at
large is showed and may apeare. And where also in the parliament begone and
holden at West. theyght day of June, in the xxviii. year of the raygne of our
said most drad soueraigue lord king Henry the.viii. and there continued and
kept unto the dissolution thereof it was ordained and enacted, that al and
singular the said acts above remembered, and every of them, should continue and
endure in their force and strength, and also be observed and kept until the
last day of the next parliament, as by the same act among other things
therein contained more plainly appears. And where also in the parliament
begone and holden at West. the.xxviii. day of april in the.xxxi. year of the
reign of our said late most dread sovereign lord king Henry the eight, and
there continued until the.xxviii. day of June then next following it was
ordained and enacted by thaucthoritie of the same parliament ye al and singular
the said several acts above remembered and every of the^ and al clauses,
articles, and provisions in them, and every of them contained, should coutinue
and endure in their force and strength, and also be observed and kept until the
last day of the next parliament, as by the same act a mongs other things
therein contained, more plainly appears. And where in the parliament holde^ at
Westminster. in the xxxv. year of the reign of our said late soueraigue lord king
Henry theight, on act was made for the preservation of woods, to endure for
vil. years then next following, and from thence to thend of the next parliamet,
as by the same act more plainly does and may appear. And where also at the
parliament holden at West. in the.xxxvii. year of the reign of ye said king
Henry theight, and there continued and kept until ye dissolutio^ thereof it was
ordained and enacted ye al and singular the said acts abou mentioned and every
of the^ except the said act made for the preservation of wodes, as is
aforsaid, should continue and endure in their force and strenght, and also to be
observed and kept, until the last day ye of next parliament then following, as
by the same act amongs other things therein contained more plainly appears.
And where also at the sessio^ of the parliament, ended at Westminster. in the xiiii.
day of March, in ye third year of the reign of our sovereign Lord king Edward
the syxte, one act was made for the true curriyng of leather, which act was
made to endure to thend of the next parliament, as by the same act more
plainly appears. And where also at the sessyon of a Parlyament ended at West.
the first day of February, in the fourth year of the reign of our said late
sovereign Lord kind Edward the.vi. one act was then and there made, concerning
the buying of rother beasts. And also one other act was then and there made
touching the duiing and selling of butter and chese, which said several acts,
were then and there made, to endure and continue, to the end of the next
parliament as by the same several acts more at large it does and may appear.
And where also at the session of a parliament by prorogation holde^ at West.
the xxiii. day of January in the v. year of the reign of our said soneraygne
lord, one other act was the^ and there made, against regratours and forstallers
to endure to thend of the next parliament which al and singular the said acts
above mentioned together, with ye said act concerning theyreseruation of wodes,
at a parliament holde^ at Westminster. the first day of March, in the vii. year of
the raygne of our said sovereign Lord King Edward the.vi. and there continued
and dyssolued the last day of the same month of March, and al clauses articles
and provisions in the^, and every of them contained were there revived and
continued, to stand in their force and strength, until the last dai of the next
parliament. And where also at the session of a parliament holden by prorogatio^
at West. ye xxiiii. day of October, in the.i. year of the raygne of our most
gracious soueraygne lady ye queen, and there continued and kept until ye
dissolution thereof, one act was there made and established against unlawful and
revellyous assembles, to endure to thend of ye next parliament as by ye same
act mor plainli does and may appear. And where also at ye same fessio^ of
parliament, last before mentioned, al and singular ye acts above mentioned and
before ye time continued at at sundri parliame^ts, as is aforesiad, and
clauses, articles, and provisions in them and every of them contained, were
their revived, and continued to stand in their force and strength, unto the
last day of the next parliament Forasmuch as al and synguler the said several
acts above mentioned be good and beneficial for ye common wealth of this
realm Be it therefore enacted ordained and established by ye king and queen our
sovereign lord and lady with thassent of ye lords spiritual and temporal and
the commons in this present parliament assembled and by thaucthoritie of the
same yt al and singular the several acts and estatutes above mentioned and
rehearsed, and every of them and al clauses articles, and provisions in the^
and every of them contained, shall be revived, continued, stand and endure in
their force and strength, to al intentes, construtcions, and purposes and shall
be observed and kept in all things, until the last day of the next parliament.

An act touching leases hereafter to be made by certain spiritual persons.
Cap.xvii.
WHere in the parliament begone and holde^ at West. the eight day of June, in
ye.xxviii. year of yt reign of our lat king of famous memory Henry theight,
and there continued and kept until ye dissolution of the same parliament, ye
xviii. dai of June next following, one act entitled, an act for restitutio^ of
ye first fruytes in the time of vacatyon, to the next incu^bente, was had and
made wherein are certain clauses for leases the^ made, and to be made
bispiritual and ecclesiastical persons, to endure, and be in force for term
of, vi. years if ye incumbentes did resign there said spiritual promotions or
if ye same should otherwise become void by thonli act of the same thincumbe^tes,
is by ye same act mor at large may appear. To thinte^t ye persons and vicares
and others having cure of souls may ye better attend, and be the more
vigylaunt in their misterye and function.

Be it enacted by the king our sovereign lord, and ye queen our soue reign
lady with thassentes of ye lords spiritual and temporal and ye commons in this
present parliament assembled and by authority of yt same yt as much of ye same
act, as does conserne the making good of ye said ieasesne any clause,
sentence, provision, or article therein contained shall extend, or be construed,
or adjudged to extend to any lease, that shall be made by any person, vicar or
any other haing any spiritual promotion, after the feast of the purificatio^ of
our Lady next coming.

Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cavvodi, Tipographi Regiae Maiestatis.
Anno M.D.L.V


