S. AUGUSTINES MANVEL. Containing special, and piked meditations, and godly
prayers: Drawn out of the Word of God, and writings of the holy Fathers, for
the exercise of the soul. Corrected, translated, and adorned, by THOMAS ROGERS.

1. These. 5.17. PRAY CONTINVALIE. Imprinted at London by Henry Denham,
dwelling in Pater noster row, at the sign of the Star.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

1581.

A Preface unto the Reader.
THis Manuel so liked me, and the well accepting of other books which I have
published to the same purpose, so pricked me forward, that I thought it
requisite to set forth the same in such order as I have done.

The rather I took this in hand before any other in the works of S.
Augustine, because this commonly has been annexed in our English tongue unto
those of S. Augustine, which already I have translated; and therefore that, as
hitherto they have been joined together, so henceforth they may be, if it so
like the owners, I thought good to do this before any other. Again, who so will
duly compare this with the other, especialie with S. Augustines prayers, shall
find this to be even an abstract in a manner of the rest, containing special and
piked meditations in few words, which in other books be more at large.
Finalie, had this book neither ben joined, nor yet had such affinity with the
other of S. Augustine already in English: yet, so singularly divine are the
prayers comprised in the same, that well I could not publish any other, before
this were finished.

1 This Book why called a Manuel.
I do call this book, as also the author does, a Manuel, because my wish is,
that Christians would use, and have it in their hands, not only when they are
at home in their chambers, and studies privately, but also when they are
abroad in the fields, gardens, and elsewhere idlelie: and that not to dandle,
and to handle only, but diligently, and zealouslie, as the part of Christians
is, to read the same for their spiritual exercise.

2 Author of this Book, who.
Touching the Author, who he was, I dare not directly set down. For in some
copies I find, that S. Augustine made the same, in others it is flatly
denied. Therefore, although it be entitled S. Augustines Manuel: yet is it in
none other sense applied unto him, than are diverse Psalms in the Psalter,
entitled David his Psalms, which happily David never saw, much less
endited. Notwithstanding, were S. Augustine the Author of the same, or were he
not, it skilleth not greatly. For the matter it contains, is very
spiritual, godly, and necessary: and wise men either do not respect the
Author, or not the Author so much as the matter; nor so much who writes, as
what is set down.

The Argument of this book is doubtless very good, 3 The Argument of this
Book.
either holy meditations, or prayers: the one whereof, which is meditation (as
Bernard notes D. Bern. in die S. Andreae sermon. 1.
,) teaches us what is wanting, the other, to wit, prayer, obteineth that which
we want; Prayer brings unto the end of our journey, meditation shows the
way; to conclude, by meditation we confess the dangers hanging over our
heads, and by prayer we escape them, through the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, Of these this whole book does consist.

The occasion of making this treatise was this. 4 The occasion why this Book
was made.
The Author considering the frailty of al men in general, and especialie his
own weakness in particular; and seeking some prop to stay himself from
falling, found none so sure a stay against the engines of Satan and his limbs,
as continual meditation, and prayer. And therefore out of the meditations and
prayers of the fathers (for so he says) he gathered this book, as a precious
jewel alwaie to be carried about him, both to keep him from security, and to
inflame the zeal of godliness within him when he waxed cold.

5 Method of this Book.
The method (for that is another circumstance to be noted in any book) is
very exquisite: for never did Goldsmith more cunningly dispose either
precious stones in a jewel, or linkes in a golden chain, than are both the
meditations in this Manuel, and the sentences in each meditation, and each
phraze wel-nigh in every sentence.

6 Use of this Book.
Last of al, how necessary this, and such like books are for this present
time, he will confess that calls into remembrance the great and general
corruption of al mankind; and waieth by what sleightes and subtelties both the
Devil seeks to devour, the flesh to entangle, and the world to draw us
headlong unto perdition: which to avoid, we have none other remedy, beside
earnest, godly, and continual prayer. This made both our Savior to command
us to Watch and pray Mark. 13, verse. 33.
; and S. Paul to bid us, Pray continualie 1. These. 5. verse. 17.
; and Cyril to break into these words Cyril, praefat. Catech.
, Be thou idle neither in the day time, nor in the night; and when sleep is
gone from thine eyes, even then let thy mind be occupied in prayer. Hitherto
agrees that of Hierome Hierome in Epist.
, When you go abroad, pray; when you return home, pray; before meat,
pray; and before you go to rest, pray. The reason Augustine does yield. For
prayer is, as a sacrifice unto God: so a scourge unto Satan August. in sermon.
. August. in sermon.
. Use therefore that which God delights in, but never do that which likes
Satan, that is, neglect not prayer.

One Chapter you shall find in this book, less than is in the Latin copy:
and yet more by two, than hitherto has been in English. The addition, I doubt
not, will like you, but the omission of a Chapter some perhaps will mislike,
which notwithstanding was done, neither of negligence unwittingly, nor
heddilie of presumption, but with good aduisement, that thy zeal might not be
cooled by the reading thereof. For it contains strange, that I say not
erroneous doctrine: as that Vnicuique Manuel cap. 25.
propria voluntas est causa suae damnationis vel saluationis; that, Bona
voluntas Deum ad nos deducit, and nos in eum dirigit; that, Per bonam
voluntatem Deum diligimus, Deum eligimus, ad Deum currimus, ad Deum peruenimus,
and eum possidemus, etc. which sentences being contrary unto the truth, and
savoring of a superstitious time, were better quite omitted, than translated to
the infecting of some, Manuel cap. 11.
or offense of any.

Again, another Chapter there is, though not clean left out, yet applied from
an il, unto a good purpose, as the eleventh Chapter, where that which was
spoken either of the sacrifice of the altar, is applied unto our Sacrament of
thanksgiving, or of the real and carnal presence of Christ, unto his spiritual
being at the Communion. And these are the things corrected in this book.

To conclude, whatsoever is done either in translating, correcting, quoting, or
publishing this book, is al done for thy edification, and to provoke thee unto
this godly exercise of prayer. For a better means thou have not to keep thy
self in the fear of God than it is. Therefore the more zealous, godly, and
learned books to this purpose are published, the more thou have to praise God,
and be thankeful.

The 15. of Iulie, Anno. 1581. Yours in Christ, THO. ROGERS.

The Authors Preface.
FOr so much as we are placed among manifold snares, our desire of heavenly
things soon waxes cold, and therefore we do stand continualie in need of
help, that so often as we slip aside, we may, being vvakened out of
security, run back unto our God, who is the true, and the sovereign
happiness.

Jn consideration vvherof, not of rash presumption, but through the great love
J bear unto my God, J have taken in hand this treatise for the advancement of
his glory, to the end J might alvvaies have about me a short abridgement of
such things as concern my God, collected out of the most piked sentences of
the holy fathers, that so often as J wax cold, J might be enflamed again
with an hot burning desire of him, through the fire which the reading thereof
should minister.

Now, O my GOD, whom J do seek, whom J do love, and whom both with heart, and
with mouth, and with al my strength, J both glorify and worship, assist me.

Truly, my mind consecrated to thy service, inflamed with thy love,
coveting, sighing, desiring only to set thee, has none other delight, but to
talk of thee, to hear of thee, to wright of thee, to confer of thee, to
meditate oftentimes of thy fame, and glorious estate, that thy svveete
remembrance may be some refreshing for my soul amidst the raging storms of
this vvretched world.

Unto thee therefore do J call most earnestly, unto thee do J cry alovvd from
the bottom of mine heart.

And when J call unto thee, J call unto thee in my self: for unless thou were
within me, J should not be at al; and were J not in thee, thou should not be
within me.

Thou art in me, because thou remainest in my memory, through it J have
known thee, and therein J find thee, when J do remember thee, and take
delight both in thee, and of thee, of whom, through whom, and in whom are
al things.

A godly Book, containing special, and piked meditations, and prayers.
Chap. 1. Of the wonderful essence, or being which God has.
O Lord, thou fillest heaven and earth Iere. 23, verse. 24.
: bearing up all things Heb. 1, 3.
, and yet not burdened; filling al things Eccle. 23, verse. 18.19.
, and yet not included; always working Ioh. 5, 17.
, and yet ever quiet; gathering, and yet lacking naught Psalm. 50, 8.9, etc.
; seking Luke 15, 4.5, etc.
, and yet wanting naught;

Thou love entirely Wis. 11, 23. John. 3, 16. John. 13, 1.
, yet thou burnest not; thou art gelous, Exo. 20, 5.
and yet secure:

Thou repentest Ier. 26, 3.
, and art not grieved; thou art angry Psalm. 79, 5.
, but never impatient;

Thou changest thy works Wis. 7, 27.
, but not thy counsel Mal. 3, 6.
: Thou receauest what thou find, and yet never did lose the same:

Thou art never needy Psalm. 50, 8.9.10, etc.
, and yet glad when thou gainest; at no time covetous, and yet exactest usury:

Thou art bountiful, to whom thou owe naught; and many are bountiful, to
bind thee unto them: Yet who has aught which is not thine 1. Cor. 7, verse.
4. Iam. 1, 17.
?

Thou paiest debts 1. Pet. 2, verse. 24. Isai. 53, 5.6, etc.
, owing naught; thou forgiuest debts Matthew. 18, verse. 23.27, etc. 35.
and yet forgoest naught:

Thou art euerie-where Job. 23, 8.9.
and euerie-where al whole:

Thou may be understood, but not seen Ioh. 1, 18. 1. Tim. 6, 16.
; and art no where absent Eccles. 23, verse. 18.19.
, yet far thou art from the cogitations of the wicked Prou. 15, verse. 29.
:

Yet art thou not absent there, where thou art far off; For where thou art not
to show favor, thou art to execute vengeance:

Thou art euerie-where present Eccl. 23, verse. 18.19.
; and yet may hardly be found:

Thou stand still when we follow thee; yet can we not lay hold upon thee:

Thou possessest al things Psa. 50, 8.9, etc.
; fillest al things Ier. 23, 24.
; enuironest al things Ier. 32, 18.19.
; ouerpassest al things Psa. 139, 7.8
; and bear up al things Heb. 1, 3.
.

Thou teach the hearts of the faithful Isa. 54, 13. John. 6, 44.45.
, without noise of words:

Thou art neither stroughted out by places Eccl. 16, 18 19.
; nor changed by time Psa. 102, 24.25, etc.
; nor have access and recesse:

Thou dwell in the light that none can attain unto 1. Tim. 6, verse. 16.
, whom never man saw, neither can see:

Abiding quiet in thy self, thou go euerie-where about the whole world:

For thou can not be cut, and divided, because thou truly art one Deuteronomy. 6,
4. 2. Kings. 19, verse. 15.19.
; nor yet be brought into parts: but being whole, thou possessest, fillest,
lightenest, and enioiest the whole.

Chap. 2. Of God his unspeakable knowledge.
WEre ye whole world replenished with Books: yet could not thine unspeakable
knowledge be uttered forth. For, because thou art in deed unutterable, thou
can by no means be either written, or concluded.

Thou art the fountain of heavenly light; and the Sun of eternal brightness.

Thou art great without quantity, and therefore unmeasurable Job. 23, 8.9.
Psalm. 139, 7.8.
; and good without quality, and therefore in deed and soueraignelie good Iam.
1, 17.
: yea, to say the truth, there is none good, but thou alone Mar. 10, verse.
18. Luke 18, 18.
: whose will is a work, and whose will is ability:

Who, even because it was thy pleasure, did make al things, which thou have
created of nothing Genesis 1, 1.2. Heb. 1, 1.2.
:

Who possessest all the creatures Psalm. 50, 8.9.10, etc.
without any lack; and gouernest them John. 5, 17.
, without pain; and rulest them Matthew. 11, verse. 25. Luke 10, 21.
without wearines; for there is nothing, either of things on high, or of things
below, that can disturb the order of thy government:

Who art in all places without any place; and containest al things without
enclosure; and art present euerie-where Ier. 32, 19.
without seat or motion:

Who neither art the author of sin Eccles. 15, verse. 20.
, which thing only thou can not do Psalm. 11, 5.6.7.
, who can do al things Exodus 6, 3. Genesis 35, 11.
; neithe^ have thou bin sorry for aught thou have done:

Of whose goodness we were created Genesis 1, 26.27. Psalm. 100, 3. Psalm. 119, 73.
; of whose justice we are punished Dan. 9, 4.5.6, etc.
; of whose mercy we are saved Gal. 3, 13. 1. Tim. 2, 6. Psalm. 103, 1.2.3.4,
etc.
;

Whose almightines does govern, rule, and fill al things Ier. 23, 24.
, which it has created:

Neither in saying, thou fillest al things, mean we that they contain thee;
but how they rather be contained of thee, neither by parts fillest thou al
things, nor yet may it be thought, that every thing according to the greatness
of the quantity it has, receaueth thee, that is, the greatest thing more, and
the smallest thing less; thou rather being in all things, or more truly al
things in thee Act. 17, 28.
:

Whose omnipotency encloseth al things; Psa. 139, 7.8, etc.
whose power none may escape.

For whosoever has not thy favor, can by no means avoid thy displeasure Reu.
6, 15.16.17.
.

Chap. 3. The desire of that soul which has a feeling of God.
FOR thee then I do call into my soul, o most gracious God, which thou
preparest to receive thee through the desire which thou enspirest into the same.

Oh, enter thereinto, I beseech thee, join it to thy self, that both thou
may possess that which thou have not only made Genesis 1, 26.27. Colos. 3, 10.
, but also renewed Romans 5, 15 16, etc.
; and I may enioie the^ as a seal upon mine heart.

Merciful God, I beseec^ thee, forsake him not which calls upon thee now: for
before ever I could call upon thee, thou did not call m^ only Romans 8, 30
, but also seek me Luke 15, 4.5, etc.
, t^ the end that I thy seruan^ might seek thee, and through seeking find
thee, and being found, love thee.

I have sought, and I hau^ found thee, o Lord, graun^ that I may love thee.

Increase my desire, and gra^^^ my request: for though tho^ give me al things
which thou have made, yet unless thou give thy self withal, I thy servant shall
never be satisfied.

Wherefore bestow thy self upon me, o my God, bestow thy self upon me.

Lo, I do love thee; and if too little I love thee, my desire is to love yet
more entirely.

I love thee I say, I long for thee, I am much delighted to think upon thee.

Behold, while fro mine heart I do sigh, and call into my remembrance thine
unspeakable kindness, ye burden of my flesh ye less greeueth; troublesome
cogitations the less invade; ye weight of mortality, and miseries do not so
load me as they were wont; al things are hush, every thing is quiet. Mine
heart burns; my mind is iocund; my memory fresh; mine understanding clear;
and al my spirit, enflamed through the desire of thy sight, perceaueth how it
is ravished with the love of things unseen.

Let the same my spirit take the wings as the Eagles Isai. 40, 31.
, let it flee, and not be weary; let it flee, and never faint, until it come
unto the place where thine honor dwells Psalm. 26, 8.
, even unto the throne of grace* there at the table, where ye supernal Citizens
do repast, to be fed from thine eyes in green^ pasture Psalm. 23, 2.
, by the still waters.

Be thou our joy Reu. 7, 15.16.17.
, our hope 1. Tim. 1, 1.
our salvation Hos. 13, 9.
, and redemption Isa. 41, 14. Isa. 44, 24.
*

Thou which hereafter will be our reward, be thou ou^ comfort.

Let my soul evermore sek^ thee; and grant that neue^ it may cease to seek,
Amen*

Chap. 4. The miserable state of that soul which neither loves our Lord and
Savior Christ, nor seeks after him.
WOE to the wretched soul, which neither seeks, nor loves Christ: such a
soul abides both dry, and miserable.

He loses his life time, that loves not thee, o God. And he that would live,
but not to serve thee, is doubtless nothing, and so to be accounted.

He which refuses to live to thee, is alredie dead: and he that sauoreth not
of heavenly wisdom, is a very fool 1. Cor. 1, 17.18.19, etc.
.

O most gracious God into thine hand I do commend, render, and yield my self,
through whom I both am Genesis 1, 26.27. Psalm. 119, 73.
, live Act. 17, 28
, and have understanding Iam. 1, 17.
.

In thee I do repose mine whole trust, confidence, and hope, through whom I
shall rise again Ioh. 11, 25.
, live John. 14, 6
, and rest.

Thee do I long for, thee do I love, thee do I worship, with whom I shall
everlastingly abide, reign, and be blessed Reu. 21, 4. Reu. 22, 5.
.

The soul which neither seeks, nor loves thee, is a friend of the world
Mat. 6, 24. Luke 16, 13.
, the slave of sin, subject to al manner wickedness; never quiet, at no time
secure.

Therefore, merciful Savior, as for my mind let it attend on thee; my
pilgrimage let it be toward thee; and mine heart let it even burn with the love
of thee.

Let my soul rest on thee, my God; let it, I say, deeply meditate of thee;
let it sing-out thy praises with joy; and let this be al my comfort in this
mine exile.

Let the shadow of thy wings be a refuge for my soul from the parching heat
of worldly cogitations. Let mine heart, a very great sea, swelling with waves
trust in thee.

Thou which aboundest with all good dainties, and art a most liberal bestower of
supernal satietie, o God, give thou food to the wearied; gather the dispersed;
deliver the captiued; amend the parted.

Lo, he stands at the door, and knocks: I therefore even by the bowels of
thy mercy, whereby thou, the day spring from on high has visited us Luke 1,
78.
, beseech thee command the door to be opened to him which knocks, that
boldly he may enter-in to thee, and rest in thee, and be refreshed of thee,
the heavenly bread. For thou art the bread Ioh. 6, 35.48.50, etc.
, and the well of life John. 4, 13 14.
; thou art the light of everlasting cleerenes Reu. 21, 23
; to conclude thou art al things, whereof the righteous do live, which love
thee.

Chap. 5. A very Christian desire of the soul after God.
O God, thou who art both the light of the hearts John. 1, 9.
that see thee; and the life of the souls John. 4, 13 14.
that love thee; and the strength of the minds that seek thee, give me grace
evermore to cleave unto thine holy love.

O come, I pray thee, into mine heart, and make me drunk with the river of thy
pleasures Psalm. 36, 8.
.

It shameth, and it irketh me at the very heart even to suffer those things
which are done in this wretched world.

The very sight of worldly vanities is a grief unto me; and to hear of
these transitory things it does troble me much.

Help me, o Lord my God, and cause mine heart to rejoice in thee; come thou
unto me, that I may behold thee.

I am penned in this house of my soul, until thou come therinto, and make it
wider. It is ruinous, o repair the same!

Many things, I acknowledge and know are in it, which may offend thine eyes;
but alas who can make it clean; or unto whom else beside thee should I cry
for help?

Cleanse me, o Lord, fro my secret faults Psalm. 19, 12 13.
; keep thy servant also from presumptuous sins.

Give me grace, o sweet Christ, o good Jesus, give me grace, I beseech thee, for
thy love and desire sake to laie-off the heavy burden of carnal desires, and
earthly lust ^. Ioh. 2, 15
.

Let the soul over the flesh; let reason over the soul; let thy grace over
reason bear swaie; and make me both in body and soul evermore to obey thy
will Matt. 6, 10
.

Grant that both mine heart, and my tongue, and al my strength may extol thy
goodness.

Enlarge mine understanding, and lift up the eyes of mine heart, that my spirit
with swift cogitation may attain unto thee the everlasting wisdom Heb. 1,
1.2, etc.
, abiding above al things.

Loase me, I beseech thee, from the fetters wherewithal I am fast bound, that
leaving al these worldly things, I may hasten unto thee, cleave to thee alone,
and think only upon thee.

Chap. 6. The happiness of that soul which is delivered out of the earthly
prison of the body.
O Happy is the soul, which loased from ye earthly prison Phil. 1, 23.
, soareth without let unto heaven; which face to face beholds thee 1. Cor.
13, verse. 12. Reave. 22, 4.
, the most gracious Lord; which is touched with no fear of death at al Reu. 7,
15.16.
, but triumphs with an incorruptible crown of perpetual glory!

O quiet and secure is such a soul; and fears now neither enemy, nor death
Reu. 21, 4.
!

She enioieth thee her good Lord, whom long she sought, and alwaie loved;

Now joined to the singing quires, she soundeth-out without cessing unto the
praise of thy glory, o Christ, her King, o sweet Jesus, most melodious Psalms
she sings of aie lasting joyfulness.

For she is satisfied with thy fatnes Psalm. 36, 8.
; thou do give her drink out of the river of thy pleasures.

Happy is the fellowship of supernal Citizens, and glorious is the solemnity
of such as return unto thee from the paineful toil of this pilgrimage Heb.
11, 13. Heb. 13, 14.
, unto the wonderful beauty, unto the surpassing glory, unto the excellency
of al comelines, where continualie thy Citizens, o Lord, behold thy face Reu.
22, 4.
. There nothing is heard to troble the mind Reu. 21, 4.
.

What mirth Reu. 5, 8.
! what melody! what singing! what Psalms be there soong without ceassing!

There the pleasant organes do sounde-out most heavenly hymns; the blessed
Angels most sweetly do sing; and songs of rare excellency are uttered out by
the supernal Citizens, unto the praise and glory of thy Name.

There is neither gal, nor any bitterness in that blessed region Reu. 21, 4.
. For there is no wicked person Reu. 21, verse. 27.
, nor any wickedness at al.

There is neither enemy to impugn, nor any enticement to offend.

There is no lack 1. Cor. 2, verse. 9.
, no shame, no contention, no vpbraiding, no blaming, no fear, no unquietness,
no punishment; doubtfulnes, violence, discord there is none.

But singular peace, and perfect love, and lasting triumphs, and praising of
God, and secure quietness, which never shall have end, and continual joy in the
holy spirit there is.

Oh, how happy should I be, did I hear those most comfortable songs of thy
Citizens, and the sugared verses uttering forth with due reverence the praises
of the sacred Trinity!

But most singularly blessed should I be, might I also with them sing to my
Lord Jesus Christ one of the pleasant songs of Zion Psa. 137, 3
.

Chap. 7. The blessed joy of the heavenly Paradise.
O Lively life! o everlasting life, and everlastingly blessed! whereas joy
is and no sorrow Reu. 7, 16, 17. Reave. 21, 4.
; rest is and no labor; honor is and no fear; wealth is and no loss; health
is and no sickness; abundance and no want; life and no death; immortality and
no corruption; happiness, and no misery at al is!

Whereas al good things are in perfect love; where sight is face unto face Reu.
22, 4.
; where perfect knowledge is in all men 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.13.
, and al things are known; whereas Gods sovereign goodness is perceived, and
the light enlightening, is glorified of the saints;

Where the present majesty of God is beholden, and the mind of the beholders
is filled continualie with this meat of life:

They see continualie, and yet they desire to see; they desire without grief,
and without loathing they be satisfied:

Where the true son of righteousness Reave. 21, verse. 23.24. Reave. 22, 5.
, with the wonderful show of his beautiful beams, does refresh al beholders,
and so inlighteneth all the Citizens of the celestial country, that they do
give light, to wit, a light enlightened through God, a light shining more
cleerelie, than does either the Sun at any time, or the Stars.

They do cleave unto the immortal Godhead, and thereby they become immortal,
and incorruptible, according to the promise of our Lord and Savior Ioh. 17, 24.
, Father, I will that they which thou have given me, be with me even where I am,
that they may behold my glory; that they al may be one, 21.
as thou, o Father, art in me, and I in thee, even that they also may be one in
us.

Chap. 8. The glorious condition of the kingdom of Heaven.
THE kingdom of heaven, is a most happy kingdom, a kingdom both immortal
Reu. 21, 4.
, and everlasting Dan. 7, 27.
.

There no times succeed by ages; neither night follows after day Reu. 21, 4.
;

There the valiant soldior after battles fought, is adorned abundantly with
unspeakable rewards 2. Tim. 4. verse. 7.8.
; and crowned honorably with an everlasting crown.

Oh that Christ of his divine goodness, having eased me of the heavy load of
my sins, oh that he would bid me, even the basest of al his servants, to lay
off the burden of this flesh Phil. 1, 23.
, that I might to my comfort Reu. 7, 16.17.
, pass over unto the everlasting ioies of his city; be admitted into the
fellowship of the Saints above Reu. 5, 1.2, etc.
; attend upon the majesty of the Creator, with the blessed Spirits; behold
the countenance of God 1. Cor, 13, verse. 12.
; be never touched any more with fear of death Reu. 21, 4.
; but rejoice securely for the immortality attained 1. Cor. 15, verse. 53.54.
; and joined to him which knows al things Eccles. 23, verse. 19.20.
, might forgo al blind ignorance 1. Cor. 13, verse. 13.
, and neither make account of earthly things; nor vouchsafe either to behold,
or to remember this vale of tears any more, whereas the laborsome life Job.
7, 1.
, the corruptible life Psa. 102, 11. Psa. 103, 14.15.
, the life replenished with all manner bitterness is Job. 14, 1.
, such a life as is the Lady of evils, the handmaid of Devils.

The which both humors puff up, and sorrows pluck down; heat withers, and
il aers infect; which both much eating makes pursie, and much fasting makes
lean;

Which by mirth is loosed, and by sadness consumed; by care is shortened, and by
security dulled; by riches made proud, and by poverty overthrown; by youth
exalted, and by age bowed;

Which is both by sickness broken, and by sadness depressed; which both ye Devil
entrappeth by his snares; and the world deceaueth by flattery; and the flesh
destroieth by filthy pleasure.

Whereby the soul is made blind, and the whole man distempered:

And after these so many, and so great evils, succeeds raging death, which
brings vain delights unto such an end, that when they are once gone, they
are as quite forgotten, as if they had never bin at al!

Chap. 9. How God after much troubles does comfort the pensive soul.
BUT what praises, or what thanks may we render Psa. 116, 12.
unto thy goodness, o GOD, who ceassest not for all this by thy gracious
visitation, to comfort us amids so great wretchedness of our mortality!

While I dread much to die; while I consider the multitude of my sins; while
I do fear thy heavy judgment; while I call into mind the hour of death; and
am a gast at the horrible pains of hell; while I wot not how preciselie, and
how strictly thou will weigh my deeds; and am utterly ignorant how I shall
end my life; and ponder many other things in mine heart, lo, of thy woonted
goodness, o Lord my God, thou art present to comfort me, wretch, replenished
with much sorrow, and from these pitious complaints and crieng, thou carriest
my pensive and troubled understanding over steep hills, unto the beds of sweet
spices, and make me to rest in green pasture Psa. 23, 2.
, by the rivers of sweet waters, where thou preparest a table diversely
furnished against my coming, to refresh my wearied spirits, and to comfort my
sorrowful heart, and so refreshed with those dainties, I forget at the length my
manifold miseries, and exalted over the earth, I do rest my self in thee which
art the true peace Phil. 4, 7.
.

Chap. 10. A prayer for grace to love God.
O Lord my God, I do love thee; and more and more I desire to love thee.

Give me grace, o Lord my God Psalm. 7, 1.3.
, who art fairer than the children of men Psa. 45, 2.
, give me grace not only to desire thee, but also to love thee both as I
would, and as I am bound.

Thou art unmeasurable Job. 23, 8.9. Psalm. 139, 7.8.
, and therefore to be loved without measure, especialie of us whom thou have so
loved Ioh. 3, 16.
, so saved 1. Pet. 2, verse. 22.
, for whose sakes thou have done such and so great things.

O Love, which burnest alwaie, and never go out, o sweet Christ, o good
Jesus, o my God who art love it self 1. Ioh. 4, 8.
, set me wholly on fire with thy fire, with the love of thee, with thy
sweetness, with hearty affection toward thee, with a desire of thee, with godly
charity, with godly joy, and reioicing; with godly kindness and sweetenes;
with godly delectation and concupiscence, the which is holy and good, and
chaste and pure, that being thoroughly replenished with the sweetenes of thy
love, and altogether purged from the gross vapors of earthly cogitations by
the fire of divine charity, I may love thee, most sweet, and most lovely
Lord, with all mine heart, with all my soul, with all my strength, and with all my
mind Deuteronomy. 6, 5. Matt. 22, 37. Luke. 10, 27.
, and that with much sorrow of heart, and plentiful tears of the eyes, with
much fear and trembling Phil. 2, 12.
, having thee in such wise both in mine heart, and in my mouth, that no strange
loves may find room within me.

Chap. 11. A prayer for grace both duly to thank God for our redemption; and
worthily to approach unto the holy Table.
O Christ my Savior, who art of all the fairest Psa. 45, 2.
, through the shedding of thy precious blood, wherewithal we be redeemed 1.
Pet. 1, 18.19.
, I humbly beseech thee, give me grace unfeignedly to repent, and heartily to
bewail my sins, especialie at such times when I offer prayers unto thee, when
I sing-foorth thy praises; when I call into mind the mystery of our redemption
1. Tim. 3, verse. 16.
, a manifest argument of thy mercy to man ward; when I am at the holy Table,
though unworthy to approach thereunto, desiring to participate of that
wonderful, and heavenly, and reverend Sacrament, which thou, o Lord my God,
the unspotted Priest Heb. 7, 26 27.
did institute, and command to be received Luke 22, 19
in remembrance of thy love, to wit of thy death 1. Cor. 11, verse. 26.
, and passion for our salvation, and for the strengthening of our daily
weakness.

Let my mind at such mysteries be confirmed with the sweetenes of thy
spiritual presence; let it behold thee with the eyes of faith, and rejoice in
thy sight.

O sweet Christ, o good Jesus, who art both the fire burning always, and the
love inflamed evermore; the everlasting and never wasting light Reu. 21, 23 24.
, and the bread of life Ioh. 6, 35.48.51.
, feeding us, and yet never diminished, and eaten-of daily, and yet
continualie abiding whole;

Shine thou upon me, and set me on fire, inlighten and sanctify me; purge thy
vessel from the dregs of malice, fill me of thy grace, and keep me full, that I
may eat the meat of thy flesh unto the salvation of my soul, that feeding
upon thee, I may live of thee, and through thee, I may attain unto thee, and
rest in thee, Amen.

Chap. 12. A zealous prayer for grace to meditate deeply upon the goodness of
God.
O Sweet love, and lovely sweetness, let my stomach digest thee; and with the
nectar of thy love be al my bowels filled; and let mine heart vtter-forth good
matter Psalm. 45, ^.
.

O my God, who art charity it self 1. Ioh. 4, 8.
, the delectable honey, the snowie milk, and the food of ye strong, make me
to growe-vp in thee, that thou with a sound palate may be tasted of me.

Thou art my life Ioh. 14, 6. John. 25, 11.
, whereby I do live Act. 17, 28.
; the hope whereunto I trust 1. Tim. 1, 1.
; and the glory, which I desire to attain Col. 3, 4.
.

Guide thou mine heart, rule thou my mind, direct mine understanding, erect my
love, cheer up my soul, and quench thou the thirst of my spirit, which
longs after thee, with thine heavenly rivers.

Let the tumultuous cogitations of the flesh, hold their peace I beseech thee;
let earthly, and worldly fantasies be still; let al dreams, and vain
revelations, let every tongue, every sign, and what else soever does
vanish-awaie, be silent.

Yea, let mine own soul also be dumme too; and ouer-passe it self, not by
thinking on it self, but upon thee, my God: because thou art in deed al mine
hope and confidence 1. Tim. 1, 1.
.

For in thee our most gracious, and kind, and merciful Lord, and God, Jesus
Christ, each of us has a portion both of blood and flesh Ephesians. 5, 30.
.

Therefore where a piece of my self does reign, there I believe I do reign;
where my blood has dominion, there I trust I have dominion; where my flesh is
glorified, there I know I am glorious.

And although I am yet a sinner, yet I doubt no whit of this participation of
grace; although my sins do hinder me, yet my substance does require it; and
although mine own offenses do exclude me, yet the communion of nature does
not repel me.

Chap. 13. A thanksgiving unto God for the incarnation of his dear Son to
save man.
FOr the Lord is not so unkind, that he can hate his own flesh Ephesians. 5, 29.
, his own members, his own bowels.

Surely I might utterly despair, in respect of mine outrageous offenses, and
infinite sins, which I both have committed, and daily do commit both in heart,
word, and deed, and by all means whereby the frailty of man may transgress,
had not thy word, o my God, bin made flesh John. 1, 14.
, and dwelled among us.

But now I dare not despair, because he having showen him self obedient to
thee unto the death, even the death of the cross Phil. 2, 8.
, has taken away Col. 2, 14.
the handwriting of our sins, and fastening it upon the cross, has
crucified both sin and death.

In him therefore who sits at thy right hand, and makes request also for us
Romans 8, 34
, I take heart again.

Through mine hope 1. Tim. 1, 1.
, in whom we are quickened Ephesians. 2, 5.6.
, and raised, and sit together in the heavenly places, I desire to come unto
thee.

To thee be praise Reu. 19, 1.
, to thee glory, to thee honor, to thee thanks, Amen.

Chap. 14. The more God is thought-vpon, the more lovely he seems.
O Most gracious Lord, who have so loved John. 3, 16
, and saved us 1. Pet. 1, 18.19.
; so quickened Ephesians. 2, 5.
, and glorified us Romans 8, verse. 30.
; o most gracious Lord, how sweet is thy remembrance! The more I think on
thee, the sweeter thou seem, and the more amiable in mine eyes!

Therefore thy good things do much delight me; and vncessantlie do I covet,
with a pure sight of the heart Matt. 5, 8.
, and with the sweet affection of godly love, as far-foorth as I am able in
the place of my pilgrimage, and so long as I carry these frail members about
me, to desire, and to thinke-vpon thy woonderful love, and beauty.

For I am wounded with the dart of thy love; I do burn exceedingly with
desire of thee; I covet long to be with thee Phil. 1, 23.
; to behold thee, is al my desire.

And therefore I will stand-vpon my guard, and with watchful eyes I will sing with
the spirit 1. Cor. 14. verse. 25.
, and I will sing with the understanding also, and with all my strength too.

I will praise thee my maker Job. 10, 8. Psalm. 100, 3.
, and renewer; I will perce the heavens with mine heart, and in desire I will be
with thee, so as my body only shall be in this miserable world, but in
thought, and in mind, and in desire Col. 3, 1.2.
I will be where thou art; and where thou my rich Matthew. 13, verse. 44.45.
, and incomparable, and much desired treasure art, there shall mine heart be also
Matt. 6, 21. Luke. 12, 34.
.

But lo, o most gracious and merciful God, mine heart is not able to consider
the glory of thine infinite goodness, and mercy. For thine honor, thy beauty,
thy strength, thy glory, magnificence, majesty, and love, exceed al sense
Phil. 4, 7.
of man's understanding; even as the courtesy of thine eternal love, whereby thou
give to such the adoption of sons Romans 8, 15 Galat. 4, 5.6.
, and ioinest them to thy self, whom thou have created Genesis 1, 26.27.
, is inestimable.

Chap. 15. How the trobles in this world are nothing answerable to the ioies in
heaven.
O My soul, were we every day to endure torments; and to suffer the pains
of hell a long space, if we would behold Christ in his glory, and be joined to
his saints; were it not meet that we suffered al kind of adversity Romans 8, 18
, to attain unto the participation of such felicity, and of so great glory!

Let the devils then lie in wait, and prepare their tentations; let fastings
break the body; let hard apparel bring-downe the flesh; let labors grieve;
watchings drie-vp; let this man cry out upon me; let him or them disquiet me;
let cold benum; the conscience murmur; heat parch me;

Let mine head ache, my breast burn, my stomach swel, my countenance become
pale, let every part of me be weakened.

Let my life waste in heaviness Psalm. 31, 10.
, and my years with mourning;

Let rottennes enter-into my bones Hab. 3, 16.
, and let me tremble in my self, so I may rest in the day of troble, and
ascend-vp unto the saints of God.

For how singular shall the glory of the righteous be 1. Cor. 2, 9
! how great the joy of all the sancts, when each of their faces shall shine as
the Sun Matthew. 13, verse. 43.
! when the Lord shall begin to sort his people into sundry degrees in the
kingdom of his Father; and according to each man's deserts and works Romans 2, 6.
Reu. 22, 12.
, as he has promised, render his rewards, even celestial for earthly Matthew.
25, verse. 34.35, etc.
, eternal for transitory, and great things for very trifles!

Doubtless there shall be store of happiness, when the Lord shall bring his sancts
to the contemplation of his fathers glory 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. Reu. 22, 4.
, and make them to sit together in heavenly places Ephesians. 2, 6.
, that God may be al in all 1. Cor. 15. verse. 28.
.

Chap. 16. Of the kingdom of heaven, and how it may be attained.
O Happy joyfulness, and ioiful happiness, to see the Sancts, to be with the
Sancts, to be a Sanct; to behold God 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
, and to enioie God from everlasting, to everlasting!

Heerevpon let us earnestly muse; these things let us hartelie desire, the
sooner to come unto their happy state.

Ask thou how this may be done; or by what merits or means? Listen o man.
This matter consists in the power of the worker, for the kingdom of God
suffers violence Matthew. 11, verse. 12.
.

The kingdom of Heaven o man, asks none other price, but thy self; it is
worth so much as thou art thy self. Give thy self, and thou shall have that.

What art thou troubled about the price? Christ has given himself 1. Pet. 1,
verse. 18.19.
, that he might purchase thee a kingdom to God even the Father 1. Cor. 15,
verse. 24.
.

So give thou thy self, that thou may be his kingdom, and let not sin
reign in thy mortal body Romans 6, verse. 12.
, but the spirit to the attainement of life.

Chap. 17. What Paradise is: and the ioies thereof.
NOw my soul, return we unto the celestial City, wherein we be written
Reave. 20. verse. 12.
, and of which we be members.

For as Citizens with ye Saints Ephesians. 2, 19.
, and of the household of God; and as the heirs of God Romans 8, 17
, and heirs annexed with Christ, let us call into mind, as we are able, ye
happy state of our City. Say we therefore with the Prophet, Glorious things
are spoken of thee Psa. 87, 3.
, o City of God; they which dwell in thee are like such as sing. It is fair in
situation, even the joy of the whole earth Psalm. 48, 2.
.

There is neither age, nor the misery of age in thee; in thee there is no
maimed, nor lame, nor crooked, nor deformed person; for all do meet together
unto a perfect man Ephesians. 4, 13.
, and unto the measure of the age of the fulness of Christ.

Then what happier thing can there be than this life, where neither poverty is
to be feared, nor sickness Reu. 21, 4^
to weaken! where no hurt is done, and no man will either be angry, or envious!

Where there is no burning concupiscence; no desire of meat; no suing for
honor and preferment!

Where we shall be out of al fear of the Devil; of his traps; and of damnation!

Where neither body, nor soul shall die Reu. 21, 4.
; and a ioiful and immortal life is!

Where no evils at al, nor discord shall be; but al things well, al things at
quiet: because the hearts of all the Sancts shall wish and will one thing!

Where peace and mirth do possess al; al things are as they should be, and at
a good stay.

Where continual light shall be; not such a light as we now enioie, but so much
cleerer, as it is more blessed! For that City, as we read, has no need of
the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it Reu. 21, 23.
; for the glory of God shall in^ighten it, and the Lamb is the light of it.

Where the Sancts shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever Dan. 12, 3.
; and they that turn many unto righteousness, as the brightness of the
firmament!

So that no night shall be there Revel. 21. verse. 25.
, no darkness there; no gathering together of clouds there; no complaining
there either of parching heat, or of nipping cold:

But such a temperature of al things there shall be, as eye has not seen 1.
Cor. 2. verse. 9. Esai. 64.4.
, neither ear has heard, nor at any time has come into the heart of any
man, they only excepted, who are found worthy to enioie that happiness, whose
names be written in the book of life Revel. 21, verse. 27.
.

Notwithstanding, a greater happiness than all this is, to be joined to the
quires of Angels, and of Archangels, and of all the celestial powers; to behold
the Patriarchs, and the Prophets; to see the Apostles of Christ, and all the
Saints, and our parents also.

This is a great glory: but the greatest of al is, to behold God himself
face to face 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. Reave. 22, 4.
; to see the incomprehensible light.

The superexcellent glory shall be, when we see God in himself, and when we
shall both see, and enioie him in our selves too, of which sight there shall be
none end.

Chap. 18. That we can not please God, but through love.
THE soul, being goodly through the image of God Genesis 1, 26.27. Colos 3, 20.
, and glorious thorough his likeness, has in it of God, whereby it may be
warned always either to stand with him, or to return unto him, if she be
moved with her affections, or defections rather.

And has not only whence to take heart again, through hope of pardon, and
mercy, but also whence boldly to aspire unto the marriage of the word Matthew.
22. verse. 2.3, etc.
, and to enter into the covenant of fellowship with God, and to bear the
pleasant yoke of amity with the king of Angels.

All this works love, if the soul show her self like to God in will, as she
is to him by nature, loving as she is beloved Ioh. 3, 16.
.

For of all the motions, senses, and affections of the mind, love only it is,
whereby man may, though not fully satisfy the love of God, yet answer in a
sort his good will.

When love once comes, it draws unto it, and captiueth al other affections.
Love suffices of it self; pleases of it self, and for it self.

Love is the merit, the reward, the cause, the fruit, the use. For by love we
are conioined to God 1. Cor. 13, verse. 1.2, etc.
.

Love makes one spirit of two. Love makes to will, and to nil one thing. Love
makes first to frame our manners; afterward to consider things that are, as
though they were not; and thirdly with a pure sight of the heart Matthew. 5,
verse. 8.
, to behold heavenly, and spiritual things.

Through love, first honest things are well handled in the world; secondly,
honest things of the world are despised Phil. 3, 8.
, and last of al, the secrets of God are seen and beholden 1. Cor. 13, verse.
13.
.

Chap. 19. How God requires some thing of us like to himself.
GOD the Father is charity 1. Ioh. 4, 8.
, God the Son is louingnes, God ye holy Ghost is the love of the Father, and
of the Son.

This charity, and this love requires a like thing in us, even love again,
whereby we may be linked, and joined to God, as it were by some alliance of
kindred.

Love is ignorant what dignity means, knows no reverence.

He that loves, approaches boldly unto God, and speaks familiarlie to him
without fear, and stopping.

He that loves not, lives not: but he that loves, looks evermore upon God
whom he loves, whom he desires, upon whom he thinks, in whom he
delights, upon whom he feeds, in whom he grows.

A man so devout, does evermore so sing, and so read, and so circumspectly,
and warelie behave himself in all his actions, as if God were, as in deed he
is Eccle. 23, verse. 19.20.
, alwaie present before his eyes.

He so prays, as if he were taken-vp and presented before the face of God in
his maiestical throne, whereas thousand thousands minister to him Dan. 7, 10.
, and ten thousand thousands stand before him.

The soul which he visits with love, awakeneth him that sleeps; it
monisheth, and mollifieth the soul, and wounds his heart.

It inlighteneth dark things; it vnlocketh things shut-vp; it inflameth cold
things; it mitigateth the froward, angry, and impatient mind.

It chaseth away vices; brideleth carnal affections; amendeth manners;
reformeth and renueth the mind; and restrains the light motions, and actions
of slipperie youth.

Al these things love works when it is present; but when it is wanting, the
soul begins to droope, even as a boiling caudron does when fire is taken
from under the same.

Chap. 20. Of the boldness of the soul that loves God.
Love doubtless is a great thing, by it the soul of hir-selfe, does boldly
aproch unto God, and cleaves constantly unto him.

The soul that loves, asks questions of God familiarlie, and consulteth
with him in all matters.

She can think of nothing, and speak of nothing beside God, al other things
she loatheth, and contemns Matthew. 6, verse. 24.
.

Whatsoever she minds, and whatsoever she speaks, it sauoreth of love, and
smells of love, so wholly has the love of God won her unto him.

He that would have the knowledge of God, let him love.

In vain does he give himself either to read, or to study, or to preach, or
to pray, that loves not 8. Cor. 1, 2, etc.
.

The love of God engenders the love of the soul, and makes her to harken
unto it self.

God loves, because he would be loved again. When he loves, he would be
loved, knowing that through love they are blessed which love him.

The loving soul renounceth al her own affections, and wholly gives her
self to love, that in rendering love for love, she may answer the love she
has found: and when she has loved what she can, yet what is it unto the
everlasting stream of that heavenly fountain!

For love and the lover, the soul and God, the Creator and the creature meet
not alike together: yet if man with all his heart wholly does love thee, o GOD,
there lacks nothing where al is.

Let not the soul then fear which loves; but let the soul shake and tremble
that loves not.

The loving soul is carried with desire, and drawn with longing; she
dissembleth her deserts; shuts her eyes from the majesty of God; opens
them to pleasure; reposing her trust in thy salvation, and confidentlie
reioicing therein.

Through love the soul withdraws herself, and departs from the bodily
senses, to the end that feeling God, she may have no feeling of her self.

Which falleth-out when the mind allured by an unspeakable sweetenes of God
steals away from her self, yea is ravished and slippeth-awaie, the better
to enioie God at her full pleasure. And this pleasure surpasses al pleasure,
where it is of continuance.

Of love springs familiarity, of familiarity boldness, of boldness taste, of
tasting hunger.

The soul which the love of God has touched can think none other thing, and
desire nothing else, but with often sighs says, As the Heart braieth for the
rivers of water Psalm. 42, 1.
: so pants my soul after thee, o God.

Chap. 21. The singular love of God to man ward.
THrough love GOD himself came unto men John. 3, 16
, came into men, was made man John. 1, 14.
.

Through love the invisible God became like unto his servants Phil. 2, 7. Mat.
20, 28.
. Through love he was wounded for our transgressions Esai. 53, 5. 1. Pet. 2, 24.
.

In those wounds of our Savior, sure and safe rest is for weaklings and
sinners. There I dwell without care, his bowels of mercy are laid open to my
sight through his wounds.

Whatsoever I lack of my self, that I do boldly take out of the bowels of my
Lord: For his mercies abound, and there want none holes for them to issue out
by.

Through the holes of the body, I behold the secrets of the heart; I see the
great mystery of godliness 1. Tim. 3, verse. 16.
; and the bowels of the mercy of our God Luke 1, 78.
, whereby the day spring from an high has visited us, are open to mine eyes.

The wounds of Jesus Christ are full of mercy, full of clemency, full of
sweetness, and love.

They boared his hands, and his feet Luke. 24, verse. 39.40. John. 20, 25
, and pierced his side with a spear Ioh. 19, 34
.

By these holes I may taste, how gracious the Lord is Psalm. 34, 8.
; for doubtless the Lord is good and merciful Psalm. 86, 5.
, and of great kindness to a which call upon him in truth Psa. 145, 8
, to al yea which call upon him Esai. 55, 6
, but especialie to such as love him Ezo. 20, 6.
.

Great redemption is given us through the wounds of our Savior Christ 1. Pet.
1, 18.19. 1. Pet. 2, 24.
, great goodness, much grace, and al virtues perfectly.

Chap. 22. The refuge of a Christian in the time of tentation.
WHen I am tempted with any filthy cogitation, I run forthwith unto the
wounds of Christ; when my flesh subdueth me, I rise-againe through the
recordation of my Lord his wounds; when the devil lays snares to entrap me, I
do fly unto the tender mercy of my Lord, and he leaves me.

If burning lust do inflame me, it is quenched through the calling of the
wounds of our Lord Col. 1, 2.3.
, the Son of God Mat. 16, 16 Luke. 1, 35.
into mind.

In all extremities I can find none so good a remedy, as the wounds of Christ.

In them I sleep securely, and rest without fear. Christ has died for us
Romans 5, 6.7.8. Romans 14, 15. 1. Cor. 15, 3.
.

Nothing is so bitter unto the death, but may by the death of my Lord be helped.

His death is my merit; my refuge, salvation, life and resurrection Ioh. 11, 25.
. The Lords mercy, is my merit.

I can not lack merits, so long as the Lord of mercies is with me. And if
great is the Lords mercies Psalm. 86, 5.15. Psa. 119, 156
, doubtless great are my merits.

The more able he is to save, the less care do I take.

Chap. 23. Special medicines against sin, and despair.
Greatly have I sinned, o Lord, and my conscience accuses me of manifold
offenses; yet do I not despair. For where sin abounded Romans 5, 20
grace abounded much more.

He that in consideration of his heinous wickedness does despair, denies God
to be a merciful God.

He greatly defaceth the glory of God, which doubts of his mercy; and as
much as in him is, denies God to have love John. 3, 16 1. John. 4, 8.
, truth Psa. 86, 15. Romans 3, 4.
, and power in him Genesis 35, 11 Revel. 4, 8.
, wherein al mine hope consists (to wit in the love of his adoption Romans 8,
15 16, etc.
, in the truth of his promise Romans 4, 16. Gal. 4, 28.
, and in the power of his redemption 1. Pet. 1, 18.19.
.)

Then let my foolish cogitation murmur as much as it will, saying, who art thou;
how great is that glory; and by what merits hopest thou to obtain ye same?
And I will boldly make this answer: I know whom I give credit unto; for of
his tender love he has adopted me for his Son Gal. 4, 28.
: who is both of his promise true John. 3, 33
, and also mighty in performance, and he may do what he will Ecc. 46, 6. 2.
Cor. 6, 18.
.

The multitude of my sins can not dismaie me, if the death of Christ come
into my mind: for my sins are not able to ouermatch his mercy.

The nails, and the spear do cry unto me, that I am reconciled to Christ,
if I love him heartily.

Longinus with his spear has opened to me ye side of Christ Ioh. 19, 34.
, and I am gone-in, and rest there quietly.

He that fears, let him love. For perfect love casteth-out fear 1. Ioh. 4, 18
.

There is no such remedy against the heat of lust, as the death of my
redeemer.

He stretched-out his arms upon the cross, and held-out his hands Matt. 27,
verse. 35. Gal. 3, 13.
, to show how he is ready to embrace the penitent sinners.

Between those arms of my Savior, I both wish to live, and desire to die.
There I will sing without care: I will magnify thee, o Lord, for thou have
exalted me Psalm. 30, 1.
, and have not made my foes to rejoice over me.

Our Savior bowed his head Ioh. 19, 30
, and gave up the ghost, even to kiss his beloved. And so often do we kiss
God, as we are pricked at the heart with the love of him.

Chap. 24. A zealous meditation to move unto the love of God.
O MY Soul, thou which art endued with the image of GOD Genesis 1, 26.27. Col. 3,
10.
, redeemed with the blood of Christ 1. Pet. 1, 18.19.
, betrothed through faith 2. Cor. 11, 2
, endued with the Spirit Romans 8, 9.15.
, adorned with virtues, and counted with the Angels Luke. 20, verse. 36.
:

Love thou him, who has so loved thee; care thou for him, who has a care of
thee 1. Pet. 5, 7.
; seek thou him, who seeks thee.

Love thy lover, of whom thou art loved 1. Ioh. 4, 7.8, etc.
; who in loving has prevented thee 1. Ioh. 4, 19
; who is the cause of thy love Iam. 1, 17.
. He is the merit; he the reward, he the fruit, the use, and the end.

Be thou careful with the careful; be thou at leisure, with him that has
leisure; clean with the clean; and holy with the holy.

As thou offerest thy self in the presence of God, so will he appear in thy
sight.

A good, and merciful God, of great kindness Psalm. 86, 5.
, requires such as are good, and merciful, and loving, and humble, and kind.

Love thou him who has brought thee out of the horrible pit Psalm. 40, 2.
, out of the mirie claie.

Choose him for thy friend before al friends; who when al things shall fail,
will keep his faith Ioh. 13, 1.
.

In the day of thy burial, when al thy friends will depart from thee, he will
not forsake thee Psa. 37, 28 Psalm. 27, 10.
; but protect thee from the roaring of them that be ready to devour Eccl. 51,
3.
, and conduct thee through an unknown contrie, and bring thee unto the
streets of supernal Zion, and there place thee with the Angels before the face
of his majesty Reu. 22, 4.
, where thou shall hear that angelical music, Holy, Holy, Holy Esai. 6, 3.
.

There is the song of mirth Reu. 5, 9. Reu. 14, 3.
, the voice of joy and welfare, and thanksgiving, and praising, and
Halleluiah for ever and ever.

There is perfect felicity, excellent glory, surpassing joy, and al good
things 1. Cor. 2, 9.
.

O my soul sigh heartily, and earnestly desire to attain unto that supernal
city, whereof such glorious things are spoken Psalm. 87, 3.
: in which who so dwell are al even like such as triumph with joy.

Through love thou may ascend. To the lover nothing is hard, nothing
impossible.

The soul that loves does oftentimes ascend, and boldly runs about the
streets of celestial Jerusalem, visiting the Patriarchs and Prophets;
saluting the Apostles, wondering at the armies of Martyrs, and Confessors; and
beholding ye flocks of virgins.

Heaven and earth, and al things in them contained, do call upon me continually
to love my Lord God.

Chap. 25. Of true knowledge, what it is.
WHat is the knowledge of the truth? It is first to know thy self, and that
thou both study to be such as thou ought to be; and also amend that which
is to be reformed. Secondly, it is to know, and to love thy maker; for this
is al man's happiness Ioh. 17, 3.
.

Consider therefore how unspeakable the love of God is to manward. He created
us of nothing Genesis 1, 26.27. Job. 10, 8. Psa. 119, 73.
; and whatsoever we have, he gave the same 1. Cor. 4, verse. 7. Iam. 1, 17.
.

But for so much as we loved the gift more than the giver; the creature than the
creator Genesis 3, 6.7, etc.
, we fell into the snare of Satan, and became his bond-slaues Romans 6, 16.17.
.

Nevertheless, God of his great love, sent his own Son Ioh. 3, 16.17.
, to redeem servants Romans 8, 3.
; and sent also the holy Ghost, whereby he made servants his sons by
adoption Gal. 4, 6.
.

He gave his Son for a ransom 1. Pet. 1, 18.19. Gal. 4, 4.5.
; the holy Ghost for a pledge of his love 2. Cor. 1, verse. 22. Ephe. 1, 13.14.
; and reserueth himself wholly for the inheritance of adoption Romans 8, 17.
.

And thus God, as he is very gracious and merciful Psa. 86, 5.
, of his good will and love to mankindward, bestows not his goods only, but
himself also to redeem man, and that not so much for his own sake, as for
man's behoof.

That men might be borne of God, God first was borne of man Ioh. 1, 14.
.

Now what heart is so flintie, but will be softened by this love of God, so
preventing man 1. John. 4, verse. 19.
!

O vehement love, that God for man's cause can vouchsafe to become man Matt. 1,
21.
!

Who can hate man, whose nature and likeness he beholds in the humanity of
God?

Doubtless, who so loves not man, hates God; and so abides in death 1. John.
3, verse. 14.
.

For God became man for man's sake Luke 1, 31.69.
, that he might be a redeemer 1. Pet. 1, 18.19.
, as he was before a creator John. 1, 1.3. Heb. 1, 3.
; and that man not only might be ransomed through his riches, but also love
him the more entirely.

God appeared in the similitude of sinful flesh Romans 8, 3.
, that each sense of man might be made blessed in him, and as well the eye of
the heart be renewed in his divinity, as the eye of the body in his humanity,
that whether it go in, or out, man's nature which he has created Genesis 1, 26.27.
, might in it find comfort and refreshment.

Chap. 26. What the sending of the holy Spirit works in us.
FOR our Savior came into ye world Luke. 2, 11.
and was crucified, and put unto death for our sakes Romans 5, 6.8.
, that he might through his death Heb. 2, 14.
, destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil.

And seeing the grapes of his flesh were carried unto ye wine press of the
cross, and the pleasant wine of his divinity began to spout-foorth; the holy
Spirit was sent to make ready men's hearts, that new wine might be put into new
vessels Matt. 9, 17.
, and to see first that they were clean, least otherwise they marred yt which
should be powred-in; and then that they were well hooped that they leaked not: I
mean that they were cleansed from the delight of wickedness; and hooped to
keepe-out the delight of vanity.

For that which is good could not enter, til that which il is were gone.

The delight in wickedness polluteth; and the delight in vanity sheddeth.

The delight in wickedness makes the vessel to stincke; and the delight in
vanity makes it full of clefts.

Men delight in wickedness, when they love sin; and they delight in vanity,
when they love transitory things.

Then cast away that which is evil, that you may taste that which good is.
Powre-out bitterness, that you may be replenished with sweetenes.

The holy Ghost is joy, and love, then cast out the spirit of the Devil, and
the spirit of this world, that you may be capable of the holy Ghost.

The spirit of the Devil works the delight of iniquity; and the spirit of
the world, the delight of vanity. And these delights are evil, because the
one is a sin of it self, and the other is an occasion of sin.

But when these evil spirits are throwne-out, the spirit of God will come, and
enter into the tabernacle of the heart, and work a good delight there Romans 14,
verse. 17.
, even a good love, which shall expel the love both of the world, and of
wickedness.

The love of the world allureth, and deceaueth 1. John. 2, verse. 15.16.17.
; the love of sin defiles, and brings unto destruction Romans 6, verse. 23.
: but the love of God inlighteneth the mind Romans 5, 5.
, cleanses the conscience 1. Cor. 13, 1.2, etc.
, reioiceth the heart Gal. 5, 22.
, and brings into the sight of God 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
.

Chap. 27. The effects of true love.
HE that loves God unfeignedly, does evermore think it long until he come
unto God Phil. 1, 23.
, until he leave the world, until he be free from the corruption of the flesh
Romans 7, verse. 24.
; his heart and affection are set on things above Col. 3, 2.
, that he may find the true peace Phil. 4, 7. Reu. 21, 4.
.

Whether he sits, or walks, or rests, or whatsoever he does, his heart
is with God 1. Cor. 10, verse. 31.
.

He exhorts al men to love God; he commends the love of God to al men, and
both in heart, in word, and by his conversation he shows, both how sweet the
love of God is, and how evil and sower the love of the world.

He derideth the glory, and reproves the care of this world, and shows what
a foolish thing it is to put any confidence in transitory things 1. Ioh. 2,
15.16.17.
.

He wondereth at the blindness of men, that they can love; he wondereth also
that every man will not forsake these transitory and fleeting things of this
world 1. Cor. 7, verse. 31.
.

He thinks that what he sauoreth, should seem sweet to al men; what he
loves, should like every man; and what he knows, every man should
understand.

Much and oftentimes does he mufe upon God, and is sweetly refreshed through
such heavenly contemplation; and the oftener he does so, the greater is his
joy.

For very comfortable is it alwaie even to think upon that, which to love and
to commend, is so delightful to the mind.

Chap. 28. What the true quietness of the mind is.
Doubtless the heart is then at rest, when through desire it is wholly fixed
upon the love of God; and desires nothing else, but with a certain blessed
sweetenes is much delighted in that which it has; and in delighting is made
iocund.

And if any time either by a vain cogitation, or through worldly business, it
be somewhat drawn away therefrom, it hasteneth to return thither with all
speed, deeming it a banishment to be anie-where beside.

For, as every moment, man may either enioie, or use the goodness of God: so
every moment is man to think upon God.

And therefore his offense is not small, who in praieng is carried suddenly
away from his sight, as though he did neither hear, nor behold.

Which is then done, when man follows his evil, and unbridled affections;
and, whereunto the sight of the mind is easily carried, prefers some vile
creature before God, by musing, and thinking thereupon, oftener than upon God,
who daily is to be thought-vpon as a creator Job. 10, 8. Psalm. 119, 73.
; to be worshipped, as a redeemer Gal. 3, 13. Gal. 4, 4.5.
; to be expected, as a savior Phil. 3, 20.21.
; and to be feared, as a judge Acts. 10, verse. 42. 2. Tim. 4, 1.8.
.

Chap. 29. That whatsoever withdraws the sight of the mind from God, is
altogether to be shunned, and abhorred.
Whosoever thou art that love ye world, look afore-hande, whether thou must
go. The way which thou take, is the worst way, and very dangerous Matthew.
7, verse. 13.
.

Wherefore, o man, avoid by little and little thy worldly business; and
withdraw thy self awhile from troublesome cogitations.

Cast away heavy cares, lay aside grievous distractions of the mind; find
some leisure to serve God, and rest thy self somewhat in him.

Enter into the chamber of thy mind Matthew. 6, verse. 6.
; exclude al things save God, and what makes to the seeking of him; and the
door being shut, seek him.

And with thine whole heart say unto God, I seek thy face, o Lord, I seek
even thy face.

Oh then, o Lord my God Psalm. 7, 1.3.
, give thou mine heart instructions, both where and how to seek thee; both
where and how to find thee.

O Lord, if here thou art not, where shall I seek thee absent? but if thou art
euerie-where Eccle. 23, verse. 18.19.20. Iere. 23, 24.
, then why do I not see thee present?

But undoubtedly thou dwell in the light that none can attain unto 1. Tim.
6, verse. 16.
.

But how may I come unto the light that cannot be attained? Or who shall guide,
and conduct me thereinto, that therein I may behold thee? Furthermore by what
tokens, and with what face may I seek thee?

O Lord my God, I never saw thee Ioh. 1, 18. 1. John. 4, 12.
; I know not thy countenance.

Then what shall he do, o Lord most hie Luke 2, 14.
, what shall this thy far exiled servant do Heb. 11, 13.
? what shall thy servant do, who is in perplexity through the love of thee;
and cast-awaie far fro thy presence?

Lo, he longs greatly to behold thee; yet thy countenance is far from his
sight. He desires to come unto thee; yet unto thy dwelling no man can attain
1. Tim. 6, verse. 16.
. He coueteth to find thee; yet he wotteth not where. He loves to seek thee;
yet he knows not thy face.

Chap. 30. How through sin man both lost the sight of God, and found
wretchedness.
O Lord, thou art my God Psalm. 7, 1.3.
, and my Lord Mat. 4, 10.
, yet did I never see thee John. 1, 18.
: thou have both made me Psa. 100, 3. Psa. 119, 73.
, yea and made me again Gal. 4, 4.
, and bestowed upon me what good things soever I enioie 1. Cor. 4, 7.
, yet hitherto have I neither seen, nor known thee.

To be short, I am made to see, yet hitherto have not I attained the thing,
that I was made for. O miserable condition of man, seeing he has so
vndiscreetlie forgone that, for which he was created! o heavy, and o hard
chance!

Alas, alas what has he forgon, and what has he found? what is lost, and what
has remained?

He has forgon happiness, for which he was made; and he has found misery Genesis
3, 16.17, etc.
, for which he was not made. He has lost that, without which nothing is
happy; and that remains which of it self is meerelie miserable.

Man did then eat even the Angels meat, which now he desires; and now he
feeds upon the bread of sorrow, which then he knew not.

O Lord, how long will thou forget, for ever Psalm. 13, 1
! How long will thou hide thy face from us! when will thou respect, and hear
us! when will thou inlighten our eyes, and show us thy countenance! when will thou restore thy self unto us!

show us thy self. Restore thy self to us, that we may prosper without whom
we are in such misery. Inuit us, and help us Lord, we beseech thee.

Mine heart is become sorowfu^ being made desolate: o make it cheereful again,
Lord, with thy consolation.

I have begun to seek thee with an hungry stomach, o let me not giue-ouer
vnrefreshed of thee; I come with a greedy appetite, let me not depart unfed; I
who am in poverty, com^ unto thee that art rich Romans 10, 12 Ephesians. 2, 4.
; in misery, unto thee most merciful 2. Cor. 1, 3
o let me not go-awaie empty and contemned.

O Lord, I am bowed, and crooked very sore Psalm. 38, 6.
, erect me that may looke-vp, and behold thee

me.

O unwrap, and unload me, that the deep swalowe me not up Psa. 69, 15
.

Teach me to seek thee; and show thy self to him that seeks thee: for I can
neither seek thee, without thou teach me; neither find thee, except thou
reveal thy self.

Let me seek thee in desiring, and desire thee in seeking; let me find thee in
loving, and love thee in finding.

Chap. 31. Of God his woonderful mercy.
I Confess LORD, thanks unto thee therefore, that thou have made me after
thine own image Genesis 1, 26.27. Col. 3, 10.
, to the end I should remember thee, think on thee, and love thee.

Notwithstanding, through the corruption of wickedness thine image is so
defaced, and so blurred with the smoke of sin that, without thou renew, and
reform the same, it can not do the thing, for which it was created.

Wherefore, Lord, who give the gift of faith Romans 12, 3
, I beseech thee, give me grace perfectly to know how great thou art.

For according to our belief thou art; and we believe thee to be such a thing,
than which there can be imagined nothing either for quantity greater Ier. 32,
18.19.
, or for virtue better Esai. 6, 3.
.

Then what art thou, o Lord God, than whom nothing is either greater, or
better; but even that, which being only the sovereign good thing of al
others of it self, has made al other things of nothing Genesis 1, 1.2.3, etc.
.

Then what good thing is there wanting to ye sovereign goodness Iam. 1, 17.
through whom is every good thing?

Wherefore thou art righteous Psalm. 11, 7.
, and true Esai. 45, 21 Psalm. 86, 15. John. 3.33. Romans 3, 4.
, and blessed Reu. 5, 12.13.
; and whatsoever is otherwise, better is it not to be atal, than to be.

But if thou art altogether most singularly good, how is it that thou sparest
the wicked? Is it because thy mercy is over al thy works Psa. 145, 9.
? But this lies hid in the light which none can attain unto 1. Tim. 6, 16
.

Verelie the fountain, whence the river of thy mercy does flow, lieth-hid in
the deep and most secret bottom of thy goodness.

For, although thou art wholly and souerainglie righteous: yet thou sparest of
thy goodness the wicked Mat. 5, 45
, because thou art wholly and most singularly merciful too.

For in very deed thou should not be so singularly good, unless thou
were gracious to some offenders.

For he who is good both to the just and to the unjust, is better than he who
shows favor only to the good.

And he which is good to the wicked, both by sparing, and by punishing the^, is
better than he, who is good only by punishing.

So thou art therefore merciful, because thou art altogether, and soueraignelie
good.

Chap. 32. The happy state of such as enioie the ioies of heaven.
O Infinite goodness, passing all understanding!

Let that mercy come upon me, which proceeds from such riches;

Let it have influence into me, which flows from thee; Spare of thy mercy,
but revenge not in thy justice.

Rise up now, o my soul, and lift up al thine understanding; consider so well
as thou can, how great, and what manner of good thing, God is.

For if each particular good thing be delectable, way advisedly how
delightful that good thing is, which contains the sweetenes of al good things
1. Cor. 2, 9.
; and not such as commonly we perceive of things created, but so much
differing there from, as the creator differs from the creature!

For if the life created be good; how good is the life that created it Ioh.
11, 25.
! If the welfare that is wrought, delight; how shall the welfare which works
al salvation Esa. 12, 1.2.3.
, delight! If the wisdom consisting in the mind, or in the knowledge of
known things, be lovely; how lovely is that wisdom which made, and created
al things of nothing John. 1, 1.2.3. Hebr. 1, 2. Prou. 8, 22.23, etc.
! To be short, if there be much and great delight in delectable things; what
and how great shall the pleasure be in him, who made these delectable things!

Oh what shall he have, or what shall he not have, that enioieth this felicity!
doubtless, whatsoever he can wish, he shall have it; and what he would not have,
shall not come to him.

For there shall be the goods both of soul and body, such goods as eye has
not seen 1. Cor. 2, 9.
, neither ear has heard, neither came into man's heart.

Chap. 33. That sovereign happiness is to be sought for.
WHY then rangest thou about, o silly man, seeking the goods of thy soul,
and of thy body? Love one good, in which are al good things, and it suffices.
Desire the simple good, which is all that good is, and it is enough.

For what love thou, o my flesh? what desire thou, o my soul? There it is
whatsoever thou love; there it is whatsoever thou desire.

If beauty delight thee; the just men shall shine as ye Sun Matthew. 13, verse.
43.
: If either such swiftnes, strength, or liberty of the body, as nothing may
withstand; they shall be as the Angels of God in heaven Matthew. 22, verse. 30.
. For it is sown a natural body 1. Cor. 15, verse. 44.
, but shall rise a spiritual body, to wit, by the power of God, not through the
strength of nature:

If a long, and an healthful life; there shall be found eternity, and eternal
soundnes Reu. 21, 4.
, because the righteous shall live ever Wis. 5, 15.
; their reward also is with the Lord:

If satietie; when the glory of the Lord appears, Psa. 17, 15.
they shall be filled:

If drunkenness; they shall be satisfied with the fatnes of the Lords house Psa.
36, 8.
:

If pleasant music; the Angels there shall sing praises without cessing unto
the Lord:

If al manner honest, not dishonest pleasure; the Lord shall give them drink out
of the river of his pleasures Psalm. 36, 8.
:

If wisdom; the very wisdom of God shall show it self to them 1. Cor. 13,
verse. 12. Reu. 22, 4.
:

If faithful amity; they shall both love GOD more than themselves, and one
another as themselves; yea, and God shall love them, more than they can
themselves. For they love both him, themselves, and one another through him;
and he loves both himself, and them too through himself.

If concord; al they shall be of one mind 1. Cor. 13, verse. 13.
; for they shall will nothing, but what God wills himself:

If power; they shall have full power over their own will, as God has of his.
For as God of himself can do what he will: so they can do what they will,
through him. Because, as they list none otherwise, than he lists: so he
lists, as they list, and what he will, must needs come to pass.

If honor, and wealth: God will make his good and faithful servants Matthew. 25,
verse. 23.
, rulers over much; yea, they shall be called the sons of God Romans 8, verse.
16.17.
, yea, and gods too; and be the heirs, even the heirs of God, and heirs
annexed with Christ.

To conclude, if certain security; they shall be as sure that that felicity
shall not fail them Reu. 7, 15.16.17. Reu. 21, 4.
, as they are sure that neither they for their parts would willingly forgo the
same; nor God for his part will bereave his friends thereof against their wills;
nor that any thing is so mighty, that it can separate God and them.

Now what, and how great joy is there, where such and so great felicity is!

Chap. 34. How the Sancts love each other mutualie in Heaven.
O Heart of man; o poor heart; o heart full of miseries, yea, overwhelmed with
miseries, how greatly would thou rejoice, if thou aboundedst with these
good things!

Ask even the most secret cogitations of thine heart, if they could receive the
joy of so excellent bliss.

But if another, whom thou love as thy self, did enioie with thee the like
felicity, doubtless thy joy would be doubled; because thou would so much
rejoice at his felicity, as at thine own.

Now if two, or three, or more, were so blessed of God, thou would be as glad
for each of them, as for thy self, if thou did love them even as thy self.

Then, how great shall the joy be in that perfect love of the innumerable
company of blessed Angels and men; where each shall love another even as
himself! for every man there shall rejoice as much for the happy estate of
each particular person, as for his own felicity.

If therefore the heart of man shall hardly receive the joy of his own bliss;
how shall it comprehend such great ioies of so many of his friends! for
undoubtedly, even as we love a man, so shall we be glad for his felicity.

As in that blessed happiness every man shall love God soueraignelie above
himself, and al others with him: so most singularly shall each man be more
glad of Gods felicity, than of his own, and of al others with him.

And if they shall so love God with all their hearts, with all their minds, and
with all their souls, that neither al their hearts, nor al their minds, nor al
their souls can be able to comprehend the excellency of the love: assuredly
the Sancts with all their hearts, with all their minds, and with all their souls
shall so rejoice, as neither their hearts, nor their minds, nor their souls,
shall be able to comprehend the abundant streams of celestial joy.

Chap. 35. Of the perfect joy of eternal life.
O MY God Psalm. 7, ^* 3.
, and my Lord Matt. 4, 10
, mine hope Psalm. 18, 1.2.
, and the joy of mine heart, resolve my soul whether this be the joy whereof
thou speak by thy Son, Ask, and ye shall receive Ioh. 16, 24.
, that your joy may be full. For I have found a certain joy which is full,
yea, and more than full.

For notwithstanding ye whole heart, be full; the whole mind, full; the whole
soul, full; yea, whole man, full of this joy: yet shall there remain joy for all that, which is incomprehensible.

So then, that whole joy shall not enter into the reioicers; but all the
reioicers shall enter into the joy of their master Matthew. 25, verse. 21.
.

Speak Lord, tell thy servant secretly in mine heart, if this be the joy
whereinto thy servants shall enter, who shall enter into their masters joy.

But surely, that joy, wherewith thine elect shall rejoice, neither eye has
seen 1. Cor. 2, 9.
, nor ear has heard, nor entered ever into the heart of man.

Then Lord, I have not yet conceived in mind, much less uttered by words, how
greatly thine elect shall rejoice.

Undoubtedly they shall so greatly rejoice, as they shall love; they shall so
entirely love, as they shall know thee, o Lord.

And how entirely shall they love thee? surely neither man's eye has seen,
nor his ear hard, nor came it ever into his heart in this world Esa. 64, 4. 1.
Cor. 2, 9.
, how perfectly they shall both know thee 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.13.
, and love thee in the world to come.

O my God, I beseech thee, grant that I may know thee, love thee, and rejoice
in thee.

And although I cannot so thoroughlie do so in this life as I should; yet give
me grace to profit from day to day, until I come unto perfection.

Let thy knowledge so grow up within me here, yt it may be found ripe there;
and thy love so increase within me here, that it may be perfect there; that my
joy may be great here in hope, and in deedeful there.

O just God, my humble suit is, that I may have the thing which thou promisest,
even that my joy may be full John. 16, verse. 34.
.

In the mean space, let my mind meditate thereof, my tongue speak thereof, mine
heart long for it, my speech reason thereof, and my soul hunger for the same.

Let my flesh thirst therefore, and al my substance desire it, even until I
enter into the joy of my master Matthew. 25, verse. 21.
, there to abide for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.
THE SVMME OF EVERY CHAPTER CONTAINED IN THIS BOOK, ACCORding as the titles
do import, with the just number of the page where every particular chapter is
to be found.
1 OF the woonderful essence, or being which God has, page 1. 2 Of God his
unspeakable knowledge, page 4. 3 The desire of that soul which has a feeling
of God, page 7. 4 The miserable state of that soul, which neither loves our
Lord and Savior Christ, nor seeks after him, pa. 11. 5 A very Christian
desire of the soul after God, page 14. 6 The happiness of that soul which is
delivered out of the earthly prison of the body, page 17. 7 The blessed joy
of the heavenly Paradise, page 20. 8 The glorious condition of the kingdom of
Heaven, page 22. 9 How GOD after much trouble does comfort the pensive soul,
page 25. 10 A prayer for grace to love God, page 27. 11 A prayer for grace both
duly to thank God for our redemption; and worthily to approach unto the holy
Table, page 29. 12 A zealous prayer for grace to meditate deeply upon the
goodness of God, page 32. 13 A thanksgiving unto God for the incarnation of
his dear Son to save man, page 34. 14 The more God is thought upon, the more
lovely he seems, page 36. 15 How the trobles in this world are nothing
answerable to the ioies in heaven, page 38. 16 Of the kingdom of heaven, and
how it may be attained, page 41. 17 What Paradise is: and the ioies thereof,
page 42. 18 That we can not please God, but through love, page 46. 19 How GOD
requires some thing of us like to himself, page 49. 20 Of the boldness of the
soul that loves GOD, page 41. 21 The singular love of GOD to manward, page
55. 22 The refuge of a Christian in time of tentation, page 57. 23 Special
medicines against sin, and despair, page 59. 24 A zealous meditation to
move unto the love of God, page 62. 25 Of true knowledge, what it is, page 65.
26 What the sending of the holy Spirit works in us, page 68. 27 The effects
of true love, page 71. 28 What the true quietness of the mind is, page 73. 29
That whatsoever withdraws the sight of the mind from God, is altogether to be
shunned, and abhorted, page 75. 30 How through sin man lost the sight of God,
and found wretchedness, 78. 31 Of God his woonderful mercy, page 81. 32 The
happy state of such as enioie the ioies of heaven, page 84. 33 That sovereign
happiness is to be sought for, page 87. 34 How the Sancts love each other
mutualie in heaven, page 91. 35 Of the perfect joy of eternal life, page 93.
FINIS.
1581.

OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT


Printed by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the sign of the
Star.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


