THE NATVRALL and Moral History of the East and West Indies.

Entreating of the remarkable things of Heaven, of the Elements, Mettalls,
Plants and Beasts which are proper to that Country: Together with the Manners,
Ceremonies, Laws, Governements, and Wars of the Indians.

Written in Spanish by Joseph Acosta, and translated into English by E. G(...)

LONDON Printed by Val: Sims for Edward Blount and William Aspley. 1604.

To the right Honorable Sir Robert Cicill Knight, Baron of Essingden, Vicount
Cranborne, principal Secretary to his Majesty, master of the Court of Wards
and Liveries, and one of his Highness most honorable Privy Counsel.
RIght Honorable; If it appear presumption in me to show my love, my duty
betraies me to it. The advantage I have gleaned from idle hours, in exchanging
this Indian History from Spanish to English, is commended to your Honors
Patronage, whose first father Joseph Acosta, has with great observation made
worthy the over-looking. A greater motive then that you are your self, needed
not to excite me to this dedication. I beseech you my good Lord, take it into
shelter, and receive that which is not, for that which I would it were. Let my
insufficiency be measured by my good will. So shall my poor abilities thrive
under your encouragement, and happily lead me on to some stronger undertaking;
wherein I shall be bound to thank you for mine own pains, and for ever
remain

Your Lordships most devoted E. G.

The Authors advertisement to the Reader.
MANY have written sundry books and discourses of the New World at the West
Indies, wherein they describe new and strange things discovered in those
parts, with the acts and adventures of the Spaniards, which have conquered
and peopled those Countries. But hitherto I have not seen any other Author
which treates of the causes and reasons of these novelties and wonders of
nature, or that has made any search thereof. Neither have I read any book
which makes mention of the histories of the ancient Indians, and natural
inhabitants of the New World. In truth these two things are difficult; The
first being the works of Nature, contrary to the ancient and received
Philosophy, as to show that the region which they call the burning Zone, is
very moist, and in many places very temperate, and that it raines there, whenas
the Sun is nearest, with such like things. For such as have written of the
West Indies, have not made profession of so deep Philosophy; yea, the
greatest part of those Writers have had no knowledge thereof. The second thing
it treats of, is, of the proper history of the Indians, the which required
much conference and travail among the Indians themselves: the which most of
them that have treated of the Indies could not do, either not understanding
the language, or not curious in the search of their Antiquities: so as they
have been contented to handle those things which have been most common and
superficial. Desiring therefore to have some more particular knowledge
thereof, I have been careful to learn from men of greatest experience and
best seen in these matters, and to gather from their discourses and relations,
what I have thought sit to give knowledge of the deeds and custom of these
people. And for that which concerns the nature of those Countries, and their
properties, I have learned it by the experience of many friends, and by my
diligence to search, discover, and confer with men of judgment and
knowledge. In my opinion there are many advertisements, which may serve and
benefit better wits for the searching out of the truth, or to proceed farther,
in finding that pleasing which is contained herein. So as although this new
World be not new, but old, in respect of the much which has been written
thereof; yet this history may in some sort be h^ld for new; for it is partly
historical, and partly philosophical, as well for that they are the works of
nature, as of free will; which are the deeds and customs of men, the which
has caused me to name it the Natural and Moral History of the Indies.
Containing these two things: In the first two books mention is made of that
which concerns the heavens temperature, and habitation of the world, which
books I had first written in Latin, and now I have translated them into
Spanish, using more the liberty of an author, then the strict bonds of a
translator, to apply my self the better to those for whom it is written in the
vulgar tongue. In the two following books, is treated of that which concerns the
Elements and natural mixtures, as Mettalls, Plants, Beasts, and what else is
remarkable at the Indies. The rest of the books relate what I could certainly
discover, and what I thought worthy memory of the Indians themselves, their
Ceremonies, Customs, Governments, Wars, and Adventures. In the same History
shall be spoken (as I could learn and comprehend,) of the figures of the
ancient Indians, seeing they had no writing nor characters as we have, which is
no small industry to have preserved their Antiquities, without the use of
letters. To conclude, the scope of this work is, that having knowledge of the
works of nature, which the wise Author of all nature made, we may praise and
glorify the high God, who is wonderful in all things and all places. And
having knowledge of the Indians customs, we may help them more easily to
follow and persever in the high vocation of the Gospel; to the knowledge
whereof, the Lord would draw this blind nation in these latter days. Besides
al these things, every one may suck out some profit for himself; for that the
wise do always draw forth some good out of the smalest subject, as we find
deep Philosophy in the least and basest creatures. I must only advertise the
Reader, that the two first books of this history or discourse, were written
in Peru, and the other five, since in Europe, duty binding me to return into
these parts: so as some speak of matters of the Indies, as of things present,
and others, as being absent. And therefore I have thought it good to advertise
the Reader hereof, that this diversity of speech may not be troublesome unto
him.

Farewell.

A Table of the most remarkable things contained in this Natural and Moral
History of the Indies:
A.
Abundance of waters under the burning zone. folio 93 Absurdity of Platoes
Atlantike Island. 73 Abuse of the Spaniards at Peru taking winter for summer. 89
Acamapach first king of Mexico. 482 Accord betwixt the king of Mexico and his
subjects before they attempted a war. 532 Adlaguagi a kind of mummery of
women. 367 Acts of Ferdinand Cortez. 574 Adimant makes a path in the Sea. 57
The Adamant impartes a virtue to iron to look always toward the north. 58
Use of the Adamant to sail by not ancient. 59 Adoration of the dead begun
and augmented. 340 Adultery punished with death. 469 Agilitie of monkies. 315
Air how necessary for the life of man 114 The Air stirred with the motion of
the heavens under the Equinoctial line, is sufficient to guide a ship. 137
Alcos little dogs, whereof the Indians are very careful. 301 Amarro Ingua
put to death by the Spaniards in Cusco. 481 Amber a kind of physical and
sweet gum. 287 Almonds growing in Cocos. 281 Almonds of Chacapoias held for
the rarest fruit in the world. ibid. The Auntients could not make a determind
voyage without the Compass. 57 Th'Antients went only with oars. 60 Ancient
Doctors more studious of the Scriptures than of Philosophy. ^ Annona a fruit
called by the Spaniards Almond butter, by reason of some resemblance. 278
Apopanaca the overseer of the Monasteries of women. 367 Apachitas tops of
hills that were worshipped. 540 Arches in buildings unknown to the Indians.
460 Aristotle not refuted by Lactantius as touching the place of the earth. 22
Arms of the Mexicans. 488 Army of the air foretelling a great ruin. 561 Art
of war much honored by the Mexicans. 488 Art to know the Stars invented
by the Phenicens. 54 Ashes issuing in great abundance out of the Vulcans. 195
Advantage which the Christians had of the Indians to plant the faith there. 389
S. Augustine doubts whether the heaven invirons the earth of all parts 3 Attire
for the head very diverse in sundry provinces at the Indies. 467 Austeritie
practiced by the Indians to keep themselves chaste. 373 Axi a kind of Indian
pepper. 168
B.
Balance wherein the Devil made the Iapponois confess themselves. 401 Barks
at the Indies called Canoes. 68 Battle without bloodshed, made only for a
ceremony at the yielding of Tescuco. 539 Balm of Palestina, and that of the
Indi^s very different. 285 Bezars stone found in the stomach of some beasts
sovereign against poison, how it grows, and which are the most excellent. 323
Beasts carefully preserved by the Ingu^s. 464 Beasts worshipped by the Indians,
and why. 340 Beasts being venomous converted by divelish arts into good
norishment 510 Beasts that are perfect cannot be engendered as those that are
imperfect according to the order of nature. 65 Beasts of sundry sorts at the
Indies that are not in Europe. 3^7 Birds remain willingly in the water, and
why. 305 Birds, some exceeding small, others wonderful great. 309 Birds very
profitable for the dung. 311 Bisexte unknown to the Indians. 437 Bochas and
Such^s notable fishes in the Lake of Titica^a. 170 B^ncos the divelles
Ministers at the Indies. 370 Bridge of straw very firm to pass over a swift
stream. 93 Brises and lower winds are two general names which comprehend the
winds of either side. 132 Bodies being dead, wonderfully well preserved. 478
Burden of the Indian sheep, and what iournies they make so laden. 321
C
CAcao a fruit much esteemed at the Indies, and serves them for money. 271
Cacavi, bread made of a root. 257 Calibasses, or Pompions at the Indies, and
of their greatness. 264 Calculation of the Indians very witty and ready. 456
Camey the second month of the Indians. 412 Canes of sugar of great revenews.
298 Canopus a star seen at the new world. 16 Cap of Comorni, sometimes called
the promontory of Cory. 37 Carthaginians did forbid the sailing to unknown
lands, and why. 36 Care of the Mexicaines to teach their children their
superstitious idolatry. 486 Cattle in troops without masters in the Islands of
Cuba Iamaica, and others. 70 Cattle at the Indies killed only for their hides.
ibid. Caymans or Lizards like unto Crocodiles, whereof Pli^ie speaks. 165
Ceremony of the Mexicans in drawing blood from diverse parts. 551 Ceremonies of
the Indians in the burial of their dead. 348 Ceremonies at the sacrificing of
men. 382 Chachalmua the chief priests and their attire at their sacrifices.
ibid. Chasquis Indian posts that carried news to all places. 452 Chica a drink
very wholesome for the back. 255 Chichimequas ancient Inhabitants of N^w
Spain, and of their barbarous life. 501 Chicocapote a fruit like unto
mermelade 278 Chille, a country of the same temperature with Spain. 87
Chinchilles, small beasts that have exquisite skins. 314 Chocholate, the
Indians drink, whereof they make great account. 271 Cinabrium, or vermilian,
called by the Indians, Limpi. 238 Coca, a leaf which the Perusians used for
money. 210 Coca, a small leaf whereof the Indians make great traffike: it does
encourage and fortify. 271 Cocas, Indian palms, and of their rare properties.
280 Coch^nille, a grain that grows upon the Tunall trees. 275 Colleges
ordained at Mexico to teach their young children to pronounce Orations. 447
Combat betwixt a Caymant and a Tiger. 166 Comedies very ordinary in China. 444
Combat betwixt an Indian and a Caymant. 167 Comets in the air moove from East
to Weast. 137 Communion imitated by the slaves of Satan. 393 Comparison to
prove the natural effect of rain in the burning zone. 95 Crown of the kings
of Mexico like to that of the duke of Venice. 518 Crimes punished with death by
the Indians. 469 Corriers at the Indies very swift being but footmen. 452 Coya
the Inguas chief wife, whose son succeeded after the uncle. 455 Cross, a
notable starr^ at the new found world. 16 Crowning of the kings of Mexico,
performed with great solemnity, and the shedding of much man's blood. 541
Covetousnes of a certain priest thinking to draw gold out of a vulcan. 195
Council of Lima dissolved the marriage betwixt brother and sister, and why.
471 Cotton grows upon trees it serves to make linen cloth. 276 Cold in the
burning zone makes Aristotle's opinion ridiculous. 101 Courage of men at the
passage of Pongo. 176 The Continent of lands is joined in some part, or else it
is very near* 68 Before the Creation there was neither time nor place, a
matter hard to imagine. ^4 Cruelty of the Indians in their sacrifices. 382
Cruel ceremony to sprinckle the Ambassadors with blood, thinking thereby to
have a better answer. 571 Cu the great Temple of Mexico, and the singularities
thereof. 361 Cugno, a kind of bread at the Indies made of roots. 186
Cuschargui, a dried flesh which the Indians used. 320 Cusco, the ancient
habitation of the kings of Peru. 128
D
Days and nights equal all the year under the liquinoctiall. 83 Days in
summer very short at Peru. 103 Five Days in the year superfluous, wherein
the Indians did nothing. 434 Dancing and public recreations necessary in every
co^mon-weal^. 492 Dancing in Mex^^o, where the King himself d^unced. 489
Da^tes, wild be^sts almost like unto moiles, and of their skins 313 D^luge
pretended by the Indians, whereof there is some likel^hood. 79 D^vision of the
lands of Azca^^zalco, after the victory obtained by ^scoalt. 533 Discovery of
the west Indies prophesied by Senec^. 38 Discovery of new lands, made more by
tempest of weather than otherwise. 62 Disseine of the Author. 82 The Devil
jealous against God, and hates men mortally. 329 The Devil did speak in the
Indies Guacas or Oratories. 351 Difference of letters, pictures, and
characters. 439 Difficulty to know whence the Indians come, for that they have
used no letters. 79 Discourse upon the discovery of Magellan by Sarmiento. 154
Division of Peru into Lanos, Sierres, and Andes. 184 Division of the people.
456 Division of the City of M^xico into four quarters, made by the
commandment of their God. 512 Divinations practis^d by the Indians, and how.
406 Divorces practiced amongst the Mexicaines, and how. 409 Death the
punishment of Virgins that were incontinent. 367 Death of Chimalpopoca the
young king of Mexico, sl^ine treacherously by the Tapanecan^. 526 Death of
Mo^esuma the l^st king of Mexico. 576 Doctors of the holy church not to be
reprooved, differing in opinion of Philosophy. 2 Dogs as dangerous as
wolves. 301 Dogs dangerous in the Islands of Cuba, Hispaniola, and others. 70
Drake an Englishman did pass the straight of Magellan in our time, and
others since. 154 Duckes in great abundance in the Lake of Titicaca, and how
they do hunt them. 171 Drought follows not the neerenesse of the Sun. 85
E.
EAgle upon a Tunall the Arms of Mexico, and why. 513 Earthquakes very
strange, and the cause. 197 Earth, how it is sustained. 10 The Earth under the
pole Antartike, is not all covered with waters. 18 The Earth in longitude is
all of one temperature, but not in latitude. 29 The Earth with the water make
one globe. ibid. Eclipse of the Moon a certain proof of the roundnesse of the
heavens. 6 Effects natural proceed from contrary causes. 96 Elements
participate with the motion of the first moover. 138 Electours of the king of
Mexico were commonly his kinsmen. 485 Election of the kings of Mexico, and the
feasts at their instalment. ibid. Election of the first K^ of Mexico. 515
Entry of the Spaniards into new Spain in the year 1518. 558 Entry of Cortez
into Mexico. 574 Error of imagination. 23 Esaies passage expounded by the
exemplification of the Gospel. 208 Emerauldes more esteemed in former time then
now. 249 Exercises wherein they instructed their youth. 487 Explication of a
passage of saint Paul against the roundnes of the earth. 14 Explication of the
110, Psalm upon the same subject. 15
F.
FAmiliar reasons to teach an Indian, that the Sun is no god. ^42 Fasting of
the Indians before the fea^^ of Ita, not accompanying with their wives. 374 A
Father loosing his children, was held for a great sinner, h^ would kill his
children to save his own life. 399 Fert^litie unfruitful in the Islands of
new Spain^* 187 Feasts of Merchants made with many sportes. 424 Feast of the
Idol of Tlascalla. 355 Feasts for to have rain. 411 Feasts for every month.
412 F^re drawn out of two sticks rubbd one against another by the Indians.
119 Fire in hell different from ours. 195 Fire from heaven consumed for their
sins. 63 Fish flying. 165 Fountain casting up hot water, the which turns
into a rock. 173 Fig tree, whereof the one half carries fruit at one
season, the other at another. 297 ^loures of Europe grow best at the Indies.
283 ^loridians had no knowledge of gold. 207 Flowing and ebbing of the sea is
no local motion, but an alteration and ferv^^ of the waters. 162 Flowing and
ebbing of the seas diverse ibid. Fountain of salt in Cusc^. 174 Forests
wonderful thick at the Indies. 291 Forests of orange trees at the Indies.
294 Form of that which is discovered at Peru. 201 Fr^^ci^ H^^nandes the Author
of a rar^ book of plants, roote^, and physical herbs at the I^dies. ^90
Fruits of Europe much incr^ased a^ the Indies. 294
G.
Garlic much esteemed a^ the Indie^. 261 Gardin^ upon the water in the midst
of a Lake. 172 Gardins artificially made upon the water t^ remove where they
please. 519 Giant^ came in an^ient time to Peru. 62 Gold found in three
sorts. 212 Gold of Caravana most famous at P^ru. 214 Gold and silver esteemed
throughout the whole world. 206 Gold and silver served the Indians but for
ornament. 209 Gold why esteemd above other mettalles. 212 Gold how refined
into powlder. 214 Goomes, with physical and odo^if^rous oils with their
names. 287 Gonzales Pziarre vanquished and defeated, his cruelty against the
Indians. 475 Governors of provinces, how est^bl^shed by the Inguas. 455 Guacas
or Sanctuaries very well maintained. 463 Guancos and Vicuna^ wild goats. 70
Guayaquil an Indian oak, and very sweet. 292 Guayavos an Indian fruit. 277
Guaynacapa, the great and valiant Ingua, and his life, he was worshipped as a
god in his life. 479 Guayras furnaces to refine gold. 233 Gospel preached to
the Indians when their Empire was at the h^ghest, even a^ to the Romans. 583
H.
HAtun^^squi Ay^^r^y, the six^ m^neth of the Indians, which answers unto
May. 413 Hearts of men pulld out and sacrificed: how that ceremony began. 509
Hair of the prie^^s horribly long and anointed with rozen. 403 Heaven is
round, and turn^^ upon two Poles, prooved more by experience than
demonstration. 5 Heaven no farther from the earth of the one side than of the
other. 18 Hens found at the Indies at the f^^st discovery, which they called
Gualpa, and their eggs Ponto. 306 Hercules Pillars the limits of the Roman
Empire, and of the old world. 27 Hypocrisy of M^tesuma last King of M^xico.
554 History of the Indies not to be contemned, and why. 495 History of
M^xico kept in the Library of Vatican. 550 History of Mexico how framed. 446
Horses goodly and strong at the Indies. 301 Horse-shooes of silver for want of
y^on. 212 House admirably filled with all sorts of beasts like to another Noah's Ark. 484 Humor of the Jews contrary to that of the Indians. 76
I.
Jealousy of the Indies one against an other for renown of valor. 472
Idleness bannished by the Inguas as dangerous for the subjects. 457 Idol
carried by four Priests for a guide, whenas the Mexicaines did seek a new
land like to the children of Israel. 504 Idols of the kings Inguas reverenced
as themselves. 356 Island of Su^atra now called Taproba^a. 37 Island ^tl^n^ik^ of
Pla^^ a mere fab^e 72 Island of fagots made with exceeding labor to pass an
army upon the sea. 550 Iland^s very far from the firm land no^ inhabi^ed.
^9 I^nmortalitie of the soul believed by the Indies. 347 Indies, what it
signifies, and what we understand by that word. 47 Weast Indies, most popular
governements, in the which there were but two kingdoms. 453 Indians not
greatly desirous of silver. 76 Indians have lived in troops, as those do of
Florida, Br^sill, and other places. 80 Indians good swimmers. 168 Indians had
no proper word to signify God. 334 The Indians know all Arts necessary for
man's life, without any need one of another. 466 Infants sacrificed to the
Sun. 336 Inguas kings of Peru worshipped after their deaths. 344 The Inguas
empery continued above 300. years. 471 Inguas married their sisters. 455
Inundation of Nile a natural thing, though it seem supernatural. 88 Justice,
by whom executed in Mexico. 486 Indian books how they can be made without
letters. 440 Justice severely executed by Motesuma the last king of Mexico. 570
Integrity of women greatly honored by the Mexicaines. 409 Inventions of
Iupanguy Ingua to deprive his father and brother of the kingdom. 476
L.
LAke exceeding hot in the midst of a cold land. 171 Lake of Mexico having
two kinds of water. 172 Lakes on the tops of mountains, and how they grow.
171 Lactanti^ laughes at the Perepatetiks touching the heaven. 2 Lactantius
con^uted touching the Antipodes. 21 Ladders of leather to come out of the
mines. 230 Lands of excellent temperature not yet discovered. 190 Lawyers have
erred. 432 Liberality of Autzol the eight king of Mexico. 551 Litters of
massy gold. 212 Lions of Peru unlike to them of Afftrike. 70 the Indians hunt
them. 303
M.
MAlaca, formerly called, the golden Ch^rsonesus. 37 Mamaco^as ancient women,
as it were mothers to the virgins secluded. 366 Mameys, a fruit like unto
peaches. 276 Manati a monstrous fish that feeds in the fields, it is like to
flesh when ye eat it. 164 Mandarins Indian officers, how hard it is to be
capable of those offices. 440 Mangocapa the fi^^t Ingua, and what they feign of
him. 474 Maguey, a tree of woonders, and to what use it serves. 273 Mandarin
tongue is the writing of the Indians, and is done by characters. 441 Many rare
things in nature, known more by chance tha^ by industry 63 Man's blood drunk
by the slave that should be sacrificed. 425 Marriage of the Indians how
celebrated. 408 Marriage amongst the Indians defended only in the first
degree. 469 Marriage of the Inguas with their sisters unlawful. 170 Marks of
some navigations of the Ancients. 61 Mattins at midnight practiced by the
Devils ministers. 365 Mays, Indian corn, how they eat it, and make drink
thereof. 253 Mechoacanes enim^es to the Mexicans, and why. 506 Men, how they
might pass to the Indies. 51 and how they might people it. 7^ Men and women
sacrificed at the death of the Inguas, to serve him in the other world. 346
Men made gods, and then sacrificed. 357 Men being sacrificed eaten by the
Priests. 385 Mineralles imitate plants in their manner of growing. 203 Mines,
some wandering, some fixed. 217 Mines in old time very rich, yet nothing near
to them of Potozi. 224 Mines exceeding painful. 228 Mines of quickesilver in
Spain. 238 Middle region of the air cold, and why. 108 Milles to grind
^ettalls. 246 Metal poor and rich what they be. 217 Metal, the nearer that
it is to the superficies of the earth, the richer. 229 Mettalls why created.
205 Mettalles are no^ found but in barren grounds. 209 M^xi, chief of the
people that came from Mexico from whom they took their name. 506 Mexico a City
built in a Lake. 170 Mockery of the Mexicains against the Tlatelulcos af^et
they had vanquished them. 548 Month at the Indies of twenty days 434 Morning
most pleasant in Europe, and most troublesome in Peru. 113 Mulberie trees
planted in new Spain have greatly profited for silkworms 298 Muttons or sheep
of Peru serving ^or ass^s to carry their burdens, profitable above all other
beasts. 319
N.
NAvatalcas, people that reformed new Spain. 498 Navigation at this day very
easy. 56 Navigation of Solomon what it might be. 60 New Spain what it is. 187
New world lying almost all under the burning zone. 82 Nights in summer very
fresh at Peru in respect of Europe. 112 Nights of six months under the Pole. 29
Night, how it comes. 6 Nobility of Mexico murdered in dancing by the
Spaniardes. 576 Nostril of the kings of Mexico pierced to hang an emerald. 545
Nutts at the Indies unpleasant called by them imprisoned. 280
O.
Objection against Aristo^l^ not resolved. 28 Occasion of war betwixt the
Tap^necans and Mexicans. 526 Ocean at the Indies divided into the north and
south seas. 207 Ointment which the Indians did use, to make themselves fit to
speak with the Devil, the which made them cruel and without fear. 403 Ophir
is at the east Indies. 41 Opinion of some that the earthly Paradise is under
the Equinocti^ll not without reason. 114 Orders of priests in Mexico and their
ordinary offices. 365 Ord^^s of Kn^ghts in Mexico, and the marks they carried.
488 Oration of the Mexicains to the king of Culhuacan. 516 Oration that an old
man made to Acama^^xtl^ first king of Mexico. 517 Oration of a Mexicaine
knight, to retain the people incensed for the murder of their king. 526
Oration of an old Mexicaine for the election of a new king. 527 Oration of the
K. of Tescuco, made to Motecuma upon his election. 555
P.
PAchacamac the great Sanctuary of the Indies. 334 Pacos, wilful beasts, and
how they be governed. 319 Palaces of recreation and affliction. 563 Palisadoe
horrible to behold, all of dead men's heads. 362 Papas, roots whereof some
Indians make a bread called Cugno. 186 Papas a kind of bread. 259 Papas in
Mexico were the sovereign priests of the Idols. 365 Paragu^y a river in
America which overflowes like unto Nile. 88 Passage of Pariacaca very
dangerous by reason of the wind. 146 Passage of Pariacaca one of the highest
parts of the earth. ibid. P^ste of Mays, called by the Indians, the flesh of
their god Vuziliputzl^, which they eat. 393 Pastures at the Indies lie common,
which makes flesh good cheap. 299 Paltas, a delicate fruit, and good for the
stomach. 277 Painting, the book of fools. 439 Penance enjoined by the Indian
Confessors. 401 Partriges none in Peru. 70 Pericol^^gero a very heavy beast.
314 Parrots fly by stocks like unto Pigeons. 70 Pearls in old time more
esteemed than now. 251 Peru abounding in wine. 187 Peru abounds more in gold
and silver then all the rest of the Indies. 207 Peru, what part of the world it
is. 183 Peru, a name derived from a river of that country, not of Ophir, as
some think. 42 Perusiens very careful to preserve their History by tradition,
without letters or characters. 449 Pleasant manner of fishing at the Indies.
168 P^lots, why at this day they sit on the poope, and not on the prowe, as in
old time. 55 Physicians in former times very cunning at the Indies. 289 Pines,
or pine apples at the Indies. 262 Pinchao, an idol of the Sun, and with what
art he was framed. 361 Pleasant act of a Portugal, whereby he freed himself
from sacrificing. 346 Plane brings forth fruit all the year. 267 Plane leaf
fit to write on. 268 Planets moove not of themselves in a corruptible body. 7
Plants, why they profit more at the Indies than in Europe. 261 Plebeians
excluded from the Kings presence, and from all office by Motecuma. 557 Pliny
died in too curious a search. 196 Pole at the south not marked by any sixed
star. 16 Pongo the most dangerous passage in the world upon the river of
Amazons. 176 Portugalles very expert in the Art of navigation. 17 Pot^zi, a
mountain famous for the rich mines, and how they were discovered. 219
Presages threatening the ruin of states not to be contemned as vain things 560
Priests which every Indian Nobleman had like unto Almoners. 349 Priests of
Idolles how they consulted with their gods. 360 Pretext of the Inguas to
enlarge their dominions, was religion, which they held for the best. 472
Processions of the Indians. 394 Prodigious sights before the ruin of Mexico.
561 Profit which may be gathered by the reading of these excerable Indian
superstitions. 428 Property most rare of the Adamant unknown to the Ant^ents.
55 Province next to Mexico left unconquered, to exercise their youth, and to
take Captains to sacrifice. 541 Ptol^me and Avicen held the bu^ning zone to be
habitable. 102 Punas, a desert in Peru, where the air killes both men and
beasts. 149 Pyramide of fire appearing in the heaven for a whole year, before
the ruin of the Mexicain Empire. 561 Pr^te Ians country exceeding hot. 106
Q.
QVantitie of gold which comes yearly from the Indies into Spain 215
Quetzalcoalt the merchants god, and where he was worshipped. 354 Qu^ppos bows
serving as registers for the remembering of that which passed in Peru. 449
Quicke-silver flies from all mettalles, except gold and silver. 234
Quicke-silver turns into smoke, and again into quickesilver. 235
Quickesilver heavier than any other metal. 236 Quickesilver how it is drawn
out of the mines. 239
R.
Rain caused by the heat of the burning zone. 89 Rayme the first month of the
Indians, and it answ ers with December. 411 Our Reason ignorant even of natural
things. 59 Regions very delightful at the Indies. 114 Regions under the
Equinoctial very temperate. 101 Religion served the Indians for a p^^text to
make war. 80 Remedy against the alteration which the wind causes in
Pariacaca. 147 Riches of some Islands in new Spain. 187 Riches incredible of
the Perusiens, when they were taken by the Spaniards. 462 Rice very common at
the Indies. 260 River of Amazons diversely called, it is termed the empress of
all rivers. 92 Rivers admirable under the burning zone. 93 River of Amazons
three score leagues wide at the mouth. 92 River of Magdale^ne called the Great
river runs far into the sea and mingles not his water. ibid. Rivers,
h^lles, great stones, and tops of mountains worshipped by the Indian. 355
Ro^kes r^sing in the midd^st of the sea and no bo^tome to be sound about them.
202 Roses how they grow at the Indies. 283 Round^^s of the heaven, and the
mo^^en thereof unknown to some doctors of the church. 2 Roots wors^^pt by the
Indians. 341 Roo^es very profitable at the Indies. ibidem A Roll the ma^ke of
the kings Inguas, as here the S^^pter and the Crown. 297 Ruin of a great
village full of sorcerers. 199
S.
SAcrifices of men how they were made. 383 Sacrifices diversely made by the
Indians, and upon diverse occasions. 376 Sacrifices usual with the Indians in
their necessities. 480 Sainos strange beasts to hunt, and how they may be
slain. 312 Salsepareille, good for the French disease. 174 Sciences known by
the Chinois. 444 S. Croix of the Sierre a province of Charcas, how it was
converted to the faith. 580 Sea held by the Ancients vnnavigable beyond the
straights of G^braltar. 26 Seas, some hot, some cold. 111 Seawater refreshes
although it be salt. 107 Silver, why esteemed above all other metal next to
gold. 216 Silver more esteemed in some places than gold. 217 S^lver, how it is
refined by fire, and how by quickesilver. 218 Silver of diverse sorts. 232
Silver, how it is tried. 247 Soccabons artificially invented to draw forth the
metal more easily. 229 The Sun the nearer it is unto us the more it heates.
^3 The Sun has contrary effects within the burning zone, and without the
tropickes. 87 The Sun by his great force causes moisture under the
Equinoctial. 95 The Sun worshipped commonly by the Indians. 335 A Sorceresse
sister to the Idol which built the town of Mal^nalco, where there are none
but sorcerers. 507 Spaniards borne at the Indies called Crollos. 278 Spaniards
held for gods. 69 Spaniards called by the Indians Virachocas, children of God,
and why. 480 Spanish ships esteemed by the Indians for rocks, and why. 69 The
Spaniard one year with an other draws a million of silver from Potozi. 225
Springs of Nile sought for by Caesar. 30 Springs, some blew, others red like
blood. 175 Snakes, the Arms of the kings of Peru. 338 Black Spots in the
milken way at the south. 16 Stars, according to the Doctors of the Church
moove of themselves. 2 Stars worshipped by the Indians for diverse reasons.
336 Stones superstitiously offered at passages to have fair way. 341 Stones
carved and cut like wood. 173 Stones, half gold, half stone. 212 Stones of a
wonderful greatness artificially joined together by the Indians in their
buildings without any mortar. 459 Straight of Magellan discovered by a
Portugal, and carries the same name. 152 Straight at the Articke Pole, which
they imagine to be in Florida, not yet discovered. 157 Straight of Gibraltar
called in old time the P^llers of H^rcules. 151 Stuffes of three sorts made
of wool. 465 Su^^illes Indian nosegay^s, they love them greatly, and present
them to their guests. 282 Supe^st^tion used at the carrying of a stream
through Mexico. 552
T.
Tobacco, a plant used for a counterpoison. 289 Ta^bos', according to the
opinion of the Indians, the most ancient race of men. 79 Temperature quite
contrary in less tha^ fifty leagues. 183 Temple at Cusco like to the Pantheon
at Rome. 359 Tescalipuca the god of Iubiles at Mexico, and his ornaments. 353
Tharsis sometimes signifies the Crisolite or Iacinth, somet^mes the Sea, which
is of that color, by the reverberation of the Sun. 46 Tharsis in the
Scripture is not Tarso a city in Cilicia. 47 Tharsis and Ophir general words
in the Scripture. ibid. Tlas^altecas, the sixth generation of the Mava^alcas,
they gave entry to the Spaniardes. 501 Tlacaell^c, the most valiant Captain
the Mexicaines had. 530 Thanksgiving after a victory. 574 Tiburons, a very
greedy fis^. 165 Three kinds of beasts found at the Indies. 303 Three kinds
of land at the Indies, and their qualities. 178 Three things ordinarily used in
all the Indian ceremonies. 410 Three kinds of government known at the Indies.
471 Tigres at Peru more cruel to the Indians than to the Spaniards. 70 Tigres
may swim seven or eight leagues by sea. ibid. Tooth of a Giant of an
exceeding greatness. 501 Tree of a wonderful greatness. 291 Tit^caca a Lake of
wonderful greatness. 169 The Trinity imitated by the Devil, and worsh^pped
by the Indians in three Images of the Sun. 412 Tunall, a tree of a strange
form fit for many uses. 274
V.
Valor of the Indians. 586 Valleys hotter than the mountains, and why. 108
Valleys the best habitations of Peru. 185 Variety of temperature of lands
lying under the Equinoctial. 105 Verm^llion and Quickesilver grow in the some
stone. 237 Victories of the Mexicans against the Tapenecans. 533 Vicugnes a
kind of wild sheep, the flesh is good for the pain in the e^es. 316 Vines
without fruit in new Spain. 188 Vines in Peru and Ch^lle bear good wine. 296
Vines of the vallie of Y^a, which do grow and are never watered with any
rain, and how. ibid Vines that carry grapes every month in the year. ibid.
Viraco^h^, the name which the Indians gave to their supreme god, with others of
great power. 333 Vuziliputzli the chief idol of Mexico and his ornaments. 352
Vittells set upon the tombs of dead men to feed them. 347 Voice heard
foretelling the ruin of Motecuma. 565 Volcan of Guat^mala more admirable than
all the rest. 194 Volcans how entertained. 196 Voyage of Hannon the
Carthagin^an admirable in his time. 36 Vros bru^ish people which esteem not
themselves. 94 Utility of all natural histories. 117 Unction of Vuzilovitli
the second king of Mexico. 521
W.
WAy by which the Spaniards go to the Indies, and their return. 128 Waters of
Guayaquil most sovereign for the French disease. 174 Wars of the Mexicans
most commonly to take prisoners. 483 Western winds hurtefull to silkewormes.
144 Western winds blow not in the burning zone. 126 Whales how taken by the
Indians, and how they eat them. 167 Winds very dangerous, which kill and
preserve the dead bodies without corruption. 147 Winds called Brises in the
burning zone, which come from the east. 127 Winds, how many, and their names.
133 Winds of the land in the burning zone, blow rather by night than by day,
and those of the sea contrary, and why. 142 Wind corrupts iron. 144 Winds
that blow southerly make the coast habitable. 125 One Wind has diverse
properties according to the place where it reigns, and the cause. 120 Wind
does cause strange diversities of temperature. 112 Wisdom of this world weak
in divine, yea in humane things. 31 Winter and summe^, and the cause. 90 Woods
rare and sweet at the Indies. 292 Words of a man which had his heart pulled
out. 390 Writing of the Chinois was from the top downward, and the Mexicans
from the foot upward. 447
X.
XAmabusis, pilgrims forced to confess their sins upon the top of a
rock. 400
Y.
YCa and Arica, and their manner of sailing in skins. 63 Year^ at the Indies
divided into eighteen months. 432 Youth very carefully instructed in Mexico.
489 Year at Peru approaching nearer to ours than that of Mexico. 437 Ytu a
great feast at the Indies which they made in their necessity. 416 Yupangu^
Ingua was in Peru like to an other Numa in Rome for the making of Laws. 261
Z.
ZEphiru^ a pleasant and wholesome wind. 126 Zone which they call burning, the
Ancients held inhabitable. 30 Burning zone in some parts temperate, in others
cold, and in others hot. 101 Burning Zone peopled, and pleasant, contrary to
the opinion of Philosophers. 86 Burning Zone why temperate. 105 In the burning
Zone they sail easily from east to weast, and not contrary, and why. 132 In
the burning Zone the neerenesse of the Sun does not always cause rain. 100
The end of the Table.
Errata.
111.22. for, Paraguen read Paraguay. 120.30. for, River read Region. 135.32.
for, to read in 141.28. for, the motion read without any ^otion 148.33. for,
inhabited read not inhabited 164.17. for, green read great 198.23. for,
hundred read five hundred 213.21. for, Curuma read Cucuma 229.17. for, to
read and 235.11. for, it read that 241.8, for, it read his 253.12, for,
maces read marks 274.8. for, little read like 278.19. for, is no read is a
351.25. for, many read in many 368.2. for, possession read profession 397.14.
for, to the communion read to the people in manner of a communion 514.21. for
partial read particular 324.32. for, convenient in a manner read in a
convenient manner. 335.3. for, of read to 347.25. for, neither read in their
Gentle Reader, from the folio 225. line 14, 16, 19, 20. where you find pieces
read pezoes till you come to folio 322. line 22.

THE FIRST BOOK of the Natural and Moral History of the East and West
Indies.
Of the opinions of some Authors, which supposed that the Heavens did not
extend to the newfound world. The first Chapter.
THE Ancients were so far from conceypt, that this newfound world was
peopled by any Nation, that many of them could not imagine there was any land
on that part: and (which is more worthy of admiration) some have flatly
denied, that the Heavens (which we now behold) could extend thither. For
although the greatest part, (yea, the most famous among the Philosophers) have
well known that the Heaven was round (as in effect it is) and by that means
did compass and comprehend within it self the whole earth: yet many, (yea, of
the holy doctors of greatest authority) have disagreed in opinion upon this
point: supposing the frame of this universal world to be fashioned like unto
a house: whereas the roof that covers it, invirons only the upper part, and
not the rest: inferring by their reasons, that the earth should else hang in
the midst of the air, the which seemed unto them void of sense. For as we
see in every building, the groundwork and foundation on the one side, and the
cover opposite unto it: even so in this great building of the world, the Heaven
should remain above on the one part, and the earth under it. The glorious
Chrysostom, (a man better seen in the study of holy Scriptures, then in the
knowledge of Philosophy) seems to be of this opinion, when in his
Commentaries upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, he does laugh at those,
Chrysostom. homil. 14 and 17. in epist and Hebre.
which hold the heavens to be round. And it seems, the holy Scripture does
infer as much; terming the Heavens a Tabernacle or Frame built by the hand of
God. And he passes farther upon this point, saying, that which mooves and
goes, Chrysostom.hom. 6.13 in Gen^s. and hom. 12 ad pop. Antioch.
is not the Heaven, but the Sun, Moon and Stars which moove in the heaven,
even as Sparrowes and other birds moove in the air: contrary to that, which
the Philosophers hold, that they turn with the Heaven itself, as the arms of
a wheel do with the wheel. Theodore^.
Theodoret a very grave Author, follows Chrysostom in this opinion, and
Theophilus likewise, as he is accustomed almost in all things. Theophil. in
capitul. 8. ad Hebre.
But Lactantius Firmian, above all the rest, holding the same opinion, Lact.
lib. 3. divin. inst. ca. 24.
does mock the Peripatetickes and Academickes, which give the heaven a round
form, placing the earth in the midst thereof: for that it seems ridiculous
unto him, that the earth should hang in the air, as is before said. By which
his opinion, he is conformable unto Epicurus, who holds, that on the other
part of the earth, there is nothing but a Chaos and infinite gulf. And it
seems that S. Jerome draws near to this opinion, Iev. in epist. a^
Ephesians.^^^. 2.^ 4.
writing upon the Epistle to the Ephesians in these words. The natural
Philosopher by his contemplation pierces to the height of heaven, and on the
other part he finds a great vast in the depth and bowels of the earth. Some
likewise say that Procopius affirms (the which I have not seen) upon the
book of Genesis, Sixtu^ Senens. lib. 5. biblio. annot at. 3.
that the opinion of Aristotle, touching the form and circular motion of the
Heaven, is contrary and repugnant to the holy Scriptures. But whatsoever the
Ancients say or hold touching this point, it must not trouble us, for that it
is well known and verified, that they have not been so studious in the
knowledge and demonstrations of Philosophy, being busied in other studies of
far greater importance. But that which is more to be admired, is, that S.
Augustine himself, Aug. lib. 2. de Genesis ad lit. c. 9.
so well seen in all natural Sciences, yea, very learned in Astrology and
Physic, remaynes yet still in doubt, not able to resolve, whether the Heaven
did compass in the earth on all parts. Id. Psalm. 35.
What care I (says he) if we suppose the Heaven does inviron the earth on all
parts like unto a bowl, being in the midst of the world, as a bottom is
compassed with thread: or that we say it is not so, and that the Heaven
covers the earth of one part only, as a great Basin that hangs over it. In
the same place he seems to show, (nay, he speaks plainly) that there is
no certain demonstration, to prove the figure of the world to be round, but
only by simple conjectures. In which places cited and others; they hold the
circular motion of the Heaven very doubtful. But we ought not to take it
offencively, nor esteem less of the Doctors of the holy Church, if in some
points of Philosophy and natural knowledge, they have varied in opinion from
that which is held for good philosophy; seeing all their study has been to
know, preach and serve the Creator of all things, wherein they have bin
excellent, and having well employed their studies in causes of greater weight,
it is a small matter in them, not to have known all particularities concerning
the creatures. But those vain Philosophers of our age, are much more to be
blamed, who having attained to the knowledge of the being and order of the
creatures, and of the course and motion of the Heavens, have not yet learned
(wretched as they are) to know the Creator of all things, but busying
themselves wholly in his works, have not yet mounted by their imaginations to
the knowledge of the Sovereign Author thereof, Sapien. 13. Romans 1.
as the holy Scripture teaches us: or if they have known him, they have not
served and glorified him, as they ought, blinded with their imaginations,
whereof the Apostle does accuse and blame them.

That the Heaven is round on all parts, mooving in his course of it self.
CHAP. 2.
But coming to our subject: there is no doubt, but the opinion which Aristotle
and the other Peripateticks held with the Stoics, (that the figure of Heaven
was round, and did moove circularly in his course) is so perfectly true; as we
which do now live in Peru, see it visibly. Wherein experience should be of more
force, then all Philosophical demonstrations, being sufficient to prove that
the Heaven is round, and comprehends and contaynes the earth within it of al
parts. And to clear any doubt that might grow, it suffices that I have seen
in this our Hemisphere, that part of Heaven which turns about this earth, the
which was unknown to the Ancients: and have observed the two Poles, whereon
the Heavens turn, as upon their Axeltrees. I say, the Articke or North Pole,
which those of Europe behold, and the other Antarticke or Southern Pole
(whereof saint Augustine is in doubt) the which we change and take for the
North here at Peru, Aug. lib. 2. de Genes. ad lit. cap. 10.
having passed the Equinoctial line. Finally, it suffices that I have sailed
near 70. degrees from North to South, that is, forty of the one side of the
line, and 23. on the other, omitting at this present the testimony of others,
which have sailed much farther then my self, and in a greater height, coming
near 70. degrees toward the South. Who will not confess, but the ship called
the Victori^ (worthy doubtless of eternal memory) has won the honor and
praise to have best discovered and compassed the round earth, yea, that great
Chaos, and infidite Vast, which the ancient Philosophers affirmed to be under,
the earth, having compassed about the world, and circled the vastness of the
great Oceans. Who is he then, that will not confess by this Navigation, but
the whole earth (although it were bigger then it is described) is subject to
the feet of man, s^eing he may measure it? Thus, without doubt the Heaven is of
a round and perfect figure; and the earth likewise embracing and joining with
the water, makes one globe or round bowl framed of these two elements, having
their bounds and limits within their own roundnes and greatness. The which may
be sufficiently proved by reasons of Philosophy and Astrology, leaving al
subtle definitions commonly objected. That, to the most perfect body, (which is
the Heaven) we must give the most perfect figure, which without doubt is round:
whose circular motion could not be firm nor equal in it self, if it had any
corner or nooke of any side, or if it were crooked, (as of necessity it must
be) if the Sun, Moon and stars, made not their course about the whole world.
But leaving all these reasons, it seems that the Moon is sufficient in this
case, as a faithful witness of the Heaven it self, seeing that her Eclypse
happens, but when as the roundnesse of the earth opposes it self diametrally
betwixt her and the Sun, and by that means keeps the Sunnebeames from
shining on her. The which could not chance, if the earth were not in the midst
of the world compassed in and environed by the whole Heaven. Some have doubted
whether the light of the Moon were borrowed from the brightness of the Sun:
but it is needless, seeing there can be found no other cause of the Eclipses,
full, and quarters of the Moon, but the communication of the beams which
proceed from the Sun. Aug. ep. 109. ad Ianuarium. cap. 4.
In like sort if we will carefully examine this matter, we shall find that
the darkness of the night proceeds from no other cause but from the shadow
which the earth makes, not suffering the light of the sun to pass to the
other part of the heaven, where his beams shine not. If then it be so, that
the sun passes no farther, neither does cast his beams on the other part of
the earth, but only turns about, and returns to his setting, making a ridge
upon the earth by his turning, (the which he must of force confess, that shall
deny the roundnes of the heaven, seeing (according to their saying) the heaven
as a basen does only cover the face of the earth,) it should then plainly
follow, that we could not observe the difference betwixt the days and nights,
the which in some regions be short and long according to the seasons, and in
some are always equal: the which S. Augustine notes in his books De Genes.
ad litter am. August. lib. de Genes. ad litteram. cap. 19.
That we may easily comprehend the oppositions, conversions, elevations,
descents, and all other aspects and dispositions of Planets and stars, when
we shall understand they move, and yet notwithstanding the heaven remains
firm and immovable. The which seems to me easy to comprehend, and will be
to all others, if it may be lawful to imagine that which my fancy does
conceive: for if we suppose that every star and planet be a body of it self,
and that it be led and guided by an Angel, Dan. 14.
as Habacuc was carried into Babylon: who I pray you is so blind, but sees
that all the diverse aspects which we see appear in planets and stars may
proceed from the diversity of motion which he that guides them does
voluntarily give them. We cannot then with any reason affirm, but that this
space and region by which they feign that stars do continually march and roll,
is elementarie and corruptible, seeing it divides it self when they pass, the
which undoubtedly do not pass by any void place. If then the region wherein
the stars and planets move, be corruptible, the stars and planets of their
own motion should be, by reason likewise corruptible, and so by consequence
they must alter, change, and be finally extinct: for naturally that which is
contained is no more durable then that which contains. And to say that the
Celestial bodies be corruptible, it agrees not with the psalm, That God made
them for ever: Psalm. 148.
And it is less conformable to the order and preservation of this universal
world. I say moreover, to confirm this truth, that the heavens move, and in
them the stars march in turning, the which we cannot easily discern with our
eyes, seeing we see that not only thestarres do move, but also the regions and
wh^le parts of heaven: I speak not only of the shining and most r^splendent
parts, as of that which we call Via lactea, and the vulgar, S. Jacques way, but
also of the darker and obscurer parts in heaven. For there we see really, as it
were spots and darkness, which are most apparent: the which I remember not to
have seen at any time in Europe, but at Peru, and in this other Hemisphere I
have often seen them very apparent. These spots are in color and form like
unto the Eclips of the Moon, and are like unto it in blacknes and darkness:
they march, fixed to the same stars, always of one form and bigness, as we
have noted by infallible observation. It may be this will seem strange to
some, and they will demand whence these spots in heaven should grow? To the
which I cannot answer otherwise at this time, but (as the Philosophers do
affirm) that this Via lactea, or milken way, is compounded of the thickest
parts of the heaven: and for this cause it receives the greater light, and
contrariwise there are other parts very thin and transparent, the which
receiving less light seem more black and obscure. Whether this be the true
reason or no, I dare not certainly affirm. Yet is it true, that according to
the figure these spots have in heaven, they move with the same proportion with
their stars without any separation: the which is a true, certain, and often
noted experience. It follows then by all that we have said, that the heaven
contains in it all the parts of the earth, circling continually about it,
without any more doubt.

How the holy Scripture teaches us that the earth is in midst of the world.
CHAP. 3.
ALthough it seems to Procopius, Gaza, and to some others of his opinion, that
it is repugnant to the holy Scripture to place the earth in the midst of the
world, and to say that the heaven is round: yet in truth, Hest 13. Sap.
1.27.11.18. Psalm. 91.7.23.39.97. Job 37. Eccles. 1.
this doctrine is not repugnant, but conformable to that which it does teach
us. For laying aside the terms which the Scripture it self does use in many
places, The roundnesse of the earth. And that which it says in an other place
that whatsoever is corporeal, is vnvironed and compassed in by the heavens,
and contained within the roundnes thereof: at the least thy cannot deny, but
that place of Ecclesiastes is very plain, where it is said, The Sunneriseth
and sets, and returns to the same place, and so begins to rise again: he
takes his course by the South, turning toward the North: this spirit march^th
compassing about all things, and then returns to the same place. In this
place the paraphrase and exposition of Gregory Neocesarien, or Nazianzene,
says, The Sun having run about the whole earth, returns as it were
turning to the same point. That which Solomon saves, (being interpreted by
Gregory) could not be trve, if any part of the earth were not environed with
the heaven. And so S. Jerome does understand it, Ierom. cap. 3. ad Ephesians.
writing upon the Epistle to the Ephesians, in this sort, The most common
opinion affirms (agreeing with Ecclesiastes:) That the heaven is round,
mooving circularly like unto a bowl. And it is most certain, that no round
figure conteyneth in it, either longitude, latitude, height or depth, for that
all parts are equal. Whereby it appears, according to S. Jerome, That those
which hold the heaven to be round, are not repugnant to the holy Scripture, but
conformable to the same. Basil. hom. li. 1. Hexam. prope finem.
And although that S. Basile especially, and S. Ambrose (who does usually
imitate him in his books called Hexameron) seem somewhat doubtful of this
point: yet in the end they grant that the world is round. It is true that S.
Ambrose does not yield to this quintessence, Amb. lib. 10. Hexam cap. 6.
which Aristotle attributes to the heavens: without doubt it is a goodly thing
to see with what a grace and excellent style the holy Scripture treates of the
situation and firmenes of the earth, to breed in us a wonderful admiration,
and no less content to behold the unspeakable power and wisdom of the
Creator. Psalm. 74.
For that in one place, God himself says, that it was he which planted the
pillars which support the earth: giving us to understand (as S. Ambrose does
well expound it) that the unmeasurable weight of the whole earth is held up by
the hands of the divine power. Amb. 1. Hexa.
The holy Scripture does commonly so call them, and uses this phrase, naming
them the pillars of heaven and earth: not those of Atlas, as the Poets feign:
but of the eternal word of God, who by his virtue supports both heaven and
earth. Moreover, the holy Scripture in an other place teaches, that the earth,
or a great part thereof, Job. 9 26.
is joined to, and compassed in by the Element of water, speaking generally,
that God placed the earth upon the waters. And in another place, Heb. 1.
that he framed the roundnes of the earth upon the Sea. And although S.
Augustine does not conclude upon this text as a matter of faith, that the earth
and the water make one globe in the midst of the world, pretending by this
means to give another exposition to the words of the Psalm: Aug. in Ps. 13^
yet notwithstanding it is most certain, that by the words of the psalm we
are given to understand, that we have no other reason to imagine any other
ciment or uniting to the earth then the Element of water, the which although it
be pliant and moveable, yet does it support and inviron this great mass of the
earth, the which was wrought by the wisdom of that great Architect. They say,
the earth is built upon the waters, and upon the sea: but contrariwise, the
earth is rather under the waters: for according to common judgment and
imagination, that which is on the other part of the earth which we inhabit,
seems to be under the earth, and so by the same reason, the waters and sea,
which do compass in the earth on the other part, should be underneath, and
the earth above: yet the very truth is, that what is properly beneath, that is
always in the midst of the universal: but the holy scripture frames it self
to our manner of conceiving and speaking. Some may demand (seeing the earth is
set upon the waters, as the scripture says,) whereon the waters are placed,
or what support have they? And if the earth and the water make one round globe,
how can all this monstrous mass be sustained? To this the holy scripture
answers them in another place, giving us greatest cause to admire the power
of the Creator: and says in these words: Job. 26.
The earth extends toward the North upon the Vast, and stays hanging upon
nothing. The which in truth is very well spoken, for that really it seems
this heap of earth and water is set upon nothing, when we describe it in the
midst of the air, as in truth it is. But this wonder which men so much
admire, God himself has not laid open, demanding of the same Job in these
terms: Job 38.
Tell me if thou can, who has laid the line or cast the lead for the
building of the world, and with what mortar the foundations have been laid
and joined. Finally, to make us understand the fashion and model of this
admirable frame of the world, the Prophet David accustomed to sing and praise
his divine works, says very well in a Psalm made of this subject, Psalm. 103.
in these words, Thou which have built the earth upon firmenes it self, that
it cannot stagger nor move for ever and ever. Meaning to show the cause why the
earth set in the midst of the air, falls not, nor staggereth from place to
place, for that by nature it has sure foundations, laid by the most wise
Creator, to the end it might sustain it self without any other support. Man's
imagination is therefore deceived in this place, seeking other foundations of
the earth, and for want thereof, does measure divine things, according to
human reason. So that we need not to fear (how great or heavy soever this
mass of earth then hanging in the air seems to be,) that it can fall or
turn topsy tur^y, being assured upon this point: for that the same Psalmist
says, that it shall never be overthrown. Truly David with reason (after he
had beheld and sung the wonderful works of the Lord) does not cease to praise
him in the same, Psalm. 103.
saying, O how great and wonderful are the works of the Lord. It appears
that all spring from his knowledge. And in truth (if I shall freely speak my
opinion touching this point) often in my travel passing the great gulfes of
the Ocean, and marching by other regions of so strange lands, staying to behold
and consider the greatness of these works of the Lord, I felt a wonderful
consolation of the sovereign wisdom and greatness of the Creator, who shines
in his works: in comparison whereof, all the Palaces, Castells, and princely
buildings, together with all the inventions of man, seem nothing, yea, are
base and contemptible in respect thereof. O how often has come into my mind
and mouth that place of the Psalm, which says thus, Great comfort have thou
given me O Lord by thy works: I will not cease to rejoice in the contemplation
of the works of thy hands. Really and in truth, the works of God have (I know
not what) secret and hidden grace and vertve: the which although they be often
beheld, yet do they still cause a new taste and content: whereas contrariwise,
the works of man, although they be built with exquisite art, yet often seen,
they are no more esteemed, but breed a distaste: be they most pleasant
Gardins, Palaces, or stately Temples, be they Piramides of proud buildings,
Pictures, carved images, or stones of rare work and invention, or whatsoever
else adorned with all the beauties possible: Yet is it most certain that viewing
them twice or thrice with attention, the eye presently turns away, being
glutted with the sight thereof. But if you behold the sea with attention, or
some steep mountain, growing from a plain to a strange height, or the
fields clad in their natural verdure with pleasant flowers, or the raging
course of some river, beating continually against the rocks: finally, what
work of nature soever, although it be often viewed, yet does it still breed a
new content and never gluttes the sight: the which is like unto a stately
bancket of the divine wisdom, which does always cause a new consideration
without any lothing.

Containing an answer to that which is objected out of the holy Scripture,
against the roundnes of the earth. CHAP. 4.
REturning then to the figure of heaven, I know not out of what authority of
the holy scripture they can prove that it is not round, nor his motion
circular: neither do I see (whereas S. Paul calls the heaven a Tabernacle, or
a Tent which God made, Heb. 8.
and not man:) how can it be applied to this purpose: for although he tells
us that it was made by God, yet must we not therefore conjecture that the
heaven covers the earth like to a roof on the one part only, neither that
the heaven was framed without motion, as it seems some would infer. The
Apostle in this place treated of the conformity of the ancient Tabernacle of
the law, saying thereupon, that the Tabernacle of the new law of grace, is
heaven: into the which, the great Priest Jesus Christ, entered once by his
blood: and thereby is understood, that there is as great pre-eminence of the
new above the old, as there is difference betwixt the author of the new, which
is God, and of the old which was man: although it be most certain, that the
old was built by the wisdom of God, who instructed his workman BeZeleell.
Exo. 36.
Neither must we imagine that these comparisons, parables, and allegories, do
in all things agree with that whereunto they are applied, as the happy
Crysostome has learnedly spoken upon this point. Chrisost. in 20. cap.
The other authority (which S. Augustine says is alleged of some to show
that the heaven is not round) is this, The heavens stretch forth like unto a
skin. Psalm. 103.
Whereby he concludes that it is not round, but flat on the upper part,
whereunto the same Doctor does answer very well and familiarly, giving us to
understand that that place of the Psalm, is not properly to be understood of
the figure of heaven, Aug. 2. de Genesis ad litterans. ca. 9.
but only to show with what facility God built so great a heaven, being no
more painful for him to build so huge a cover as the heaven is, then to
unfold a double skin. Or else the Psalmist pretending to show us the great
majesty of God, to whom the heaven with his greatness and beauty does serve in
like manner, as our tents and pavilions in the field. The which was well
expressed by a Poet calling it, The Tent of the clear heaven. In like sort,
the place of Isaii, which says, Heaven serves me as a chair, and the earth
for a foote-stoole. Isaie. 66.
But if we follow the error of the Antromorphites, which did atribute
corporal members unto God, according to his divinity: we should have occasion
upon this last text, to examine how it were possible the earth should be a
foote-stoole to Gods feet, and how the same God could hold his feet of the
one part and the other, and many heads round about, seeing that he is in all
parts of the world, which were a vain and ridiculous thing. We must
therefore conclude, that in the holy scriptures we ought not to follow the
letter which killes, 2. Cori^. ^.2.
but the spirit which quickneth, as says S. Paul.

Of the fashion and form of Heaven, at the newfound world. CHAP. 5.
MAny in Europe demand of what form and fashion Heaven is in the Southern
parts, for that there is no certainty found in ancient books, who although
they grant there is a Heaven on this other part of the world, yet come they
not to any knowledge of the form thereof, although in truth they make mention
of a goodly great Star seen in those parts, Plin. lib. 6. c^p. 22.
which they call Canopus. Those which of late days have sailed into these
parts, have accustomed to write strange things of this heaven; that it is very
bright, having many goodly stars: and in effect, things which come far,
are commonly described with increase. But it seems contrary unto me, holding
it for certain, that in our Region of the North, there is a greater number and
bigger Stars; finding no stars in these parts, which exceed the Fisher or
the Chariot in bigness. It is true, that the Cross in these parts is very
fair and pleasing to behold: we call the Cross, four notable and apparent
stars, which make the form of a cross, set equally and with proportion. The
ignorant suppose this Cross to be the southern Pole, for that they see the
Navigators take their height thereby, as we are accustomed to do by the North
star. But they are deceyved, and the reason, why Sailors do it in this
^orte, is for that in the South parts there is no fixed star that marks the
Pole, as the North star does to our Pole. And therefore they take their
height by the star at the foot of the Cross, distant from the true and fixed
Pole Antarticke thirty degrees, as the North star is distant from the Pole
Articke three degrees or little more. And so it is more difficult to take the
height in those parts, for that the said star at the foot of the Cross must
be right, the which chances but in one hour of the night; which is in diverse
seasons of the year in diverse hours, and often times it appears not in the
whole night, so as it is very difficult to take the height. And therefore the
most expert Pilots regard not the Cross, taking the height of the Sun by the
Astrolabe, by which they know in what height they are: wherein commonly the
Portugals are more expert, as a Nation that has more discourse in the Art of
Navigation then any other. There are also other stars in these southern
parts, which in some sort resemble those of the North. That which they call the
Milken way, is larger and more resplendent in the south parts, appearing
therein those admirable black spots, Via lactea.
whereof we have made mention. As for other particularities, let others speak
of them with greater curiositle, and let this which we have said, suffice for
this time.

That there is Land and Seavader the two Poles. CHAP. 6.
IIt is no small labor to have unfolded this doubt with this knowledge and
resolution, that there is a Heaven in these parts of the Indies, which does
cover them as in Europe, Asia, and A^^ri^ke. And this point serves often
against many Spaniards, who being here, sigh for Spain, having no discourse,
but of their country, They wonder, yea, they grow discontented with us,
imagining that we have forgotten and make small account of our native soil. To
whom we answer, that the desire to return into Spain, does nothing trouble
us, being as near unto Heaven at Peru, as in Spain: as saint Jerome says
well, writing unto Paulinus; That the gates of Heaven are as near unto
Brittanie, as to Jerusalem. But although the Heaven does compass in the world
of all pa^ts, yet must we not imagine that there is land necessarily on all
parts of the world. For being so, that the two elements of earth and water make
one globe or bowl, according to the opinion of the most renowned ancient
Authors, (as Plutarch testifies) and as it is prooved by most certain
demonstrations, Plut.^li.de plac^tis ^hil. cap. 9. and 1^.
we may conjecture, that the sea does occupy all this part, which is under
the Antartike or southern Pole, so as there should not remain any place in
these parts for the earth, the which saint Augustine does very learnedly hold
against them that maintain the Antipodes, saying, that although it be
prooved, and we believe that the world is round like to a bowl, we may not
therefore infer, that in this other part of the world, the earth is
uncovered, and without water. Without doubt, Aug. lib. 16. de c^vit. cap. 9.
saint Augustine speaks well upon this point; and as the contrary is not
prooved, so does it not follow, that there is any land discovered at the
Antarticke Pole. The which experience has now plainly taught us, for although
the greatest part of the world under the Pole Antarticke be sea, yet is it not
altogether, but there is likewise land, so as in all parts of the world, the
earth and water embrace one another, which truly is a thing to make us admire
and glorify the Art of the sovereign Creator. We know then by the holy
Scripture, that in the beginning of the world, G^^es. 1.
the waters were gathered together in one place, so as the earth remained
uncovered. Moreover, the same holy Writ does teach us, that these gatherings
together of the water were called Sea; and as there be many, so of necessity
there must be many Seas. And this diversity of seas is not only in the
Mediterranean Sea, whereas one is called Euxi^e, another the Caspian, an other
the Erethean or read Sea, an other the Persian, an other of Italy, and so
many others. But also in the great Ocean, which the holy Scripture does usually
call a gulf: although really and in truth it be but a Sea, yet in many and
diverse manners: as in respect of Peru and all America, the one is called the
North Sea, the other the South; and at the East Indies, the one is called the
Indian sea, the other that of China. And I have observed, as well by my own
navigation, as by the relation of others, that the Sea is never divided from
the Land above a thousand Leagues. And although the great Ocean stretches
far, yet does it never pass this measure. I will not for all this affirm
that we sail not above a thousand leagues in the Ocean, which were repugnant
to truth, being well known that the ships of Portugal have sailed four
times as much, and more; and that the whole world may be compassed about by
sea, as we have seen in these days, without any further doubt. But I say and
affirm, that of that which is at this day discovered, there is no land distant
from an other firm land, by direct line, or from some Islands near unto it
above a thousand leagues, and so betwixt two firm lands there is no greater
distance of sea, accompting from the nearest parts of both the lands: for from
the end of Europe or Affricke and their coasts, to the Canaries, the Isles of
Acores, Cape Verd and others in the like degree, are not above three hundred
leagues, or five hundred from the Main land. From the said Islands running
along to the West Indies, there are scant nine hundred leagues, to the Islands
of saint Dominick, the Virgins, the Happy Islands and the rest; and the same
Islands run along in order to the Islands of Barlovent which are Cuba,
Hispan^ola, and Boriquen; from the same Islands unto the Main land are scarce
two or three hundred leagues, and in the nearest part far less. The firm
land runs an infinite space* from Terra^Florida to the land of Patagons, and
on the other side of the South, from the Straight of Maggellan, to the Cape of
Mendoce, there runs a long Continent but not very large: for the largest is
the Travers of Peru, which is distant from Brasil about a thousand leagues. In
this South Sea, although they have not yet discovered the end toward the
West, yet of late they have found out the Islands, which they call Solomon, the
which are many and great, distant from Peru about eight hundred leagues. And
for that we find by observation, that whereas there be many and great
Islands, so there is some firm Land not far off, I my self with many others
do believe, that there is some firm land near unto the Islands of Solomon,
the which does answer unto our America on the West part, and possibly might
run by the height of the South, to the Straightes of Maggellan. Some hold,
that Nova Guinea is firm Land, and some learned men describe it near to the
Islands of Solomon; so as it is likely, a good part of the world is not yet
discovered, seeing at this day our men sail in the South Sea unto China and
the Philippines: and we say, that to go from Peru to those parts, they pass a
greater Sea, then in going from Spain to Peru. Moreover, we know, that by
that famous Straight of Maggellan these two Seas do join and continue one
with an other (I say the South sea with that of the North) by that part of the
Antarticke Pole, which is in fifty one degrees of altitude. But it is a great
question (wherein many have busied themselves^) whether these two Seas join
together in the North part: but I have not heard, that any unto this day, could
attain unto this point, but by certain likelihoods and conjectures, some
affirm, there is an other Straight under the North, opposite to that of
Maggellan. But it suffices for our subject, to know, that there is a firm
Land on this Southern part, as big as all Europe, Asiae and Affricke: that
under both the Poles we find both land and sea, one embracing an other.
Whereof the Ancients might stand in doubt, and contradict it for want of
experience.

To confute the opinion of Lactantius, who holds there be no Antipodes. CHAP.
7.
SEeing it is manifest, that there is firm land upon the South part or Pole
Antartike, we must now see if it be inhabited: Lact. lib. 7. in^^. divin. cap.
23.
the which has been a matter very disputable in former times. Lactantius
Firmian, and S. Augustine mock at such as hold there be any Antipodes, (which
is as much to say, Aug. lib. 16. de ^u^tate. c. ^.9.
as men marching with their feet opposite to ours. But although these two
authors agree in these ieasts, yet do they differ much in their reasons and
opinions, as they were of very diverse spirits and judgments. Lactantius
follows the vulgar, seeming ridiculous unto him that the heaven should be
round, and that the earth should be compassed in the midst thereof, like unto
a ball, whereof he writes in these terms, What reason is there for some to
affirm, that there are Antipodes, whose steps are opposite to ours? Is it
possible that any should be so gross and simple as to believe there were a
people or nation marching with their fe^te vpwardes, and their heads
downwardes, and that things which are placed here of one sort, are in that
other part hanging topsie turvie: that trees and corn grow downwardes, and
that rain, snow, and hail, fall from the earth upward. Then after some other
discourse, the same Lactantius uses these words, The imagination and conceit
which some have had, supposing the heaven to be round, has been the cause to
invent these Antipodes hanging in the air. So as I know not what to say of
such Philosophers, who having once erred, continue still obstinately in their
opinions defending one another. But whatsoever he says, we that live now at
Peru, and inhabit that part of the world which is oposite to Asia and their
Antipodes (as the Cosmographers do teach us) find not our selves to be
hanging in the air, our heads downward, and our feet on high. Truly it is
strange to consider, that the spirit and understanding of man cannot attain
unto the truth, without the use of imagination: and on the other part, it were
impossible but he should err and be deceived, if he should wholly forbear it.
We cannot comprehend the heaven to be round as it is, and the earth to be in
the midst of it, without imagination. But if this imagination were not
controuled and reformed by reason, in the end we should be deceived; whereby
we may certainly conclude, that in our souls there is a certain light of
heaven, whereby we see and judge of the interior forms which present
themselves unto us, and by the same we allow of, or reject that which
imagination does offer unto us. Hereby we see that the rational soul is above
all corporal powers: and as the force and etenall vigor of truth does rule in
the most eminent part of man: yea, we plainly see that this pure light is
participant and proceeds from that first great light, that whosoever knows not
this, or doubts thereof, we may well say that he is igmorant, or doubts
whether he be a man or no. So, if we shall demand of our imagination what it
thinks of the roundnes of heaven, without doubt she will answer us as
Lactantius does, That if the heaven were round, the Sun and stars should
fall, when as they move and change their places, rising toward the South. Even
so, if the earth did hang in the air, those which inhabit the other part,
should go with their feet upwards, and their heads downward, and the rain
which falls from above, should mount upward, with many other ridiculous
deformities. But if we consult with the force of reason, she will make small
accoumpt of all these vain imaginations, nor suffer us to believe them no more
than a foolish dream. But Reason will answer with this her integrity and
gravitie, that it were a very gross error, to imagine the whole world to be
like unto a house, placing the earth for the foundation, and the heaven for the
covering. Moreover she will say, that as in all creatures the head is the
highest part and most elevated, although all creatures have not heads placed
in one, and the same sctuation, some being in the highest part, as man, some
athwart, as sheep, others in the midst, as spiders:) even so the heaven, in
what part soever it be, remains above, and the earth likewise in what part
soever, remains underneath. Our imagination therefore is grounded upon time
and place, the which she cannot comprehend nor conceive in general, but in
particular. It follows, that when we shall raise it to the consideration of
things which exceed the time and place which are known unto her, then
presently she shrinkes and cannot subsist, if reason does not support her. In
like sort we see, upon the discourse of the creation of the world, our
imagination straies to seeeke out a time before the creation thereof, and to
build the world: she discribes a place, but she comes not to consider that the
world might be made after another fashion. Notwithstanding, reason does teach
us, that there was no time before there was a motion, whereof time is the
measure, neither was there any place before the universal, which comprehendes
within it all place. Arist. 1. dd Cel. ca. 3.
Wherein the excellent Philosopher Aristotle does plainly satisfy (and in few
words) that argument made against the place of the earth, helping himself
with our use of imagination, when he sa^eth, and with truth, That in the
world the same place of the earth is in the midst and beneath, and the more a
thing is in the midst, the more it is underneath. The which answer being
produced by Lactantius Firmian, yet he does pass it over without confutation,
by reason, saying that he cannot stay thereon, and omit the handling of other
matters.

The reason why S. Augustine denied the Antipodes. CHAP. 8.
THe reason which moved S. Augustine to deny the Antipodes, was other then that
formerly alleged, being of a higher judgment, for the reason before mentioned
(that the Antipodes should go upwards) is confuted by the same Doctor in his
book of sermons in these words, The ancients hold, Aug lib. Categoriacum. c.
10. in tom^ 1.
that the earth of all parts is beneath, and the heaven above, by reason
whereof the Antipodes, which they say go opposite unto us, have like unto us
the heaven above their heads. Seeing then S. Augustine has confessed this to
be conformable to good Philosophy, what reason shall we say did move so
learned and excellent a man to follow the contrary opinion? Doubtless he drew
the motive and cause from the bowels of divinity, whereby the holy Writ does
teach us, that all mankind does come from the first man Adam: and to say that
men could pass to that new world, crossing the great Ocean, were incredible,
and a mere lie. And in truth, if the success an experience of what we have
seen in these ages, had not satisfied us in this point, we had yet held this
reason to be good. And although we know this reason neither to be pertinent
nor true, yet will we make answer thereunto, showing in what sort, and by what
means, the first lineage of men might pass thither, and how and by what
means they came to people and inhabit the Indies. And for that we mean
hereafter to entreat briefly of this subject, it shall be fit now to
understand what the holy Doctor Augustine disputes upon this matter in his
books of the city of God, It is no point that we ought to believe (as some
affirm) that there are Antipodes, Lib. 16. c^p. 9
that is to say, men which inhabit that other part of the earth, in whose
region the Sun rises when it sets with us, and that their steps be
opposite and contrary to ours, seeing they affirm not this by any certain
revelation which they have, but only by a Philosophical discourse they make,
whereby they conclude, that the earth being in the midst of the world,
environed of all parts and covered equally with the heaven, of necestitie that
must be in the lowest place which is in the midst of the world. Afterward he
continues in these words, The holy Scripture does not err, neither is
deceived in any sort: the truth whereof is well approved in that which it
propounds of things which are passed, for as much as that which has
benefore-told, has succeeded in every point, as we see: And it is a thing void
of all sense, to say, that men could pass from this continent to the new found
world and cut through the Vast Ocean, seeing it were impossible for men to
pass into those parts any other way, being most certain that almen desce^d
from the first man. Wherein we see, that all the difficulty S. Augustine has
found, was nothing else but the incomparable greatness of this vast Ocean.
Gregory Nazianzene was of the same opinion, Nazian. epist. 27. ad P^stumi^num.
assuring (as a matter without any doubt) that it was not possible to sail
beyond the Straights of Gibraltar: and upon this subject he writes in an
Epistle of his: I agree well with the saying of Pindarus, That past Cadiz, that
Sea is not nauigable. And he himself in the funeral Sermon he made for saint
Basil says: It was not tolerable for any one sailing on the Sea, to pass
the Straight of Gibraltar. And it is true, that this place of Pindarus, where
he says, That it is not lawful, neither for wise men nor fools, to know what
is beyond the Straight of Gibraltar, has been taken for a Proverb. Thus we
see by the beginning of this Proverb, how the Ancients were obstinately settled
in this opinion; as also by the books of Poets, Historiographers and ancient
Cosmographers, that the end and bounds of the earth were set at Cadiz in
Spain: where they plant the pillars of Hercules: there they set the limits of
the Roman Empire, and there they describe the bounds of the world. And not
only profane writers speak in this sort, but also the holy Scripture, to
apply it self to our phrase says, That the edict of Augustus Caesa^ was
published, to the end that all the world should be taxed: and of Alexander the
great, that he stretched forth his Empire even to the end and uttermost bounds
of the earth. And in another place they say, that the Gospel did flourish and
increase through the universal world. For the holy Scripture by an usual
phrase, calls all the world, that which is the greatest part thereof, and
was at that time discovered and known. And the Ancients were ignorant, that
the East Indian Sea, and that of the West were navigable, wherein they have
generally agreed. By reason whereof, Pliny writes as a certain truth, that
the seas which are betwixt two lands, takes from us a just moitie of the
habitable earth. For says he, we cannot pass thither, neither they come
hither. Finally, Tullie, Macrobius, Pomponius Mela, and the ancient Writers
hold the same opinion.

Of Aristotle's opinion, touching the new World, and what abused him to make
him deny it. CHAP. 9.
BEsides all the former reasons, there was yet an other, which moved the
Ancients to believe it to be impossible for men to pass to this new world: the
which they held; for that besides the vastness of the great Ocean, the heat
of that Region, which they call the burning Zone, was so excessive, as it would
not suffer any man, how venturous or laborious so-ever, to pass by sea or
land, from one Pole to an other. For although these Philosophers have
themselves affirmed, that the earth was round, (as in effect it is) and that
under the 2. Poles there was habitable land; yet could they not conceyve, that
the Region, containing all that lies betwixt the two Tropickes, (which is the
greatest of the five Zones or Regions, by the which the Cosmographers and
Astrologers divide the World) might be inhabited by man. The reason they give
to maintain this Zone to be inhabitable, was, for the heat of the Sun, which
makes his course directly over this Region, and approaches so near, as it is
set on fire, and so by consequence, causes a want of waters and pastures.
Aristotle was of this opinion, who although he were a great Philosopher, yet
was he deceyved in this point: for the clearing whereof, it shall be good to
observe his reasons, and to note wherein he has discoursed well, Arist. 2.
Meta ^ap. 5.
and wherein he has erred. This Philosopher makes a question of the
Meridionall or Southern wind, whether we should believe it takes his
beginning from the South, or from the other Pole contrary to the North, and
writes in these terms. Reason teaches us, that the latitude and largeness of
the habitable earth, has her bounds and limits, and yet all this habitable
earth cannot be united and joined one to the other, by reason the middle
Region is so intemperate. For it is certain, that in her longitude, which is
from East to West, there is no immoderate cold nor heat, but in her latitude
and height, which is from the Pole to the Equinoctial Line. So as we may well
pass the whole earth in her longitude, if the greatness of the Sea, which
ioynes lands together, were no hinderance. Hitherto there is no contradicting
of Aristotle, who has great reason to affirm, that the earth in her
longitude, which is from East to West, runs more equally, and is more proper
for the life and habitation of man, then in her latitude from North to South.
The which is true, not only for this foresaid reason of Aristotle, that there
is always one temperature of the Heavens from East to West, being equally
distant both from the Northern cold and the Southern heat. But also for an
other reason, for that traveling always in longitude, we see the days and
nights succed one another by course, the which falls not out going in her
latitude: for of necessity we must come to that Region under the Pole,
whereas there is continual night for six Months, a very inconvenient thing
for the life of man. The Philosopher passes on further, r^prooving the
Geographers, which described the earth in his time, and says thus: We may
discern the truth of that which I have said, by the passages which may be
made by land, and the navigations by sea, for there is a great difference
betwixt the longitude and the latitude, for the distance from the pillars of
Hercules, at the Straight of Gibraltar, unto the East Indies, exceeds the
proportion of above five to three, the passage which is from Ethiopia to the
lake of Meotis in the farthest confines of Scythia, the which is confirmed by
the account of iourneyes by land, and by sailing, as we do now know by
experience: we have also knowledge of the habitable earth, even unto those
parts which are inhabitable. And truly in this point we must pardon
Aristotle, seeing that in his time, they had not discovered beyond the first
Ethiopia, called the exterior, joining to Arabia and Affricke, the other
Ethiopia being wholly unknown in his age: Yea, all that great Land, which we
now call the Land of Prete Ian, neither had they any knowledge of the rest that
lies under the Equinoctial, and runs beyond the Tropicke of Capricorn, unto
the Cape of good Hope, so famous and well known by the navigation of
Portugals; so as if we measure the Land from this Cape unto Scythia and
Tartaria, there is no doubt, but this distance and latitude, will prove as
great as the longitude, which is from Gibraltar unto the East Indies. It is
certain, the Ancients had no knowledge of the springs of Nilus, nor of the
end of Ethiopia, and therefore Lucan reprooves the curiosity of Julius
Caesar, searching out the springs of Nilus in these verses; O Roman what
availes thee so much travel,
Lucan. 10. Pharsal.
In search of Niles first source thy self to gravel.
And the same Poet, speaking to Nile says: Since thy first source is yet so
vnrevealed,
Nile, what thou art, is from the world concealed.


But by the holy scripture we may conceive that this land is habitable: for if
it were not, the Prophet Sophonias would not say (speaking of these nations
called to the Gospel,) Soph. ^^.3.
The children of my dispersed (so he calls the Apostles) shall bring me
presents from beyond the bancks of Ethiopia. Yet (as I have said) there is
reason to pardon the Philosopher, who believed the writers and Cosmographers of
his time. Let us continue and examine what follows of the same Aristotle: One
part of the world (says he) which lies toward the North, beyond the
temperate zone, is inhabitable for the exceeding cold: the other part upon the
South, is likewise inhabitable beyond the Tropicke for the extreme heat. But
the parts of the world lying beyond India on the one side, and the pillars of
Hercules on the other, without doubt cannot be joined and continued one with
the other: so as all the habitable earth is not contained in one continent, by
reason of the sea which divides it. In this last point he speaks truth: then
he continues touching the other parts of the world, saying, It is necessary
the earth should have the same proportion with the Pole Antarticke, as this our
part which is habitable has with the North: and there is no doubt, but in that
other world all things should be ordered as in ours, especially in the growing
and order of the winds. And having alleged other reasons to no purpose, he
concludes, saying, We must confess of necessity, that the Southern wind is
that which blows and comes from the burning zone, the which being so near the
sun, wantes water and pastures. This is Aristotle's opinion, and in truth,
man's conjecture can hardly pass any farther. So as I do often consider (with a
Christian contemplation) how weak the Philosophy of the wise of this world
has been in the search of divine things, seeing in human things (wherein
they seem so well read) they often err. Aristotle holds, that the habitable
earth of the Pole Antartike, in longitude from East to West is very great, and
in latitude from the Pole Antartike to the Equi^^cticall is very s^^all ^^ the
which is so contrary to the truth, that in a manner all the habitation on this
side the Pole Antartike is in latitude, (I mean from the Pole to the line) and
in longitude from East to West it is so small, as the latitude exceedes in
three parts or more. In his other opinion he affirme^, that the middle region
is inhabitable, being under the burning zone, burnt up by the excessive heat
caused by the ne^renes of the sun* and by this reason has neither waters nor
pastures. The which is in like so^t contrary: for the greatest part of this new
world, is situated betwixt the two Tropickes under the burning zone, and yet
is it found very well peopled and inhabited by men and other sorts of
crea^ures, being a region of all the world the most fruitful of waters and
pastures, and very temperate in the greatest part, which the will of God has
so appointed, to show that even in natural things he has confounded the
wisdom of this world* To conclude, we must believe that the burning zone is
well inhabited, although the ancients have held it impossible. But the other
zone or region, which lies betwixt the burning zone and that of the Pole
Antartike, although it be in a climate more commodious for the life of man,
yet is it smally peopled and inhabited, seeing we know no other dwelling in it
but the Kingdom of Chile and a small portion joining to the Cape of good Hope.
The rest is possessed by the Ocean. Although many be of opinion (the which I
likewise hold) that there is much more land not yet discovered, the which
should be firm land opposite to the Kingdom of Chile, which runs beyond the
circkle or Tropicke of capricorn. And if there be any: without doubt it is a
land of an excellent temper, being in the midst of two extremes, and situate
in the same climate with the best regions in Europe. And in this regard
Aristotle's conjecture was good. But speaking of what is discovered at this day
in this zone, it is little in regard of the large countries inhabited under the
burning zone

That Pliny, and the ancients, held the same opinion with Aristotle. CHAP. 10.
THis opinion of Aristotle's, has been held by Pliny, who says thus, Plin.
lib. ^. cap. 61.
The temperature of the middle region of the world, where the sun continually
runs his course, is scorched and burnt up as with a near fire. Joining to
the same region, there are two others of either side, which (lying betwixt the
heat of this burning zone and the cruel cold of the other two extremes,) are
very temperate, and can have no communication one with another, by reason of
the excessive heat of the heaven: which has been the opinion of the Ancients,
generally discribed by the Poet in these verses.

Heavens circuit is of five zones, one whereof,
Which still the sun burns, makes the earth below
With flames intempestiue red hot to glow.
And the same Poet in another place.

Hear this, if any harbor in that seat
Whose quarter under that large zone is set
Amidst four others by the sun enlightened.
And another Poet speaks more plainly.

As many regions are there on the ground,
As are in heaven, wherein five parts are found,
Whereof the midst, through heat raisd from the rays
Of scorching sun, inhabitable stays.
The Ancients have grounded their general opinion upon one reason, which
seemed to them certain and not to be confuted: for finding that the more a
region drew near unto the South, the hotter it was: the proof whereof was so
infallible in those regions, as by the same reason in Italy, Apulia is hotter
then Tuscane, and in Spain Andelozia then Biscaie. A thing so apparent, that
although there be but eight degrees difference or less betwixt the one and
the other, yet do we find the one extreme hot, and the other very cold,
whereby they did infer, that the region so near the South, having the sun
so directly for zenith, must of necessity be continually scorched with heat.
They did likewise see, that the diverse seasons of the year, as the Spring,
Summer, Autumn and Winter, were caused by the neerenes and distance of the
sun, finding also that although they were far from the Tropicke, by which
the sun does pass in summer, yet when it approached near unto them, at the
same season they felt great heat. Whereby they did conjecture, that if they
had had the sun so near unto them as to go directly over their heads, the
heat would have been so insupportable, as it would burn and consume men with
the vehemence thereof. The same reason moved the Ancients, to think that the
middle region was not habitable, and therefore they called it the burning zone.
And in truth, if visible experience did not unfold this doubt, we should yet
confess, that this reason were very peremptory and Mathematical: whereby we
may see how weak our understanding is, to comprehend these natural things.
But we may say, it is fallen out to the great good and happiness of our age, to
have the knowledge of these two great wonders, that is, to know how easily we
may sail through the great Ocean, and that under the burning zone men enjoy a
very temperate heaven, the which the Ancients could never believe. Of the last
of these two wonders, touching the quality and habitation of the burning zone,
by the grace of God we will discourse amply thereof in the next book. I think
it therefore fit in this book to treat of the manner of sailing through the
Ocean, for that it imports us much for the subject of this work. But before
we come to this point, it shall be good to show what the Ancients thought of
these new men, whom we call Indians.

That in ancient Books we find some knowledge of this new world. CHAP. 11.
LEt us return to that which has been formerly spoken. We must necessarily
conclude, that the Ancients did believe, that either there were no men beyond
the Tropicke of Cancer (as S. Augustine and Lactantius do affirm) or if there
were any, Plutarch. 3. de placitis phil. cap. 11.
at the least they did not inhabit betwixt the two Tropicks, (as Aristotle and
Pliny have maintained, and before them the Philosopher Parmenides) the
contrary whereof is before sufficiently prooved, both for the one and the
other. But many through curiosity may demand, if the Ancients had no
knowledge of this truth, which to us is now so apparent: seeing that in truth
it seems very strange, that this new world which is so spacious as we do
visibly see it, should be hidden from the Ancients by so many ages. But some at
this day, seeking to obscure the felicity of this age, and the glory of our
Nation, strive to prove, that the new found world was known to the Ancients.
And in truth we cannot deny, but there was some apparency. S. Jerome writing
upon the Epistle to the Ephesians, says, S Ierom. super ap. 1. ad Ephesians.
We seek with reason what the Apostle means in these words, where he says:
you have walked for a season according to the course of this world, whether he
would have us to understand, that there is an other world, which neither is,
nor depends of this world: but other worlds, whereof Clement writes in his
Epistle, the Ocean and the worlds which are beyond the Ocean: These are the
words of S. Jerome, but in truth I cannot find this Epistle of S. Clement
cited by S. Jerome: yet I believe undoubtedly, that S. Clement has written it,
seeing S. Jerome makes mention thereof. And with reason saint Clement says,
that beyond the Ocean there is an other world, yea, many worlds, as in truth
there is; seeing there is so great distance from one new world to an other
new world: (I mean from Peru and the West Indies, to China and the East
Indies.) Moreover, Pliny, who has been so curious a searcher out of strange
things, reports in his natural History, that Hannon a Captain of the
Carthaginians, sailed through the Ocean, from the Straight of Gibraltar,
coasting along the land, Pil^. li. 2. c. 67.
even unto the confines of Arabia, and that he left this his Navigation in
writing. If it be as Pliny writes, it follows that Hannon sailed as far as
the Portugals do at this day, passing twice under the Equinoctial: which is a
fearful thing. And the same Pliny reports of Cornelius Nepos a very grave
Author, who says, that the same course has been sailed by an other man,
called Eudaxius, but by contrary ways: for this Eudaxius following the King of
Latyres, passed by the red sea into the Ocean; and turning back, came to the
Straight of Gibraltar, the which Cornelius Nepos affirms to have happened in
his time. And also other grave Authors do write, that a ship of Carthage driven
by force of wind into the Ocean, came to a Land, which until then was
unknown: and returning to Carthage, kindled a great desire in the Citizens to
discover and people this land: the which the Senate perceyving, did forbid this
navigation by a rigorous decree; fearing that with the desire of new lands,
they should leave to love their own Country. By all this we may gather, that
the Ancients had some knowledge of the new world: yet shall you hardly find in
the books of ancient Writers, any thing written of our America, and all the
West Indies: but of the East Indies (I say) there is sufficient testimony, not
only of that on the other side, but also of that on this side, which then was
farthest off; going thither by a contrary way to that at this day. Is it not
easy to find Molaco in ancient books, which they called the golden
Chersonese: the Cape of Comori, which was called the Promontorie of Coci; and
that great and famous Island of Sumatra, so well known by the ancient name of
Taprobana. What shall we say of the two Ethiopiaes, the Brachmanes, and that
great Land of the Chinaes? Who doubts, but there was often mention made
thereof in ancient books? But of the West Indies, we find not in Pliny, that
in this navigation they passed the Islands of the Canaries, Plin. lib. 6. cap.
21.
which he calls Fortunate: the principal whereof is said to be called
Canarie, for the multitude of dogs which are in it. But there is scarce any
mention in ancient books of the voyages which are made at this day beyond the
Canaries, by the Gulf which with reason they call great. Yet many hold
opinion, that Seneca the Tragedian did prophecy of the West Indies, in his
Tragedy of Medea, which translated, says thus; Senec. in M^d. Act. 2. in sin.
An age shall come, ere ages end,
Blessedly strange and strangely blessed,
When our Sea far and near or'prest,
His shore shall farther yet extend.
Descryed then shall a large Land be,
By this profound Seas navigation,
An other World, an other Nation,
All men shall then discovered see.
Thule accounted heretofore
The worlds extreme, the Northern bound,
Shall be when Southwest parts be found,
A nearer Isle, a neighbor shore.


This Seneca reports in these verses; and we cannot well deny, but
(understanding it literally) it is very true: for if we reckon the many years
he speaks of, beginning from the time of the Tragedian, it is above a thousand
and four hundred years past: and if it were from the time of Medea, it is
above two thousand years, the which we see plainly now accomplished: seeing
the passage of the Ocean so long time hidden, has been found out, and that
they have discovered a great land and a new world inhabited, more spacious then
all the Continent of Europe and Asia. But therein may a question with reason be
made, whether Seneca spoke this by divination, or poetically and by chance. And
to speak my opinion, I believe he did divine, after the manner of wise men
and well advised; for that in his time they undertook new voyages and
navigations by sea, he knew well, like a Philosopher, that there was an other
land contrary and opposite unto us, which they call Antichthon. And by this
ground he might conceyve, that the industry and courage of man might in the
end pass the Ocean, and discover new lands and another world, for that in
Senecaes time, they had knowledge of the Voyage which Pliny speaks of,
whereby they passed the great Ocean. The which seems to be the motive of
Senecaes prophecy, as he gives us to understand by these former verses, after
the which having described the careful life of the Ancients, free from malice,
he follows thus: Now is it not as erst it was,
For whether the Ocean will or nill,
He traverst is by hardy will:
Which pastime makes time so to pass.


And a little after he says thus: Now every boat dares swim and sport
On surging Seas, fearing no wrack:
Passengers seeking what they lack,
So long a voyage think but short.
Nothing is now more to discover,
No place is now left to surprise,
Towns now that for defense devise,
With new fortifications cover.
All in the world turned round about,
No thing in place as it was enured,
Nothing unseen, nothing assured
This Circle universe throughout.
The Indian, whom at home heat fries,
Drinks of Araxis waters cold:
The Persian rich in gems and gold,
Wash in the Rhine and Elbe likewise.


Seneca did conjecture this by the great courage of men, as that which shall
happen last, saying, It shall fall out in the latter age, etc. as has bin
before mentioned.

Of the opinion which Plato held of the West Indies. CHAP. 12.
IF any one has treated more particularly of the west Indies, the honor
belongs to Plato, who in his time faith thus. In those days, they could not
sail this Gulf (meaning the Atlantike Sea (which is the Ocean) which meets
at the Straight of Gibraltar) for that the passage was stopped at the mouth of
the pillars of Hercules, (which is the same Straight of Gibraltar) and this
Island was in those days joined* to the foresaid mouth, and was of that
bigness, as it exceeded all Asia and Affricke together: and then was there a
passage to go from these Islands to others, and from those others Islands, they
went to the firm Land, the which was near environed with the very Sea. This
is reported by Critias in Plato. And such as believe that this narration of
Plato is a true History, delivered in these terms, say, that this great
Atlanticke Island (the which did exceed both Affricke and Asia in greatness)
did then comprehend the greatest part of the Ocean called Atlantike: which the
Spaniards now sail in: and that those other Islands, which (he said( were
near unto this great one; are those, which we now call the Islands of
Barlovante; that is, Cuba, Hispaniola, S. John de Port ricco, Iamaica, and
other Islands of that Country: and that the maine Land whereof he makes
mention, is the same we now call firm Land, that is, Peru and America; and
that Sea, which he says is adjoining to the firm Land, is the South sea, the
which he calls the very Sea, for that in comparison of her greatness, all
other Seas, both Mediterranean, yea, and the Atlantike Sea, are small in regard
thereof. Hereby in truth they give a cunning and witty interpretation to
these words of Plato. But whether this interpretation should be held for true
or not, I am resolved to declare in an other place.

That some have held opinion that in places of holy Scripture, whereas they
speak of Ophir, is to be understood of our Peru. CHAP. 13.
SOme hold opinion, that mention is made of the West Indies in the holy
scripture; taking the region of Peru for that Ophir which so famous Robert
Steevens, or to say more truly Francis Vatable, a man well seen in the Hebrew
tongue (as I have heard our master report, who was his disciple) says in his
annotations upon the 9. chapter of the 3. book of Kings^, that the Island of
Hispaniola which Christopher Colombus found out, was that of Ophir, In. 3. lib.
Reg. cap. 9.
from whence Solomon caused to be brought four hundred and twenty, or four
hundred and 50. talents of most fine and pure gold, In. appaca^^^ Bibliae
regiae impha leg. ca. 9.
for that the gold of Cibao which our men bring from Hispaniola, is of the
same fashion and quality. And there are many others which affirm that our
Peru is Ophir, deriving one name from another, who believe, that when as the
book of Paralipomenon was written, 2. Para^^p. 9. 3. Reg. 10.
they called it Peru, grounding it upon that which the holy scripture says,
that they brought from Ophir pure gold, precious stones, and wood which was
rare and goodly: which things abound in Peru, as they say. But in my opinion,
it is far from the truth, that Peru should be Ophir so famous in the Bible.
For although in this Peru, there be good store of gold, yet is there not such
abundance, as it may be equalled with the fame of the riches that was in
ancient time at the East Indies. 2 Para. ^. 4. Reg. 22. 9. Reg 9.
I find not that in Peru there are such precious stones, or such exquisite
woods, as the like have not bend seen at Jerusalem. For although there be
exquisite Emeralds, and some hard trees of Aromaticall wood, yet do I not find
any thing ofso great commendation as the scripture gives unto Ophir. Moreover,
it seems not likely that Solomon would leave the East Indies (most rich and
plentiful) to send his fleetes to this farther land: whether if they had come
so often (as it is written,) we had surely found more signs and testimonies
thereof. Moreover, the Etimologie of the name of Ophir, and the change or
reduction thereof to Peru, seems to me of small consideration, being most
certain that the name of Peru is not very ancient, nor common to all that
country. It has been usual in the discovery of the new world, to give
names to lands and ports of the sea, according to the occasions presented at
their ariuall: and I believe that the name of Peru, has been so found out, and
put in practice: for we find here that the name has been given to all the
country of Peru, by reason of a river so called by the inhbitants of the
country, where the Spaniards arived upon their first discovery. Whereby we
maintain that the Indians themselves be ignorant, and do not use this name
and appellation to signify their land. It seems moreover, the same Authors
will say, that Sepher spoken of in the scripture, is that which we now call
Andes, which are most high mountains in Peru. But this resemblance of names
and appellations is no sufficient proof. If that were of force, we might as
well say, that Iectan is Iecsan, mentioned in the holy scripture. Neither may
we say, Iectan filius Heber Gen 10. Iecsan filius Abrahae ex Cetura. Genesis 25.
that the names of Titus and Paul, which the Kings Inguas of Peru do use, come
from the Romans or Christians, seeing it is too weak an argument, to draw a
conclusion of great matters. We see plainly, that it is contrary to the
intention of the holy scriptures, which some have written, that Tharsis and
Ophir were one and the same Province, conferring the 22* chapter of the 4.
book of the Kings, with the 20. chapter of the second book of Paralipomenon,
for that in the book of the Kings, it is said, that Iosaphat prepared a fleet
of ships in Asiongaber to fetch gold at Ophir, and in Paralipomenon, it is
written, that the same fleet was furnished to go unto Tharsis. Whereby it may
be supposed, that in these foresaid books, where the scripture speaks of
Tharsis and Ophir, that it means one thing. Some one may demand, what region
or Province that Ophir was, whether Solomon's fleet went with the Mariners of
Hyram King of Tire and Sidon to fetch hold. And whether King Iosaphats fleet,
3. Reg. 9. 4. Reg. 22.
pretending to go, did suffer shipwreck, and perish in Asiongaber, as the holy
scripture does testify. In this I do willingly agree with the opinion of
Joseph, in his books of Antiquities, where he says, that it is a Province of
the East Indies, Genesis 10.
the which was found by that Ophir the son of Iectan, wher^of mention is made
in the 10. of Genessis: and that Province did abound with most fine gold.
Thereof it comes, they did so much extol the gold of Ophir or of Ophas, or as
some will say, this word of Obrise is the same with Ophrise, for finding there
seven sorts or kinds of gold (as S. Jerome reports,) that of Ophir was held
for the most fine, as here we esteem the gold of Valdivia and Caramaya. The
chiefest reason which moves me to think that Ophir is at the East Indies, and
not in the West* is, for that Solomon's fleet could not come hither, without
passing the East Indies, all China, and a great part of the sea: being unlikely
they would pass over all the world to come thither for gold, that continent
especially lying in that sort, as they could not come to the knowledge thereof
by any voyage by land. And hereafter we will show that the Ancients had never
knowledge in thearte of Navigation, without the which they could not run so
far into the sea. Finally, in these matters (when as there appears no
certain proofs, but only light conjectures,) we are not bound to believe
but what we shall think good.

What Tharsis and Ophir signify in the holy Scripture. CHAP. 14.
IF every man's conjecture and opinion may be allowed, for my part I hold, that
in the holy scripture these words of Tharsis and Ophir, most commonly do not
signify any certain place: but it is a word and signification general to the
Hebrews, as in our vulgar tongue, this word of Indies, is general unto us in
our usual manner ofspeech: for we mean by the Indies, those rich countries
which are far off, and strange unto us. So we Spaniards do indifferently call
Indies, the countries of Peru, Mexico, China, Malaca, and Bresil: and from what
parts soever of these any letters come, we say they be from the Indies, which
countries be far distant and different one from another. Yet we cannot deny,
but that name of Indies, is properly to be understood of the East Indies. And
for that in old time they did speak of these Indies, as of a country far
off, so likewise, in the discovery of other remote lands, they have given them
the names of Indies, being distant from the rest, and held as the end of the
world. Even so, in my judgment, Tharsis in the holy scripture, does not
signify any certain and determined place, but only regions a far off, and
(according to the vulgar opinion,) very rich and strange: for that which
Josephus and some others would affirm, that Tharsis is Tarso, according to the
meaning of the scripture, Ierom ad Marcel. in. 3. tomo.
in my opinion has been well refuted by S. Jerome: not only for that these
words are written with diverse letters, the one with an aspiration, the other
without: but also, that many things are written of Tharsis, which cannot agree
with Tarso, a City in Cilicia. It is true, that in some places of the
scripture, Tharsis is said to be in Cilicia, the which you shall find in the
book of Judith, speaking of Holophernes, who having passed the limits of
Assyria, Judith. 2.
he came to the great mountains of Ange, (which perchance is Taurus,) which
hills be on the left hand of Cilicia, and that he entered into all the
Castells, Lege Pline. lib. 5. cap. 27.
where he assembled all his forces, having destroyed that famous City of
Melothi, he ruined all the children of Tharsis and of Israel, which were
joining unto the desert, and those which were in the South, toward the land of
Cellon, and from thence passed Euphrates: but as I have said, that which is so
written of Tharsis, Theodor in 1. Joan.
cannot be applied to the City of Tharso. Theodoret and some others, following
the interpretation of the 70. Astasmont ibid and in alphabeto aparatus.
in some places they set Tharsis in Affrike, saying, it was the same City
which was aunciently called Carthage, and is now the kingdom of Thunis: and
they say, that Jonas meant to go thither, when as the scripture reports, that
hefled from the Lord into Tharsis. Others pretend, that Tharsis, is a certain
country of the Indies: whereunto it seems that S. Jerome is inclined. Ier. ad
Marcel.
I will not now decide these opinions: but I hold that in this case, the
scripture does not always signify one region or certain part of the world.
It is true, that the wise men or Kings that came to worship Christ, were of
the East: and the scripture says, they were of Saba, Epha, and Madiem. And
some learned men hold that they were of Ethiopia, Arabia, and Persia: and yet
the Psalmist and the Church sings of them: Psalm 60 Isa^^. 16.
The Kings of Tharsis shall bring presents. We agree then with S. Jerome: that
Tharsis, is a word that has many and diverse significations in the scripture.
Sometimes it signifies the Crisolite, or Iacinth stone, sometimes a certain
region of the Indies, sometimes the sea which is of the color of a Iacinth by
the reverberation of the sun. But the same Doctor does with reason deny that
Tharsis is any region of the Indies whether Jonas would fly, seeing that
parting from Ioppa, it had been impossible to sail unto the Indies by that
sea, for that Ioppa (which at this day we call Iaffe,) is no port of the red
Sea, joining to the East Indian Sea, but of the Mediterranean Sea, which has
no issue into the Indian. Whereby it does plainly appear, that the voyage
which Solomon's Fleet made, parting from Asiongaber (whereas the ships of king
Iosaphat were lost) went by the red Sea to Tharsis and Ophir, the which is
directly testified in the Scripture. The which voyage was very different from
that which Jonas pretended to Tharsis: seeing that Asiongaber is the port of a
City of Idumea, seated upon the Straight, whereas the red sea ioynes with the
great Ocean. From this Ophir they brought to Solomon gold, silver, Elephants
teeth, Monkies, Indian Cocks, and their voyage was of three years: all which
without doubt ought to be understood of the East Indies, which is fruitful
and abundant of all these things, as Pliny testifies, and our own
experience does witness. From our Peru, doubtless they could not bring any
Elephants teeth, those beasts being unknown there; but they might well bring
gold, silver, and pleasant monkies. Finally, the holy Scripture, in my opinion,
does commonly understand by this word of Tharsis, either the great Sea, or
far and strange Regions. So as he supposes that the prophecies which speak
of Tharsis (seeing the spirit of prophecy may comprehend all things) may often
be applied to things of our new world.

Of the Prophecy of Abdias, which some do interpret to be the Indies. CHAP.
15.
MAny say and affirm, that in the holy Scripture it was foretold long before,
that this new world should be converted to Jesus Christ by the Spanish nation,
and to this purpose they expound the text of the Prophecy of Abdias, which
says thus: At the transmigration of this O^t, the children of Israel shall
possess all the the dwellings of the Cananites unto Sarepte, and the
transmigration of Jerusalem, which is at Bosphorus, shall possess the Cities
of the South, and they that shall save, shall come up to the hill of Sion to
judge the mount of Esau, and the kingdom shall be the Lords. This has been
set down acording to the letter, but the hebrew Authors read it thus: And the
transmigration of this O^t of the childrens, which be the Cananites, unto
Zarphat (which is France) and the transmigration of Jerusalem, which is in
Sapharad (understood for Spain) shall possess for inheritance the Cities of
the South, and those which procure salvation, shall mount up to the hill of
Sion, to judge the mount of Esau, and the kingdom shall be the Lords. Yet some
of them do not produce any sufficient testimony of the Ancients, nor pertinent
reasons to prove that Sapharad (which S. Jerome does interpret the Bosphor or
Straight, and the 70. Interpreters Euphrates,) should signify Spain, but
their only opinion. Others allege the Caldean Paraphrase, which is of this
opinion, and the ancient Rabbis, which expound it on this sort; as also that
Zarphat is France, (which the vulgar and the 70- Interpreters call Sarepte.)
But leaving this dispute, which belongs to men of more leisure; what necessity
is there to believe, that the cities of the South or of Mageb (as the
70.write) be those of this new world? Moreover, what need is there to believe
and to take the Spanish Nation for the transmigration from Jerusalem to
Sapharad, unless we will understand Jerusalem spiritually, and thereby the
Church? So as by the transmigration from Jerusalem to Sapharad, the holy
spirit shows us the children of the holy Church, which inhabit the ends of
the earth, and the banks of the Sea, for so is Sapharad understood in the
Syrian tongue, and does well agree with our Spain, which according to the
Ancients is the end of the earth, being in a manner all environed with Sea.
And by the Cities of the South, we may well understand these Indies, seeing
the greatest part of this new world is seated in the South; and the better
part looks to the Pole Antartike. That which follows is easy to interpret,
viz. They which procure Salvation, shall ascend the hill of Sion, to judge the
mount of Esau. For we may say, they unite themselves to the doctrine and
strength of the holy Church, which seek to break and disperse the profane
errors of the Gentiles, for that may be interpreted to judge the mount of Esau:
whereby it follows, that in those days the Realm shall neither be for the
Spaniards, nor for them of Europe, but for Jesus Christ our Savior. Whosoever
shall expound the Prophecy of Abdias in this sort, ought not to be blamed;
being most certain, that the holy Spirit did understand all secrets long
before. And it, seems there is great reason to believe, that mention is made
in the holy Scripture of a matter of such importance, as the discovery of the
Indies, of the new world, and their conversion to the faith. Isay says in
these words; Oh the wings of ships which come from the other part of Ethiopia.
Isay. 18. luxt^ 70. Interp.
Many learned Authors hold, that all this Chapter is understood of the
Indies:and that same Prophet in an other place says; I^ay. 66.
Those which shall escape out of Israel, shall go far off to Tharsis and to
remote Islands, where they shall convert many Nations unto the Lord. Amongst
the which, he names Greece, Italy, Affricke with many others: the which
without doubt may well be applied unto the conversion of the Indies. Being
most certain that the Gospel shall be preached generally throughout the world,
as our Savior has promised, and then the end of the world shall come. It
follows then, and so we ought to understand it, that there be many Nations
upon the face of the earth, to whom Jesus Christ has not yet been preached.
Whereby we may gather, that there remained a great part of the world unknown
to the Ancients, and that yet at this day, there is a good part to discover.

By what means the first men might come to the Indies, the which was not
willingly, nor of set purpose. CHAP. 16.
NOw it is time to make answer to such as say there are no Antipodes, and that
this region where we live, cannot be inhabited. The huge greatness of the Ocean
did so amaze S. Augustine, as he could not conceive how mankind could pass to
this newfound world. But seeing on the one side we know for certain, that
many years ago there were men inhabiting in these parts, so likewise we
cannot deny but the scripture does teach us clearly, that all men are come
from the first man: without doubt we shall be forced to believe and confess,
that men have passed hither from Europe, Asia or Affricke, yet must we
discover by what means they could pass. It is not likely that there was an
other Noah's Ark, by the which men might be transported into the Indies, and
much less any Angel to carry the first man to this new world, holding him by
the hair of the head, like to the Prophet Abac^c: for we entreat not of the
mighty power of God, but only of that which is conformable unto reason, and
the order and disposition of humane things. Wherefore these two things ought to
be held for wonderful and worthy of admiration, yea, to be numbered among the
secrets of God. The one is; how man could pass so huge a passage by Sea and
Land. The other is; that there being such multitudes of people, they have yet
been unknown so many ages. For this cause I demand, by what resolution,
force or industry, the Indians could pass so large a Sea, and who might be
the Inventer of so strange a passage? Truly I have often times considered
thereof with my self, (as many others have done) but never could I find any
thing to satisfy me. Yet will I say what I have conceived, and what comes
presently into my mind, seeing that testimonies fail me, whom I might
follow, suffering my self to be guided by the rule of reason, (although it be
very subtle.) It is most certain, that the first men came to this land of
Peru by one of these two means, either by land or by sea. If they came by sea,
it was casually, and by chance, or willingly, and of purpose. I understand by
chance, being cast by force of some storm or tempest, as it happens in
tempestuous times. I mean done of purpose, when they prepared fleetes to
discover new lands. Besides these two means, I see it is not possible to find
out any other, if we will follow the course of humane things, and not devise
fabulous and poetical fictions; for no man may think to find another Eagle
as that of Ganimede, or a flying Horse, like unto Perseu^, that should carry
the Indians through the air; or that peradventure these first men have used
fishes, as Mirmaides, or the fish called a Nicholas, to pass them thither. But
laying aside these imaginations and fopperies, let us examine these two means,
the which will be both pleasant and profitable. First in my judgment, it were
not far from reason to say, that the first and ancient people of these
Indies, have discovered and peopled after the same sort as we do at this day,
that is, by the Art of Navigation and aid of Pilots, the which guide
themselves by the height and knowledge of the heavens, and by their industry
in handling and changing of their sails according to the season. Why might not
this well be? Must we believe, that we alone, and in this our age, have only
the Art and knowledge to sail through the Ocean? We see even now, that they
cut through the Ocean to discover new lands, as not long since Alvaro Mendana
and his companions did, who parting from the Port of Lima, came along^t the
West, to discover the land which lies Eastward from Per^;and at the end of
three months, they discovered the Islands, which they call the Islands of
Solomon, which are many and very great, and by all likelehood, they lie
adjoining to new Guinnie,or else are very near to some other firm land. And
even now by commandment from the King and his Counsel, they are resolved to
prepare a new fleet for these Islands. Seeing it is thus, why may we not
suppose, that the Ancients had the courage and resolution to travel by sea,
with the same intent to discover the land which they call Antictho^ opposite to
theirs, and that (according to the discourse of their Philosophy) it should be
with an intent, not to rest until they came in view of the lands they sought?
Surely there is no repugnancie or contrariety in that which we see happen at
this day, and that of former ages, seeing that the holy scripture does wit^es,
that Solomon took Masters and Pilots from Tire and Sidon, men very expert in
Navigation, 2. Para* 9.
who by their industry performed this voyage in three years. 3. R^z. 10.
To what end think you does it note the Art of Mariners, and their knowledge,
with their long voyage of three years, but to give us to understand, that
Solomon's sleete sailed through the great Ocean? Many are of this opinion, which
think that S. Augustine had small reason to wonder at the greatness of the
Ocean, who might well conjecture, that it was not so difficult to sail
through, considering what has been spoken of Solomon's Navigation. But to say
the truth, I am of a contrary opinion, neither can I persuade my self, that
the first Indians came to this new world, of purpose, by a determined voyage;
neither will I yield, that the Ancients had knowledgein the Art of Navigation,
whereby men at this day pass the Ocean, from one part to another, where they
please, the which they perform with an incredible swiftnes and resolution;
neither do I find in all Antiquities, any marks or testimonies of so notable
a thing, and of so great importance. Besides, I find not, that in ancient
books there is any mention made of the use of the Adamant or Loadstone, nor of
the Compass to sail by: yea, I believe they had no knowledge thereof. And if
we take away the knowledge of the compass to sail by, we shall easily judge
how impossible it was for them to pass the great Ocean. Such as have any
knowledge of the sea, understand me well: for that it is as easy to believe
that a Mariner in full sea can direct his course where he please, without a
compass, as for a blind man to show with his finger any thing, be it near or
far off. And it is strange, that the Ancients have been so long ignorant of
this excellent property of the Adamant stone: P^in^lib. 3. c^. 6 and lib. 34.
cap. 1.14. and lib. 7. cap. 4.
for Pliny, who was so curious in natural causes, writing of this Adamant
stone, speaks nothing of that virtue and property it has, always to turn
the iron which it touches toward the North: the which is the most admirable
virtue it has. Aristotle, Theophrastes, Dioscorides, Lucretius, nor any other
Writers, or natural Philosophers, Dios.lib. ^. cap. 10. Lucret. lib. 6.
that I have seen, make any mention thereof, although they treat of the
Adamant stone. Saint Augustine writing many and sundry properties and
excellencies of the Adamant stone, Aug. de Cuit. D^^ c^^. 4. vbi multa de
magnet^.
in his books of the City of God, speaks nothing thereof. And without doubt,
all the excellencies spoken of this stone, are nothing in respect of this
strange property, looking always toward the North, which is a great wonder
of nature. There is yet another argument, Plin.lib. 7. c. 16
for Plinic treating of the first inventers of Navigation, and naming all the
instruments, yet he speaks nothing of the compass to sa^e by, nor of the
Adamant stone. I say only, that the art to know the stars, was invented by
the Phaeniciens. And there is no doubt, but whatsoever the Ancients knew of the
Art of Navigation, was only in regard of the stars, and observing the
Shoares, Capes, and differences of lands. And if they had once lost the sight
of land, they knew not which way to direct their course, but by the Stars
Sun, and Moon: and that sailing (as it does often, in a dark and cloudie
season,) they did govern themselves by the quality of the winds, and by
conjecture of the ways which they had passed. Finally they went as they were
guided by their own motions. As at the Indies, the Indians sail a long way by
sea, guided only by their own industry and natural instinct. And it serves
greatly to purpose, that which Pliny writes of the Ilanders of Taprobana,
(which at this day, we call Sumatra,) speaking in this sort, when as he treates
of the art and industry they use in sailing. Those of Taprobana see not the
North to sail by* which defect they supply with certain small birds they
carry with them, the which they often let fly, and as those birds by a
natural instinct fly always toward the land, so the Mariners direct their
course after them. Who doubts then, if they had had any knowledge of the
compass, they would not have used these little birds for their guides, to
discover the Land. To conclude, this suffices to show that the Ancients had no
knowledge of the secrets of the Loadstone: seeing that for so notable a thing,
there is no proper word in Latin, Greek, or Hebrew: for a thing of such
importance, could not have wanted a name in these tongues, if they had known
it. Whereupon the Pilots at this day to direct him his course that holds the
helm, sit aloft in the poope of the Ship, the better to observe the
compass: where as in old time, they sat in the prow of the Ship, to mark
the differences of lands and seas, from which place, they commanded the Helm:
as they use at this day, at the entry or going out of any Port or haven: and
therefore the Greeks called Pilots Proritaes, for that they remained still in
the prow.

Of the properties and admirable virtue of the Adamant stone for Navigation,
whereof the Ancients had no knowledge. CHAP. 17.
BY that which has been formerly spoken, it appears, that the Navigation to
the Indies, is as certain, and as short, as we are assured of the Adamant
stone. And at this day, we see many that have sailed from Lisbone, to Goa, from
Siville to Mexico, and through all the South sea, even unto China, and to the
straight of Maggellan, and that as certainly, and as easily, as the Husbandman
goes from his Farm unto the City. We have also seen men that have made
fifteen, yea, eighteen voiages to the Indies, and we have heard speak of
some Ancients, which have made above twenty vioges, passing, and repassing the
great Ocean, in the which they have not seen any signs of such as have
traveled, nor met with any passengers to demand the way of them. S^p. 2
For as the Wife man says, a ship cutteth the waves of the water, leaving no
way where it passes, nor any path in the floods. But by the virtue and
property of the Adam ant stone, it makes as it were a beaten path in this
Ocean. The high Creator of all things, having imparted this virtue unto it,
that by the touch of iron, it has always his motion and aspect toward the
North, in what part of the world soever you be. Some search what should be the
cause of this wonderful property, and imagine I know not what simpathie. But
for my part, I take more pleasure and content in the considerations of these
wonders, to praise the power and greatness of the Almighty, and rejoice in the
contemplation of his admirable works, and to say with Solomon, Sap. 14.
speaking upon this subject, O father whose providence governes and maintains
a piece of wood, giving it an assured way upon the sea, and in the midst of the
swelling waves, to show, that in the like sort, thou can save and deliver man
from all peril and shipwreck; yea, although he were in the midst of the sea
without ship. But for that thy works are full of wisdom, men hazard their
lives in a small piece of wood, and pass through the sea in a ship, and are
saved. And upon the same subject the Psalmist says, They which go to the sea
in ships, and traffic by the great waters, have seen the works of the
Lord, Psalm. 106.
and his wonders in the depth of the sea. And in truth, it is not one of the
least wonders of God, that the force of so small a stone should command the
sea, and force the infinite depth thereof to obey him, and follow his
commandment. But for that it is an usual thing, and seems easy, men do not
admire it, nor take any great regard thereof: and for that his bounty is such,
the ignorant make less account thereof. Notwithstanding, such as will duly
consider it, are led by reason, to bless the wisdom of God, and to give him
thanks for so great a benefit. Being then decreed in heaven, that these
nations of the Indies, which have lain so long hidden, should be known and
discovered, and that this rowt should be frequented, to the end so many souls
should come to the knowledge of Jesus Christ, and win eternal life. There
was an assured guide provided for such as travel that way, that is, the
Compass to sail by, and the virtue of the Adamant stone. We do not
certainly know at what time this Art of sailing was brought to light. But for
my part, I hold for certain, that it is not veri^ ancient, for besides the
reasons alleged in the former chapter, I have not read in any ancient Author,
treating of dialles, any mention made of the Adamant. And yet undoubtedly, the
principal and most necessary instument for sun dialls, which we use at this
day, is the needle of iron touched with the Adamant stone. Some approved
Authors write in the History of the East Indies, that the first which began to
discover this secret upon the sea, was Vascor de Gama, who in the height of
Mosambique, Lib. 1. d^ Ital. illustr. regn^. 19 Plin. lib. 2. cap. 71. and.
lib. 7. c. 1. vlt. Ozor. de reb. g^st. Eman. li. 1
met with certain Mariners Moors, which used this compass or needle to sail
by, and by the means thereof, he sailed through those seas: yet they write not
from whom they learned this Art. And some amongst them are of our opinion, that
the Ancients were ignorant of this secret. Moreover, I will show a greater
wonder of the needle to sail by, which we might hold incredible, if we had not
proof thereof by undoubted experience. The iron touched or rubbed with that
part of the Adamant stone which is toward the South, has this virtue, to
turn always and in all places to the contrary, which is the North. Yet does
it not in all places directly regard it, but has certain points and climats,
where it directly regardes the North, and their stays: but changing this
climate, it inclines a little, either to the East, or to the West, the farther
it goes from this climat, which the Mariners call North-east, or North-west,
which is to say, coasting or inclining to the East, or to the West. And it is a
thing of such consequence, to understand this declining or coasting of the
needle, that if they observe it not advisedly (although it be small,) they
shall stray wonderfully in their course, and arrive in another place then where
they pretended to go. Once a very expert Pilot of Portugal told me, that there
were four points in all the world, whereas the needle looked directly toward
the North, the which he named, but I do not well remember them. One is in the
height of the Island of Corvo at the Terceres or Acores, which is very well
known to all men: but passing to a greater altitude, it declines to the West:
and contrariwise, drawing to a less altitude, toward the Equinoctial, it
leanes to the East. The masters of this Art can well tell how far and how
much. For my part, I would gladly know, of such as presume to know all
things, what should be the cause of this effect, and for what reason, a
little iron touched with the Adamant stone, receyves such virtue, as to look
always toward the North, and with such dexterity, that it understands the
sundry Clymates and scituations of the world, and which way it should turn and
incline, as well as any Philosopher or Cosinographer whatsoever. And seeing we
cannot well discover the causes and reasons of these things which we see
daily, without doubt they were very hard to believe, if they were not apparent.
Herein we discover our folly and vanity, to make our selves iudges' and to
subject divine and high things to our reason and discourse. It is therefore
better, as S. Gregory the divine says, ^o subject reason unto faith, for that
in her own mansion she has no government. But this shall suffice. Let us
return to our purpose, and conclude, that the use of the needle to sail by,
was unknown to the Ancients: whereby we may resolve, that it was impossible to
make a determined voyage, parting from the other world, to come to this by the
Ocean.

Wherein an answer is made to them that say, that in times passed they have
sailed through the Ocean, as at this day. CHAP. 18.
THat which is alleged to the contrary of that which has been spoken, that
Salomons Fleet sailed in three years, is no sufficient proof, seeing the holy
Scripture does not directly affirm, that this voyage continued three years,
but that it was made once in three years. And although we grant, that the
voyage lasted three years, it might be, as it is likely, that this Fleet
sailing toward the East Indies, was stayed in their course, by the diversity
of Ports and Regions, which they discovered: as at this day, in all the South
Sea, they sail from Chile to new Spain, the which voyage, although it be
more certain, yet is it longer, by reason of the turnings they are forced to
make upon the Coast, and they stay in diverse Ports: And in truth, I do not
find in ancient books, that they have lanched far into the Ocean, neither
can I believe, that this their sailing was otherwise then they use at this day
in the Mediterranean Sea: which makes learned men to conjecture, that in old
time they did not sail without Owers, for that they went always coasting
along the shore: and it seems the holy Scripture does testify as much,
speaking of that famous voyage of the Prophet Jonas: where it says, that the
Mariners being forced by the weather, rowed to land.

That we may conjecture, how the first Inhabitants of the Indies came thither
by force of weather, and not willingly. CHAP. 19.
HAving showed, that there is no reason to believe, that the first Inhabitants
of the Indies came thither purposely; it follows then, that if they came by
Sea, it was by chance, or by force of weather, the which is not incredible,
notwithstanding the vastness of the Ocean, seeing the like has happened in
our time, when as that Mariner, (whose name we are yet ignorant of) (to the
end so great a work, and of such importance, should not be attributed to any
other Author then to God) having (through tempest discovered this new world,)
left for payment of his lodging, where he had received it, to Christopher
Columbus, the knowledge of so great a secret. Even so it might chance, that
some of Europe or Affricke in times past, have bin driven by soul weather, and
cast upon unknown lands beyond the Ocean. Who knows not, that most, or the
greatest part of the Regions in this new world, were discovered by this
means, the which we must rather attribute to the violence of the weather, then
to the spirit and industry of those which have discovered. And to the end we
may know, that it is not in our time only, that they have undertaken such
voiages, through the greatness of our ships, and the valor and courage of
our men: we may read in Pliny, that many of the Ancients have made the like
voyages, he writes in this manner: It is reported that Caius Caesar, son to
Augustus Caesar, Plin. li. 2. c. 69.
having charge upon the Arabian Sea, did there see and find certain pieces
and remainders of Spanish ships that had perished. And after he says: Nepos
reports of the Northern circuit, that they brought to Quintus Metellus
Caeler companion in the Consulship to Caius Affranius ( the same Metellus being
then Proconsull in Gaul) certain Indians which had been presented by the
King of Sueden: the which Indians, sailing from India, for their traffic,
were cast upon Germany by force of tempest. Doubtless, if Pliny speaks
truth, the Portugales in these days, sail no further then they did in those
two shipwrackes, Plin. lib 6. c. 22
the one from Spain to the red Sea, the other from the East Indies to
Germany. The same Author writes in another place, that a servant of Annius
Plocanius, who farmed the customs of the red Sea, sailing the course of
Arabia, there came so furious a Northern wind, that in fifteen days he
passed Caramania, and discovered Hippares, a port in Taprobane, which at this
day we call Sumatra. And they report of a ship of Carthage, which was driven
out of the Mediterranean Sea, by a Northern wind, to the view of this new
world. The which is no strange thing to such as have any knowledge of the sea,
to know that sometimes a storm continues long and furious, without any
intermission. I my self, going to the Indies, parting from the Canaries, have
in fifteen days, discovered the first land peopled by the Spaniards. And
without doubt, this voyage had been shorter, if the Mariners had set up all
their sails to the Northern winds that blew. It seems therefore likely to
me, that in times past, men came to the Indies against their wills, driven by
the fury of the winds. In Peru, they make great mention of certain Giants,
which have been in those parts, whose bones are yet seen at Manta, and Port
Vi^il, of a huge greatness, and by their proportion, they should be thrice as
big as the Indians. At this day they report that the Giants came by sea, to
make war with those of the Country, and that they made goodly buildings,
whereof at this day they show a well, built with stones of great price. They
say moreover, that these men committing abominable sins, especially against
nature, were consumed by fire from heaven. In like fort the Indians report of
Y^a, and Arica, that in old time they were wont to sail far to the Islands of
the West, and made their voiages in Seals skins blown up. So as there wants
no witnesses, to prove that they sailed in the South sea, before the Spaniards
came thither. Thus we may well conjecture, that the new world began to be
inhabited, by men that have been cast upon that coast by the violence of the
Northern winds, as we have seen in our age. So it is, (being a matter very
considerable) that the works of nature of greatest importance, for the most
part, have been found out accidentally, and not by the industry and diligence
of man. The greatest part of physical herbs, of Stones, Plants, Mettalls,
Perle, gold, Adamant, Amber, Diamont, and the most part of such like things,
with their properties and virtues, have rather come to the knowledge of man by
chance, then by art or industry, to the end we may know, that the glory and
praise of such wonders, should be attributed to the providence of the Creator,
and not to man's understanding: for that which we think to happen accidently,
proceeds always from the ordinance and disposition of God, who does all
things with reason.

Notwithstanding all that has been said, it is more likely that the first
inhabitants of the Indies, came by land. CHAP. 20.
I Conclude then, that it is likely the first that came to the Indies, was by
shipwreck and tempest of wether, but heerevpon grows a difficulty, which
troubles me much. For, suppose we grant that the first men came from far
Countries, and that the nations which we now see, are issued from them, and
multiplied; yet can I not conjecture, by what means brute beasts (whereof
there is great abundance) could come there, not being likely, they should have
bin embarked and carried by sea. The reason that inforceth us to yield, that
the first men of the Indies are come from Europe, or Asia, is the testimony of
the holy scripture, which teaches us plainly, that all men came from Adam.
^en. 7.
We can therefore give no other beginning to those at the Indies, seeing the
holy scripture says, that all beasts and creatures of the earth perished, but
such as were reserved in the Ark of Noah, for the multiplication and
maintenance of their kind: so as we must necessarily refer the
multiplication of all beasts to those which came out of the Ark of Noah, on
the mountains of Ararat, where it stayed. And by this means, we must seek
out both for men and beasts, the way whereby they might pass from the old
world to this new. Saint Augustine, treating upon this question, by what reason
you shall find in some Islands, Wolves, A^g. lib. 6. d: Ciuit. cap. 7.
Tigers, and other ravenous beasts, which breed no profit to men, seeing
there is no doubt, but Elephants, Horses, Oxen, Dogs, and other beasts which
serve man to use, have been expressly carried in ships, as we see at this day
brought from the East into Europe, and transported from Europe, to Peru,
although the voiages be very long. And by what means these beasts which
yield no profit, but are very hurtefull (as Wolves, and others of that wild
nature) should pass to the Indies, supposing, as it is certain, that the
deluge drowned all the earth. In which Treaty, this learned and holy man
labors to free himself of these difficulties, saying that they might swim
unto these Islands, or that some have carried them thither for their delight in
hunting: or that, by the will of God, they had been newly created of the earth,
after the same manner of the first creation, when God said, Let the earth bring
forth every living thing according to his kind, Genesis 1.
Cattle, and creeping Worms, and the beasts of the field, every one in his
kind. But if we shall apply this solution to our purpose, the matter will
remain more doubtful: for beginning at the last point, it is not likely,
according to the order of Nature, nor conformable to the order of government
established by God, that perfect creatures, as Lions, Tigers, and Wolves,
should be engendered of the earth, as we see that Rattes, Frogs, Bees, and
other imperfect creatures, are commonly engendered. Moreover, to what purpose
is that which the scripture says, and does so often repeat, Genesis 7.
Thou shall take of all the beasts and birds of the air, seven, and seven,
male and female, to maintain generation upon earth; if such beasts after the
deluge, should be created again after a new kind of creation, without
conjunction of male and female? And heerevpon might grow another question:
Seeing such creatures are breeding on the earth (according to this opinion)
wherefore are they not likewise in all other parts of the maine Land, and in
many Islands, seeing we must not regard the natural order of generation, but
the bounty of the Creator. On the other part, I will not hold it for a thing
incredible, that they have carried some of these beasts for the pleasure of
hunting: for that we often see, Princes and great men keep and nourish in
their cages, (only for their pleasure and greatness) both Lions, Bears, and
other savage beasts, especially when they are brought from far Countries:
but to speak that of Woolves, Foxes and other beasts which yield no profit,
and have nothing rare and excellent in them, but to hurt the cattle; and to
say also that they have carried them by sea for hunting, truly it is a thing
that has no sense. Who can imagine, that in so long a voyage, men would take
the pains to carry Foxes to Peru, especially of that kind which they call
Anas, which is the filthiest that I have seen? Who would likewise say, that
the have carried Tigers and Lions? Truly it were a thing worthy the laughing
at, to think so. It was sufficient, (yea, very much) for men, driven against
their wills by tempest, in so long and unknown a voyage, to escape the danger
of the Sea with their own lives, without busying themselves to carry Woolves
and Foxes, and to nourish them at Sea. If these beasts then came by Sea, we
must believe it was by swimming, which may happen in some Islands not far
distant from others, or fom the main Land, the which we cannot deny, seeing
the experience we have, and that we see these beasts, being pressed to swim
day and night without weariness, and so to escape. But this is to be
understood in small, Straights and passages: for in our Ocean, they would mock
at such swimmers, whenas birds fail in their flight, yea, those of the
greatest wing, upon the passage of so great a Gulf. And although we find
small birds, which fly above a hundred leagues, as we have often seen in our
travel, yet it is a matter impossible^, at the least very difficult, for birds
to pass all the Ocean. All this being true which we have spoken, what way
^^all we make for beasts and birds to go to the Indies? and how can I say,
they passed from one world to an other? I conjecture then, by the discourse I
have made, that the new world, which we call Indies, is not altogether severed
and disioyned from the other world: and to speak my opinion, I have long
believed, that the one and the other world are joined and continued one with an
other in some part, or at the least, are very near. And yet to this day, there
is no certain knowledge of the contrary. For toward the Articke or Northern
Pole, all the longitude of the earth is not discovered, and many hold, that
above Florida, the Land runs out very large toward the North, and as they
say, ioynes with the Scithike or German Sea. Others affirm, that a Ship
sailing in that Sea, reported to have seen the coast of Bacalaos, which
stretches almost to the confines of Europe. Moreover, no man knows how far
the land runs beyond the Cape of Mendoca in the South sea, but that they
affirm it is a great Continent, which runs an infinite length: and returning
to the Southern Pole, no man knows the lands on the other part of the
Straight of Magellan. A ship belonging to the Bishop of Plaisance, which
passed the Straight, reports to have sailed always within sight of Land: the
like Hernando Lamer a Pilot does affirm, who (forced by foul weather) passed
two or three degrees above the said Straight. So as there is no reason or
experience that does contradict my conceit and opinion; which is, that the
whole earth is united and joined in some part, or at the least, the one
approaches near unto the other. If this be true, (as in effect there is some
likelihood:) the answer is easy to the doubt we have propounded, how the
first Inhabitants could pass to the Indies: For that we must believe they
could not so conveniently come thither by Sea, as traveling by Land, which
might be done without consideration, in changing by little and little their
lands and habitations. Some peopling the lands they found, and others seeking
for new; in time they came to inhabit and people the Indies, with so many
nations, people, and tongues as we see.

By what means tame Beasts passed to the Indies. CHAP. 21.
THe signs and arguments, which offer themselves to such as are curious to
examine the Indians manners and fashions, help much to maintain the foresaid
opinion: for that you shall not find any inhabiting the Islands that are far
from the maine Land, or from other Islands, as the Bermudes, the reason whereof
is, for that the Ancients did never sail but along the coast, and in view of
land: whereupon it is reported, that they have found no great Ships in any part
of the Indies, capable to pass such Gulphs, but only Balsae, Barks and
Canoes, which are all less then our long boats, the which the Indians do
only use, with the which they could not run through so great a Passage,
without apparent danger of ship-wracke: and although their ships had been
sufficient, yet had they no knowledge of the Astrolabe or Compass. If then
they had been but eight or ten days at Sea withoutsight of land, they must
of necessity loose themselves, having no knowledge where they were: we know
many Islands well peopled with Indians, and their usual navigations, the which
was such, as they may well perform in Canoes and boats, without any Compass
to sail by. Whenas the Indians of Peru, which remain at Tombs, did see our
first Spanish ships sailing to Peru, and viewed the greatness of their
sails, being spread, and of the bodies of the ships, they stood greatly
amazed, not being able to persuade themselves that they were ships, having
never seen any of the like form and greatness, they supposed they had been
rocks. But seeing them advance, and not to sincke, they stood transported with
amazement, until that beholding them nearer, they discovered men with beards
that walked in them, whom then they held for some gods or heavenly creatures.
Whereby it appears, how strange it was to the Indians to have great Ships.
There is yet an other reason, which confirms us in the foresaid opinion, which
is, that these beasts (which we say are not likely to have been transported by
Sea to the Indies,) remain only on the maine Land, and not in any Islands,
four days journey from the maine Land. I have made this search for proof
thereof, for that it seems to me a point of great importance, to confirm me
in mine opinion, that the confines of the Indies, Europe, Asia, and Affricke
have some communication one with another, or at the least, approach very near
together. There are in America and Peru many wild beasts, as Lions: (although
they be not like in greatness, fierceness, nor of the same color, read, to
the renowned Lions of Africa.) There are also many Tigers, very cruel, and
more to the Indians then to the Spaniardes: there are likewise Bears, but in
no great abundance: of Boares and Foxes an infinite number. And yet if we
shall seek for all these kinds of beasts in the Islands of Cuba, Hispaniola,
Iamaica, Marguerita, or Dominica, you shall not find any. So as in the said
Islands, although they were very fertile, and of a great circuit, yet was there
not any kind of beasts for service when the Spaniards arrived, but at this day
there are so great troops of Horses, Oxen, Kyne, Dogs and Hogs, which have
multiplied in such abundance, as now the Kine have no certain master, but
belong to him that shall first kill them, be it on the mountains or on the
plains; which the Indians do, only to save their hides, whereof they make
great traffic, without any regard of the flesh to eat it. Dogs have so
increased, as they march by troops, and endammage the cattle no less then
wolves, which is a great inconvenience in these Islands. There wants not only
beasts in these Islands, but also birds both great and small. As for Parrets,
there are many that fly by flocks, but (as I have said,) there are few of any
other kind. I have not seen, nor heard of any Partriges there, as in Peru.
Likewise, there are few of those beasts, which at Peru they call Guancos, and
Vicunas, like to wild Goats, very swifte, in whose stomach they find the
Beezars stone, which many do greatly value: sometimes you shall find them as
big as a hens egg, yea, half as big again. They have no other kind of
beasts, but such as we call Indian sheep, the which (besides their wool and
flesh (wherewith they clothe and feed themselves,) do serve them as Asses to
bear their burdens. They carry half as much as a Moyle, and are of small
charge to their masters, having need, neither of shoes, saddle, nor oats to
live by, nor of any furniture, for that Nature has provided them of all these,
wherein she seems to have favored these poor Indians. Of all these
creatures, and of many other sorts, whereof I will make mention, the maine
land at the Indies aboundes. But in the Islands, there are not any found, but
such as the Spaniards have brought. It is true, that once one of our Friars did
see a Tigre in an Island, as he reported unto us upon the discourse of his
peregrination and shipwreck; but being demanded how far it was from the
maine land, he answered, six or eight leagues at the most; which passage,
Tigres might easily swim over. We may easily infer by these arguments, and
others like, that the first Indians went to inhabit the Indies, more by land
then by sea; or if there were any navigation, it was neither great, nor
difficult, being an indibitable thing, that the one world is continued and
joined with the other, or at the least, they approach one near unto another in
some parts.

That the lineage of the Indies, has not passed by the Atlantike Island, as some
do imagine. CHAP. 22.
SOme (following Platoes opinion mentioned before,) affirm, that these men
parted from Europe, Sag. cap. 12.
or Affricke, to go to that famous and renowned Atlantike Island, and so passed
from one Island unto another, until they came to the maine land of the Indies:
for that Critias of Plato in his time discourses in this manner: if the
Atlantike Island wereas great as all Asia, and Affrike together, or greater, as
Plato says, it should of necessity contain all the Atlantike Ocean, and
stretch even unto the Islands of the new world. And Plato says moreover, that
by a great and strange deluge, the Atlantike Island was drowned, and by that
means the sea was made vnnavigable, through the abundance of banckes, rocks,
and roughness of the waves, which were yet in his time. But in the end, the
ruins of this drowned Island weresetled, which made this sea navigable. This
has been curiously handled and discoursed of by some learned men of good
judgment; and yet (to speak the truth) being well considered, they are
ridiculous things, resembling rather to Ovids tales, then a History or
Philosophy, worthy of accoumpt. The greatest part of Platoes Interpreters,
affirm, that it is a true History, whatsoever Critias reports of the strange
beginning of the Atlantike Island, of the greatness thereof, of the wars they
had against them of Europe, with many other things. That which gives it the
more credit of a true History, be the words of Critias, (whom Plato brings
in in his time,) saying, that the subject he means to treat of, is of strange
things, but yet true. The other disciples of Plato, considering that this
discourse has more show of a fable, then of a true History, say, that we must
take it as an allegory, and that such was the intention of their divine
Philosopher. Of this opinion is Procles, and Porphire, yea, and Origene, who so
much regardes the writings of Plato, as when they speak thereof, they seem to
be the books of Moses, or of Esdras: and whereas they think the writings of
Plato have no show of truth, they say, they are to be understood mystically,
and in allegories. But to say the truth, I do not so much respect the
authority of Plato, (whom they call Divine,) as I will believe he could write
these things of the Atlantike Island for a true History, the which are but
mere fables, seeing he confesses that he learned them of Critias, being a
little child, who (among other songs,) sung that of the Atlantike Island. But
whether that Plato did write it for a true History, or a fable, for my part, I
believe that all which he has written of this Island, beginning at the Dialogue
of Time, and continuing to that of Critias, cannot be held for true, but among
children and old folks. Who will not accoumpt it a fable, to say that Neptune
fell in love with Clite, and had of her five pair of twins at one birth* And
that out of one mountain, he drew three round balls of water, and two of
earth, which did so well resemble, as you would have judged them all one
bowell? What shall we say moreover of that Temple of a thousand pace long, and
five hundred broad, whose walls without were all covered with silver, the
seeling of gold, and within ivorie, indented and inlaied with gold, silver, and
pearl? In the end, speaking of the ruin thereof, he concludes thus in his
time, In one day, and one night, came a great deluge, whereby all our soldiers
were swallowed by heaps within the earth, and in this sort the Atlantike Island
being drowned, it vanished in the Sea. Without doubt it fell out happily, that
this Island vanished so suddenly, seeing it was bigger then Asia and Affrike:
and that it was made by enchantment. It is in likesort all one to say, that the
ruins of this so great an Island, are seen in the bottom of the sea, and that
the Mariners which see them, cannot sail that way. Then he adds, For this
cause unto this day, that Sea is not navigable, by reason of the bancke which
by little and little is grown in that drowned Island. I would willingly demand
what Sea could swallow up so infinite a continent of land, greater then Asia
and Affrike, whose confines stretched unto the Indies, and to swallow it up in
such sort, as there should at this day remain no signs nor marks thereof,
whatsoever: seeing it is well known by experience, that the Mariners find no
bottom in the Sea, where they say this Island was. Notwithstanding, it may
seem indiscreete and far from reason, to dispute seriously of those things
which are reported at pleasure, or if we shall give that respect to the
authority of Plato (as it is reason,) we must rather understand them to
signify simply, (as in a picture) the prosperity of a City, and withal, the
ruin thereof. For the argument they make, to prove that this Atlantike Island,
has been really and indeed, saying that the sea in those parts, does at this
day bear the name of Atlantike, is of small importance, for that we know
Mount Atlas, Plin. lib. 5. cap. 1. and lib. 6. c. 31
whereof Pliny says this sea took the name, is upon the confines of the
Mediterranean Sea. And the same Pliny reports, that joining to the said
Mount, there is an Island called Atlantike, which he reports to be little, and
of small account.

That the opinion of many which hold, that the first race of the Indians comes
from the Jews, is not true. CHAP. 23.
NOw that we have showed how unlikely it is, that the first Indians passed to
the Indies by the Atlantike Island, there are others hold opinion, that they
took the way, whereof Esdras speaks in his fourth book, in this manner: And
whereas thou saw that he gathered an other peaceable troop unto him, 4.
Esdr. 13.
thou shall know, those are the ten tribes, which were carried away captives out
of their own land, in the time of king Ozeas, whom Salmanazar king of the
Assyrians took captives, and led them beyond the river, so were they brought
into an other land: but they took this counsel to themselves, to leave the
multitude of the heathen, and go forth into a farther country, where never
mankind dwelt, that they might there observe their statutes, which they could
not keep in their own land: and they entered by the narrow passages of the
river Euphrates, for then God showed his wonders, and stayed the springs of the
flood, until they were passed over: for the way unto that Country is very
long, yea, of a year and a half, and this Region is called Arsareth, then
dwelt they there until the latter time, and when they come forth again, the
most Mighty shall hold still the springs of the river again, that they may
go through; for this cause saw thou this multitude peaceable. Some will
apply this text of Esdras to the Indies, saying, they were guided by God,
whereas never mankind dwelt, and that the land where they dwelt, is so far
off, as it requires a year and a half to perform the voyage, being by
nature very peaceable. And that there are great signs and arguments amongst
the common sort of the Indians, to breed a belief, that they are descended
from the Jews: for commonly you shall see them fearful, submisse,
ceremonious and subtle in lying. And moreover they say, their habites are like
unto those the Jews used, for they wear a short coat or waste-coat, and a
cloak imbroidered all about; they go barefooted, or with soles tied with
latchers over the foot, which they call Oiotas. And they say, that it appears
by their Histories, as also by their ancient pictures, which represent them in
this fashion, that this attire was the ancient habit of the Hebrews, and that
these two kinds of garments, which the Indians only use, were used by Samson,
which the Scripture calls Tunicam, and Sidonem: being the same which the
Indians term wast-coat and cloak. But all these conjectures are light, and
rather against them then with them; for we know well, that the Hebrews used
letters, whereof there is no show among the Indians; they were great lovers of
silver, these make no care of it: the Jews, if they were not circumcised, held
not themselves for Jews, and contrariwise the Indians are not at all, neither
did they ever use any ceremony near it, as many in the East have done. But
what reason of conjecture is there in this, seeing the Jews are so careful to
preserve their language and Antiquities, so as in all parts of the world they
differ and are known from others, and yet at the Indies alone, they have
forgotten their Lineage, their Law, their Ceremonies, their Messiah; and
finally, their whole Iudaisme. And whereas they say, the Indians are fearful
cowards, superstitious, and subtle in lying; for the first; it is not common
to all, there are some nations among the Barbarians free from these vices,
there are some valiant and hardy, there are some blunt and dull of
understanding. As for ceremonies and superstitions, the Heathen have always
used them much; the manner of habites described which they use, being the
plainest and most simple in the world; without Art, the which has been
common, not only to the Hebrews, but to all other Nations; seeing that the
very History of Esdras (if we shall believe the Scriptures that be Apocrypha)
make more against them then for their purpose: for he says in that place,
that the ten tribes went from the multitude of the Heathen, to keep their
faith and ceremonies, and we see the Indians given to all the Idolatries in the
world. And those which hold this opinion, see well if the entries of the River
Euphrates stretch to the Indies, and whether it be necessary for the Indies to
repasse that way, as it is written. Besides, I know not how you can name them
peaceable, seeing they be always in war amongst themselves. To conclude, I
cannot see how that Euphrates in Esdras Apocrypha, should be a more convenient
passage to go to the new world, then the enchanted and fabulous Atlantike
Island of Plato.

The reason why we can find no beginning of the Indians. CHAP. 24.
IT is easier to refute and contradict the false opinions conceyved of the
Original of the Indians, then to set down a true and certain resolution; for
that there is no writing among the Indians, nor any certain remembrances of
their founders: neither is there any mention made of this new world in their
books that have knowledge of letters: our Ancients held, that in those parts,
there were neither men; land, nor heaven. So as he should seem rash and
presumptuous, that should think to discover the first beginning of the
Indians. But we may judge a far off, by the former discourse, that these
Indians came by little and little to this new world, and that by the help and
means of the neerenesse of lands, or by some navigation: the which seems to
me the means whereby they came, and not that they prepared any army to go
thither of purpose: neither that they have been carried thither by any
ship-wracke or tempest, although some of these things may chance in some part
of the Indies: for these Regions being so great, as they contain Nations
without number, we may believe, that some came to inhabit after one sort, and
some after an other. But in the end I resolve upon this point, that the true
and principal cause to people the Indies, was, that the lands and limits
thereof are joined and continued in some extremities of the world, or at the
least, were very near. And I believe, it is not many thousand years past,
since men first inhabited this new world and West Indies, and that the first
men that entered, were rather savage men and hunters, then bredde up in civil
and well governed Commonweals: and that they came to this new world, having
lost their own land, or being in too great numbers, they were forced of
necessity to seek some other habitations; the which having found, they
began by little and little to plant, having no other law, but some instinct
of nature, and that very dark, and some customs remaining of their first
Countries. And although they came from Countries well governed, yet is it not
incredible to think, that they had forgotten all through the tract of time and
want of use; seeing that in Spain and Italy we find companies of men, which
have nothing but the shape and countenance only, whereby we may conjecture in
what sort this new world grew so barbarous and uncivil.

What the Indians report of their beginning. CHAP. 25.
IT is no matter of any great importance, to know what the Indians themselves
report of their beginning, being more like unto dreams, then to true Hiries.
^hey make great mention of a deluge happened in their Country: but we cannot
well judge if this deluge were universal (whereof the scripture makes
mention,) or some particular inundation of those regions where they are. Some
expert men say, that in those Countries are many notable signs of some great
inundation, and I am of their opinion which think that these marks and shows
of a deluge, was not that of Noe, but some other particular, as that which
Plato speaks of, or Deucalions flood, which the Poets sing of: whatsoever it
be, the Indians say, that al men were drowned in this deluge: and they report
that out of the great Lake Titicaca, came one Viracocha, which stayed in
Tiaguanaco, where at this day there is to be seen the ruins of ancient and
very strange buildings, and from thence came to Cusco, and so began mankind to
multiply. They show in the same Island a small Lake, where they feign that the
sun hid himself, and so was preserved; and for this reason they make great
sacrifices unto him in that place, both of sheep and men. Others report, that
six, or I know not what number of men, came out of a certain cave by a
window, by whom men first began to multiply: and for this reason they call
them Pacaritampo. And therefore they are of opinion, that the Tambos is the
most ancient race of men. They say also, that Mango Capa, whom they acknowledge
for the founder and chief of their Inguas, was issued of that race, and that
from him sprang two families or linages, the one of Havan Cusco, the other of
Vrni Cusco. They say moreover, that when the Kings Inguas attempted war and
conquered sundry Provinces, they gave a color and made a pretext of their
enterprise, saying, that all the world ought to acknowledge them; for that all
the world was renewed by their race and Country: and also that the true
religion had been reveiled to them from heaven. But what avails it to speak
more, seeing that all is full of lies and vanity, and far from reason? Some
learned men write, that all which the Indians make mention of, is not above
400. years old, and whatsoever they speak of former ages, is but a confusion
full of obscurity, wherein we find no truth. The which may not seem strange,
they having no use of books, or writing; in steed whereof, they use counting
with their Quipocamayes, the which is peculiar unto them. But which reckoning
all they can report is not past 400. years. Instructing my self carefully of
them, to know from what land, and what nation they passed, to that where they
^ow live, I have found them so far unable to give any reason thereof, as they
believe confidently, that they were created at their first beginning at this
new world, where they now dwell. But we have freed them of this error by our
faith, Act. 17.
which teaches us, that all men came from the first man. There are great and
apparent conjectures, that these men for a long time, had neither Kings nor
commonweals, but lived in troops, as they do at this day in Florida, the
Chiriquanas those of Bresill and many other nations, which have no certain
Kings, but as occasion is offered in peace or war, they choose their
Captains as they please. But some men excelling others in force and wit, began
in time to rule and domineere as Nembroth did: Genit^.
so increasing by little and little, they erected the kingdoms of Peru and
Mexico, which our Spaniards found: and although they were barbarous, yet did
they far surpass all the other Indians. Behold how the foresaid reason does
teach us, that the Indians began to multiply, for the most part, by savage men
and fugitives, which may suffice touching the beginning of these men we speak
of, leaving the rest, until we treat of their History more at large.

THE SECOND BOOK of the Natural and Moral History of the Indies.
That it is not out of purpose, but necessary to treat of the (...). CHAP. 1.
FOR the well conceiving of things at the Indies, it is necessary to know the
nature and disposition of that Region, which the Ancients did call the burning
Zone, the which they held inhabitable, seeing the greatest part of this new
world, which has bin of late discovered, lies and is situate under this
region in the midst of heaven. And it seems to me greatly to purpose which
some do say, that the knowledge of things at the Indies, depends of the well
understanding the nature of the Equinoctial: for that the difference which is
betwixt the one and the other world, proceeds in a manner from the qualities of
this Equinoctial. And we must note, that all the space betwixt the two
Tropickes, must be properly taken and held for this middle line, which is the
Equinoctial; so called, for that the Sun running his course therein, makes
the days and nights even throughout the world: yea, they that dwell under this
line, enjoy, throughout the year, the same equality of days, and nights. In
this Equinoctial line, we find so many admirable qualities, that with great
reason man's understanding does study and labor to search out the causes; not
moved thereunto so much by the doctrine of ancient Philosophers, as by reason
and certain experience.

For what reason the Ancients held, that the burning Zone was inhabitable.
CHAP. 2.
EXamining this subject from the beginning, no man can deny that which we
plainly see, that the Sun when it draws near, does heat, and when it
retyres, grows cold. The days and nights, with the Winter and Summer be
witnesses hereof; whose variety with the heat and cold, grows by the
neerenes and distance of the Sun. Moreover it is certain, the more the Sun
approaches and casts his beams prependicularly, the more the earth is
scorched and burnt, the which we see plainly in the heat of the South, and in
the force of Summer, whereby we may judge (in my opinion) that the farther a
Country is distant from the course of the Sun, the more cold it is. So we
find by experience, that the Countries and Regions, which approach nearest to
the North, are coldest: and contrariwise, those that lie near the Zodiake,
where the Sun keeps his course, are most hot. For this cause Ethiopia
passes Affrike and Barbary in heat, Barbary exceedes Andalousia,
Andalousia, Castile and Arragon surpass Biscaie and France. And the more they
decline to the North, the colder they are: and so by consequence, those which
approach nearest to the Sun, and are beaten perpendicularly with his beams,
they do most feel the heat thereof. Some urge another reason to this effect,
which is, that the motion of the heaven is very ^odaine and light toward the
Tropikes, but near the Poles it is slow and heavy, whereby they conclude,
that the region which the Zodiake circles and conteines, is set on fire with
heat for three causes and reasons; the one for the neerenes of the Sun, the
other, for that his beams reflect directly, and the third, for that it does
participate and feel this swift and sudden motion of the heaven. See what
reason and discourse teaches us, touching the cause of heat and cold upon the
regions of the earth. But what shall we say of the two other qualities, wet and
dry? Even the same. For the drought seems to grow by the neerenes of the
Sun, and moistnes, being retired far off, for that the night being colder
then the day, is likewise more moist; and the day which is drier, is also
hotter. Winter, whilst the Sun runs his course farther off, is more cold and
rainie, and Summer, when the Sun is near, is more hot and dry: for even
as the fire has the property to parch and burn, so has it to dry up the
moistnes. These things therefore considered, Aristotle and other Philosophers
attribute unto the regions of the South, which they call burning, an excessive
heat and a drouth likewise. And therefore they said, this region is wonderfully
scorched and dry; and so by consequence, has neither waters nor pastures,
whereby of necessity it must be contrary and unfit for man's life.

That the burning Zone is very moist, contrary to the opinion of the Ancients.
CHAP. 3.
ALl that we have propounded, seems undoubtedly true, and to purpose; and yet
the conclusion they would draw from it, is directly false; for that the Region
of the South, which they call the burning Zone, is peopled and inhabited by
men; and we our selves have stayed long there, being very commodious,
pleasant and agreeable. If therefore it be so (as we cannot deny it) that from
a true proposition, we cannot draw a false conclusion, and yet this conclusion
should be false, (as indeed it is,) we must of necessity return back the
same way, to examine this proposition more strictly, and whence the error
should proceed: we will first show the truth, as assured experience does
teach us, then will we prove it, (although it be very difficult) and will
endeavor to give a reason, following the terms of Philosophy. The last point
that we propounded, that the drought is greatest, whenas the Sun is nearest
to the earth, seems certain and infallible, and yet it is very false; f^r
there is never greater abundance of rain in the burning Zone, then whenas the
Sun goes directly over them, and is very near. Truly it is an admirable
thing, and worthy observation, that the air is most clear, and without rain
under this burning Zone, whenas the Sun is farthest off; and contrariwise
there is most rain, snow and mists, whenas the Sun is nearest. Such as have
not traveled in this new world, will happily think this incredible, and it
will seem strange even unto such as have been there, if they have not well
observed it: but the one and the other will willingly yield, in noting the
certain experience of that which has been said of this part of Peru, which
looks to the Southern or Antartike Pole: the Sun is then farthest off, when
it is nearest unto Europe, that is, in May, June, July and August, whenas he
makes his course in the Tropicke of Cancer. During which Months, the air at
Peru is very clear and calm, neither does there fall any snow or rain; all
their rivers fall much, and some are dried up quite: but as the year
increases, and the Sun approaches near unto the Tropicke of Capricorn,
then begins it to rain and to snow, and their Rivers swell from October to
December. Then after that the Sun retyring from Capricorn, whenas his beams
reflect directly upon the heads of them of Peru, then is the violence of their
waters great, then is the time of rain, snow, and great overflowings of their
Rivers, when as their heat is greatest, that is, from January to mid March:
this is so true and certain, as no man may contradict it. And at that time the
contrary is found in the Regions of the Pole Articke, beyond the Equinoctial,
which proceeds from the same reason. But let us now look into the temperature
of Panama and all that coast, as well of new Spain, the Islands of Barlovent,
Cuba, Hispaniola, Iamaica, as of S. John de Port ricco, we shall without doubt
find, that from the beginning of November, until April, they have the air
clear and bright; the reason is, for that the Sun passing by the
Equinoctial to the Tropicke of Capricorn, retyres from those Regions more
then at any other time of the year. And contrariwise, they have violent
showers and great swellings of water, whenas the Sun returns and is nearest
unto them, which is from June, unto September, for then his beams beat most
upon them. The like happens at the East Indies, as we learn daily by letters
that come. So as it is a general rule, (although in some places there is an
exception) that in the Region of the South or burning Zone, which is all one,
the air is most clear and driest, whenas the Sun is farthest off; and
contrariwise, when it approaches, there is greatest rain and humiditie: and
even as the Sun advances or retyreth little or much, even so the earth
abounds or wants water and moisture.

That in the Regions which be without the Tropicks, there is greatest store of
waters, whenas the Sun is farthest off, contrary to that under the burning
Zone. CHAP. 4.
IN Regions which lie without the Tropicks, we see the contrary to that which
has been spoken: for that the rain is mingled with cold, and the drought
with heat, the which is well known in all Europe and the old world, as we see
in the same manner in the new world, whereof the whole Kingdom of Chile is a
witness, which lying without the Tropicke of Capricorn, and in the same
height with Spain, is subject to the same laws of Winter and Summer, but that
Winter is there, whenas it is Summer in Spain, being under diverse Poles. So as
when it is cold in these Provinces, the waters are in great abundance, which
is, when the Sun is farthest off, from the beginning of April, to the end of
September: finally, the disposition of seasons is like to that in Europe, which
is, that the heat and drought comes whenas the Sun returns, which is the
cause that this Realm of Chile approaches nearer the temperature of Europe,
then any other of the Indies, as well in the fruits of the earth, as in the
bodies and spirits of men. The like they report of that part which lies before
the Inner Ethiopia, that stretches out in manner of a point unto the Cape
Bonne Esperance or Good Hope, the which they hold for a true cause of the
inundations of Nile, which be in Summer, whereof the Ancients have so much
disputed, for that in that Region the Winter and rain begins in April, whenas
the Sun has passed Aries: and these waters, which partly grow from snow, and
partly from rain, assemble and make great Lakes and Pooles, from whence by
good and true Geographie the River of Nile proceeds, and by this means goes
by little and little stretching out her course, till that having run a long
way, it finally in the time of Summer overfloweth Egypt, which seems against
nature, and yet it is certainly reported; for at what time it is Summer in
Egypt, lying under the Tropicke of Cancer, then is it winter at the springes of
Nile, which is under the other Tropicke of Capricorn. There is in America an
other inundation like to that of Nile, at Paraguen, or River de la Plata, which
is as much to say, as the River of silver, the which receiving yearly infinite
waters which fall from the Mountains of Per^, does so terribly swell in her
course, and over-flowes that Region, as the Inhabitants are forced, during
those Months, to retire themselves into boats and Canoes, and to leave the
dwelling of the Land.

That betwixt the two Tropicks, the greatest abundance of rain is in Summer,
with a discourse of Winter and Summer. CHAP. 5.
TO conclude, Summer is always accompanied with heat and drought, in the two
temperate Zones, and Winter with cold and moistness: but under the burning
Zone those qualities are not alike, for that rain accompanies heat, and
drought follows the cold: I understand by cold, want of excessive heat, so as
Winter is taken in our Europe for the cold and raynie season, and Summer for
the hot and clear season. Ou^ Spaniards which live at Peru, and in new
Spain, seeing these two qualities not to concur together as in Spain, call
that season Winter, wherein there is greatest abundance of rain and waters;
and Summer; where there is little or non^ at all: wherein they are plainly
deceived, although they a^^irme by a general rule, that in the Mountains of
Peru, it is Summer from the Month of April to September, for that the rain
cease in that season; and that Winter is, from the month of September unto
April, for that the showers return then* and therefore it is winter and
summer at the same instant that in Spain. So as when the Sun^e goes directly
over their heads, they then take it to be the depth of Winter, having greatest
store of rain. But it is worthy to be laughed at, coming from ignorant men
and unlearned: for even as the difference betwixt the day and night proceeds
from the presence or absence of the Sun in our hemisphere, according to the
motion of the first motor, which is the cause of day and night; even so the
difference which we see betwixt Winter and Summer, proceeds from the neerenesse
and distance of the Sun, according to the motion of the said Sun, which is
the proper cause. To speak truth then, it is Summer whenas the Sun is
nearest, and Winter when it is farthest off. Both heat and coldness, and
every other temperature, grows of necessity, by the neerenesse and distance
of the sun; but to rain, or not to rain, which is humiditie and drought,
do not necessarily follow. It is therefore easy to judge (besides this vulgar
opinion) that at Peru, the Winter is clear and without rain, and the Summer
full of showers, and not otherwise, as many believe, that the winter is hot,
and the summer cold. They fall into the like error, upon the difference they
make betwixt the Plains and the Mountains of Peru, saying, that when it is
summer upon the mountain, it is winter in the vallie, which is in April, May,
June, July, and August: for then the air is very clear upon the mountain,
without any rain or mistes, and at the same season, we commonly see fogges in
the plain, which they call Guarva, which is as it were a very sweet dew
wherewith the sun is covered. But winter and summer, as it is said, are
caused by the neerenesse and distance of the sun. Seeing then that throughout
all Per^, both upon the Mountains and on the Plains, the sun approaches and
retyreth in one sort, there is no reason to say, that when it is summer in one
part, that it is winter in an other; yet is it no m^tter of any importance, to
contend upon the signification of words: Let them term them as they please,
and call that summer when it raines not, although the heat be greater. But
that, whereunto we must have greatest regard, is the truth of the subject,
which is, that drought and want of rain, is not always greatest, when the
sun approaches nearest, as we see in the burning Zone.

That the burning Zone abounds with waters and pastures, against the opinion of
Aristotle, who holds the contrary. CHAP. 6.
BY the former Discourse we may easily conceive, that the burning Zone is not
dry, but abounding with waters; the which is so true, as it exceeds all the
Regions of the world for store of waters, except in some parts, where there are
sands and desert Countries, as we find likewise in some other parts of the
world. As for water from Heaven, we have already shown, that there is great
abundance of rain, snow and hail, which especially abound in the kingdom of
Peru. But as for land-waters, as rivers, fountains, brooks, springs, floods,
and lakes, I have not spoken thereof till now; yet being an ordinary thing,
that the waters below have a correspondencie with them above, we must not
imagine that there can be any want: and in truth there is so great store of
springs and fountains, as you shall not find in any Region or Country of the
world; so many lakes, marshes, and such store of rivers, for the greatest part
of America is almost inhabitable through too great abundance of waters: for
that the rivers swelled with the great Raines in Summer, do often overflow
their banckes, with such fury, as they break all they encounter: and in many
places they cannot pass, by reason of the mudde and mire of marshes and
valleys: for this cause, those that live near to Paraguen, (whereof we have
made mention,) foreseeing the rising of the River before it comes, put
themselves and their goods into Canoes, and so preserve themselves and their
goods, f^oating up and down, almost for the space of three months: and when
the River is returned within her bounds, then they go to their houses, still
wette and dropping with the ^^ood. And this River is so great, as Nile, Ganges
and Euphrates all together cannot equal it. But what shall we say of the great
river of Magdalaine, which falls into the sea betwixt S. Martha and
Carthagene, and with reason is called the great river? Sailing in those parts,
I was amazed to see her stream (which was very clear) run ten leagues into
the sea, being in breadth above two leagues, not mingling no^ vanquished with
the violent waves of the Ocean. But if we shall speak more of rivers, that
great flood called by some, the river of Amazons, by others Marannon, and by
some, the river of Orellana, which our Spaniards sailed in their discoveries,
ought to blemish all the rest; and in truth I am in doubt whither I may term
it a river, or a sea. It flows from the mountains of Peru, from whence it
recei^es a great abundance of water, both of rain and of rivers, which it
gathers into it; then passing by the great plains of Pautiti, Dorado, and
the Amazons, in the end it falls into the Ocean, almost right against the
^land of Marguerite and Trinidado. It has so large and broad a channel,
specially in the last third part of her length, as it contains in it many great
^lands. And that which seems incredible, when you sail through the midst of
it, you shall see nothing but air and water. They say moreover, that from the
midst you cannot see nor discover with the eye, many great and high mountains
which are upon the banks, by reason of her great breadth. We have learned from
credible persons, the great and wonderful breadth of this river (which in my
opinion, deserves well the name of Empress and Queen of all floods,) which
was by the report of a brother of our company, who being then young, sailed it
in the company of Peter d'Orsua, with whom he was present at all the
adventures of this strange entry and discovery; and at the seditious and
pernicious acts of that wicked Diego d' Aguirra, from the which God delivered
him to place him in our company. Such are the rivers in that region, which they
call the burning Zone, and the dry and parcht up country, in the which
Aristotle and the Ancients affirmed there were neither waters, nor pastures.
But seeing I have made mention of the river of Marannon, to show the abundance
of the waters that are in the burning zone, it shall not be from the purpose,
to speak somewhat of that great Lake which they call Titicaca, which is in the
midst of the Province of Collao. There are above ten great rivers which loose
themselves entering into that Lake, and yet has it no issue but one small
current of water, although some hold it to be very deep, and of such a
fashion, as it is impossible to build a bridge over it, for the depth of the
water, neither can they pass it by boat for the violence of the current. They
pass it by an artificial and notable practice, peculiar to the Indians, with
a bridge of straw laid upon the water, the which (being of so light a
substance) sinkes not, and yet this passage is very easy and safe. This Lake
contains almost four score leagues, thirty five in length, and fifteen in
breadth at the largest place. There are many Islands which in old time were
inhabited and tilled, but now lie waste. It brings forth a great abundance of
reeds, which the Indians call Totora, which serves them to a thousand uses;
for it is meat for swine, for horses, and for men, they make houses therewith,
fire and barks. To conclude, the Vros in this their Totora find all they have
need of. These Vros be such dull and brutish people, as they esteem not
themselves men. It is reported of them, that being demanded of what nation they
were? They answered, they were not men, but Vros, as it were some kind of
beasts. There are whole villages of these Vros inhabiting in the Lake in their
boats of Totora, the which are tied together and fastened to some rock, and
often times the whole village changes from place to place. So as he that
would seek them now whereas they were yesterday, shall find no show nor
remainder of them, or of their village. The current or issue of this Lake,
having run above fifty leagues, makes another Lake, but less then the first
which they call Paria, and contains in it some small Islands, but they find no
issue thereof. Some imagine it runs under the ground, and that it falls into
the South sea; giving out, that there is a branch of a river which they see
rise and enter into the sea near the bank, having no knowledge of the Spring.
But contrariwise, I believe that the waters of this Lake, dissolve and are
dispearsed within the Lake it self through the heat of the Sun. This
discourse seems sufficient to prove, that the Ancients had no reason to hold,
that the middle region was inhabitable for the defect of waters, seeing there
is such store both from heaven and on the earth.

Showing the reason why the Sun without the Tropicks, causes greatest
quantity of waters when it is farthest off; and contrariwise, within them it
breeds most, when it is nearest. CHAP. 7.
COnsidering with my self often times, what should cause the Equinoctial to be
so moist, as I have said; to refute the opinion of the Ancients, I find no
other reason, but the great force of the sun in those parts, whereby it
draws unto it a great abundance of vapors from out of the Ocean, which in
those parts is very great and spacious: and having drawn unto it this great
abundance of vapors, does suddenly dissolve them into rain, and it is
approoved by many tried experiences, that the rain and great storms from
heaven proceed from the violent heat of the Sun: first (as we have said
before) it raines in those countries, whenas the Sun casts his beams
directly upon the earth, at which time he has most force: but when the Sun
retyres, the heat is moderate, and then there falls no rain: whereby we may
conclude, that the force and heat of the Sun is the cause of rain in those
Countries. Moreover we observe, both in Peru, New Spain, and in all the
burning Zone, that the rain does usually fall in afternoon, when as the
sunne-beames are in their greatest force, being strange to see it rain in the
morning. And therefore travelers foreseeing it, begin their iourneyes early,
that they may end and rest before noone, for they hold that commonly it raines
after noone. Such as have frequented and traveled those Countri^s, can
sufficiently speak thereof. And there are, that (having made some abode there)
say, that the greatest abundance of rain is, when the Moon is at the full;
but to say the truth, I could never make sufficient proof thereof, although I
have observed it. Moreover, the days, the year and the months, show the
truth hereof, that the violent heat of the sun causes the rain in the
burning Zone: experience teaches us the like in artificial things, as in a
Limbecke, wherein they draw waters from herbs and flowers; for the vehemency
of the fire forces and drives up an abundance of vapors, which being
pressed, and finding no issue, are converted into liquor and water. The like
we see in gold and silver, which we refine with quicke-silver, the fire being
small and slow, we draw out almost nothing of the quicke-silver, but if it be
quick and violent, it does greatly evaporate the quicksilver, which
incountring the head above, does presently turn into liquor, and begins to
drop down: Even so the violent heat of the sun produces these two effects,
when it finds matter disposed, that is, to draw up the vapors on high, and to
dissolve them presently, and turn them into rain, when there is any obstacle
to consume them. And although these things seem contrary, that one sun
within the burning Zone, being near, should cause rain, and without the Zone
afar off should breed the like effect; so it is, that all well considered,
there is no contrariety. A thousand effects in natural causes proceed of
contrary things by diverse means: we dry linen by the fire, and in the air,
and yet the one heats and the other cooles; pastures are dried and hardened by
the sun and with the frost; moderate exercise provokes sleep, being too
violent, it hinders: if you lay no wood on the fire, it dies; if you lay on
to^ much, it likewise quenches: for the only proportion entertaines and makes
it to continue. To well discern a thing, it must not be too near the eye, nor
too far off, but in a reasonable distance proportionable; being too far off
from any thing, we loose the sight, and too near likewise, we cannot see it.
If the sun beams be weak, they draw up no fogge from the rivers, if they be
violent, having drawn up the vapors, they presently dissolve and consume
them; but if the heat be moderate, it draws up and preserves it: for this
reason the vapors rise not commonly in the night, nor at noone, but in
morning, whenas the sun begins to enter into his force. There are a thousand
examples of natural causes upon this subject, which we see do often grow from
contrary things: whereby we must not wonder, if the sun being near,
engenders rain, and being far off, works the like effect: but being of a
moderate and proportionable distance, causes none at all. Yet there remains
one doubt, why the neerenes of the sun causes the rain under the burning
Zone, and without, when it is farthest off. In my opinion the reason is, that
in Winter without the Tropicks, the sun has not force sufficient to consume
the vapors which rise from the land and sea; for these vapors grow in great
abundance in the cold region of the air, where they are congealed and
thickened by the extremity of the cold; and after being pressed, they dissolve
and turn into water. Therefore in Winter when the sun is farthest off, the
days short, and the nights long, his heat has small force: but when the sun
approaches, which is in the summer time, his force is such, as it draws up
the vapors, and suddenly consumes and disperseth them; for the heat and the
length of the days grow through the neerenes of the sun. But within the
Tropickes under the burning Zone, the far distance of the sun works the same
effects that the neerenes does without the Tropiks; by reason whereof, it
raines no more under the burning Zone when the sun is far off, then without
the Tropicks when it is nearest, for that in this approaching and rety^ing, the
sun remains always in one distance whence proceeds this effect of
cleerenes. But when the sun is in the period of his force in the burning
zone, and that he cast his beams directly upon the inhabitants heads, there is
neither cleerenes nor drienes, as it seems there should be, but rather great
and strange showers; for that by this violent heat, he draws up suddenly a
great abundance of vapors from the Earth and Ocean, which are so thick, as
the wind, not able easily to disperse them, they melt into water, which
breeds the cold rain in so great abundance: for the excessive heat may
soon draw up many vapors, the which are not so soon dissolved: and being
gathered together through their great abundance, they melt and dissolve into
water. The which we may easily discern by this familiar example: roast a piece
of porke, mutton, or veale, if the fire be violent, and the meat near, we see
the fat melts suddenly, and drops away, the reason is, that the violent
heat draws forth the humor and fat from the meat, and being in great
abundance, cannot dissolve it, and so it distills more away: But when the fire
is moderate, and the meat in an equal distance, we see that it rostes
hansomely, and the fat drops not too suddenly, for that the moderate heat
draws out the moistnes which it consumes suddenly. And therefore Cooks make a
moderate fire, and lay not their meat too near nor too far off, lest it
melt away. The like may be seen in another experience in candles of tallow or
wax, if the wike be great, it melts the tallow or the wax, for that the heat
cannot consume the moistnes which rises, but if the flame be proporcionable,
the wax melts nor drops not, for that the flame does waste it by little and
little as it rises. The which seems to me the true reason, why under the
Equinoctial and burning Zone, the violence of the heat does cause rain, the
which in other Regions grows through want thereof.

How we should understand, that which has been formerly spoken of the burning
Zone. CHAP. 8.
IF in natural and physical things, we must not seek out infallible and
mathematical rules, but that which is ordinary and tried by experience, which
is the most perfect rule, we must then believe what we have said, that there
is more humiditie under the burning Zone then in other Regions; and that it
raines less there, when the sun is nearest, must be taken and understood
after one sort, as in truth it is the most common and ordinary. But this is
not to hinder the exceptions which nature has given to this rule, making some
Regions of the burning Zone extremely dry. The which is reported of Ethiopia,
and we have seen it in a great part of Peru, where all that land or coast,
which they call Plains, wants rain, yea, land waters, except some valleys,
where rivers fall from the mountains; the rest is a sandy and barren soil,
where you shall hardly find any springs, but some deep wells. But with the
help of God, we will show the reason why it raineth not in these Plains (the
which many demand;) for now I only pretend to show, that there are many
exceptions to natural rules, whereby it may happen, that in some part of the
burning Zone, it raines not when the sun is nearest, but being farthest off,
although unto this day I have neither seen nor heard of it: but if it be so,
we must attribute it to the particular quality of the earth: and also, if
sometimes the contrary does chance, we must have regard that in natural
things there happens many contrarieties and le^s, whereby they change and
dissolve one another. For example, it may be the sun will cause rain, and
that the winds will hinder it, or else cause more abundance then has been
usual. The winds have their properties and diverse beginnings, by the which
they work diverse effects, the which are most commonly contrary to that which
the order and season requires. Seeing then in all places we see great varieties
in the year, which proceeds from the diverse motions and aspectes of Planets,
it is not out of purpose to say, that in the burning Zone, we may see and
observe some things contrary to that we have tried. But to conclude, that
which we have spoken, is a certain and undoubted truth, which is, that the
great draught which the Ancients held to be in the middle region, which they
call the burning Zone, is nothing at all: but contrariwise there is great
humiditie, and then it raines most, when the sun is nearest.

That the Burning Zone is not violently hot, but moderate. CHAP. 9.
HItherto we have treated of the humiditie of the Burning Zone, now it shall
be fit to discourse of the other two qualities, Hot, and Cold. We have
showed in the beginning of this Discourse, how the Ancients held that the
burning Zone was hot and exceeding dry, the which is not so; for it is hot
and moist, and in the greatest part, the heat is not excessive, but rather
moderate, which some would hold incredible, if we had not tried it. When I
passed to the Indies, I will tell what chanced unto me: having read what
Poets and Philosophers write of the b^^ning Zone, I persuaded my self, that
coming to the Equinoctial, I should not endure the violent heat, but it fell
out otherwise; for when I passed, which was when the sun was there for Zenith,
being entered into Aries, in the month of March, I felt so great cold, as I
was forced to go into the sun to warm me, what could I else do then, but
laugh at Aristotle's Meteors and his Philosophy, seeing that in that place, and
at that season, whenas all should be scorched with heat, according to his
rules, I, and all my companions were a cold? In truth there is no region in
the world more pleasant and temperate, then under the Equinoctial, although it
be not in all parts of an equal temperature, but have great diversities. The
burning Zone in some parts is very temperate, as in Quitto, and on the plains
of Peru, in some parts very cold, as at Potozi, and in some very hot, as in
Ethiopia, Bresill, and the Molucques. This diversity being known and certain
unto us, we must of force, seek out another cause of cold and heat then the
sun beams, seeing that in one season of theyeere, and in places of one
height and distance, from the Pole and Equinoctial we find so great
diversity, that some are environed with heat, some with cold, Plato in Tim.
and Critiae.
and others tempered with a moderate heat. Plato places his most renowned
Atlantike Island under the burning Zone; then he says, that at certain
seasons of the year, it has the sun for Zenith, and yet it was very
temperate, fruitful, and rich. Pliny says, that Taprobana (which at this
day they call Sumatra,) is under the Equinoctial, Plin. lib. 6. c. 12
as in effect it is, writing, that it is not only happy and rich, but also
peopled with men and beasts: whereby we may easily judge, that although the
Ancients held the heat of the burning Zone to be insupportable, yet might they
well understand, that it was not so great as they had spoken. The most
excellent Astrologer and Cosmographer Ptolome, and the worthy Philosopher and
Physician Avicen; were of a better resolution, being both of opinion, that
under the Equinoctial, there were very commodious habitations.

That the heat of the burning Zone is temperate, by reason of the rain and the
shortness of the days. CHAP. 10.
SInce the discovery of this new world, we have found by experience, that
which late Writers have held for truth. But it is a natural thing, whenas any
matter beyond our conceit is made known unto us by experience, we by and by
examine the cause. Therefore we desire to know the reason, why a Region where
the sun approaches nearest, is not only temperate, but in many parts cold.
Considering this matter generally, I find two general causes, which makes
this Region temperate: the one is that before mentioned, for that this Region
is very moist and subject to rain, and there is no doubt but the rain does
refresh it, for that the water is by nature cold; and although by the force of
the fire it be made hot, yet does it temper this heat proceeding only from
the sunne-beames. The which we see by experience in the inner Arabia, the which
is burnt with the Sun, having no showers to temper the violence thereof. The
clouds and mists are the cause that the sun offends not so much, and the
showers that fall from them, refresh both the air and the earth, and moisten
likewise how hot soever it be. They drink rain water, and it quenches the
thirst, as our men have well tried, having no other to drink. So as reason and
experience does teach us, that rain of it self does temper the heat; and
having by this means showed, that the burning Zone is much subject unto rain,
it appears that there is matter in it, to temper the violence of the heat. To
this I will add an other reason, which deserves to be known, not only for
this matter, but for many others; for although the Sun be very hot and
burning under the Equinoctial, yet is it not long, so as the heat of the day
being there shorter, and of less continuance, it causes not so violent a
heat; the which it behooves to specify more particularly. Such as are
practiced in the knowledge of the Sphere teach very well, that the more the
Zodiake is oblique and traversing our Hemisphere, the more unequal are the
days and nights; and contrariwise, where the sphere is straight, and the
signs mount directly, there the days and nights are equal^. And therefore in
all that Region which is between the two Tropicks, there is less inequality
then without them, and the more we approach the Line, the less inequality we
find, the which we have tried in those parts. Those of Quitto, for that they
are under the line; have not throughout the whole year, the days and nights
more short at one season, then at an other, but are continually equal. Those
of Lima being distant almost twelve degrees, find some difference betwixt the
days and the nights, but very little, for that in December and January, the
days increase an hour or little less. Those of PotoZi find much more
difference, both in winter and in summer, being almost under the Tropicke. But
those that live without the Tropikes, find the days in winter shorter, and in
summer longer: the more remote they are from the Equinoctial and come near the
Pole, as we see in Germany and in England, the days are longer in summer, then
in Italy and in Spain. It is a thing which the Sphere does teach, and
experience does plainly show us. We must add an other proposition, which is
likewise true and very considerable for all the effects of nature to
understand the perseverance and continuation of the efficient cause to work
and moove. This presupposed, if any one demand of me, why under the
Equinoctial Line, the heat is not so violent in summer, as in some other
Regions, (as in Andelousiae in the months of July and August) I will answer,
that in Andelousia the days are longer, and the nights shorter; and as the day
being hot, inflames and causes heat; so the nights being cold and moist, give
a refreshing. According to the which, at Peru, there is no such great heat, for
that the days in summer are not long, nor the nights short; so as the heat of
the day is much tempered by the freshness of the night. And although the
burning Zone be nearer the Sun then all other Regions, yet does not the heat
continue there so long. It is a natural thing, that a small fire continued,
heats more, then a greater that lastes but little, especially if there be any
thing to refresh it. He therefore that shall put these two properties of the
Zone in one balance, that it is most rainie in the time of greatest heat, and
that the days are shortest there, he shall perchance find them to equal the
other two contrarieties, which be, that the Sun is nearer and more directly
over them then in other Regions.

That there be other reasons besides the former mentioned, which show, that the
burning Zone is temperate, especially along the Ocean. CHAP. 11.
BEing a thing concluded, that the two forenamed properties are common and
universal to all the region of the burning Zone: and yet in the same there are
found some places very hot, and other exceeding cold: Also, that the
temperature is not there equal in all places, but under one climate, one part
is hot, another cold, and the third temperate, all at one season; we are
forced to seek out other reasons, whence this great diversity should proceed
in the burning Zone. Discoursing therefore upon this question, I do find
threeapparant and certain causes, and a fourth more obscure and dark. The
apparent and certain causes be: The first is the Ocean, the second, the
situation of the land, and the third, the nature and property of many and
sundry winds. Besides these three which I hold for manifest, I believe there
is a fourth hidden and less apparent, which is the property of the same land
inhabited, and the particular influence of the heavens. Whosoever would nearly
consider the causes and general reasons before mentioned, shall find them
insufficient for the full resolution of this point, observing that which daily
happens in diverse parts of the Equinoctial. Manomotapa, and a great part of
the kingdom of Prester Iean are seated under the line, or very near. In which
regions they endure excessive heat, and the men are all black; the which is
not only in those parts of the land far from the sea, but also in Islands
environed with the sea. The Island of Saint Thomas is under the Line, the Islands
of Cape Verd are very near, and both in the one and the other are violent
heates: and the men are likewise black. Under the same line, or very near,
lies a part of Peru, and of the new kingdom of Grenado, which notwithstanding
are very temperate Countries, inclining rather to cold then heat, and the
inhabitants are white. The Country of Bresill is in the same distance from the
line with Peru, and yet both Bresill and all that coast is extremely hot,
although it be in the North sea, and the other coast of Peru, which is in the
South sea, is very temperate. I say then, that whosoever would consider these
differences, and give a reason thereof, cannot content himself with these
general rules before specified, to prove that the burning Zone may be a
temperate land. Among the special causes and reasons, I have first placed the
Sea, for without doubt, the neerenesse thereof does help to temper and cool
the heat: for although the water be salt, yet is it always water, whose nature
is cold, and it is a thing remarkable, that in the depth of the Ocean, the
water cannot be made hot by the violence of the Sun, as in rivers: finally,
even as salt-peeter (though it be of the nature of salt) has a property to
cool water, even so we see by experience, that in some ports and havens, the
salt water does refresh; the which we have observed in that of Callao, whereas
they put the water or wine which they drink, into the Sea in flaggons to be
refreshed, whereby we may undoubtedly find, that the Ocean has this
property, to temper and moderate the excessive heat: for this cause we feel
greater heat at land then at sea, Caeteris paribus; and commonly Countries
lying near the sea, are coooler then those that are farther off. Caeteris
paribus, as I have said, even so the greatest part of the new world, lying very
near the Ocean, we may with reason say, although it be under the burning
Zone, yet does it receive a great benefit from the sea to temper the heat.

That the highest lands are the coldest, and the reason thereof. CHAP. 12.
But if we shall yet search more particularly, we shall not find in all this
land an equal temperature of heat, although it be in equal distance from the
sea, and in the same degree, seeing that in some parts there is great heat,
and in some, very little. Doubtless, the cause thereof is, that the one is
lower, and the other higher; which causes that the one is hot, and the other
cold. It is most certain, that the tops of the mountains are colder then
in the bottom of the valleys, the which proceeds, not only for that the
sun beams have greater repercussions upon lower places, although it be a
great reason; yet there is an other, which is, that the Region of the air is
colder when it is farthest from the ground. The Plains of Collao at Peru and
of Popaian in new Spain make sufficient proof hereof. For without al doubt
those parts are high countries, and for this reason cold, although they be all
environed with high points of mountains, much subject to the Sun beams. But
if we demand why at Peru, and in new Spain, the Plains along the coast be
very hot, and the plains of the same Countries of Peru and new Spain be
contrariwise cold? In truth I see no other reason can be given, but that the
one is a low country, and the other high. Experience does teach us, that the
middle region of the air is colder than the nether. And therefore the more
the mountains approach to the middle, the colder they are, being covered with
snow and frosts. Reason it self does yield to it. For if there be a sphere
and region of fire, as Aristotle and the other Philosophers say, the middle
region of the air must be most cold, by Antiparistasis, the cold being
expelled and thickened there, as in summer time we see in wells that are very
deep. For this cause the Philosophers affirm, that the two extreme regions
of the air, that above, and the other below, are the hottest, and the middle
region more cold. If it be thus, as experience does teach us, we shall yet
draw out another reason and notable argument, to show that the burning Zone is
temperate, which is, that the greatest part of the Indies is a high country,
filled with many mountains, which by their neerenesse refresh the neighbor
countries. You may continually see upon the tops of these mountains, snow,
hail and frozen waters; and the cold so bitter, as the grass is all withered,
so as the men and beasts which pass that way, are benumbed with cold. This,
as I have said, is in the burning Zone: and it happens most commonly when they
have the sun for zenith. It is therefore most certain and conformable unto
reason, that the mountains are colder than the valleis and plains, for that
they participate more of the middle region of the air, which is very cold.
The cause why the middle region of the air is more cold, has bin showed
before: for that the region of the air next to the fiery exhalation, the which
(according to Aristotle) is upon the sphere of the air, repells and thrustes
back all the cold, the which retires it self into the middle region of the
air, by Antiparistasis, as the Philosophers speak. Now if any one should
question with me in this manner; If it be so that the air is hot and moist, as
Aristotle holds, and as we commonly say, whence then proceeds the cold which
is congealed in the middle region of the air, seeing it cannot come from the
fiery sphere? For if it come from the water, or the earth, Arist. Me.
by this reason the lower region of the air should be colder than the middle.

To answer truly what I think, I will confess, that this Argument and
Objection is so difficult, as I am almost ready to follow the opinion of such
as reproove the qualities, agreements and disagreements which Aristotle gives
unto the Elements, saying they are but imaginations, who for this occasion hold
the air to be cold by nature. And to this end they use many arguments and
reasons, whereof we will propound one very familiar and well known, leaving
the rest aparte. In the canicular days we are accustomed to beat the air
with a fan, and we find that it does refresh us; so as these Authors
affirm, that heat is no private property of any other Element, but of fire
only, which is dispersed and mingled with all things (as the great Denis does
teach us.) Dionys. c. 25. de coel. hierar.
But whether it be so, or otherwise (for I will not contradict Aristotle, but
in that which is most certain) in the end they agree all, that the middle
region of the air is colder than the lowest next to the earth, as experience
does show us; seeing that in this middle region are congealed, snow, hail,
frosts, and other signs of extreme cold. The middle region then which they
call the burning Zone, having on the one side the sea, and on the other the
mountains, we must hold them for sufficient causes to temper and cool the
heat.

That the cold winds be the principal cause to make the burning Zone
temperate. CHAH. 13.
THe temperature of this region ought chiefly to be attributed to the property
of the wind that blows in that country, the which is pleasant and fresh. The
providence of the great God Creator of al things has bin such, as he has
ordained fresh and cool winds in that region where the sun makes his course
(which seems should be burnt up) that by their coolenes the excessive heat of
the sun might be qualified. And they are not far from appearance of reason,
which held that the earthly Paradise was under the Equinoctial. If they had
not deceived themselves in the cause of their opinion, saying that the
equality of the days and nights, was sufficient of it self to make that Zone
temperate; to which opinion many others have been opposite, of which number
was that renowned Poet, saying; That coast incessantly by hot beams tired
Of Phoebus, who from thence never retired.


The coolness of the night then is not sufficient to moderate and to correct
the violent heat of the Sun; but rather this burning Zone, receives so sweet
a temperature, by the benefit of the fresh and pleasant air, as
notwithstanding, it were held by the Ancients to be more hot then a burning
furnace: yet those which inhabit there, take it for a delightful spring. It
appears by arguments and very apparent reasons, that the cause hereof
consistes principally in the quality of the wind. We see in one climate, some
regions and Cities hotter then others, only for that they feel less wind
to refresh them. The like is in other Countries where no wind blows, the
which are all on fire like unto a furnace. There are many of these Villages and
Towns in Bresill, Ethiopia, and Paraguen, as every one knows, and that which
is more considerable; we see these differences, not only on the Land, but also
on the Sea: there are some seas where they feel great heat, as they report of
that of Mozambigus and Ormus in the East, and of the Sea of Panama in the West:
the which for this reason, engenders and brings forth great Lizards (called
Cayamans,) as also in the sea of Bresill. There are other seas in the same
degree of height, very cold, as that of Peru, in the which we were a cold,
(as I have said before) when we first sailed it, which was in March, when the
Sun was directly over us. In truth on this continent, where the land and sea
are of one sort, we cannot imagine any other cause of this so great a
difference, but the quality of the wind which does refresh them. If we shall
nearly look into the consideration of the wind, whereof we have spoken, we
may resolve many doubts which some object, and which seem strange and
wonderful: wherefore the Sun casting his beams upon the burning Zone, and
particularly at Peru, and that more violently then in Spain in the Canicular
days, yet they defend the heat with a light covering, so as with a slender
covering of mats or straw, they are better preserved from the heat, then in
Spain under a roof of wood, or a vault of stone. Moreover, why are not the
nights in summer at Peru, as hot and troublesome as in Spain? Wherefore on
the highest tops of mountains, even amongst the heaps of snow, you shall
sometimes feel great and insupportable heat? Wherefore in all the Province of
Colao, when ye come into the shade, how little soever, you feel cold: But
coming into the Sun beams, you presently find the heat excessive? Why is
all the coast of Peru, being full of sands, very temperate? And why is Potozi
(distant from the silver City but eighteen leagues, and in the same degree)
of so diverse a temperature, that the Country being extremely cold, it is
wonderfully barren and dry? And contrariwise, the silver City is temperate,
inclining unto heat, and has a pleasant and fertile soil? It is more certain,
that the wind is the principal cause of these strange diversities; for
without the benefit of these cool winds, the heat of the Sun is such, as
(although it be in the midst of the snow,) it burns and sets all on fire: but
when the coolenes of the air returns suddenly, the heat is qualified how
great soever it be: and whereas this cool wind raines ordinary, it keeps
the gross vapors and exhalations of the earth from gathering together, which
cause a heavy and troublesome heat: whereof we see the contrary in Europe,
for by the exhalation of these vapors, the earth is almost burnt up with the
Sun by day, which makes the nights so hot and troublesome, as the air does
often seem like unto a furnace: for this reason, at Peru, this freshnes of the
wind, is the cause (by the means of some small shade at the Sunnesetting)
that they remain cool. But contrariwise, in Europe the most agreeable and
pleasing time in summer, is the morning, and the evening is the most hot and
troublesome. But at Peru, and under all the Equinoctial it is not so, for
every morning the wind from the sea does cease, and the Sun begins to cast
his beams; and for this reason they feel the greatest heat in the morning,
until the return of the same winds, which otherwise they call the tide or
wind of the sea, which makes them first to feel cold. We have tried all this,
whilst we were at the Islands of Barlovante, where in the mornings we did sweat
for heat, and at noone we felt a fresh air; for that then, a North-easterly
wind which is fresh and cool, does commonly blow.

That they which inhabit under the Equinoctial, live a sweet and pleasant
life. CHAP. 14.
IF those which have held opinion, that the earthly Paradise was under the
Equinoctial, had been guided by this discourse, Vi^es. lib. 13. de Ciuit. c.
21.
they had not seemed altogether deceived, not that I will conclude, that the
delightful Paradise, whereof the Scripture speaks was in that place, which
were too great a temeritie to affirm it for certain. But I may well say, if
there be any Paradise on earth, it ought to be placed whereas they enjoy a
sweet and quiet temperature; for there is nothing more troublesome or
repugnant to man's life, then to live under a heaven or air that is contrary,
troublesome or sickly: as there is nothing more agreeable, then to enjoy a
heaven that is sound, sweet and pleasant: It is certain that we do not
participate of any of the Elements, nor have not the use of any so often in our
bodies as of the air. It is that which invironeth our bodies on all parts,
which enters into our bowels, and at every instant visits the heart; and
there ingraves her properties. If the air be any thing corrupted, it causes
death, if it be pure and healthful, it augmenteth the strength; finally we may
say, that the air alone is the life of man: so as although we have goods and
riches, if the air be troublesome and unwholesome, we cannot live quietly, nor
with content: But if the air be healthful, pleasant, and sweet, although we
have no other wealth, yet does it yield content. Considering with my self,
the pleasing temperature of many Countries at the Indies, where they know not
what winter is, which by his cold does freese them, nor summer which does
trouble them with heat, but that with a Matte they preserve themselves from the
injuries of all weather, and where they scarce have any need to change their
garments throughout the year. I say, that often considering of this, I find
that if men at this day, would vanquish their passions, and free themselves
from the snares of covetousness, leaving many fruitelesse and pernicious
disseines, without doubt they might live at the Indies very pleasant and
happily: for that which other Poets sing of the Elisean fields and of the
famous Tempe, or that which Plato reports or faines of his Atlantike Island; men
should find in these lands, if with a generous spirit they would choose rather
to command their silver and their desires, then to remain slaves as they are.
That which we have hitherto discoursed, shall suffice touching the qualities of
the Equinoctial, of cold, heat, drought, rain, and the causes of
temperature. The particular discourse of winds, waters, lands, mettalls,
plants, and beasts, (whereof there is great abundance at the Indies,) shall
remain for the other books; for the difficulty of that which is handled in
this, though briefly, will happily seem too tedious.

An advertisement to the Reader.
THE Reader must understand, that I wrote the two first books in Latin, when
I was at Peru, and therefore they speak of matters of the Indies, as of things
present: Being since returned into Spain, I thought good to translate them
into our vulgar tongue, and not to change my former manner of speeach. But in
the five following books, for that I made them in Europe, I have been forced
to change my style, and therein to treat of matters of the Indies, as of
Countries and things absent. And for that this diversity of speech might with
reason offend the Reader, I have thought good to advertise him thereof.

THE THIRD BOOK of the Natural and Moral History of the Indies.
That the natural History of the Indies, is pleasant and agreeable. CHAP. 1.
Every natural History is of it self pleasing, and very profitable, to such
as will raise up their discourse and contemplation on high, in that it does
move them to glorify the Author of all nature, as we sea the wise and holy men
do, Psalm. 103.135. 91.92.18.8. Job 28.39.
specially David in many Psalms. And Job likewise, treating of the secrets of
the Creator, whereas the same Lord answers Job so amply. He that takes
delight to understand the wondrous works of Nature, shall taste the true
pleasure and content of Histories; and the more, whenas he shall know they are
not the simple works of men, but of the Creator himself, and that he shall
comprehend the natural causes of these works, then shall he truly occupy
himself in the study of Philosophy. But he that shall raise his
consideration higher, beholding the great and first architect of all these
marvells, he shall know his wisdom and infinite greatness, and (we may say)
shall be divinely employed. And so the discourse of natural things, may serve
for many good considerations, although the feeblenes and weakness of many
appetites, are commonly accustomed to stay at things less profitable, which is
the desire to know new things, called curiosity. The Discourse and History of
natural things at the Indies (besides the common content it gives,) has yet
another benefit, which is to treat of things a far off, the greatest part
whereof were unknown to the most excellent Authors of that profession, which
have bin among the Ancients. And if we should write these natural things of
the Indies, so amply as they require, being so strange, I doubt not but we
might compile workse, no less then those of Pliny, Theophrastes, and
Aristotle. But I hold not my self sufficient, and although I were, yet is not
my intent, but to note some natural things which I have seen and known being
at the Indies, or have received from men worthy of credit, the which seem rare
to me, and scarce known in Europe. By reason whereof, I will pass over many
of them briefly, either because they are written of by others, or else require a
longer discourse then I can now give.

Of the winds, their differences, properties, and causes in general. CHAP. 2.
HAving discoursed in the two former Books of that which concerns the heavens,
and the habitation of the Indies in general, it behooves ^s now to treat of
the three elements, air, water and land, and their compounds, which be
mettalls, plants and beasts; for as for the fire, I see no special matter at
the Indies which is not in other regions, unless some will say, that the
manner to strike fire in rubbing two stones one against another, as some
Indians use, or to boil any thing in gourdes, casting a burning stone into it,
and other such like things, are remarkable, whereof I have written what might
be spoken. But of those which are in the Vulcans and mouths of fire at the
Indies, worthy doubtless to be observed, I will speak in their order,
treating of the diversity of grounds, whereas they find these fires or
Vulcans. Therefore to begin with the winds, I say, that with good reason,
Solomon in the great judgment which God had given him, esteems much the
knowledge of the winds; and their properties, being very admirable; for that
some are moist, others dry, some unwholesome, others found, some hot, others
cold, some calm and pleasant, others rough and tempestuous, some barren, and
others fertile, with infinite other differences. There are some winds which
blow in certain regions, and are, as it were, Lords thereof, not addmitting
any entry or communication of their contraries. In some parts they blow in
that sort, as sometimes they are Conquerours, sometimes conquered; often there
are diverse and contrary winds, which do run together at one instant,
dividing the way betwixt them, sometimes one blowing above of one sort, and
another below of an other sort; sometimes they encounter violently one with
another, which puts them at sea in great danger: there are some winds which
help to the generation of creatures, and others that hinder and are opposite.
There is a certain wind, of such a quality, as when it blows in some country,
it causes it to rain fleas, and in so great abundance, as they trouble and
darken the air, and cover all the sea shore: and in other places it raines
frogs. These diversities and others which are sufficiently known, are
commonly attributed to the place by the which these winds pass. For they say,
that from these places they take their qualities to be cold, hot, dry or
moist, sickly or sound, and so of the rest, the which is partly true, and
cannot be denied; for that in a small distance you shall see in one wind many
diversities. For example, the Solanus or Eastern wind is commonly hot and
troublesome in Spain; and in Murria it is the coolest and healthfullest that
is, for that it passes by the Orchards, and that large champaine which we see
very fresh. In Carthagene which is not far from thence, the same wind is
troublesome and unwholesome. The meridionall (which they of the Ocean call
South, and those of the Mediterranean sea, Mezo giorno) commonly is raynie and
boisterous, and in the same City whereof I speak, it is wholesome and
pleasant. Pliny reports that in Affricke it raines with a Northern wind, and
that the Southern wind is clear. He then that shall well consider what I
have spoken of these winds, he may conceive, that in a small distance of land
or sea, one wind has many and diverse qualities, yea sometimes quite
contrary; whereby we may infer, that he draws his property from the place
where it passes, the which is in such sort true (although we may not say
in(...)) as it is the only and principal cause of the diversity of the
winds. It is a thing we easily find, that in a river containing fifty
leagues in circuit (I put it thus for an example) that the wind which
blows of the one part, is hot and moist; and that which blows on the other,
is cold and dry: Notwithstanding this diversity is not found in places by
which it passes, the which makesmee rather ^o say, that the winds bring these
qualities with them, whereby they give unto them the names of these qualities.
For example, we attribute to the Northern wind, otherwise called Cicrco, the
property to be cold and dry, and to dissolve mists; to the Southern wind
his contrary called Lev^s^he, we attribute the contrary quality, which is
moist and hot, and ingenders mists. This being general and common, we must
seek out another universal cause, to give a reason of these effects. It is
not enough to say, that the places by which they pass, give them these
qualities, seeing that passing by the same places we see contrary effects. So
as we must of force confess, that the region of the heaven where they blow,
gives them these qualities; as the Septentrionall is cold, because it commes
from the North, which is the region farthest from the Sun. The Southern
which blows from the Midday or South, is hot, and for that the heat draws
the vapors, it is also moist and raynie: and contrariwise the north is dry
and subtle, for that it suffers no vapors to congeale. And in this manner
we may discourse of other winds, giving them the qualities of the region
where they blow. But looking more precisely into it, this reason can not
satisfy me: I will therefore demand, What does the region of the air by
which they pass; if i^ does (...) them their qualities. I speak it for that
in German in the Southern wind is hot and moist, and in Affrike the
Northern is cold and dry. Notwithstanding it is most certain, that in what
region soever of Germany the Southern wind is engendered, it must needs be
more cold then any part of Affrike where the Northern is engendered. And if it
be so, why is the Northern wind more cold in Affrike then the Southern in
Germany, seeing it proceeds from a hotter region? Some may answer me that the
reason is, for that it blows from the North, which is cold; but this is
neither sufficient, nor true: for if it were so, whenas the Northern wind
blows in Affrike, it should also run and continue his motion in all the
Region, even unto the North, the which is not so: For at one instant there
blow Northern winds very cold, in countries that are in fewer degrees; and
Southern winds which are very hot, in countries lying in more degrees, the
which is most certain, usual, and well known. Whereby (in my opinion) we
may infer that it is no pertinent reason to say, that the places by which the
winds do pass give them their qualities, or that they be diversified for that
they blow from diverse regions of the air, although the one and the other have
some reason, as I have said. But it is needful to seek further, to know the
true and original cause of these so strange differences which we see in the
winds. I cannot conceive any other, but that the same efficient cause which
brings forth and makes the winds to grow, does withal give them this
original quality: for in truth the matter whereon the winds are made, which
is no other thing (according to Aristotle) but the exhalation of the interior
Elements, may well cause in effect a great part of this diversity, being more
gross, more subtle, more dry, and more moist. But yet this is no pertinent
reason, seeing that we see in one region, where the vapors and exhalations are
of one sort and quality, that there rise winds and effects quite contrary.
We must therefore refer the cause to the higher and celestial efficient,
which must be the Sun, and to the motion and influence of the heavens, the
which by their contrary motions, give and cause diverse influences. But the
beginnings of these motions and influences are so obscure and hidden from men,
and on the other part, so mighty, and of so great force, as the holy Prophet
David in his prophetical Spirit, and the Prophet Jeremy admiring the
greatness of the Lord speak thus, Qui profert ventos d^ thesauris suis.:
Psalm^ 134^ Jeremy. 10.
He that draws the winds out of his treasures. In truth these principles and
beginnings are rich and hidden treasures: for the Author of all things holds
them in his hand, and in his power; and when it pleases him, sends them
forth for the good or chastisement of men, and sends forth such winds as he
pleases: not as that Eolus whom the Poets do foolishly feign to have charge
of the winds, keeping them in a cave like unto wild beasts. We see not the
beginning of these winds, neither do we know how long they shall continue, or
whither they shall go. But we see and know well the diverse effects and
operations they have, even as the supreme truth, the Author of all things has
taught us, saying, Spiritus vbi vult spirat, and vocemeius audis, and nescis
vnde venit, aut q^^ vadit. The spirit or wind blows where it pleases, and
although thou feel the breath, yet do thou not know whence it comes,
nor whither it shall go: To teach us, that conceiving a little of matters
which are present and common unto us, we should not presume to understand that
which is so high and so hidden, as the causes and motives of the Holy Ghost. It
is therefore sufficient that we know his operations and effects, the which
are plainly discovered in his greatness and perfections, and to have treated
alitle philosophically of the winds, and the causes of their differences,
properties, and operations, which we have produced into three; the place by
which they pass, the regions where they blow, and the celestial virtue, the
beginning and motive of the winds.

Of certain properties of winds which blow at the new world. CHAP. 3.
IT is a question much disputed by Aristotle, whether the Southern wind,
which we call Abreguo, blows from the pole Antartike, or only from the
Equinoctial line^ which is properly to demand, if beyond the Equinoctial it
hold the same quality of hot and rainie, as we see here. It is a point
whereof we may with reason stand in doubt, for although it pass the
Equinoctial, yet is it still the Southern wind, seeing it comes from the same
part of the world; as the Northern wind which comes to the contrary,
continues still the same wind, although it pass the burning Zone and
Equinoctial line. And it seems hereby, that these two winds should hold
their first properties, the one to be hot and moist, the other cold and dry;
the South to breed mists and rain, and the North to disperse them, and to
make a clear Sky. Notwithstanding Aristotle leanes to the contrary opinion,
for that in Europe the Northern wind is cold, because it comes from the
Pole, a region extremely cold, and the Southern wind contrariwise is hot,
because it comes from the South, which is the region the Sun does most
heat. By this reason then we should believe that the South wind should be
cold to them that inhabit on the other side of the line, and the Northern
wind should be hot, for in those parts the Southern wind comes from the
Pole, and the Northern from the Line. And though it seems by this reason,
that the Southern wind should be more cold there, than the Northern is here:
for that they hold the region of the South Pole to be more cold then that of
the North, by reason that the Sun stays seven days every year in the
Tropike of Cancer, more then it does in the Tropicke of Capricorn, as it
appears by the Equinoxes and Solstices he makes in the two Circles, wherein
it seems, that Nature would show the pre-eminence and excellency of this
moity of the world, which is in the North, above the other part in the South:
so as it seems there is reason to believe that these qualities of the winds
do change in passing the Line; but in truth it is not so, as I could
comprehend by the experience I had some years, being in those parts of the
Indies, which lie on the South of the other side of the Line.

It is true, that the Northern wind is not usually cold and clear there as
here. In some parts of Peru, as at Lima, and on the Plains, they find the
Northern winds troublesome and unwholesome, and all along the coast, which
runs above five hundred leagues, they hold the Southern winds for healthful
and cool, and (which is more) most clear and pleasant; yea it never raines,
contrary to that we see in Europe, and of this side the Line. Yet that which
chances upon the coast of Peru is no general rule, but rather an exception,
and a wonder of Nature, never to rain upon that coast, and ever to have one
wind, without giving place to his contrary, whereof we will hereafter speak
our mind.

Now let us stand upon this point, that the Northern wind beyond the line,
has not the same properties, which the Southern wind has on this side,
although they both blow from the midday, to regions and parts of the world
which be opposite and contrary. For it is no general rule there, that the
Northern wind is neither hot nor rainie there, as the South wind is on this
side; but contrariwise, it raines whenas the South wind blows there, as we
see in all the Sierre or mountain of Peru, in Chile, and in the Country of
Congo, which is on the other side of the line, and far advanced into the Sea.
And in Potozi likewise, the wind which they call Tomahani, (which is our
North,) if my memory fail me not, is extremely cold, dry, and unpleasant,
as it is here with us. Yet does not the Northern wind disperse the clouds
usually there, as it does here: but contrariwise, if I be not deceived, it
does often cause rain. There is no doubt, but the winds do borrow this great
diversity of contrary effects, from the places by which they pass, and the
near regions where they are bred, as we see by daily experience in a thousand
places. But speaking in general of the quality of the winds, we must rather
look to the coasts or parts of the world from whence they proceed, then to
observe, whether they be on this side, or beyond the line, as it seems the
Philosopher held opinion. These capital winds, which be the East, and West,
have no such universal qualities, nor so common in this continent, nor in the
other, as the two former. The Solanus or Eastern wind, is commonly here
troblesome and unwholesome, and the Western or Zephirus, is more mild and
healthful. At the Indies, and in all the burning Zone, the Eastern wind
which they call Brise, is contrariwise very healthful and pleasant. Of the
West, I cannot speak any thing certain or general, for that it blows not at
all, or very seldom in the burning Zone, for in all the navigation betwixt the
two Tropikes, the Eastern wind is ordinary. And for that it is one of the
admirable works of Nature, it shall be good to understand the cause and the
beginning thereof.

That the burning Zone, the Brises, or Easterly winds, do continually blow,
and without the Zone the western, and that the Easterly are ordinary always
there. CHAP. 4.
THe ways at Sea are not as at Land, to return the sameway they pass. It is
all one way (says the Philosopher) from Athens to Thebes, and from Thebes to
Athens; but it is not so at Sea, Iuan. de ^^cos in Decade. 1. li. 4. ca. 6.
for we go one way, and return by another. The first which discovered the East
and weast Indies, labored much with great difficulty to find out their
course, until that Experience (the mistress of these secrets,) had taught them,
that to sail through the Ocean, is not like the passage in Italy, through the
Mediterranean sea, where in their return, they observe the same Ports and
Capes they had sight of in their passage, attending still the benefit of the
wind, which changes instantly, and when that fails, they have recourse to
their owers; and so the Galleys go and come daily, coasting along the shore.
In some parts of the Ocean, they may not look for any other wind then that
which blows, for that commonly it continues long. To conclude, that which is
good to go by, is not fit to return with: for in the sea beyond the Tropicke,
and within the burning Zone, the Easterly winds rain continually, not
suffering their contraries. In the which region, there are two strange things,
the one is, that in that Zone, (being the greatest of the five, into the which
the world is divided,) the Easterly winds (which they call Brises) do rain,
not suffering the Western or Southern, (which they call lower winds,) to
have their course at any season of the year: The other wonder is, that these
Easterly winds never cease to blow, and most commonly in places nearest to the
line, (where it seems that calmes should be more frequent, being a part of the
world, most subi^ct to the heat of the Sun, but it is contrary, for you
shall hardly find any calmes there, and the wind is cold and continues
longer, which has been found true in all the navigations of the Indies. This
is the reason, why the voyage they make from Spain to the West Indies is
shorter, more easy, and more assured, then the return to Spain. The fleetes
parting from Siville, have more difficulty to pass the Canaries, for that the
gulf of Yegues or of Mares, is variable, being beaten with diverse winds, but
having passed the Canaries, they sail with a western wind until they come
to the burning Zone, where presently they find an Easterly wind, and so they
sail on with full winds, so as they have scant any ne^de to touch their
sails in the whole voyage: for this reason they called this great gulf, the
gulf of Dances for the calmenes and pleasantnes thereof. Then following their
course, they come to the Islands of Guadelupe Dominique, Desir^e, Marigualante,
and the rest, which in that place, be as it were, the suburbs of the Indies.
There the fleetes separate and divide themselves, whereof some (which go to new
Spain,) take to the right hand toward Hispaniola; and having discovered Cape
S. Anthony, they pass unto S. Ihon Delua, always using the same Easterly
winds. Those for the maine Land, take the left hand, discovering the high
mountain of Tayrone, then having touched at Carthagene, they pass unto Nombre
de Dios, from whence they go by land to Panama, and from thence, by the South
sea to Peru. But when the fleetes return to Spain, they make their voyage in
this sort: The fleet of Peru discovers Cape S. Anthony, then they enter into
the Havana, which is a goodly Port in the Island of Cuba. The fleet of new
Spain, does likewise touch at the Havana, being parted from the true Cross,
or from the Island of S. Ihon Delua, the which is not without difficulty, for
that commonly Easterly winds blow there, which is a contrary wind to go to
the Havana. These fleetes being joined together for Spain, they seek their
height without the Tropicks, where presently they find Westerly winds, which
serve them until they come in view of the Acores, or Terceres, and from thence
to Seville. So as their voyage in going, is of a small height, not above
twenty degrees from the line, which is within the Tropickes. But the return
is without the Tropickes, in eight and twenty or thirty degrees of height at
the least, for that within the Tropickes, the Eastern winds continually blow,
the which are fittest to go from, Spain to the West Indies, for that their
course is, from East to west; and without the Tropickes, (which is in three and
twenty degrees of height,) they find westerly winds, the which are the more
certain and ordinary, the farther you are from the line, and more fit to
return from the Indies; for that they are winds blowing from the South and
West, which serve to run into the East and North. The like discourse is of
the Navigation made into the South sea, going from new Spain, or Peru, to the
Philippines or China, and returning from the Philippines or China to new
Spain, the which is easy, for that they sail always from East to West,
near the line, where they find the Easterly winds to blow in their poope. In
the year 1584. there went a ship from Callo^ in Lima to the Philippines,
which sailed 2000. and 700. leagues without sight of land, and the first it
discovered, was the Island of Lusson, where they took port, having performed
their voyage in two months, without want of wind or any torment, and their
course was almost continually under the line; for that from Lima (which is
twelve degrees to the South) he came to Menilla, which is as much to the North.
The like good fortune had Alvaro de Mandana, whenas he went to discover the
Islands of Soloman, for that he had always a full gale, until he came within
view of these Islands, the which must be distant from that place of Peru, from
whence he parted, about a thousand leagues, having run their course always
in one height to the South. The return is like unto the voyage from the Indies
unto Spain: for those which return from the Philippines or China to Mexico,
to the end they may recover the Western winds, they mount a great height,
until they come right against the Islands of Iappon, and discovering the
Caliphornes, they return by the coast of new Spain, to the Port of Acapulco,
from whence they parted. So as it is proved likewise by this navigation, that
they sail easily from East to West, within the Tropickes, for that their
Easterly winds do rain: but returning from West to East, they must seek the
Western winds without the Tropickes, in the height of seven and twenty
degrees. The Portingales prove the like in their navigations to the East
Indies, although it be in a contrary course; for that going from Portugal the
voyage is troublesome, but their return is more easy, for that in going,
their course is from the West to the East: so as they must of necessity mount,
until they have found their general winds, which they hold to be above the
seven and twentieth degree. And in their return, they discover the Terceres,
but with more ease, for that they come from the East, where the Easterly or
Northern winds do serve them. Finally, the Mariners hold it for a certain
rule and observation, that within the Tropickes continually rain Easterly
winds, and therefore it is very easy to sail to the West. But without the
Tropickes, there are in some seasons Easterly winds, and in some, and more
ordinary Western winds: by reason whereof, they which sail from West to
East, labor always to be out of of the burning Zone, to put themselves in the
height of seven and twenty degrees. And for this reason, men have endangered
themselves to undertake strange Navigations, and to seek out far Countries
unknown.

Of the differences of the Brises or Eastern winds, and the Western, and
likewise of other winds. CHAP. 5.
ALthough that which we have spoken, be general and well approoved, yet there
remains still a desire in me to learn the cause of this secret; why under the
burning Zone we sail always from East to Weast, with so great facility, and
not from Weast to East* Which is as much as if we should demand, why the
Easterly winds rain there, and not the Weasterly, for that according to good
Philosophy, that which is perpetual, universal, and of it self (as the
Philosophers say) must have a proper cause, and of it self. But before I stay
at this question, which seems remarkable, it shall be necessary to show what
we understand by Brises or Easterly winds, and Weasterly, for that it will
serve much for this subject, and for many other matters touching winds and
navigations. The Pilotes make two and thirty points of winds, for that to
bring their ship to the desired haven, they must make their account as
punctually and as strictly as they can; for bending to the one side, or the
other, never so little, in the end of their course, they should find
themselves far from their pretended place. And they reckon but two and
thirty quarters of the winds, for that more would confound the memory. But
with reckoning as they account two and thirty winds, so may they reckon, three
score and four, one hundred twenty and eight, and two hundred fifty and six.
Finally, multiply these parts to an infinite, for the place where the ship
is, being as it were the center, and all hemisphere in circumference, what
should let, but we may account lines without number, the which coming from
this center, draw directly to these lineall circles in so many parts, which
might cause as many diverse winds, seeing that the wind comes from all parts
of the hemisphere, which we may divide into as many parts as we will imagine,
yet the wisdom of man, conformable to the holy Scripture, observes four
winds, the principal of all others, and as it were the four corners of the
world, the which they join in making a cross with two lines, whereof the one
goes from one Pole to another; and the other from one Equinoctial to the
other. Of the one side the North or Aquilon, and the Southern wind or midday
opposite; and on the other side the East, which comes from the Sun rising,
and the Weast from his setting. And although the holy Scripture in some places
speaks of other diversities of winds, as of Eurus and Aquilo^, which those in
the Ocean sea call Nordest, and they of the mediterranean sea, Gregual, whereof
there is mention made in Saint Paul^ navigation; yet the same holy Scripture
makes mention of those four notable winds, which all the world knows, which
areas is said, North, South, East and Weast.

But for that we find three differences in the rising of the Sun, from
whence the name of East comes, that is, the two greatest declinings which he
does usually make, and the mean betwixt them both, as he does rise in
diverse places, in winter, in summer, and in that which holds the middle of
these two seasons. For this reason they have reckoned two other winds, the
East of summer, and the East of winter; and by consequence, two Weasts, the one
of summer, and the other of winter, their contraries. So as there are eight
winds in eight notable points of heaven, which are the two Poles, the two
Equinoxes, the two Solstices, and their opposites in the same Circle, the which
are called by diverse names and appellations in every place of the sea and land.
Those which sail the Ocean, do usually call them thus. They give the name of
North to those winds that blow from our Pole, which carries the same name,
and Northeast that which is nearest, and comes from the summer East: They call
East that which comes directly from the rising Equinoctial, and Southeast that
which comes from the winter rising. To the Midday or Pole Antartike they give
the name of Southwest; and to that of the winters setting, the name of
Southwest, to the right setting Equinoctial the name of West, and to the
summers setting, Northweast. They divide amongst them the rest of the winds,
and give them their names as they participate and approach to others: as
North-northweast, North-northeast, East-northeast, East-southeast,
South-southweast, Weast-southwest, Weast-norwest; so as by their names we know
whence they proceed. In the Mediterranean sea, although they follow the same
division and manner of reckoning, yet do they give them other different names;
they call the North Tramontana, and his contrary, the South MeZo-giorno, or
Mydy; the East they call Levant, and the Weast Povant: and those which cross
these four they call thus: Southeast is by them named Xirocque, or Xaloque,
and his opposite, which is Norwest; Mestrall they call the northeast. Gre^ or
Greguall; and the Southweast his contrary; Levesche, Libique, or Affricaine. In
Latin the four known winds be, S^ptentrio, Auster, Subsolanus, Favonius; and
those which be interlaced are Aquilo, Vulturnus, Affricus and Corus; according
unto Pliny, Vulturnus and Eurus, is the same wind that Southeast or Xaloque,
Favonius is the Weast or Pon^nt, Aquilo and Boreas is Nortest or Gregual, or
Tramontana, Affricus and Libique is the Southweast or Levesche, Auster and
Notus is the South or Midday, Corus and Zephirus the Northwest or Mestral, and
to the Northeast or Gregual, they give no other name then Phenicien. Some
divide them after an other manner: but for that it is not now our purpose to
repeat the Latin and Greek names of all the winds, let us only show
which be those amongst these winds, that the Mariners of the Indian Ocean call
Brises, and lower winds. I was long in some difficulty about these names,
seeing them to use them very diversely, until I found that these names were
more general, then proper and peculiar. They call Brises those which serve to
go to the Indies, the which blow in their poope, which by this means
comprehend all the Easterly winds, and those which depend of them. And they do
call lower winds those which are fit to return from the Indies, which blow
from the South to the summer-weast, so as they be, as it were, two Esquadrons
of winds of either side, the Corporalles be of oneside Northeast or Greguall,
on the other Southweast or Levesche. But you must understand, that of the
number of eight winds and differences which we have counted, five are proper
to sail by, and not the other three. I say, that when a ship sails at sea, he
may make a long voyage with one of these winds, although they serve him not
equally; but he cannot use any of the other three. As if a ship go to the
South, he shall sail with the North, Northeast, Northweast, and with East and
Weast: for sidewindes serve to go, or to come. But with a Southern wind he
cannot sail, being directly contrary, nor with with his two Collaterals which
is Southest and Southwest, which is a very trivial thing, and common to them
that sail. And therefore it is not needful to explain them here, but to
signify that the side-windes of the right East, are those which commonly blow
to the burning Zone, which they do call Brises: and those from the South
declining to the Weast, which serve to sail from Weast to East, are not common
in the burning Zone, and therefore they seek them without the tropikes; and
the Indian Mariners commonly call them lower winds, or Vents dabas.

What is the reason why sailing v^der the burning Zone, we find always
Easterly winds? CHAP. 6.
LEt us now speak of that which touches the Question propounded, what should
be the reason why under the burning Zone we sail easily from East to Weast,
and not contrary: wherein we must presuppose two certain grounds. The one is,
that the motion of the first moover, which they call Diurnall, not on^lie
draws and mooves with him the celestial spheres, which are inferior unto
him, as we see daily in the sun, the moon, and the stars, but also the
Elements do participate of this motion, insomuch as they are not hindered. The
earth is not moved, by reason of her heaviness, which makes it immooveable,
being far from this first motor. The element of water moves not likewise with
this Diurnall motion, for that it is united to the earth and make one sphere,
so as the earth keeps it from all circular motion. But the other two elements of
fire and air, are more subtle and nearer the heavenly regions, so as they
participate of their motion, and are driven about circularly, as the same
celestial bodies. As for the fire, without doubt it has his sphere, (as
Aristotle and other Philosophers have held) but for the air (which is no point
of our subject) it is most certain that it mooves with a motion diurnall,
which is from East to Weast, which we see plainly in Comets that moove from
the East unto the Weast, mounting, descending, and finally turning in the
hemispheare in the same sort as the Stars move in the firmament; for
otherwise these Comets being in the region and sphere of the air, whereas they
engender, appears consumed. It should be impossible for them to moove
circularly, as they do, if the element of the air does not moove with the
same motion that the first motor does. For these elements being of a burning
substance, by reason they should be fixed, without mooving circularly, if the
sphere where they are did not moove; if it be not as we feign, that some Angel
or intellectual Spirit does walk with the Comet, guiding it circularly. In
the year of our Lord God one thousand five hundred seaventy and seven
appeered that wonderful Comet, (in form like unto a feather) from the horizon
almost to the midst of heaven, and continued from the first of November,
until the eight of December: I say from the first of November, for although in
Spain it was noted but the ninth of November (according to the testimony of
Writers of that time) yet at Peru, where I was then, I remember well, we did
see it, and observe it eight days before, and all the time after. Touching the
cause of this diversity, some may dilate upon it particularly, I will only
show, that during those forty days which it continued, we all observed (both
such as were in Spain, and we that lived then at the Indies) that it moved
daily with an universal motion, from East to Weast, as the Moon and other
Planets, whereby it appeeres that the sphere of the air, being its Region, the
element it self must of necessity moove after the same sort. We noted, also,
that besides this universal motion, it had an other particular, by which it
moved with the planets fro west to east; for every night it turned more
Eastward* like unto the Moon, Sun, and Planet of Venus. We did also observe
a third particular motion, whereby it moved from the zodiac toward the
North; for after some nights it was found nearer unto the Septentrionall
signs. And it may be this was the reason why the great Comet was sooner seen
by those that were southerly, as at Peru, and later discovered by them of
Europe: for by this third motion (as I have said) it approached nearer the
Northern Regions. Yet every one may well observe the differences of this
motion, so as we may well perceive, that many and sundry celestial bodies,
give their impressions to the sphere of the air. In like sort it is most
certain that the air mooves with the circular motion of the heaven, from Est
to West, which is the first ground before mentioned. The second is no less
certain, the which is, that the motion of the air in those parts that are
under the Line, or near unto it, is very swift and light, the more it
approaches to the Equinoctial; but the farther off it is from the Line,
approaching near the Poles, the more slow and heavy this motion is. The
reason hereof is manifest, for that the mooving of the celestial bodies,
being the efficient cause of the mooving of the air, it must of necessity be
more quick and light, where the celestial bodies have their swiftest motion.

To labor to show the reason why the heaven has a quicker motion under the
burning Zone, which is the Line, then in any other part of the heaven, were to
make small account of men: seeing it is easy to see in a wheel, that its
motion is more slow and heavy in the part of greatest circumference, then in
the less, and that the greater circumference ends at one instant with the
lesser. From these two grounds proceeds the reason, where such as sail great
gulphs from east to west, do always find the wind in their powpe, going in
a small altitude, and the nearer they come to the Equinoctial, the more
certain and durable the wind is. And contrariwise, sailing from west to east,
they always find the wind contrary; for that the swift motion of the
Equinoctial draws after it the element of the air, as it does the surplus of
the higher spheres. So as the air does always follow the motion of the day.
Going from east to weast, without any alteration, and the motion of the air
being swift, draws after it all the vapors and exhalations which rise from
the sea, which causes in those Regions a continual easterly wind, which
runs from the Levant. Father Alonso Sanches a religious man, and of our
company, who has traveled the east and west Indies, as a man ingenious, and
of experience, said, that sailing under the Line, or near unto it, with a
continued and durable season, it seemed to him to be the same air, moved by
the heaven the which guided the ships, and was not properly a wind nor
exhalation, but an air moved with the daily course of the sun: for proof
whereof he showed, that the season is always equal, and alike at the gulf of
Danees* and in other great gulphes where we sail under the burning Zone, by
reason whereof their sails are always of one fashion, without any blustering,
having no need, in a manner, to change them in all their course. And if the
air were not moved by the heavens, it might sometimes fail, sometimes change
to the contrary, and sometimes there would grow some storms. Although this be
learnedly spoken, yet can we not deny it to be a wind, seeing there are
vapors and exhalations of the sea; and that we sometimes see the Brise or
easterly winds stronger, sometimes more weak, and placed in that sort, as
sometimes they can hardly carry all their sails. We must then know (and it is
true) that the air moved, draws unto it the vapors it finds; for that the
force is great, and finds no resistance, by reason whereof the eastern and
weasterne winds are continual, and in a manner always alike, in those parts
which are near the Line, and almost under all the burning zone, which is the
course the Sun follows betwixt the two circles of Cancer and Capricorn.

Why without the Zone, in a greater altitude, we find always west^rly wind^s
CHAP. 7.
Whosoever would nearly look into what has bin spoken, may likewise understand,
that going from the west to the east, in altitude beyond the Tropikes, we shall
find western winds, for that the motion of the Equinoctial being so swift,
it is a cause that the ay^e mooveth under it according to this motion, which is
from east to weast, drawing after it the vapors and exhalations that rise of
either side the Equinoctial or burning zone, incount^ing the course and motion
of the zone, are forced by the repercussion to return almost to the contrary,
whence grow the southweast winds so ordinary in those parts. Even as we see in
the course of waters, the which (if they be incountred by others of more
force,) return in a manner back. So it seems to be like in vapors and
exhalations, whereby it grows that the winds do turn and separate
themselves from one part to another. These westerly winds do commonly rai^^ in
a mean altitude, which is from twenty and seeven to thirty and seven degrees,
though they be not so certain nor so regular as the Brises that are in a less
altitude. The reason is, for that the southwest winds are no causes of this
proper and equal motion of the heaven, as the Brises are, being near to the
Line. But (as I have said) they are more ordinary, and often more furious and
tempestuous. But passing into a greater altitude, as of forty degrees, there
is as small assurance of winds at sea as at land; for sometimes the east or
north wind blows, and sometimes the south, or weast: whereby it happens
their navigations are more uncertain, and more dangerous.

Of the exceptions to the foresaid Rules, and of the Winds and Calmes both at
Land and at Sea. CHAP. 8.
THat which we have spoken of winds, which blow ordinarily within and without
the Zone, must be understood of the maine Sea, and in the great gulphes; for at
land it is otherwise, where we find all sorts of winds, by reason of the
inequality which is betwixt the mountains and the valleys; the great number
of Rivers and Lakes, and the diverse scituations of Countries, whence the gross
and thick vapors arise, which are moved from the one part or the other,
according to the diversity of their beginnings, which cause these diverse
winds the motion of the air, caused by the heaven having not power enough, to
draw and move them with it. And this variety of winds is not only found at
land, but also upon the sea coast, which is under the burning Zone, for that
there be foraine or land winds which come from the land, and many which blow
from the sea; the which winds from the sea, are commonly more wholesome and
more pleasant then those of the land, which are contrariwise troublesome and
unwholesome, although it be the differrence of the coast that causes this
diversity: commonly the land winds blow from midnight to the sun rising,
and the sea winds until sun setting. The reason perhaps may be, that the
earth, as a gross substance, fumes more whenas the sun shines not upon it,
even as green wood, or scarce dry, smoakes most when the flame is quenched.
But the sea, which is compounded of more subtle parts, engenders no fumes,
but when it is hot, even as straw or haie, being moist and in small quantity,
breeds smoke when it is burnt, and when the flame fails, the fume suddenly
cease. Whatsoever it be, it is certain that the land wind blows by night,
and that of the sea by day. So that even as there are often contrary, violent,
and tempestuous winds upon the sea coast, so do we see very great calmes. Some
men of great experience report, that having sailed many great passages at sea
under the line, yet did they never see any calmes, but that they always make
way little or much, the air being moved by the celestial motion, which is
sufficient to guide a ship, blowing in poope, as it does. I have already said,
that a ship of Lima going to Mani^^a, sailed two thousand seven hundred
leagues, always under the line, or not above twelve degrees from it, and that
in the months of February and March, whenas the sun is there for Zenith,
and in all this space they found no calmes, but always a fresh gale, so as in
two months they performed this great voyage. But in the burning Zone and
without it, you shall usually see great calmes upon the coasts, where the
vapors come from the Islands, or maine land. And therefore storms and
tempests, and the sudden motions of the air, are more certain and
ordinary upon the coasts, whereas the vapors come from the land, then in full
sea, I mean under the burning Zone, for without it and at sea, there are both
calmes and whirlewindes. Notwithstanding, sometimes betwixt the two Tropickes,
yea, under the line, you shall have great rain and sudden showers, yea,
far into the sea; for the working whereof, the vapors and exhalations of the
sea, are sufficient, which moving sometimes hastily in the air, cause thunder
and whirlewindes, but this is more ordinary near to the land, and upon the
land. When I sailed from Peru to new Spain, I observed, that all the time we
were upon the coast of Peru, our voyage was (as it was ordinary,) very calm
and easy, by reason of the Southern wind that blows, having always a fore
wind, returning from Spain and new Spain. As we passed the gulf, lanching
farther into the sea, almost under the line, we found the season cool, quiet,
and pleasant, with a full wind, but coming near to Nicaragua, and to all
that coast, we had contrary winds, with great store of rain and fogges. All
this navigation was under the burning Zone: for from twelve degrees to the
South, which is Lima, we sailed to the seventeenth, which is Gautulco, a port
of new Spain: and I believe, that such as have observed their navigations,
made under the burning Zone, shall find what I have said, which may suffice
for the winds which rain at sea, under the burning Zone.

Of some mervellous effects of the winds, which are in some parts of the
Indies. CHAP. 9.
IT were a very difficult matter, to report particularly the admirable effects
which some winds cause in diverse regions of the world, and to give a reason
thereof. There are winds, which naturally trouble the water of the sea, and
makes it green and black, others clear as Cristall, some comfort and make
glad, others trouble and breed heavines. Such as nourish silkewormes, have
great care to shut their windows, whenas the South-west winds do blow, and to
open them to the contrary: having found by certain experience, that their
worms diminish and die with the one, and fatten and become better with the
other; and who so will nearly observe it, shall find in himself, that the
diversities of winds, cause notable impressions and changes in the body,
principally in sick parts and ill disposed, when they are most tender and
weak. The holy scripture calls one a burning wind, Ex. c. 10. and 14 I^b.
17. Joan. 4. Osee. 13. Dan. 3.
another, a wind full of dew and sweetness. And it is no wonder if we see such
notable effects of the winds, in plants, beasts, and men, seeing that we see
it visibly in iron, which is the hardest of all mettalls. I have seen grates
of iron in some parts of the Indies, so rusted and consumed, that pressing it
betwixt your fingers, it dissolved into powder, as if it had been hay or
parched straw, the which proceeds only from the wind which does corrupt it,
having no means to withstand it. But leaving apart many other great and
notable effects, I will only make mention of two. The one, although it causes
pangs grater then death it self, yet does it not breed any further
inconvenience. The other takes away life without feeling of it. The sickness of
the sea, wherewith such are troubled as first begin to go to sea, is a matter
very ordinary; and yet if the nature thereof were unknown to men, we should
take it for the pangs of death, seeing how it af^licts and torments while it
does last, by the casting of the stomach, pain of the head, and other
troublesome accidents. But in truth this sickness so common and ordinary,
happens unto men by the change of the air and sea. For although it be true
that the motion of the ship helps much, in that it moves more or less: and
likewise the infections and ill favors of things in the ship: yet the proper
and natural cause, is the air and the vapors of the sea, the which does so
weaken and trouble the body and the stomach, which are not accustomed
thereunto, that they are wonderfully moved and changed: for the air is the
Element, by which we live and breathe, drawing it into our entrails, the
which we bathe therewithal. And therefore there is nothing that so suddenly,
and with so great force does alter us, as the change of the air we breathe, as
we see in those which die of the plague. It is approved by many experiences,
that the air of the sea, is the chief cause of this strange indisposition;
the one is, that when there blows from the sea a strong breath, we see them at
the land as it were sea sick, as I my self have often found. Another is, the
farther we go into the sea, and retire from land, the more we are touched and
dazeled with this sickness. Another is, that coasting along any Island, and after
lanching into the maine, we shall there find the air more strong. Yet will I
not deny, but the motion and agitation may cause this sickness, seeing that we
see some are taken therewith passing rivers in Barks: others in like sort
going in Coches and Carosses, according to the diverse complexions of the
stomach: as contrariwise, there are some, how boistrous and troublesome soever
the sea be, do never feel it. Wherefore it is a matter certain, and tried,
that the air of the sea, does commonly cause this effect in such as newly go
to sea. I thought good to speak this, to show a strange effect, which happens
in some parts of the Indies, where the air and the wind that rains make men
dazie, not less, but more then at sea. Some hold it for a fable, others say it
is an addition: for my part I will speak what I have tried. There is in Peru,
a high mountain which they call Pariacaca, and having heard speak of the
alteration it bred, I went as well prepared as I could. according to the
instructions which was given me, by such as they call Vaguianos or expert men:
but notwithstanding all my provision, when I came to mount the degrees, as they
call them, which is the top of this mountain, I was suddenly surprised with so
mortal and strange a pang, that I was ready to fall from the top to the
ground: and although we were many in company, yet every one made haste (without
any tarrying for his companion,) to free himself speedily from this ill
passage. Being then alone with one Indian, whom I entreated to help to stay
me, I was surprised with such pangs of straining and casting, as I thought to
cast up my heart too; for having cast up meat, sleugme, and choler, both
yellow and green; in the end I cast up blood, with the straining of my
stomach. To conclude, if this had continued, I should undoubtedly have died;
but this lasted not above three or four hours, that we were come into a more
convenient and natural temperature, where all our companions (being fouteteene
or fifteen) were much wearied. Some in the passage demanded confession,
thinking verily to die; others left the ladders and went to the ground, being
overcome with casting, and going to the stool: and it was told me, that some
have lost their lives there with this accident. I beheld one that did beat
himself against the earth, crying out for the rage and grief which this
passage of Pariacaca had caused. But commonly it does no important harm,
only this, pain and troublesome distaste while it endures: and not only the
passage of Pariacaca has this property, but also all this ridge of the
mountain, which runs above five hundred leagues long, and in what place
soever you pass, you shall find strange intemperatures, yet more in some
parts then in other, and rather to those which mount from the sea, then from
the plains. Besides Pariacaca, I have passed it by Lucanas and Soras; in an
other place, by Colleguas, and by Cavanas. Finally, by four different places,
going and coming, and always in this passage I have felt this alteration,
although in no place so strongly, as at the first in Pariacaca, which has
been tried by allsuch as have passed it. And no doubt but the wind is the
cause of this intemperature and strange alteration, or the air that reigns
there. For the best remedy (and all they find) is to stop their noses, their
ears, and their mouths, as much as may be, and to cover themselves with
clothes, especially the stomach, for that the air is subtle and piercing,
going into the entrails, and not only men feel this alteration, but also
beasts that sometimes stay there, so as there is no spur can make them go
forward. For my part I hold this place to be one of the highest parts of land
in the world; for we mount a wonderful space. And in my opinion, the
mountain N^vade of Spain, the Pirences, and the Alps of Italy, are as
ordinary houses, in regard of hie Towers. I therefore persuade my self, that
the element of the air is there so subtle and delicate, as it is not
proportionable with the breathing of man, which requires a more gross and
temperate air, and I believe it is the cause that does so much alter the
stomach, and trouble all the disposition. The passages of the mountains
N^vade, and other of Europe, which I have seen, although the air be cold
there, and does force men to wear more clothes, yet this cold does not take
away the appetite from meat, but contrariwise it provokes; neither does it
cause any casting of the stomach, but only some pain in the feet and
hands. Finally, their operation is outward. But that of the Indies, whereof I
speak (without molesting of foot or hand, or any outward part) troubles all
the entrails within: and that which is more admirable, when the sun is hot,
which makes me imagine, that the grief we feel comes from the quality of
the air which we breathe: Therefore that is most subtle and delicate, whose
cold is not so sensible, as piercing. All this ridge of mountains is, for the
most part, desert, without any villages or habitations for men, so as you shall
scarce find any small cotages to lodge such as do pass by night: there are no
beasts, good or bad, but some Vicunos, which are their country muttons, and
have a strange and wonderful property, as I shall show in his place. The
grass is often burnt, and all black with the air, and this desert runs
five and twenty or thirty leagues overthwart, and in length above five hundred
leagues. There are other deserts or places inhabited, which at Peru they call
Punas (speaking of the second point we promised) where the quallitie of the
air cutteth off man's life without feeling. In former time the Spaniardes went
from Peru, to the realm of Chille by this mountain, but at this day they do
pass commonly by sea, and sometimes along the side of it. And though that
way be laborious and troublesome, yet is there not so great danger as by the
mountain, where there are Plains, on the which many men have perished and
died, and sometimes have escaped by great hap, whereof some have remained
lame. There runs a small breath, which is not very strong nor violent, but
proceeds in such sort, that men fall down dead, in a manner without feeling,
or at the least, they loose their feet and hands: the which may seem
fabulous, yet is it most true.

I have known and frequented long the Gennerall Jerome Costilla, the ancient
peopler of Cusco, who had lost three or four toes, which fell off in passing
the desert of Chille, being perished with this air, and when he came to look
on them, they were dead, and fell off without any pain, even as a rotten Apple
falls from the tree. This Captain reported, that of a good army which he
had conducted by that place, in the former years, since the discovery of this
kingdom by Almagro, a great part of the men remained dead there, whose bodies
he found lying in the desert, without any stink or corruption; adding thereunto
one thing very strange, that they found a young boy alive, and being examined
how he had lived in that place, he said, that he lay hidden in a little
cave, whence he came to cut the flesh of a dead horse with a little knife,
and thus had he nourished himself a long time, with I know not how many
companions that lived in that sort, but now they were all dead, one dying this
day, and another to morrow, saying that he desired nothing more then to die
there with the rest, seeing that he found not in himself any disposition to
go to any other place, nor to take any taste in any thing. I have understood
the like of others, and particularly of one that was of our company, who being
then a Secular man, had passed by these deserts: and it is a strange thing, the
quality of this cold air, which killes, and also preserves the dead bodies
without corruption. I have also understood it of a reverend religious man, of
the Order of Saint Dominike, and Prelate thereof, who had seen it passing by
the deserts: and which is strange, he reported, that traveling that way by
night, was forced to defend himself against that deadly wind which blows
there (having no other means) but to gather together a great number of those
dead bodies that lay there, and made thereof, as it were, a rampire and a
bolster for his head: in this manner did he sleep, the dead bodies giving him
life. Without doubt this is a kind of cold so piercing, that it quenches the
vital heat, cutting off his influence; and being so exceeding cold, yet does
not corrupt nor give any putrefaction to the dead bodies, for that putrefaction
grows from heat and moystnesse. As for the other kind of air which
thunders under the earth, and causes earthquakes, more at the Indies, then in
any other Regions, I will speak thereof in treating the qualities of the land
at the Indies. We will content our selves now with what we have spoken of the
wind and air, and pass to that which is to be spok^n of the water.

Of the Ocean that invirons the Indies, and of the North and South Seas. CHAP.
10.
AMongst all waters the Ocean is the principal, by which the Indies have been
discovered, and are environed therewith; for either they be Islands of the Ocean
sea, or maine land, the which wheresoever it ends, is bounded with this Ocean.
To this day they have no^ discovered at the Indies any mediterranian sea, as in
Europe, Asia, and Affrike, into the which there enters some arm of this great
sea, and makes distinct seas, taking their names from the Provinces they bathe:
and almost all the mediterranean Seas continue and join together, and with the
Ocean itself, by the straight of Gibraltar, which the Ancients called, the
Pillars of Hercules, although the red sea being separated from the
mediterranean seas, enters alone into the Indian Ocean; and the Caspian sea
ioynes not with any other: so that at the Indies we find not any other sea
then this Ocean, which they divide into two, the one they call the north sea,
and the other the south; for that the Indies which were first discovered by the
Ocean, and reaches unto Spain, lies all to the north, and by that land
thereafter discovered a sea on the other side, the which they called the South
sea, for that they decline until they have passed the Line: and having lost
the North, or Pole articke, they called it South. For this cause they have
called all that Ocean the South sea, which lies on the other side of the East
Indies, although a great part of it be seated to the north, as all the coast of
new Spain, Nuaragna, Guatimala and Panama. They say, that he that first
discovered this sea, was called Blasconunes of Bilbo, the which he did by that
part which we now call maine land, where it grows narrow, and the two seas
approach so near the one to the other, that there is but seven leagues of
distance: for although they make the way eighteen from Nombre de Dios, to
Panama, yet is it with turning to seek the commodity of the way, but drawing
a direct line, the one sea shall not be found more distant from the other. Some
have discoursed and propounded to cut through this passage of seven leagues,
and to join one sea to the other, to make the passage from Peru more
commodious and easy, for that these eighteen leagues of land betwixt Nombre
de Dios and Panama, is more painful and chargeable then 2300. by sea,
whereupon some would say, it were a means to drown the land, one sea being
lower then another. Herodo^us.
As in times past we find it written, that for the same consideration, they
gave over the enterprise to win the red sea into Nile, in the time of King
Sesostris, and since, in the Empire of the Othomans. But for my part, Ioviu^.
I hold such discourses and propositions for vain, although this inconvenient
should not happen, the which I will not hold for assured. I believe there is no
human power able to beat and break down those strong and impenetrable
mountains, which God has placed betwixt the two seas, and has made them most
hard rocks, to withstand the fury of two seas. And although it were possible
to men, yet in my opinion they should fear punishment from heaven, in seeking
to correct the works, which the Creator by his great providence has ordained
and disposed in the framing of this universal world. Leaving this discourse of
opening the land, and joining both seas together, there is yet another less
rash, but very difficult and dangerous to search out. Whether these two great
gulphes do join in any other part of the world, which was the enterprise of
Fernando Magellan a Portugal gentleman, whose great courage and constancy in
the research of this subject, and happy success in the finding thereof, gave
the name of ete^nall memory to this straight, which justly they call by the
name of the discoverer Magellan, of which straight we will entreat a little,
as of one of the greatest wonders of the world. Some have believed, that this
Straight which Magellan had discovered in the South sea, was none, or that it
was straightned, as Don Alonso d' Arsille writes in his Auracane: and at this
day there are some that say, there is no such straight, but that they are
Islands betwixt the sea and land, for that the maine land ends there, at the
end whereof are all Islands, beyond the which the one sea ioynes fully with the
other, or to speak better, it is all one Sea. But in turth it is most
certain, there is a straight and a long and stretched out land on either side,
although it has not yet been known how far it stretches of the one side
of the straight toward the South. After Magellan, a ship of the Bishop of
Plaisance passed the straight, Don Gui^ieres Carvaial, (whose maste they say is
yet at Lima, at the entry of the palace,) they went afterward coasting along
the South, to discover the Straight, by the commandment of Don Garcia of
Mendoce, then governer of Chille, according to that which Captain Ladrillero
found it and passed it. I have read the discourse and report he made, where he
says, that he did not hazard himself to land in the Straight, but having
discovered the North sea, he returned back, for the roughnes of the time,
winter being now come, which caused the waves coming from the North, to grow
great and swelling, and the sea continually foming with rage. In our time,
Francis Drake an Englishman, passed this straight. After him, Captain
Sarmiento passed it on the South side. And lastly, in the year 1587. other
Englishmen passed it, by the instruction of Drake, which at this time run
along all the coast of Peru. And for that the report which the master Pilot
that passed it made, seems notable unto me, I will here set it down.

Of the Straight of Magellan, and how it was passed on the South side. CHAP. 11.
IN the year of our Lord God, one thousand five hundred seaventy nine, Francis
Drake having passed the Straights that run alongest the coast of Chille, and
all Peru, and taken the ship of Saint Iean d' Anthona, where there was a
great number of bars of silver, the Viceroy Don Francis of Toledo armed and
sent forth two good ships, to discover the Straight, appoynting Peter
Sarmiento for Captain, a man learned in Astrology. They parted from Callao of
Lima in the beginning of October; and forasmuch as upon that coast there blows
a contrary wind from the South, they took the sea, and having sailed little
above thirty days with a favorable wind, they came to the same altitude of
the Straight: but for that it was very hard to discover, they approached near
unto the land, where they entered into a great Bay, in the which there is an
Archipelague of Islands: Sarimento grew obstinate, that this was the Straight,
and stayed a whole month to find it out, by diverse ways creeping up to
the high mountains. But seeing they could not discover it, at the instance of
such as were in the army, they returned to sea. The same day the weather grew
rough, with the which they ran their course, in the beginning of the night
the Admiralls light failed so, as the other ship never see them after: The
day following, the force of the wind continuing still, being a ^ide wind, the
Admiralles ship discovered an opening, which made land, thinking good to
enter there for shelter, until the tempest were past. The which succeeded in
such sort, as having discovered this vent, they found that it ran more and
more into the land; and coniecturing that it should be the Straight which they
sought, they took the height of the Sun, where they found themselves in
fifty degrees and a half, which is the very height of the Straight: and, to
be the better assured, they thrust out their Brigandine, which having run many
leagues into this arm of the sea, without seeing any end, they found it to be
the very Straight. And for that they had order to pass it, they planted a hie
Cross there, with letters thereon, to the end, that if the other ship should
chance to arrive there, they should have news of their General, and follow.
They passed the Straight in a favorable time without difficulty, and passing
into the north sea, they came to certain unknown Islands, where they took in
fresh water, and other refreshings: From thence they took their course
toward Cape de Vert, from whence the Pilote mayor returned to Peru, by the
way of Carthagene, and Panama, carrying a discourse of the Straight to the
Viceroy, and of all their success, of whom he was well rewarded for his good
service.

But Captain Peter Sarmiento sailed from Cape Vert to Seville in the same ship
wherewith he had passed the Straight, and went to Court; where his Majesty
rewarded him; and at his instance, gave commandment to prepare a great army,
which he sent under the command of Diego Flores de Valdes, to people and
fortify this Straight. But this army, after variable success, spent much, and
profited little.

Returning now to the Viceadmiralles ship, which went in company of the
General, having lost him in the storm, they took the sea, but the wind being
contrary and stormy, they looked all to perish, so as they confessed
themselves, and prepared for death. This tempest continued three days without
intermission, and hourly they feared to run on ground; but it fell out
contrary, for they went still from land, until the end of the third day, that
the storm ceased, and then taking the height, they found themselves in fifty
six degrees: but seeing they had not crossed, and yet were far from land,
they were amazed, whereby they surmized (as Hernando Lamero told me) that the
land which is on the other side of the Straight, as we go by the south sea,
runs not the same o romer that it does to the Straight, but that it turns
to the East* for else it were impossible but they should have touched land,
having run so long time with this cross wind: but they passed on no
further, neither could they discover the lands end (which some hold to be
there) whether it were an Island on the other side of the Straight, where the
two seas of North and South do join together, or that it did run up
toward the East, and join with the land of Vesta, as they call it, which
answers to the Cape of Good Hope (as it is the opinion of some.) The truth
hereof is not to this day well known, neither is there any one found that has
discovered that land. The Viceroy Don Martin Henrique sa^de unto me, that he
held this report for an ^nvention of the English, that the Straight should
pr^sen^lie make an Island, and that the two seas did join together; for that
(being Viceroy of New Spain) he had diligently examined the Portugal
Pilote, who had bin left there by Francis Drake, and yet had no knowledge of
any such matter by him. But that was a very Straight, and a maine land on
either side. Returning then to the said Viceadmirall, they discovered this
Straight (as the said Hernando Lamero reported unto me) but by another mouth
or entry, and in a greater height, by reason of a certain great Island which
is at the entry of the Straight, which they call, the Bell, for the form it
carries. And (as he said) he would have passed it: but the Captain and
soldiers would not yield thereunto, supposing that the time was too far
spent, and that they were in great danger. And so they returned to Chille and
Peru, without passing it.

Of the Straight which some hold to be in Florida. CHAP. 12.
EVen as Magellan found out this Straight upon the South, so some have
pretended to discover another Straight, which they say is in the north, and
suppose it to be in Florida, whose coast runs in such sort, as they know no
end thereof. Peter Melendez the Adelantade, a man very expert at sea, affirms
for certain, that there is a Straight, and that the King had commanded him to
discover it, wherein he showed a great desire: he propounded his reasons to
prove his opinion, saying, that they have seen some remainders of ships in
the North sea, like unto those the which the Chinois use, which had been
impossible, if there were no passage from one sea unto another. Moreover, he
reported, that in a certain great Bay in Florida, (the which runs 300.
leagues within the land,) they see Whales in some season of the year, which
come from the other sea. Showing moreover other likelihood, he concludes, that
it was a thing agreeing with the wisdom of the Creator, and the goodly order
of nature, that as there was communication and a passage betwixt the two seas
at the Pole Antartike, so there should in like sort, be one at the Pole Artike,
which is the principal Pole. Some will say, that Drake had knowledge of this
Straight, and that he gave occasion so to judge, whenas he passed along the
coast of new Spain by the South sea. Yea, they hold opinion, that other
Englishmen which this year 1587. took a ship coming from the Philippines,
with great quantity of gold and other riches, did pass this straight, which
prize they made near to the Calliphornes, which course the ships returning
from the Philippines and China, to new Spain, do usually observe. They
confidently believe, that (as the courage of man is great, and his desire
infinite, to find new means to enrich himself) so within few years this
secret will be discovered. And truly, it is a thing worthy admiration, that as
the Ants do always follow the trace of other; so men in the knowledge and
search of new things, never stay, until they have attained the desired end for
the content and glory of men. And the high and eternal wisdom of the
Creator uses this curiosity of men, to communicate the light of his holy
Gospel to people, that always live in the obscure darkness of their errors.
But to conclude, the straight of the Artike Pole (if there be any) has not
been yet discovered. It shall not therefore be from the purpose, to speak what
we know of the particularities of the Antartike straight, already discovered
and known, by the report of such as have seen and observed it.

Of the properties of the Straight of Magellan. CHAP. 13.
THis Straight, as I have said, is just fifty degrees to the South, and from
one sea to another, fourscore and ten, or a hundred leagues, in the narrowest
place, it is a league and little less, where it was intended the King should
build a Fort to defend the passage. It is so deep in some places, that it
cannot be sounded, and in some places they find ground at 18. yea, at 15.
fadomes. Of these hundred leagues which it contains in length from one sea
unto the other, it is plainly seen, that the waves of the South sea, run
30. leagues, and the other 70. are possessed with the billows and waves of the
North sea. But there is this difference, that the 30. leagues to the South,
run betwixt the rocks and most high mountains, whose tops are continually
covered with snow: so as they seem) by reason of their great height) to be
joined together, which makes the entry of the Straight to the South so hard to
discover. In these 30. leagues, the sea is very deep, and without bottom, yet
may they fasten their ships to the land, the b^nckes being straight and uneven,
but in the 70. leagues toward the North, they find ground, and of either side
there are large plains, the which they call Ca^^na^. Many great rivers of
fair and clear water run into this Straight, and thereabout are great and
wonderful forests, whereas they find some trees of excellent wood and
sweet, the which are not known in these parts, whereofsuch as passed from
thence to Peru, brought some to show. There are many meadows within the land,
and many Islands in the midst of the Straight. The Indians that inhabit on the
South side, are little, and cowards, those that dwell on the North part, are
great and valiant: they brought some into Spain, which they had taken. They
found pieces of blew cloth, and other marks and signs that some men of Europe
had passed there. The Indians ^^luted our men with the name of Iesia. They are
good Archers, and go^ clad in wild beasts skins, whereof there is great
abundance. The waters of the Straight rise and fall as the tide, and they may
visibly see the tides come of the one side of the North sea, and of the other
from the South whereas they meet, the which (as I have said) is thirty
leagues from the South, and three score and ten from the North. And although
it seems there should be more danger then in all the rest, yet whenas
Captain Sarmi^nto his ship (whereof I spoke) passed it, they had no great
storms, but found far less difficulty then they expected: for then the
time was very calm and pleasant. And moreover, the waves from the north sea,
came broken, by reason of the great length of three score and ten leagues,
and the waves from the south sea were not raging, by reason of the great
deapth, in which deapth, the waves break, and are swallowed up. It is true,
that in winter the straight is not navigable, by reason of the tempests and
raging of the sea in that season. Some ships which have attempted to pass
the Straight in winter, have perished. One only ship passed it on the South
side, which is the Captain I made mention of. I was fully instructed of all
that I have spoken by the Pilote thereof, called Hernando Alonse, and have
seen the true description of the Straight they made in passing it, whereof
they carried the copy to the King of Spain, and the original to their viceroy
of Peru.

Of the ebbing and flowing of the Indian Ocean. CHAP. 14.
ONe of the mostadmirable secrets of Nature is the ebbing and flowing of the
sea, not only for this strange property of rising and falling, but much more
for the difference there is thereof in diverse seas, yea in diverse coasts of
one and the same sea. There are some seas that have no daily flowing nor
ebbing, as we see in the inner Mediterranean, which is the Thyrene sea, and yet
it flows and ebbes every day in the upper Mediterranean sea, which is that of
Venice, and justly gives cause of admiration, that these two seas being
Mediterranean, and that of Venice being no greater then the other, yet has it
his ebbing and flowing as the Ocean, and that other sea of Italy none at all.
There are some Mediterranean seas, that apparently rise and fall every month;
and others that neither rise in the day, nor in the month. There are other
seas, as the Spanish Ocean, that have their flux and reflux every day; and
besides that, they have it monthly, which comes twice, that is to say, at
the entry, and at the full of every Moon, which they call Spring tides. To say
that any sea has this daily ebbing and flowing, and not monthly, I know not
any. It is strange, the difference we find of this subject at the Indies, for
there are some places whereas the sea does daily rise and fall two leagues as
at Panama, and at a high water it rises much more; There are other places
where it does rise and fall so little, that hardly can you find the
difference. It is ordinary in the Ocean sea to have a daily flowing and ebbing,
and that was twice in a natural day, and ever it falls three quarters of an
hour sooner one day then another, according to the course of the Moon: so as
the tide falls not always in one hour of the day. Some would say, that this
flux and reflux proceeded from the local motion of the water of the sea; so as
the water that rises on the one side, falls on the other that is opposite
unto it: so that it is full sea on the one side when as it is a low water on
the opposite, as we see in a kettle full of water, when we moove it, when it
leanes to the one side the water increases; and on the other it diminishes.
Others affirm, that the sea rises in all parts at one time, and decreaseth
at one instant: as the boiling of a pot, coming out of the center it extends
it self on all parts, and when it cease, it falls likewise on all parts.

This second opinion is true, and in my judgment, certain and tried, not so
much for the reasons which the Philosophers give in their Meteors, as for the
certain experience we may make. For to satisfy my self upon this point and
question, I demanded particularly of the said Pilot, how he found the tides in
the straight, and if the tides of the South sea did fall whenas those of the
North did rise. And contrariwise (this question being true) why the increase of
the sea in one place, is the decrease thereof in another, as the first opinion
holds. He answered that it was not so, but they might see plainly, that the
tides of the North and South seas rise at one instant, so as the waves of one
sea incountred with the other, and at one instant likewise they began to
retire, every one into his sea, saying, that the rising and falling was daily
seen, and that the encounter of the tides (as I have said) was at three score
and ten leagues to the North sea, and thirty to the South. Whereby we may
plainly gather, that the ebbing and flowing of the Ocean is no pure local
motion, but rather an alteration: whereby all waters really rise and increase
at one instat, and in others, they dimini^h, as the boiling of a pot, whereof I
have spoken. It were impossible to comprehend this point by experience, if it
were not in the Straight, where all the Ocean, both on the one side, and on
the other ioynes together: for none but Angels can see it, and judge of the
opposite parts: for that man has not so long a sight, nor so nimble and swift
footing as were needful, to transporte his eyes from one part to another, in
so short a time, as a tide will give him respite, which are only six hours.

Of sundry Fishers, and their manner of fishing at the Indies. CHAP. 15.
THere are in the Indian Ocean, an infinite number of fishes, the kinds and
properties whereof the Creator only can declare. There are many such as we have
in the sea of Europe, as shaddes, and aloses which come from the sea into the
rivers; dorads, pilchards, and many other. There are others, the like I do not
think to have seen in these parts, as those which they do call Cabrillas,
which do somewhat resemble the trowt, and in new Spain they call them Bobos,
they mount from the sea into the rivers. I have not seen any Besugues there,
nor trowts, although some say there are in Chille. There are Tonins in some
parts upon the coast of Peru, but they are rare, and some are of opinion, that
at a certain time they do cast their spawne in the Straight of Magellan, as
they do in Spain at the Straight of Gibraltar, and for this reason they find
more upon the coast of Chille, although those I have seen there, are not like
to them in Spain. At the Islands (which they call Barlovente) which are Cuba,
Saint Dominique, Port rique, and Iamaique, they find a fish which they call
Manati, a strange kind of fish, if we may call it fish, a creature which
ingenders her young ones alive, and has teates, and does nourish them with
milk, feeding of grass in the fields, but in effect it lives continually in
the water, and therefore they eat it as fish; yet when I did eat of it at
Saint Dominique on a friday, I had some scruple, not for that which is
spoken, but for that in color and taste it was like unto morselles of veale,
so is it green, and like unto a cow on the hinder parts. I did wonder at
the incredible ravening of the Tib^rons, or sharkes, whenas I did see drawn
from one (that was taken in the Port) out of his gullet, a buchers great knife,
a great iron hook, and a piece of a cowes head with one whole horn, neither
do I know if both were there, or no. I did see in a creek made with that
sea, a quarter of a horse for pleasure hanging upon a stake, whither presently
came a company of these Tiburons, at the smell thereof: and for the more
pleasure, this horse flesh was hung in the air, I know not how many hand
breadth from the water; this company of fish flock about it, leaping up, and
with a strange nimblenesse cut off both flesh and bone off the horse leg, as if
it had been the stalk of a lettuce; their teeth being as sharp as a rasour.
There are certain small fishes they call Rambos, which cleave to these
Tiburons, neither can they drive them away, and they are fed with that which
falls from the Tiburons. There are other small fishes, which they call flying
fishes, the which are found within the tropickes, and in no other place, as I
think: they are pursued by the Ducades; and to escape them they leap out of
the sea, and go a good way in the air, and for this reason they are called
flying Fishes: they have wings as it were of linen cloth, or of parchment,
which do supporte them some space in the air. There did one fly or leap into
the ship wherein I went, the which I did see, and observe the fashion of his
wings.

In the Indian histories there is often mention made of Lezards or Caymans (as
they call them) and they are the very same which Pliny and the Ancients call
Crocodiles, they find them on the sea side, and in hot rivers, for in cold
rivers there are none to be found. And therefore they find none upon all the
coast of Peru unto Payra, but forward they are commonly seen in the rivers. It
is a most fierce and cruel beast, although it be slow and heavy. He goes
hunting and seeks his prey on the land, and what he takes alive, he drownes
it in the water, yet does he not eat it, but out of the water, for that his
throat is of such a fashion, as if there entered any water, he should easily be
drowned. It is a wonderful thing to see a combat betwixt a Caymant and a
Tigre, whereof there are most cruel at the Indies. A religious man of our
company told me that he had seen these beasts fight most cruelly one against
the other; upon the sea shore the Caymant with his tail gave great blows
unto the Tygre, striving with his great force to carry him into the water: and
the Tygre with his paws resisted the Caymant, drawing him to land. In the end
the Tigre vanquished and opened the Lezard; it seems by the belly, the which
is most tender and penetrable, for in every other part he is so hard, that no
lance, and scarce a harquebuze can pierce it. The victory which an Indian had
of a Caymant was yet more rare: the Caimant had carried away his young child,
and suddenly plunged into the sea; the Indian moved with choler, cast
himself after him, with a knife in his hand, and as they are excellent
swimmers and dievers, and the Caymant swimmeth always on the top of the
water, he hurt him in the belly, and in such sort, that the Caymant feeling
himself wounded, went to the shore, leaving the little infant dead. But the
combat which the Indians have with Whales is yet more admirable, wherein
appears the power and greatness of the Creator, to give so base a Nation (as
be the Indians) the industry and courage to encounter the most fierce and
deformed beast in the world, and only to fight with him, but also to vanquish
him, and not to triumph over him. Considering this, I have often remembered that
place of the Psalm, speaking of the Whale, Draco iste quem formasti ad
illudendum eum: What greater mockery can there be, then to see an Indian lead
a whale as big as a mountain, vanquished with a cord? The manner the Indians
of Florida use (as some expert men have told me) to take these whales,
(whereof there is great store) is, they put themselves into a Canoe, which is
like a bark of a tree, and in swimming approach near the whales side, then
with great dexterity they leap to his neck, and there they ride as on horse
back expecting his time, then he thrustes a sharp and strong stake (which
he carries with him) into the whales nosthrill, for so they call the hole or
vent by which they breathe, presently he beats it in with an other stake as
forcibly as he can; in the mean space the whale does fu^iously beat the
sea, and raises mountains of water, running into the deep with great
violence, and presently rises again, not knowing what to do for pain; the
Indian still sittes firm, and to give him full payment for this trouble, he
beats another stake into the other vent or nosthrill, so as he stops him
quite, and takes away his breathing, then he betakes him to his Canoe, which
he holds tied with a cord to the whales side, and goes to land, having first
tied his cord to the whale, the which he lettes run with the whale, who
leapes from place to place, whilst he finds water enough: being troubled with
pain, in the end he comes near the land, and remains on ground by the
hugeness of his body, unable any more to moove; then a great number of Indians
come unto the Conqueror, to gather his spoils, they kill him, and cut his
flesh in pieces, the which is bad enough; this do they dry and beat into
powlder, using it for meat, it does last them long: wherein is fulfilled,
that which is spoken in another Psalm of the whale, Dedisti eum escam populis
Aethiopum: Peter Mendez the Adelantade did often speak of this kind of
fishing. Whereof M^nardes makes mention in his book. There is an other fishing
which the Indians do commonly use in the sea, the which, although it be less,
yet is it worthy the report. They make as it were faggots of bul-rushes or dry
sedges well bound together, which they call Ba^sas, having carried them upon
their shoulders to the sea, they cast them in, and presently leap upon them;
being so set, they lanch out into the deep, rowing up and down with small
reeds of either side: they go a league or two into the sea to fish, carrying
with them their cords and nets upon these faggots, and bear themselves
thereon. They cast out their nets, and do there remain fishing the greatest
part of the day and night, until they have filled up their measure, with the
which they return well satisfied. Truly it was delightful to see them fish at
Callao of Lima, for that they were many in number, and every one set on
horseback, cutting the waves of the sea, which in their place of fishing are
great and furious, resembling the Tritons or Neptunes, which they paint upon
the water, and being come to land, they draw their bark out of the water
upon their backs, the which they presently undo, and lay abroad on the
shore to dry. There were other Indians of the valleys of Yca which were
accustomed to go to fish in leather, or skins of sea-wolves, blown up with
wind, and from time to time they did blow them like balls of wind, lest
they should sink. In the vale of Canete, which in old time they called
Guaroo, there were a great number of Indian fishers; but because they resisted
the Ingua, when he came to conquer that land, he made show of peace with them,
and therefore to feast him, they appointed a solemn fishing of many thousand
Indians, which went to sea in their vessels of reeds; at whose return, the
Ingua (who had laid many soldiers in ambush) made a cruel butcherie of them,
so as afterward this land remained unpeopled, although it be abundant and
fertile. I did see an other manner of fishing, whereunto Don Francis of Toledo
the Viceroy did lead me, yet was it not in the sea, but in a river which
they call great in the Province of Charcas, where the Indians Chiraquanas
plunged into the water, and swimming with an admirable swiftness, followed the
fish, where with darts and hooks which they use to carry in their right hand,
only swimming with the left) they wound the fish, and so hurt, they brought
them forth, seeming in this more like unto fishes then men of the land. But
now that we have left the sea, let us come to other kind of waters that
remain to be spoken of.

Of Lakes and Pooles that be at the Indies. CHAP. 16.
IN place of the Mediterranean Sea, which is in the old world, the Creator has
furnished this new with many Lakes, whereof there are some so great, as they
may be properly called seas; seeing the Scripture calls that of Palestina so,
which is not so great as some of these. The most famous, is that of Titicaca,
which is at Peru, in the Province of Callao, the which as I have said in the
former book, contains near fourscore leagues in compass, into the which,
there runs ten or twelve great rivers. A while since, they began to sail in
it with barks and ships, wherein they proceeded so ill, that the first
ship was split with a tempest that did rise in the Lake. The water is not
altogether sower nor salt, as that of the sea, but it is so thick, as it
cannot be drunk. There are two kinds of fishes breed in this Lake in great
abundance, the one they call Suches, which is great and savorous, but
phlegmatike and unwholesome; and the other Bogos, which is more healthful,
although it be less and fuller of bones; there are great numbers of
wilde-duckes and wigens. Whenas the Indians will feast it, or show delight to
any one that passes along the two banckes, which they call Chucuyto and
Omasugo, they assemble a great number of Canoes, making a circle and invironing
the foul, until they take with their hands what they please; and they call
this manner of fishing Chaco. On the one and the other bank of this Lake* are
the best habitations of Peru. From the issue thereof there grows a lesser
Lake, although it be great, which they call Paria, upon the banks whereof,
there are great numbers of cattle, especially swine, which grow exceeding
fat with the grass upon those banks. There are many other Lakes in the high
mountains, whence proceed brooks and rivers, which after become great floods.
Upon the way from Arequippa to Callao, there are two Lakes, upon the mountains
of the one and other side the way, from the one flows a brook, which grows to
a ^loud, and falls into the South sea; from the other, they say the famous
river of Aporima takes her beginning; from the which, some hold that the
renowned river of Amazos, otherwise called Maragnon proceeds, with so great an
assembly and abundance of waters, which join in these mountains. It is a
question may be often asked, why there are so many Lakes in the tops of these
mountains, into the which no river enters, but contrariwise, many great
streams issue forth, and yet do we scarce see these Lakes to diminish any
thing at any season of the year. To imagine that these Lakes grow by the snow
that melts, or rain from heaven, that does not wholly satisfy me: for there
are many that have not this abundance of snow, nor rain, and yet we see no
decrease in them, which makes me to believe they are springs which rise there
naturally, although it be not against reason, to think that the snow and rain
help somewhat in some seasons. These Lakes are so common in the highest tops
of the mountains, that you shall hardly find any famous river that takes not
his beginning from one of them. Their water is very clear, and breeds little
store of fish, and that little is very small, by reason of the cold which is
there Continually. Notwithstanding, some of these Lakes be very hot, which is
another wonder. At the end of the vallie of Tarapaya near to Potozi, there is
a Lake in form round, which seems to have been made by compass, whose water
is extremely hot, and yet the land is very cold: they are accustomed to
bathe themselves near the bank, for else they cannot endure the heat being
farther in. In the midst of this Lake, there is a boiling of above twenty foot
square, which is the very spring, and yet (notwithstanding the greatness of this
spring) it is never seen to increase in any sort: it seems that it exhales of
it self, or that it has some hidden and unknown issue, neither do they see
it decrease; which is another wonder, although they have drawn from it a great
stream, to make certain engines grind for metal, considering the great
quantity of water that issues forth, by reason whereof, it should decrease.
But leaving Peru, and passing to new Spain, the Lakes there, are no less to
be observed; especially that most famous of Mexico, where we find two sorts
of waters, one salt Lake to that of the sea, and the other clear and sweet,
by reason of the rivers that enter into it. In the midst of this Lake, is a
rock very delightful and pleasant, where there are baths of hot water that
issue forth, the which they greatly esteem for their health. There are
gardins^ in the midst of this Lake, framed and fleeting upon the water, where
you may see plottes full of a thousand sorts of herbs and flowers, and they
are in such sort, as a man cannot well conceive them without sight. The City
of Mexico, is seated in the same Lake, although the Spaniards have filled up
the place of the situation with earth, leaving only some currents of water,
great and small, which enter into the City, to carry such things as they have
need of, as wood, herbs, stone, fruits of the country, and all other
things. When Cortez conquered Mexico, he caused Brigandins to be made, yet
afterward he thought it more safe not to use them: therefore they use Canoes,
whereof there is great store. There is great store of fish in this Lake, yet
have I not seen any of price: notwithstanding, they say the revenue of this
Lake, is worth three hundred thousand ducats a year. There are many other
Lakes, not far from this, whence they bring much fish to Mexico. The Province
of Mechovacan is so called, for that it abounds greatly with fish. There are
goodly and great Lakes, in the which there is much fish, and this Province is
cool and healthful. There are many other Lakes, whereof it is not possible to
make mention, nor to know them in particular, only we may note by that which
has been discoursed in the former book, that under the burning Zone there is
greater abundance of Lakes, then in any other part of the world: and so by
that which we have formerly spoken, and the little we shall say of rivers and
fountains, we will end this discourse of Waters.

Of many and diverse Springs and Fountains. CHAP. 17.
THere is at the Indies, as in other parts of the world, great diversity of
Springs, Fountains, and Rivers, and some have strange properties. In
Guancavilica of Peru, (where the mines of quicksilver be,) there is a
Fountain that casts forth hot water, and in running, the water turns to
rock, of which rock or stone, they build in a mauer all the houses of the
Village. This stone is soft, and easy to cut, for they cut it as easily with
iron as if it were wood, it is light and lasting. If men or beasts drink
thereof, they die, for that it congeales in the very entrails, and turns into
stone, and for that cause some horses have died. As this water turns into
stone, the which flows, stoppes the passage to the rest; so as of necessity
it changes the course, and for this reason it runs in diverse places, as the
rock increases. At the point of Cape S. Helaine, there is a spring or
fountain of pitch, which at Peru, they call Coppey. This should be like to
that which the Scripture speaks of the savage valley, where they did find
pits of pitch. The Mariners use these fountains of pitch or Coppey, to pitch
their ropes and tackling, for that it serves them as pitch and tar in Spain.
When I sailed into new Spain by the coast of Peru, the Pilot showed me an
Island, which they call the I Will of Wolves, where there is another fountain or
pit of Coppey or pitch, with the which they anoint their tackling. There are
other fountains and springs of Goultran rozen, which the Pilot (an excellent
man in his charge) told me he had seen, and that sometimes sailing that
ways, being so far into the sea, as he had lost the sight of land, yet did
he know by the smell of the Coppey, where he was, as well as if he had known
the land, such is the savor that issues continually from that fountain. At
the baths, which they call the baths of Ingua, there is a course of water,
which comes forth all hot and boiling; and joining unto it, there is another
whose water is as cold as ice. The Ingua was accustomed to temper the one with
the other; and it is a wonderful thing to see springs of so contrary
qualities, so near one to the other. There are an infinite number of other hot
springs, specially in the Province of Charcas, in the water whereof, you cannot
endure to hold your hand, the space of an Ave Maria, as I have seen tried by
wager. In a farm near to Cusco, springs a fountain of salt, which as it runs
turns into salt, very white and exceeding good, the which (if it were in
another country) were no small riches, yet they make very small accoumpt
thereof, for the store they have there. The waters which run in Guayaquel,
which is in Peru, almost under the Equinoctial line, are held to be healthful
for the French disease, and other such like, so as they come from many places
far off to be cured. And they say the cause thereof is, for that in that
Country there is great abundance of roots, which they call Sallepareille,
the virtue and operation whereof is so known, that it communicates her
property to the waters wherein it is put to cure this disease. Bilcanota is a
mountain the which (according to common opinion,) is in the highest part of
Peru, the top whereof is all covered with snow, and in some places is black
like coal. There issues forth of it, two springs in contrary places, which
presently grow to be very great b^rookes, and so by little and little become
great floods, the one goes to Calloa, into the great Lake Titicaca, the other
goes to the lands, and is that which they call Yucay, which joining with
another, runs into the North sea, with a violent and furious course. This
spring, when it comes out of the rock Bilcanota, as I have said, is of the
color of lie, having an asshie color, and castes a fume as a thing burnt, the
which runs far in this sort, until the multitude of waters that run into
it, quench this smoke and fire which it draws from the spring. In new Spain,
I have seen a spring as it were ink, somewhat blew, in Peru another, of
color red like blood, whereupon they call it the red river.

Of Rivers. CHAP. 18.
AMongst all Rivers, not only at the Indies, but generally through the world,
the River Maragnon, or of Amazons, is the chief, whereof we have spoken in the
former book. The Spaniards have often sailed it, pretending to discover the
lands, which by report are very rich, especially those they call Dorado and
Paytiti, Iean de Salnies, the Adelantade, made a memorable entry, though of
small effect. There is a passage which they call Pongo, one of the most
dangerous in all the world; for the river being there straightned, and forced
betwixt two high steep rocks: the water falls directly down with so great a
violence, that coming steep down, it causes such a boiling, as it seems
impossible to pass it without drowning: yet the courage of men durst attempt
to pass it, for the desire of this renowned Dorado: they slipped down from the
top to the bottom, thrust on with the violence and current of the flood,
holding themselves fast in their Canoes or barks: and although in falling they
were turned topsie turvie, and both they and their Canoes plunged into the
deep, yet by their care and industry they recovered themselves again; and in
this sort the whole army escaped, except some few that were drowned. And that
which is more admirable, they carried themselves so cunningly, that they
neither lost their powlder nor munition. In their return (having suffered many
troubles and dangers) they were forced, in the end, to pass back that same
way) mounting by one of those high Rocks, sticking their poniards in the rock.

Captain Peter d' Orsua made an other entry by the same river, who being dead
in the same voyage, and the soldiers mutined; other Captains followed the
enterprise, by an arm that comes into the north sea. A religious man of our
company told us, that being then a secular man, he was present in a manner at
all that enterprise, and that the tides did flow almost a hundred leagu^s up
the river, and whereas it enters into the sea, (the which is under the Line, or
very near) it has 70. leagues, breadth at the mouth of it, a matter
incredible; and which exceedes the breadth of the Mediterranean sea, though
there be some others, who in their descriptions give it but twenty five or
thirty leagues breadth at the mouth. Next to this river that of Plata, or of
Silver holds the second place, which is otherwise called Paragu^y, which
runs from the mountains of Peru, into the sea, in thirty five degrees of
altitude to the South: it rises (as they say) like to the river of Nile, but
much more without comparison, and makes the fields it overflowes like unto a
sea, for the space of three months, and after returns again to his course,
in the which ships do sail many leagues against the stream. There are many
other rivers that are not of that greatness, and yet are equal: yea they
surpass the greatest of Europe, as that of Magdalaine, near to Saint Marthe
the great river, and that of Alvarado in new Spain, and an infinite number of
others. Of the south side, on the mountains of Peru, the rivers are not usually
so great, for that their current is not long, and that many waters cannot join
together, but they are very swift, descending from the mountains, and have
sudden falls, by reason whereof they are very dangerous, and many men have
perished there. They increase and overflowe most in the time of heat. I have
gone over twenty and seven rivers upon that coast, yet did I never pass any
one by a foord. The Indians use a thousand devises to pass their rivers. In
some places they have a long cord that runs fro one side to the other, and
thereon hangs a basket, into the which he puts himself that means to pass;
and then they draw it from the bancke with another cord, so as he passes in
this basket. In other places the Indian passes, as it were on horse back,
upon a bottle of straw, and behind him he that desires to pass; and so
rowing with a piece of a boorde, carries him over. In other places they make a
floate of gourds or pompions, upon the which they set men with their stuff to
carry over, and the Indians having cords fastened to them, go swimming before,
and draw this floate of pompions after them, as horses do a Coach: others go
behind thrusting it forward. Having passed, they take their bark of pompions
upon their back, and return swimming: this they do in the river of Saint at
Peru. We passed that of Alvarado in new Spain upon a table, which the Indians
carried upon their shoulders, and when they lost their footing, they swamme.
These devises, with a thousand others wherewith they use to pass their rivers,
breed a terror in the beholders, helping themselves with such weak and
unsure means; and yet they are very confident. They do use no other bridges but
of hair or of straw. There are now upon some rivers bridges of stone, built
by the diligence of some governors, but many fewer then were needful in such
a country, where so many men are drowned by default thereof, and the which
yeeldes so much silver, as not only Spain, but also other strange Countries
make sumptuous buildings therewith. The Indians do draw from these floudes
that run from the mountains to the valleys and plains, many and great
brooks to water their land, which they usually do with such industry, as there
are no better in Murcia, nor at Millan it self, the which is also the greatest
and only wealth of the Plains of Peru, and of many other parts of the Indies.

Of the quality of the land at the Indies in general. CHAP. 19.
WE may know the quality of the land at the Indies, for the greatest part
(seeing it is the last of the three Elements, whereof we have propounded to
treat in this Book) by the discourse we have made in the former Book of the
burning Zone, seeing that the greatest part of the Indies does lie under it.
But to make it known the more particularly, I have observed three kinds of
lands, as I have passed through those Regions: whereof there is one very low,
another very high, and the third which holds the middle of these two extremes.
The lower is that which lies by the sea coasts, whereof there is in all parts
of the Indies, and it is commonly very hot and moist, so as it is not so
healthful; and at this day we see it less p^opled, although in former times
it has been greatly inhabited with Indians, as it appears by the histories
of New Spain and Peru, and where they kept and lived, for that the soil was
natural unto them being bred there. They lived of fishing at sea, and of
seeds, drawing brooks from the rivers, which they used for want of rain, for
that it raines little there, and in some places not at all. This low country
has many places inhabitable, as well by reason of the sands which are
dangerous, (for there are whole mountains of these sands) as also for the
marshes which grow by reason of the waters that fall from the mountains,
which finding no issue in these flat and low lands, drown them, and make
them unprofitable.

And in truth the greatest part of all the Indian sea coast is of this sort,
chiefly upon the South sea: The habitation of which coasts is at this present
so wasted and contemned, that of thirty parts of the people that inhabited
it, there wants twenty nine; and it is likely the rest of the Indians will in
short time decay. Many, according to the variety of their opinions, attribute
this to diverse causes; some to the great labor which has been imposed upon
these Indians; others, unto the change and variety of meats and drinks they
use, since their commerce with the Spaniards; others to their great excess and
drinking, and to other vices they have: for my part, I hold this disorder to be
the greatest cause of their decay, whereof it is not now time to discourse any
more. In this low country (which I say generally is unhealthful, and unfit
for man's habitation) there is exception in some places which are temperate and
fertile, as the greatest part of the Plains of Peru, where there are cool
valleys and very fertile. The greatest part of the habitation of the coast
entertaines all the traffike of Spain by sea: whereon all the estate of the
Indies depends. Upon this coast there are some Towns well peopled, as Lima
and Truxillo in Peru, Panama and Carthagena upon the maine land, and in the
Islands S. Dominique, Port Ricco, and Havana, with many other Towns which are
less than these, as the true Cross in new Spain, Yca, Arigua and others in
Peru: the ports are commonly inhabited, although but slenderly. The second sort
of land is contrary, very high, and by consequent, cold and dry, as all the
mountains are commonly. This land is neither fertile nor pleasant, but very
healthful, which makes it to be peopled and inhabited. There are pastures, and
great store of cattle, the which, for the most part, entertaines life, and by
their cattle, they supply the want they have of corn and grain, by trucking
and exchange. But that which makes these lands more inhabited and peopled, is
the riches of the mines that are found there, for that all obeys to gold and
silver. By reason of the mines there are some dwellings of Spaniards and
Indians, which are increased and multiplied, as Potozi and Gancavelicqua in
Peru, and Cacatecas in new Spain. There are also through all these mountains
great dwellings of the Indians, which to this day are maintained; yea some will
say they increase, but that the labor of the mines does consume many, and
some general diseases have destroyed a great part, as the Cocoliste in new
Spain: yet they find no great diminution. In this extreamitie of of high
ground they find two commodities, as I have said, of pastures and mines,
which do well countervaile the two other that are in the lower grounds
alongest the sea coast, that is, the commerce of the sea, and the abundance of
wine which grows not but in the hot lands. Betwixt these two extremes there
is ground of a mean height, the which, although it be in some parts higher
or lower one than other, yet does it not approach neither to the heat of the
sea coast, nor the intemperature of the mountains. In this sort of soil
there grows many kinds of grain, as wheat, barley, and mays, which grows
not at all in the high countries, but well in the lower, there is likewise
store of pasture, cattle, fruits, and green forests. This part is the best
habitation of the three, for health and recreation; and therefore it is best
peopled of any part of the Indies, the which I have curiously observed in
many voyages that I have undertaken, and have always found it true, that the
Province best peopled at the Indies be in this situation. Let us look nearly
into new Spain, (the which without doubt is the best Province the Sun does
circle) by what part soever you do enter, you mount up; and when you have
mounted a good height, you begin to descend, yet very little: and that land
is always much higher then that along the sea coast.

All the land about Mexico is of this nature and situation; and that which is
about the Vulcan, which is the best soil of the Indies, as also in Peru,
Arequipa, Guamangua and Cusco, although more in one then in the other. But in
the end, all is high ground, although they descend into deep valleies, and
climb up to high mountains: the like is spoken of Quitto, Saint Foy, and of
the best of the new kingdom. To conclude, I do believe that the wisdom and
providence of the Creator would have it so, that the greatest part of this
country of the Indies should be hilly, that it might be of a better
temperature: for being low, it had been very hot under the burning Zone,
especially being far from the sea. Also all the land I have seen at the
Indies, is near to the mountains on the one side or the other, and sometimes
of all parts: So as I have oftentimes said there, that I would gladly see
any place, from whence the horizon did fashion it self and end by the heaven,
and a country stretched out and even, as we see in Spain in a thousand
champaine fields; yet do I not remember that I have ever seen such sightes at
the Indies, were it in the Islands, or upon the maine land, although I have
traveled above seven hundred leagues in length. But as I have said, the
neerenesse of the mountains is very commodious in this region, to temper the
heat of the Sun. To conclude, the best inhabited parts of the Indies are as
I have said: and generally, all that country aboundes in grass, pastures,
and forests, contrary unto that which Aristotle and the Auntients did hold.
So as when we go out of Europe to the Indies, we wonder to see the land so
pleasant, green and fresh. Yet this rule has some exceptions, and chiefly in
the land of Peru, which is of a strange nature amongst all others, whereof we
will now proceed to speak.

Of the properties of the land of Peru. CHAP. 20.
We mean by Peru, not that great part of the world which they call America,
seeing that therein is contained Bresil, the kingdom of Chille, and that of
Grenade, and yet none of these kingdoms is Peru, but only that part which
lies to the South, beginning at the kingdom of Quitto, which is under the
Line, and runs in length to the realm of Chille, the which is without the
Tropickes, which were six hundred leagues in length, and in breadth it
contains no more then the mountains, which is fifty common leagues, although
in some places, as at Chachapayas, it be broader. This part of the world which
we call Peru, is very remarkable, and contains in it strange properties,
which serves as an exception to the general rule of the Indies. The first is,
that upon all that coast it blows continually with one only wind, which is
South and Southweast, contrary to that which does usually blow under the
burning Zone. The second is, that this wind being by nature the most violent,
tempestuous, and unhealthful of all others, yet in this region it is
mavelous pleasing, healthful, and agreeable: so as we may attribute the
habitation of that part thereunto, without the which it would be troublesome
and inhabitable, by reason of the heat, if it were not refreshed with the
wind. The third property is, that it never raines, thunders, snowes, nor
hailes in all this coast, which is a matter worthy of admiration. Fourthly,
that alittle distance from the coast it raines and snowes terribly. Fifthly,
that there are two ridges of mountains which run the one as the other, and
in one altitude, notwithstanding on the one there are great forests, and it
raines the greatest part of the year, being very hot; and the other is all
naked and bare, and very cold: so as winter and summer are divided on those
two mountains, and rain and cleerenesse it self. For the better
understanding hereof, we must consider that Peru is divided as it were into
three parts, long and narrow, which they call Lanos, Sierras, and Andes; the
Lanos runs along est the sea coast; the Sierras be all hills, with some
valleys; and the Andes be steep and craggie mountains. The Lanos or sea
coast, have some ten leagues in breadth, in some parts less, and in some
parts alittle more. The Sierra contains some twenty leagues in breadth: and
the Andes as much, sometimes more, sometimes less. They run in length from
north to south, and in breadth from east to weast. It is a strange thing, that
in so small a distance, as fifty leagues, equally distant from the Line and
Pole, there should be so great a contrariety, as to rain almost continually
in one place, and never in the other. It never raines upon the coast or Lanos,
although there falls sometimes a small dew, which they call Guarva, and in
Castill Mol^^ ^a, the which sometimes thickens, and falls in certain drops
of water, yet is it not troublesome, nor such as they need any covering. Their
coverings are of mattes with a little earth upon them which is sufficient. Upon
the Andes it raines in a manner continually, although it be sometimes more
clear then other. In the Sierra which lies betwixt both the extremes, it
raineth in the same season as it does in Spain, which is from September unto
April, but in the other season, the time is more clear, which is when the
Sun is farthest off, and the contrary when it is nearest, whereof we have
discoursed at large in the former book. That which they call Andes, and
Sierra, are two ridges of most high mountains, which run above a thousand
leagues, the one in view of the other, and almost equally. There are an
infinite number of Vicagues, which breed in the Sierres, and are properly like
unto wild goats, very nimble and swift. There are also of those beasts which
they call Guanacos and Pacos, which are sheep, which we may well term the
asses of that country; whereof we shall speak in their place. And upon the
Andes they find Apes, very gentle and delightful, and Parrots in great
numbers. There also they find the herb or tree which they call Coca, that is
so greatly esteemed by the Indians, and the traffic they make of it, is
worthy much money.

That which they call Sierre, causes valleys, whereas it opens, which are the
best dwellings of Peru, as is the valley of Xauxa of Andaguaylas, and Yucay. In
these valleys there grows wheat, mays and other sorts of fruits, but less in
one then in the other. Beyond the City of Cusco, (the ancient Court of the
Lords of those Realms,) the two ridges of mountains separate them. selves
one from the other, and in the midst leave a plain and large champian, which
they call the Province of Callao, where there are many rivers and great store
of fertile pastures: there is also that great Lake of Titicaca. And although it
be a full soil, and in the same height and intemperature, that the Sierre
having no more trees nor forests, yet the want they have of bread, is
countervailed with the roots they sow, the which they call Papas, and they
grow in the earth. This root is the Indians food; for drying it, and making
it clean, they make that which they call Chugno, which is the bread and
nourishment of those Provinces. There are other roots and small herbs which
they eat. It is a healthful soil, best peopled, and the richest of all the
Indies, for the abundance of cattle they feed, as well of those that are in
Europe, as sheep, neat, and goats, as of those of the Country, which they
call Guanacos and Pacos, and there are store of Partridges. Next to the
Province of Callao, is that of Charcas, where there are hot valleys very
fertile, and very high rocks, the which are very rich in mines, so as in no
part of the world shall you find better, nor fairer.

The reason why it raines on the Lanos, along the Sea coast. CHAP. 21.
FOr that it is rare and extraordinary to see a Country where it never raines
nor thunders; men desire naturally to know the cause of this strangenes. The
reason which some give that have nearly looked into it, is, that upon that
coast there rise no vapors, sufficient to engender rain for want of matter;
but only that there be final and light vapors, which cannot breed any other
then mistes and dewes, as we see in Europe, oftentimes vapors do rise in the
morning, which are not turned into rain, but into mistes only: the which
grows from the substance, which is not gross and sufficient enough to turn
to rain. They say, the reason why that which happens but some times in Europe,
falls out continually upon the coast of Peru, is, for that this region is very
dry, and yeeldes no gross vapors. The dryness is known by the gre^
abundance of sands, having neither wells nor fountains, but of fifteen
stades deep, (which is the height of a man or more,) and that is near unto
rivers, the water whereof, piercing into the land, gives them means to make
wells. So as it has been found by experience, that the course of rivers being
turned, the wells have been dried up, until they returned to their ordinary
course: and they give this reason for a material cause of this effect, but
they have another efficient, which is no less considerable, and that is the
great height of the Sierre, which coming along the coast, shadows the Lanos;
so as it suffers no wind to blow from the land, but above the tops of these
mountains. By means whereof, there raines no wind, but that from the Sea,
which finding no opposite, does not press, nor strain forth the vapors which
rise to engender rain; so as the shadow of the mountains keeps the vapors
from thickning, and convertes them all into mistes. There are some experiences
agree with this discourse; for that it raines upon some small hills along the
coast, which are least shadowed, as the rocks of Atico and Arequipa. It has
rained in some years whenas the Northern or easterly winds have blown: yea,
all the time they have continued, as it happened in seventie eight, upon the
Lan^s of Trugillo, where it rained abundantly, the which they had not seen in
many ages before. Moreover, it raines upon the same coast, in places, whereas
the Easterly or Northern winds be ordinary, as in Guayaquil, and in places
whereas the land rises much, and turns from the shadow of the mountains, as
in those that are beyond Ariqua. Some discourse in this manner, but let every
one think as he please. It is most certain, that coming from the mountains
to the valleys, they do usually see as it were two heavens, one clear and
bright above, and the other obscure, and as it were a graie veil spread
underneath, which covers all the coast: and although it rain not, yet this
mist is wonderful profitable to bring forth grass, and to raise up and
nourish the seed: for although they have plenty of water, which they draw
from the Pooles and Lakes, yet this moisture from heaven has such a virtue,
that ceasing to fall upon the earth, it breeds a great discommoditie and defect
of grain and seeds. And that which is more worthy of admiration, the dry and
barren sands are by this deaw so beautified with grass and flowers, as it is
a pleasing and agreeable sight, and very profitable for the feeding of
cattle, as we see in the mountain called Sandy, near to the City of Kings.

Of the property of new Spain, of the Islands, and of other Lands, CHAP. 22.
NEw Spain passes all other Provinces in pastures, which breeds infinite
troops of horse, kine, sheep, and other cattle. It aboundes in fruit and
all kind of grain. To conclude, it is a Country the best furnished, and most
accomplished at the Indies. Yet Peru does surpass it in one thing, which is
wine, for that there grows store, and good; and they daily multiply and
increase, the which does grow in very hot valleys, where there are waterings.
And although there be vines in new Spain, yet the grape comes not to his
maturitie, fit to make wine. The reason is, for that it raines there in Iulie
and August, whenas the grape ripens: and therefore it comes not to his
perfection. And if any one through curiosity would take the pains to make
wine, it should be like to that of Genua and Lombardie, which is very small and
sharp, having a taste like unto veriuice. The Islands which they call
Barlovente, which be Hispaniola, Cuba, Port Ricco, and others there abouts, are
beautified with many green pastures, and abound in cattle, as neat, and
swine, which are become wild. The wealth of these Islands, be their sugarworkes
and hides. There is much Cassia fistula and ginger. It is a thing incredible,
to see the multitude of these marchandizes brought in one fleet, being in a
manner impossible that all Europe should waste so much. They likewise bring wood
of an excellent quality and color, as Ebone, and others, which serve for
buildings and Ioyners. There is much of that wood which they call Lignum
Sanctum or Guage, fit to cure the pox. All these Islands and others there
abouts, which are many, have a goodly and pleasant aspect, for that throughout
the year, they are beautified with grass and green trees, so as they cannot
discern when it is Autumn or Summer, by reason of continual moisture joined
to the heat of the burning Zone. And although this land be of a great
circuit, yet are there few dwellings, for that of it self it engenders great
Arcabutos, as they call them, which be Groves or very thick Coppeses: and on
the plains there are many marshes and bogges. They give yet another notable
reason, why they are so smally peopled, for that there have remained few
natural Indians, through the inconsiderateness and disorder of the first
Conquerors that peopled it: and therefore, for the most part, they use Negros,
but they cost dear, being very fit to till the land. There grows neither
bread nor wine in these Islands, for that the too great fertility and the vice
of the soil, suffers them not to seed, but castes all forth in grass, very
vneaqually. There are no olive trees, at the least, they bear no olives, but
many green leaves pleasant to the view, which bear no fruit. The bread they
use is of Cacave, whereof we shall hereafter speak. There is gold in the
rivers of these Islands, which some draw forth, but in small quantity, I was
little less then a year in these islands, and as it has been told me of the
maine land of the Indies, where I have not been, as in Florida, Nicaraqua,
Guatimala, and others, it is in a manner of this temper, as I have described:
yet have I not set down every particular of Nature in these Provinces of the
firm land, having no perfect knowledge thereof. The Country which does most
resemble Spain, and the regions of Europe, in all the West Indies, is the
realm of Chille, which is without the general rule of these other Provinces,
being seated without the burning Zone, and the Tropicke of Capricorn. This
land of it self is cool and fertile, and brings forth all kinds of fruits
that be in Spain; it yeeldes great abundance of bread and wine, and aboundes
in pastures and cattle. The air is wholesome and clear, temperate betwixt
heat and cold, winter and summer are very distinct, and there they find great
store of very fine gold. Yet this land is poor and finally peopled, by reason
of their continual war with the Auricanos, and their associates, being a
rough people and friends to liberty.

Of the unknown Land, and the diversity of a whole day, betwixt them of the
East and the West. CHAP. 23.
THere are great conjectures, that in the temperate Zone at the Antartike Pole,
there are great and fertile lands: but to this day they are not discovered,
neither do they know any other land in this Zone, but that of Chille, and some
part of that land which runs from Ethiopia, to the Cape of Good Hope, as has
been said in the first book; neither is it known if there be any habitations
in the other two Zones of the Poles, and whether the land continues and
stretches to that which is toward the Antartike or South Pole. Neither do we
know the land that lies beyond the straight of Magellan, for that the greatest
height yet discovered, is in fifty ^ix degrees, as has been formerly said;
and toward the Artike or Northern Pole, it is not known how far the land
extendes, which runs beyond the Cape of Mendocin, and the Caliphornes, nor
the bounds and end of Florida, neither yet how far it extendes to the West.
Of late, they have discovered a new land, which they call New Mexico, where
they say is much people that speak the Mexicaine tongue. The Philippines and
the following Islands, as some report that know it by experience, ran above
nine hundred leagues. But to entreat of China, Cochinchina, Syam, and other
regions which are of the East Indies, were contrary to my purpose, which is
only to discourse of the West: nay, they are ignorant of the greatest part of
America, which lies betwixt Peru and Bresill, although the bounds be known of
all sides, wherein there is diversity of opinions; some say it is a drowned
land, full of Lakes and waterie places; Others affirm there are great and
flourishing kingdoms, imagining there be the Paytiti, the Dorado, and the
Caesar's, where they say are wonderful things. I have heard one of our company
say, a man worthy of credit, that he had seen great dwellings there, and the
ways as much beaten, as those betwixt Salamanca, and Villadillit, the which he
did see, whenas Peter d'Orsua, and after, those that succeeded him, made their
entry and discovery by the great river of Amazons, who believing that the
Dorado which they sought, was farther off, cared not to inhabit^ there, and
after went both without the Dorado, which they could not find, and this great
Province which they left. To speak the truth, the habitations of America, are
to this day unknown, except the extreamities, which are Peru, Bresill, and
that part where the land begins to straighten, which is the river of Silver,
then Tucuman, which makes the round to Chille and Charc^. Of late we have
understood by letters from some of ours which go to S. Croix, in the Sierre,
that they go discovering of great Provinces and dwellings, betwixt Bresill and
Peru. Time will reveile them, for as at this day the care and courage of men is
great, to compass the world from one part to another; so we may believe, that
as they have discovered that which is now known, they may likewise lay open
that which re^^nes, to the end the Gospel may be preached to the whole world,
seeing the two Crowns of Portugal and Ca^^ille, have met by the East and
West, joining their discoveries together, which in truth is a matter to be
observed, that the one is come to China and Iappan by the East, and the other
to the Philippines, which are neighbors, and almost joining unto China, by the
West: for from the Islands of Lusson, which is the chief of the Philippines, in
the which is the City of Mamill^, unto Macan, which is in the I Will of Cauton,
are but four score or a hundred leagues, and yet we find it strange, that
notwithstanding th^^ small distance from the one to the other, yet according to
their accoumpt, there is a days difference betwixt them; so as it is Sunday at
Macan, whenas it is but Saturday at Mamille, and so of the rest. Those of Macan
and of China have one day advanced before the Philippines. It happened to
father Alo^^^ Sanches, of whom mention is made before, that parting from the
Philippines, he arrived at Macan the second day of May, according to their
computation, and going to say the Mass of S. Athanasius, he found they did
celebrate the feast of the invention of the holy Cross, for that they did then
reckon the third of May. The like happened unto him in another voyage beyond
it.

Some have found this alteration and diversity, strange, supposing that the
fault proceeds from the one or the other; the which is not so: but it is a
true and well observed computation, for according to the difference of ways
where they have been, we must necessarily say, that when they meet, there
must be difference of a day; the reason is, for that sailing from West to
East, they always gain of the day, finding the sun rising sooner: and
contrariwise, those that sail from East to West, do always loose of the day,
for that the Sun rises later unto them; and as they approach nearer the East
or the West, they have the day longer or shorter. In Peru, which is westward in
respect of Spain, they are above six hours behind; so as when it is noone
in Spain, it is morning at Peru; and when it is morning here, it is midnight
there. I have made certain proof thereof, by the computation of Eclipses of
the Sun and Moon. Now that the Portugalls have made their navigations from
West to East, and the Castillans from East to West, when they came to join and
meet at the Philippines and Macan, the one have gained twelve hours, and the
other has lost as much; so as at one instant, and in one time, they find the
difference of twenty hours, which is a whole day; so as necessarily, the one
are at the third of May, whenas the others accoumpt but the second; and whenas
the one does fast for Easter eve, the others eat flesh for the day of the
resurrection. And if we will imagine that they pass farther, turning once
again about the world, using the same computation, when they should return to
join together, they should find by the same accoumpt, two days difference:
for as I have said, those that go to the Sun rising, accoumpt the day
sooner, for that the Sun rises to them sooner, and those that go to the
setting, accoumpt the day later, for that it goes from them later: finally, the
diversity of the noone tide, causes the diverse reckoning of the day. And now
for as much as those that do sail from East to West, change their noone tide
without perceiving it, and yet still follow the same computation they did when
they parted; of necessity having made the compass of the world, they must
find the want of a whole day in their computation.

Of the Volcans or Vents of fire. CHAP. 24.
ALthough we find vents of fire in other places, as mount Aetna and Wesuvio,
which now they call mount S^ma, yet is that notable which is found at the
Indies. Ordinarily these Volcans be rocks or pikes of most high mountains,
which raise themselves above the tops of all other mountains; upon their
tops they have a plain, and in the midst thereof a pit or great mouth,
which discends even unto the foot thereof; a thing very terrible to behold.
Out of these mouths, there issues smoke, and sometimes fire: some cast little
smoke, and have in a manner no force of Volcans, as that of Arequipa, which is
of an unmeasurable height, and almost all fand. It cannot be mounted up in
less then two days, yet they have not found any show of fire, but only the
relics of some sacrifices which the Indians made while they were Gentiles,
and sometimes it does cause a little smoke. The Volcan of Mexico which is
near to the Village of Angels, is likewise of an admirable height, whereas
they mount thirty leagues in turning: from this Volcan issues not continually,
but sometimes, almost every day, a great exhalation or whirle-winde of smoke,
which ascends directly up like to the shot of a Crosse-bow, and grows after
like to a great plume of feathers, until it cease quite, and is presently
converted into an obscure and dark cloud. Most commonly it rises in the
morning after the Sun rising, and at night when it sets, although I have
seen it break out at other times. Sometimes it does cast forth great store
of ashes after this smoke. They have not yet seen any fire come from it; yet
they fear it will issue forth and burn all the land round about, which is the
best of all the kingdom: And they hold it for certain, that there is some
correspondencie betwixt this Vulcan and the Sierre of Tlaxcala, which is near
unto it, that causes the great thunders and lightnings they do commonly hear
and see in those parts.

Some Spaniards have mounted up to this Volcan, and given notice of the mine
of sulphre to make powlder thereof. Cortez reports the care he had to
discover what was in this Volcan. The Volcans of Guatimalla are more renowned,
as well for their greatness and height: which those that sail in the South
Sea discover a far off, as for the violence and terror of the fire it casts.
The three and twentieth day of December, in the year of our Lord God one
thousand five hundred eighty and six, almost all the City of Guatimalla fell
with an Earthquake, and some people slain. This Volcan had then six months
together, day and night cast out from the top, and vomited as it were, a
flood of fire, the substance falling upon the sides of the Volcan, was turned
into ashes like unto burnt earth (a thing passing man's judgment, to conceive
how it could cast so much matter from its center during six months, being
accustomed to cast smoke alone, and that sometimes with small flashes. This
was written unto me being at Mexico, by a Secretary of the audience of
Guatimalla, a man worthy of credit, and at that time it had not ceased to
cast out fire. This year past, being in Quitto in the City of Kings, the
Volcan which is near thereunto, cast such abundance of ashes, that in many
leagues compass thereabout it darkened the light of the day: and there fell
such store in Quitto, as they were not able to go in the streets. There have
been other Volcans seen which cast neither smoke, flame, nor yet ashes, but
in the botome they are seen to burn with a quick fire without dying: such a
one was that which in our time a coverous and greedy Priest seeing, persuaded
himself that they were heaps of gold he did see burning, imagining it
could be no other matter or substance, which had burnt so many years, and not
consumed. And in this conceit he made certain kettles with chains, and an
instrument, to gather and draw up the gold out of this pit or Volcan: but
the fire scorned him, for no sooner did his iron chain and caldron approach
near the fire, but suddenly they were broken in pieces. Yet some told me,
that this man was still obstinate, seeking other inventions for to draw out
this gold as he imagined.

What should be the reason why the fire and smoke continues so long in these
Vulcans? CHAP. 25.
THere is no need now to make any mention of other Vulcans, seeeing we may
well understand by the former what they are: yet is it worthy the search, what
should be the cause why the fire and smoke continues in these Volcans; for
that it seems a prodigious thing, yea against the course of Nature, to vomit
and cast out so many flames. Whence does this matter proceed, or whether it
be engendered within the bowelles thereof? Some have held opinion, that these
Volcans consume the inner substance they have of Nature; and for this reason
they believe, that naturally they shall end, whenas they have consumed the fuel
(as a man may say) that is within them. According to which opinion we see at
this day, some mountains and rocks, from whence they draw a burnt stone
which is light, but very hard, and is excellent to build with, as that which
is carried to Mexico. And in effect there are some shows of that which has
been spoken, that these mountains or rocks had sometimes a natural fire,
which has died after the matter was consumed; and so these stones have
remained burnt and pierced with the fire as we see. For my part, I will not
contradict it, that in those places there has not bin fire sometimes, or
Volcans. But there is some difficulty to be believe it should be so in all
Volcans, considering the matter they cast out is almost infinite; and that
being gathered together, it could not be contained in the same concavitie from
whence it goes. Moreover, there are some Volcans, that in hundreds, yea
thousands of years are always of one fashion, casting out continually, smoke,
fire, and ashes. Pliny the Historiographer of natural things (as the other
Pliny his nephew reports) searching out the secret how this should pass: and
appr^ching too near th'exhalation of fire of one of these Volcans, died; and
thinking by his diligence to find an end thereof, had an end of his life. For
my part, upon this consideration I think, that as there are places in the earth,
whose virtue is to draw vaporous matter, and to convert it into water, which be
the fountains that always run, and have always matter to make them run,
for that they draw unto them the substance of water. In like sort there are
places that have the property to draw unto them hot exhalations, and to
convert them into fire and smoke which by their force and violence cast out
other thick matter which dissolves into ashes, into pumice stone, or such like
substance: and for a sufficient argument to prove it to be so in these
Volcans, they sometimes cast smoke, and not always, and sometimes fire, and
not always, which is according to that it can draw unto it, and digest, as
the fountains which in winter abound, and in summer decrease; yea some are
quite dried up, according to the force and vigor they have, and the matter
that is presented: even so it is of these Volcans, which cast fire more or
less at certain seasons. Others say, that it is hell fire, which issues
there, to serve as a warning, thereby to consider what is in the other life:
but if hell (as Divines hold) be in the center of the earth, the which
contains in diameter above two thousand leagues, we can not judge that this
fire is from the center; for that hell fire (as saint Basil and others teach)
is very different from this which we see, for that it is without light, Basil.
psalm. 28. and in exam.
and burns without comparison much more then ours. And therefore I conclude,
that what I have said, seems to me more reasonable.

Of Earthquakes. CHAP. 26.
SOme have held, that from these Volcans which are at the Indies, the
earthquakes proceed, being very common there: but for that they ordinarily
chance in places far from those Volcans, it can not be the total cause. It
is true they have a certain simpathy one with another, for that the hot
exhalations which engender in the inner concavities of the earth, seem to be
the material substance of fire in the Volcans, whereby there kindles an other
more gross matter, and makes these shows of flame and smoke that come forth.
And these exhalations (finding no easy issue in the earth) move it, to issue
forth with great violence, whereby we hear that horrible noise under the earth,
and likewise the shaking of the earth, being stirred with this burning
exhalation; Even as gunpowlder in mines, having fire put to it breaks rocks
and walls: and as the chestnut laid into the fire, leapes and breaks with a
noise, whenas it casts forth the air (which is contained within the husk) by
the force of the fire: Even so these Earthquakes do most commonly happen in
places near the water or sea. As we see in Europe, and at the Indies, that
towns and cities farthest from the sea and waters are least afflicted
therewith; and contrariwise, those that are seated upon ports of the sea, upon
rivers, the sea coast, and places near unto them, feel most this calamity.
There has happened in Peru, (the which is wonderful, and worthy to be noted)
Earthquakes which have run from Chille unto Quitto, and that is above hundred
leagues, I say the greatest that ever I heard speak of, for lesser be more
common there. Upon the coast of Chille (I remember not well in what year)
there was so terrible an Earthquake, as it overturned whole mountains, and
thereby stopped the course of rivers which it converted into lakes, it beat
down towns, and flew a great number of people, causing the sea to leave her
place some leagues, so as the ships remained on dry ground, far from the
ordinary road, with many other heavy and horrible things. And as I well
remember, they say this trouble and motion, caused by the Earthquake, ran
three hundred leagues alongest the coast. Soon after, which was in the year
eighty two, happened that Earthquake of Arequipa, which in a manner overthrew
the whole city. Since in the year eighty six, the ninth of Iulie, fell an
other Earthquake in the city of Kings, the which as the Viceroy did write,
had run a hundred three score and ten leagues alongest the coast, and
overthwart in the Sierre fifty leagues. The mercy of the Lord was great in
this earth quake, to forewarne the people by a great noise which they heard
alittle before the Earthquake, who taught by former experiences, presently put
themselves in safety, leaving their houses, streets, and gardins, to go into
the fields; so as although it ruined a great part of the City, and of the
chiefest buildings, yet there died not above fifteen or twenty persons of all
the Inhabitants. It caused the like trouble and motion at sea, as it had done
at Chille, which happened presently after the Earthquake, so as they might see
the sea furiously to fly out of her bounds, and to run near two leagues
into the land, rising above fourteen fadome: it covered all that plain, so
as the ditches and pieces of wood that were there, swamme in the water. There
was yet an other earthquake in the Realm and City of Quitto; and it seems
all these notable Earthquakes upon that coast, have succeeded one an other by
order, as in truth it is subject to these inconveniences. And therefore
although upon the coast of Peru, there be no torments from heaven, as thunder
and lightning, yet are they not without fear upon the land: and so every one
has before his eyes, the Heraults of divine Justice, to moove him to fear
God. For as the Scripture says, Fecit haec vt timeatur. Returning then to our
purpose, I say the sea coast is most subject to these earthquakes, the reason
is, in my judgment, for that the water does stop the conduites and passages
of the earth, by which the hot exhalations should pass, which are engendered
there. And also the humiditie thickning the superficies of the earth, does
cause the fumes and hot exhalations to go close together and encounter
violently in the bowels of the earth, which do afterward break forth.

Some have observed, that such Earthquakes have usually happened, whenas a rainie
season falls after some dry ye^res. Whereupon they say, that the Earthquakes
are most rare, where are most wells, the which is approoved by experience.
Those of the City of Mexico hold opinion, that the Lake whereon it is
seated, is the cause of the Earthquakes that happen there, although they be not
very violent: and it is most certain, that the Towns and Provinces, far
within the land, and farthest from the sea, receive sometimes great losses by
these Earthquakes, as the City of Chachapoyas at the Indies, and in Italy
that of Ferrara, although upon this subject. It seems this latter, being near
to a river, and not far from the Adriatic sea, should rather be numbered among
the sea-Townes. In the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred eighty and
one, in Cugiano, a City of Peru, otherwise called the Peace, there happened a
strange accident touching this subject. A village called Angoango (where many
Indians dwelt that were sorcerers and idolatrers) fell suddenly to ruin, so
as a great part thereof was raised up and carried away, and many of the
Indians smothered, and that which seems incredible (yet testified by men of
credit) the earth that was ruined and so beaten down, did run and slide upon
the land for the space of a league and a half, as it had been water or wax
molten, so as it stopped and filled up a Lake, and remained so spread over the
whole country.

How the land and sea embrace one an other. CHAP. 27.
I Will end with this Element of earth, uniting it to the precedent of water,
whose order and embracing is truly of it self admirable. These two elements
have one sphere divided between them, and entertain and embrace one another
in a thousand sorts and manners. In some places the water encounters the land
furiously as an enemy, and in other places, it invirons it after a sweet and
amiable manner. There are parts whereas the sea enters far within the land, as
coming to visit it; and in other parts the land makes restitution, casting
his capes, points and tongues far into the sea, piercing into the bowelles
thereof. In some parts one element ends and another begins, yielding by
degrees one unto another. In some places (where they join) it is exceeding
deep, as in the Islands of the South Sea, and in those of the North, whereas
the ships ride close to the land; and although they sound three score and
ten, yea four score fadomes, yet do they find no bottom, which makes men
conjecture, that these are pikes or points of land which rise up from the
bottom, a matter worthy of great admiration. Heerevpon a very expert Pilote
said unto me, that the Islands which they call of Woolves, and others, that lie
at the entry of the coast of New Spain, being called Cocos, were of this
manner.

Moreover, there is a place in the midst of the great Ocean, without the view
of land, and many leagues from it, where are seen as it were two towers or
pikes of a very high elevated rock, rising out of the midst of the sea, and
yet joining unto it they find no bottom. No man can yet perfectly comprehend,
nor conceive the full and perfect form of the land at the Indies, the bounds
being not wholly discovered to this day: yet we may guess that it is
proportioned like a heart with the lungs. The broadest of this heart is from
Bresill to Peru, the point at the straight of Magellan, and the top where it
ends is the firm land, and there the continent begins by little and little to
extend itself until we come to the height of Florida and the upper lands,
which are not yet well discovered. We may understand other particularities of
this land at the Indies, by the Commentaries which the Spaniards have written
of their success and discoveries; and amongst the rest, of the Peregrination
which I have written; which in truth is strange, and may give a great light.
This in my opinion may suffice at this time, to give some knowledge of things at
the Indies, touching the common elements, of the which all parts of the world
are famed.

THE FOVRTH BOOK of the Natural and Moral History of the Indies.
Of three kinds of mixtures or compounds, of the which I must entreat in this
History. CHAP. 1.
HAving entreated in the former book of that which concerns the Elements, and
the simples of the Indies, in this present book we will discourse of mixtures
and compounds, seeming fit for the subject we shall treat of. And although
there be many other sundry kinds, yet we will reduce this matter into three,
which are Mettalls, Plants, and Beasts. Mettalls are (as plants,) hidden and
buried in the bowels of the earth, which have some conformity in themselves,
in the form and manner of their production; for that we see and discover even
in them, branches, and as it were a body, from whence they grow and proceed,
which are the greater veins and the less, so as they have a knitting in
themselves: and it seems properly that these minerales grow like unto plants,
not that they have any inward vegitative life, being only proper to plants:
but they are engendered in the bowels of the earth, by the virtue and force of
the Sun and other planets, and in long continuance of time, they increase and
multiply after the manner of plants. And even as mettalls be plants hidden in
the earth, so we may say, that plants be living creatures fixed in one place,
whose life is maintained by the nourishment which Nature furnishes from their
first begnning. But living creatures surpass plants, in that they have a more
perfect being; and therefore have need of a more perfect food and
nourishment; for the search whereof, Nature has given them a moving and
feeling to discover and discern it. So as the rough and barren earth is as a
substance and nutriment for mettalls; and that which is fertile and better
seasoned a nourishment for plants. The same plants serve as a nourishment for
living creatures, and the plants and living creatures together as a nourishment
for men, the inferior nature always serving for the maintenance and
sustentation of the superior, and the less perfect yielding unto the more
perfect: whereby we may see how much it wants, that gold and silver and other
things which men so much esteem by their covetousness, should be the happiness
of man, whereunto he should tend, seeing they be so many degrees in quality
inferior to man, who has been created and made only to be a subject to serve
the universal Creator of all things, as his proper end and perfect rest, and
to which man, all other things in this world, were not propounded or left, but
to gain this last end. Who so would consider of things created, and discourse
according to this Philosophy, might draw some fruit from the knowledge and
consideration thereof, making use of them to know and glorify their Author.
But he that would pass on farther to the knowledge of their properties and
profits, and would curiously search them out, he shall find in these
creatures, that which the Wiseman says, that they are snares and pitfalles to
the feet of fools and ignorant, into the which they fall and loose themselves
daily. Sap. 14.
To this intent therefore, and that the Creator may be glorified in his
creatures, I pretend to speak of some things in this Book, whereof there are
many at the Indies worth the report, touching mettalls, plants, and beasts,
which are proper and peculiar in those parts. But for that it were a great
work to treat thereof exactly, and requires greater learning and knowledge;
yea, much more leisure then I have, my intent is only to treat of some things
succinctly, the which I have observed, as well by experience, as the report of
men of credit, touching these three things which I have propounded, leaving to
men more curious and diligent to treat more amply of these matters.

Of the abundance and great quantity of Metal at the West Indies. CHAP. 2.
THe wisdom of God has made mettalls for physic, and for defense, for
ornament and for instruments for the work of men, of which four things we may
easily yield examples, but the principal end of mettalls, and the last
thereof, is, for that the life of man has not only need of nourishment as
the beasts, but also he must work and labor according unto the reason and
capacity which the Creator has given him. And as man's understanding does
apply it self to diverse arts and faculties, so the same Author has given
order, that he should find matter and subject to diverse arts, for the
conservation, reparation, surety, ornament and exaltation of his works. The
diversity therefore of mettalls, which the Creator has shut up in the closets
and concavities of the earth, is such, and so great, that man draws profit and
commodity from every one of them. Some serve for curing of diseases, others
for arms and for defense against the enemies, some are for ornament and
beautifying of our persons and houses, and others are fit to make vessels and
yron-workes, with diverse fashions of instruments, which the industry of man
has found out and put in practice. But above all the uses of mettalls, which
be simple and natural, the communication and commerce of men has found out
one, which is the use of money, the which (as the Philosopher says) is the
measure of all things. ^^ri^t ^. Ethic. cap. 5.
And although naturally, and of it self, it be but one only thing, yet in
value and estimation we may say, that it is all things. Money is unto us as it
were, meat, clothing, house, horse, and generally whatsoever man has need
of. By this means all obeyes to money, and as the Wise man says, to find an
invention that one thing should be all. Men guided or thrust forward by a
natural instinct, choose the thing most durable and most maniable, which is
metal, and amongst metals, gave them the pre-eminence in this invention of
money, which of their nature were most durable and incorruptible, which is
silver and gold. The which have bin in esteem, not only amongst the Hebrews
Assirians, Greeks, Romans, and other nations of Europe and Asia, but also
amongst the most retired and barbarous nations of the world, as by the Indians
both East and West, where gold and silver is held in great esteem, employing
it for the works of their Temples and Palaces, and for the attyring and
ornament of kings and great personages. And although we have found some
Barbarians, which know neither gold nor silver, as it is reported of those of
Florida, which took the bags and sackes wherein the silver was, the which
they cast upon the ground, and left as a thing unprofitable. And Pliny
likewise writes of the Babitacques, which abhorred gold, and therefore they
buried it, to the end that no man should use it. But at this day they find few
of these Floridiens or Babitacques, but great numbers of such as esteem,
seek, and make accoumpt of gold and silver, having no need to learn it of
those that go from Europe. It is true, their covetousness is not yet come to
the height of ours, neither have they so much worshipped gold and silver,
although they were Idolaters, as some blind Christians, who have committed
many great outrages for gold and silver. Yet is it a thing very worthy
consideration, that the wisdom of the Eternal Lord, would enrich those
parts of the world, which are most remote, and which are peopled with men of
less civilitie and government, planting there great store of mines, and in
the greatest abundance that ever were, thereby to invite men to search out
those lands, and to possess them, to the end that by this occasion, they might
plant religion, and the worship of the true God, amongst those that knew it
not, fulfilling therein the prophecy of Isaie. ^^ie. 54.
saying, that the Church should stretch forth her bounds, not only to the
right, but also to the left: which is understood as S. Augustine says, that
the Gospel should be spread abroad, Aug. lib. 1. de con^o^. ^^ang. cap. 31.
not only by those that sincerely, and with a true and perfect charity preach
and declare it, but also by those that publish it, tending to temporal ends;
whereby we see, that the Indian land, being more abundant in mines and
riches, has been in our age best instructed in the Christian religion, the
Lord using our desires and inclinations to serve his sovereign intentions.
Hereupon a Wise man said, that what a father does to marie his daughter well, is
to give her a great portion in marriage; the like has God done for this land so
rough and laboursome, giving it great riches in mines, that by this means it
might be the more sought after. At the West Indies then there are great store
of mines of all sorts of mettalls, as copper, iron, lead, tin,
quicke-silver, silver and gold: and amongst all the regions and parts of the
Indies, the realms of Peru abound most in these mettalls, especially with
gold, silver, quick silver, or mercury, whereof they have found great store,
and daily discover new mines. And without doubt, according to the quality of
the earth, those which are to discover, are without comparison, far more in
number, then those which are yet discovered: yea, it seems that all the land
is sowed with these mettalls, more then any other in the world that is yet
known unto us, or that ancient writers have made mention of.

Of the quality and nature of the earth where the mettalls are found, and that
all these mettalls are not employed at the Indies, and how the Indians used
them. CHAP. 3.
THe reason why there is so great abundance of mettalls at the Indies,
(especially at the west of Peru, as I have said,) is the will of the Creator,
who has imparted his gifts as it pleased him. But coming to a natural and
philosophical reason, Philo. lib 5. de Genes.mund.
it is very true, which Philon a wise man writes, saying, that gold, silver,
and mettalls, grow naturally in land that is most barren and unfruitful. And
we see, that in lands of good temperature, the which are fertile with grass
and fruits, there are seldom found any mines; for that Nature is contented to
give them vigor to bring forth fruits more necessary for the preservation
and maintenance of the life of beasts and men. Eusebius. lib. 8. de prepar. evau.
c. 9.
And contrariwise to lands that are very rough, dry, and barren, (as in the
highest mountains and inaccessible rocks of a rough temper,) they find mines
of silver, of quicke-silver and of gold, and all those riches (which are come
into Spain since the West Indies were discovered) have been drawn out of such
places which are rough and full, bare and fruitless: yet the taste of this
money, makes these places pleasing and agreeable, yea, well inhabited with
numbers of people. And although there be, as I have said, many mines of all
kinds of mettalls as at the Indies, yet they use none but those of gold and
silver, and as much quicke-silver as is necessary to refine their gold and
silver. They carry iron thither from Spain and China. As for copper, the
Indians have drawn of it, and used it for their arms, the which were not
usually of iron, but of copper. Since the Spaniards possessed the Indies, they
have drawn very little, neither do they take the pain to seek out these
mines, although there be many busying themselves in the search of richer and
more precious mettalls, wherein they spend their time and labor. They use no
other mettalls, as copper, and iron, but only that which is sent them from
Spain, or that which remains of the refining of gold and silver. We find not
that the Indians in former times used gold, silver, or any other metal for
money, and for the price of things, but only for ornament, as has been said,
whereof there was great quantity in their Temples, Palaces, and Toombes, with
a thousand kinds of vessels of gold and silver, which they had. They used no
gold nor silver to traffic or buy withal, but did change and trucke one
thing for another, as Homer and Pliny report of the Ancients. They had some
other things of greater esteem, Plin. lib. 33. cap. 3.
which went current amongst them for price, and in steed of coin: and unto
this day this custom continues amongst the Indians, as in the Provinces of
Mexico, in steed of money they use Cacao, (which is a small fruit,) and
therewith buy what they will. In Peru they use Cocae, to the same end, (the
which is a leaf the Indians esteem much,) as in Paraguay, they have stampes
of iron for coin, and cotton woven in S. Croix, of the Sierre. Finally, the
manner of the Indians traffic, and their buying and selling, was to exchange,
and give things for things: and although there were great martes and famous
faires, yet had they no need of money, nor of brokers, for that every one had
learned what he was to give in exchange for every kind of merchandise. Since
the Spaniards entered, the Indians have used gold and silver to buy withal: and
in the beginning there was no coin, but silver by weight was theirprice and
money, as they report of the ancient Romans. Since, ^li^. lib. 33. c. 4
for a greater benefit, they have forged coin in Mexico and Peru, yet unto
this day they have not in the West Indies, coined any money of copper or other
metal but only of silver and gold: for the richnes of that Country has
not admitted nor received such money as they call bullion, nor other kinds of
alloy, which they use in Italy, and in other Provinces of Europe; Although in
some Islands of the Indies, as S. Dominique and Port Ricco, they use coin of
leather, which is square, the which are current only in those Islands, having
little silver or gold. I say little, although there be much, for that no man
digges it and refines it. But for that the riches of the Indies, and their
manner to labor in the mines, consistes of gold, silver, and quicke^silver, I
will speak some thing of these three mettalls, leaving the rest for this time.

Of gold which they dig and refine at the Indies. CHAP. 4.
GOld amongst other metals has bin always held the most excellent; and with
reason, being the most durable and incorruptible of all others; for sire which
consumes and diminishes the rest, amends it, and brings it to perfection.
Gold which has often passed through the fire, keeps his color, and is most
fine and pure; which properly is called (as Pliny says) Obriso, whereof the
Scripture makes so often mention, and use, which consumes all other mettalles,
(as the same Pliny says) does not any thing waste gold, Plin. lib. 33. c. 3
nor yet hurt it, neither is it eaten, nor grows old. And although his
substance and body be firm and solid; yet does it yield and bow
woonderfully; the Beaters and Drawers of gold know well the force it has to
be drawn out without breaking. All which things well considered, with other
excellent properties, will give men of judgment to understand, wherefore the
holy Scripture does compare Charity to gold. Apoc. 3. and 21. Cant. 3.
Psalm. 67. 3. Reg. 6.
To conclude, there is little need to relate the excellencies thereof to make
it more desirable. For the greatest excellency it has, is to be known (as it
is) amongst men, for the supreme power and greatness of the world. Coming
therefore to our subject; at the Indies there is great abundance of this
metal, and it is well known by approoved histories, that the Inguas of Peru
did not content themselves with great and small vessels of gold, as pots, cups,
goblets, and flagons; yea with kowles or great vessels, but they had chaires
also, and litters of massy gold: and in their Temples they had set up maine
Images of pure gold, whereof they find some yet at Mexico, but not such store
as when the first Conquerours came into the one and the other kingdom, who
found great treasure, and without doubt there was much more hidden in thearth
by the Indians. It would seem ridiculous to report that they have made their
horse shoes of silver for want of iron, and that they have paid three hundred
crowns for a bottle of wine, and other strange things; and yet in truth this
has come to pass, yea and greater matters. They draw gold in those parts,
after three sorts: or at the least, I have seen all three used. For either
they find gold in grains, in powlder, or in stone. They do call gold in
grains, small morsels of gold, which they find whole, without mixture of any
other metal, which has no need of melting or refining in the fire: and they
call them pippins, for that commonly they are like to pippins, or seeds of
melons, or pompions: and that whereof Job speaks, when he says, Leve illius
aurum, Job 18.
though sometimes there be greater, and such as I have seen weighed many
pounds. It is the excellency of this metal alone (as Pliny affirms) to be
found thus pure and perfect, which is not seen in any other mettalles, Plin.
lib. 3. ca. 5
which are always earthly, and have a scumme, and need purging by the fire: I
have likewise seen silver natural like to. Yea there is an other kind which
the Indians call Papas, and sometimes they find pieces very five and pure, like
to small round roots, the which is rare in that metal, but usual in gold.
They find little of this gold in pippin, in respect of the other kinds.
Gold in stone is a vein of gold that grows or ingendereth within the stone
or flint, as I have seen in the mines of Curuma, within the government of
Salines, very great stones pierced and intermixed with gold; others that were
half gold, and half stone. The gold which grows in this manner, is found
in pittes or mines, which have their veins like to the silver mines, but it is
very hard to draw it forth: Agatarchides writes in his first book of the
Erithrean or red sea (as Phocion reports in his Bibliotheca) of the manner and
fashion to refine gold, drawn out of stones, the which the ancient Kings of
Egypt were wont to use, and it is a strange thing to see how that which is
written resembles properly to the manner they use at this day in refining these
mettalls of gold and silver. The greatest quantity of gold which is drawn
at the Indies, is that in powlder, the which is found in streams and places
where much water has passed, because the slouds at the Indies abound in this
kind of gold; As the Ancients for this occasion did celebrate the river of
Tagus in Spain, Pa^olus in Asia, and Ganges in the East Indies, and called
the^ R^menta auri, the which we others call gol^e in p^wl^er, and of this sort
is the greatest quantity of gold they have at this day. At this present in
the ^lands of Barlovent, Hispaniola, Cuba, and Port Ricco, there has been,
and is great quantity in the rivers, but they bring little from thence into
Spain, for want of the natural inhabitants of the country, and the
difficulty to draw it. There is great abundance in the kingdom of Chille,
of Quitto, and in the new Realm of Grenado.

The most famous gold is that of Caranava in Peru, and of Valdivia in Chille,
for that it rises with his alloy and perfection, which is twenty three carrats
and a half, and sometim^s more. They make account likewise of the gold of
Vera^^a to be very fine. They bring much gold to Mexico from the Philippines,
and China, but commonly it is weak and of base alloy. Gold is commonly found
mixed with silver or with copper; but that which is mixed with silver is
commonly of fewer carra^s then that which is mixed with copper. If there b^^a
si^e part^ of silver, (...) 3 (...)
Pliny says, it is then properly called Fl^^^^, which has the property to
shine more at the light of the fire, then fine gold or fine silver. That which
is incorporate with copper, is commonly of a higher value. They refine powldred
gold in basens, washing it in many waters, until the sand falls from it, and
the gold as most heavy remains in the bottom. They refine it likewise with
quicke-silver and strong water, for that the allume whereof they make this
water has the virtue to separate gold from dross, or from other mettalls.
After it is purified and molten, they make brickes or small bars to carry it
unto Spain; for being in powlder, they cannot transport it from the Indies,
for they can neither custom it, mark it, nor take say, until it be molten.
The foresaid His^^ria^ grapher reports that Spain above all other Countries
of the world, did abound in gold and silver; (...). 33. (...)
especially Galitia and Portugal, and above all, the Asturia^s, whence he
says they brought every year twenty thousand pounds of gold, and that they
found not so great abundance in any other place. The which is confirmed in the
book of Macabees, where it is said, that amongst the great riches of the
Romans, 1. Ma^cab. 8.
they had in their power, the gold and silver of Spain. At this day the great
treasure of Spain comes from the Indies, wherein the divine Providence has
appointed one Realm to serve another, which do imparte their wealth to
participate their government for the good the one of the other, in
communicating mutually the goods and graces they do enjoy: we can not value
nor esteem the quantity of gold that is brought from the Indies; but we may
well say, it is much more then that which (...) reports was brought yearly
from Spain to Rom^. In the fleet where I came, which was in the ye^re, 1585.
the declarati^n of the firm land was of of twelve cassons or chests of gold,
every casson at the least weied four Arobes, that is a hundred weight; and a
thousand fifty and six mares from New Spain, which was for the King only,
besides that which came for Merchants and private men being registered; and much
that came vnregistred. This may suffice touching the gold of the Indies, and
now we will speak of silver.

Of the Silver at the Indies. CHAP. 5.
WE read these words in the Book of Job, Silver has certain beginnings and
roots in his veins, Job 28.
and gold has a settled place, where it ingenders and thickens, iron with
digging is drawn out of the earth, and stone molten with heat is turned into
copper: Hereby he wisely shows in few words, the nature of silver, gold, iron
and copper. We have spoken something of the places where gold is ingendered
and congealed, which is either of the foresaid stones in the deapth of
mountains, and in the bowels of the earth: or in the sand of rivers, and
where brooks have run, or else on the tops of mountains, the which gold
in powlder runs down with the water. And this is the common opinion they
hold at the Indies. Whereupon many of the common sort believe that the deluge
(having drowned all, even to the highest hills) has been the cause that at
this day they find this gold in the rivers, and in places so far off. Now
we will show how they discover the mines of silver, their veins; roots, and
beginnings whereof Job speaks.

And first I will say, that the reason why they give silver the second place
among all other mettalles, is, for that it approaches nearer to gold then any
other, being more durable and less indomaged by the fire, and more maniable
then any other: yea it passes gold in brightness, beauty and sound, the
which is clear, and agreeable, for the color is more conformable and
resembling the light, and the sound more percing, more lively, and more
delicate. Likewise there are some places where they value silver more then
gold. It is yet an argument, to judge that gold is more precious rhen all
other mettalls, for that it is found with greater difficulty; and Nature
seems more sparing in bringing it forth (although there be countries as they
say of Chine) where they find gold more easily then silver: yet it is more
common and ordinary, to find silver with more facility and greater abundance
then gold. The Creator has furnished the Weast Indies with so great a treasure
of silver, as all that which we read of in ancient Histories, and that which
is spoken of the mines of Spain, and other provinces, is not comparable to
that we see in those parts. The mines of silver are commonly found in
mountains, and high rocks very desert, although they have sometimes bin found
in Plains and Champaines. There are two different kinds, the one they call
straggling, the other fixed and settled. The straggling, are pieces of metal
found in certain places, the which drawn away, there is no more found. But
the fixed veins, are those which have a continuance in depth and length, like
to great branches and arms of trees; and when they find any one of them, they
commonly find many in the same place. The manner to purge and refine silver
which the Indians have used, was by melting, in dissolving this mass of
metal by fire, which casts the earthly dross aparte, and by his force
separates silver from lead, tin from copper, and other mettalls mixed. To this
end they did build small furnaces in places whereas the wind did commonly
blow, and with wood and cole made their refining, the which furnaces in Ptru
they call Guayras. Since the Spaniards entered, besides this manner of refining
which they use to this day: they likewise refine silver with quicke-silver, and
draw more by this means then in refining it by fire. For there is some kind of
silver metal found which can by no means be purged, and refined by fire, but
only with quickesilver. But thi^ kind of metal is commonly poor and weak,
the which usually they find in greatest abundance. They c^l that poor which
yields least silver, and great quantity of other metal, and that rich which
yieldes m^st silver. It is strange to see, not only the difference betwixt the
refining of metal by fire, and without it by quicke-silver, but also that
some of these mettalles, which are refined by the fire, can not well be molten
with any artificial wind, as with bellows; but when it is kindled and blown
with the natural air, or natural wind. The metal of the mines of Porco is
easily refined with bellows, and that of the mines of Potozi cannot be molten
with bellows, but only by the breath of their Guayras, which are small
furnaces upon the sides of the mountains, built expressly where the wind lies,
within the which they melt this metal; and though it be hard to yielde a
reason for this difference, yet is it most certain and approoved by long
experience: so as the greedy desire of this metal so much valued amongst
men, has made them seek out a thousand gentle inventions and devises, whereof
we will hereafter make mention. The chief places of the Ind^^s from whence
they draw silver, a^e N^w Spain^, and P^ru; but the mines of P^ru far
surpass the rest; and amongst all others of the world, those of Potozi,
whereof we will entreat alittle at leisure, being the most famous and
remarkable things at the Indies.

Of the mountain or hill of Potozi, and the discovery thereof. CHAP. 6.
THe mountain or hill of Potozi so famous, situate in the Province of
Charcas, in the kingdom of Peru, distant from the Equinoctial toward the
South, or Pole Antartike, 21. degrees and two thirds: so as it falls under the
Tropicke, bordering upon the burning Zone, and yet this region is extremely
cold, yea, more then old Castill in the kingdom of Spain, and more then
Flanders it self, although by reason it should be hot or temperate, in regard
of the height and elevation of the Pole where it is seated. The reason of this
so cold a temperature, is the height of the mountain, whereas cold and
intemperate winds continually blow, especially that which they call Thomahavi,
which is boistrous and most cold. It raines most commonly in June, Iulie, and
August. The ground and soil of this mountain is dry, cold, and very
unpleasant, yea altogether barren, which neither engenders nor brings forth any
fruit, grass, nor grain; it is naturally inhabitable, for the intemperature
of the heaven, and the barrennes of the earth. But the force of silver, which
draws unto it the desire of all things, has peopled this mountain more then
any other place in all these Kingdoms, making it so fruitful of all kinds of
meats, as there wantes nothing that can be desired, yea, in great abundance;
and although there be nothing but what is brought by carriage, yet every place
aboundes so with fruit, conserves exquisite wines, silks, and all other
delicats, as it is not inferior to any other part. This mountain is of color
dark red, and is in form pleasing at the first sight, resembling perfectly
the fashion of a pavilion, or of a sugar loaf. It exceedes all other hills
and mountains about it in height. The way whereby they ascend, is very rough
and uneven, and yet they go upon horseback. It is round at the top, and at
the foot it has a league in circuit. It contains from the top to the
bottom 1680. common yardes, the which reduced to the measure of Spanish
leagues, makes a quarter of a league. At the foot of this mountain there is
another small hill that rises out of it, in the which there has been
sometimes mines of metal dispearsed, which were found as it were in purses,
and not in fixed or continued veins; yet were they very rich, though few in
number. This small rock was called by the Indians Guayna Potozi, which is young
Potozi; at the foot whereof begins the dwellings of the Spaniards and
Indians, which are come to the riches and work of Potozi, which dwelling may
contain some two leagues in circuit, and the greatest traffic and commerce
of all Peru is in this place. The mines of this mountain were not dug nor
discovered in the time of their Inguas, which were the Lords of Peru, before
the Spaniardes entered, although they had dug and opened the mines of Porco,
near to Potozi, distant only six leagues. The reason might be the want of
knowledge thereof, although some do report I know not what fable, that having
sometimes labored to open those mines, a voice was heard, commanding them not
to touch it, being reserved for others. In truth they had no knowledge of
Potozi, nor of the wealth thereof, till after twelve years that the Spaniards
were entered into Peru, the discovery whereof was made in this manner.

An Indian called Gualpa, of the Nation of Chumbibilca, which is a Province of
Cusco, going one day to hunt for venison, passing toward the weast whither
the beast was fled, he beg^^ne to run up against the rock, which at that
time was covered and planted with certain trees, they call Quinua, and with
thick bushes, and as he strived to get up a way which was somewhat rough and
uneasy, he was forced to lay hold upon a branch, which issued from a vein
of a silver mine (which since they have called Rich) which he pulled up,
perceiving in the hole or root thereof, metal, the which he knew to be very
good, by the experience he had of the mines of Porco: and after finding upon
the ground, certain pieces of metal, which lay broken and dispersed near to
this vein, being scarce well able to judge thereof, for that the color was
spoiled and changed by the Sun and rain. He carried it to Porco to try by
the Guayras (which is the trial of metal by fire, and having thereby found
the great riches and his happy fortune, he secretly dug and drew metal out
of this vein, not imparting it to any man, until that an Indian called Guanca,
of the valley of Xaura, which is upon the bordures of the City of Kings, who
remaining at Porco, near unto Gualpa of Chumbibilca, perceved one day that he
made a refining, and that his wedges and brickes were greater then such as were
usually made in those places: and also increasing in his expense of apparel,
having till then lived but basely. For this reason, and for that the metal
his neighbor refined was different from that of Porco, he thought to discover
this secret, and wrought so, that although the other kept it as secret as he
could, yet through importunity he was forced to carry him unto the rock of
Potozi, having enjoyed this rich treasure full two months. And then Gualpa the
Indian willed Guanca for his part to take a vein, which he had discovered
near to the rich vein, which at this day is called the vein of Diego
Centeno, that was not less rich, but more hard to dig and to draw forth;
and so by agreement they divided between them the richest rock in the world.
It chanced after, the Indian Guanca finding some difficulty to dig and draw
forth his metal, being most hard, and the other Gualpa refusing to impart
any of his mine unto him, they fell at debate; so as Guanca of Xaura grieved
therewith, and with some other discontents, discovered this secret unto his
master called Villaroel a Spaniard, who then remained at Porco. This Villaroel
desirous to understand the truth, went to Potozi, and finding the riches his
Yanacona or servant had discovered unto him, caused the Indian Guanca to be
enrolled, undertaking with him the said vein, which was called Centeno, they
call it undertaking, that is as much as to note and mark the mine, and so much
ground in circuit for him, which the Law graunts unto those that discover any
mine, or unto those that dig them: by means whereof, having discovered them
to the Justice, they remained Lords of the mine, to dig and draw forth the
silver, as being their own, paying only their duties unto the King, which is a
fifth part. So as the first discovery and inregistring of the mines of Potozi
was the 21. of April, in the year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred
forty five in the territory of Porco, by the said Villaroel a Spaniard, and
Guan^a an Indian. Presently after they discovered another vein, which they
called the vein of Tin, the which is very rich, although it be rough and
very painful to work in, the metal being as hard as slint. Since the
thirty day of August in the same year of a thousand five hundred forty and
five the vein called Mendieta was enrolled, and these are the four principal
veins of Potozi. They say of the rich vein, the first that was discovred that
the metal lay above the ground the height of a lance, like unto rocks,
raising the superficies of the earth, like unto a crest of three hundred foot
long, and thirteen foot broad, and that this remained bare and uncovered by
the deluge. This vein having resisted the violence and force of the water, as
the hardest part. The metal was so rich as it was half silver, and this
vein continued in his bounty fifty or three score stades, which is the height
of a man, and then it failed. In this manner the mines of Potozi were discovered
by the Divine Providence, who (for the felicity of Spain) would have the
greatest treasure that ever was in this world, discovered, at such time whenas
the Emperor Charles the fifth of famous memory held the Empire, the kingdoms
of Spain, and the Seigniorie of the Indies. Presently after that, the
discovery of Potozi was known in Peru; many Spaniardes, and the most part of
the Bourgeois of the silver City, which is eighteen leagues from Potozi,
came thither to take mines: yea there came many Indians from diverse provinces,
especially tha GuayZadores of Porco, so as within a short space it was the best
peopled habitation of all the kingdom.

Of the treasure which is daily drawn from the rock or mountain of Potozi.
CHAP. 7.
I Have often doubted, if in ancient Histories there were found any so rich
mines, as those we have seen in our time in Peru. If there were ever rich mines
in the world, and famous for this effect, they have bin those of Spain, which
they of Cartbage did enjoy, and since, the Romans, the which as I have said,
are not only famous and esteemed in profane books, but also, in the holy
Scriptures. He that makes most particular mention of these mines, at the
least that I have seen, is Pliny, ^lin. ^b. 33. c. 6
who writes thus in his natural History: They find silver almost in all
provinces, but that of Spain is the best, which grows and ingenders in a
barren soil, upon mountains and rocks. It is a certain and infallible
thing, that in places where they have once discovered any of these veins,
there are others not far off, which is likewise found in all other mettalls,
and for this the Greeks, in my opinion, called them mettalls. It is strange
that the pits or holes of these mines of Spain, the which they began to
dig in Hannibals time, are at this day, and hold the names of their
discoverers. Amongst these mines, that which Bebello discovered, which holds
his name unto this day, was very famous; and they say it yielded so great
riches to Hanniball, that ev^rie day they gathered three hundred pounds weight
of silver, and unto this day they have always continued laboring in this
mine, so as it is now digd 15. hundred pases deep into the mountain. Out of
which pits, notwithstanding the deapth, the Gascoin^s that labor in them draw
out the water, that they may work with more ease, whilst their candelles and
lights last, G^n^bra^^^^ Ch^onograph.
and that in such abundance, as it seems to be a river. Hitherto are the
words of Pliny, the which I would set down word by word, the better to
content such as know what mines be, seeing that what is tried at this day, was
then in use. And truly the riches of this mine of Hannibal upon the Pirrenean
hills, was great and famous, which the Romans possessed, having continued the
work even unto Plinies time, which was about three hundred years. The deapth
of this mine was fifteen hundred pases, which is a mile and a half: and it
was so rich in the beginning, that it was worth daily to the master thereof
three hundred pounds, at twelve ounces to the pound. But although this were a
great treasure, it did not approach near to that which in our time has bin
found in Potozi: for as it appears by the Registers of the house of
contraction of that Province, and as many ancient men worthy of credit do
testify, whenas the licentiate Pollo governed that Province, the which was
many years after the discovery of this mountain, they did every saturday
enter a hundred and fifty and two hundred thousand pieces, whereof the Kings
fifth amounted to thirty and forty thousand pieces; and for every year a
million and a half, or little less. So as according to that computation they
did draw every day from this mine thirty thousand pieces, Every ^eece is
worth 13. rialls and a fourth part
whereof there came to the King for his fifth, six thousand pieces a day.

There is yet another thing to be spoken of, to show the riches of Potozi, that
the account which has been made, was only of silver that was marked and
customed. And it is well known in Peru, that they have long used silver in
these Realms, which they call current, which was neither marked nor customed.
And they hold it for certain which know these mines, that in these days, the
greatest part of silver drawn at Potozi, was not customed, and this had
course amongst the Indians, and much amongst the Spaniardes, as I have seen
continued to mytime; so as it may appear, the third part of the riches of
Potozi, yea the one half came not to light, neither was it customed. There is
yet a more notable consideration, in that which Pliny says, they had
dug a fifteen hundred pases in this mine of Bebell^; and that continually
they found water, which is the greatest hinderaunce they have to draw forth
their metal. But in this of Potozi, although they have dug two hundred
stades or heights of a man in deapth; yet did they never find any water, which
is the greatest happiness of this mountain. But the mines of P^r^o, whose
metal is good and very rich, are at this day left for the discommoditie of
water, which they have found in their work; for they are two insupportable
labors in searching of the metal; first to dig and break the rocks, and
then to draw out the water all together. The first of them, that is, to cut
through the rocks, is pain enough; yea very hard and excessive: finally, at
this day the King receives for his fifth yearly, from the mines of Potozi, a
million of silver, besides the wealth that grows by quickesilver, and other
royal prerogatives, which is a great treasure. Some men of judgment having
cast up the accomptes, say, that what has been brought into the custom house
of Potozi, unto the year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred eighty and
five, amounts unto a hundred thousand millions of pieces of essay, whereof
every Piece is worth thirteen rialls, and a fourth part, not reckoning the
silver which has bin carried away without custom, or that has been entered in
other royal custom houses, or the silver that has been wrought in the
country, which is not entered, the which is innumerable, although the first
Registers of Entries are not so exactly kept as at this day; for that in the
beginning and first discoveries, they made their receipt by Romans, so great was
their abundance.

But by the instructions and remembraunces of Don Francisco de Toledo the
Viceroy in the year of our Savior Christ, one thousand five hundred seaventy
and four they find seventy and six millions to that year: and from that
year to eighty five inclusive, it appears by the royal registers, there were
thirty five millions more entered. They sent this account to the Viceroy from
Potozi, in the year I have mentioned, being then in Peru; and since the wealth
that has come from Peru by ship, has amounted to much more. In that fleet
where I came, in the year one thousand five hundred eighty seven, there were
eleven millions transported in the two fleets of Peru and Mexico, whereof two
thirds were in that of Peru, and almost the one half for the King. I thought
good to set this down particularly, to show the power which his heavenly
Majesty has given to the Kings of Spain, heaping so many Crowns and
Kingdoms upon them, who (by the especial favor of heaven) have joined the
East with the Weast Indies, invironing the whole world with their Power. This
digression shall serve to show the riches of Potozi, we will now show how they
labor in the mines, and how they refine their mettalls.

How they labor in the mines of Potozi. CHAP. 8.
BOctius complaining of the first inventer of mines, Bo^tius de consolat.
spoke well; Heus primus quis fuit ille,
Auri qui ponder a testi.
Gemmasque, latere volentes,
Preciosa pericula fodit?
Alas, who was the first,
So curious and accursed,
Who dug out of the mine,
Man's mind to vndermind,
Heavy weights of gold ore,
Better concealde before:
And pearl crept into ground,
Pale for fear to be found:
Galing gold, wringing rings,
Precious, but perilous things.


With reason he calls them precious dangers, ^li. lib. 33. c^. 4
for the great labor and peril wherewith they draw out these mettalls, which
men so much esteem. Pliny says, that in Italy there are many mines, but the
Ancients would not suffer their people to work in them, only to preserve the
people. They brought these mettalls from Spain, and made the Spaniards labor
in the mines as tributaries. The like does Spain now with the Indies, for
there remaining many mines of metal yet in Spain, they will not seek them,
nor suffer any to work in them, by reason of the inconveniences which happen
daily, but they bring them from the Indies, where they dig it with much
labor and peril. This rock of Potozi, contains as I have said, four
principal veins, that is, the Rich vein, that of Centeno, that of Tin,
(...).
and that of Mendieta. All these veins are of the East part of the mountain,
as looking to the Sun rising, for on the West part there is not any. The
foresaid veins run from North to South, which is from Pole to Pole. In the
largest place they have six foot, and in the narrowest a spanne breadth. There
are others of diverse fashions that run out of the said veins; like as out of
the great arms of trees, there commonly sprowt forth less. ^verie vein has
diverse mines which are parts and portions of the same, distinct and divided
betwixt diverse Masters, by whose names they are commonly called. The great mine
contains fourscore yardes, neither may it be more by the law, and the least
contains four. All these mines are at this day very deep. In the rich mine
they reckon 78. mines, which are 80. yards deep, or a hundred stades or height
of a man, and in some places two hundred. In the vein of Centeno, are 24.
mines, whereof some are 70. or 80. stades deep, and so of the other veins of
this mountain. For a remedy to this great profunditie, they have invented
mines, which they call Socca bones, which are caves or ventes made at the foot
of the mountain, the which go crossing til they encounter with the veins: for
we must understand, that although the veins run North to South, as has
been said, yet is it in declining from the top to the foot of the mountain,
which may be as they believe by conjecture, above twelve hundred stades. And by
this account, although the mines extend in such a profunditie, yet there
remains six times as much space unto the bottom or root, the which they say,
are most rich and abundant, as the body and spring of all veins. Although
unto this day we have seen the contrary by experience, for the higher the
vein is to the superficies of the earth, the more rich they find it: and the
deeper it goes, the poorer it is, and of the baser aloy. They then invented the
Soccabons, by which they enter to work in the mines very easily, with less
charge, pain, and danger. They have eight foot in breadth, and a stade in
height, the which they shut with doors. By them they draw forth their metal
very easily, paying to the proprietary of the Soccabon, the fifth part of all
the metal they draw forth. There are nine already made, and others are
begun. They were twenty and nine years in making of one Soccabon, as they
call it, of the venom that flows from the rich vein. It was begun in the
year 1550. the eleventh year of the discovery, and was ended in the year
1585. the eleventh of August. This Soccabon crossed the rich vein thirty five
stades from the root or spring, and from thence where it met to the mouth of
the mine, were a hundred thirty five stades. So as they must descend all this
depth to labor in the mine. This Soccabon contains from his mouth unto the
vein of Crusero as they call it, 250. yardes, in which work were spent
twenty nine years, whereby we may see what great pains men take to draw
silver out of the bowels of the earth. They labor in these mines in
continual darkness and obscurity, without knowledge of day or night. And
forasmuch as those places are never visited with the Sun; there is not only
continual darkness, but also an extreme cold, with so gross an air
contrary to the disposition of man, so as, such as newly enter, are sick, as
they at sea. The which happened to me in one of these mines, where I felt a
pain at the heart, and beating of the stomach. Those that labor therein, use
candles to light them, dividing their work in such sort, as they that work in
the day, rest by the night, and so they change. The metal is commonly hard,
and therefore they break it with hammers, splitting and hewing it by force, as
if they were s^intes. After they carry up this metal upon their shoulders, by
ladders of three branches, made of neates lether twisted like pieces of wood,
which are crossed with staves of wood; so as by every one of these ladders they
mount and descend together. They are ten stades long a piece: and at the end of
one, begins another of the same length, every ladder beginning and ending at
platformes of wood, where there are seats to rest them, like unto galleries,
for that there are many of these ladders to mount by one at the end of another.
A man carries ordinarily the weight of two Arrobes of metal upon his
shoulders, Every Arobe is 25. pound.
tied together in a cloth in manner of a skippe, and so mount they three and
three. He that goes before carries a candle tied to his thumb: for (as it is
said,) they have no light from heaven, and so go they up the ladder holding it
with both their hands, to mount so great a height, which commonly is above a
hundred and fifty stades: a fearful thing, and which breeds an amazement to
think upon it, so great is the desire of silver, that for the gain thereof,
men endure any pains. And truly it is not without reason, that Pliny treating
of this subject, exclaimes and says thus, We enter even into the bowels of
the earth, Plin. in proem. lib. 33. cap. 6.
and go hunting after riches, even to the place of the damned. And after in the
same book he says: Those that seek for mettalls, perform works more then
Giants, making holes and caves in the depth of the earth, piercing mountains
so deep by the light of candles, whereas the day and the night are alike, and
in many months they see no day. So as, often the walls of their mines fall,
smothering many of them that labor therein. And afterward he adds, They
pierce the hard rock with hammers of iron, waying 150 pounds, and draw out
the metal upon their shoulders, laboring day and night, one delivering his
charge to another, and all in darkness, only the last sees the light: with
wedges and hammers they break the flintes, how hard and strong soever, for the
hunger of gold is yet more sharp and strong. This Pliny says, who although
he speaks as a historiographer of that age, yet does he seem to prophecy of
this time. Neither is it less which Phocion of Agatharchides reports of the
great travel they endure, whom they called Chrysios, in drawing out of gold:
for as the said Author says, gold and silver are as painful to dig and
draw forth, as they are pleasing to possess.

How they refine the Metal of Silver CHAP. 9.
THe Veins as I have said, where they find silver, runs betwixt two rocks,
which they call the Chase, whereof the one is commonly as hard as flint, and
the other soft and easy to break. This metal is not always equal, and of
the same bounty, for you shall find in one and the same vein, one sort of
metal very rich, which they call C^cilla, or Tacana, from which they draw
much silver; and another is poor, from whence they draw little. The most rich
metal of this mountain, is of the color of Amber, and the next is that
which inclines to black. There is other somewhat red, and other of the color
of ashes: finally of diverse and sundry colors, which seem to such as know
them not, to be stones of no value. But the miners do presently know his
quality and perfection, by certain signs and small veins they find in
them. They carry all this metal they draw out of these mines, upon Indian
sheep, which serve them as Asses to carry it to the milles, the richest
metal is refined by melting in those small furnaces, which they call Guayra^,
for that is most leadie; by reason whereof, it is most subject to melt, and for
the better melting thereof, the Indians cast in a matter, they call Soroche,
which is a metal full of lead. The metal being in these furnaces, the filth
and earthie dross, through the force of the fire, remains in the bottom, and
the silver and lead melt; so as the silver swimmes upon the lead, until it be
purified; then after they refine the silver many times, after this manner of
melting. They have usually drawn out of one quintall of metal, thirty,
forty, and fifty pieces of silver, and yet I have seen some most excellent,
that have bin shown me, where they have drawn in the melting two hundred,
yea, two hundred and fifty pieces of silver of a quintall of metal; a rare
wealth, and almost incredible, if we had not seen the trial thereof by fire,
but such mettalls are very rare. The poorest metal is that which yeeldes
two, three, five, or six pieces, or little more. This metal has commonly
little lead, but is dry, and therefore they cannot refine it with fire. And
for this reason in Potozi, there was great store of these poor mettalls,
whereof they made no great account, but were rejected like straw, and as the
skumme of the good metal, until they found means to refine it by
quicke-silver, whereby the skumme they called Oquiache was of great profit, for
the quicke-silver by a strange and wonderful property, purifies the silver,
and is apt for these mettalls which are dry and poor, wherein they consume
less quicke-silver then in the richer: for the richer they are, the more need
of quicke-silver they have. At this day the most usual manner of refining in
Potozi, is by quicke-silver, as also in the mines of Cacatecas, and others of
new Spain. There were in old time upon the sides and tops of Potozi, above
six thousand Guayras, which are small furnaces where they melt their metal,
the which were placed like lights, (a pleasant sight to behold by night,)
casting a light a far off like a flame of fire. But at this day there are not
above two thousand, for that (as I have said,) they use little melting, but
refine it by quicke-silver, the which is the greatest profit. And for that the
properties of quicke-silver are admirable; and that this manner of refining of
silver is remarkable, I will discourse of quicke-silver, of the mines and
work, and what is requisite for that subject.

Of the wonderful properties of Quicke-silver. CHAP. 10.
QVickesilver, so called by the Latins, for that it runs and slides suddenly
from place to place, amongst all other mettalls has great and wonderful
virtues. The first is, although it be a true metal, yet is it not hard,
neither has it any certain form nor subsistence like to other mettalls, but
is liquide, not like unto gold and silver molten, but of his own proper
nature; and although it be a liquor, yet is it more heavy then any other
metal: and therefore all others swim above and sink not to the bottom,
being more light. I have seen two pounds of iron put into a barrel of
quicke-silver, the which did swim about like unto wood or cork upon the
water. Pli. lib. 33. ca 6
Pliny gives an exception hereunto, saying, that gold alone does sink and
not swim above it. I have not seen the experience; but it may be this
grows, by reason that quicke-silver by nature does inviron gold, and covers
it, which is one of the most important properties it has; for it ioynes with
gold in a strange manner, it seeks it where it lies, and invirons it in such
sort, as it does distinguish and sep^rate it from any other body or metal
wherewith it is mixed: for this reason such take gold as will preserve
themselves from the dangerrs and discommodities of quicke-silver. They have
used a remedy to those (in whose ears they had put quicke-silver, to cause
them to die secretly,) to put little plates of gold into their ears, (for that
gold has the virtue to draw out Mercury,) and after they drew out thief
plates all white with the quicke-silver, it did stick unto them. Being one day
at Madril, I went to see the exquisite works which Iacomo de Treco, (a rare
work man of Milan,) made for S. Laurence the Royal, it was my hap to be there
one day, whenas they gilded certain pieces of a countertable of brass, which
is done with quicke-silver; and for that the fume of Mercury is mortal, he
told me that the worke-men preserved themselves from this venom, by swallowing
a double duckat of gold roled up; the which being in the stomach, draws unto
it all the quicke-silver that enters in fume by the ears, eyes, nostrilles,
and mouth, and by this means freed themselves from the danger of
quicke-silver, which the gold gathered in the stomach, and after cast out by
the excrements: a thing truly worthy of admiration. After the quicke-silver
has purified and purged gold from all other mettalls and mixtures, he is
likewise separated from the gold his friend by the heat of the fire, the
which purifies it from all quicke-silver. Pliny says, Plin. lib. 33. c. 6
that by a certain art and invention they did separate gold from
quicke-silver. It seems to me the Ancients had no knowledge to refine silver
by quicke-silver, which at this day is the greatest use, and chief profit of
quickesilver; for that he says plainly, that quickesilver ioynes with no
other metal but with gold; and when he makes mention of refining of silver,
he speaks only but of the manner of melting; whereby we may infer that the
Ancients had no knowledge of this secret. In truth, though there be a league
and simpathie betwixt gold and quicke-silver, yet whereas the mercury finds
no gold, it ioynes with silver, though not in the like manner as with gold; but
in the end, it does cleanse and purge it from earth, copper, and lead, amongst
the which the silver grows, without any need of fire to melt it: yet must
they use fire to separate it from the silver, as I will show hereafter.
Quicksilver holds no account of other mettalls, but of gold and silver; but
contrariwise it does corrupt them, force and consume them, and flies from them
as much as may be. The which is likewise admirable, and for this cause they put
it in earthen vessels, or in beasts skins. For if it be put in vessels of
copper, of iron, or other metal, it presently pierces and corrupts them. And
therefore Pliny calls it the poison of all things, for that it consumes and
spoils all. We find quicksilver in the graves of dead men, which after it
has consumed the bodies, comes forth pure and whole. There has been
likewise found in the bones and marrow of men and beasts, who having received
it in fume by the mouth and nosthrills, congeales within them and pierces even
unto the bones. Therefore it is a dangerous thing to frequent so perilous and
mortal a creature. It has an other property, which is, to run and make a
hundred thousand small drops, whereof not one is lost, be they never so
little, but they return every way to their liquor. It is almost incorruptible,
having nothing in a manner that may consume it. And therefore Pliny calls it
the eternal sweat. It has yet another property, that although it does
separate gold from copper, and all other mettalles, yet they that will guilde
copper, brass, or silver, use quicke-silver as the means of this union; for
with the help thereof they guilde mettalls. Amongst all the woonders of this
strange liquor that seems to me most worthy observation, that although it be
the weightiest thing in the world, yet is it converted into the lightest of
the world, which is smoke, and suddenly the same smoke which iss o light a
thing, turns again into so heavy a substance, as is the proper liquor of
quicke-silver, whereinto it is dissolved; for this smoke incountering the
metal on high, being a solid body, or coming into a cold region,
suddenly it thickens and is converted into quickesilver, and if you set him
once again to the fire, he does likewise return into smoke, to be resolved
again into quicke-silver. A strange transmutation of so heavy a substance into
so light a thing; and of so light into so heavy, the which we may hold for a
rare thing in Nature. And therefore the Author of Nature is justly to be
glorified in these and all other strange properties of this metal, seeing
that all things created do properly obey their secret and unknown laws.

Of the place where they find quicke-silver, and how they discovered these
rich mines in Guancavilca. CHAP. 11.
QVicke-silver is found in a kind of stone, which does likewise yield
Vermillion, which the Ancients called Minium, and at this day they call the
Images of cristall miniades, which are painted with quicksilver. The Ancients
made great account of this Minium or vermillion, holding it for a sacred
color, as Pliny reports, saying, that the Romans were accustomed to paint
the face of Jupiter, and the bodies of those that triumphed in Ethiopia: yea
their idolles and their Governors likewise had their faces colored with this
Minium. And this vermillion was so esteemed at Rome* (which they brought only
from Spain, where they had many pittes and mines of quickesilver, which
continue there to this day) that the Romans suffered it not to be refined in
Spain, left they should steal some of it, but they carried it to Rome, sealed
up in a mass as they drew it out of the mine. and after refined it. They did
yearly bring from Spain, especially from Andalusie, about ten thousand
pound weight, which the Romans valued as an infinite treasure. I have reported
all this out of that Author, to the end that those which doesee what passes at
this day in Peru, may have the content to know what chanced in former ages,
among the mightiest Lords of the world. I speak for the Inguas kings of Peru,
and for the natural Indians thereof, which have labored and dug long in
these mines of quicke-silver, not knowing what quicke-silver was, seeking only
for Cinabrium or vermillion, which they call Limpi, the which they esteem
much, for that same effect that Pliny reports of the Romans and Ethiopians,
that is, to paint the face and bodies of themselves and their idols: the like
has been much practiced by the Indians, especially when they went to the
wars, and use it at this day in their* feasts and dancing, which they call
slubbering, supposing that their faces and visages so slubbered, did much
terrify, and at this day they hold it for an ornament and beautifying; for
this cause there were strange works of mines in the mountains of Guan^avilca,
which are in Peru, near to the city of Guamangu^, out of the which they drew
this metal, it is of such a manner, that if at this day they enter by the
caves or Soccabones, which the Indians made in those days, they loose
themselves, finding no passage out: but they regarded not quicke-silver, which
naturally is in the same substance or metal of vermillion, neither had they
knowledge of any such matter.

The Indians were not alone for so long a time without the knowledge of this
treasure, but likewise the Spaniards, who until the year of the incarnation
of our Savior, one thousand five hundred three score and six, and threescore
and seven (at such time as the licentiate Castro governed in Peru) discovered
not the mines of quicke-silver, which happened in this manner. A man of
judgment called Henrique Guar^es, a Portugal borne, having a piece of this
colored metal, as I have said, which the Indians call Limpi, with which
they paint their faces, as he beheld it well, found it to be the same which
they call Vermillion in Castille; and for that he knew well that vermillion
was drawn out of the same metal that quickesilver was, he coniectured these
mines to be of quickesilver, went to the place whence they drew this metal,
to make trial thereof. The which he found true, and in this sort the mines
of Palcas in the territory of Guamangua, being discovered, great numbers of
men went thither to draw out quickesilver, and so to carry it to Mexico, where
they refine silver by the means of quickesilver, wherewith many are enriched.
This country of mines which they call Guancavilca, was then peopled with
Spaniards and Indians that came thither, and come still to work in these mines
of quicke-silver, which are in great numbers, and very plentiful: but of all
these mines, that which they call d' Amador de Cabrera, or of Saints, is
goodly and notable. It is a rock of most hard stone, interlaced all with
quickesilver, and of that greatness, that it extendes above four score Varres
or yardes in length, and forty in breadth; in which mine they have many pittes
and ditches, of three score and ten stades deep, so as three hundred men may
well work together; such is the capacity thereof. This mine was discovered by
an Indian of Amador of Cabrera, called Navincopa of the village of Acoria, the
which Amador of Cabrera caused to be registered in his name. He was in surte
against the Procurer fiscall, but the vsufruite was adjudged to him by sentence
as the discoverer. Since he sold his interest to another, for two hundred and
fifty thousand ducates; and afterward thinking he had bin deceived in the
sale, he commenced an action against the buyer, being worth, as they say, above
five hundred thousand ducats; yea, some hold it to be worth a million of
gold: a rare thing to see a mine of that wealth.

Whenas Don Francisco of Toledo governed in Peru, there was one which had bin
in Mexico, and observed how they refined silver with mercury, called Pero
Fernandes de Valesco, who offered to refine silver at Potoz^, with mercury; and
having made trial thereof in the year of our redemption, one thousand five
hundred seaventy and one, performed it with credit; then began they to
refine silver at PotoZi with quicksilver, which they transported from
Guancavelicqua, which was a goodly help for the mines; for by the means of
quickesilver they drew an infinite quantity of metal from these mines, whereof
they made no account, the which they called scrapings. For as it has been
said, the quickesilver purifies the silver, although it be dry, poor, and of
base alloy, which can not be done by melting in the fire. The Catholic King
draws from it quickesilver mines, without any charge or hazard, almost four
hundred thousand pieces of a mine, the which are fourteen rialls a piece, or
little less, besides the rights that rise in Potozi, where it is employed, the
which is a great riches. They do yearly, one with another, draw from these
mines of Guancavilca, eight thousand quintalls of quickesilver, yea and more.

The manner how to draw out Quicke-silver, and how they refine Silver. CHAP. 12.
LEt us now speak how they draw out Quicke-silver, and how they refine Silver
therewith. They take the stone or metal where they find the quicke-silver,
the which they put into the fire in pots of earth well luted, being well
beaten, so as this metal or stone coming to melt by the heat of the fire,
the quicke-silver seperates it self, and goes forth in exhalation, and
sometimes even with the smoke of the fire, until itincounters some body where
it stays and congeales, and if it pass up higher, without meeting of any hard
substance, it mountes up until it be cold; and then congeled, it falls down
again. When the melting is finished, they vnstoppe the pottes and draw forth
the metal, sometimes staying until it be very cold, for if there remained
any fume or vapor, which should encounter them that vnstopt the pottes, they
were in danger of death, or to be benumined of their limbs, or at the least,
to loose their teeth. And for that they spend an infinite quantity of wood, in
the melting of these mettalls. A Miller called Rodrigo de Tores, found out a
profitable invention, which was, to gather certain straw which grows
throughout all those mountains of Peru, the which they call Ycho, it is like
unto a hard reed wherewith they make their fire. It is a strange thing to see
the force which this straw has to melt and dissolve these mettalls, the which
falls out, as Pliny says, that there is gold which melts more easily with
the flame of straw, Plin. lib. 33. c. 4
then with hot burning coals. They put the quicke-silver thus molten into
skins, for that it keeps best in lether, and in this sort they lay it into
the Kings store-howse, from whence they carry it by sea to Ariqua, and so to
Potozi by land upon their sheep. There is yearly spent in PotoZi for the
refining of mettalles, about six or seven thousand quintalles of quicke-silver,
besides that they draw from the plates, (which is the earth or dross of the
first washings of these mettalls, which are made in caldrons.) The which plates
they burn in their furnaces, to draw out the quicke-silver which remains in
them: and there are above fifty of these furnaces in the City of PotoZi, and
in Tarpaya. The quantity of mettalls which they refine, (as some men of
experience have made the account,) does amount yearly to above three hundred
thousand quintalles; from the earth and dross whereof being molt and refined,
they may draw yearly above two thousand quintalles of quicksilver. We must
understand there are diverse sorts of mettalls, for some yield much silver,
and waste little quicke-silver; others consume much quicke-silver, and yield
little silver; and there are others which consume much quicke-silver, and
yeeldes much silver; and others that consume little quicke-silver, and also
yield little silver; and as men encounter in these mettalles, so they grow
rich or poor in their traffic. Although commonly the rich metal yeeldes
much silver, and consumes much quicke-silver; and likewise that which is poor,
yeeldes little silver, and consumes as little mercury. They first beat and
grind the metal very small, with hammers and other instruments, which beat
this stone like unto tanne milles, and being well beaten, they searce it in a
copper searce, making the poulder as small and fine, as if it were horse hair:
these searces being well fitted, do sift thirty quintalles in a day and a
night; then they put the poulder of the metal into the vessels upon furnaces,
whereas they anoint it and mortify it with brine, putting to every fifty
quintalles of poulder, five quintalls of salt. And this they do for that the
salt seperates the earth and filth, to the end the quicke-silver may the more
easily draw the silver unto it. After they put quicke*silver into a piece of
holland and press it out upon the metal, which goes forth like a dew,
always turning and stirring the metal, to the end it may be well
incorporate. Before the invention of these furnaces of fire, they did often
mingle their metal with quicke-silver, in great troughes, letting it settle
some days, and did then mix it, and stir it again, until they thought all
the quicke-silver were well incorporate with the silver, the which continued
twenty days and more, and at the least nine days. Since they discovered (as
the desire to get is diligent,) that to shorten the time fire did much help:
to incorporate silver the sooner with quicke-silver, they in vented these
furnaces, whereon they set vessels to put in their metal, with salt and
quicke-silver, and underneath they put fire by little and little, in furnaces
made for the nonce underneath; so as in five or six days the quicke-silver is
incorporate with the silver. And when they find that the mercury has done
his part, and assembled all the silver, leaving nothing behind, but is well
imbrued as a sponge does water, dividing it from the earth, lead, and copper,
with the which it is engendered. Then after they separate it likewise from the
quicke-silver, the which they do in this sort; they put the metal in
caldrons, and vessels full of water, where with certain wheels they turn
the metal round about, as if they should make mustard, and so the earth and
dross goes from the metal with the water that runs away: The silver and
quicke-silver as most ponderous remaining in the botome; the metal which
remains, is like unto sand: then they take it out and wash it again in great
platters of wood, or keelers full of water, still drawing the earth from it,
until they leave the silver and quicke-silver well cleansed. There slippes away
also some small portion of silver and quicke-silver with the earth and dross,
which they call washings, the which they after wash again and draw out the
remainder. When the silver and quicke-silver are cleansed and begin to shine,
and that there remains no earth, they put all the metal into a cloth, which
they strain out very forcibly, so as all the quicke-silver passes out, being
not incorporate with the silver, and the rest remains as a loaf of silver,
like to a mark of almonds pressed to draw oil. And being thus pressed, the
remainder contains but the sixth part in silver, and five in mercury. So as if
there remains a mark of threescore pounds, ten are of silver, and fifty of
mercury. Of these marks they make pinnes, (as they call them,) like pine
apples, or sugar loaves, hollow within, the which they commonly make of a
hundred pound weight; then to separate the silver from the quicke-silver, they
put it into a violent fire, which they cover with an earthen vessel, like to
the mold of a sugar loaf, or unto a capuchon or hoode, the which they cover
with coals, and set fire unto it; whereby the quicke-silver exhales in smoke,
the which striking against the capuchon of earth, it thickens and distills,
like unto the smoke of a pot covered; and by a pipe like unto a limbecke,
they receive the quicke-silver which distills, the silver remaining without
changing the form, but in weight it is diminished five parts of that it was,
and is spungious, the which is worthy the observation. Of two of these loaves
they make one bar of silver, in weight 65. or 66. marks: and in this sort
they carry it to the touch, custom, and mark. Silver drawn with mercury, is
so fine, that it never abates of two thousand three hundred and fourscore of
alloy, and it is so excellent, that the worke-men are enforced to alay it,
putting some mixture to it, as they do likewise in their mints, whereas their
money is stamped. Silver indures all these martiredomes, (if we may so call it,)
to be refined, the which if we consider well, it is a body framed where they
grind, sift, kneade, lay the leven, and bake the silver: besides all this,
they wash it and wash it again, they bake it and bake it again, enduring the
pestells, sives, troughes, furnaces, caldrons, presses: and finally, by the
water and fire. I speak this, for that seeing seeing this art in PotoZi, I did
consider what the Scripture speaks of the just, Mat. 3. Eccles. 2. Psalm. 11
Colabit eos et purgabit quasi argentum: And that which they speak in another
part, Sic vt argentum purgatum terra, purgatum s^ptuplum. So as to purify
silver, to refine and cleanse it from the earth and stone where it engenders,
they purge and purify it seven times: for in effect it passes their hands
seven times, yea, oftener, until it remains pure and fine; so is it in the
word of God, where the souls must be so purified, that shall enjoy the
heavenly perfection.

Of their Engines to grind the metal, and of their trial of Silver. CHAP.
13.
TO conclude, this subject of silver and of mettalls, there remains yet two
things to speak of, the one is of their engines and milles, the other of their
essay or trial: I have said before, how they grind their metal: for the
receving of the quicksilver, which is done with diverse instruments and engines,
some with horses like unto hand-milles, others like water-milles; of which two
sorts there are great numbers. But for that the water they do use commonly,
is but of rain, whereof they have not sufficient but three months in the
year, December, January, and February: for this reason they have made Lakes
and standing Pooles, which contain in^circuite about a thousand and six
hundred rods, and in deapth three stades; there are seven with their sluices:
so as when they have need of any water, they raise up a sluice, from whence
runs a little stream of water, the which they stop upon holy days. And
when the Lakes and Pooles do fill, and that the year abounds with rain,
their grinding does then continue six or seven months; so as even for
silvers sake men desire a good year of rain in Potozi, as they do in other
places for bread. There are some other engines in Tarapaya, which is a valley
three or four leagues distant from Potozi, whereas there runs a river as in
other parts. The difference of these engines is, that some go with six
pestels, some with twelve, and others with fourteen. They grind and beat
the metal in morters, laboring day and night; and from thence they carry it
to be sifted, upon the banks of the brook of Potozi. There are forty eight
water-mills, of eight, ten, and twelve pestells, and four on the other side,
which they call Tanacognugno; in the City of Tarapaya, there are two and
twenty engines all upon the water; besides there are thirty go with horses in
PotoZi, and many others in divers^partes, so great the desire of man is to get
silver, which is tried by deputies appointed by the King.

To give the alloy to every piece, they carry the bars of silver unto the Assay
master, who gives to every one his number, for that they carry many at once,
he cuttes a small piece of every one, the which he weighs justly, and puttes
them into a cruset, which is a small vessel made of burnt bones beaten; after
he places every crusible in his order in the furnace, giving them a violent
fire, then the metal melts, and that which is lead, goes into smoke, and
the copper and tin dissolves, the silver remaining most fine, of the color
of fire. It is a strange thing, that being thus refined, although it be liquide
and molten, yet it never spilles, were the mouth of the crusible turned
downewardes; but it remayn^th fixed, without the loss of a drop. The Assay
master knows by the colour^ and other signs, when it is refined, then does
he draw the crusibles from the fire, and weighs every piece curiously,
observing what every one wants of his weight; for that which is of high alloy,
wastes but little, and that which is baser, diminishes much; and according to
the waste, he sees what alloy he bears, according to the which he marks every
bar punctually. Their ballaunce and weights are so delicate, and their
grains so small, as they cannot take them up with the hand, but with a small
pair of pincers: and this trial they make by candle light, that no air might
moove the balance. For of this little the price of the whole bar depends.
In truth it is a very delicate thing, and requires a great dexterity, Psalm.
65. Prover. 17.27.
which the holy Scripture uses in many places, to show how God prooves his
chosen: and to note the differences of the merits of souls, whereas God gives
the title of an Assay-maister to the Prophet Jeremy, that he may try and
declare the spiritual virtue of men, and of his works, which is the proper
work of the Spirit of God, being he that weighs the Souls of men. Ier^m. 6.
Prover. 1.
We will rest content with what we have spoken touching silver, mettalls and
mines, and will pass to the two other mixtures, the which are plants and
beasts.

Of Emeraldes. CHAP. 14.
IT shall not be from the purpose, to speak something of Emeraldes, both for
that it is a precious thing, as gold and silver, as also for that they take
their beginning from mines and mettalls, Pli. lib. 3^. ca. 3
as Pliny reports. The Emerald has bin in old time in great esteem, as the
same Author writes, giving it the third place amongst all iewelles and precious
stones, that is next to the diamond and pearl. At this day they do not so
much esteem the Emerald, nor the pearl, for the great abundance is brought
of these two sorts from the Indies, only the diamond holds the principality,
the which can not be taken from it. Next, the rubies come in price and other
stones, which they hold more precious than the Emerald. Men are so desirous of
singularities and rare things, that what they see to be common, they do not
esteem. They report of a Spaniard, who being in Italy when the Indies were
first discovered, showed a^ Emerald to a Lapidary, who asking him the value
thereof, after he had well viewed it, being of an excellent luster and form,
he prized it at a hundred ducats: he then showed him an other greater than it,
which he valued at three hundred ducats. The Spaniard drunk with this
discourse, carried him to his lodging, showing him a casket full. The Italian
seeing so great a number of Emeralds, said unto him, Sir, these are well
worth a crown a piece: the like has happened both at the Indies and in
Spain, where the stones have lost their estimation, for the great abundaunce
they find of them there.

Pliny reports many excellencies of the Emerald, amongst the which he says,
Plin. lib. 37. c. 5
that there is nothing more pleasing, nor more healthful for the sight;
wherein he has reason, but his authority imports little, seeing there is
such store. Plin. lib. 9. c. 35
It is reported that Lelia a Roman Dame bestowed upon a scoffion and a
garment embroidered with pearl and emerald 400000. ducats, the which at this
day might be done with less than forty thousand ducats, yea two such. In
diverse parts of the Indies, and the Kings of Mexico, did much esteem them;
some did use to pierce their nosthrils, and hang therein an excellent Emerald:
they hung them on the visages of their idolles. The greatest store is found in
the New Kingdom of Grenado, and Peru, near unto Manta and port Vieil. There
is toward that place a soil which they call, the Land of Emeraldes, for the
knowledge they have of abundance to be there: and yet unto this day they have
not conquered that Land. The Emeralds grow in stones like unto cristall; I have
seen them in the same stone, fashioned like a vein, and they seem by little
and little to thicken and refine. I have seen some that were half white, and
half green; others all white, and some green and very perfect. I have seen
some of the bigness of a nut, and there have bin some greater found: but I
have not known that in our time they have found any of the form and bigness
of the platt or jewel they have at Genes, the which they esteem (and with
reason) to be a jewel of great price, and no relic; yet without comparison,
the Emerald which Theophrastus speaks of, which the King of Babylon presented
to the King of Egypt, surpasses that of Genes; it was four cubits long, and
three broad, and they say, that in Jupiters Temple, there was a needle or
pyramide, made of four Emeralds stones of forty cubits long, and in some
places four broad, and in others two: and that in his time there was in Tir
in Hercules Temple, a pillar of an Emerald. It may be (as Pliny says) it was
of some green stone, somewhat like to the Emerald, and they called it a false
Emerald. As some will say, that in the Cathedral Church of Cordou^ there are
certain pillars of Emeraldes which remain since it was a Mesquite for the
Kings Miramamolins Moors, which reigned there. In the fleet, the year one
thousand five hundred eighty and seven, in the which I came from the Indies,
they brought two chests of Emeraldes, every one weighing at the least four
Arobes, whereby we may see the abundance they have. The holy Scripture
commends these Emeralds as precious jewels, Exodus 29.39. Apoc. 21.
they number them amongst the precious stones, which the hie Priest carried on
his Ephod or breast plate, as those which did beautify the walls of the
heavenly Jerusalem.

Of Pearls. CHAP. 15.
NOw that we entreat of the great riches that comes from the Indies, it were no
reason to forgette the Pearl, which the Ancients called Marguerites, and at
the first were in so great estimation, as none but royal persons were suffered
to wear them: but at this day there is such abundance as the Negres
themselves do wear chains thereof; they grow in shells or oysters, in eating
whereof I have found pearls in the midst of them: These oisters within are
of the color of heaven, very lively. In some places they make spoones, the
which they call mother of Pearl. The pearls do differ much inform, in
bigness, figure, color and polishing; so likewise in their price they differ
much. Some they call Ave Mariaes, being like the small grains of beads;
others are Pater nosters, being bigger. Seldom shall you find two of one
greatness, form, and color. For this reason the Romans (as Pliny writes)
called them Unions. Plin. lib. 3. c. 3^*
Whenas they do find two that are alike in all points, they raise the price
much, especially for carerings. I have seen some payres valued at thousands of
ducats, although they were not like to Cleopatraes two pearls, whereof Pliny
reports, either of them being worth a hundred thousand ducats, with the which
this foolish Queen won a wager she had made against Marc Anthony, to spend
in one supper above an hundred thousand ducats; so at the last course she
dissolved one of these pearls in strong vinegar, and drank it up. They say
the other pearl was cut in two, and placed in the Pantheon at Rome, at
th'^ares of the image of Venus. Esope reports of Clovis the son of a
Comedian, who in a banquet presented to every one of his ghests (amongst other
meats) a rich pearl dissolved in vinegar, to make his feast the more royal
and sumptuous.

These were the follies of those ages, and those at this day are nothing less,
for that we see, not only hattes and bands, but also buskins, and women's
pantofles, (yea of base condition) imbrodred all over with pearl. They fish
for pearls in diverse parts of the Indies, the greatest abundance is in the
south Seas, near unto Panama, where the Islands of pearls be, as they call
them. But at this day they find greatest store, and the best, in the north
Sea, the which is near to the rive of Hatch. I did see them make their
fishing, the which is done with great charge and labor of the poor slaves,
which dive six, nine, yea twelve fadomes into the sea, to seek for oysters,
the which commonly are fastened to the rocks and gravel in the Sea, they pull
them up, and bring them above the water to their canoes, where the^ open them,
drawing forth the treasure they have within them. The water of the Sea in this
part is very cold, but yet the labor and toil is greatest in holding of
their breath, sometimes a quarter, yea half an hour together, being under the
water at their fishing. And to the end these poor slaves may the better
continue and hold their breaths, they feed them with dry meats, and that in
small quantity, so as covetousness makes them abstain and fast thus against
their wills. They employ their pearls to diverse works, and they pierce them
to make chains, whereof there is great store in every place. In the year of
our Lord one thousand five hundred eighty one I did see the note of what came
from the Indies for the King, there were eighteen maces of pearl, besides
three caskets, and for particulars, there were twelve hundred threescore and
four marks, and besides them, seven caskets not pierced, which heretofore we
would have esteemed and held for a lie.

Of the Indian Bread, and of Mays. CHAP. 16.
IN our discourse of Plants, we will begin with those which are proper and
peculiar to the Indies; and after with the rest that are common to the Indies
and Europe; and forasmuch as plants were chiefly created for the nourishment of
man, and that the chief (whereof he takes his nourishment,) is bread, it shall
be good to show what bread the Indians use, and whereon they live for want
thereof. They have (as we have here,) a proper name, whereby they note and
signify bread, which at Peru, they call Tanta, and in other places by another
name. But the quality and substance of the bread the Indians use, differs much
from ours: for we find not they had any kind of wheat or barley, nor any other
kind of grain which they use in Europe ^o make bread withal: insteede
whereof they used other kinds of grains and roots, amongst the which Mays
holds the first place, and with reason, in Castile they call it Indian wheat,
and in Italy they call it Turkey grain. And even as wheat is the most common
grain for the use of man, in the regions of the old world, which are Europe,
Asia, and Affrike: So in the new found world, the most common grain is Mays,
the which is found almost in all the kingdoms of the West Indies, as at Peru,
new Spain, in the new kingdom of Granado, in Gautimalla, in Chille, and upon
the maine land. I do not find that in old time, in the Islands of Barlovente,
as Cuba S. Dominique, Iamaique, and S. I^an, that they used Mays: at this day
they use much Yuca and Cacavi, whereof we will presently entreat. I do not
think that this Mays is any thing inferior to our wheat, in strength nor
substance, but it is more hot and gross, and engenders more blood, whereupon
they that have not bin accustomed thereunto, if they eat too much, they swell
and become scabbed. It grows upon canes or reeds; every one bears one or two
grapes or branches, to the which the grain is fastened, and although the
grain be big, yet find they great store thereof, so as in some clusters I
have told seven hundred grains. They must plant it with the hand one by one,
and not very thick; it desires a hot and moist ground, and grows in great
abundance in many places of the Indies. It is not strange in those countries
to gather 300. Fanegues or measures for one sown. There is difference of Mays
as there is of wheat, one is great and very nourishing, another small and dry,
which they call Moroche; the green leaves and canes of Mays, is a good food
for their mules and hor^es, and it serves them for straw when it is dried; the
grain is of more nourishment for horses then barley; and therefore in those
countries, they use to water their horses before they eat, for if they should
drink after, they would swell as when they eat wheat. Mays is the Indians
bread, the which they commonly eat boiled in the grain hot, and they call it
Mote, as the Chinois and Iopponois eat their Rice sodden with the hot water;
sometimes they eat it baked. There is some Mays round and big, as that of
Lucanas, which the Spaniards eat roasted as a delicate meat, and has a better
taste then Buarbenses, or roasted peason. There is another kind of eating it
more pleasant, which is, to grind the Mays, and to make small cakes of the
flower, ^he which they put in the fire, and then bring them hot to the table.
In some places they call them Arepa^. They make also round bowls of this
paste, and so trim them that they continue long, eating it as a dainty dish.

They have invented at the Indies (for friandise and pleasure) a certain kind
of paste, they do make of this flow mixed with sugar, which they call biscuits
and mellinders. This Mays serves the Indians, not only for bread, but also for
wine: for they do make their drink thereof, wherewith they are sooner drunk
than with wine of grapes. They make this wine of Mays in diverse sorts and
manners, calling it in Peru Acua, and by the most common name of the Indies
Chicha. And the strongest is made like unto beer, steeping the grain until
it break. After they boil it in such sort, that it grows so strong, as
alittle overthrowes a man. In Peru they call this Sora, it is defended by the
Law, for the great inconveniences that grow thereby, making men drunk. But
this Law is ill observed, for that they use it still; yea they spend whole
days and nights in drinking carowse. Pli^i. 14. c. 22.
Pliny reports, that this manner of beverage of grain stieped, and after
sodden; wherewith they were drunk, was in old time used in Spain, France and
other Provinces, as at this day in Flanders they use ale made of malt. There
is another manner of making this Acua or Chicha, which is to champe the mays,
and make a leven thereof, and then boil it; yea the Indians hold opinion,
that to make good leven, it must be champed by old withered women, which makes
a man sick to hear, and yet they do drink it. The cleanliest manner, the
most wholesome, and that which least harmeth, is to roast the Mays, which the
most civil Indians do use, and some Spaniardes, yea for physic: For in
effect they find it a very wholesome drink for the reins, so as you shall
hardly find any one at the Indies complain of pain in the back, for that
they do drink of this Chicha. The Spaniards and Indians eat this Mays boiled
and roasted for daintiness, when it is tender in the grape like milk, they
put it into the pot, and make sawces that are good to eat. The buds of Mays
are very fat, and serve insteede of butter and oil: so as this Mays at the
Indies serves both for men and beasts, for bread, wine, and oil. For this
reason the Viceroy Don Francisco de Toledo said, that Peru had two things
rich, and of great norishment, which were Mays, and the cattle of the
country. In truth he had reason, for these two things did serve them as a
thousand.

I will ask sooner than I can answer it, whence Mays was first carried to the
Indies, and why they do call this profitable grain in Italy, Turkey grain?
for in truth I do not find that the Ancients make any mention of this
grain, though that mil (that Pliny writes to come from the Indies into
Italy, ten years before he did write it) has some resemblance unto Mays,
for that it is a grain, as he says, that grows in reed, and covers it self
with the leaf, and has the top like hairs, being very fertile; all which
things agree not with mill. To conclude, God has imparted to every region what
is needful. To this continent he has given wheat, which is the chief
nourishment of man; and to the Indians he has given Mays, which has the
second place to wheat, for the nourishment of men and beasts.

Of Yucas, Cacavi, Papas, Chunes, and Ris. CHAP. 17.
IN some parts of the Indies they use a kind of bread they call Cacavi, which
is made of a certain root they call Yuca: This Yuca is a great and gross
root, which they cut in small morsells, they grate or scrape it, and then
put it in a press to strain, making a thin and broad cake thereof, almost
'like unto a Moors target or buckler; then do they dry it, and this is the
bread they eat. It has no taste, but is healthful and of good nourishment:
For this reason we said, being at S. Dominike, that it was the proper food for
great eaters, for that they might eat much, without any fear of surffetting.
They must of necessity water this Cacavi before they eat it: it is sharp,
and easily watered with water or broth, wherein it is very good, for that it
swells much, and so they make Capirotades, but it is hardly stieped in milk,
in honny of canes, or in wine, for that these liquors cannot pierce it, as it
does bread made of wheat. Of this Cacavi there is one kind more delicate than
any other, which is that they make of the slower called Xauxau, which they do
much esteem in those parts. For my part, I esteem more a morsel of bread,
how hard and black soever. It is a strange thing that the juice or water that
comes from this root when they strain it, which makes the Cacavi is a
deadly poison, and killes any that drinks thereof: but the substance that
remains, is a very wholesome bread and nourishment, as we have said. There
is another kind of Yuca, which they call sweet, and has not this poison in
the juice: this is eaten in the root boiled or roasted, and is good meat.
Cacavi will keep long, and therefore they carry it to sea in steed of
biscuit. The place where they use most of this bread, is at the Islands of
Barlovente, which are S. Dominicke, Cuba, Port Ricco, Iamaique, and some others
thereabouts; for that the soil of these Islands will neither bear wheat, nor
Mays, for whenas they sow wheat, it comes up well, and is presently green,
but so unequally, as they cannot gather it; for of the seed sown, at one
instant, some is spindled, some is in the ear, and some does but bud, one is
great and an other little, one is in the grass and another in the grain; and
although they have carried laborers thither, to see if there were any tillage
or Art to be used, yet could they find no remedy for the quality of the earth.
They carry meal from New Spain or the Canaries, which is so moist, that
hardly can they make any profitable bread, or of good taste. The wafer cakes
wherewith they say Mass, did bend like to wet paper, by reason of the extreme
humiditie and heat which are jointly in that country. There is an other
extreme contrary to this, which hinders the growing of mais or wheat in some
parts of the Indies, as on the height of the Sierre of Peru, and the provinces
which they call of Colao, which is the greatest part of this Realm, where the
climate is so cold and dry, as it will not suffer any of these seeds to
grow: in steed thereof the Indians use an other kind of root, which they
call Papas, these roots are like to grownd nuttes, they are small roots,
which cast out many leaves. They gather this Papas, and dry it well in the
Sun, then beating it they make that which they call Chuno, which keeps many
days, and serves for bread. In this realm there is great traffic of Chuno,
the which they carry to the mines of Potozi: they likewise eat of these Papas
boiled or roasted, there is one sweet of these kinds, which grows in hot
places, whereof they do make certain sawces and minced meats, which they call
Locro. To conclude, these roots are the bread of that land; so as when the
year is good, they rejoice much, for that oftentimes they freeze in the earth,
so great is the cold of that Region: they carry Mays from the valley or sea
coast, and the Spaniardes which are dainty, carry likewise from the same
places wheat meal, whereof they do make good bread, because that the land
is dry.

In other parts of the Indies, as at the Philippines, they use Rice insteade
of bread, whereof there grows very good, and in great abundance in all that
country, and in China, and it is of good nourishment, they seethe it in
purcelaines, and after mix it hot with the water amongst other meats. In
many places they do make their wine and drink of this Rice, steeping, and then
after boiling it, as they do the beer in Flaunders, or the Acua in Peru. Rice
is a meat not much less common and general throughout the world, than wheat
or mays, and perchance more; for besides that they use it, in China, Ioppon,
and the Philippines, and in the greatest part of the East Indies; it is a
grain most common in Affrike and Ethiopia. It requires a wet ground, almost
overflowne like to a meadow. In Europe, Peru, and Mexico, where they have the
use of wheat, they eat Rice as a meat, and not for bread; they seethe it
with milk or with broth, or in some other sort. The most exquisite Rice
comes from the Philippines and China, as has been said. And this may
suffice to understand what they eat generally at the Indies in stead of bread.

Of diverse Roots which grow at the Indies. CHAP. 18.
ALthough in these parts the Land be more abundant and fertile in fruits that
grows upon the earth, by reason of the great diversity of fruit trees, and
plants we have; yet for roots and other things that grow under the earth, the
which they use for meats, in my opinion there is greatest abundance there:
for of these kinds of plants, we have readishes, turnips, parsneps, carrots,
liekes, garlike, and some other profitable roots. But in those countries they
have so many diverse sorts, as I cannot reckon them; those which I now remember
besides Papas, which is the principal, there is Ocas, Yanococas, Camotes,
Vatas, Xiquimas, Yuca, Cochu^ha, Cavi, Totora, Mani, and an infinite number of
other kinds, as the Patattres, which they eat as a delicate and toothsome
meat. They have likewise carried fruits to the Indies from these parts, the
which prosper better there, then the Indian plants do, brought into Europe; the
reason in my opinion is, for that there is greater variety of temperatures then
in these parts, by means whereof, the plants in those regions do rise and
prosper better, fitting themselves to the temperature they require. And the
roots and plants which grow there, and were not transported from hence, are
better then they be here; for onions, garlike and parsnips are not in Spain,
as they be at Peru: and as for turnips, there is so great abundance, as they
have increased in so me places in such sort, that as they have affirmed to me,)
they could not destroy the abundance which grew up, for to sow corn there.
We have seen redish roots as big as a man's arm, very tender, and of a
good taste, and of these tootes I have spoken, some serve for ordinatie meat,
as the Camores, which being roasted, serve as pulse. There are other roots that
serve them for dainties, as the Cochuch^; it is a small sweet root, which
some preserve for more delight. There are other roots fit to cool, as the
Piquima, which is in quality very cold and moist, and in summer it refreshes
and quenches the thirst; but the Papas and Ocas, be the chief for nourishment
and substance. The Indians esteem garlike above all the roots of Europe, and
hold it for a fruit of great force: wherein they want no reason, for that it
comforts and warmes the stomach, for that they eat it with an appetite raw
as it comes out of the ground.

Of diverse sorts of green Herbs, and Pulses, and of those they call
Concombres, Pines, or Pine Apples, small fruits of Chille, and of Prunes.
CHAP. 19
SE^ing we have begun with the lesser Plants, I might in few words, touch
that which concerns Flowers and Pot-hearbes, and that which the Latins call
Arbusta, without any mention of trees. There are some kinds of these shrubbes
at the Indies, which are of very good taste. The first Spaniards named many
things at the Indies with such Spanish names, as they did most resemble, as
Pines, Concombres, and Prunes, although they be very different fruits to those
which are so called in Spain. The Pines, or Pine-aples, are of the same
fashion and form outwardly to those of Castlle, but within they wholly differ,
for that they have neither aples, norscales, but are all one flesh, which may
be eaten when the skin is off, it is fruit that has an excellent smell, and
is very pleasant and delightful in taste, it is full of juice, and of a sweet
and sharp taste, they ^ate it being cut in morcells, and steeped a while in
water and salt. Some say that this breeds choler, and that the use ther^of is
not very healthful. But I have not seen^ any experience thereof, that might
breed belief. They grow one by one like a cane or stalk, which rises
amongst many leaves, like to the lilly, but somewhat bigger. The apple is on
the top of every cane, it grows in hot and moist grounds, and the best are
those of the Islands of Barlovente. It grows not in Peru, but they carry them
from the Andes, the which are neither good nor ripe. One presented one of these
Pine-apples, to the Emperor Charles the fifth, which must have cost much pain,
and care to bring it so far, with the plant from the Indies, yet would he not
try the taste. I have seen in new Spain, conserves of these Pines, which was
very good. Those which they call Concombres, are no trees, but shrubbes,
continuing but one year. They gave it this name, for that some of this fruit,
and the most part, is in length, and roundnes like to the Concombres of Spain:
but for the rest they differ much, for they are not green, but violet, yellow,
or white, neither are they thornie or rough, but pollished and even, having a
very different taste, and far better then that of Spain, for they have a
sharp sweet taste, very pleaasant when it is ripe, yet is it not so sharp as
the Pine. They are very cool, full of liquor and of easy digestion, and in
time of heat, fit to refresh. They take away the rind which is white, and all
that remains is meat. They grow in a temperate soil, and require watering.
And although for the resemblance they call them Concombres, yet are there many
of them round, and others of a different fashion: so as they have not the
figure of Concombres. I do not remember to have seen this kind of fruit in
new Spain, nor at the Islands, but upon the Lanos of Peru. That which they call
the little fruit of Chille, is of the same sort, very pleasant to eat, and
comes near the taste of cheries, but in all other things it differs much: for
that it is no tree, but an herb, which grows little and spreades upon the
earth, casting forth this little fruit, the which in color and grains,
resembles almost the mulbery, when it is white and not ripe, yet is it more
rough and bigger then the mulbery. They say this little fruit is naturally
found in the fields of Chille, where I have seen of them. They set it upon
plants and branches, and it grows like any other shrubbe. Those which they
call Prunes, are verily the fruits of trees, and have more resemblance then
the rest to our plumbs. There are diverse sorts, whereof they call some Prunes
of Nicaragua, the which are very red and small, and have little meat upon the
stone, but that little is of an exquisite taste; and of a sharpenes, as good,
or rather better then cheries. They hold this fruit to be very wholesome, and
therefore they give it to sick folks, especially to provoke an appetite.
There are others that be great and of a dark color, they have much meat, but
it is gross and of no taste, like to the Chavacanas, which have every one two
or three small stones. But to return to pot-hearbs, I find not that the
Indians had any gardins of diverse herbs and plants, but did only till the
land in some parts for pulses, which they use, as those which they call
Fr^solles and Palares, which serve them as our lentils, beans, or tares:
neither have I known that these pulses, or any other kinds that be in Europe,
were there before the Spaniards entered, who carried plants and pulses from
Spain thither, where they now grow and increase wonderfully, and in some
places exceed greatly the fertility of these parts. As if we speak of
mellons which grow in the vallie of Yuca, in Peru, whose root becomes a stalk
that continues many years carrying mellons yearly, and they trim it like
unto a tree; a thing which I do not know to be in any part of Spain. But that
is more monstrous of the Calibasses or Indian Pompions, and the greatness they
have as they grow, especially those which are proper to the Country, which
they call Capallos; the which they eat most commonly in Lent, boiled and
trimmed with some other sauce. There are a thousand kinds of Calibasses, some
are so deformed in their bigness, that of the rind cut in the midst and
cleansed, they make as it were baskets to put in all their meat for their
dinner. Of the lesser they make vessels to eat and drink in, and do trim
them hansomely for many uses. I have spoken this of small plants, we will now
speak of greater; but first of their Axi, which is of the lesser.

Of Axi or Indian Pepper. CHAP. 20.
THey have not found at the West Indies any kind of Spices, proper or peculiar
to them, as pepper, cloves, cinnamon, nu^megges or ginger, although one of our
company, who had traveled much, and in diverse parts, told us, that in the
deserts of the Island of Iamaique he had found trees where pepper grew. But
they are not yet assured thereof, neither is there any trade of these spices
at the Indies,. The ginger was carried from the Indies to Hispaniola, and it
has multiplied so, as at this day they know not what to do with the great
abundance they have. In the fleet the year 1587. they brought 22053.
quintalls of ginger to Seville: but the natural spice that God has given to
the weast Indies, is that we call in Castill, Indian pepper, and in India, Axi,
as a general word taken from the first land of the Islands, which they
conquered. In the language of Cusco, it is called Vchu, and in that of Mexico,
Chili. This plant is well known, and therefore I will speak alittle, only
we must understand, that in old time it was much esteemd amongst the Indians,
which they carried into places where it grew not, as a merchandise of
consequence. It grows not upon cold grounds, as on the Sierre of Peru, but in
hot valleis, where it is often watered. There is of this Axi of diverse
colors, some is green, some red, some yellow, and some of a burning color,
which they call Caribe, the which is extremely sharp and biting; there is an
other sort not so sharp, but is so sweet, as they may eat it alone as any
other fruit. There is some of it very small and pleasing in the mouth, almost
like to the smell of musk, and is very good. That which is sharp and biting
in this Axi, be the veins and the grain only; the rest is not: for that they
eat it green and dry, whole and beaten, in the pot, and in sawces, being the
chief sauce, and all the spice they have at the Indies. When this Axi is taken
moderately, it helps and comforts the stomach for digestion: but if they take
too much, it has bad effects, for of it self it is very hot, fuming, and
pierces greatly, so as the use thereof is prejudicial to the health of young
folks, chiefly to the soul, for that it provokes to lust. It is strange,
that although the fire and heat of it be well known by experience, and that
every man says, it burns in the mouth and the stomach; yet some, yea many
hold, that the Indian pepper is not hot, but cold, and well tempered. But I
might say to them, the like should be of pepper; though they brought me as many
experiences as they would of the one and the other: yet is it a very mockery
to say it is not hot, seeing it is in the highest degree. They use salt to
temper this Axi, having great sorce to correct it, and so they moderate one
with the other by the contrariety that is in them. They use also Tomates,
which are cold and very wholesome. It is a kind of grain great and full of
juice, the which gives a good taste to sauce, and they are good to eat. They
have generally throughout the Indies of this Indian pepper, at the Islands, new
Spain, Peru, and all the rest that is discovered. And as mays is the general
grain for bread, so Axi is the most common spice for sawces.

Of the Plane tree. CHAP. 21.
Coming to the greater plants or trees at the Indies, the first that shall be
needful to treat of, is the Plane or Platano, as the vulgar call it. I have
been sometimes in doubt, whether the Plane which the Ancients have so much
celebrated, and that of the Indies were of one kind. This well observed, and
that which they write of the other, without all doubt they will appear to be
of sundry kinds. The reason why the Spaniards called it Plane, (for the
Indians had no such name) was as in other trees, for that they have found some
resemblance of the one with the other, even as they called some fruits,
prunes, pines, and cucumbers, being far different from those which are called
by those names in Castille. The thing wherein was most resemblance, in my
opinion, betwixt the Planes at the Indies, and those which the Ancients did
celebrate, is the greatness of the leaves, for that these have them very great
and cool, and the Ancients did likewise much esteem them for the greatness
and coolness of their leaves. It is also a plant that requires much water,
and in a manner continually, which agrees with the sacred Scripture that says;
Like to the Plane near the waters. But in truth there is no more comparison
nor resemblance of the one with the other, then there is (as the Proverb says)
betwixt an egg and a chestnut. For first, the ancient plane carries no fruit,
at the least, they made no account the^* of, but the chiefest reason why they
esteemed it, was, for the shadow, for that there was no more Sun under a
Plane than under a roof. And contrariwise, the reason why they should regard
it at the Indies, yea make great account thereof, is by reason of this fruit,
which is very good; for they have little shade. Moreover, the ancient Plane had
the body so big, and the boughs so spread, Plin.^^b. 2. c^. 1
that Pliny reports of one Licinius a Roman Captain, who with eighteen of
his companions dined at ease in th'hollow of one of these planes: and of the
Emperor Caius Caligula, who with eleven of his ghests feasted upon the top
of an other Plane, where he made them a sumptuous banquet. The Indian Planes
have neither so great nor hollow bodies, not so broad boughs. He says
moreover, that the ancient Planes grew in Italy and in Spain, although they
had been brought thither from Greece; and first from Asia, but the Indians
Planes grow neither in Italy nor in Spain. I say they grow not there, for
although we have seen some at Seville in the Kings gardins, yet they prosper
not, nor are of any account. Finally, whatsoever they find alike betwixt the
one and the other, is very different. For although the leaves of the ancient
Planes were very great, yet were they not such, nor so great as those at the
Indies, seeing that Pliny compares it to the leaf of a Vine or Fig tree.

Pli. lib. 11. c. 16
The leaves of the Indian Plane, are of a wonderful bigness, and are, in a
manner, sufficient to cover a man from the foot to the head, so as no man can
doubt but there is great difference betwixt the one and the other. But put the
case that this Indian Plane be different from the ancient, yet deserves it no
less commendation, it may be, more, by reason of the profitable qualities it
has. It is a plant that makes a stock within theearth, out of the which
springs many and sundry siens and sprigges, divided, and not joined together.
These sprigges grow big, every one making a small tree apart, and in growing
they cast forth these leaves, which are of a fine green smooth, and great as I
have said. When it is grown to the height of a stade and a half, or two, it
puttes forth one only bough of fruit, whereon sometimes there are great
numbers of this fruit, and sometimes less. I have told upon some of these
boughs three hundred, whereof every one was a spanne long more or less, and
two or three fingers big; yet is there much difference herein, betwixt some
and others, they take away the rind, and all the rest is a firm kernel and
tender, good to eat, and nourishing. This fruit inclines more to cold then
heat. They are accustomed to gather the boughs or clusters, as I have said,
being green, and put them into vessels, where they ripen, being well covered,
especially when there is a certain herb mingled with it, which serves for
this effect. If they suffer them to ripen on the tree, they have a better
taste, and a very good smell, like to Camoisses or sweet apples. They last
almost all the year, for that there are always young ones that grow out of
this stock; so as when one ends, another begins to yield his fruit, the
one is half ripe and the other begins to bud anew, so as one succeedes
another, and the fruit continues the whole year. In gathering the cluster,
they cut the sprigge or stalk, for that it bears but one, and never but once:
but as I have said, the stalk remains, and castes forth new sienes or
stalks, until it grows old and dies. This Plane continues many years, and
requires much moisture, and a very hot ground. They put ashos at the foot of
it, for the better ^^tertaining ther^f, and they make small groves; and very
thick, which are of great profit and revenue unto them; for that it is the
fruit* they use most at the Indies, and is general in all places, although
they say the first beginning comes from Ethiopia. And in truth the Negros use
them much, and in some places they serve them as bread, yea they make wine of
them. They eat this fruit raw like other fruits; they likewise roast it, and
make many sorts of potages, and conserves, and in all things it serves very
well. There is a kind of small Planes, white and very delicate, which in
Hispaniola they call Dominiques. There are others which are stronger and
bigger, and red of color. There grows none in the kingdom of Peru, but are
brought from the Indies, as from Mexico, Cuernavaca, and other valleys. Upon
the firm land, and in some Islands there are great store of Planes, like unto
thick groves. If this plant were fit for the fire, it were the most profitable
of all others, but it is nothing fit, for neither the body no^ the boughs will
burn, and much less will it serve for building, being a sappy wood, and
without force. Yet Don Alonze Darzilla (as it is said) used the leaves of this
tree dried, to write a part of the Auricana, and in truth it may serve for
want of paper, seeing that the leaf is as broad as a sheet of paper, or
little less, and four times as long.

Of Cacao and Coca. CHAP. 22.
ALthough the Plane be the most profitable, yet that Cacao is most esteemed at
Mexico, and the Coca in Peru; in which two trees they have great superstition.
The Cacao is a fruit little less than almonds, yet more satte, the which being
roasted has no ill^taste. It is so much esteemed amongst the Indians (yea and
among the Spaniards) that it is one of the richest and the greatest traffickes
of new Spain: for being a dry fruit, and that keeps long without
corruption, they carry whole ships laden from the province of Guatimalla.
The last year an English Pirat did burn in the Port of Guatulco in new
Spain, above a hundred thousand charges of Cacao. They use it in steed of
money, for with five Cacaos they buy one thing, with thirty an other, and with
a hundred an other, without any contradiction; and they use to give it to the
poor that beg for alms. The chief use of this Cacao, is in a drink which
they call Choch^late, whereof they make great account in that Country,
foolishly, and without reason; for it is loathsome to such as are not
acquainted with it, having askumme or froth that is very unpleasant to taste,
if they be not very well conceited thereof. Yet it is a drink very much
esteemed among the Indians, wherewith they feast noble men as they pass
through their Country. The Spaniards both men and women, that are accustomed to
the Country, are very greedy of this Chocholate. They say they make diverse
sorts of it, some hot, some cold, and some temperate, and put therein much
of that Chili; yea they make paste thereof, the which they say is good for the
stomach, and against the Catarre. Whatsoever it be, such as have not been
nourished there, are not very curious thereof. The tree whereon this fruit
grows, is of reasonable bigness, and well fashioned, it is so tender, that to
keep it from the burning of the Sun, they plant near unto it, a great tree,
which serves only to shadow it, and they call it the mother of Cacao. There
are places where they are like to the Vines and Olive trees of Spain. The
province where there is greatest abundance for the traffike of Merchandise, is
Guatimalla. There grows none in Peru, but Coca, wherein they hold an other
great superstition, which seems to be fabulous. In truth the traffic of
Coca in Potozi does yearly mount to above half a million of pieces, for that
they use fourscore and ten, or four score and fifteen thousand baskets
every year. In the year, one thousand five hundred eighty three, they spent a
hundred thousand. A basket of Coca in Cusco is worth two pieces and a half,
and three; and in Potozi it is readily worth four pieces, and five Tomines,
and five pieces tried. It is a kind of merchandise, by the which all their
Markets and Faires are made with great expedition. This Coca whereof they make
such account, is a small green leaf, which grows upon small trees about a
fadome high, and in hot and moist grounds; every four months it casts forth
this leaf, which they call Tresmitas or Tremoy; it requires great care in
planting, being very tender, and much more to keep it, when it is gathered.
They lay it in order in long and narrow baskets, and so lade their sheep of
the Country, which go in troops, with one, two, or three thousand baskets of
this merchandise. They bring it commonly from the Andes and valleys, where
there is an extreme heat, and where it raines continually the most part of
the year: wherein the Indians endure much labor and pain to entertain it,
and often many die; for that they go from the Sierre and cold places to till
and gather them in the Andes. And therefore there has been great question and
diversity of opinions among learned men, whether it were more expedient to pull
up these trees, or to let them grow, but in the end they remained. The Indians
esteem it much, and in the time of their Kings Inguas it was not lawful for
any of the common people to use this Coca without license from the Governor.
Their use is to carry it in their mouths, chawing it, and sucking out the
juice, but they swallow it not. They say it gives them great courage, and is
very pleasing unto them. Many grave men hold this as a superstition and a
mere imagination: for my part, and to speak the truth, I persuade not my
self that it is an imagination; but contrariwise, I think it works and gives
force and courage to the Indians: for we see the effects, which cannot be
attributed to imagination, as to go some days without meat, but only a
handful of Coca, and other like effects. The sauce wherewith they do eat
this Coca, is proper enough, whereof I have tasted, and it is like the taste of
leather. The Indians mingle it with the ashes of bones burnt and beat into
powlder; or with lime, as others affirm, which seems to them pleasing and of
a good taste; and they say it does them much good. They willingly employ their
money therein, and use it as money: yet all these things were not inconvenient,
were not the hazard of the traffic thereof, wherein so many men are occupied.
The Seigniors Inguas, used Coca as a delicate and royal thing, which they
offered most in their sacrifices, burning it in honor of their idols.

Of Maguey, Tunal, Cochenille, Anir, and Cotton. CHAP. 23.
MAguey is a tree of wonders, whereof the Notaries or Chapetons (as the Indians
call them) are wont to write miracles, in that it yields water, wine, oil,
vinegar, honny, sirrope, threede, needles, and a thousand other things. It is a
tree which the Indians esteem much in new Spain, and have commonly in their
dwellings some one of them for the maintenance of life; it grows in the
fields, and has great and large leaves, at the end whereof is a strong and
sharp point, which serves to fasten little pins, or to sow as a needle; and
they draw out of this leaf as it were a kind of thread which they use. They
cut the body which is big, when it is tender, wherein is a great hollownesse,
by which the substance mounts from the root, and is a liquor which they drink
like water, being sweet and fresh. This liquor being sodden, turns like wine,
which grows to vinegar, suffering it to sour, and boiling it more, it becomes
as honey, and boiling it half, it serves as sirrope: which is healthful
enough, and of good taste; in my judgment it is better then the sirrope of
raisins. Thus do they boil this liquor, and use it in diverse sorts, whereof
they draw a good quantity, for that in some season they draw daily some pots
of this liquor. There are also of these trees in Peru, but they are not so
profitable as in new Spain. The wood of this tree is hollow and soft, and
serves to keep fire, like to the match of a harquebuze, and preserves it long;
I have seen the Indians use it to that end.

The Tunall is another famous tree in new Spain: if we may call a tree a heap
of leaves gathered together one upon another, it is the strangest fashiond tree
of all other, for first there grows one leaf out of the ground, then another
upon it, and so one upon one, till it comes to his perfection; but as the
leaves grow up, and on the sides, those underneath do become great, and loose
in a manner the form of leaves, making a body and branches, which are
sharp, pricking and deformed, so as in some places they do call it a Thistle.
There are thistles or wild Tunalls, the which do carry no fruit, or else it
is very pricking without any profit. There are likewise planted Tunalls which
yield fruit much esteemed amongst the Indians, the which they call Tunas, and
they are much greater then Plumbes, and long. They open the shell which is
fat, and within it is meat and small grains, like to those of figs, which
be very sweet; they have a good taste, especially the white, which have a
pleasing smell, but the red are not usually so good. There is another sort of
Tunalls, which they esteem much more, although it yeeldes no fruit, yet it
bears an other commodity and profit, which is of the grain, for that
certain small worms breed in the leaves of this tree, when it is well
husbanded, and are thereunto fastened, covered with a certain small fine web,
which does compass them in daintily; and this is that Indian Cochenille, so
famous, and wherewith they die in grain. They let it dry, and being dried,
carry it into Spain, which is a great and rich merchandise. The arobe of this
Cochenille or grain is worth many ducats. In the fleet, the year 1587. they
did bring five thousand six hundred seventy seven arobes, which amounted to
two hundred four score three thousand seven hundred and fifty pieces, and
commonly there comes every year as great a wealth.

These Tunalls grow in temperate grounds inclining to cold. In Peru there
grows none to this day, I have seen some plants in Spain, but they deserve
not estimation. I will speak something likewise of the Anir, although it comes
not from a tree, but from an herb, for that it serves for the dying of cloth,
and is a merchandise which agrees with the grain; it grows in great
abundance iu new Spain, from whence there came in the fleet I mentioned
5263. arobes, or thereabouts, which amounted to so many pieces. Cotton likewise
grows upon small shrubs, and great trees like to little apples, which do open
and yield forth this web; which being gathered, they spinne to make stuffes.
It is one of the things at the Indies of greatest profit, and most in use; for
it serves them both instead of flax and wool to make their garments. It
grows in a hot soil, and there is great store in the valleys, and sea coast
of Peru, in new Spain, the Philippines and China. But the greatest store of
any place that I know, is in the province of Tucuman, in that of saint Croix of
the Sierre, and at Paraguey, whereas Cotton is their chief revenue. They carry
cotton into Spain from the Island of Saint Dominike: and the year that I spoke
of, there came 64000. arobes. At the Indies whereas this cotton grows, they
make cloth, which both the men and women use commonly, making table napkins
thereof, yea and sails for their ships. There is some course, and other that
is fine and delicate; they die it into diverse colors, as we do by our
woollen cloth in Europe.

Of Mameys, Guayavos, and Paltos CHAP. 24.
THese Plants we have spoken of, are the most profitable of the Indies, and the
most necessary for the life of man: yet there are many other that are good to
eat, among the which the Mameys are esteemed, being in fashion like to great
peaches, and bigger, they have one or two stones within them, and their meat
is some what hard. There are some sweet, and others somewhat sower, and have
the rind hard. They make conserves of the meat of this fruit, which is like
to marmelade. The use of this fruit is reasonable good, but the conserves they
make thereof, are better. They grow in Islands. I have not seen any in Peru. It
is a great tree, well fashioned, and a reasonable fair leaf. The Guayavos be
other trees which commonly carry an ill fruit, full of sower kernells, and are
like to little apples. It is a tree little esteemed upon the firm land and at
the Islands, for they say it smells like to the Punaises. The taste and savor
of this fruit is very gross, and the substance unwholesome. In S. Dominique
and other Islands, there are whole mountains full of these Guayavos, and they
say, there was no such kind of trees before the Spaniards came there, but that
they brought them they know not from whence. This tree has multiplied
infinitely, for that there is no beast that will eat the kernells or the
grain, so as being thus scattered on the earth, being hot and moist, it
multiplies in this sort. In Peru, the Guayavos differs from others, for that
the fruit is not red, but white, neither has it any ill smell, but is of a
very good taste; and of what sort of Guayavos soever it be, the fruit is as
good as the best of Spain, especially of those which they call Guayavos de
Matos, and of other little white Guayvilles. It is a fruit reasonably wholesome,
and agrees with the stomach, being of a strong digestion, and cold. The Paltas
commonly are hot and delicate. The Palto is a great tree, and carries a fair
leaf, which has a fruit like to great pears: within it has a great stone,
and all the rest is soft meat, so as when they are full ripe, they are as it
were butter, and have a delicate taste. In Peru the Paltas are great, and have
a very hard skale, which may be taken off whole. This fruit is most usual in
Mexico, having a thin skin, which may be pilled like an apple: they hold it
for a very wholesome meat, and as I have said, it declines a little from heat.
These Mamayes Guayavos, and Paltos, be the Indians peaches, apples, and pears;
and yet would I rather choose them of Europe. But some others by use, or it may
be by affection, do more esteem those of the Indies. I doubt not but such as
have not seen nor tasted of these fruits, will take small pleasure to read
this discourse, yea, they will grow weary to hear it, as I have done in
writing it, which makes me to abridge it, speaking of some other sorts of
fruits, for it were impossible to entreat of them all.

Of Chicocapote, Amonas, and Capollis. CHAP. 25.
SOme desirous to augment things at the Indies, have given out that there is
no kind of fruit like unto Cotignac, or marmelade, and another which tastes
like a meat made of almonds and cream, which they call Blanckemanger, for
that the taste of them deserves these names, the marmalad is that which they
call Capotes, or Chicocapotes, which have a sweet taste, and near unto the
color of marmalade. Some Crollos, (for so they call the Spaniards borne at the
Indies,) say that this fruit passes all the fruits of Spain in excellency:
yet am I not of that opinion, at the least they say, it passes all other
fruits in taste; but I will not dwell upon this question, for that it does not
deserve it. Those Chicocapotes or Capotes, wherein there is little difference,
grow in the hotest parts of new Spain, neither have I knowledge of any such
fruit in the firm land of Peru. As for the Blanckemanger, it is that Annona
or Guanavana, which grows in the firm land, which is fashoned like unto a
pear, a little sharp and opened, within it is white, tender and soft like
butter, sweet and of a pleasing taste: It is no whit meat, though they call
it Blanckemanger, but in truth they have added much unto it, by giving this
name: although it be delicate and of a saucy and delicious taste, and
according to the judgment of some, it is held for the best fruit of the
Indies, yet has it many black kernells within it, and the best which I have
seen is in new Spain, where the Capolies grow, which be like unto cheries,
with a stone, but some what bigger: the form and shape is like unto cheries,
of a good taste, being sweet and sharp; but I have not seen any Capollyes in
any other Country.

Of many sorts of fruit Trees, of Cocos, Almondes, of the Andes, and Almonds
of Chachapoyas. CHAP. 26.
IT were not possible to reckon all the fruits and trees at the Indies, for
that I remember not many, and there are many more whereof I have no knowledge;
and in my opinion, it were troublesome to speak of all those I now remember.
There are some gross fruits, as those which they call Lucumes, (of which
fruit they speak in a proverb, that it is a counterfeit price,) The Guanos,
Pacayes, Hubos, and the nuttes which they call imprisoned; which fruits seem
to many, to be the same kind of nuttes we have in Spain; yea, they say, if
they were often transplanted from place to place, they would carry nuttes
altogether like to those of Spain. And the reason why the fruit is so
unpleasant, is, for that they are wild. To conclude, we ought well to consider
the providence and riches of the Creator, who impartes to so diverse parts of
the world, such variety of fruit trees, all for the service of man that
inhabites the earth. And it is an admirable thing to see so many different
forms, tastes, and effects unknown, whereof we did never hear speak, before
the discovery of the Indies. And whereof Pliny himself, Dioscorides and
Theophrastes, (yea, the most curious,) had no knowledge, notwithstanding all
their search and diligence. There have been some curious men of our age,
which have written some Treatises of the Indian plants, of herbs, and rivers,
and of their operations for physic, to whom they may fly for their better
instruction. I only pretend, (and in few words,) to treat superficially of
that which comes to memory touching this subject; yet do I not think it good
to pass away under silence the Cocos or Indian palms, by reason of a very
notable property it has. I call them palms, not properly, or that it bears
dates, but that they are trees like to other palms. They are high and strong,
and the higher they grow, the broader they stretch out their branches. These
Cocos yield a fruit which they likewise call Cocos, whereof they commonly make
vessels to drink in, and some they say have a virtue against poison, and to
cure the pain in the side. The nutte and meat being dried, is good to eat,
and comes near in taste to green chesnuttes. When the Coco is tender upon the
tree, the substance within it, is as it were milk, which they drink for
daintines, and to refresh them in time of heat. I have seen of these trees in
S. Iean de Port Ricco, and other parts of the Indies, and they report a
wonderful thing, that every month or Moon, this tree castes forth a new
branch of this Cocos; so as it yeeldes fruit twelve times in the year, as it
is written in the Apocalips: and in truth this seems like unto it, for that
all the branches are of different ages, some beginning, others being ripe, and
some half ripe. These Cocos, are commonly of the form and bigness of a small
melon. There is of another kind which they call Coquillos, the which is a
better fruit, whereof there be some in Chille. They are some what less then
nuttes, but more round. There is another kind of Cocos, which have not the
kernel so oily, but within they have a great number of small fruits like
almonds, like unto the grains of a Poungarnet.

These almonds are thrice as big as those of Castille, and resemble them in
taste, though they be more sharp, and likewise moist and oily. It is a good
meat, they use it also in feasting; for lack of almons to make marchpanes, and
such other things. They call them Almonds of the Andes, for that these Cocos
grow abundantly upon the Andes of Peru; they are so strong and hard, as to
open them, they must beat them with a great stone, when they fall from the
tree. If they chance to hit any one on the head, he has no more need of any
surgeon. It is an incredible thing, that within the hollow of these Cocos,
which are no bigger than the rest, or little more, there are such a multi^^de
of these almonds. But as touching almonds and other fruits, all trees must
yield to the almonds of Chachapo^^s, which I cannot otherwise call. It is the
most pleasing, delicate, and wholesome fruit of all that I have seen at the
Indies; yea a learned Physician did affirm, that amongst all the fruits at
the Indies, or in Spain, none came near these Almonds in excellency. There
are both greater and less than those of the Andes, but all are fatter than
those of Castille. They are very tender to eat, and they have much juice and
substance; and are oily and very pleasant: they grow upon high trees, bearing
great leaves. And as it is a pre^ious thing, so nature has given them a good
covering and defense, being in a husk somewhat bigger, and more pricking than
a chestnut. Yet when this husk is dry, they easily draw forth the grain.
They say, that the Apes who are very greedy of this fruit, and whereof there
is abundance in Chachapoyas of Peru (which is the only country (to my
knowledge) where these trees do grow) fearing they should prick them, and
yet desirous to draw forth the almond, they cast them from the top of the
tree against the stones, and having broken the husk, they open them to eat
the fruit at their pleasure.

Of many and diverse flowers, and of some trees which yield only a flower, and
how the Indians do use them CHAP. 27.
THe Indians are great lovers of flowers, and in new Spain more than in any
other part of the world, and therefore they are accustomed to make many kinds
of nosegaies, which there they call Suchilles, with such pretty variety and
art, as nothing can be more pleasing. They have a custom amongst them, that
the chiefest man offer their Suchillos or nosegayes in honor to Noblemen, and
to their ghests; and they presented us with such abundance as we passed
through that Country, as we knew not what to do with them; and at this day
they use the principal flowers of Castill, to that end, for that they grow
better there than here, as gilliflowers, roses, jasmins, violets, orange
flowers, and other sorts which they have transported ou^ ^f Spain. The rose
tree grows too fast in some places, so as they bear no roses. It chanced
one day that a rose tree was burned, and the siens which sprowted out,
presently bare abundance of roses, and thereby they learnd to prune them, and
to cut off the superfluous branches, so as at this day they yield reasonable
store of ros^s. But besides these kinds of flowers, which have been
transported from hence. There are many others, whose names I do not know,
whereof some are red, blew, yellow, violet and white, with a thousand different
colors, which the Indians did use to carry on their heads, as feathers for
ornament. True it is, that many of these flowers are only pleasing to the
sight, having no good savor, either they are gross, or else they have none at
all; and yet there be some of an excellent scent. As those which grow upon a
tree termed by them Floripondio or carry flower, which bears no fruit, but
only these flowers, which are greater than the Lilly, and are like to little
bells, all white, which have within them small threeds, as we see in the
lilly: it leaves not all the year to bear these flowers, whose smell is
wonderful sweet and agreeable, especially in the cool of the morning. The
Viceroy Don Francisco de Toledo sent of these trees unto King Philip, as a
thing worthy to be planted in royal gardins. In new Spain the Indians
esteem much of a flower, which they call Volosuchil, which signifies flower
of the heart, for that it bears the form of a heart, and is not much less.
There is likewise an other great tree, which bears this kind of flower,
without any fruit; it has a strong savor, and in my opinion, too violent,
the which may seem to some more pleasing. It is a thing well known, that the
flower which they call of the Sun, ^^th the figure of the Sun, and turns
according to the motion thereof. There are other kinds which they call
gilleflowers of the Indies, the which are like to a fine orange tawnie vellet,
or a violet; those have no scent of any account, but only are fair to the
eye. There are other flowers which besides the bea^^ie of the eye, although
they have no smell, yet have they a savor like unto cresses, the which if you
should eat with outlooking of them, you would judge them to be no other. The
flower of Granadille is held for an admirable thing, and they say, it has in
it the marks of the passion, and that therein they note the nails, the
pillar, the whips, and crown of thorns, and the wounds, wherein they are not
altogether without reason, and yet to find out and observe these things, it
requires some piety to cause belief: but it is very exquisite and fair to
the eye, although it have no smell. The fruit which they also call Granadille
is eaten and drunk; or to speak more properly, sucked, for a refreshing; this
fruit is sweet, and too sweet after some opinions. The Indians have used in
their feasts and dances, to carry flowers in their hands, and the Kings and
Noblemen carry them for their greatness. For this reason we commonly see their
ancient pictures with flowers in their hands, as we see here with gloves. I
think this sufficient touching flowers. They use BaZilic to this effect,
although it be no flower, but an herb only, which they were won^ to plant
carefully in their gardins, but now they regard it not; so as it grows only
about their pooles and ponds,

Of Balm. CHAP. 28.
THe Sovereign Creator has not only fashioned Plants to serve as meat, but
also for recreation, for physic, and for the cure of man. I have spoken
somewhat of those that serve for nourishment, which is the chief, and a little
of those that serve for recreation, and now we are to entreat of those which
are proper for physic, wherein I will speak something. And although all
plants are medicinal when they are well known and applied, yet there are some
things especially, which we see directly ordained by the Creator for physic;
and for the health of man: as liquors, oiles, gummes, and rozines, which come
from diverse plants and herbs, and which easily show by experience whereto
they are proper. Above all, Baulme is with reason esteemed for the excellent
smell, but much more for the exquisite effect it has to cure wounds, and
diverse other remedies, as experience has taught in the cure of diseases. The
Balm which comes from the West Indies, is not of the same kind of right Balm
which they bring from Alexandria or Caire, and in old time was in Judea; which
Judea (as Pliny writes) did of all the world possess this greatness, until
the Emperor Vespasian brought it to Rome and into Italy. Pli. lib. 12 c. 15
The reason why I say the liquor of the one and the other are not of one kind,
is for that the trees from whence it comes are very different: for the balm
tree of Palestine was small, and fashioned like to a Vine (as Plinic reports)
who had seen it, and those that at this day that have seen them in the East,
say as much. As also the holy Scripture calls the place where the Balm
thickens, Can^. 1.
Vine of Enguaddy, for the resemblance it has to vine. At the Indies I have
seen the tree from whence they draw the Balm, which is as big as a
poungarnet tree, and some thing near the fashion; and if my memory fails me
not, it has nothing common with the vine, although that Strabo writes, that
the ancient tree of Balm, Strab. lib. 16. Geograp.
was of the bigness of a poungarnet tree. But in their accidents and operations,
their liquors are alike, as likewise they be in their admirable smells, and in
the cure and healing of wounds, in color and substance, seeing they report of
other Balmes that there is some white, vermilion, green, and black, the which
is likewise seen in that of the Indies. And as they drew forth the ancient in
cutting and making incisions in the bark, to cause the liquor to distill out,
so do they with that at the Indies, although it distilles in greater
abundance. And as in the ancient there is one kind which is pure, the which
they call Opobalsamum, which be the very tears that distill, so as there is
another sort which is not so exquisite, the which they draw from the bark and
leaves strained and boiled on the fire, the which they call Xilobalssamum. The
like is also in the Indian Balmes; there is one pure that distilles from the
tree, and others that the Indians draw out by straining and boiling the leaves
and wood, yea, they do sophisticate and augment it with other liquors, to make
it increase. It is not without reason they call it Balm, for in truth it is
so, (although it be not of the same kind of the ancient,) yet it is much
esteemed, and should be more, if the great abundance were not the cause as in
Emeraldes and Pearls. That which importes most, is the use wherein it is
employed, for cream and unctions in the Church, and in such veneration: for
that the Apostolic sea has given liberty to give cream of Balm at the
Indies, and that they should use it in confirmation and other ceremonies which
they use. They bring Balm to Spain from new Spain, from the Province of
Guatimalla, from Chiappa, and other places where it aboundes most, although the
most esteemed be that which comes from the Island of Tollu, which is upon the
maine land, not far from Carthagene. This Balm is white, and commonly they
hold the white to be more perfect then the red, although Pliny gives the
first place to the vermilion, Pli^. li. 12. c. 25
the second to the white, the third to green, and the last to black; but it
seems that Strabo esteemed more the white Balmes as ours do. Monardes
discourses at large of the Indian Balm in the first and second part,
especially of that of Carthagene and Tollu, which is all one. I have not found
that the Indians in old time did much esteem Balm, nor yet employ it in any
important use, although Monardes says, that the Indians cured their wounds
therewith, and from thence the Spaniardes learned it.

Of Amber, and other Oils, Gums, and Drugges, which they bring from the Indies
CHAP. 29.
NExt to Balm, Amber holds the second place: it is another liquor which is
likewise sweet and medicinal; but more thick, and turns into a paste of a
hot complexion, and a good perfume, the which they apply to wounds, bruises,
and other necessities; wherein I will refer my self to the Physicians,
especially to Doctor Monardes, who in his first Part, has written of this
liquor, and many others that are physical, which comes from the Indies. This
Amber comes from new Spain, which has that advantage above other Provinces in
goomes, liquors, and juice of trees, whereby they have such abundance of
matter, for perfume and physic, as is the Anime, whereof there comes great
store, Copall, or Suchicopal, which is another kind, storax and encense, which
have excellent operations, and have a very good smell fit for fumigations.
Likewise the Tacamahaca and Caranna, which are also very medicinal. They bring
likewise from this Province oil of Aspicke, which the Physicians and Painters
use much, the one for plasters, the other to vernish their pictures. They bring
also for the Physicians, Cassia fistule, the which grows plentifully in S.
Dominique. It is a great tree, which carries these canes as his fruit. They
brought in the fleet wherein I came from S. Dominique forty eight quintalles
of Cassia fistule. Salcepareille is not less known, for a thousand remedies
wherein it is used. There came in the same fleet fifty quintalles from the
same Island. There is much of this Sa^cepar^ille at Peru, and most excellent in
the Province of Gua^aquill, which is under the Line. Many go to be cured into
this Province, and it is the opinion of some, that the pure water only which
they drink, gives them health, for that it passes by roots as I have said,
from whence it draws this virtue, so as there needs no great covering or
garments to make a man sweat in that country. The wood of Guayac, which they
call Lignum sanctum, or Indian wood grows abundantly in the same Islands, and
is as heavy as iron, so as it presently sinkes in the water, hereof they
brought in the same fleet 350. quintalls, and they might have brought twenty,
yea, a hundred thousand of this wood, if there were use for it. There came in
the same fleet, and from the same Island, 130. quintalles of Bresill wood, the
which is fiery red, so well known, and much used in dying and other things.
There are at the Indies infinite numbers of other aromaticall woods, gummes,
oils, and drugges, so as it is not possible to name them all, neither does it
now much import. I say only, that in the time of the Kings Inguas of C^sco,
and the Mexicaine Kings, there were many great personages expert in curing of
diseases with simples, and did goodly cures, having the knowledge of the many
virtues and properties of herbs, roots, woods, and plants, which grow
there, and whereof the Ancients of Europe have had no knowledge. There are a
thousand of these simples fit to purge, as the roots of Mechoacan, the Pignons
of Punua, the conserve of Guanucquo, the oil of Fig Trees, and many other
things, the which being well applied, and in time, they hold to be of no less
efficacy then the drugges that come from the East. The which may be seen in
reading the discourse which Monardes has made in the first and second Part,
where he treates amply of Tobacco, or Petum, whereof they have made notable
experiences against poison. Tobacco is a small tree or plant, common enough,
the which has in it rare virtues, as amongst others it serves for a
counterpoison, like to many and diverse other plants: for the Creator of all
things has imparted his virtues at his pleasure, not willing that any thing
should grow idle. But it is another sovereign gift to man, to know them and
their proper uses, the which the same Creator gives to whom he pleases.
Doctor Francis Hernandes has made a goodly work upon this subject, of Indian
plants, liquors, and other physical things, by the Kings express commission
and commandment, causing all the plants at the Indies to be lively painted,
which they say are above a thousand two hundred; and that the work cost above
three score thousand ducats: out of which work the Doctor Nardus Anthonius an
Italian Physician has made a curious extract, sending him to the foresaid
books, that desires more exactly to know the plants at the Indies, especially
for physic.

Of great forests at the Indies, of Cedars, of Ceivas, and other great trees.
CHAP. 30.
ALthough from the beginning the earth did bring forth plants and trees by the
commandment of the Lord, yet has it yielded more in one place than in
another: and besides the plants and trees, which by the industry of man have
been transplanted and carried from place to place, there are many which Nature
it self has brought forth. I do believe, that of this sort there are more at
the new world, which we do call the Indies, either in number or diversity,
than in the old, as Europe, Asia, or Affrike. The reason is, for that the
climate at the Indies is generally hot and moist, as we have declared in the
second Book, against the opinion of the Auntients, which causes the earth
naturally for to bring forth an infinite number of wild plants, whereby the
greatest part of the Indies is inhabitable, being almost impossible to travel
by reason of the woods and thick forests that are there; which they labor
daily to cut down. It has bin needful (passing through some parts of the
Indies, especially where they newly entered) to make their way, in cutting down
trees, and pulling up bushes, so that (as some religious men have written that
have tried it) they could not sometimes have passed above a league in a day.
One of our brothers (a man worthy of credit) reported unto us, that being
straied in the mountains, not knowing which way he should pass, he fell
among such thick bushes, that he was forced to go upon them, without setting
foot to the ground, by the space of fifteen whole days: and to see the
Sun, or to mark some way in this thick forest full of wood, he was forced
to climb to the top of the highest trees to discover. He that shall read the
discourse of his travel, how often he was lost, and the ways he passed, with
the strange adventures that happened unto him, the which I have written
briefly, being so worthy the knowledge, and having my self traveled alittle
over the mountains at the Indies, were it but the eighteen leagues betwixt
Nombre de Dios and Panama, may well judge what great forests there are. So as
having no winter in those parts, to nip them with cold, and the humiditie of
the heavens, and earth being so great, as the mountains bring forth infinite
forests, and the plains which they call Savanas, great plenty of grass:
there is no want of pasture for feeding, of timber building, nor of wood for
fuel. It is impossible to set down the differences and forms of so many
wild trees, for that the names of the greatest part are unknown.

Cedars in old time so much esteemed, are there very common, both for
buildings and ships, and they are of diverse sorts, some white, and some
read, very odoriferant. There are great store of Bay trees, very pleasant to
behold upon the Andes of Peru, upon the mountains, in the Islands of
Nicaragua, and in New Spain. There are also infinite numbers of Palms and
Ceivas, whereof the Indians make their Canoes, which are boats made of one
piece. They bring into Spain from the Havana, excellent timber. In the Island
of Cuba, there are infinite numbers of like trees, as Ebene, Caovana,
Grenadille, Cedars, and other kinds which I do not know. There are great pine
trees in New Spain, though they be not so strong as those in Spain: they
bear no pignous or kernells, but empty apples. The oaks as they call them of
Guaiaquil, is an excelent wood and sweet, when they cut it; yea there are kanes
or most high reeds, of whose boughs or small reeds they do make bottles and
pitchers to carry water, and do likewise use them in their buildings. There is
likewise the wood of Mansle, or Fur, whereof they make masts for their
ships, and they hold them as strong as iron. Molle is a tree of many
virtues, which casts forth small boughs, whereof the Indians make wine. In
Mexico they call it the tree of Peru, for that it came from thence: but it
grows also in New Spain, and better than those in Peru. There are a thousand
other trees, which were a super^^uous labor to entreat of, whereof some are
of an exceeding greatness, I will speak only of one which is in Tlaco
Chavoya, three leagues from Guayaca in New Spain: this tree being measured
within, being hollow, was found to have nine fadome, and without, near to the
root, sixteen, and somewhat higher, twelve. This tree was struck with
lightning from the top to the bottom^, through the heart, the which caused
this hollownesse; they say that before the thunder fell upon it, it was able to
shadow a thousand men, and therefore they did assemble there for their daunces
and superstitions: yet to this day there does remain some boughs and verdure,
but not much. They know not what kind of tree it is, but they say it is a kind
of Cedar. Such as shall find this strange, let them read what Pliny
reports of the Plane of Lidia, Plin. lib. 12. c. 1*
the hollow whereof contained four score foot and one, and seemed rather a
Cabin or a house, than the hollow of a tree, his boughs like a whole wood, the
shadow whereof covered a great part of the field. By that which is written of
this tree, we have no great cause to wonder at the Weaver, who had his
dwelling and loome in the hollow of a chestnut tree; and of another chestnut
tree, if it were not the very same, into the hollow whereof there entered
eighteen men on horseback, and passed out without disturbing one another. The
Indians did commonly use their idolatries in these trees, so strange and
deformed, even as did the ancient Gentiles, as some Writers of our time do
report.

Of Plants and fruits which have bin carried out of Spain to the Indies. CHAP.
31.
THe Indians have received more profit, and have bin better recompensed in
plants that have bin brought from Spain, than in any other merchandise, for
that those few which are carried from the Indies into Spain, grow little
there, and multiply not, and contrariwise the great number that have been
carried from Spain to the Indies, prosper well and multiply greatly: I know not
whether I shall attribute it to the bounty of the plants that go from hence,
or to the goodness of the soil that is there. Finally, there is at the Indies
any good thing that Spain brings forth; in some places it is better, in some
worse, as wheat, barley, herbs, and all kinds of pulses, also lettuce,
colewortes, radishes, onions, garlike, parsley, turnips, parseneps, Becengenes,
or apples of love, siccorie, beetes, spinach, pease, beans, vetches; and
finally, whatsoever grows here of any profit, so as all that have voyaged
thither, have been curious to carry seeds of all sorts, and all have grown,
although diversely, some more, some less. As for those trees that have most
abundantly fructified, be orange trees, limons, citrons, and others of that
sort. In some parts there are at this day, as it were whole woods and forests
of orange trees: the which seeming strange unto me, I asked who had planted
the fields with so many orange trees* they made me answer, that it did come by
chance, for that oranges being fallen to the ground, and rotten, their seeds
did spring, and of those which the water had carried away into diverse parts,
these woods grew so thick: which seemed to me a very good reason. I have said
that this fruit has generally increased most at the Indies, for that I have
not been in any place but I find orange trees, for that all their soil is
hot and moist, which this tree most desires. There grows not any upon the
Sierre or mountain, but they carry them from the valleys or sea coast. The
conserve of oranges which they do make at the Islands, is the best I have seen
any where; peaches, presses and apricockes have greatly multiplied, especially
in New Spain. At Peru there grows few of these kinds of fruits, except
peaches, and much less in the Islands. There grows apples and pears, yet but
scarcely: there are but few plumbs, but abundance of figs, chiefly in Peru.
They find quinces in all the country of the Indies, and in New Spain, in such
abundance, as they gave us fifty choice ones for half a riall. There is great
store of pomegranets, but they are all sweet, for the sharp are not there
esteemed. There are very good melons in some parts of Peru. Cherries both
wild and tame have not prospered well at the Indies, the which I do not impute
to want of temperature, for that there is of all sorts, but to carelessness, or
that they have not well observed the temperature. To conclude, I do not find
that in those parts there wants any dainty fruit. As for gross fruits, they
have no Beillottes nor chesnuttes, neither do I find that any have grown
there to this day. Almonds grow there, but rarely. They carry from Spain, for
such as are dainty mouthed, both almonds, nuttes, and filberds; but I have not
known they had any medlers or servises, which importes little. In my
judgment, this may suffice to show that there wants no delightful fruits.
Now let us speak somewhat of plants that profit, and which have been carried
from Spain, and so will end that Treatise, being too troublesome.

Of grapes, vignes, olives, mulberies, and kanes of sugar. CHAP. 32.
I Mean by profitable plants, those, which besides that which they eat in the
house, bring silver to their masters; the chief of these is the vigne,
whereof comes wine vinegar, grapes, green and dry, veriuyce, and sirrope.
But the wine is the best. There grows no wine, nor grapes in the Islands, nor
firm land, but in new Spain, there are some vignes which bear grapes, and
yet make no wine. The cause is, for that the grape ripens not well, by reason
of the rain that falls in the months of July and August, which hinders their
ripening, so as they serve only to eat. They carry wine out of Spain, and
from the Canaries, to all parts of the Indies, except Peru and the realm of
Chille, where there are vignes that yield excellent wine, which increase daily
both in quantity, for that it is a great riches in that country, and in beauty,
for that they are become with time and practice more expert vignerous. The
vignes of Peru are commonly in hot valleys, where there are waters, which they
water with the hand, because there falls no rain at all from heaven; and
upon the Lanos and Sierre it comes not in time. There are some places where
the vignes are not watered, neither from heaven nor earth, and yet they
increase in great abundance, as in the valley of Yca; and in the ditches that
they call VillacuZi, in which places they find ditches, or the earth suncke
down amongst the dead sands, which are thorowout the year of a wonderful
coolness, and yet it raines not there at any time, neither is there any manner
of means to water it artificially; the reason is, because the soil is
spongious, and suckes up the water of the rivers that fall from the mountain,
which moisten these sands, or else it is the moistness of the sea, as others
suppose, which passing over this sand, is the cause why it is not barren nor
unprofitable, as the Philosopher teaches. The vignes have so increased there,
as for this cause only the tithes of the Churches are multiplied five or six
times double within these twenty years. The most fertile valleys for vignes
be Victor near to Arequipa, Yca in the territory of Lima, and Caraguato in the
Country of Chuquiavo; they carry this wine to Potozi, Cusco and diverse parts,
which yeeldes a great revenue: for notwithstanding all the abundance they
have, a bottle or arobe is there worth five or six ducats, and if it be
Spanish wine (as they commonly carry in their fleetes) it is worth ten or
twelve. They make wine like to that of Spain, in the realm of Chille, being
in the same climate; but it corrupts being carried to Peru: they eat the
grape where they cannot drink the wine. And it is strange, that in the city of
Cusco you shall find ripe grapes all the year long: the reason is (as they
say) for that those valleis bring forth fruits in diverse months of the
year, either for that they cut their vignes in diverse seasons; or that this
variety proceeds from the quality of the soil; but whatsoever it be, it is
most certain, there are some valleys which carry fruit all the year. If any
one wonder at this, it may be he will wonder much more at that which I shall
say, and perchance not believe it. There are trees in Peru, whereof the one
part yeeldes fruit one six months of the year, and the other half part
yeeldes fruit the other six months. In Malla which is thirteen leagues from
the City of Kings, there is a fig tree, whereof the one half which is
toward the South, is green, and yields his fruit one season of the year,
that is, when it is summer upon the Sierre, and the other moity toward the
Lanos or sea coast, is green, and yeeldes his fruit in the other contrary
season, when it is summer upon the Lanos, which grows from the diverse
temperature, and the air which comes from the one part, and the other. The
revenue of wine there is not small, but it goes not out of the country. But
the silk that is made in new Spain is transported into other countries, as to
Peru. There were no Mulberrie trees in the Indies, but such as were brought
from Spain, and they grow well, especially in the province which they call
Mistecqua, where there are silke-wormes, and they put to work the silk they
gather, whereof they make very good taffataes: Yet to this day they have made
neyth^r damask, satin, nor velvet. The sugar yet is a greater revenue, for
they not only spend it at the Indies, but also they carry much into Spain, for
the canes grow exceeding well in many parts of the Indies. They have built
their engines in the Islands, in Mexico, in Peru, and in other parts, which
yields them a very great revenue.

It was told me, that the engine for sugar in Nasca, was worth yearly above
thirty thousand pieces of revenue. That of Chicama joining to Truxillo, was
likewise of great revenue, and those of new Spain are of no less; and it is a
strange thing to see what store they consume at the Indies. They brought from
the Island of S. Dominique, in the fleet wherein I came eight hundred ninety
eight chests of sugar, which being (as I did see) shipped at Port Ricco (every
chest (in my opinion) weied eight arobes, every arobes weighing five and twenty
pounds, which are two hundred weight of sugar) is the chief revenue of these
Islands, so much are men given to the desire of sweet things. There are
likewise olives and olive trees at the Indies, I say in Mexico and in Peru, yet
has there not been to this day any mill for oil, for that they eat all
their olives, and dress them well: they find the charge is greater to make
oil than the profit, and therefore they carry all the oil they do spend from
Spain. And here we will end with plants, and will pass to such beasts as be
at the Indies.

Of Beasts bearing wool, and of Kine. CHAP. 33.
I ^inde there are three kinds of beasts at the Indies, whereof some have been
carried from Spain, others are of the same kind we have in Europe, and yet
not carried by the Spaniardes; and others are proper to the Indies, whereof
there are none in Spain. Of the first kind are sheep, kine, goats, swine,
horses, asses, dogs, cattes and other such beasts, for there are of all these
kinds at the Indies. The smaller cattle have greatly multiplied, and if they
could make profit of their woolls by sending them into Europe, it were one of
the greatest riches the Indies had, for there the flocks of sheep have great
pastures, whereas their feeding fails not. In Peru there is such store of
pastures and feedings, as no man has any proper to himself, but every man
feeds his troops where he pleases. For this reason there is commonly great
store of flesh, and very good cheap, and all other things that come from
sheep, as milk, and cheese. For a time they lost their woolles, until that
some began to husband it, and to make cloth and coverings, which has been a
great help for the poorer sort of the country, for that the cloth of Castille
is very dear there. There are many Clothiers in Peru, but more in new Spain,
yet the cloth that comes from Spain, is far better, whether the woll be more
fine, or the work men more expert. In former times there were men that did
possess threescore and ten, yea, a hundred thousand sheep, and at this day
they have not many less. If this were in Europe, it were a very great
substance, but in that country it is but a mean wealth. In many parts of the
Indies, and I think in the greatest part, small cattle do not increase and
profit well, by reason that the grass is high, and the soil so vicious, that
they cannot feed so well as great cattle. And therefore there is an infinite
number of line, whereof there are two kinds. Some are ^ame and go in troops,
as in the Land of Charca, and other Provinces of Peru, as also in all new
Spain: from these tame kine they draw such profit as they do in Spain, that
is, the flesh, butter, calves, and oxen to till the ground. The other kind is
wild, which live in the mountains and forests, and therefore they tame them
not, neither have they any master to whom they are proper, both for the
roughnes and thickenes of the forest, as also for the great multitude there
is, and he that first killes them, is the master, as of any wild beast. These
wild kine have so multiplied in S. Dominique, and thereabouts, that they
troop together in the fields and woods by thousands, having no master to whom
they appertain. They hunt these beasts only for their hides, they go to the
field on horseback with their weapons to hough them, coursing the kine: and
when they have stricken any and stayed them, they are their own, they flea
them and carry the hides home, leaving the flesh, which every one neglects for
the abundance there is, so as some have testified in this Island, that in some
places the air has been corrupted with the abundance of these stinking
carcases. The hides they bring into Spain, is one of the best revenues of the
Islands, and of new Spain. In the fleet the year 1^87. there came from S.
Dominique, 3^444. hides, and from new Spain, 64350. which they value at 96532.
pieces, so as when they discharge one of these fleetes, it is admirable to
behold the river of Seville, and in the arcenall (where they unlade,) so many
hides, and so much merchandise. There are also great numbers of goats, whose
chief profit is their tallowe, besides their kidmilke and other commodities,
for that both rich and poor use this tallowe for lights, for as there is a
great quantity, so do they make very good accoumpt of it; yea, more then of
oil, but all the tallow they use is only of the males. They yse their skins
for shoes, yet I hold them not so good, as those which are carried from
Castill. Horses have multiplied there, and are very excellent in many places;
yea in many parts there are races found as good as the best in Spain, as well
for passing of a carrier, and for pomp, as also for travel: and therefore
they use horses most commonly, although there be no want of moyles, whereof
there are many, especially where they make their carriages by land. There is no
great numbers of asses, having no great use for them, neither for travel nor
service. There are some few ca^mells; I have seen some in Peru, that were
brought from the Canaries, and have multiplied there alittle. In S. Dominique,
dogs have so multiplied in number and bigness, as at this day it is the
scourge and affliction of that Island: for they eat the sheep, and go in
troops through the fields. Such that kill them are rewarded like to them that
kill woolves in Spain. At the first there were no dogs at the Indies but
some beasts like unto little dogs, the which the Indians call Alco, and
therefore they call all dogs that go from Spain, by the same name, by reason
of the resemblance that is betwixt them. The Indians do so love these little
dogs, that they will spare their meat to feed them, so as when they travel
in the country, they carry them with them upon their shoulders, or in their
bosoms, and when they are sick, they keep them with them, without any use,
but only for company.

Of some Beasts of Europe, which the Spaniardes found at the Indies, and how
they should pass thither. CHAP. 34.
IT is certain that they have carried from Spain all these beasts whereof I
have spoken, of which kinds there were none at the Indies, when they were
first discovered about a hundred years since; for besides that it may be well
approved by witnesses at this day living. It is also a sufficient argument to
see that the Indians in their tongue, have no proper words to signify these
beasts, but they use the same Spanish names, although they be corrupted: for
being ignorant of the thing, they took the word common to those places from
whence they came. I have found this a good rule, to discern what things the
Indians had before the Spaniardes came there, and what they had not: for they
gave names to those they had and knew before, and have given new names to these
that are newly come unto them, which commonly are the same Spanish names,
although they pronounce them after their manner, as for a horse, wine, and
wheat. They found of some sorts of beasts that are in Europe, and were not
carried thither by the Spaniards. There are Lions, Tigres, Bears, Boares,
Foxes, and other fierce and wild beasts, whereof we have treated in the first
book, so as it was not likely they should pass to the Indies by Sea, being
impossible to swim the Ocean: and it were a folly to imagine that men had
embarked them with them. It follows therefore that this world ioynes with the
new in some part: by which these beasts might pass, Genes. 6.
and so by little and little multiplied this world. The lions which I have
seen, are not red, neither have they such hair as they usually paint them
with. They are gray, and not so furious as they seem in pictures. The Indians
assemble in troops to hunt the lion, and make as it were a circle, which they
do call Chaco, wherewith they inviron them, and after they kill them with
stones, staves, and other weapons. These lions use to climb trees, where being
mounted, the Indians kill them with lances and crossebowes, but more easily
with harquebuzes. The Tygres are more fierce and cruel, and are more dangerous
to meet, because they break forth and assail men in treason: They are
spotted, as the Historiographers describe them. I have heard some report that
these Tygres were very fierce against the Indians, yet would they not adventure
at all upon the Spaniards, or very little; and that they would choose an
Indian in the midst of many Spaniardes, and carry him away.

The Bears which in Cusco they call Otoioncos, be of the same kind that ours
are, and keep in the ground. There are few swarms of Bees, for that their
honniecombes are found in trees, or under the ground, and not in hives as in
Castille. The honny comhes which I have seen in the Province of Charcas, which
they call Chiguanas, are of a gray color, having little juice, and are more
like unto sweet straw, than to honey combs. They say the Bees are little, like
unto flies; and that they swarm under the earth. The honey is sharp and black,
yet in some places there is better, and the combs better fashioned, as in the
province of Tucuman in Chille, and in Carthagene. I have not seen nor heard
speak^ of wild boares, but of foxes and other wild beasts that eat their
cattle and foul, there are more than their shepherds would willingly have.
Besides these beasts that are furious and hurtful, there are others that are
profitable, and have not been transported by the Spaniardes, as stagges and
diere, whereof there is gro^t abundance in all the forests. But the greatest
part is a kind of diere without horns, at the least, I have never seen nor
heard speak of other, and all are without horns like unto Corcos. It seems
not hard to believe, but is almost certain, that all these beasts for their
lightness, and being naturally wild, have passed from one world to an other,
by some parts where they join, seeing that in the great Islands far from the
maine land I have not heard that there are any, though I have made diligent
inquiry.

Of Fowls which are here, and are at the Indies, and how they could pass
thither. CHAP. 35.
We may more easily believe the same of birds, and that there are of the same
kinds that we have, as partridges, turtles, pigeons, stockdoves, quails, and
many sorts of falcons, which they send from New Spain, and Peru, to the
noblemen of Spain, for they make great account of them. There are also Herons
and Eagles of diverse kinds; and there is no doubt but these birds and such
like, have sooner passed thither than lions, tygres, and stagges. There are
likewise at the Indies great numbers of parrots, especially upon the Andes of
Peru, and in the Islands of Port Ricco and saint Dominique, where they flee by
flocks, as pigeons do here. To conclude, birds with their wings may go where
they will; and truly many kinds might well pass the gulf, seeing it is
certain, as Pliny affirms, Pli. li. 10. c. 23.
that there are many that pass the sea, and go into strange regions, although
I have not read that any foul has passed by flight so great a gulf, as is
the Indian Ocean, yet hold I it not altogether impossible, seeing the common
opinion of mariners, that you shall find them two hundred leagues and more
from the land, And as Aristotle does teach, that birds endure the water
easily, having little respiration, as we see in sea foul, which dive and
remain long under the water. Even so we may say, that the foul which be at
this present upon the maine land, and in the Islands at the Indies, might pass
the sea, resting themselves in some small Islands, or upon some land which they
discovered by a natural instinct (as Pliny reports of some) or peradventure
falling into the water, when they were weary of flying, Pli. lib. 10. c. 2^
and after began their flight a new when they had alittle rested. As for the
fowls which we see in the Islands, where there are no beasts, I believe
certainly that they passed by one of the foresaid means. But for other birds
which we find upon the maine land, especially those whose flight is short,
it is more credible that they came thither as the beasts did, which are of the
same kinds that we have in Europe. For at the Indies there are great birds,
very heavy, as Estridges, whereof there are many in Peru; which do use
sometimes to terrify the Indian sheep as they do go with their burdens.

But leaving these birds that govern themselves without the care of man, but
only for hawking, let us now speak of tame foul; I wondered at hens,
seeing there were some at the Indies before the Spaniards came there, the which
is well approoved, for they have a proper name of the country, and they call a
hen Gualpa, and the egg P^nto, and they use the same proverb we do, to
call a coward, a hen. Those that were at the discovery of the Islands of
Soloman, do report that they have seen hens there like unto ours: we may
conceive that the hen being so tame a foul, and so profitable, men might
carry them with them when they passed from one place to another, as we see at
this day the Indians in their travel carry their hen with them, or chicken
upon the burden they have on their shoulders: and likewise they carry them
easily in their cages of reeds or wood. Finally, there be at the Indies many
kinds of beasts and birds, such as we have in Europe, as I have specified,
and other sorts which I leave to others to discourse of.

How it spould be possible, that at the Indies there should be any sorts of
beasts, whereof the like are no where else. CHAP. 36.
IV were a matter more difficult, to show, and prove, what beginning many and
sundry sorts of beasts had, which are found at the Indies, of whose kinds we
have none in this continent. For if the Creator has made them there, we may
not then allege nor fly to Noah's Arc, neither was it then necessary to save
all sorts of birds and beasts, if others were to be created anew. Moreover, we
could not affirm, that the creation of the world was made and finished in six
days, if there were yet other new kinds to make, and specially perfect beasts,
and no less excellent than those that are known unto us: If we say then that
all these kinds of creatures were preserved in the Arc by Noah, it follows,
that those beasts, of whose kinds we find not any but at the Indies, have
passed thither from this continent, as we have said of other beasts that are
known unto us. This supposed, I demand how it is possible that none of their
kind should remain here? and how they are found there, being as it were
travelers and strangers? Truly it is a question that has long held me in
suspens. I say for example, if the sheep of Peru, and those which they call
Pacos and Guanacos, are not found in any other regions of the world, who has
carried them thither? or how came they there? seeing there is no show nor
remainder of them in all this world? If they have not passed from some other
region, how were they formed and brought forth there? It may be GOD has made
a new creation of beasts. That which I speak of these Pacos and Guanacos may
be said of a thousand different kinds of birds and beasts of the forest,
which have never been known, neither in shape nor name; and whereof there is
no mention made, neither among the Latins, nor Greeks, nor any other nations
of the world. We must then say, that though all beasts came out of the Arc,
yet by a natural instinct, and the providence of heaven, diverse kinds
dispersed themselves into diverse regions, where they found themselves so well,
as they would not part; or if they departed, they did not preserve
themselves, but in process of time, perished wholly, as we do see it chance in
many things. For if we shall look precisely into it, we shall find that it is
not proper and peculiar alone to the Indies, but general to many other Nations
and Provinces of Asia, Europe, and Affrike, where they say there are certain
kinds of creatures, that are not found in other regions, at the least if they
be any where else, they are known to be carried from thence. Seeing then these
creatures came out of the Arc, as for example, the elephant which we find
only in the East Indies, and from thence have been imparted to other regions,
we may say as much of these creatures of Peru, and of others of the Indies,
which are not found in any other part of the world.

We may likewise consider well upon this subject, whether these beasts differ
in kind, and essentially from all others, or if this difference be accidental,
which might grow by diverse accidents, as we see in the linages of men, some
are white, others black, some giants, others dwa^fes: and in apes, some have
no tail, others have: and in sheep, some are bare, others have fleeces; some
great and strong with a long neck, as those of Peru; others weak and little,
having a short neck, as those of Castille. But to speak directly, whosoever would
by this Discourse, showing only these accidental differences, preserve the
propagation of beasts at the Indies, and reduce them to those of Europ, he shall
undertake a charge he will hardly discharge with his honor. For if we shall
judge the kinds of beasts by their properties, those of the Indies are so
diverse, as it is to call an egg a chestnut, to seek to reduce them to the
known kinds of Europe.

Of Fowls that are proper to the Indies. CHAP. 37.
THere are many kinds of notable fowls at the Indies, either of the same sort
that ours be, or of different. They bring certain birds from China, that have
no feet, and all their bodies are almost feathers. They sit not upon the
ground, but hang upon boughs, by strings or feathers which they have, and so
rest themselves, like flies or aierie things. In Peru there are birds which
they ^^ll Tomineios, so small, that often times I have doubted seeing them
fly, whether they were bees or butter-flies; but in truth they are birds.
Contrariwise, those which they call Condores, be of an exceeding greatness, and
of such a force, that not only they will open a sheep and eat it, but also a
whole calfe. Those which they call Auras, and others PoullaZes, (which in my
opinion are of the kind of ravens,) are of a strange lightness, and have a very
quick sight, being very fit to cleanse Cities, for that they leave no carrion
nor dead thing. They pass the night on trees or upon rocks, and in the
morning they come to the cities and towns, sitting on the tops of the
highest buildings, where they attend their prey. Their young have white
feathers, as they report of ravens, and so change into black.

The Guacamayac be birds bigger then Parrets, and resemble them something; they
are esteemed for the variety of their feathers, which be very fair and
pleasing. In new Spain there are abundance of birds with excellent feathers,
so as there be not any found in Europe that comes near them, as we may see by
the images of feathers they bring from thence, the which are (with great
reason,) much valued and esteemed, giving cause of admiration, that with the
feathers of birds, they should make so excellent a work, and so perfectly
equal, as they seem properly to be the true colors of a painter, and have
so lively and pleasing a regard, as the Painter cannot exceed it with his
pencill and colors. Some Indians which are good and expert workmen in this
Art, will represent perfectly in feathers, whatsoever they see drawn with the
pencill, so as the Painters of Spain, have in this point, no advantage over
them. Don Philip the Prince of Spain, his schoolmaster, did give unto him
three figures or po^traitures made of feathers, as it were to put in a
Breviary. His Highness did show them to King Philip his father, the which his
Majesty beholding attentively, said, that he had never seen in so small a
work, a thing of so great excellency and perfection. One day as they presented
to Pope Sixtus quintus, another square bigger then it, wherein was the figure
of St. Francis, and that they had told him it was made of feathers by the
Indians, he desired to make trial thereof, touching the table with his
fingers, to see if it were of feathers, for that it seemed strange, to see them
so properly fitted, that the eye could not judge nor discern whether they were
natural colors of feathers, or artificial, done with the pencill. It is a
goodly thing to see the luster which a green, an orange tawny like gold, and
other fine colors do cast, and beholding them another way they seem dead
colors. They make the best and goodliest figures of feathers in the Province
of Mechovacan, and in the village of Pascaro. The manner is with small delicate
pinsors they pull the feathers from the dead fowls, and with a fine paste they
cunningly join them together. They take the small and delicate feathers of
those birds, which in Peru they call T^miney^s, or others like unto them, which
have the most perfect colors in their feathers. The Indians (besides these
images,) did use feathers in many other most excellent works, especially for
the ornament of Kings and Noblemen, their Temples and Idols. There are also
other great birds, which have excellent and fine feathers, whereof they make
plumes of sundry colors, especially when they go to war, enriching them with
gold and silver very artificially, which was a matter of great price. They have
the same birds still, but they are not so curious, neither do they make so
many gentill devises as they were wont. There are other birds at the Indies,
contrary to these of so rich feathers, the which (besides that they are ill
favovred,) serve to no other use but for dung, and yet perchance they are of no
less profit. I have considered this, wondering at the providence of the
Creator, who has so appointed, that all creatures should serve man. In some
Islands or Phares, which are joining to the coast ^of Peru, we see the tops
of the mountains all white, and to sight, you would take it for snow, or for
some white land, but they are heaps of dung of sea foul which go continually
thither: and there is so great abundance, as it rises many else, yea, many
lances in height, which seems but a fable. They go with boats to these
Islands, only for the dung, for there is no other profit in them. And this dung
is so commodious and profitable, as it makes the earth yield great abundance
of fruit. They call this dung Guano, whereof the valley has taken the name,
which they call Limagua^a, in the valleys of Peru, where they use this dung,
and it is the most fertile of all that country. The quinces, poungranets, and
other fruits there, exceed all other in bounty and greatness; and they say,
the reason is, for that the water wherewith they water it, passes by a land
compassed with this dung, which causes the beauty of this fruit. So as these
birds have not only the flesh to serve for meat, their singing for
recreation, their feathers for ornament and beauty, but also their dung serves
to fatten the ground. The which has bin so appointed by the sovereign
Creator, for the service of man, that he might remember to acknowledge and be
loyal to him from whom all good proceeds.

Of Beasts for the Chases. CHAP. 38.
BEsides the Beasts of Chase, whereof we have spoken, which be common to the
Indies and Europe, there are others which I do not remember to have seen
here, unless perhaps they have been brought from thence. There are beasts
called Sainos, made like small hogs, which have this singular to themselves,
to have their navill upon the ridge of their backs: these go by troops
through the woods, they are cruel and nothing fearful, but contrariwise they
assail, and have their tallents sharp as rasors, wherewith they make
dangerous wounds and incisions, if such as hunt them put not themselves in
safety. Such as hunt them, (for the more safer killing of them,) they climb
up into trees, whither the Sainos or hogs come presently in troops, biting
the tree when they cannot hurt the man, and then with their lances they kill
what they will. They are very good to eat, but they must of necessity cut off
the round piece where the navil grows upon the back; for otherwise, within a
day they corrupt. There is another kind of little beast like to sucking
pigges, and they call them Guadatinaias. I am in doubt whether there were any
swine at the Indies, before the Spaniardes came thither, like to these in
^paine, for that in the discovery of the Islands of Soloman, it is said, they
found hens and swine of Spain. But howsoever it be, it is most certain,
that this cattle has greatly multiplied at the Indies. They eat the flesh
fresh, and hold it to be as wholesome and as good, as if it were of mutton; as
in Carthagene in some parts, they are become wild and cruel, the which they
hunt like wild boares, as we see in S. Dominique, and other Islands where the
beasts live in the forests. In some places they feed them with the grain of
Mays, and they grow wonderfully fat, to have the grease, which they use for
want of oil; in some places they make g^mons, as in Toll^ca of new Spain, and
in Paria at Peru. Returning then to such beasts as are pecullar there, even as
the Sainos are like unto swine, though somewhat less; even so the Dantes
resemble small kine, but more unto mules, having no horns. The hides of these
beasts are much esteemed for jerkins and other coverings, they are so hard as
they resist any blow whatsoever. And as the Dantes be defended by the hardness
of their hides, so those which they call Armadillos are by the multitude of
their scales, which open and shut as they please like to a curasse. There be
little beasts which go through the woods, called Armadillos, by reason of the
defense they have hiding themselves within their scales, and opening when they
list: I have eaten of them, and do not hold it for a meat of any great
worth, but the flesh of the Yguanas is a better meat, but more horrible to
the eye: for they are like to the very Lizardes of Spain, although they be of
a doubtful kind, for that they go to the water, and coming to land they
climb the trees upon the banks; and as they cast themselves from the trees
into the water, the boats watch underneath to receive them. The Chinchilles is
an other kind of small beasts, like squirrels, they have a wonderful smoothe
and soft skin, which they wear as a healthful thing to comfort the
stomach, and those parts that have need of a moderate heat; they make
coverings and rugges of the hair of these Chinchilles, which are found on the
Sierre of Peru, where there is likewise a small beast very common which they
call Cuyes, and which the Indians hold for a very good meat, and they are
accustomed often to offer these Cuyes in their sacrifices. They are like small
conies, and have their borows i^ the ground, and in some places they have
undermined all the land: some are gray, some white, and some speckled. There
are other small animalles which they call Viscachas, and are like to hares,
although they be bigger, they hunt them and eat the flesh. Of common hares
there are great store in some parts. There are also connies in the realm of
Quitto, but the good are come from Spain. There is another strange beast, the
which for his great heaviness, and slownesse in mooving, they call
Perico-ligero, or the little light dog, he has three nails to every hand,
and mooves both hand and feet, as it were by compass and very heavily: it is
in face like to a monkie, and has a shrill cry; it climeth trees, and eats
Ants.

Of Micos or Indian Monkies. CHAP. 39.
THroughout all the mountains, either of these Islands of the firm land, or of
the Andes, there are infinite numbers of Micos or Monkies, which are a kind of
apes, but very different, in that they have a tail, yea a very long one. And
amongst them there are some kinds which are thrice, yea four times bigger
than the ordinary; some are all black, some bay, some gray, and some spotted.
Their agilitie and manner of doing is admirable, for that they seem to have
reason and discourse to go upon trees, wherein they seem to imitate birds.
Going from Nombre de Dios to Panama, I did see in Capira, one of these monkies
leap from one tree to an other, which was on the other side of a river, making
me much to wonder. They leap where they list, winding their tails about a
branch to shake it: and when they will leap further than they can at once,
they use a pretty devise, tying themselves by the tails one of another, and by
this means make as it were a chain of many: then do they launch themselves
forth, and the first helped by the force of the rest, takes hold where he
list, and so hangs to a bough, and helps all the rest, till they be gotten up.
It were long to report the fooleries, tricks, traverses, and pleasant sportes
they make when they are taught, which seem not to come from bruit beasts, but
from a manlike understanding. I saw one in Carthagen^ in the Governors house,
so taught, as the things he did seemed incredible: they sent him to the Tavern
for wine, putting the pot in one hand, and the money in the other; and they
could not possibly get the money out of his hand, before he had his pot full
of wine. If any children met him in the street, and threw any stones at him,
he would set his pot down on the one side, and cast stones against the
children till he had assured his way, then would he return to carry home his
pot. And which is more, although he were a good bibber of wine (as I have
oftentimes seen him drink, when his master has given it him) yet would he
never touch it until leave was given him. They told me moreover, that if he
saw any women painted, he would fall upon them, pull off their attire, and
would seek to bite them.

This may be an addition which I have not seen, but I do not think there is
any beast in the world approaches so near the conversation of a man, as this
monkey does. They report so many things, which for fear I should be thought
to give credit to fables, or they should be so esteemed, I think best to
omit, blessing the Author of all creatures, in that he would createa kind
of beast, only for the recreation and delight of man. Some report that they
carried these Micos or Monkies to Solomon from the Weast Indies, but for my
part, I hold it was from the East Indies.

Of Vicugnes, and Tarugnes of Peru. CHAP. 40.
AMongst the most remarkable things at the Indies of Peru, be the Vicugnes, and
sheep of the country, as they call them, which are tractable beasts and of
great profit; the Vicugnes are wild, and the sheep are tame. Some think
that the Vicugnes are those which Aristotle, Arist. libr. 3. de partib. animal.
c. 2. lib. 10. c. 72
Pliny, and other Authors call Capreas, which are wild goats, and in truth
they have some resemblance, for the lightness they have in the woods and
mountains, but yet they are no goats, for the Vicugnes have no horns, as
those have, whereof Aristotle makes mention; neither are they the goats of the
East Indies, from whom they draw the Bezar stone; for if they be of that kind,
it were a diverse one, as in the race of dogs, the mastie is diverse from the
greyhound. The Vicugnes of Peru are not those beasts which carry the Bezar
stone, in the Province of new Spain, which there they call BeZaars, for that
they are a kind of Stagges and Venison; yet do I not know in any part of the
world there be any of these beasts* but in Peru, and in Chille, which are
countries joining one to another. These Vicugnes are greater then goats, and
less then calves. Their hair is of the color of dried roses, somewhat
cleerer; they have no horns like Stagges and Goats. They feed upon the
heighest tops of the mountains, which they call Pugnas. The snow nor frost
does not offend them, but contrariwise they seem to delight in it. They go in
troops, and run most lightly; when they meet with any travelers or beasts,
they fly away, seeming very fearful, and in flying they drive their young ones
before them. They do not find that they multiply much: and therefore the Kings
Inguas did defend the hunting of Vicugnes; if it were not for their feasts, or
by their commandment. Some complain, that since the Spaniards entered there,
they have given too much liberty to hunt the Vicugnes, and by this means they
are much diminished. The manner the Indians use in their hunting, they assemble
many men together, to the number of 1000. or 2000. yea, more, and invironing a
great circuit of wood, they hunt their game until they have compassed it in on
all parts, and by this means they commonly take three or four hundred, and so
choosing what they list, they let go the rest, especially the females for
breed. They are accustomed to sheere these beasts, and of their fleece to make
coverings and rugges of great value, for that this wool is like to white
silk, which lastes long: and as the color is natural and not died, so is it
perpetual. The stuffes that are made of this wool, are very fresh and good in
summer, and they hold them profitable for the inflammation of the reins, and
other parts tempering the excessive heat. This wool has the like virtue when
it is made in quiltes, and therefore some use it to that end, for the trial
they have made thereof. They say moreover, that this wool or coverings made
thereof, is physical for other indispositions, as for the gowt: yet do I not
know that they have made any certain trial thereof. The flesh of these
Vicugnes is not good, although the Indians eat it, and dry it. For the
effects of Physic, I will say what I have seen upon the Sierre of Peru,
coming one night into a Tambo or Inn, being much afflicted with pain in mine
eyes, thinking they would fall out, (the which does commonly happen in those
parts, for that they pass through places covered with snow, which is the cause
of this accident. Being troubled with this pain, and out of patience, there
came an Indian woman which said to me, Father, lay this to thine eyes, and thou
shall be cured, it was a piece of the flesh of Vicugnes newly killed and all
bloody. I used this medicine, and presently the pain ceased, and soon after
went quite away. Besides these Chacos which is the most common manner of
hunting at the Indies, they have used another more private to take them, which
is, that coming near, they do cast certain lines with plummets of lead,
which entangle their legs, so as they cannot run, and by this means they
take the Vicugne. The chief reason why this beast is esteemed, is, by reason
of the BeZars stone they find in them, whereof we will entreat hereafter.
There is another kind of beasts, which they call Tarugues, which likewise are
wild, and more nimble than the Vicugnes. They are greater of body, and more
hot. They have soft ears and hanging: they go not in troops as the Vicugnes.
I have not seen them but alone, and most commonly in high places. They also
draw BeZars stones from these Tarugues, which are greater, and have more
operation and virtue.

Of Pacos, Guanacos, and Indian Mutlons. CHAP. 41.
THere is nothing at Peru of greater riches and profit than the cattle of the
country, which our men call Indian sheep, and the Indians in their general
language call them Lama. For all things well considered, it is a beast of the
greatest profit and least charge of any that I know: from them they draw
meat and clothing, as from the sheep of Spain. Moreover they have the
benefit to carry all things they have need of, using them to bear their
burdens: and they have no need either of shoes or saddles, nor yet of oats,
but he serves his master for naught, feeding on the grass he finds in the
fields; so as God has furnished them of sheep and mares, and all in one
beast. And as it is a poor nation, so would he in this point free them from
charge, for that there is much pasture upon the Sierre: and this kind of
cattle has no need of any other charge. There are two kinds of these sheep
or Lamas, the one they call Pacos, or sheep bearing wool, and the others are
bare, and have little wool, so are they better for burden; they are bigger
than great sheep, and less than calves, they have a very long neck, like to
a cammell, whereof they have good need: for being high of stature, they have
need of a long neck, else should they be deformed. They are of diverse
colors, some all white, others all black, some gray and some spotted, which
they call Moromoro. The Indians had great superstitions in choosing the beasts
for sacrifices, of what color they should be, according to the diversity of
seasons and sacrifices. Their flesh is good, although it be hard, but that of
their Lambs is the better, and the most delicate that can be eaten: yet they
eat not many, for that the chief fruit and profit they yielde, is their
wool, to make clothes, and their service to carry burdens. The Indians make
stuffs of this wool wherewith they clothe themselves, the one is gross and
common, which they call Hanaca, and the other fine and delicate which they call
Cumbi, they make carpets and coverings, and other exquisite works, which last
long, and have a very fair luster, like half silk: and that which is most
rare, is their manner of weaving their works, being both sides alike, so as you
shall not find any end in a whole piece. The Ingua king of Peru had many chief
workmen, to make this work of Cumb^* and the which, for the most part, were
resident in the Province of Capachica, joining to the great lake of Titicaca.
They die this wool into diverse fine colors, with sundry kinds of herbs,
whereof they make many sorts of works both course and fine. All the Indians,
both men and women, work in the Sierre, and have their loo^nes in their
houses, having no need to buy any stuffes for their necessary uses. Of the
f^esh of these sheep they make Cuschargui, or dried flesh, the which will last
very long, whereof they make great account. They are accustomed to drive
troops of these sheep with burdens, and to go in bands, three hundred, five
hundred, yea a thousand in a company, with wine, mays, coca, chuno,
quicke-silver, and all other ^indes of m^rchandise, and of silver, which is the
best of all. They carry bars of silver from PotoZi to Ariq^^, which is three
score and ten leagues. I have often w^ondered to see these troops of sheep
laden with a thousand or two thousand bars of silver, and much m^re, which is
above three hundred thousand ducats, without any other guard o rescort than
some Indians, which serve only to guide these sheep, and to lade and unlade
them, or at the most, some few Spaniardes: and they sleep all night in the
midst of the fields, without other guarde: and yet in so long a way and so
weak a guarde, they never find want or loss of any thing in so great a
treasure of silver, so safe is the way in Peru. The burden which one of these
sheep does commonly carry, is of four or six arrobes: Six arobes (...)
hundred and fifty pounds weight.
when their voyage is long they go not above two, three, or four leagues at
the most on a day. Those that guide those troops, have their ordinary
lodgings, where they are assured to have water and pasture, and there they
unlade and set up their tents, making fire, and dressing their meats, which
is not painful, although it be a ^leugmatike and slow manner of travel.
When there is but one days journey, one of these sheep will bear eight
arobes in weight, or more, and bears this burden eight or ten leagues in a
day, as the poor soldiers were wont to do, when they marched through Peru.
This kind of cattle delights most in a cold air, and for this cause they
live upon the Sierre, and die in the Lanos, by reason of the heat. Sometimes
these sheep are all covered with ice and frost, and yet they continue sound
and well. The bare sheep are pleasant to behold, for they will stay upon the
way, raising up their necks, and will look upon any one very wistly, and so
they remain a long time, without mooving or any show of fear, which gives
occasion of laughter, seeing them thus to stand. And yet sometimes they do
grow amazed suddenly, and run away with their burdens, even to the highest
rocks, so as not being able to come unto them, they are constraind to kill them
with an harquebuze, lest they should loose their bars of silver, which they
sometimes carry. The Pacos will grow reasty under their burdens, lying down,
and will endure to be cut in a thousand pieces before they will rise when this
humor takes them: whereof the proverb grows in Peru, to say that one is
reastie, to signify, he is obstinate; for that when any of these beasts is
moodie, it is with excess: the remedy they have is, to stay and sit down by
the Paco, making much on him, until the fit be past, and that he rise: and
sometimes they are forced to stay two or three hours. They have a disease like
to scabbes, which they call Carache, whereof they commonly die. The Ancients
had a remedy, to bury them quick that had the Carache, lest they should
infect the rest, being a very contagious disease, and goes from one to another.
An Indian that has one or two of these sheep, is not reputed poor, for one
of them is worth six or seven pieces of assay, and more, according to the
time and places.

Of the BeZaars stone. CHAP. 42.
THe Bezaars stone is found in all these beasts before mentioned, which are
proper to Peru, whereof some Authors of our time have written whole books,
which they may read that desire to have a more particular knowledge. For the
present subject it shall be sufficient to say, that this stone which they call
Bezaar, is found in the stomach and belly of this beast, sometimes one alone,
sometimes two, three, and four. They are very different in form, greatness
and color, for that some are small like filberds, and less; others like
walnuts; some like pigeons eggs, and others as big as a hens egg: and I
have seen some as big as an orange; in form some are round, others in
fashion like to lentils, and many other forms. For their color, some are
black, some white, some gray, dark green, and others, as if they had been
gilded. It is no certain rule to judge the best and most fine by the color
or form. All these stones are made and fashioned of diverse films and skins one
upon another. In the province of Xaura and other provinces of Peru, they find
these stones in diverse kinds of beasts, both wild and tame, as in the Guanacos,
Pacos, Vicugnes, and Tarugues, some add an other kind, which they say are
wild goats, which the Indians call Cypris. These other kinds of beasts are
very well known in Peru, whereof we have already discoursed. The Guanacos or
country sheep, or Pacos, have commonly the lesser stones, and black, neither
are they so much approoved for the use of Physic. They draw the greatest
Bezaar stones from the Vicugnes, and they are gray, or white, or of a dark
green, which are held for the better. They esteem those of the Tarugues for
the most excellent, whereof there are some reasonable big: they are commonly
white, inclining to gray; and they have the filmes commonly bigger and thicker
than the rest.

They find the Bezaar stone equally both in male and female. All beasts that
engender it, chaw the cuid, and commonly feed upon the snow and rocks. The
Indians report and teach by tradition from their fathers and Ancients, that in
the province of Xaura, and in other provinces of Peru, there are many herbs and
venomous beasts, which poison the water and the pastures where they eat and
drink, and where they breathe: amiddest which venomous herbs there is one
very well known of the Vicugne, by a natural instinct, and of other beasts
that engender the Bezaar stone, which eat this herb, and by means thereof
they preserve themselves from the poisoned waters and pastures: and they say,
that of this herb the stone is compounded in the stomach, whence it draws
all the virtue against poison and other wonderful effects. This is the
opinion and tradition of the Indians, discovered by men of great experience in
the kingdom of Peru, which agrees with reason, and with that which Pliny
reports of the mountain goats, Pli. lib. 10. c. 72
which are nourished and fed upon poison without suffering any harm. The
Indians being demanded, why the sheep, kine, goats, and calves, such as are
in Castille, have not the Bezaar stone, seeing that they feed on the same
rocks: their answer is, That they believe not, that those beasts of Castille
eat of that herb, or that they have found the Bezaar stone in stags and
fallow diere. This seems to agree with our knowledge, for that in new Spain
they find the Bezaar stone, although there be no Vicugnes, Pacos, Tarugues, nor
Guanacos, but only stags, in some of which they find these stones.

The principal virtue of the BeZaar stone is against poison and venomous
diseases, although there be herein diverse opinions, some hold it for a
mockery, others for a miracle. Howsoever it be, it is most certain that it is
of a great operation, when it is applied in time, and convenient in a manner, as
herbs, and to persons capable and disposed: for there is no medicine that
does always cure infallibly. In Spain and Italy, we have seen admirable
effects of this stone, against the T^verdette, which is a kind of plague, but
not so much^s in Peru. They do apply it beaten and put into some liquor, which
may make it fit for the cure of melancholy, the falling sickness, pestilent
fevers, and many other diseases. Some take it in wine, others in vinegar, with
water Dezahac, of League de beufe, borrage and other sorts, as the Physicians
and Apoticaries can tell. The Bezaar stone has no proper savor, as Rasis the
Arabian does testify. We have seen notable trialls, and there is no doubt
but the Author of this universal world, has given great virtues to this
stone. The Bezaar stones which comes from the East Indies, have the first place
of account, they are of an olive color, the second are those of Peru, and the
third those of New Spain. Since that these stones were in request, they say,
the Indians have made artificial ones; and many when they see these stones
greater then the ordinary, they take them to be false and counterfeit: trial
and experience is the best mistres to know them. One thing is worthy
admiration, that they grow and are fashioned upon very strange things, as upon
the tagge of a point, upon a pin, or a piece of wood, which they find in the
center of this stone, and yet do they not hold it false, for that the beast
might swallow it, and the stone thicken upon it, and grows one upon another,
and so it increases. I did see in Peru, two stones fashioned upon Pignons of
Castille, which made us to wonder much, for that in all Peru, we had not seen
any pines or Pignons of Castille, if they were not brought from Spain, which
seems to me very extraordinary. This little may suffice touching the Bezaars
stone. They bring other physical stones from the Indies, as the stone of
Hyiada, or of Rate, the blood stone, the stones of milk, and of the sea. Those
which they call Cornerina^, for the heart, whereof there is no need to speak,
having nothing common with the subject of beasts, whereof we have entreated:
which gives us to understand how the great Master and Author of all, has
imparted his benefits and wonderful secrets, to all parts of the world; for
the which he is to be glorified for ever.

(*)

A Prologue to the Books following.
HAving entreated of the Natural History of the Indies, I will hereafter
discourse of the Moral History, that is to say, of the deeds and customs of
the Indies. For after the heaven, the temperature, the situation, and the
qualities of the new world; after the elements and mixtures; I mean metals,
plants, and beasts, whereof we have spoken in the former Books, as occasion
did serve: both Order and Reason does invite us to continue and undertake the
discourse of those men which inhabit the new world. And therefore I pretend in
the following books, to speak what I think worthy of this subject. And for
that the intention of this History, is not only to give knowledge of what
has passed at the Indies, but also to continue this knowledge, to the fruit
we may gather by it, which is to help this people for their souls health, and
to glorify the Creator and Redeemer, who has drawn them from the obscure
darkness of their infidelity, and imparted unto them the admirable light of
his Gospel. And therefore I will first speak in these books following, what
concerns their religion, or superstition, their customs, their idolatries,
and their sacrifices; and after, what concerns their policy and government,
their laws, customs, and their deeds. And for that the memory is preserved
amongst the Mexicaine Nation, of their beginnings, successions, wars, and
other things worthy the relation: besides, that which shall be handled in the
sixth book, I will make a peculiar Discourse in the seventh, sh^wing the
disposition and forewarnings this Nation had of the new Kingdom of Christ our
Lord, which should be ext^nded in these Countries, and should conquer them to
himself, as he has do^e in all the rest of the world. The which in truth is a
thing worthy of great consideration, to see how the divine providence has
appointe^, that the light of his word should find a passage in the furthest
bounds of the world. It is not my project at this time to write what the
Span^ardes have done in those parts, for there are books enough written upon
this subject, nor yet how the Lords servants have labored and profited, for
that requires a new labor. I will only content my self to plant this
History and relation at the doors of the Gospel, seeing it is already
entered, and to make known the Natural and Moral things of the Indies; to
the end that Christianity may be planted and augmented, as it is expounded at
large in the books we have written, De procuranda Indiorum salute. And if any
one wonder at some fashions and customs of the Indies, and will scorn them as
fools, or abhor them as divelish and inhumane people, let him remember that
the same things, yea, worse, have been seen amongst the Greeks and Romans,
who have commanded the whole world, as we may easily understand, not only of
our Authors, as Eusebius, of Cesarea, Clement Alexandrine, and others, but also
of their own; as Pliny, Denis Halicarnassis, and Plutarke: for the Prince of
darkness being the head of all Infidelity, it is no new thing to find among
Infidells, cruelties, filthiness, and follies fit for such a Master. And
although the ancient Gentiles have far surpassed these of the new world in
valor and natural knowledge, yet may we observe many things in them worthy
the remembrance. But to conclude, they show to be barbarous people, who being
deprived of the supernatural light, want likewise philosophy and natural
knowledge.

THE FIFTH BOOK of the Natural and Moral History of the Indies.
That the Pride and Malice of the Devil, has been the cause of Idolatry.
CHAP. 1.
THE Pride and Presumption of the Devil is so great and obstinate, that
always he seeks and strives to be honored as God: and does arrogate to
himself all he can; whatsoever does appertain to the most high God, he
cease not to abuse the blind Nations of the world, upon whom the clear
light of the holy Gospel has not yet shone. Job. 41.
We read in Job of this proud tyrant, who settes his eyes aloft, and amongst
all the sons of pride, he is the King. The holy Scripture instructes us
plainly of his vile intentions, and his overweening treason, whereby he has
pretended to make his Throne, equal unto Gods, saying in Esaias, Thou did
say within thy self, I will mount up to heaven, Esa. 14.
and set my chair upon all the stars of heaven, and I will sit upon the
top of the Firmament, and in the sides of the North, I will ascend above the
height of the clouds, and will be like to the most High. Ezech. 2^.
And in Ezechiel, Thy heart was lifted up, and thou have said, I am God, and
have set in the chair of God in the midst of the sea. Thus does Satan
continually persist in this wicked desire, to make himself God. And although
the just and severe chastisement of the most high has spoiled him of all his
pomp and beauty, which made him grow proud, being entreated as his fellonie
and indiscretion had deserved, as it is written by the same Prophets; yet has
he left nothing of his wickedness and perverse practices, the which he has
made manifest by all means possible, like a mad dog that bites the sword
wherewith he is stricken. For as it is written, the pride of such as hate God,
does always increase. H^nce comes the continual and strange care which this
enemy of God has always had, to make him to be worshipped of men, inventing so
many kinds of Idolatries, whereby he has so long held the gretest part of the
world in subjection; so as there scarce remains any one corner for God and his
people of Israel. Mat. 12.
And since the power of the Gospel has vanquished and disarmed him, and that
by the force of the Cross, he has broken and ruined the most important and
puissant places of his kingdom with the like tyranny; he has begun to
assail the barbarous people and Nations farthest off, striving to maintain
amongst them his false and lying divinity, the which the Son of God had
taken from him in his Church, tying him with chains as in a cage or prison,
like a furious beast to his great confusion, and rejoicing of the servants of
God, as he does signify in Job.

But in the end, although idolatry had been rooted out of the best and most
notable parts of the world, yet he has retired himself into the most remote
parts, and has ruled in that other part of the world, which although it be
much inferior in nobility, yet is it not oflesse compass. There are two
causes and chief motives, for the which the devil has so much labored to
plantidolatry and all infidelity, so as you shall hardly find any Nation where
there is not some marks thereof. The one is this great presumption and pride,
which is such, that whosoever would consider, how he durst affront the very Son
of God, and true God in saying impudently, that he should fall down and
worship him: the which he did, Mat. 4.
although he knew not certainly that this was the very God, yet had he some
opinion that it was the Son of God. A most cruel and horrible pride, to dare
thus impudently affront his God; truly he shall not find it very strange,
that he makes himself to be worshipped as God, by ignorant Nations, seeing
he would seek to be worshipped by God himself, calling himself God, being
an abominable and detestable creature. The other cause and motive of
idolatry, is the mortal hatred he has conceived for ever against mankind.
For as our Savior says, he has been a murderer from the beginning, and
holds it as a condition and inseparable quality of his wickedness. And for
that he knows the greatast misery of man, is to worship the creature for God:
for this reason he never leaves to invent all sorts of Idolatries, to destroy
man, and make him ennemy to God. There are two mischiefs which the devil
causes in idolatry; the one, that he denies his God, according to the text,
Thou have left thy God who created thee: Deuteronomy. 32.
The other is, that he does subject himself to a thing baser than himself;
for that all creatures are inferior to the reasonable, and the devil, although
he be superior to man in nature, yet in estate he is much inferior, seeing
that man in this life is capable of Divinity and Eternity. By this means God
is dishonored, and man lost in all parts by idolatry, wherewith the devil in
his pride is well content.

Of many kinds of idolatry the Indians have used. CHAP. 2.
Sap. 14.
IDolatry says the Holy Ghost by the Wise man, is the cause. beginning, and
end of all miseries, for this cause the enemy of mankind has multiplied so
many sorts and diversities of idolatry, as it were an infinite matter to
specify them all. Yet we may reduce idolatry to two heads, the one grounded
upon natural things, the other upon things imagined and made by man's
invention. The first is divided into two; for either the thing they worship is
general, as the Sun, Moon, Fire, Earth and Elements, or else it is
particular, as some certain river, fountain, tree, or forest, when these
things are not generaly worshipped in their kinds, but only in particular. In
this first kind of idolatry they have exceeded in Peru, and they properly call
it Guaca. The second kind of idolatry which depends of man's invention and
fictions, may likewise be divided into two sorts, one which regards only the
pure art and invention of man, as to adore the Images or statues of gold,
wood, or stone of Mercury or Pallas, which neither are, nor ever were any thing
else but the bare pictures: and the other that concerns that which really has
been, and is in truth the same thing, but not such as idolatry faines; as the
dead, or some things proper unto them, which men worship through vanity and
flattery, so as we reduce all to four kinds of idolatry, which the
infidells use; of all which it behooveth us to speak something.

That the Indians have some knowledge of God. CHAP. 3.
FIrst, although the darkness of infidelity holds these Nations in
blindness, yet in many things the light of truth and reason works somewhat
in them. And they commonly acknowledge a supreme Lord and Author of all
things, which they of Peru called Vnachocha, and gave him names of great
excellence, as Pachacamac, or Pachayachachic, which is, the Creator of heaven
and earth: and Vsapu, which is admirable, and other like names. Him they did
worship, as the chiefest of all, whom they did honor in beholding the heaven.
The like we see amongst them of Mexico, and China, and all other infidelles*
Which accords well with that which is said of Saint Paul, in the Acts of the
Apostles, where he did see the Inscription of an Altar; Ignoto Deo: To the
unknown God. Whereupon the Apostle took occasion to preach unto them, saying,
He whom you worship without knowing, Acts. 17.
him do I preach unto you. In like sort, those which at this day do preach the
Gospel to the Indians, find no great difficulty to persuade them that there is
a high God and Lord over all, and that this is the Christians God, and the true
God. And yet it has caused great admiration in me, that although they had this
knowledge, yet had they no proper name for God. If we shall seek into the
Indian tongue for a word to answer to this name of God, as in Latin, Deus, in
Greek, Theos, in Hebrew, El, in Arabike, Alla; but we shall not find any in
the Cuscan or Mexicaine tongues. So as such as preach or write to the Indians,
use our Spanish name Dios, fitting it to the accent or pronounciation of the
Indian tongues, the which differ much, whereby appears the small knowledge
they had of God, seeing they cannot so much as name him, if it be not by our
very name: yet in truth they had some little knowledge, and therefore in Peru
they made him a rich temple, which they called Pachacamac, which was the
principal Sanctuary of the realm. And as it has been said, this word of
Pachacamac, is as much to say, as the Creator, yet in this temple they used
their idolatries, worshipping the Devil and figures. They likewise made
sacrifices and offerings to Viracocha, which held the chief place amongst the
worships which the Kings Inguas made. Hereof they called the Spaniards
Virocochas, for that they hold opinion they are the sons of heaven, and
divine; even as others did attribute a deity to Paul and Barnabas, calling the
one Jupiter, and the other Mercury, so would they offer sacrifices unto them,
as unto gods: and as the Barbarians of Melite (which is Malte) seeing that the
viper did not hurt the Apostle, Acts. 1^.
they called him God.

As it is therefore a truth, conformable to reason, that there is a sovereign
Lord and King of heaven, Pla. in Tim. Arist. c. vlt. 2. metaph. Tresmegist.
Diman. and Ascl^p.
whom the Gentiles (with all their infidelities and idolatries) have not
denied, as we see in the Philosophy of Timee in Plato, in the Metaphisickes of
Aristotle, and in the Aesculape of Tresmigister, as also in the Poesies of
Homer and Virgil. Therefore the Preachers of the Gospel have no great
difficulty to plant and persuade this truth of a supreme God, be the Nations
of whom they preach never so barbarous and brutish. But it is hard to root
out of their minds, that there is no other God, nor any other deity then one:
and that all other things of themselves have no power, being, nor workeing
proper to themselves, but what the great and only God and Lord does give and
impart unto them. To conclude, it is necessary to persuade them by all means,
in reproving their errors, as well in that wherein they generally fail, in
worshipping more then one God, as in particular, (which is much more) to hold
for Gods, and to demand favor and help of those things which are not Gods,
nor have any power, but what the true God their Lord and Creator has given
them.

Of the first kind of Idolatry, upon natural and universal things. CHAP. 4.
NExt to Viracocha, or their supreme God, that which most commonly they have
and do adore amongst the Infidells, is the Sun; and after, those things which
are most remarkable in the celestial or elementarie nature, as the moon,
stars, sea, and land. The Guacas, or Oratories, which the Inguas Lords of
Peru, had in greatest reverence, next to Viracocha and the sun, was the
thunder which they called by three diverse names, Chuquilla, Catuilla, and
Intiillapa, supposing it to be a man in heaven, with a sling and a mace, and
that it is in his power to cause rain, hail, thunder, and all the rest that
appertains to the region of the air, where the clouds engender. It was a
Guaca, (for so they called their Oratories,) general to all the Indians of
Pe^^, offering unto him many sacrifices: and in Cusco, which is the Court and
Metropolitan City, they did sacrifice children unto him, as to the Sun.
They did worship these three, Viracocha, the Sun, and Thunder after another
manner then all the rest, as Pollo writes who had made trial thereof, they did
put as it were a gauntlet or glove upon their hands, when they did lift them up
to worship them. They did worship the earth* which they called Pachamama,
as the Ancients did the goddess^ Tellus: and the sea likewise which they call
Mamacocha, as the Ancients worshipped Thetis, or Neptune. Moreover, they did
worship the rainebow, which were the arms and blazons of the Ingua, with two
snakes stretched out on either side. Amongst the stars they all did commonly
worship that which they called Colca, and we here Cabrille. They did attribute
diverse offices to diverse stars, and those which had need of their favor did
worship them, as the shepherd did sacrifice to a star which they called
Vrcuhillay, which they hold to be a sheep of diverse colors, having the care
to preserve their cattle; and they imagine it is that which the Astronomers
call Tyra. These shepherds worship two other stars, which walk near unto
them, they call them Cat^chillay, and Vrcuchillay; and they feign them to be an
Ewe and a Lamb. Others worshipped a star which they called Machacu^y, to
which they attribute the charge and power over serpents, and snakes, to keep
them from hurting of them. They ascribe power to another star, which they
called Chuguinchinchay, (which is as much as Tigre,) over Tigres, Bears, and
Lions, and they have generally believed, that of all the beasts of the earth,
there is one alone in heaven like unto them, the which has care of their
procreation and increase. And so they did observe and worship diverse stars,
as those which they called Chacana, Topatarca, Mamanan, Mirco, Miquiquicay, and
many other. So as it seemed they approached somewhat near the propositions of
Platoes Idees. The Mexicaines almost in the same manner after the supreme God,
worshipped the Sun: And therefore they called Hernando CorteZ,) as he has
written in a letter sent unto the Emperor Charles the fifth.) Son of the
Sun, for his care and courage to compass the earth. But they made their
greatest adoration to an Idol called Vitzilipuztli, the which in all this
region they called the most puissant, and Lord of all things for this cause the
Mexicaines built him a Temple, the greatest, the fairest, the highest, and the
most sumptuous of all other. The situation and beauty thereof, may well be
coniectured by the ruins which yet remain in the midst of the City of
Mexico. But here the Mexicaines Idolatry has bin more pernicious and
hurtful then that of the Inguas, as we shall see plainer hereafter, for that
the greatest part of their adoration and idolatry, was employed to Idols, and
not to natural things, although they did attribute natural effects to these
Idols, as rain, multiplication of cattle, war, and generation, even as the
Greeks and Latins have forged Idols of Phoebus, Mercury, Jupiter, Minerva,
and of Mars. To conclude, whosoever shall nearly look into it, shall find this
manner which the Devil has used to deceive the Indians, to be the same
wherewith he has deceived the Greeks and Romans, and other ancient Gentiles,
giving them to understand that these notable creatures, the Sun, Moon,
Stars, and Elements, had power and authority to do good or harm to men.
And although God has created all these things for the use of man, yet has he
so much forgotte himself, as to rise up against him. Moreover, he has imbased
himself to creatures that are inferior unto himself, worshipping and calling
upon their works, forsaking his Creator. As the Wise man says well in these
words, All men are vain and abused that have not the knowledge of God, Sap 13.
seeing they could not know him, that is, by the things that seemed good unto
them: and although they have beheld his works, yet have they not attained to
know the author and maker thereof, but they have believed that the fire, wind,
swift air, the course of the stars, great rivers, with Sun and Moon, were
Gods and governors of the world: and being in love with the beauty of these
things, they thought they should esteem them as Gods. It is reason they should
consider how much more fair the Creator is, seeing that he is the Author of
beauties and makes all things. Moreover, if they admire the power and effects
of these things, thereby they may understand how much more mighty he is that
gave them their being, for by the beauty and greatness of the creatures, they
may judge what the Maker is. Hitherto are the words of the Book of Wisdom,
from whence we may draw a good and strong argument, to overthrow the Idolatry
of Infidells, who seek rather to serve the creature then the Creator, Romans 1.
as the Apostle does justly reprehend them. But for as much as this is not of
our present subject, and that it has been sufficiently treated of in the
Sermons written against the errors of the Indians, it shall be sufficient now
to show that they did worship the great God, and their vain and lying gods all
of one fashion: for their manner to pray to Viracocha, to the Sun, the
Stars, and the rest of their Idols, was to open their hands, and to make a
certain sound with their mouths, (like people that kissed,) and to ask that
which every one desired in offering his sacrifices, yet was there great
difference betwixt the words they used in speaking to the great Ticiviracocha,
to whom they did attribute the chief power and commandment over all things,
and those they used to others, the which every one did worship privately in his
house, as Gods or particular Lords, saying, that they were their intercessors
to this great Ticciviracocha. This manner of worship, opening the hands, and as
it were kissing, has something like to that which Job had in horror, as fit
for Idolaters, saying, If I have kissed my hands with my mouth, Job. 31.
beholding the Sun when it shines, or the Moon when it is light, the which
is a great iniquity, and to deny the most great God.

Of the Idolatry the Indians used to particular things. CHAP. 5.
THe Devil has not been contented to make these blind Indians to worship
the Sun, Moon, Stars, Earth and Sea, and many other general things in
nature, but he has passed on further, giving them for God, and making them
subject to base and abject things, and for the most part, filthy and infamous.
No man needs to wonder at this barbarous blindness, if he remember what the
Apostle speaks of Wise men and Philosophers, That having known God, R^m. 1.
they did not glorify him, nor give him thanks as to their God, but they were
lost in their own imaginations and conceits, and their hearts were hardened in
their follies, and they have changed the glory and deity of the eternal God,
into shows and figures of vain and corruptible things, as men, birds, beasts
and serpents: we know well that the Egyptians did worship the Dog of Osiris,
the Cow of Isis, and the Sheep of Ammon: the Romans did worship the goddess
Februa, of Fevers, and the Tarpeien Goose: and Athenes the wise did worship
the Cock and the Raven, and such other like vanities and mockeries, whoreof
the ancient Histories of the Gentiles are full. Men fell into this great
misery, for that they would not subject themselves to the Law of the true God
and Creator, as Saint Athanasius does learnedly handle, writing against
Idolatry. But it is wonderful strange to see the excess which has been at
the Indies, especially in Peru: for they worshipped rivers, fountains, the
mouths of rivers, entries of mountains, rocks or great stones, hills and
the tops of mountains, which they call Apachitas, and they hold them for
matters of great devotion. To conclude, they did worship all things in nature,
which seemed to them remarkable and different from the rest, as acknowledging
some particular deity.

They showed me in Caxamalca of Nasca a little hill or great mount of sand,
which was the chief Idol or Guaca of the Ancients. I demanded of them what
divinity they found in it? They answered, that they did worship it for the
wonder, being a very high mount of sand, in the midst of very thick
mountains of stone. We had need in the city of Kings, of great store of
great wood; for the melting of a Bell, and therefore they cut down a great
deformed tree, which for the greatness and antiquity thereof had been a long
time the Oratorie and Guaca of the Indians. And they believed there was a
certain Divinity in any thing that was extraordinary and strange in his kind,
attributing the like unto small stones and mettalls; yea unto roots and
fruits of the earth, as the roots they call Papas. There is a strange kind
which they call Lallahuas, which they kissed and worshipped. They did likewise
woorshippe Bears, Lions, Tygres and Snakes, to thend they should not hurt
them: and such as their gods be, such are the things they offer unto them in
their worship. They have used as they go by the way, to cast, in the cross
ways, on the hills, and tops of mountains, which they call Apachittas,
old shoes, feathers, and Coca chewed, being an herb they use much. And when
they have nothing left, they cast a stone as an offering, that they might pass
freely, and have greater force, the which they say increases by this means,
as it is reported in a provincial Counsel of Peru. And therefore they find
in the hie ways great heaps of stones offered, and such other things. Con^il.
Limen^^. 2. p. 2. cap. 99.
The like folly ^id the Ancients use, of whom it is spoken in the Proverbs,
Like unto him that offers stones unto Mercury, Prou. 27.
such a one is he that honors fools, meaning that a man shall reap no
more fruit nor profit of the second than the first, for that their God Mercury,
made of stone, does not acknowledge any offering, neither does a fool any
honor that is done him. They used another offering no less pleasant and
ridiculous, pulling the hair from the eyebrowes to offer it to the Sun,
hills, Apachittas, to the winds, or to any other thing they fear. Such is the
miseries that many Indians have lived in, and do to this day, whom the devil
does abuse like very Babes, with any foolish illusion whatsoever: So does
Saint Chrysostom in one of his Homilies compare them, but the servants of God
which labor to draw them to salvation, ought not to contemn these follies and
childishness, being sufficient to plunge these poor abused creatures into
eternall^perdition; but they ought with good and clear reasons, to draw them
from so great ignorance. For in truth it is a matter worthy of consideration,
to see how they subject themselves to such as instruct them in the true way of
life. There is nothing among all the creatures more beutifull than the sun,
which all the Gentiles did commonly worship. A discreet captain and good
christian told me, that he had with a good reason persuaded the Indians, that
the Sun was no god. He required the Ca^ique or chief Lord, to give him an
Indian that were light, to carry him a Letter; which done, he said to the
Cacique, Tell me, who is Lord and chief, either this Indian that carries the
letter, or thou that do send him? The Cacique answered, without doubt I am,
for he does but what I commau^d him. Even so replied the Captain, is it of
the Sun we see, and the Creator of all things: For that the Sun is but a
servant to the most high Lord, which (by his commandment) runs swiftly,
giving light to all nations. Thus thou see it is against reason to yield that
honor to the Sun, which is due to the Creator and Lord of all. The Captains
reason pleased them all; and the Cacique with his Indians said it was truth,
and they were much pleased to understand it.

They report of one of the Kings Inguas, a man of a subtle spirit, who
(seeing that all his predecessors had worshipped the Sun,) said, that he did
not take the Sun to be God, neither could it be, for that God was a great
Lord, who with great quiet and leisure performs his works, and that the
Sun does never cease his course, saying, that the thing which labored so
much could not seem to be God. Wherein he spoke truth. Even so, when they
show the Indians their blind errors, by lively and plain reasons, they are
presently persuaded and yield admirably to the truth.

Of another kind of idolatry upon the dead. CHAP. 6.
THere is an other kind of idolatry, very different from the rest, which the
Gentiles have used for the deads sake whom they loved and esteemed: and it
seems that the Wise man would give us to understand, that the beginning of
idolatry proceeded thence, saying thus; The seeking of Idolles was the
beginning of fornication, and the bringing up of them is the destruction of
life; Wisd. 14.
for they were not from the beginning, neither shall they continue for ever,
but the vanity and idleness of men has found out this invention, therefore
shall they shortly come to an end: for when a father mourned heavily for the
death of his miserable son, he made for his consolation, an Image of the dead
man, and b^ganne to worship him as a god, who a little before had ended his
days like a mortal man, commanding his servants to make ceremonies and
sacrifices in remembrance of him. Thus in process of time this ungracious
custom waxing strong, was held for a law, and Images were worshipped by the
commandment of Kings and Tirantes. Then they began to do the like to them
that were absent, and such as they could not honor in presence, being far
off, they did worship in this sort, cansing the Images of Kings to be brought
whom they would worship, supplying (by this invention) their absence whom they
desired to flatter. The curiositic of excellent workmen increased this
Idolatry, for these Images were made so excellent by their Art, that the
ignorant were provoked to worship them, so as by the perfection of their
Art, pretending to content them that gave them to make, they drew Pictures and
Images far more excellent: and the common people, led with the show and
grace of the work, did hold and esteem him for a God, whom before they had
honored as a man: And this was the miserable error of men, who sometimes
yielding to their affection and sense, sometimes to the flattery of their
Kings, did attribute unto stones the incommunicable name of God, worshipping
them for Gods.

All this is in the book of Wisdom, worthy to be noted; and such as are
curious in the search of Antiquities, shall find that the beginning of
idolatry were these Images of the dead. I say idolatry, which is properly the
worship of Idolles and Images: for that it is not certain that this other
idolatry to worship the creatures, as the Sun, and the hosts of heaven, or
the number of Planets and Stars, whereof mention is made in the Prophets,
has been after the idolatry of Images, Ier. 10.
although without doubt they have made idols in honor of the Sun, S^ph. ^.
the Moon, and the Earth. Returning to our Indians they came to the height of
Idolatry by the same means the Scripture makes mention of: first they had a
care to keep the bodies of their Kings and Noblemen whole, from any ill scent
or corruption above two hundred years. In this sort were their Kings Inguas
in Cusco, every one in his Chapel and Oratorie, so as the Marquise of Canette
being Viceroy, to root out Idolatry, caused three or four of their gods to be
drawn out and carried to the city of Kings, which bredde a great admiration,
to see these bodies (dead so many years before) remain so fair and also
whole. Every one of these Kings Inguas left all his treasure and revenues, to
entertain the place of worship where his body was laid, and there were many
Ministers with all his family dedicated to his service: for no King successor
did usurp the treasures and plate of his predecessor, but he did gather all
new for himself, and his palace. They were not content with this Idolatry to
dead bodies, but also thev made their figures and representations: and every
King in his life time caused a figure to be made wherein he was represented,
which they called Guaoigui, which signifies brother, for that they should do
to this Image, during his life and death, as much honor and reverence as to
himself. They carried this Image to the wars, and in procession for rain or
fair weather, making sundry feasts and sacrifices unto them. There have been
many of these Idolles in Cusco, and in that territory, but now they say that
this superstition of worshipping of stones has altogether ceased, or for the
most part, after they had been discovered by the diligence of the Licentiate
Pollo, and the first was that of the Inguas Rocha, chief of the faction or race
of Hanam Cusco. And we find that among other Nations they had in great
estimation and reverence the bodies of their predecessors, and did likewise
worship their Images.

Of Superstitions they used to the Dead. CHAP. 7.
THe Indians of Peru believed commonly that the Souls lived after this life,
and that the good were in glory, and the bad in pain; so as there is little
difficulty to persuade them to these articles. But they are not yet come to
the knowledge of that point, that the bodies should rise with the souls* And
therefore they did use a wonderful care, as it is said, to preserve the
bodies which they honored after death: to this end their successors gave them
garments, and made sacrifices unto them, especially the Kings Inguas, being
accompanied at their funerals, with a great number of servants and women for
his service in the other life: and therefore on the day of his decease, they
did put to death the woman he had loved best, his servants and officers that
they might serve him in the other life.

Whenas Guanacapa died, (who was father to Atagualpa, at what time the
Spaniards entered,) they put to death above a thousand persons of all ages and
conditions, for his service to accompany him in the other life, after many
songs and drunkenness they slew them; and these that were appointed to death,
held themselves happy. They did sacrifice many things unto them, especially
young children, and with the blood they made a stroke on the dead man's face,
from one ear to the other. This superstition and inhumanitie, to kill both men
and women, to accompany and serve the dead in the other life, has been
followed by others, and is at this day used amongst some other barbarous
Nations. And as Pollo writes, it has been in a manner general throughout all
the Indies. The Reverent Beda reports, that before the Englishmen were
converted to the Gospel, they had the same custom, to kill men to accompany
and serve the dead. It is written of a Portugal, who being captive among the
Barbarians, had been hurt with a dart, so as he lost one eye, and as they
would have sacrificed him to accompany a Nobleman that was dead, he said unto
them, that those that were in the other life, would make small account of the
dead, if they gave him a blind man for a companion; and that it were better to
give him an attendant that had both his eyes. This reason being found good by
the Barbarians, they let him go. Besides this superstition of sacrificing men to
the dead, being used but to great Personages, there is another far more
general and common in all the Indies, which is, to set meat and drink upon
the grave of the dead, imagining they did feed thereon: the which has
likewise been an error amongst the Ancients, as saint Augustine writes, and
therefore they gave them meat and drink. At this day many Indian Infidells,
do secretly draw their dead out of the churchyard, and bury them on hills,
or upon passages of mountains, or else in their own houses. They have also
used to put gold and silver in their mouth, hands, and bosom, and to apparel
them with new garments durable, and well lined under the hearse.

They believe that the souls of the dead wandered up and down and endure
cold, thirst, hunger and travel, and for this cause they make their
anniversaries, carrying them clothes, meat and drink. So as the Prelates,
neitheir Synodes, above all things, give charge to their Priests to let the
Indians understand, that the offerings that are set upon the sepulcher, is not
to feed the dead, but for the poor and ministers, and that God alone does
feed the souls in the other life; seeing they neither eat nor drink any
corporal thing, being very needful they should understand it, lest they
should convert this religious use into a superstition of the gentiles, as many
do.

Of the manner of burying the dead among the Mexicaine and sundry other
Nations. CHAP. 8.
HAving reported what many nations of Peru have done with their dead, it shall
not be from the purpose, to make particular mention of the Mexicaines in this
point, whose mortuaries were much solempnised, and full of notable follies. It
was the office of the priests and religious of Mexico (who lived there with a
strange observance, as shall be said hereafter) to interre the dead, and do
their obsequies. The places where they buried them, was in their gardens, and
in the courts of their own houses: others carried them to the places of
sacrifices which were done in the mountains: others burnt them, and after
buried the ashes in they^ Temples; and they buried them all, with whatsoever
they had, of apparel, stones, and jewels. They did put the ashes of such as
were burnt into pots, and with them, the jewels, stones, and earerings of the
dead, how rich and precious soever. They did sing the funeral offices, like to
answers, and did often lift up the dead bodies, doing many ceremonies. At
these mortuaries they did eat and drink; and if it were a person of quality,
they gave apparel to all such as came to the interrement. When any one dyed,
they laid him open in a chamber, until that all his kinsfolks and friends
were come, who brought presents unto the dead, and saluted him as if he were
living. And if he were a King or Lord of some town, they offered him slaves
to be put to death with him, to the end they might serve him in the other
world. They likewise put to death his priest, or chaplain (for every Noble man
had a priest which administered these ceremonies within his house,) and then
they killed him, that he might execute his office with the dead. They likewise
killed his cook, his butler, his dwarfes, and deformed men, by whom he was
most served: neither did they spare the very brothers, of the dead, who had
most served them: for it was a greatness amongst the Noble men, to be served
by their brethren and the rest. Finally, they put to death all of his train,
for the entertaining of his house in the other world: and lest poverty should
oppress them, they buried with them much wealth, as gold, silver, stones,
curtins of exquisite work, bracelets of gold, and other rich pieces. And if
they burned the dead, they used the like with all his servants, and ornaments
they gave him for the other world. Then took they all the ashes they buried
with very great solemnity. The obsequies continued ten days with songs of
plaints, and lamentations, and the priests carried away the dead with so many
ceremonies, and in so great number, as they could scarce accoumpt them. To the
Captains and Noblemen they gave trophies and marks of honor, according to
their enterprises and valor employed in the wars and governements; for this
effect they had arms and particular blasons. They carried these marks or
blazons to the place where he desired to be buried or burnt, marching before
the body, and accompanying it, as it were in procession, where the priests and
officers of the Temple went with diverse furnitures and ornaments, some casting
incense, others singing, and some sounding of mournful flutes and drums,
which did much increase the sorrow of his kinsfolks and subjects. The priest
who did the office was decked with the marks of the idol which the noble man
had represented; for all noble men did represent idolles, and carried the name
of some one: and for this occasion they were esteemed and honored. The order
of knighthoode did commonly carry these foresaid marks. He that should be
burnt, being brought to the place appointed, they environed him with wood of
pine trees, and all his baggage, then set they fire unto it, increasing it
still with goomie wood, until that all were converted into ashes, then came
there forth a Priest attired like a Devil, having mouths upon every joint of
him, and many eyes of glass, holding a great staff, with the which he did
mingle all the ashes very boldly, and with so terrible a gesture, as he
terrified all the assistants. Sometimes this minister had other different
habites, according to the quallitie of the dead. I have made this digression of
obsequies and funerals, upon the idolatry and superstition they had to the
dead. It is reason to return now to our chief subject, and to finish this
matter.

The fourth and last kind of Idolatry the Indians used, especially the
Mexicaines to Images and Idols. CHAP. 9.
ALthough in truth God is greatly offended with these above named Idolatries,
where they woorship the creatures; yet the Holy Ghost does much more reproove
and condemn another kind of idolatry, and that is of those that worship Images
and figures made by the hand of men, which have nothing else in them but to be
of wood, stone, or metal, and of such form as God has given them. And
therefore the Wiseman speaks thus of such people, They are miserable, whose
hopes may be counted among the dead, that have called the works of men's hands
gods, as gold, silver, and the invention of the likeness of beasts, or a
fruitless stone, which has nothing more in it than antiquity. Esa. 44. I^re.
10. Baruch 6. Psalm. 113.
And he does divinely follow this proposition against this error and folly
of the Gentiles; as also the Prophets Esaias, Jeremy, Baruc, and King David do
treat thereof amply. It is convenient and necessary that the Ministers of
Christ which do reproove the errors of idolatry, should have a good sight, and
consider well these reasons which the Holy Ghost does so lively set down,
being all reduced into a short sentence, by the Prophet Osee, Osee. ^.
He that has made them was a workman, and therefore can they be no gods,
therefore the Calfe of Samaria shall be like the Spiders web. Returning to our
purpose, there has been great curiosity at the Indies in making of idolles
and pictures of diverse forms and matters, which they worshipped for gods, and
in Peru they called them Guacas, being commonly of foul and deformed beasts,
at the least, such as I have seen, were so. I believe verily that the Devil,
in whose honor they made these idolles, was pleased to cause himself to be
worshipped in these deformities, and in ^rneth it was found so, that the Devil
spoke and answered many of these Guacas or idols, and his priests and
ministers came to these Oracles of the father of lies, and such as he is, such
were his counsels and prophesies. In the provinces of New Spain, Mexico,
Tescuco, Tlascalla, Cholula, and in the neighbor countries to this realm,
this kind of idolatry has been more pactised than in any other realm of the
world. And it is a prodigious thing to hear the superstitions rehearsed that
they have used in that point, of the which it shall not be unpleasant to speak
something. The chiefest idol of M^xic^ was, as I have said, Vitziliputzli. It
was an image of wood like to a man, set upon a stool of the color of ^ zure,
in a brankard or litter, at ^very corner was a pie^^ of wood in form of a
Serpents head. The stool signified that he was set in heaven: this idol had
all the forehead azure, and had a band of azure under the nose from one ear to
another: upon his head he had a rich plume of feathers, like to the beak of a
small bird, the which was covered on the top with gold burnished very
brown: he had in his left hand a white target, with the figures of five
pineapples, made of white feathers, set in a cross: and from above issued
forth a crest of gold, and at his sides he had four darts, which (the
Mexicaines say) had been sent from heaven to do those acts and prowesses
which shall be spoken of: In his right hand he had an azured staff, cut in
fashion of a waving snake. All these ornaments with the rest he had, carried
his sense as the Mexicaines do show; the name of Vitziliputzli signifies the
left hand of a shining feather.

I will speak hereafter of the proud Temple, the sacrifices, feasts and
ceremonies of this great idol, being very notable things. But at this present
we will only show, that this idol thus richly appareled and decked, was set
upon an high Altar, in a small piece or box, well covered with linen
clothes, jewels, feathers and ornaments of gold, with many rundles of
feathers, the fairest and most exquisite that could be found: he had always a
curtine before him for the greater veneration. Joining to the chamber or
chapel of this idol, there was a piece of less work, and not so well
beautified, where there was another idol they called T lalos. These two idols
were always together, for that they held them as companions, and of equal
power. There was another idol in Mexico much esteemed, which was the god of
repentance, and of jubilies and pardons for their sins. They called this
idol TeZcallipuca, he was made of a black shining stone like to Iayel, being
attired with some Gentile devises after their manner; it had earerings of gold
and silver, and through the nether lip a small canon of cristall, in length
half a foot: in the which they sometimes put a green feather, and sometimes
an azured, which made it resemble sometimes an Emerald, and sometimes a
Turquois: it had the hair broided and bound up with a haire-lace of gold
burnished, at the end whereof did hang an ^are of gold, with two firebrands of
smoke painted therein, which did signify the prayers of the afflicted and
sinners that he heard, when they recommended themselves unto him. Betwixt the
two ears hanged a number of small herons. He had a jewel hanging at his
neck, so great that it covered all his stomach: upon his arms bracelets of
gold; at his navilla rich green stone: and in his left hand a fan of
precious feathers, of green, azure and yellow, which came forth of a looking
glass of gold, shining and well burnished, and that signified, that within
this looking glass he saw whatsoever was done in the world. They called
this glass or chaston of gold Irlacheaya, which signifies his glass for to
look in. In his right hand he held four darts, which signified the
chasticement he gave unto the wicked for their sins. And therefore they
feared this idol most, lest he should discover their faults and offenses. At
his feast they had pardon of their sins, which was made every four years,
as shall be declared hereafter. They held this idol Tescatlipuca for the god of
drought, of famine, barrenness and pestilence: And therefore they painted him
in another form, being set in great malesty upon a stool compassed in with a
red curtin, painted and wrought with the heads and bones of dead men. In the
lest hand it had a target with five pines, like unto pine apples of cotton: and
in the right a little dart with a threatening countenance, and the arm
stretched out* as if he would cast it; and from the target came four darts. It
had the countenance of an angry man, and in choler, the body all painted
black, and the head full of Quails feathers. They used great superstition to
this idol, for the fear they had of it. In Cholula which is a commonwealth of
Mexico, they worshipped a famous idol which was the god of merchandise, being to
this day greatly given to traffic. They called it Qnetzaalcoalt.

This idol was in a great place in a temple very hie: it had about it, gold,
silver, jewels, very rich feathers, and habites of diverse colors. It had the
form of a man, but the visage of a little bird, with a red bill, and above a
comb full of wartes, having ranckes of teeth, and the tongue hanging out. It
carried upon the head, a pointed myter of painted paper, a sith in the hand,
and many toys of gold on the legs; with a thousand other foolish
inventions, whereof all had their significations, and they worshipped it, for
that he enriched whom he pleased, as Memnon and Plutus. In truth this name
which the Choluanos gave to their God, was very fi^te, although they
understood it not: they called it Quetzaalcoalt, signifying color of a rich
feather, for such is the devil of covetousness. These barbarous people
contented not themselves to have gods only, but they had goddesses also, as
the Fables of Poets have brought in, and the blind gentility of the Greeks and
Romans worshipped them. The chief goddess they worshipped was called ToZi, which
is to say, our granmother, who as the Histories of Mexico report, was daughter
to the king of Culhuacan, who was the first they s^eaed by the commandment of
Vitzliputzli, whom they sacrificed in this so^t, being his sister, and then
they began to flea men in their sacrifices, and to clothe the living with the
skins of the sacrificed, having learned that their gods were pleased
therewith, as also to pull the hearts out of them they sacrificed, which they
learned of their god, who pulled out the hearts of such as he punished in
Tulla, as shall be said in his place. One of these goddesses they worshipped had
a son, who was a great hunter, whom they of Tl^scalla afterward took for
a god, and those were ennemies to the Mexicaines, by whose aid the Spaniardes
won Mexico. The province of Tlascalla is very fit for hunting, and the people
are much given thereunto. They therefore made a great feast unto this idol,
whom they painted of such a form, as it is not now needful to loose any time
in the description thereof. The feast they made was pleasant, and in this sort:
They sounded a Trumpet at the break of day, at the sound whereof they all
assembled with their bows, arrows, netts, and other instruments for hunting:
then they went in procession with their idol, being followed by a great number
of people to a high mountain, upon the top whereof they had made a bower of
leaves, and in the midst thereof an Altar richly decked, whereupon they
placed the idol. They marched with a great bruit of Trumpettes, Cornets,
Flutes and Drums, and being come unto the place, they environed this
mountain on all sides, putting fire to it on all parts: by means whereof
many beasts flew forth, as stagges, connies, hares, foxes, and woolves, which
went to the top flying from the fire. These hunters followed after with great
cries and noise of diverse instruments, hunting them to the top before the
idol, whither fled such a number of beasts, in so great a prease, that they
leaped one upon another, upon the people, and upon the Altar, wherein they
took great delight. Then took they a great number of these beasts, and
sacrificed them before the idol, as stagges and other great beasts, pulling
out their hearts, as they use in the sacrifice of men, and with the like
ceremony: which done, they took all their prey upon their shoulders, and
retired with their idol in the same manner as they came, and entered the city
laden with all these things, very joyful, with great store of music,
trumpets, and drums, until they came to the Temple, where they placed their
idol with great reverence and solemnity. They presently went to prepare their
venison, wherewith they made a banquet to all the people; and after dinner they
made their plays, representations, and daunces before the idol. They had a
great number of other idolles, of gods and goddesses; but the chief were of
the Mexicaine Nation, and the neighbor people as is said.

Of a strange manner of Idolatry practiced amongst the Mexicaines. CHAP. 10.
AS we have said that the kings Inguas of Peru caused Images to be made to
their likeness, which they called their Guacos or brothers, causing them for
to be honored like themselves: even so the Mexicains have done of their gods,
which was in this sort. They took a captive, such as they thought good, and
before they did sacrifice him unto their idols; they gave him the name of the
idol, to whom he should be sacrificed, and apparelled him with the same
ornaments like their idol, saying, that he did represent the same idol. And
during the time that this representation lasted, which was for a year in some
feasts, in others six months, and in others less: they reverenced and
worshipped him in the same manner, as the proper idol; and in the mean time he
did eat, drink, and was merry. When he went through the streets, the
people came forth to worship him, and every one brought him an alms, with
children and sick folks, that he might cure them, and bless them, suffering
him to do all things at his pleasure, only he was accompanied with ten or
twelve men lest he should fly. And he (to the end he might be reverenced as he
passed) sometimes sounded upon a small flute, that the people might prepare to
worship him. The feast being come, and he grown fat, they killed him,
opened him, and eat him, making a solemn sacrifice of him.

In truth it was a pitiful thing to consider in what sort Satan held this
people in his subjection, and does many to this day, which commit the like
cruelties and abominations, with the loss of the miserable souls and bodies
of such as they offer to him, and he laughes and mockes at the folly of these
poor miserable creatures, who deserve well, for their offenses, to be forsaken
of the most high God, to the power of their adversary, whom they have chosen
for their god and support. But seeing we have spoken sufficient of the Indians
idolatry: it follows that we treat of their Religion, or rather
Superstition, which they use in their sacrifices, temples, ceremonies, and the
rest.

How the Devil has labored to make himself equal unto God, and to imitate
him in his Sacrifices, Religion, and Sacraments. CHAP. 11.
BEfore we come to this point, we ought to consider one thing, which is
worthy of special regard, the which is, how the Devil by his pride has
opposed himself to God; and that which God by his wisdom has decreed for
his honor and service, and for the good and health of man, the Devil st^ives
to imitate and to pervert, to be honored, and to cause man to be dammed: for
as we see the great God has Sacrif^^^s, Priests, Sacraments, Religious
Prophets, and Ministers, dedicated to his divine service and holy ceremonies,
so the Devil has his sacrifices, priests, his kinds of sacraments, his
ministers appointed, his secluded and fained holiness, with a thousand sorts
of false prophets. All which will be pleasant to understand, being declared in
particular, and of no s^^ll s^uite for him that shall remember, how the Devil
is the father of lies, ^^hn. 5.
as the truth says in the Gosp^l; and therefore he seeks to usurp to
himself the glory of God, Ex^^. 7.
and to counterfeit the light by his darkness. The Sooth-saiers of Egypt taught
by their master Sa^^^^, labored to do wonders, like unto those of ^^s^s and
Aron, to be equal unto them. We read in the Book of Iud^es of that Micas,
Priest of the vain Idol, which used the same ornaments which were used in the
Tabernacle of the true God, as the Ephod, the Seraphin, and other things. There
is scarce any thing instituted by Jesus Christ our Savior in his Law of his
Gospel, the which the Devil has not counterfaited in some sort, and carried
to his Gentiles, as may be seen in reading that which we hold for certain, by
the report of men worthy of credit, of the customs and ceremonies of the
Indians, whereof we will treat in this Book.

Of the Temples that were found at the Indies. CHAP. 12.
BEginning then with their Temples, even as the great God would have a house
dedicated, where his holy name might be honored, and that it should be
particularly vowed to his service; even so the Devil, by his wicked practices,
persuaded Infid^^ to build him proud Temples, and particular Oratories and
Sanctuaries. In every Province of Peru, there was one principal Guaca, or
house of adoration; and besides it, there was one general throughout all the
Kingdom of the Inguas; amongst the which there has been two famous and
notable, the one which they called Pachamana, is four leagues from Lima,
whereat this day they see the ruins of a most ancient and great building, out
of the which Francis Pizarre and his people drew infinite treasure, of vessel
and pottes of gold and silver, which they brought when they took the Ingua
A^tagu^l^^. There are certain memories and discourses which say, that in this
Temple the Devil did speak visibl^, and g^v^an ^ivers by his Oracle, and that
sometimes they did seea spotted snake: and it was a thing very comin ^n and
approoved at the Indies, that the Devil spoke and answered in these fall se
Sanctuaries deceiving this miserable people. But where the Gospel is entered,
and the Cross of Christ planted, the father of lies is become mute, as Plutark
writes of his time, Cur cessaverit Pithias fondere oracula: Plu. lib. de tract.

Just. in apol. pro cl^ris^.


and Iustine Martyr treates amply of the silence which Christ imposed to
devils, which spoke by Idols, as it had been before much prophesied of in the
holy Scripture. The manner which the Infidel Ministers and Inchanters had to
consult with their gods, was as the Devil had taught them. It was commonlyin
the night, they entered backward to their idol, and so went bending their bodies
and head, after an ugly manner, and so they consulted with him. The answer he
made, was commonly like unto a fearful hissing, or to a gnashing which did
terrify them; and all that he did advertise or command them, was but the way
to their perdition and ruin. There are few of these Oracles found now, through
the mercy of God, and great power of Jesus Christ. There has been in Peru
another Temple and Oratorie, most esteemed, which was in the City of Cusco,
where at this day is the monastery of S. Dominicke. We may see it has been a
goodly and a stately work, by the pavement and stones of the building, which
remain to this day. This Temple was like to the Pantheon of the Romans, for
that it was the house and dwelling of all the gods; for the Kings Inguas did
there behold the gods of all the Nations and provinces they had conquered,
every Idol having his private place, whither they of that Province came to
worship it with an excessive charge of things which they brought for his
service. And thereby they supposed to keep safely in obedience, those Provinces
which they had conquered, holding their gods, as it were in hostage. In this
same house was the Pinchao, which was an Idol of the Sun, of most fine gold,
wrought with great riches of stones, the which was placed to the East, with so
great Art, as the Sun at his rising did cast his beams thereon: and as it
was of most fine metal, his beams did reflect with such a brightness, that it
seemed another Sun. The Inguas did worship this for their God, and the
Pachayacha, which signifies the Creator of heaven. They say, that at the spoil
of this so rich a Temple, a soldier had for his part this goodly plate of gold
of the Sun. And as play was then in request, he lost it all in one night at
play, whence came the proverb they have in Peru for great gamesters, saying,
that they play the Sun before it rises.

Of the Proud Temples at Mexico. CHAP. 13.
THe Superstitions of the Mexicaines, have without comparison been greater
then the rest, as well in their ceremonies, as in the greatness of their
Temples, the which in old time the Spaniards called by this word Cu, which word
might be taken from the Ilanders of S. Dominique, or of Cuba, as many other
words that are in use, the which are neither from Spain, nor from any other
language now usual among the Indians, as is Mays, Chico, Vaquiano, Chapeton,
and other like. There was in Mexico, this Cu, the famous Temple of
Vitziliputzli, it had a very great circuit, and within a fair Court. It was
built of great stones, in fashion of snakes tied one to another, and the
circuit was called Coatepantli, which is, a circuit of snakes: upon the
top of every chamber and oratorie where the Idols were, was a fine pillar
wruogh twit h^small stones, black as icate, set in goodly order, the ground
raised up with white and red, which below gave a great light, upon the top of
the pillar were battlements very artificially made, wrought like snailes,
supported by two Indians of stone, sitting, holding candlestickes in their
hands, the which were like Croisants garnished and enriched at the ends, with
yellow and green feathers and long fringes of the same. Within the circuit of
this court, there were many chambers of religious men, and others that were
appointed for the service of the Priests and Popes, for so they call the
sovereign Priests which serve the Idol. This Court is so great and spacious,
as eight or ten thousand persons did dance easily in round, holding hands, the
which was an usual custom in that Realm, although it seem to many
incredible.

There were four gates or en^^ies, at the East, West, North, and South; at
every one of these gates began a f^ire cawsey of two or three leagues long.
There was in the midst of the Lake where the City of Mexico is built, four
large cawseies in cross, which did much beautify it; upon every portall or
entery, was a God or Idol, having the visage turned to the causey, ^ight
against the Temple gate of VitZiliputZli. There were thirty steps of thirty
fadome long, and they divided from the circuit of the court by a street that
went betwixt them; upon the top of these steps there was a walk of thirty
foot broad, all pla^te^d with chalk, in the midst of which walk was a
Pallisado artificially made of very high trees, planted in order a fadome one
from another* These trees were very big, and all pierced with small holes
from the foot to the top, and there were rods did run from one tree to
another, to the which were chained or tied many dead men's heads. Upon every
rod were twenty sculles, and these ranckes of sculles continue from the foot
to the top af the tree. This Pallissado was full of dead men's sculls from one
end to the other, the which was a wonderful mournful sight and full of
horror. These were the heads of such as had been sacrificed; for after they
were dead, and had eaten the flesh, the head was delivered to the Ministers of
the Temple, which tied them in this sort until they fell off by morcells; and
then had they a care to set others in their places. Upon the top of the
Temple were two stones or chappells, and in them were the two Idols which I
have spoken of, VitziliputZli, and his companion Tlalot. These Chappells were
carved and graven very artificially, and so high, that to ascend up to it,
there was a staire of stone of sixscore steps. Before these Chambers or
Chappells, there was a Court of forty foot square, in the midst whereof, was
a high stone of five hand breadth, poynted in fashion of a Pyramide, it was
placed there for the sacrificing of men; for being laid on their backs, it
made their bodies to bend, and so they did open them and pull out their hearts,
as I shall show hereafter. There were in the City of Mexico, eight or nine
other Temples, the which were joined one to another within one great circuit,
and had their private st^ires, their courts, their chambers, and their
dortoires. The entries of some were to the East, some to the West, others to
the South, and some to the North. All these Temples were curiously wrought, and
compassed in with diverse sorts of battlements and pictures, with many figures
of stones, being accompanied and fortefied with great and large spurs or
platformes. They were dedicated to diverse gods: but next to the Temple of
VitziliputZli, was that of Tescalipuca, which was the god of penance and of
punishments, very high and well built.

There were four steps to ascend, on the top was a flat or table of six
score foot broad, and joining unto it was a hall hanged with tapistry and
curtins of diverse colors and works. The door thereof being low and large,
was always covered with a veil, and none but the priests might enter in. All
this Temple was beutified with diverse images and pictures most curiously; for
that these two Temple were as the cathedral churches; and the rest in respect
of them as parishes and her* mitages: they were so spacious, and had so many
chambers, that there were in them places for the ministry, colleges,
schools, and houses for priests, whereof we will entreat hereafter. This
may suffice to conceive the devils pride, and the misery of this wretched
nation, who with so great expense of their goods, their labor, and their
lives, did thus serve their capital enemy, who pretended nothing more than the
destruction of their souls, and consumption of their bodies. But yet they were
well pleased, having an opinion in their so great an error, that they were
great and mighty gods, to whom they did these services.

Of the Priests and their offices. CHAP 14.
WE find among all the nations of the world* men specially dedicated to the
service of the true God, or to the false, which serve in sacrifices, and
declare unto the people what their gods command them. There was in Mexico a
strange curiosity upon this point. And the devil counterfeiting the use of
the Church of God, has placed in the order of his Priests, some greater or
superiors, and some less, the one as Acolites, the other as Levites, and that
which has made me most to wonder, was, that the devil would usurp to
himself the service of God; yea and use the same name: for the Mexicaines in
their ancient tongue called their hie Priests Papas, as they should say
sovereign Bishops, as it appears now by their Histories. The Priests of
VitZliputzli succeeded by linages of certain quarters of the City, deputed
for that purpose, and those of other idols came by election, or being offered
to the temple in their infancy. The daily exercise of the Priests was to cast
incense on the idolles, which was done four times in the space of a natural
day. The first at break of day, the second at noone, the third at Sun
setting, and the fourth at midnight. At midnight all the chief officers of the
Temple did rise, and in stead of bells, they sounded a long time upon
trumpets, cornets and flutes very heavily; which being ended, he that did the
office that week, stepped forth, attyred in a white roabe after the Dalmatike
manner, with a censor in his hand full of coals, which he took from the harth
burning continually before the Altar; in the other hand he had a purse full of
incense, which he cast into the censor, and as he entered the place where the
idol was, he incensed it with great reverence, then took he a cloth, with the
which he wiped the Altar and the curtins. This done, they went all into a
Chapel, and there did a certain kind of rigorous and austere penance,
beating themselves, and drawing of blood, as I shall show in the treatise of
Penance, which the Devil has taught to his creatures; and hereof they never
failed at these Ma^tins at midnight. None other but the Priests might
entermeddle with their sacrifices, and every one did employ himself according
to his dignity and degree. They did likewise preach to the people at some
feasts, as I will show when we treat thereof. They had revenues, and great
offerings were made unto them. I will speak hereafter of their unction in
Consecrating their Priests. In Peru the Priests were entertained of the
revenues and inheritance of their God, which they called Chacaras, which were
many, and also very rich.

Of the monastery of Virgins which the devil has invented for his service.
CHAP. 15.
AS the religious life (whereof many servants of God have made profession in the
holy Church, immitating Jesus Christ and his holy Apostles) is very pleasing in
the sight of his divine majesty, by the which his holy Name is so honored, and
his Church beutified: So the father of lies has labored to imitate and
counterfeit him herein; yea, as it were has striven with God in the
observance and austere life of his ministers. There were in Peru many
monasteries of Virgins (for there are no other admitted) at the least one in
every Province. In these monasteries there were two sorts of women, one
ancient, which they called Mamacom^^, for the instruction of the young; and the
other was of young maidens, placed there for a certain time, and after they
were drawn forth, either for their gods or for the Ingua. They called this
house or monastery Acl^guagi, which is to say, the house of the chosen. Every
monastery had his Vicar or Governor called Appopanaca, who had liberty and
power to choose whom he pleased, of what quality soever, being under eight
years of age, if they seemed to be of a good stature and constitution.

These Virgins thus shut up into these monasteries, were instructed by the
Momacomas, in diverse things needful for the life of man, and in the
customs and ceremonies of their gods; and afterward they took them from
thence, being above fourteen, sending them to the Court with suregards,
whereof some were appointed to serve the Guacas and Sanctuaries, keeping their
virginities for ever: some others were for the ordinary sacrifices that were
made of maidens, and other extraordinary sacrifices, they made for the health,
death, or wars of the Ingua; and the rest served for wives and concubines to
the Ingua, and unto other his kinsfolks and captains, unto whom he gave
them, which was a great and honorable recompense: This distribution was used
every year. These monasteries possessed rents and revenues for the
maintenance of these Virgins, which were in great numbers. It was not lawful
for any father to refuse his daughters when the Appopanaca required them for
the service of these monasteries. Yea many fathers did willingly offer their
daughters, supposing it was a great merit to be sacrificed for the Ingua. If
any of these Momacomas or Acllas were found to have trespassed against their
honor, it was an inevitable chasticement to bury them alive, or to put them to
death by some other kind of cruel torment.

The devil has even in Mexico had some kind of religious women, although
their possession was but ^^^ one year, and it was in this sort: Within this
gre^^ circuit whereof we have spoken, which was in the principal temple, there
were two houses like cloyste^s, the one opposite to the other, one of men, the
other of women: In that of women, they were virgins only, of twelve or
thirteen years of age, which they called the Maids of Penance. They wereas
many as the men, and lived chastely and regularly, as virgins dedicated to the
service of their god. Their charge was, to sweep and make clean the temple,
and every morning to prepare meat for the idol and his ministers, of the
alms the religious gathered. The food they prepared for the idol were small
loaves in the form of hands and feet, as of marchpane: and with this bread
they prepared certain sawses which they cast daily before the idol, and his
priests did eat it, as those of Baal, that Daniel speaks of. Dan. 14.
These virgins had their hair cut, and then they let them grow for a
certain time* they rose at midnight to the idols mattins, which they daily
celebrated, performing the same exercises the religious did. They had their
Abesses who employed them to make cloth of diverse fashions for the ornament of
their idols and temples. Their ordinary habit was all white, without any
work or color. They did their penance at midnight, sacrificing and wounding
themselves, and piercing the top of their ears, they laid the blood which
issued forth upon their cheeks: and after, (to wash off the blood) they
bathed themselves in a poole which was within their monastery. They lived very
honestly and discreetly; and if any were found ^o have offended, although but
lightly, presently they were put to death without remission, saying, she had
polluted the house of their god. They held it for an augure and advertisement,
that some one of the religious, man, or woman, had committed a fault, when they
saw a Ratte or a Mowse pass, or a Bat in the chapel of their idol, or that
they had gnawed any of the vailes* for that they say, a Catte or a Bat would
not adventure to commit such an indignity, if some offense had not gone
before, and then they began to make search of the fact, and having discovered
the offender or offenders, of what quality soever, they presently put them to
death.

None were receyved into this monastery, but the daughters of one of the six
quarters, named for that purpose: and this profession continued, as I have
said, the space of one whole year: during the which time, their fathers, and
they themselves had made a vow to serve the idol in this manner, and from
thence they went to be married. These virgins of Mexico, especially they of
Peru had some resemblance to the Vestall Virgins of Rome, as the Histories
show, to the end we may understand how the devil has desired to be served by
them that observe Virginity, not that chastity is pleasing unto him, for he
is an unclean spirit, but for the desire he has to take from the great God,
as much as in him lies, this glory to be served with cleanness and integrity.

Of the Monasteries of religious men that the devil has invented for
superstition. CHAP. 16.
IT is well known, by Letters written by the fathers of our company from
Iappon the number and multitude of religious men that are in those Provin^^^,
whom they call Boncos, and also their superstit^^^, customs and lies. Some
fathers that have been in those countries, report of these Boncos and religious
men of China, saying, that there are many Orders, and of diverse sorts, some
came unto them clad in white, bearing hoodes, and others all in black, without
hair or hoode, and these are commonly little esteemed, for the Mandarins or
ministers of Justice whippe them, as they do the rest of the people. They make
profession, not to eat any flesh, fish, nor any thing that has life, but
only Rice and herbs; but in secret they do eat any thing, and are worse
than the common people. They say the religious men which are at the Court,
which is at Paquin, are very much esteemed. The Mandarins go commonly to
recreate themselves at the Narells or monasteries of these Monks, and return
in a manner always drunk. These monasteries commonly are without the towns,
and have temples within their close: yet in China they are not greatly curious
of idolles, or of temples, for the Mandarins little esteem idols, and do hold
it for a vain thing, and worthy to be laughed at: yea they believe there is no
other life, nor Paradise, but to be in the office of the Mandarins, nor any
other hell, than the prisons they have for offenders. As for the common sort,
they say, it is necessary to entertayne them with idolatry, as the Philosopher
himself reaches his Governors: Arist. 12. (...).
and in the Scripture it was an excuse which Aaron gave, for the idol of the
Calfe, that he caused to be made; yet the Chinois used to tarry in the poupe of
their ships, Exodus 32.
in little chapels, a virgin imbosst set in a chair with two Chinois before
her kneeling in manner of Angels, having a light burning there both day and
night. And when they are to set sail, they do many sacrifices and
ceremonies, with a great noise of drums and bells, casting papers burnt at
the poupe.

Coming to our religious men, I do not know that in Peru there is any proper
houses for men, but for the Priests and Sorcerers, whereof there is an infinite
number. But it seems, that in Mexico the devil has set a due observation:
for within the circuit of the great temple there were two monasteries, as
before has bin said, one of Virgins, whereof I have spoken, the other of young
men secluded, of eighteen or twenty years of age, which they called
religious. They wear shaved crowns, as the Friars in these parts, their
hair alittle longer which fell to the midst of their care, except the hinder
part of the head, which they let grow the breadth of four fingers down to
their shoulders, and which they tied up in tresses. These young men that
served in the temple of Vitzliputzli lived poorly and chastely, and did the
office of Levites, ministering to the priests and chief of the temple, their
incense, lights, and garments; they swept and made clean the holy places,
bringing wood for a continual fire to the harth of their god, which was like a
lamp that still burnt before the Altar of their idol. Besides these young men,
there were other little boys, as novices, that served for manual uses, as to
deck the temple with boughs, roses, and reeds, give the Priests water to wash
with, give them their rasors to sacrifice, and go with such as begged alms to
carry it. All these had their superiors, who had the government over them,
they lived so honestly, as when they came in public, where there were any
women, they carried their heads very low, with their eyes to the ground, not
daring to behold them: they had linen garments, and it was lawful for them
to go into the City four or six together, to ask alms in all quarters:
and when they gave them none, it was lawful to go into the corn fields and
gather the cares of corn or clusters of Mays, which they most needed, the
Master not daring to speak, nor hinder them. They had this liberty, because
they lived poorly, and had no other revenues, but alms. There might not be
above fifty live in penance, rising at midnight to sound the cornets and
trumpets to awake the people. Every one watched the idol in his turn, left
the fire before the Altar should die: they gave the censor, with the which the
Priest at midnight incensed the idol, and also in the morning, at noone, and
at night. They were very subject and obedient to their superiors, and passed
not any one point that was commanded them. And at midnight after the priesthad
ended his censing, they retired themselves into a secret place, apart,
sacrificing, and drawing blood, from the calfes of their legs with sharp
bodkins: with this blood they rubbed their temples, and under their cares: and
this sacrifice finished, they presently washed themselves in a little poole
appointed to that end. These young men did not anoint their heads and bodies
with any Petum, as the Priests did: their garments were of a course white
linen cloth they do make there. These exercises and strictness of penance
continued a whole year, during which time they lived with great austeritie and
solitariness. In truth it is very strange to see that this false opinion of
religion has so great force among these young men and maidens of Mexico, that
they will serve the Devil with so great rigor and austerity, which many of us
do not in the service of the most high God, the which is a great shame and
confusion; for those amongst us that glory to have done a small penance,
although this exercise of the Mexicaines, was not continual, but for a year
only, which made it the more tolerable.

Of Penance and the Strictnes the Indians have used at the Devils persuasion.
CHAP. 17.
SEeing we are come to this point, it shall be good both to discover the
cursed pride of Satan, and to confound it, and somewhat to quicken our coldness
and sl^th in the service of the great GOD: to speak some thing of the rigor
and strange penance this miserable people used at the Devils persuasion, like
to the false Prophets of Baal, 3 R^g. 28.
who did beat and wound themselves with lancets, drawing forth blood; or like
those that sacrificed their sons and daughters unto loathsome Belphegor,
passing them through the fire, Psalm. 105. 4. Reg. ^^.
as holy Writ testifies: for Satan has always desired to be served, to the
great hurt and spoil of man. It has been said that the priests and
religious of Mexico, rose at midnight, and having cast incense before the
idol, they retired themselves into a large place, where there were many
lights; and sitting down, every one took a point of Manguay, which is like
unto an awle or sharp bodkin, with the which, or with some other kinds of
launcets or rasors, they pierced the calfes of their legs near to the bone,
drawing forth much blood, with the which they anointed their temples, and
dipped these bodkins or lancets in the rest of the blood, then set they them upon
the battlements of the Court, stickt in gloabes or bowls of straw, that all
might see and know the penance they did for the people: they do wash off the
blood in a lake appointed for that purpose, which they call Ezapangue, which is
to say, water of blood.

There were in the Temple a great number of bodkins or lancets, for that they
might not use one twice. Moreover, these Priests and Religious men, used great
fastings, of five or ten days together, before any of their great feasts, and
they were unto them as our four ember weeks: they were so strict in
continence, that some of them (not to fall into any sensuality,) slit their
members in the midst, and did a thousand things to make themselves unable,
lest they should offend their gods. They drunk no wine, and slept little, for
that the greatest part of their exercises were by night, committing great
cruelties and martiring themselves for the Devil, and all to be reputed great
fasters and penitents.

They did use to discipline themselves with cords full of knottes, and not
they only, but the people also used this punishment and whipping, in the
procession and feast they made to the idol TeZcalipuca, the which (as I have
said before,) is the god of penance; for then they all carried in their hands
new cords of the thread of Manguey a fadome long, with a knot at the end, and
therewith they whipped themselves, giving great lashes over their shoulders.
The Priests did fast five days together before this feast, eating but once a
day, and they lived apart from their wives, not going out of the Temple during
those five days, they did whip themselves rigorously in the manner aforesaid.
The Jesuits which have written from the Indies, treat amply of the penances
and exceeding rigor the Boncos use, all which was but counterfeit, and more in
show, then in truth. In Peru to solemnize the feast of the Yta, which was
great, all the people fasted two days; during the which, they did not
accompany with their wives, neither did they eat any meat with salt or
garlike, nor drink Chica. They did much use this kind of fasting for some
sins, and did penance, whipping themselves with sharp stinging nettles, and
often they struck themselves over the shoulders with certain stones. This
blind Nation, by the persuasion of the Devil, did transport themselves into
craggy mountains, where sometimes they sacrificed themselves, casting
themselves down from some high rock. All which are but snares and deceites of
him that desires nothing more then the loss and ruin of man.

Of the Sacrifices the Indians made to the Devil, and whereof. CHAP. 18.
IT has been in the abundance and diversity of Offerings and Sacrifices
taught unto the Infidells for their idolatry, that the enemy of God and man,
has most showed his subtlety and wickedness. And as it is a fit thing and
proper to religion, to consume the substance of the creatures, for the service
and honor of the Creator, the which is by sacrifice: even so the father of
lies has invented the means to cause the creatures of God to be offered unto
him, as to the Author and Lord thereof. The first kind of sacrifices which men
used, was very simple: for Caine offered the fruits of the earth, and Abell
the best of his cattle, the which likewise Noe and Abraham did afterward,
and the other Patriarchs, Genesis 15.
until that this ample ceremony of Levi was given by Moses, wherein there are
so many sorts and differences of sacrifices of diverse things, for diverse
affairs, and with diverse ceremonies. In like sort, among some Nations, he
has been content to teach them to sacrifice of what they had: but among
others he has passed far* giving them a multitude of customs and
ceremonies upon sacrifices, and so many observances, as they are wonderful.
And thereby it appears plainly, that he means to contend and equal himself
to the ancient law, and in many things usurp the same ceremonies* We may draw
all the sacrifices the Infidells use into three kinds, one of insensible
things, another of beasts, and the third of men. They did use in Peru to
sacrifice Coca, which is an herb they esteem much, of Mays, which is their
wheat, of colored feathers, and of Chaquira, which otherwise they call Mollo,
of shelles or oysters, and sometime gold and silver, being in figures of little
beasts. Also of the fine stuff of Cumbi, of carved and sweet wood, and most
commonly tallow burnt. They made these offerings or sacrifices for a prosperous
wind, and fair weather, or for their health, and to be delivered from some
dangers and mishappes. Of the second kind, their ordinary sacrifice was of
Cuyes, which are small beasts like rabbets, the which the Indians eat
commonly. And in matters of importance, or when they were rich men, they did
offer Pacos, or Indian sheep, bare, or with wool, observing curiously the
numbers, colors, and times. The manner of killing their sacrifices, great or
small, which the Indians did use according to their ancient ceremonies, is the
same the Moors use at this day, the which they call Alquible, hanging the
beast by the right fore leg, turning his eyes toward the Sun, speaking
certain words, according to the quality of the sacrifice they flew: for if
it were of color, their words were directed to Chuquilla, and to the Thunder,
that they might want no water: if it were white and smoothe, they did offer it
to the Sun with certain words: if it had a fleece, they did likewise offer
it him with some others, that he might shine upon them and favor their
generation: If it were a Guanaco, which is gray, they directed their sacrifice
to Viracocha. In Cusco they did every year kill and sacrifice with this
ceremony, a shorn sheep to the Sun, and did burn it, clad in a red
waste-coate, and when they did burn it, they cast certain small baskets of
Coca into the fire, which they call Vilcaronca; for which sacrifice, they have
both men and beasts appointed which serve to no other use. They did likewise
sacrifice small birds, although it were not so usual in Peru as in Mexico,
where the sacrificing of quails was very ordinary. Those of Peru did
sacrifice the birds of Puna, (for so they call the desert when they should go
to the wars, for to weaken the forces of their adversaries Guacas. They
called these sacrifices Cuzcovicca, or Contevicca, or Huallavicca, or
Sophavicca, and they did it in this manner: they took many kinds of small
birds of the desert, and gathered a great deal of a thornie wood, which they
call Ya^lli, the which being kindled, they gathered together these small
birds. This assembly they called Qui^o, then did they cast them into the fire,
about the which the officers of the sacrifice went with certain round stones
carved, whereon were painted many snakes, lions, toades, and tigres, uttering
this word, Vsachum which signifies, let the victory be given unto us, with
other words, whereby they said the forces of their enemies Guacas were
confounded. And they drew forth certain black sheep, which had been kept
close some days without meat, the which they called Vrca, and in killing them
they spoke these words; As the hearts of these beasts be weakened, so let our
enemies be weakened. And if they found in these sheep that a certain piece of
flesh behind the heart were not consumed by fasting and close keeping, they
then held it for an ill augure. They brought certain black dogs, which they
call Appuros, and slew them, casting them into a plain, with certain
ceremonies, causing some kind of men to eat this flesh, the which sacrifices
they did, lest the Ingua should be hurt by poison: and for this cause they
fasted from morning until the stars were up, and then they did glut and defile
themselves like to the Moors. This sacrifice was most fit for them to
withstand their enemies gods: and although at this day a great part of these
customs have ceased, the wars being ended, yet remains there some relikes, by
reason of the private or general quarrels of the Indians, or the Caciques, or
in their Cities. They did likewise offer and sacrifice shelles of the sea,
which they call Mollo, and they offered them to the fountains and springs,
saying, that these shells were daughters of the sea, the mother of all waters.
They gave unto these shells sundry names, according to the color, and also
they use them to diverse ends. They used them in a manner in all kind of
sacrifices, and yet to this day they put beaten shells in their Chica, for a
superstition. Finally they thought it convenient to offer sacrifices of every
thing they did sow or raise up. There were Indians appointed to do these
sacrifices to the fountain, springs, and rivers, which passed through the
towns, or by their Chacras, which are their farms, which they did after seed
^ime, that they might not cease running, but always water their grounds. The
sorcerers did conjure, to know what time the sacrifices should be made, which
being ended, they did gather of the contribution of the people, what should be
sacrificed and delivered them to such as had the charge of these sacrifices.
They made them in the beginning of winter, at such time as the fountains,
springs, and rivers, did increase by the moistures of the weather, which they
did attribute to their sacrifices. They did not sacrifice to the fountains and
springs of the deserts. To this day continues the respect they had to
fountains, springs, pooles, brooks, or rivers, which pass by their Cities
or Chacras, even unto the fountains and rivers of the deserts. They have a
special regard and reverence to the meeting of two rivers, and there they wash
themselves for their health, anointing themselves first with the flower of
Mays, or some other things, adding thereunto diverse ceremonies, the which they
do likewise in their bathes.

Of the Sacrifices they made of men. CHAP. 19.
THe most pitiful disaster of this poor people, is their slavery unto the
Devil, sacrificing men unto him, which are the Images of God. In many nations
they had used to kill (to accompany the dead, as has been declared) such
persons as had been agreeable unto him, and whom they imagined might best
serve him in the other world. Besides this, they used in Peru, to sacrifice
young children of four or six years old unto ten: and the greatest part of
these sacrifices were for the affairs that did import the Ingua, as in
sickness for his health: and when he went to the wars for victory, or when
they gave the wreathe to their new Ingua, which is the mark of a King, as
here the Scepter and the Crown be. In this solemnity they sacrificed the
number of two hundred children, from four to ten years of age, which was a
cruel and inhumane spectacle. The manner of the sacrifice was to drown them
and bury them with certain representations and ceremonies: sometimes they
cut off their heads, anointing themselves with the blood from one ear to an
other.

They did likewise sacrifice Virgins, some of them that were brought to the
Ingua from the monasteries, as has been said. In this case there was a very
great and general abuse: If any Indian qualified, or of the common sort, were
sick, and that the Divine told him confidently that he should die, they did
then sacrifice his own son to the Sun, or to Virachoca, desiring them to
be satisfied with him, and that they would not deprive the father of life. This
cruelty is like to that the holy Scripture speaks of, which king Moab used in
sacrificing his first borne son upon the wall, in the sight of all Israel, to
whom this act seemed so mournful, as they would not press him any further,
but returned to their houses. The holy Scripture also shows that the like
kind of sacrifice had been in use amongst the barbarous nations of the
Cananeans and Iebuseans and others, whereof the book of Wisdom speaks, They
call it peace to live in so great miseries and vexations as to sacrifice their
own children, or to do other hidden sacrifices, as to watch whole nights,
doing the acts of fools, and so they keep no cleanenesse in their life, nor
in their marriages, but one through envy takes away the life of an other, an
other takes away his wife and his contentment, and all is in confusion, blood,
murder, theft, deceit, corruption, infidelity, seditions, periuries,
mutinies, forgetfulness of God, pollution of souls, change of sexes and
birth, inconstancy of marriages, and the disorder of adultery and filthiness:
for idolatry is the sincke of all miseries. The Wise man speaks this of those
people of whom David complains, Psalm. 105.
that the people of Israel had learned those customs, even to sacrifice their
sons and daughters to the devil, the which was never pleasing nor agreeable
unto God. For as he is the Author of life, and has made all these things for
the commodity and good of man, so is he not pleased that men should take the
lives one from another; although the Lord did approove and accept the
willingness of the faithful patriarch Abraham, yet did he not consent to the
deed, which was, to cut off the head of his son: wherein we see the malice
and tyranny of the devil, who would be herein as God, taking pleasure to be
worshipped with the effusion of man's blood, procuring by this means, the ruin
of soul and body together, for the deadly hatred he bears to man, as his
cruel enemy.

Of the horrible sacrifices of men which the Mexicaines used. CHAP. 20.
ALthough they of Peru have surpassed the Mexicaines in the slaughter and
sacrifice of their children, (for I have not read nor understood that the
Mexicaines used any such sacrifices) yet they of Mexico have exceeded them, yea
all the nations of the world, in the great number of men which they had
sacrificed, and in the horrible manner thereof. And to the end we may see the
great misery wherein the Devil holds this blind Nation, I will relate
particularly the custom and inhumane manner which they have observed: First the
men they did sacrifice were taken in the wars, neither did they use these
solemn sacrifices but of Captives: so as it seems therein they have followed
the custom of the Ancients. For as some Authors say, they called the sacrifice
Victima, for this reason, because it was of a conquered thing: they also called
it Hostia quasi ab host, for that it was an offering made of their enemies,
although they have applied this word to all kinds of sacrifices. In truth the
Mexicaines did not sacrifice any to their idols, but Captives, and the
ordinary wars they made, was only to have Captives for their sacrifices:
and therefore when they did fight, they labored to take their enemies alive,
and not to kill them, to enjoy their sacrifices. And this was the reason which
Motecuma gave to the Marquise du Val, when he asked of him, why being so
mighty, and having conquered so many kingdoms, he had not subdued the
Province of Tlascalla, which was so near* Motecuma answered him, that for two
reasons he had not conquered that Province, although it had been easy, if he
would have undertaken it: the one was for the exercise of the youth of Mexico,
left they should fall into idleness and delight: the other and the chief cause
why he had reserved this Province, was, to have Captives for the sacrifices of
their gods. The manner they used in these sacrifices, was, they assembled within
the Palissadoe of dead men's sculles, (as has been said,) such as should be
sacrificed, using a certain ceremony at the foot of the palisado, placing a
great guard about them. Presently there slept forth a Priest, attyred with a
short surplise full of tasselles beneath, who came from the top of the temple
with an idol made of paste of wheat and mays mingled with honey, which had the
eyes made of the grains of green glass, and the teeth of the grains of
mays, he descended the steps of the temple with all the speed he could, and
mounted on a great stone planted upon a high terrasse in the midst of the
court. This stone was called Quauxicalli, which is to say, the stone of Eagle,
whereon he mounted by a little ladder, which was in the fore part of the
terrase, and descended by an other staire on the other side, still embracing
his idol. Then did he mount to the place where those were that should be
sacrificed, showing this idol to every one in particular, saying unto them;
this is your god. And having ended his show, he descended by the other side of
the stairs, and all such as should die, went in procession unto the place
where they should be sacrificed, where they sound the Ministers ready for that
office. The ordinary manner of sacrificing was, to open the stomach of him that
was sacrificed, and having pulled out his heart half alive, they tumbled the
man down the stairs of the Temple, which were all imbrewed and defiled with
blood: And to make it the more plain, six sacrificers being appointed to
this dignity, came into the place of sacrifice, four to hold the hands and
feet of him that should be sacrificed, the fifth to hold his head, and the
sixth to open his stomach, and to pull out the heart of the sacrificed. They
called them Chachalmua, which in our tongue is as much, as the ministers of holy
things. It was a high dignity, and much esteemed amongst them, wherein they
did inherit and succeed as in a (...) simple. The minister who had the office
to kill, which was the sixth amongst them, was esteemed and honored as the
sovereign Priest and Bishop, whose name was different, according to the
difference of times and solemnities. Their habites were likewise diverse when
they came forth to the sacrifice, according to the diversity of times. The
name of their chief dignity was Papa and Topilzin, their habit and robe was
a red curtin after the Dalmatike fashion, with tasselles below, a crown of
rich feathers, green, white, and yellow upon his head, and at his ears like
pendants of gold, wherein were set green stones, and under the lip upon the
midst of the beard he had a piece like unto a small canon of an azured
stone. These sacrifices came with their faces and hands colored with a
shining black. The other five had their hair much curled, and tied up with
laces of leather, bound about the midst of the head: upon their forehead they
carried small roundelets of paper painted with diverse colors, and they were
attired in a Dalmatike robe of white, wroght with black. With this attire they
represented the very figure of the Devil, so as it did strike fear and terro^
into all the people, to see them come forth with so ho^rible a representation.
The sovereign priest carried a great knife in his hand, of a large and sharp
flint: another priest carried a collar of wood wrought in form of a snake: All
six put themselves in order, joining to this Piramidall stone, whereof I have
spoken, being directly against the door of the Chapel of their idol. This
stone was so pointed, as the man which was to be sacrificed, being laid there
on, upon his back, did bend in such sort, as letting the knife but fall upon
his stomach it opened very easily in the midst. When the sacrificers were
thus in order, they drew forth such as had been taken in war, which were to
be sacrificed at that feast, and being accompanied with a guard of men all
naked, they caused them to mount up these large stairs in rank, to the place
where the Ministers were prepared: and as every one of them came in their
order, the six sacrificers took the prisoner, one by one foot, another by the
other, and one by one hand, another by the other, casting him on his back upon
this pointed stone, where the fifth of these Ministers put the collar of wood
about his neck, and the high priest opened his stomach with the knife, with a
strange dexterity and nimblenes, pulling out his heart with his hands, the
which he showed smoking unto the Sun, to whom he did offer this heat and
fume of the heart, and presently he turned toward the idol, and did cast the
heart at his face, then did they cast away the body of the sacrificed, tumbling
it down the stairs of the Temple, the stone being set so near the stairs,
as there were not two foot space betwixt the stone and the first step, so as
with one spurn with their foot, they cast the body from the top to the
bottom. In this sort one after one they did sacrifice all those that were
appointed. Being thus slain, and their bodies cast down, their masters, or
such as had taken them, went to take them up, and carried them away: then
having divided them amongst them, they did eat them, celebrating their feast
and solemnity. There were ever forty or fifty at the least thus sacrificed,
for that they had men very expert in taking them. The neighbor Nations did the
like, imitating the Mexicaines in the customs and ceremonies of the service of
their gods.

Of another kind of sacrifices of men which the Mexicaines used. CHAP. 21.
THere was an other kind of sacrifice which they made in diverse feasts, which
they called Racaxipe VelitZli, which is as much as the ^^eaing of men. They
call it so, for that in some feasts they took one or more slaves, as they
pleased; and after they had flead him, they with that skin apparelled a man
appointed to that end. This man went dancing and leaping through all the houses
and market places of the city, every one being forced to offer something unto
him: and if any one failed, he would strike him over the face, with a corner
of the skin, defyling him with the congealed blood. This invention continued
until the skin did stink: during which time, such as went gathered together
much alms, which they employed in necessary things for the service of their
gods. In many of these feasts they made a challenge, betwixt him that did
sacrifice, and him that should be sacrifyced thus: they tied the slave by one
foot to a wheel of stone, giving him a sword and target in his hands to
defend himself: then presently stepped forth he that sacrificed him, armed
with another sword and target: if he that should be sacrificed defends himself
valiantly against the other, and resisted him, he then remained freed from the
sacrifyce, winning the name of a famous Captain, and so was reputed: but if
he were van^uished, they then sacrifyced him on the stone whereunto he was
tied. It was an other kind of sacrifyce, whenas they appointed any slave to be
the representation of the idol, saying that it was his picture: they every
year gave one slave to the Priests, that they might never want the lively
image of their idol. At his first entry into the office, after he had been
well washed, they attyred him with all the ornaments of the idol, giving him
the same name. He was that whole year reverenced and honored as the idol it
self, and had always with him twelve men for his guarde, lest he should
fly, with which guarde they suffered him to go freely and where he would:
and if by chance he fled, the chief of the guarde was put in his place to
represent the idol, and after to be sacrificed.

This Indian had the most honorable lodging in all the temple, where he did
eat and drink, and whither all the chief Ministers came to serve and honor
him, carrying him meat after the manner of great personages. When he went
through the streets of the city, he was well accompanied with noble men, he
carried a little flute in his hand, which sometimes he sounded, to give them
knowledge when he passed: Then presently the women came forth with their little
children in their arms, which they presented unto him, saluting him as god.
All the rest of the people did the like: at night they put him in a strong
prison or cage, left he should fly; and when the feast came, they sacrificed
him, as has been said. By these and many other means has the Devil
abused and entertained these poor wretches, and such was the multitude of
those that had been sacrificed by this infernal cruelty, as it seems a matter
incredible, for they affirm there were some days five thousand or more, and
that there were above twenty thousand sacrifyced in diverse pla^es. The devil
to intertaine this murder of men, used a pleasant and strange invention, which
was, when it pleased the priests of Satan they went to their Kings, telling
them how their gods died for hunger, and that they should remember them.
Presently they prepared themselves, and advertised one another, that their gods
required meat, and therefore they should command their people to be ready to
go to the wars; and thus the people assembled, and the companies appointed
went to field, where they mustred their forces; and all their quarrel and
fight was to take one an other for sacrifice, striving on either side to take
what captives they could, so as in these battles they labored more to take,
then to kill, for that all their intention was to take men alive, to give them
to their idols to eat, for after that manner brought they their sacrifice unto
their gods. And we must understand, that never king was crowned until he had
subdewed some province, from the which he brought a great number of captives
for the sacrifices of their gods, so as it was an infinite thing to see what
blood was spilt in the honor of the Devil.

How the Indians grew weary, and could not endure the cruelty of Satan. CHAP.
22.
MAny of these Barbarians were now wearied and tired with such an excessive
cruelty, in sheading so much blood, and with so tedious a tribute, to be
always troubled to get captives, for the feeding of their gods, seeming unto
them a matter supportable, yet left they not to follow and execute their
rigorous laws, for the great awe the ministers of these idols kept them in,
and the cunning wherewith they abused this poor people. But inwardly they
desired to be freed from so heavy a yoke. And it was a great providence of God;
that the first which gave them knowledge of the Law of Christ, found them in
this disposition: for without doubt it seemed to them a good law, and a good
God, to be served in this sort. Heerevpon a grave religious man in New Spain
told me, that when he was in that Country he had demanded of an ancient
Indian, a man of quality, for what reason the Indians had so soon received
the Law of Ie^us Christ, and left their own, without making any other proof,
trial, or dispute thereon, for it seemed they had changed their religion,
without any sufficient reason to moove them. The Indian answered him, Believe
not Father, that we have embraced the Law of Christ so rashly as they say, for
I will tell you, that we were already weary and discontented with such things
as the idols commanded us, and were determined to leave it, and to take an
other Law. But whenas we found that the religion that you preached had no
cruelties in it, and that it was fit for us, and both just and good, we
understood and believed that it was the true Law, and so we received it
willingly. Which answer of this Indian agrees well with that we read in the
first Discourse, that Fernand Cortez sent to the Emperor Charles the fifth,
wherein he reports, that after he had conquered the city of Mexico, being in
Cuyoacan, there came Ambassadors to him from the province and commonwealth of
Mechoacan, requiring him to send them his law, and that he would teach them to
understand it, because they intended to leave their own, which seemed not good
unto them, which Cortez granted, and at this day they are the best Indians,
and the truest Christians that are in New Spain. The Spaniards that saw these
cruel sacrifices, resolved with all their power to abolish so detestable and
cursed a butchering of men, and the rather, for that in one night before their
eyes they saw threescore or threescore and ten Spaniards sacrificed, which
had been taken in a battle given at the conquest of Mexico: and another time
they found written with a cole in a chamber in TeZcusco these words; Hecre
such a miserable man was prisoner with his companions whom they of Tezcusco did
sacrifice.

There happened a very strange thing upon this subject, and yet true, being
reported by men worthy of credit, which was, that the Spaniards beholding
these sacrifices, having opened and drawn out the heart of the ^ustie young
man, and cast him from the top of the stairs, (as their custom was,) when
he came at the bottom, he said to the Spaniards in his language, Knights,
they have slain me, the which did greatly moove our men to horror and pity.
It is no incredible thing, that having his heart pulled out, he might speak,
seeing that Galen reports that it has often chanced in the sacrifice of
beasts, after the heart has been drawn out, G^te^. lib. 2. de Hip. and
Platon. (...). cap. 4.
and cast upon the altar, the beasts have breathed, yea, they did bray and cry
out alowde, and sometimes did run. Leaving this question how this might be
in nature, I will follow my purpose, which is, to show how much these barbarous
people did now abhor this insuportable slaverie they had to that insernall
murderer, and how great the mercy of the Lord has been unto them, imparting
his most sweet and agreeable law.

How the Devil has labored to imitate and counterfaite the Sacraments of the
holy Church. CHAP 25.
THat which is most admirable in the hatred and presumption of Satan, is, that
he has not only counterfaited in idolatry and sacrifices, but also in
certain ceremonies, our sacraments, which Jesus Christ our Lord has
instituted, and the holy Church does use, having especially pretended to
imitate, in some sort, the Sacrament of the Communion, which is the most high
and divine of all others,) for the great error of Infidells which proceeded in
this manner. In the first month, which in Peru they called Rayme, and answers
to our December, they made a most solemn feast, called Capacrayme, wherein
they made many sacrifices and ceremonies, which continued many days: during
the which, no stranger was suffered to be at the Court which was in Cusco.
These days being past, they then gave liberty to strangers to enter, that
they might be partakers of the feasts and sacrifices, ministering to them in
this manner. The Mamacomas of the Sun, which were a kind of Nuns of the
Sun, made little loaves of the ^lower of Mays, died and mingled with the
blood of white sheep, which they did sacrifice that day; then presently they
commanded that all strangers should enter, who set themselves in order, and the
Priests which were of a certain lineage, discending from Liuquiyupangui, gave
to every one a morcell of these small loaves, saying unto them, that they gave
these pieces, to the end they should be united and confederate with the Ingua,
and that they advised them not to speak nor think any ill against the Ingua,
but always to bear him good affection, for that this piece should be a
witness of their intentions and will, and if they did not as they ought, he
would discover them and be against them. They carried these small loaves, in
great platters of gold and silver appointed for that use, and all did receive
and eat these pieces, thanking the Sun infinitely for so great a favor
which he had done them, speaking words and making signs of great contentment
and devotion: protesting that during their lives, they would neither do nor
think any thing against the Sun nor the Ingua: and with this condition they
received this food of the Sun, the which should remain in their bodies for
a witness of their fidelity which they observed to the Sun and to the Iugua
their King. This manner of divelish communicating they likewise used in the
tenth month called Coyarayme, which was September, in the solemn feast which
they called Cytua, doing the like ceremonies. And besides this communion (if it
be lawful to use this word in so divelish a matter,) which they imparted to
all strangers that came, they did likewise send of these loaves to all their
Guacas, sanctuaries, or idols, of the whole Realm, and at one instant they
found people of all sides, which came expressly to receive them, to whom they
said (in delivering them,) that the Sun had sent them that, in sign that he
would have them all to worship and honor him, and likewise did send them in
honor of the Caciques. Some perhaps will hold this for a fable and a
fiction: yet is it most true, that since the Ingua Yupangi, (the which is he
that has made most laws, customs, and ceremonies, as Numa did in Rome:) this
manner of communion has continued, until that the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ thrust out all these superstitions, giving them the right food of life,
which unites their souls to God: whosoever would satisfy himself more amply, let
him read the relation which the Licentiate Pollo did write, Don Ieronimo de
Loaysa Archbishop of the City of Kings, where he shall find this and many
other things which he has discovered and found out by his great diligence.

In what manner the Devil has labored in Mexico to counterfaite the feast of
the holy Sacrament and Communion used in the holy Church. CHAP. 24.
IT is a thing more worthy admiration, to hear speak of the Feast and
solemnity of the Communion which the Devil himself the Prince of Pride,
ordained in Mexico, the which (although it be somewhat long,) yet shall it not
be from the purpose to relate, as it is written by men of credit. The
Mexicaines in the month of May, made their principal feast to their god
Vitz^liputZli, and two days before this feast, the Virgins whereof I have
spoken, (the which were shut up and secluded in the same Temple, and were as it
were religious women,) did mingle a quantity of the seed of beetes with
roasted Mays, and then they did mould it with honey, making an idol of that
paste, in bigness like to that of wood, putting insteede of eyes, grains of
g^eene glass, of blue, or white; and for teeth, grains of M^^s, set forth
with all the orn^ment and furniture that I have said. This being finished, all
the Noblemen came and brought it an exquisite an^ rich garment, like unto that
of the idol, wherewith they did attire it. Being thus clad and decked, they did
set it in an azured chair, and in a litter to carry it on their shoulders. The
morning of this feast being come, an hour before day, all the maidens came
forth attired in white, with new ornaments, the which that day were called the
Sisters of their god VitzliputZli, they came crowned with garlands of Mays
roasted and parched, being like unto azahar or the flower of orange, and about
their necks they had great chains of the same, which went bauldricke-wise
under their left arm. Their cheeks were died with vermillion, their arms
from the elbow to the wrist, were covered with red parrots feathers. And thus
attyred, they took the idol one their shoulders, carrying it into the Court,
where all the young men were, attyred in garments of an artificial re^,
crowned after the same manner, like unto the women. Whenas the maidens came
forth with the idol, the young men drew near with much reverence, taking the
litter wherein the idol was, upon their shoulders, carrying it to the foot of
the stairs of the Temple, where all the people did humble themselves, laying
earth upon their heads, which was an ordinary ceremony which they did observe
at the chief feast of their gods. This ceremony being ended, all the people
went in procession with all the diligence and speed they could, going to a
mountain which was a league from the city of Mexico, called Chapulteper, and
there they made sacrifices. Presently they went from thence with like
diligence, to go to a place near unto it, which they called, Atlacuyavaya,
where they made their second station: and from thence they went to another
Burgh or Village a league beyond Cuyoacan, from whence they parted, returning
to the City of Mexico, not making any other station. They went in this sort
above four leagues in three or four hours, calling this procession, Ypayna
Vitzliputzli. Being come to the foot of the stairs, they set down the
brancard or litter with the idol, tying great cords to the arms of the
brancarde, then with great observance and reverence, they did draw up the
litter with the idol in it to the top of the Temple, some drawing above, and
others helping below, in the mean time there was a great noise of fluites,
trumpets, cornets, and drums. They did mount it in this manner, for that the
stairs of the Temple were very steep and narrow, so as they could not carry
up the litter upon their shoulders, while they mounted up the idol, all the
people stood in the Court with much reverence and fear. Being mounted to the
top, and that they had placed it in a little lodge of roses, which they held
ready, presently came the young men, which strawed many flowers of sundry
kinds, wherewith they filled the temple both within and without. This done,
all the Vi^gins came out of their convent, bringing pieces of paste compounded
of beetes, and roasted Mays, which was of the same paste whereof their idol was
made and compounded, and they were of the fashion of great bones. They
delivered them to the young men, who carried them up and laid them up and laid
them at the idols feet, wherewith they filled the whole place, that it could
receive no more. They called these morcels of paste, the flesh and bones of
VitziliputZli. Having laid abroad these bones, presently came all the
Ancients of the Temple, Priests, Levites, and all the rest of the Ministers,
according to their dignities and antiquities, (for herein there was a strict
order amongst them, one after another, with their vailes of diverse colors and
works, every one according to his dignity and office, having garlands upon
their heads, and chains of ^lowers about their necks: after them came their
gods and goddesses whom they worshipped of diverse figures, attired in the same
livery, then putting themselves in order about those morsells and pieces of
paste, they used certain ceremonies with singing and dancing. By means
whereof they were blessed and consecrated for the flesh and bones of this idol.

This ceremony and blessing (whereby they were taken for the flesh and bones of
the idol) being ended, they honored those pieces in the same sort as their
god. Then came forth the sacrificers, who began the sacrifice of men, in the
manner as has been spoken, and that day they did sacrifice a greater number
than at any other time, for that it was the most solemn feast they observed.
The sacrifices being ended, all the young men and maids came out of the temple
attired as before, and being placed in order and rank one directly against
another, they daunced by drums the which sounded in praise of the feast, and
of the idol which they did celebrate. To which song all the most ancient and
greatest noble men did answer, dancing about them, making a great circle as
their use is, the young men and maids remaining always in the midst. All
the city came to this goodly spectacle, and there was a commandment very
strictly observed throughout all the land, that the day of the feast of the
idol Vitziliputzli, they should ^a^e no other meat, but this paste with honey,
whereof the idol was made. And this should be eaten at the point of day, and
they should drink no water nor any other thing till after no one: they held
it for an ill sign, yea for sacrilege, to do the contrary: but after the
ceremonies ended, it was lawful for them to eat any thing. During the time of
this ceremony, they hid the water from their little children, admonishing all
such as had the use of reason, not to drink any water; which if they did, the
anger of God would come upon them, and they should die, which they did observe
very carefully and strictly. The ceremonies, dancing, and sacrifice ended, they
went to unclothe themselves, and the priests and superiors of the temple took
the idol of paste, which they spoiled of all the ornaments it had, and made
many pieces, as well of the idol it self as of the tronchons which were
consecrated, and then they gave them to the communion, beginning with the
greater, and continuing unto the rest, both men, women, and little children,
who received it with such tears, fear, and reverence, as it was an admirable
thing, saying that they did eat the flesh and bones of God, wherewith they
were grieved. Such as had any sick folks demanded thereof for them, and
carried it with great reverence and veneration.

All such as did communicate, were bound to give the tenth of this seed,
whereof the idol was made. The solemnity of the idol being ended, an old
man of great authority stepped up into a high place, and with alowde voice
preached their law and ceremonies. Who would not wonder to see the devil so
curious to seek to be worshipped and reverenced in the same manner that Jesus
Christ our God has appointed and also taught, and as the holy Church has
accustomed? Hereby it is plainly verified what was propounded in the
beginning, that Satan strives (all he can) to vsurp and challenge unto himself
the honor and service that is due to God alone, although he does still
intermixe with it his cruelties and filthiness, being the spirit of murder
and uncleanness, and the father of lies.

Of Consessors and Consession which the Indians used. CHAP. 25.
THe father of lies would likewise counterfeit the sacrament of Confession, and
in his idolatries seek to be honored with ceremonies very like to the manner of
Christians. In Peru they held opinion, that all diseases and adversities came
for the sins which they had committed: for remedy whereof they used
sacrifices: moreover they confessed themselves verbally, almost in all
provinces, and had Confessors appointed by their superiors to that end, there
were some sins reserved for the superiors. They received penance, yea some.
times very sharply, especially when the offender was a poor man, and had
nothing to give his Confessor. This office of Confessor was likewise exercised
by women. The manner of these confessors forcerers whom they call Ychuiri or
Ychuri, has been most general in the provinces of Collasuio. They hold
opinion, that it is a heinous sin to conceal any thing in confession. The
Ychuyri or confessors discovered by lottes, or by the view of some beast hides,
if any thing were concealed, and punished them with many blows, with a stone
upon the shoulders, until they had revealed all, then after they gave him
penance, and did sacrifice. They do likewise use this confession, when their
children, wives, husbands, or their Caciques be sick, or in any great
exploite. And when their Ingra was sick, all the provinces confessed
themselves, chiefly those of the province of Collao. The Confessors were bound
to hold their confessions secret, but in certain cases limited. The sins
that they chiefly confessed, was first to kill one another out of war, then
to steal, to take another man's wife, to give poison or sorcery to do any
harm: and they held it to be a grievous sin, to be forgetful in the
reverence of their Guacas, or Oratories, not to observe the feasts, or to
speak ill of the Ingua, and to disobey him. They accused not themselves of any
secret acts and sins. But according to the report of some Priests, after the
christians came into that Country, they accused themselves of their thoughts.
The Ingua confessed himself to no man, but only to the Sun, that he might
tell them to Virachoca, and that he might forgive them. After the Ingua had
been confessed, he made a certain bath to cleanse himself in a running
river, saying these words: I have told my sins to the Sun, receive them, O
thou River, and carry them to the sea, where they may never appear more.
Others that confessed, used likewise these baths, with certain ceremonies very
like to those the Moors use at this day, which they call Guadoy, and the
Indians call them Opacuna. When it chanced that any man's children died, he was
held for a great sinner, saying that it was for his sins that the son died
before the father. And therefore those to whom this had chanced, after they
were confessed, they were bathed in this bath called Opacuna, as is said
before. Then some deformed Indian, crookebackt, and counterfeit by nature, came
to whippe them with certain nettles. If the Sorcerers or Inchaunters by their
lots and divinations affirmed that any sick body should die, the sick man
makes no difficulty to kill his own son, though he had no other, hoping by
that means to escape death, saying that in his place he offered his son in
sacrifice. And this cruelty has been practiced in some places, even since
the Christians came into that country. In truth it is strange, that this
custom of confessing their secret sins, has continued so long amongst
them, and to do so strict penances, as, to fast, to give apparel, gold and
silver, to remain in the mountains, and to receive many stripes upon the
shoulders. Our men say, that in the province of Chiquito, even at this day they
meet with this plague of Confessors or Ychuris, whereas many sick persons
repair unto them: but now, by the grace of God, this people begins to see
clearly the effect and great benefit of our confession, whereunto they come
with great devotion. And partly this former custom has been suffered by the
providence of the Lord, that confession might not seem tedious unto them.

By this means the Lord is wholly glorified, and the Devil (who is a deceiver)
deceived. And for that it concerns this matter, I will report the manner of
a strange confession the Devil has invented at Iapp^^, as appears by a
letter that came from thence, which faith thus: There are in Ocaca very great
and high and stiep rocks, which have pricks or points on them, above two
hundred fadome high. Amongst these rocks there is one of these pikes or
points so terribly high, that when the Xamabusis (which be pilgrims) do but
look up unto it, they tremble, and their hair stares, so fearful and
horrible is the place. Upon the top of this point there is a great rod of
iron of three fadome long, placed there by a strange devise, at the end of this
rod is a balance tied, whereof the scales are so big, as a man may sit in
one of them: and the Goquis (which be devils in humane shape) command these
pilgrims to enter therein one after another, not leaving one of them: then with
an engine or instrument which mooveth, by means of a wheel, they make this
rod of iron whereon the balance is hanged, to hang in the air, one of these
XamabuZisbeing set in one of the scales of the ballaunce. And as that wherein
the man is set has no counterpoise on the other side, it presently hangs
down, and the other rises until it meets with and touches the rod: then
the Goqnis tells them from the rock, that they must confess themselves of
all the sins they have committed, to their remembrance, and that with a loud
voice, to the end that all the rest may hear him. Then presently he begins
to confess, whilst some of the standers by do laugh at the sins they do
hear; and others sigh, and at every sin they confess, the other scale of
the balance falls alittle, until that having told all his sins, it
remains equal with the other, wherein the sorrowful penitent sits: then the
Goquis turns the wheel, and draws the rod and balance unto him, and the
Pilgrim comes forth, then enters another, until all have passed. A Iapponois
reported this after he was christened, saying that he had been in this
pilgrimage, and entered the balance seven times, where he had confessed
himself publicly. He said moreover, that if any one did conceal any sin,
the empty scale yielded not: and if he grew obstinate after instance made to
confess himself, refusing to open all his sins, the Goquis cast him down
from the top, where in an instant he is broken into a thousand pieces. Yet
this christian, who was called John told us, that commonly the fear and
terror of this place is so great to all such as enter therein, and the danger
they see with thei^^^^ to fall out of the balance, and to be broken in pieces,
that seldom there is any one but discovers all his sins. This place is called
by another name Sangenoto^^ro, that is to say, the place of Confession: we see
plainly by this discourse, how the Devil has pretended to vfurp unto
himself the service of God, making confession of sins (which the Lord has
appointed for the remedy of man) a divellish superstition, to their great loss
and perdition. He has done no less to the Heathen of Iappon, than to those
of the provinces of Colla^ in Peru.

Of the abominable unction which the Mexicaine prieste^ and other Nations
used, and of their witchcraftes. CHAP. 26.
GOd appointed in the ancient Law the manner how they should consecrate
Aarons person, and the other Priests, and in the Law of the Gospel, we have
likewise the holy cream and unction which they use when they consecrate the
Priests of Christ. There was likewise in the ancient Law a sweet
composition, which God defend should be employed in any other thing then in
the divine service. The Devil has sought to counterfeit all these things after
his manner, as he has accustomed, having to this end invented things so foul
and filthy, whereby they discover we^ who is the Author. The priests of the
idolles in Mexico were anointed in this sort, they anointed the body from the
foot to the head, and all the hair likewise, which hung like tresses, or a
horse mane, for that they applied this unction wet and moist. Their hair grew
so, as in time it hung down to their hammes, so heavily, that it was
troublesome for them to bear it, for they did never cut it, until they died,
or that they were dispensed with for their great age, or being employed in
governments or some honorable charge in the commonwealth. They carried their
hair in tresses, of six fingers breadth, which they died black with the fume
of sapine, or fur trees, or rosine; for in all Antiquity it has bin an
offering they made unto their idols, and for this cause it was much esteemed
and reverenced. They were always died with this tincture from the foot to the
head, so as they were like unto shining Negroes, and that was their ordinary
unction: yet whenas they went to sacrifice and give incense in the mountains,
or on the tops thereof, or in any dark and obscure caves, where their idolles
were, they used an other kind of vn^tion very different, doing certain
ceremonies to take away fear, and to give them courage. This unction was made
with diverse little venomous beasts, as spiders, scorpions, palmers,
salamanders and vipers, the which the boys in the Colleges took and gathered
together, wherein they were so expert, as they were always furnished when the
Priests called for them. The chief care of these boys was, to hunt after
these beasts; if they went any other way, and by chance met with any of these
beasts, they stayed to take them, with as great pain, as if their lives
depended thereon. By the reason whereof the Indians commonly feared not these
venomous beasts, making no more accomp^ than if they were not so, having been
all bred in this exercise. To make an ointment of these beasts, they took them
all together, and burnt them upon the h^rt^ of the Temple, which was before the
Altar, until they were consumed to ashes: then did they put them in morters
with much Tobacco or Petum (being an herb that Nation uses much, to benumme
the flesh, that they may not feel their travel) with the which they mingle
the ashes, making them loose their force; they did likewise mingle with these
ashes, scorpions, spiders and palmers alive, mingling all together, then did
they put to it a certain seed being grownd, which they call Ololuchqui,
whereof the Indians make a drink to see visions, for that the virtue of this
herb is to deprive man of sense. They did likewise grind with these ashes
black and hairie worms, whose hair only is venomous, all which they mingled
together with black, or the fume of rosine, putting it in small po^, which
they set before their god, saying it was his mea^e. And therefore they called
it a divine meat. By mea^^ of this ointment they became witches, and did see
and speak with the Devil. The priests being slubbered with this ointment,
lost all fear, putting on a spirit of cruelty. By reason whereof they did very
boldly kill men in their sacrifices, going all alone in the night to the
mountains, and into obscure caves, contemning all wild beasts, and holding it
for certain and approved, that both lions, tigres, serpents, and other furious
beasts which breed in the mountains, and forests, fled from them, by the
virtue of this Petum of their god.

And in truth though this Petum had no power to make them fly, yet was the
Divelles picture sufficient whereinto they were transformed. This Petum did
also serve to cure the sick, and for children; and therefore (...) called it
the Divine Physic and so they came from all parts to the superiors and
priests, as to their saviors, that they might apply this divine physic,
wherewith they anointed those parts that were grieved. They said that they felt
hereby a notable case, which might be, for that Tobacco and Ololuchqui have
this property of themselves, to benumme the flesh, being applied in manner of
an emplaister, which must be by a stronger reason being mingled with poisons,
and for that it did appease and benumme the pain, they held it for an effect
of health, and a divine virtue. And therefore rann^ they to these priests as to
holy men, who kept the blind and ignorant in this error, persuading them what
they pleased, and making them run after their inventions and divellish
ceremonies, their authority being such, as their words were sufficient to
induce belief as an article of their faith. And thus made they a thousand
superstitions among the vulgar people, in their manner of offering incense, in
cutting their hair, tying small flowers about their necks, and strings with
small bones of snakes, commanding them to bathe at a certain time; and that
they should watch all night at the harth, lest the fire should die, that they
should eat no other bread but that which had bin offered to their gods, that
they should upon any occasion repair unto their witches, who with certain
grains told fortunes, and divined, looking into keelers and pailes full of
water. The sorcerers and ministers of the devil used much to besmere
themselves. There were an infinite number of these witches, divines,
enchanters, and other false prophets. There remains yet at this day of this
infection, although they be secret, not daring publicly to exercise their
sacrileges, divelish ceremonies and superstitions, but their abuses and
wickedness are discovered more at large and particularly in the confessions made
by the Prelates of Peru.

There is a kind of sorcerers amongst the Indians allowed by the Kings Inguas,
which are as it were sooth-saiers, they take upon them what form and figure
they please, flying far through the air in a short time, beholding all that
was done. They talk with the Devil, who answers them in certain stones or
other things which they reverence much. They serve as coniurers, to tell what
has passed in the farthest parts, before any news can come. As it has
chanced since the Spaniardes arrived there, that in the distance of two or
three hundred leagues, they have known the mutinies, battles, rebellions,
and deaths, both of tyrants, and of those of the Kings party, and of private
men, the which have been known the same day they chanced, or the day after, a
thing impossible by the course of nature. To work this divination, they shut
themselves into a house, and became drunk until they lost their senses, a day
after they answered to that which was demanded. Some affirm they use certain
unctions The Indians say, that the old women do commonly use this office of
witchcraft, and specially those of one Province, which they call Coaillo, and
of another town called Manchey, and of the Province of Guarochiri. They
likewise show what is become of things stolen and lost. There are of these
kinds of Sorcerers in all parts, to whom commonly do come the Anacona^^, and
Cyva, which serve the Spaniardes, and when they have lost any thing of their
masters, or when they desire to know the success of things past or to come, as
when they go to the Spaniardes cities for their private affairs, or for the
public, they demand if their voyage shall be prosperous, if they shall be
sick, if they shall die, or return safe, if they shall obtain that which
they pretend: and the witches or coniurers answer, yea, or no, having first
spoken with the Devil, in an obscure place: so as these Anaconas do well hear
the sound of the voice, but they see not to whom these coniurers speak,
neither do they understand what they say. They make a thousand ceremonies and
sacrifices to this effect, with the which they mock the Devil and grow
exceeding drunk, for the doing whereof, they particularly use an herb called
Villea, the juice whereof they mingle with their Chica, or take it in some
other sort, whereby we may see how miserable they are, that have for their
masters, the ministers of him whose office is to deceive. It is manifest that
nothing does so much let the Indians from receiving the faith of the holy
Gospel, and to persever therein, as the conferrence with these witches, whereof
there have bin, and are still, great numbers, although by the grace of the
Lord, and diligence of the Prelates and Priests, they decrease, and are not so
hurtefull. Some of them have been converted and preached publicly,
discovering and blaming themselves, their errors and deceites, and manifesting
their devises and lies, whereof we have seen great effects: as also we
understand by letters from Iappon, that the like has arrived in those parts:
all to the glory and honor of our Lord God.

Of other Ceremonies and Customs of the Indians, which are like unto ours.
CHAP. 27.
THe Indians had an infinite number of other ceremonies and customs, which
resembled to the ancient law of Moses, and some to those which the Moors use,
and some approached near to the law of the Gospel, as their bathes or Opacuna,
as they call them: they did wash themselves in water, to cleanse them from their
sins. The Mexicaines had also amongst them a kind of baptism, the which they
did with ceremony, cutting the ears and members of young children newborn,
counterfaiting in some sort the circumcision of the Jews. This ceremony was
done principally to the sons of Kings and Noblemen: presently upon their
birth the priests did wash them, and did put a little sword in the right hand,
and in the left a target. And to the children of the vulgar sort, they put the
marks of their offices, and to their daughters instruments to spinne, knit,
and labor. This ceremony continued four days, being made before some idol.
They contracted marriage after their manner, whereof the Licentiate Pollo has
written a whole Treatise, and I will speak somewhat thereon hereafter. In
other things their customs and ceremonies have some show of reason. The
Mexicaines were married by the hands of their priests in this sort. The
Bridegroom and the Bride stood together before the priest, who took them by
the hands asking them if they would marry, then having understood their
wills, he took a corner of the veil wherewith the woman had her head
covered, and a corner of the man's gown the which he tied together on a knot,
and so led them thus tied to the Bridegroomes house, where there was a harth
kindled, and then he caused the wife to go seven times about the harth, and so
the married couple sat down together, and thus was the marriage contracted.
The Mexicaines were very jealous of the integrity of their wives: so as if
they found they were not as they ought to be, (the which they knew either by
signs or dishonest words,) they presently gave notice thereof to their
fathers and kinsfolks of their wives, to their great shame and dishonor, for
that they had not kept good guarde over them. But they did much honor and
respect such as lived chastely, making them great banquttes, and giving great
presents both to her and to her kinsfolks. For this occasion they made great
offerings to their gods, and a solemn banquet in the house of the wife, and
another in the husbands. When they went to house they made an inventory of all
the man and wife brought together, of provisions for the house, of land, of
jewels and ornaments, which inventories every father kept, for if it chanced
they made any devorce, (as it was common amongst them when they agree not,)
they divided their goods according to the portion that every one brought, every
one having liberty in such a case, to marry whom^ they pleased: and they gave
the daughters to the wife, and the sons to the husband. It was defended upon
pain of death, not to marry again together, the which they observed very
strictly. And although it seem that many of their ceremonies agree with ours,
yet differ they much for the great abomination they mingle therewithal. It is
common and general to have usually one of these three things, either cruelty,
filthiness, or sloth: for all their ceremonies were cruel and hurtefull, as to
kill men and to spill blood, are filthy and beastly, as to eat and drink to
the name of their Idols, and also to piss in the honor of them, carrying
them upon their shoulders, to anoint and besmeere themselves filthily, and to
do a thousand sorts of villainies, which were at the least, vain, ridiculous,
and idle, and more like the actions of children, then of men. The cause thereof
is the very condition of this wic^ed spirit, whose intention is always to do
ill, provoking men still to murders and filthiness, or at the least to vanities
and fruitelesse actions, the which every man may well know, if he duly consider
the behavior and actions of the Devil, toward those he sets to deceive. For
in all his illusions we find a mixture of these three, or at least of one of
them. The Indians themselves (since they came to the knowledge of our faith,)
laugh and mock at these fooleries and toys, in the which their gods held them
busied, whom they served more for fear, least they should hurt them, in not
obaying them in all things, then for any love they bare them. Although some,
yea, very many lived, abused and deceived, with the vain hope of temporal
goods, for of the eternal they had no knowledge. And whereas the temporal
power was greatest, there superstition has most increased; as we see in the
Realms of Mexico and Cusco, where it is incredible to see the number of idols
they had: for within the city of Mexico there were above three hundred Mango
Ingua Yupangu^, amongst the Kings of Cusco, was he that most augmented the
service of their idols, inventing a thousand kinds of sacrifices, feasts, and
ceremonies. The like did King Iscoalt in Mexico, who was the fourth king. There
was also a great number of superstitions and sacrifices in other Nations of the
Indians, as in the Province of Guatimala, at the Islands in the new Kingdom, in
the Province of Chille, and others that were like Commonwealthes and
Comminalties. But it was nothing (...) respect of Mexico and Cusco, where
Satan was in ^ome, or in his Jerusalem, until he was cast out against his
will, and the holy Cross planted in his place, and the Kingdom of Christ our
God occupied, the which the tyrant did usurp.

Of some Feast celebrated by them of Cusco, and how the Devil would imitate
the mystery of the holy Trinity. CHAP. 28.
TO conclude that which concerns Religion, there restes something to speak of
the feasts and solemnities which the Indians did celebrate, the which (for that
they are diverse and many) cannot be all specified. The Ingnas Lords of Peru,
had two kinds of feasts, some were ordinary, which fell out in certain
months, of the year: and others extraordinary, which were for certain causes
of importance, as when they did crown a new King, when they began some war
of importance, when they had any great need of water or drought, or other like
things. For the ordinary feasts, we must understand, that every month of the
year they made feasts, and diverse sacrifices, and although all of them had
this alike, that they offered a hundred sheep, yet in color, and in form,
they are very diverse. In the first month which they call Rayme, which is the
month of December, they made their first feast, which was the principal of
all others, and for that cause they called it Capacrayme, which is to say, a
rich and principal feast. In this feast they offered a great number of sheep
and lambs in sacrifice, and they burnt them with sweet wood, then they caused
gold and silver to be brought upon certain sheep, setting upon them three
Images of the Sun, and three of the thunder, the father, the son, and the
brother. In these feasts they dedicated the Inguas children, putting the Guaras
or ensigns upon them, and they pierced their ears: then some old man did
whip them with slings, and anointed their faces with blood, all in sign that
they should be true Knights to the Ingua. No stranger might remain in Cusco
during this month, and this feast, but at the end thereof they entered, and
they gave unto them pieces of the paste of mays with the blood of the
sacrifice, which they did eat in sign of confederation with the Ingua, as
has bin said before. It is strange that the Devil after his manner has
brought a trinity into idolatry, for the three images of the Sun called
Apomti, Churunti, and Intiquaoqui which signifies father and lord Sun, the
son Sun, and the brother Sun. In the like manner they named the three
Images of Chuquilla, which is the God that rules in the region of the air,
where it thunders, raines and snows. I remember, that being in Cuquisaca, an
honorable priest showed me an information, which I had long in my hands,
where it was prooved that there was a certain Guaca or Oratory, whereas the
Indians did worship an idol called Tangatanga, which they said was one in
three, and three in one. And as this Priest stood amazed the reat, I said that
the Devil by his infernal and obstinate pride (whereby he always pretendes
to make himself God,) did steal all that he could from the truth, to employ
it in his lyings and deceits. Coming then to the feast of the second month,
which they called Camey, besides the sacrifices which they made, they did cast
the ashes into the river, following five or six leagues after, praying it to
carry them into the sea, for that the Virochoca should there receive this
present. In the third, fourth and fifth month, they offered a hundred black
sheep, speckled, and gray, with many other things, which I omit for being
too tedious. The ^ixt month is called Hat^^cuZ qui Aymorey, which answers to
May, in the which they sacrificed a hundred sheep more, of all colors: in
this moon and month, which is when they bring May from the fields into the
house, they made a feast, which is yet very usual among the Indians, and they
do call it Aymorey.

This feast is made coming from the Chacra or farm unto the house, saying
certain songs, and praying that the Mays may long continue, the which they
call Mamacora. They take a certain portion of the most fruitful of the Mays
that grows in their farms, the which they put in a certain grenier which
they do call Pirua, with certain ceremonies, watching three nights: they put
this Mays in the richest garments they have, and being thus wrapped and
dressed, they worship this Pirua, and hold it in great veneration, saying it is
the mother of the mays of their inheritances, and that by this means the mays
augments and is preserved. In this month they make a particular sacrifice, and
the witches demand of this Pirua, if it has strength sufficient to continue
until the next year: and if it answers no, then they carry this Mays to the
farm to burn, whence they brought it, according to every man's power; then
make they another Pirua, with the same ceremonies, saying, that they renew it,
to the end the seed of Mays may not perish, and if it answers that it has
force sufficient to last longer, they leave it until the next year. This
foolish vanity continues to this day, and it is very common amongst the
Indians to have these Piruas, and to make the feast of Aymorey. The seventh
month answers to June, and is called A^caycuZ qui Intiraymi, in it they made
the feast that is called Intiraymi, in the which they sacrificed a hundred
sheep called Guanacos, and said it was the feast of the Sun. In this month
they made many Images of Quinua wood carved, all attired with rich garments,
and they made their dancings which they do call Cayo. At this feast they cast
flowers in the high ways, and thither the Indians came painted, and their
noblemen had small plates of gold upon their beards, and all did sing; we
must understand that this feast falls almost at the same time, whenas the
Christians observe the solempnitie of the holy Sacrament, which does resemble
it in some sort, as in dancing, singing and representations. And for this
cause there has been, and is yet among the Indians, which celebrated a feast
somewhat like to ours of the holy Sacrament) many superstitions in celebrating
this ancient feast of Inti^aymi. The eight month is called Chahua Huarqui, in
the which they did burn a hundred sheep more, all gray, of the color of
Viscacha, according to the former order, which month does answer to our July.
The ninth month was called Yapaguis, in the which they burnt an hundred sheep
more, of a chestnut color; and they do likewise kill and burn a thousand
Cuyes, to the end the frost, the air, the water, nor the sun should not hurt
their farms: and this month does answer unto August. The tenth month was
called Coyarami, in the which they burnt a hundred white sheep that had
fleeces. In this month which answers to September, they made the feast called
Situa in this manner: They assembled together the first day of the moon before
the rising thereof: and in seeing it they cried aloude, carrying torches in
their hands, and saying, Let all harm go away, striking one an other with
their torches. They that did this, were called Panconcos: which being done,
they went to the common bath, to the rivers and fountains, and every one to
his own bath, setting themselves to drink four days together. In this month
the Mamacomas of the sun made a great number of small loaves with the blood
of the sacrifices, and gave a piece to every stranger; yea they sent to every
Guaca throughout the realm, and to many Curacas, in sign of confederation and
loyalty to the Sun and the Ingua, as has bin said.

The bathes drunkenness and some relickes of this feast Situa, remain even
unto this day, in some places, with the ceremonies a little different, but yet
very secretly, for that these chief and principal feasts have ceased. The
eleventh month Homaraymi Punchaiquis, wherein they sacrificed a hundred sheep
more. And if they wanted water, to procure rain, they set a black sheep tied
in the midst of a plain, pouring much Chica about it, and giving it nothing
to eat, until it rained, which is practiced at this day in many places, in
the time of our October. The twelfth and last month was called Aymara, wherein
they did likewise sacrifice a hundred sheep, and made the feast called
Raymicantara Rayquis. In this month which answered to our November, they
prepared what was necessary for the children that should be made novices, the
month following, the children with the old men made a certain show, with
rounds and turnings: and this feast was called Ituraymi, which commonly they
make when it raines too much, or too little, or when there is a plague.

Among the extraordinary feasts which were verymany, the most famous was that
which they called (...). This feast Ytu has no prefixed time nor season, but
in time of necessity. To prepare themselves thereunto, all the people fasted
two days, during the which they did neither company with their wives, nor eat
any meat with salt or garlic, nor drink any Chica. All did assemble
together in one place, where no stranger was admitted, nor any beast: they had
garments and ornaments, which served only for this feast. They marched very
quietly in procession, their heads covered with their vailes, sounding of
drums, without speaking one to another. This continued a day and a night;
then the day following they daunced and made good cheer for two days and two
nights together, saying, that their prayer was accepted. And although that this
feast is not used at this day, with all this ancient ceremony, yet commonly
they make another which is very like, which they call Ayma, with garments
that serve only to that end, and they make this kind of procession with their
Drums, having fasted before, then after they make good cheer, which they
usually do in their urgent necessities. And although the Indians forbear to
sacrifice beasts, or other things publicly, which cannot be hidden from the
Spaniardes, yet do they still use many ceremonies that have their beginnings
from these feasts and ancient superstitions: for at this day they do covertly
make this feast of Ytu, at the dances of the feast of the Sacrament, in making
the daunces of Lyamallama, and of Guacon, and of others, according to their
ancient ceremonies, wherevntowe ought to take good regard. They have made
more large Discourses of that which concerns this matte^ for the necessary
observation of the abuses and superstitions the Indians had in the time of
their gentility, to the end the Priests and Curates may the better take heed.
Let this suffice now to have treated of the exercise wherewith the devil held
those superstitious nations occupied, to the end, that against his will we may
see the difference there is betwixt light and darkness, betwixt the truth of
Christ and the lies of the Gentiles, although the ennemy of God and man has
labored with all his devises to counterfeit those things which are of God.

Of the feast of Iubilee which the Mexicaines celebrated. CHAP. 29.
THe Mexicaines have been no less curious in their feasts and solemnities,
which were of small charge, but of great effusion of man's blood. We have
before spoken of the principal feast of VitZiliputZli, after the which the
feast of Tezcalipuca was most solemnized. This feast fell in May, and in
their Calendar they called it Tozcolt: it fell every four years with the
feast of Penance, where there was given full indulgence and remission of
sins. In this day they did sacrifice a captive which resembled the idol
Tezcalipuca, it was the nineteenth day of May: upon the even of this feast,
the Noblemen came to the Temple, bringing a new garment like unto that of the
idol, the which the Priest put upon him, having first taken off his other
garments, which they kept with as much, or more reverence than we do our
ornaments. There were in the coffers of the idol many ornaments, iewelles,
earerings, and other riches, as bracelets and precious feathers which served to
no othervse, but to be there, and was worshipped as their god it self. Besides
the garment wherewith they worshipped the idol that day, they put upon him
certain ensigns of feathers, with fannes, shadows and other things, being
thus attired and furnished, they drew the curtain or veil from before the
door, to the end he might be seen of all men: then came forth one of the
chief of the temple, attired like to the idol, carrying flowers in his hand,
and a flute of earth, having a very sharp sound, and turning toward the east,
he founded it, and then looking to the west, north and south he did the like.
And after he had thus sounded toward the four parts of the world (showing
that both they that were present and absent did hear him) he put his finger
into the air, and then gathered up earth, which he put in his mouth, and did
eat it in sign of adoration. The like did all they that were present, and
weeping, they fell flat to the ground, invocating the darkness of the night,
and the winds, entreating them not to leave them, nor to forget them, or else
to take away their lives, and free them from the labors they endured therein.
Thieves, adulterers, and murderers, and all others offenders had great fear
and heaviness, whilst this flute sounded; so as some could not dissemble nor
hide their offenses. By this means they all demanded no other thing of their
god, but to have their offenses concealed, pouring forth many tears, with
great repentance and sorrow, offering great store of incense to appease their
gods. The courageous and valiant men, and all the old soldiers, that followed
the Art of War, hearing this flute, demanded with great devotion of God the
Creator, of the Lord for whom we live, of the sun, and of other their
gods, that they would give them victory against their ennemies, and strength
to take many captives, therewith to honor their sacrifices. This ceremony was
done ten days before the feast: During which ten days the Priest did sound
this flute, to the end that all might do this worship in eating of earth, and
demand of their idol what they pleased: they every day made their prayers,
with their eyes lift up to heaven, and with sighs and groanings, as men that
were grieved for their sins and offenses. Although this contrition was only
for fear of the corporal punishment that was given them, and not for any fear
of the eternal, for they certainly believed there was no such severe
punishment in the other life.

And therefore they offered themselves voluntarily to death, holding opinion
that it is to all men an assured rest. The first day of the feast of this idol
TeZcalipuca being come, all they of the City assembled together in a court, to
celebrate likewise the feast of the Calendar, whereof we have already spoken,
which was called Toxcoalth, which signifies a dry thing: which feast was not
made to any other end, but to demand rain, in the same manner that we
solemnise the Rogations: and this feast was always in May, which is the time
that they have most need of rain in those countries. They began to
celebrate it the ninth of May, ending the nineteenth. The last day of the
feast the Priests drew forth a litter well furnished with curtins and
pendants of diverse fashions. This litter had so many arms to hold by as
there were ministers to carry it. All which came forth besmeered with black
and long hair, half in tresses with white strings, and attyred in the livery
of the idol. Upon this litter they set the personage of the idol, appointed
for this feast, which they called the resemblance of their God TeZcalip^^^, and
taking it upon their shoulders, they brought it openly to the foot of the
stairs: then came forth the young men and maidens of the Temple, carrying a
great cord wreathed of chains of roasted mays, with the which they environed
the Litter, putting a chain of the same about the idolles neck, and a garland
upon his head. They called the cord Toxcalt, signifying the drought and
barrenness of the time. The young men came wrapped in read curtines, with
garlands and chains of roasted mays. The maids were clothed in new garments,
wearing chains about their necks of roasted mays; and upon their heads myters
made of rods covered with this mays, they had their feet covered with
feathers, and their arms and cheeks painted. They brought much of this
roasted mays, and the chief men put it upon their heads, and about their
necks, taking flowers in their hands. The idol being placed in his litter,
they strewed round about a great quantity of the boughs of Manguey, the leaves
whereof are large and pricking.

This litter being set upon the religious mens-shoulders, they carried it in
procession within the circuit of the Court, two Priests marching before with
censors, giving often incense to the idol; and every time they gave incense,
they lifted up their arms as high as they could to the idol, and to the
Sun, saying, that they lifted up their prayers to heaven, even as the smoke
ascended on high. Then all the people in the Court turned*round to the place
whither the idol went, every one carrying in his hand new cords of the thread
of manguey, a fadome long, with a knotte at the end, and with them they whipped
themselves upon the shoulders; even as they do here upon holy Thurseday.
All the walls of the Court and battlements were full of boughs and flowers, so
fresh and pleasant, as it did give a great contentment. This procession being
ended, they brought the idol to his usual place of abode, then came a great
multitude of people with flowers, dressed in diverse sorts, wherewith they
filled the temple and all the court, so as it seemed the ornament of an
Oratory. All this was put in order by the priests, the young men administering
these things unto them from without. The chapel or chamber where the idol
remained was all this day open without any veil.

This done, every one came and offered curtines, and pendants of Sandally,
precious stones, jewels, insence, sweet wood, grapes, or ears of Mays,
quails: and finally, all they were accustomed to offer in such solemnities.
Whenas they offered quails, (which was the poor man's offering,) they used
this ceremony, they delivered them to the priests, who taking them, pulled
off their heads, and cast them at the foot of the Altar, where they lost
their blood, and so they did of all other things which were offered. Every one
did offer meat and fruit according to their power, the which was laid at the
foot of the altar, and the Ministers gathered them up, and carried them to
their chambers. This solemn offering done, the people went to dinner, every
one to his village or house, leaving the feast suspended until after dinner.
In the mean time, the young men and maidens of the temple, with their
ornaments, were busied to serve the idol, with all that was appointed for him
to eat: which meat was prepared by other women, who had made a vow that day
to serve the idol. And therefore such as had made this vow, came by the point
of day, offering themselves to the Deputies of the Temple, that they might
command them what they would have done, the which they did carefully perform.
They did prepare such variety of meats, as it was admirable. This meat being
ready, and the hour of dinner come, all these virgins went out of the Temple
in procession, every one carrying a little basket of bread in her hand, and in
the other, a dish of these meats; before them marched an old man, like to a
steward, with a pleasant habit, he was clothed in a white surples down to the
calves of his legs, upon a dublet without sleeves of red leather, like to a
iacket, he carried wings insteede of sleeves, from the which hung broad
ribbands, at the which did hang a small Calibasse or pumpion, which was covered
with flowers, by little holes that were made in it, and within it were many
superstitious things. This old man thus attyred, marched very humbly and
heavily before the preparation, with his head declining: and coming near the
foot of the stairs, he made a great obeisance and reverence. Then going on
the one side, the virgins drew near with the meat, presenting it in order one
after another, with great reverence. This service presented, the old man
returned as before, leading the virgins into their convent. This done, the young
men and ministers of the Temple, came forth and gathered up this meat, the
which they carried to the chambers of the chief Priests of the Temple; who had
fasted five days, eating only once a day, and they had also abstained from
their wives, not once going out of the Temple in these five days. During the
which, they did whippe themselves rigorously with cords, they did eat of this
divine meat, (for so they called it,) what they could, neither was it lawful
for any other to eat thereof. All the people having dined, they assembled
again in the court to see the end of the feast, whither they brought a
captive, which by the space of a whole year, had represented the idol, being
attyred, decked, and honored, as the idol it self, and doing all reverence
unto him, they delivered him into the hands of the sacrificers, who at that
instant presented themselves, taking him by the feet and hands. The Pope did
open his stomach, and pull out his heart, then did he lift up his hand as high
as he could, showing it to the Sun, and to the Idol, as has been said.
Having thus sacrificed him that represented the idol, they went into a holy
place appointed for this purpose, whither came the young men and virgins of the
Temple, with their ornaments, the which being put in order, they danced and
sung with drums and other instruments, on the which the chief Priests did
play and sound. Then came all the Noblemen with ensigns and ornaments like to
the young men, who danced round about them. They did not usually kill any other
men that day, but him that was sacrificed, yet every fourth year they had
others with him, which was in the year of Iubile and full pardons. After Sun
set, every one being satisfied with sounding, eating, and drinking, the virgins
went al to their convent, they took great dishes of earth full of bread mixed
with honey, covered with small panniers, wrought and fashioned with dead men's
headsand bones, and they carried the collation to the idol, mounting up to the
court, which was before the door of the Oratorie: and having set them down,
they retired in the same order as they came, the steward going still before.
Presently came forth all the young men in order, with canes or reeds in their
hands, who began to run as fast as they could to the top of the stairs
of the Temple, who should come first to the dishes of the collation. The Elders
or chief Priests observed him that came first, second, third, and fourth,
without regarding the rest. This collation was likewise all carried away by the
young men, as great Relics. This done, the four that arrived first were placed
in the midst of the Ancients of the Temple, bringing them to their chambers
with much honor, praising them, and giving them ornaments; and from thence
forth they were respected and reverenced as men of mark. The taking of this
collation being ended, and the feast celebrated with much joy and noise, they
dismissed all the young men and maids which had served the idol; by means
whereof they went one after another, as they came forth. All the small children
of the colleges and schools, were at the gate of the court, with bottomes of
rushes and herbs in their hands, which they cast at them, mocking and
laughing, as of them that came from the service of the idol: they had liberty
then to dispose of themselves at their pleasure, and thus the feast ended.

Of the Feast of Merchants, which those of Cholutecas did celebrate. CHAP. 30.
ALthough I have spoken sufficiently of the service the Mexicaines did unto
their gods, yet will I speak something of the feast they called Quetzacoaalt,
which was the god of riches, the which was solemnised in this manner. Forty
days before the Merchants bought a slave well proportioned, without any fault
or blemish, either of sickness or of hurt, whom they did attire with the
ornaments of the idol, that he might represent it forty days. Before his
clothing they did cleanse him, washing him twice in a lake, which they called
the lake of the gods; and being purified, they attyred him like the idol.
During these forty days, he was much respected for his sake whom he
represented. By night they did imprison him, (as has been said,) left he
should fly, and in the morning they took him out of prison, setting him upon
an eminent place, where they served him, giving him exquisite meats to eat.
After he had eaten, they put a chain of flowers about his neck, and many
nosegaies in his hands. He had a well appointed guard, with much people
toaccompany him. When he went through the City, he went dancing and singing
through all the streets, that he might be known for the resemblance of
their god, and when he began to sing, the women and little children came
forth of their houses to salute him, and to offer unto him as to their god. Two
old men of the Ancients of the Temple, came unto him nine days before the
feast, and humbling themselves before him, they said with a low and submisse
voice, Sir, you must understand that nine days hence the exercise of dancing
and singing does end, and thou must then die; and then he must answer, in a
good hour. They call this ceremony, Neyolo MaxiltleZtli, which is to say, the
advertisement: and when they did thus advertise him, they took very careful
heed whether he were sad, or if he danced as joyfully as he was accustomed,
the which if he did not as cheerfully as they desired, they made a foolish
superstition in this manner. They presently took the sacrificing rasors, the
which they washed and cleansed from the blood of men, which remained of the
former sacrifices. Of this washing they made a drink mingled with another
liquor made of Cacao, giving it him to drink; they said that this would make
him forget what had been said unto him, and would make him in a manner
incensible; returning to his former dancing and mirth. They said moreover, that
he would offer himself cheerfully to death, being enchanted with this drink.
The cause why they sought to take from him this heaviness, was, for that they
held it for an ill augure, and a fore telling of some great harm. The day of
the feast being come, after they had done him much honor, sung, and given him
incense, the sacrificers took him about midnight and did sacrifice him, as
has been said, offering his heart unto the Moon, the which they did
afterward cast against the idol, letting the body fall to the bottom of
the stairs of the Temple, where such as had offered him took him up, which
were the Merchants, whose feast it was. Then having carried him into the
chiefest man's house amongst them, the body was dressed with diverse sawces, to
celebrate (at the break of day,) the banquet and dinner of the feast, having
first bid the idol good morrow, with a small dance, which they made whilst the
day did break, and that they prepared the sacrifice. Then did all the
Merchants assemble at this banquet, especially those which made it a traffic
to buy and sell slaves, who were bound every year to offer one, for the
resemblance of their god. This idol was one of the most honored in all the
land: and therefore the Temple where he was, was of great authority: There
were threescore stairs to ascend up unto it, and on the top was a court of
an indifferent largeness, very finely dressed and plastered, in the midst
whereof, was a great round thing like unto an Oven, having the entry low and
narrow: so as they must stoop very low that should enter into it. This Temple
had chambers and chappells as the rest, where there were convents of Priests,
young men, maids, and children, as has been said: and there was one Priest
alone resident continually, the which they changed weekly: For although there
were in every one of these temples, three or four Curates or Ancients, yet did
every one serve his week without parting. His charge that week, (after he had
instructed the children,) was to strike up a drum every day at the Sun
setting, to the same end that we are accustomed to ring to evensong. This
drum was such as they might hear the house sound thereof throughout all the
parts of the City, then every man shut up his merchandise, and retired unto
his house, and there was so great a silence, as there seemed to be no living
creature in the Town. In the morning whenas the day began to break, they
began to sound the drum, which was a sign of the day beginning, so as
travelers and strangers attended this signal to begin their iournies, for
till that time it was not lawful to go out of the city.

There was in this temple a court of a reasonable greatness, in the which they
made great dances, and pastimes, with games or comedies the day of the idols
feast; for which purpose there was in the midst of this court a theater of
thirty foot square very finely decked and trimmed, the which they decked with
flowers that day, with all the art and invention that might be, being
environed round with Arches of diverse flowers and feathers, and in some places
there were tied many small birds, connies, and other tame beasts. After dinner
all the people assembled in this place, and the players presented themselves,
and played comedies, some counterfeit the deaf, and the rheumatike, others the
lame, some the blind, and without hands, which came to seek for cure of the
idol: the deaf answered confusedly, the rheumatike did cough, the lame
halted, telling their miseries and griefs, wherewith they made the people to
laugh; others came forth in the form of little beasts, some were attired like
snailes, others like toades, and some like lizardes: then meeting together,
they told their offices, and every one retyring to his place, they founded on
small flutes, which was pleasant to hear. They likewise counterfeited
butterflies and small birds of diverse colors, and the children of the Temple
represented these forms, then they went into a little forest planted there
for the nonce, where the Priests of the Temple drew them forth with
instruments of music. In the mean time they used many pleasant speeches,
some in propounding, others in defending, wherewith the assistants were
pleasantly entertained. This done, they made a mask or mummerie with all
these personages, and so the feast ended: the which were usually done in their
principal feasts.

What profit may be drawn out of this discourse of the Indians superstitions.
CHAP 31.
THis may suffice to understand the care and pain the Indians took to serve
and honor their Idols* or rather the devil: for it were an infinite matter,
and of small profit, to report every thing that has passed, for that it may
seem to some needless to have spoken ^hus much: and that it is a loss of
time, as in reading the fables that are fained by the Romans of Knighthoode.
But if such as hold this opinion will look well into it, they shall find
great difference betwixt the one and the other: and that it may be profitable
for many considerations, to have the knowledge of the cu^^oms and ceremonies
the Indians used: first this knowledge is not only profitable, but also
necessary in those countries where these superstitions have been practiced, to
the end that Christians, and the masters of the Law of Christ, may know the
errors and superstitions of the Ancients, and observe if the Indians use them
not at this day, either secretly or openly. For this cause many learned and
worthy men have written large Discourses, of what they have found: yea the
Provincial counsels have commanded them to write and print them, as they
have done in Lima, where has been made a more ample Discourse than this. And
therefore it imports for the good of the Indians, that the Spaniardes being
in those parts of the Indies, should have the knowledge of all these things.
This Discourse may likewise serve the Spaniards there, and all others
whersoever, to give infinite thanks to God our Lord, who has imparted so
great a benefit unto us, giving them his holy Law, which is most just, pure,
and altogether profitable. The which we may well know, comparing it with the
laws of Satan, where so many wretched people have lived so miserably. It may
likewise serve to discover the pride, envy, deceipts, and ambushes of the
Devil, which he practices against those he holds captives, seeing on the
one side he seeks to imitate God, and make comparison with him and his holy
Law, and on the other side: he does mingle with his actions so many
vanities, filthiness and cruelties, as he that has no other practice but to
sophis^^cate and corrupt all that is good. Finally, he that shall see the
darkness and blindenes wherein so many Provinces and Kingdoms have lived so
long time, yea and whe^in many Nations, and a great part of the world live yet,
deceived with the like trumperies, he can not (if he have a Christians heart)
but give thanks to the high God, for such as he has called out of so great
darkness, to the admirable light of his Gospel: beseeching the unspeakable
charity of the Creator to preserve and increase them in his knowledge and
obedience, and likewise be grieved for those that follow still the way of
perdition. And that in the end he beseech the Father of Pity, to open unto
them the treasures and riches of Jesus Christ, who with the Father and
Holy Ghost reigns in all Ages; Amen.

THE SIXTH BOOK of the Natural and Moral History of the Indies.
That they err in their opinion, which hold the Indians to want judgment.
CHAP. 1.
HAving treated before of the religion the Indians used, I pretend to discourse
in this Book of their customs, policy, and government, for two considerations:
the one is to confu^e that false opinion many do commonly hold of them, that
they are a gross and brutish people, or that they have so little understanding,
as they scarce deserve the name of any: So as many excesses and outrages are
committed upon them, using them like brute beasts, and reputing them unworthy
of any respect; which is so common and so dangerous an error (as they know
well who with any zeal and consideration have traveled amongst them, and that
have seen and observd their secrets and counsels;) And moreover, for the
small regard many m^^e of these Indians, who presume to know much, and yet are
commonly the most ignorant and presumptuous. I find no better means to
confound this pernicious opinion, then in relating their order and manner,
whenas they lived under their own laws, in which (although they had many
barbarous things, and without ground, yet had they many others worthy of great
admiration, whereby we may understand, that they were by nature, capable to
receive any good instructions: and besides, they did in some things, pass many
of our commonweals. It is no matter of marvel if there were so great and
gross faults amongst them, seeing there has been likewise amongst the most
famous Law givers and Philosophers (yea without exception, Lycurgus and Plato)
and amongst the wisest commonwealths, as the Romans and Athenians, where we
may find things so full of ignorance, and so worthy of laughter, as in truth
if the commonweales of the Mexicaines, or of the Inguas, had been known in
those times of the Romans and the Greeks, their laws and governements had
been much esteemed by them: But we at this day little regarding this, enter by
the sword, without hearing or understanding; persuading our selves that the
Indians affairs deserve no other respect, but as of venison that is taken in
the forest, and brought for our use and delight.

The most grave and diligent, which have searched and attained to the knowledge
of their secrets, customs and ancient government, hold another opinion, and
admire the order and discourse that has been betwixt them. Of which number is
Polo Ondeguardo, whom I usually follow in the discourse of matters of Peru,
and for these of Mexico John de Touar, who had a Prebend in the Church of
Mexico, and is now of our company of Jesuits, who by the commandment of the
viceroy Don Martin Enriques, have made a diligent and a large collection of the
Histories of that nation, and many other grave and notable personages, who both
by word and writing have sufficiently informed me of all those things I shall
here set down. The other end, and the good which may follow by the knowledge
of the laws customs and government of the Indians, is, that we may help and
govern them with the same laws and customs, for that they ought to be ruled
according to their own laws and privileges, so far forth as they do not
contradict the Law of Christ, and his holy Church, which ought to be
maintained and kept as their fundamental laws. For the ignorance of laws and
customs has bred many errors of great importance, for that the Governors
and Judges, know not well how to give sentence, nor rule their subjects. And
besides, the wrong which is done unto them, against reason, it is prejudicial
and hurtefull unto our selves; for thereby they take occasion to abhor us, as
men both in good and in evil always contrary unto them.

Of the supputation of times, and the Calendar the Mexicaines used. CHAP. 2.
ANd to begin then by the division and supputation of times which the Indians
made, wherein truly we may well perceive the great signs of their vivacitie
and good understanding. I will first show in what sort the Mexica^nes counted
and divided their year, their months, their calendar, their computations,
their worlds and ages. They divided the year into eighteen months, to which
they gave twenty days, wherein the three hundred and three score days are
accomplished, not comprehending in any of these months the five days that
remain, and make the year perfect. But they did reckon them aparte, and
called them the days of nothing: during the which, the people did not any
thing, neither went they to their Temples, but occupied themselves only in
visiting one another, and so spent the time: the sacrificers of the Temple did
likewise cease their sacrifices. These five days being past, they began the
computation of the year, whereof the first month and the beginning was in
March, when the leaves began to grow green, although they took three days
of the month of February; for the first day of their year was, as it were,
the six and twenty day of February, as appears by their calendar, within
the which ours is likewise comprehended and contained with a very ingenious
Art, which was made by the ancient Indians that knew the first Spaniardes. I
have seen this Calendar, and have it yet in my custody, which well deserves
the sight, to understand the discourse and industry the Mexicaine Indians had.
Every one of these eighteen months had his proper name, and his proper
picture, the which was commonly taken of the principal feast that was made in
that month, or from the diversity of times, which the year caused in that
month. They had in this Calendar certain days marked and distinguished for
their feasts. And they accounted their weeks by thirteen days, ma^king the
days with a Zero or cipher, which they multiplied unto thirteen, and then
began to count, one, two, etc. They did likewise mark the years of these
wheels, with four signs or figures, attributing to every year a peculiar
sign, whereof one was of a house, an other of a conny, the third of a reed,
and the fourth of a flint. They painted them in this sort, noting by those
figures the year that did run, saying of so many houses, of so many flints
of such a wheel, happened such a thing. For we must understand that their
wheel, which was an age, contained four weeks of years, every week
containing thirteen years, which in all made fifty two years. In the midst
of this wheel they painted a Sun, from the which went four beams or lines
in cross to the circumference of the wheel; and they made their course, even
as the circumference was divided into four equal parts, every one with his
line, having a distinct color from the rest, and the four colors were,
green, blew, red, and yellow: every portion of these four had thirteen
separations which had all their signs or particular figures, of a house, a
conny, a reed, or a flint, noting by every sign a year, and upon the head of
this sign they painted what had happened that year.

And therefore I did see in the Calendar mentioned the year when the Spaniards
entered Mexico, marked by the picture of a man clad in red, after our manner,
for such was the habit of the first Spaniard, whom Fernand Cortes sent, at
the end of the two and fifty years, which finished the wheel. They used a
pleasant ceremony, which was, the last night they did break all their
vessels and stuff, and put out their fire, and all the lights, saying, that
the world should end at the finishing of one of these wheels, and it might be
at that time: for (said they) seeing the world must then end, what need is
there to provide meat to eat, and therefore they had no further need of
vessel nor fire. Upon this conceit they passed the night in great fear, saying
it might happen there would be no more day, and they watched very carefully for
the day; but when they saw the day begin to break, they presently beat many
drums, and sounded cornets, flutes, and other instruments of joy and
gladness, saying, that God did yet prolong the time with another age, which
were fifty two years. And then began an other wheel. The first day and
beginning of this age they took new fire, and bought new vessels to dress
their meat, and all went to the high Priest for this new fire, having first
made a solemn sacrifice, and given thanks for the coming of the day, and
prolongation of an other age. This was their manner of accounting their years,
months, weeks, and ages.

How the Kings Inguas accounted the years and months. CHAP. 3.
ALthough this supputation of times practiced amongst the Mexicaines, be
ingenious enough and certain, for men that had no learning; yet in my opinion
they wanted discourse and consideration, having not grounded their computation
according unto the course of the moon, nor distributed their months
accordingly, wherein those of Peru have far surpassed them: for they divided
their year into as many days, perfectly accomplished as we do here, and into
twelve months or moons, in the which they employed and consumed the eleven
days that remaind of the moon as Polo writes. To make the computation of
their year sure and certain, they used this industry; upon the mountains
which are about the city of Cusco (where the Kings Inguas held their court,
being the greatest sanctuary of those realms, and as we should say an other
Rome) there were twelve pillars set in order, and in such distaunce the one
from the other, as every month one of these pillars did note the rising and
setting of the sun. They called them Suceanga, by means whereof they taught
and showed, the feasts, and the seasons fit to sow and reap, and to do
other things. They did certain sacrifices to these pillars of the sun. Every
month had his proper name, and pecular feasts. They began the year by
January as we do. But since, a king Ingua called Pachacuto, which signifies a
reformer of the Temple, began their year by December, by reason (as I
conjecture) that then the Sun returns from the last point of Capricorn,
which is the tropike nearest unto them. I know not whether the one or the other
have observed any Bisexte, although some hold the contrary. The weeks which
the Mexicaines did reckon, were not properly weeks, being not of seven days:
the Inguas likewise made no mention thereof which is no wonder, seeing the
account of the week is not grounded upon the course of the sun, as that of
the year, nor of the moon, as that of the month; but among the Hebrews i^ is
grounded upon the creation of the world, as Moses reports; and amongst the
Greeks and Latins upon the number of the seven planets, of whose names the
days of the week have taken their denomination; yet was it much for those
Indians, being men without books and learning, to have a year, seasons, and
feasts, so well appointed as I have said.

That no nation of the Indies has been found to have had the use of letters.
CHAP 4.
LEtters were invented to signify properly the words we do pronounce, even as
words (according to the Philosopher) are the signs and demonstrations of
man's thoughts and conceptions. And both the one and the other (I say the
letters and words) were ordained to make things known. The voice for such as
are present, and letters for the absent, and such as are to come. Signs and
marks which are not properly to signify words, but things, cannot be called,
neither in truth are they letters, although they be written, for we can not
say that the Picture of the sun be a writing of the sun, but only a
picture; the like may be said of other signs and characters, which have no
resemblance to the thing, but serve only for memory: for he that invented
them, did not ordain them to signify words, but only to note the thing:
neither do they call those characters, letters, or writings, as indeed they
are not, but rather ciphers, or remembraunces, as those be which the Spherists
or Astronomers do use, to signify diverse signs or planets of Mars, Venus,
Jupiter, etc.

Such characters are ciphers, and no letters: for what name soever Mars may
have in Italian, French, or Spanish, this character does always signify it,
the which is not found in letters: for although they siguify the thing, yet is
it by means of words. So as they which know not the tongue, understand them
not: as for example, the Greeks nor the Hebrews, cannot conceive what this
word Sol does signify, although they see it written; for that they understand
not the Latin word: so as writing and letters are only practiced by them,
which signify words therewith. For if they signify things mediately, they are
no more letters nor writings, but ciphers and pictures: whereby we may observe
two notable things. The one, that the memory of histories and antiquities may
be preserved by one of these three means, either by letters and writings, as
has been used amongst the Latins, Greeks, Hebrews, and many other Nations;
or by painting, as has been used almost throughout all the world, for it is
said in the second Nicene Counsel, Painting is a book for fools which cannot
read: or by ciphers and characters, as the cipher signifies the number of a
hundred, a thousand and others, without noting the word of a hundred, or a
thousand. The other thing we may observe thereby, is that which is propounded
in this chapter, which is, that no Nation of the Indies discovered in our time,
has had the use of letters and writings, but of the other two sorts, images,
and figures. The which I observe, not only of the Indies of Peru, and new
Spain, but also of Iappon, and China. And although this may seem false to
some, seeing it is testified by the discourses that have been written, that
there are so great Libraries and Universities in China, and Iappon, and that
mention is made of their Chapas, letters, and expeditions, yet that which I
say, is true, as you may understand by the discourse following.

Of the fashion of Letters, and Books; the Chinois used. CHAP. 5.
THere are many which think, and it is the most common opinion, that the
writings which the Chinois used, are letters, as those we use in Europe, and
that by them we may write words and discourses, and that they only differ
from our letters and writings, in the diversity of caracters, as the Greeks
differ from the Latins, and the Hebrews from the Chaldees. But it is not so,
for they have no Alphabet, neither write they any letters, but all their
writing is nothing else but painting and ciphering: and their letters signify
no parts of distinctions, as ours do, but are figures and representations of
things, as of the Sun, of fire, of a man, of the sea, and of other things.
The which appears plainly, for that their writings and Chapas, are understood
of them all, although the languages the Chinois speak, are many and very
different, in like sort as our numbers of ciphers are equally vnderstooode in
the Spanish, French, and Arabian tongues: for this figure 8. wheresoever it be,
signifies eight, although the French call this number of one sort, and the
Spaniards of another. So as things being of themselves innumerable, the letters
likewise or figures which the Chinois use to signify them by, are in a manner
infinite: so as he that shall read or write at China, (as the Mandarins do,)
must know and keep in memory at the least fourscore and five thousand
characters or letters, and those which are perfect herein, know above sixscore
thousand. Astrange and prodigious thing; yea, incredible, if it were not
testified by men worthy of credit, as the fathers of our company, who are
there continually, learning their language and writing, wherein they have
studied day and night above ten years, with a continual labor; for the
charity of Christ, and the desire of salvation of souls, prevailed in them
above all this labor and difficulty. For this reason learned men are so much
esteemed in China, for the difficulty there is to conceive them: and those
only have the offices of Mandarins, Governors, Judges, and Captains. For this
cause the fathers take great pains to instruct their children to read and
write. There are many of these schools where the children are taught, where
the masters teach them by day, and the fathers at home by night: so as they
hurt their eyes much, and they whippe them often with reeds, although not so
severely as they do offenders. They call it the Mandarin tongue, which
requires a man's age to be conceived. And you must understand, that although the
tongue which the Mandarins speak, be peculiar and different from the Vulgar,
which are many, and that they study it, as they do Latin and Greek here,
and that the learned only throghout all China, do understand it: so it is
notwithstanding that all that is written in it, is understood in all tongues:
and although all the Provinces do not understand one another by speaking, yet
by writing they do: for there is but one sort of figures and characters for
them all, which signify one thing, but not the same word and prolation: seeing
(as I have said,) they are only to denote the things, and not the word, as we
may easily understand by the examples of numbers in ciphering. And they of
Iappon and the Chinois, do read and understand well the writings one of
another, although they be diverse Nations, and different in tongue and language.
If they speak what they read or write, they should not be understood. Such
are the letters and books the Chinois use, being so famous in the world. To
make their impressions, they grave a board or plank with the figures they will
print, then do they stamp as many leaves of paper as they list, of the same
sort as they have made their pictures, the which are graven in copper or wood.
But a man of judgment may ask, how they could signify their conceptions by
figures, which approached near or resemble the thing they would represent? As
to say, the Sun heats, or, that he has beheld the Sun, or, the day is of
the Sun. Finally, how it were possible to denote by the same figures, the
case, the conjunction, and the articles, which are in many tongues and
writings? I answer thereunto, that they distinguish and signify this variety
by certain points, strikes, and dispositions of the figure. But it is
difficult to understand how they can write proper names in their tongue,
especially of strangers, being things they have never seen, and notable to
invent figures proper unto them. I have made trial thereof being in Mexico
with the Chinois, willing them to write this proposition in their language,
Joseph Acosta is come from Peru: and such like: whereupon the Chinois was long
pensive, but in the end he did write it, the which other Chinois did after
read, although they did vary a little in the pronountiation of the proper
name. For they use this devise to write a proper name: they seek out something
in their tongue, that has resemblance to that name, and set down the figure
of this thing. And as it is difficult among so many proper names, to find
things to resemble them in the prolation, so is it very difficult and
troublesome, to write such names. Upon this purpose, father Allonso SancheZ
told us, that when he was in China, being led into diverse Tribunal seats,
from Manderin to Manderin, they were long in putting his name in writing in
their Chapas, yet in the end they did write it after their manner, and so
ridiculously, that they scarce came near to the name: and this is the fashion
of letters and writings which the Chinois used. That of the Iapponois approached
very near, although they affirm that the Noblemen of Iappon that came into
Europe, did write all things very easily in their language, were they of our
proper names: yea, I have had some of their writings showed me, whereby it
seems they should have some kind of letters, although the greatest part of
their writings, be by the characters and figures, as has bin said of the
Chinois.

Of the Schools and Universities of China. CHAP. 6.
THe fathers of our company say, that they have not seen in China, any great
schools or universities of Philosophy, and other natural sciences; believing
there is not any, but that all their study is in the Mandarin tongue, which is
very ample and hard, as I have said: and what they study, be things written
in their own tongue, which be histories of sects, and opinions, of civil
laws, of moral proverbes, of fables, and many other such compositions that
depend thereon. Of divine sciences they have no knowledge, neither of natural
things, but some small remainders of straied propositions, without art or
method, according to every man's wit and study. As for the Mathematikes,
they have experience of the celestial motions, and of the stars. And for
Physic, they have knowledge of herbs, by means whereof, they cure many
diseases, and use it much. They write with pensils, and have many books written
with the hand, and others printed, but in a bad order. They are great plaiers
of come dies, the which they perform with great preparation of theaters,
apparel, bells, drums, and voices. Some fathers report to have seen comedies
which lasted ten or twelve days and nights, without any want of comedians, nor
company to behold them. They do make many different scenes, and whilst some
act, the others feed and sleep. In these comedies they do commonly treat of
moral things, and of good examples, intermingled with pleasant devises. This
is the sum of that which our men report of the letters and exercises of them
of China; wherein we must confess to be much wit and industry. But all this
is of small substance, for in effect all the knowledge of the Chinois, tendes
only to read and write, and no farther: for they attain to no high
knowledge. And their writing, and reading, is not properly reading, and
writing; seeing their letters are no letters that can represent words, but
figures of innumerable things, the which cannot be learned, but in a long time
and with infinite labor. But in the end with all their knowledge, an Indian of
Peru or Mexico, that has learned to read and write, knows more then the
wisest Mandarin that is amongst them: for that the Indian with four and
twenty letters which he has learned, will write all the words in the world:
and a Mandarin with his hundred thousand letters, will be troubled to write
some proper name, as of Martin, or Alonso, and with greater reason he shall be
less able to write the names of things he knows not. So as the writing in
China, is no other thing but a manner of painting or ciphring.

Of the fashion of letters and writings which the Mexicaines used. CHAP. 7.
WE find amongst the Nations of New Spain a great knowledge and memory of
antiquity; and therefore searching by what means the Indians had preserved
their Histories, and so many particularities, I learned, that although they
were not so subtle and curious as the Chinois, and those of Iappon, yet had
they some kind of letters and books amongst them, whereby they preserved
(after their manner) the deeds of their predecessors. In the province of
Yu-lata^, where the Bishopric is, which they call de Honduras, there were
books of the leaves of trees, folded and squared, after their manner, in the
which the wise Indians contained the distribution of their times, the knowledge
of the planets, of beasts and other natural things, with their antiquities, a
thing full of great curiosity and diligence. It seemed to some Pedant that all
this was an enchantment and magic art, who did obstinately maintain, that
they ought to be burnt, so as they were committed to the fire. Which since, not
only the Indians found to be ill done, but also the curious Spaniards, who
desired to know the secrets of the country. The like has happened in other
things: for our men thinking that all was but superstition, have lost many
memorialls of an ancient and holy things, which might have profited much. This
proceeds of a foolish and ignorant zeal, who not knowing, nor seeking to
know what concerned the Indians, say preiudicately, that they are all but
witchcrafts, and that all the Indians are but drunkards, incapable to know or
learn any thing. For such as would be curiously informed of them, have found
many things worthy of consideration. One of our company of Jesuits, a man very
witty and well experienced, did assemble in the province of Mexico, the Ancients
of Tescuco, of Talla, and of Mexico, conferring at large with them, who showed
unto him their books, histories and kalenders, things very worthy the sight,
because they had their figures and hierogliphicks, whereby they represented
things in this manner: Such as had form or figure, were represented by their
proper images, and such as had not any, were represented by characters that
signified them, and by this means they figured and writ what they would. And
to observe the time when any thing did happen, they had those painted wheels,
for every one of them contained an age, which was two and fifty years, as has
been said; and of the side of those wheels, they did paint with figures and
characters right against the year, the memorable things that happened therein.
As they noted the year whenas the Spaniards entered their Country, they
painted a man with a hatte and a red ierkin, upon the sign of the reed, which
did rule then, and so of other accidents. But for that their writings and
characters were not sufficient as our letters and writings be, they could not
so plainly express the words, but only the substance of their conceptions.
And forasmuch as they were accustomed to rehearse Discourses and Dialogues by
heart, compounded by their Orators and ancient Rhethoritians, and many Chapas
made by their Poets (which were impossible to learn by their Hierogliphickes
and Characters) the Mexicaines were very curious to have their children learn
those dialogues and compositions by heart. For the which cause they had
Schools, and as it were, Colleges or Seminaries, where the Ancients taught
children these Orations, and many other things, which they preserved amongst
them by tradition from one to another, as perfectly, as if they had been
written; especially the most famous Nations had a care to have their children
(which had any inclination to be Rhetoritians, and to practice the office of
Orators) to learn these Orations by heart: So as when the Spaniardes came into
their Country, and had taught them read and write our letters, many of the
Indians then wrote these Orations, as some grave men do witness that had read
them. Which I say, for that some which shall happly read these long and
eloquent discourses in the Mexicaine History, will easily believe they have
been invented by the Spaniardes, and not really taken and reported from the
Indians. But having known the certain truth, they will give credit (as
reason is) to their Histories. They did also write these Discourses after their
manner, by Characters and Images: and I have seen for my better satisfaction,
the Pater noster, Ave Maria, and Simboll, or general confession of our faith,
written in this manner by the Indians.

And in truth whosoever shall see them, will wonder thereat. For, to signify
these words, I a sinner do confess my self, they painted an Indian upon his
knees, at a religious man's feet, as one that confesses himself: and for
this, To God most mighty, they painted three faces with their Crowns, like to
the Trinity, and To the glorious Virgin Marie, they painted the face of our
Lady, and half the body of a little child: and for S. Peter and S. Paul,
heads with crowns, and a key with a sword: and whereas images failed, they did
set characters, as Wherein I have sinned, etc. whereby we may conceive the
quickenesse of spirit of these Indians, seeing this manner of writing of our
prayers and matters of faith has not been taught them by the Spaniards,
neither could they have done it, if they had not had an excellent conception of
that was taught them. And I have seen in Peru, a confession of sins brought
by an Indian, written in the same forte with pictures and characters, painting
every one of the ten Commandementes, after a certain manner, where there
were certain marks like ciphers, which were the sins he had committed
against the Commandments. I nothing doubt but if any of the most sufficient
Spaniards were employed to make memorialles of the like things by their images
and marks, they would not attain unto it in a whole year, no not in ten.

Of Registers and the manner of reckoning which the Indians of Peru used. CHAP.
8.
BEfore the Spaniardes came to the Indies, they of Peru had no kind of
writing, either letters, characters, ciphers, or figures, like to those of
China and Mexico: yet preserved they the memory of their Antiquities, and
maintain an order in all their affairs, of peace, war, and policy, for
that they were careful observers of traditions from one to another, and the
young ones learned, and carefully kept, as a holy thing, what their superiors
had told them, and taught it with the like care to their posterity. Besides
this diligence, they supplied the want of letters and writings, partly by
painting, as those of Mexico, (although they of Peru were very gross and
blockish) and partly, and most commonly by Quippos. These Quippos are
memorialls or registers, made of bows, in the which there are diverse knottes
and colors, which do signify diverse things, and it is strange to see what
they have expressed and represented by this means: for their Quippos serve
them insteede of Books of histories, of laws, ceremonies, and accounts of
their affairs. There were officers appointed to keep these Quippos, the which
at this day they call Quipocamayos* the which were bound to give an account of
every thing, as Notaries and Registers do here. Therefore they fully believed
them in all things, for according to the variety of business, as wars,
policy, tributes, ceremonies and lands, there were sundry Quippos or
branches, in every one of the which there were so many knottes little and
great, and strings tied unto them, some red, some green, some blew, some
white; and finally, such diversity, that even as we derive an infinite number
of words from the four and twenty letters, applying them in diverse sorts,
so do they draw innumerable words from their knottes, and diversity of
colors. Which thing they do in such a manner, that if at this day in Peru,
any Commissary come at the end of two or three years, to take information
upon the life of any officer, the Indians come with their small reckonings
verified, saying, that in such a village they have given him so many eggs
which he has not paid for, in such a house a hen, in an other, two burdens
of grass for his horse, and that he has paid but so much money, and remains
debtor so much. The proof being presently made with these numbers of knottes
and handfulls of cords, it remains for a certain testimony and register. I
did see a handful of these strings, wherein an Indian woman carried written a
general confession of all her life, and thereby confessed herself, as well as
I could have done it in written paper. I asked her what those strings meant
that differed from the rest: she answered me, they were certain
circumstaunces which the sin required to be fully confessed. Beside these
Quippos of thread, they have an other, as it were a kind of writing with small
stones, by means whereof, they learn punctually the words they desire to know
by heart. It is a pleasant thing to see the old and the impotent (with a
wheel made of small stones) learn the Pater noster, with another the Ave
Maria, with another the Creed; and to remember what stone signifies, Which was
conceived by the holy ghost, and which, Suffered under Pontius Pilate.

It is a pleasant thing to see them correct themselves when they do err; for
all their correction consists only in beholding of their small stones. One
of these wheels were sufficient to make me forget all that I do know by
heart. There are a great number of these wheels in the Church-yardes for this
purpose. But it seems a kind of witchcraft, to see an other kind of Quippos,
which they make of grains of Mays, for to cast up a hard account, wherein a
good Arithmetitian would be troubled with his pen to make a division: to see
how much every one must contribute: they do draw so many grains from one
side, and add so many to another, with a thousand other inventions. These
Indians will take their grains, and place five of one side, three of another,
and eight of another, and will change one grain of one side, and three of
another: So as they finish a certain account, without erring in any point: and
they sooner submit themselves to reason by these Quippos, what every one
ought to pay, then we can do with the pen. Hereby we may judge if they have
any understanding, or be brutish: for my part, I think they pass us in those
things, whereunto they do apply themselves.

Of the order the Indians hold in their writings. CHAP. 9.
IT shall be good to add hereunto what we have observed, touching the Indians
writings: for their manner was not to write with a continued line, but from the
top to the bottom, or in circle-wise. The Latins and Greeks do write from
the left hand unto the right, which is the vulgar and common manner we do use.
The Hebrews contrariwise began at the right to the left, and therefore their
books began where ours did end. The Chinois write neither like the Greeks
nor like the Hebrews, but from the top to the bottom, for as they be no
letters but whole words, and that every figure and character signifies a
thing, they have no need to assemble the parts one with an other, and
therefore they may well write from the top to the bottom. Those of Mexico,
for the same cause did not write in line, from one side to another, but
contrary to the Chinois, beginning below, they mounted upward. They used this
manner of writing, in the account of their days, and other things which they
observed: Yet when they did write in their wheels or signs, they began from
the midst where the Sun was figured, and so mounted by their years unto
the round and circumference of the wheel. To conclude, we find four
different kinds of writings, some writ from the right to the left, others
from the left to the right, some from the top to the bottom, and others from
the foot to the top, wherein we may discover the diversity of man's
judgment.

How the Indians dispatched their Messengers. CHAP. 10.
TO finish the manner they had of writing, some may with reason doubt how the
Kings of Mexico and Peru had intelligence from all those realms that were so
great, or by what means they could dispatch their affairs in Court, seeing
they had no use of any letters, nor to write pacquets: wherein we may be
satisfied of this doubt, when we understand, that by words, pictures, and
these memorialles, they were often advertised of that which passed. For this
cause there were men of great agilitie, which served as curriers, to go and
come, whom they did nourish in this exercise of running from their youth,
laboring to have them well breathed, that they might run to the top of a
high hill without wearines. And therefore in Mexico they gave the prize to
three or four that first mounted up the stairs of the Temple, as has been
said in the former Book. And in Cusco, when they made their solemn feast of
Capacrayme, the novices did run who could fastest up the rock of Ynacauri.
And the exercise of running is general; much used among the Indians. Whenas
there chanced any matter of importance, they sent unto the Lords of Mexico,
the thing painted, whereof they would advertise them, as they did when the
first Spanish ships appeared to their ^ight, and when they took Topanchan. In
Peru they were very curious of footmen, and the Ingua had them in all parts of
the realm, as ordinary Posts called Chasquis, whereof shall be spoken in his
place.

Of the manner of government, and of the Kings which the Indians had. CHAP. 11.
IT is apparent, that the thing wherein these barbarous people show their
barbarism, was in their government and manner of command: for the more that
men approach to reason, the more mild is their government and less insolent;
the Kings and Lords are more tractable, agreeing better with their subjects,
acknowledging them equal in nature, though inferior in duty and care of the
commonwealth. But amongst the Barbarians all is contrary, for that their
government is tyrannous, using their subjects like beasts, and seeking to be
reverenced like gods: For this occasion many nations of the Indies have not
endured any Kings, or absolute and sovereign Lords, but live in comminalties,
creating and appointing Captains and Princes, for certain occasions only, to
whom they obey during the time of their charge, then after they return to
their former estates. The greatest part of this new world (where there are no
settled kingdoms, nor established commonweales, neither princes nor succeeding
kings) they govern themselves in this manner, although there be some Lords
and principal men raised above the common sort. In this sort the whole
Country of Chille is governed, where the Auracanes, those of Teucapell and
others, have so many years resisted the Spaniardes. And in like sort all the
new kingdom of Grenad^, that of Guatimalla, the Islands, all Florida, Bresill,
L^s^^ and other countries of great circuit: but that in some places, they are
yet more barbarous, scarcely acknowledging any head, but all command and
govern in common, having no other thing, but will, violence, industry and
disorder, so as he that most may, most commands. At the East Indies there are
great kingdoms, well ordered and governed, as that of Sian, Bisnaga, and
others, which may bring to field when they please, a hundred or two hundred
thousand men.

As likewise the Kingdom of China, the which in greatness and power, surpasses
all the rest, whose kings, (as they report,) have continued above two thousand
years, by means of their good order and government. But at the West Indies,
they have only found two Kingdoms or settled Empires, that of the Mexicaines
in new Spain, and of the Inguas in Peru. It is not easy to be said, which of
the two was the mightiest Kingdom, for that Motecuma, exceeded them of Peru,
in buildings, and in the greatness of his court: but the Inguas, did likewise
exceed the Mexicaines, in treasure, riches, and greatness of Provinces. In
regard of antiquity, the Monarchy of the Inguas, has the advantage,
although it be not much, and in my opinion, they have been equal in feats of
arms and victories. It is most certain, that these two Kingdoms have much
exceeded all the Indian Provinces, discovered in this new world, as well in
good order and government, as in power and wealth, and much more in
superstition and service of their idols, having many things like one to an
other. But in one thing they differed much, for among the Mexicaines, the
succession of the kingdom, was by election, as the Empire of the Romans, and
that of Peru, was hereditarie, and they succeeded in blood, as the Kingdoms of
France, and Spain. I will therefore hereafter treat of these two
governments, (as the chief subject and best known amongst the Indians,) being
fit for this discourse, leaving many and tedious things which are not of
importance.

Of the Government of the Kings and Inguas of Peru. CHAP. 12.
THe Ingua which ruled in Peru, being dead, his lawful son succeeded him,
and so they held him that was borne of his chief wife, whom they called Coya.
The which they have always observed since the time of an Ingua, called
Yupangui, who married his sister: for these Kings held it an honor to marry
their sisters. And although they had other wives, and concubines, yet the
succession of the Kingdom appertained to the son of the Coya. It is true,
that when the King had a legitimate brother, he succeeded before the son, and
after him his nephew, and son to the first. The Curacas, and Noblemen, held
the same order of succession in their goods and offices. And after their manner
they made excessive ceremonies, and obsequies for the dead. They observed one
custom very great and full of state, that a King which entered newly into his
Kingdom, should not inherit any thing of the movables, implements, and
treasure of his predecessor, but he must furnish his house new, and gather
together gold, silver, and other things necessary, not touching any thing of
the deceased, the which was wholly dedicated for his Oratorie or Guaca, and for
the entertainment of the family he left, the which with his offspring, was
always busied at the sacrifices, ceremonies, and service of the deceased King:
for being dead, they presently held him for a god, making sacrifices unto him,
images, and such like. By this means, there was infinite treasure in Peru: for
every one of the Inguas, had labored to have his Oratorie and treasure
surpass that of his predecessors. The mark or ensign, whereby they took
possession of the realm, was a red roll of wool, more fine then silk, the
which hung in the midst of his forehead: and none but the Ingua alone might
wear it, for that it was as a Crown and royal Diadem: yet they might
lawfully wear a roll hanging on the one side, near unto the ear, as some
Noblemen did, but only the Ingua might carry it in the midst of his
forehead. At such time as they took this roll or wreathe, they made solemn
feasts, and many sacrifices, with a great quantity of vessel of gold, and
silver, a great number of small forms or images of sheep, made of gold and
silver, great abundance of the stuffes of Cumby, well wrought, both fine and
courser, many shells of the sea of all sorts, many feathers, and a thousand
sheep, which must be of diverse colors. Then the chief Priest took a young
child in his hands, of the age of six or eight years, pronouncing these
words with the other ministers speaking to the image of Viracocha, Lord we
offer this unto thee, that thou may maintain us in quiet, and help us in
our wars, maintain our Lord the Ingua in his greatness and estate, that he
may always increase, giving him much knowledge to govern us. There were
present at this ceremony and oath, men of all parts of the Realm, and of all
Guacas and Sanctuaries. And without doubt, the affection and reverence this
people bare to their Kings Inguas, was very great, for it is never found that
any one of his subjects committed treason against him, for that they proceeded
in their governments, not only with an absolute power, but also with good order
and justice, suffering no man to be oppressed: The Ingua placed governors in
diverse Provinces, amongst the which, some were superiors, and did acknowledge
none but himself, others were of less command, and others more particular,
with so goodly an order, and such gravitie, as no man durst be drunk, nor
take an ear of Mays from his neighbor. These Inguas held it for a maxim,
that it was necessary to keep the Indians always in action: and therefore we
see it to this day, long cawseies and works of great labor, the which they
say were made to exercise the Indians, lest they should remain idle. When he
conquered any new Province, he was accustomed presently to send the greatest
part, and the chief of that Country into other Provinces, or else to his
Court, and they call them at this day in Peru, Mitimas, and in their places he
sent others of the Nation of Cusco, especially the Orciones, which were as
Knights of an ancient house. They punished faults rigorously. And therefore
such as have any understanding hereof, hold opinion, that there can be no
better government for the Indians, no more assured, then that of the Inguas.

Of the distribution the Inguas made of their Vessel. CHAP. 13.
TO relate more particularly what I have spoken before, you must understand,
that the distribution which the Inguas made of their vessels, was so exact and
distinct, as he might govern them all with great facility, although his
realm were a thousand leagues long: for having conquered a Province, he
presently reduced the Indians into Towns and Comminalties, the which he divided
into bands, he appointed one to have the charge over every ten Indians, over
every hundred another, over every thousand another, and over ten thousand
another, whom they called Humo, the which was one of the greatest charges. Yet
above all in every Province, there was a Governor of the house of the Inguas,
whom all the rest obeyed, giving unto him every year in particular account of
what had passed, that is, of such as were borne, of those that were dead and of
their troops and grain. The Governors went every year out of Cusco, where
they remained, and returned to the great feast of Rayme, at the which, they
brought the tribute of the whole Realm to the Court; neither might they enter
but with this condition. All the Kingdom was divided into four parts, which
they called Tahuantinsuyo, that is, Chinchasuyo, Collasuyo, Andesuyo, and
Condesuyo, according to the four ways which went from Cusco, where the Court
was resident, and where the general assemblies of the realm were made. These
ways and Provinces being answerable unto them, were toward the four quarters
of the wo^ld, Collasuyo to the South, Chinchasuyo to the North, Condesuy^o to
the West, and And^suyo to the East. In every town and village, there were two
sorts of people, which were of Hanansaya, and Vrinsaya, which is as much to
say, as those above, and those below. When they commanded any work to be done,
or to furnish any thing to the Ingua, the officers knew presently how much
every Province, Town, and Family, ought to furnish: so as the division was not
made by equal portions, but by cottization, according to the qualities and
wealth of the Country. So as for example, if they were to gather a hundred
thousand Fan^gues of Mays, they knew presently how much every Province was to
contribute, were it a tenth, a seventh, or a fifth part. The like was of Towns
and Villages, Aillos, or Linages. The Quipocamayos, which were the officers and
intendants, kept the account of all with their strings and knottes, without
failing, setting down what every one had paid, even to a hen, or a burden of
wood, and in a moment they did see by diverse regis^ers what every one ought to
pay.

Of the Edifices and manner of building of the Inguas CHAP. 14.
THE Edifices and Buildings which the Inguas made in temples, fortresses,
ways, country houses, and such like, were many in number, and of an excessive
labor, as does appear at this day by their ruins and remainders, both in
Cusco, Tyaguanaco, Tambo, and other places, where there are stones of an
unmeasurable greatness: so as men cannot conceive how they were cut, brought,
and set in their places. There came great numbers of people from all Provinces,
to work in these buildings and fortresses, which the Ingua caused to be made
in Cusco, or other parts of the Realm. As these works were strange, and to
amaze the beholders, wherein they used no mortar nor ciment, neither any iron,
or steel, to cut, and set the stones in work. They had no engines or other
instruments to carry them, and yet were they so artificially wrought, that in
many places they could not see the joints: and many of these stones are so
big, that it were an incredible thing, if one should not see them. At
Tiaguanaco, I did measure a stone of thirty eight foot long, of eighteen
broad, and six thick. And in the wall of the fortress of Cusco, which is of
Moallon, there are stones of a geater bigness. And that which is most strange,
these stones being not cut nor squared to join, but contrariwise, very
unequal one with another in form and greatness, yet did they join them
together without ciment, after an incredible manner. All this was done by the
force of men, who endured their labor with an invincible patience. For to
join one stone with an other, they were forced to handle and try many of them
often, being uneven. The Ingua appointed every year what numbers of people
should labor in these stones and buildings, and the Indians made a division
amongst them, as of other things, so as no man was oppressed. Although these
buildings were great, yet were they commonly ill appointed and unfit, almost
like to the Mosquites or buildings of the Barbarians.

They could make no arches in their edifices, no^ mortar or cyment to build
them withal: when they saw arches of wood built upon the river of Xaura, the
bridge being finished, and the wood broken down, they all began to run
away, supposing that the bridge which was of stone should presently fall; but
when they found it to stand firm, and that the Spaniards went on it, the
Cacique said to his companions; It is reason we should serve these men, who in
truth seem to be the children of the Sun. The bridges they made were of
reeds plaited, which they tied to the banks with great stakes, for that they
could not make any bridges ofstone or wood. The bridge which is at this day
upon the current of the great lake Chiquitto in Collao is admirable, for the
course of that water is so deep, as they can not settle any foundation, and so
broad, that it is impossible to make an arch to pass it: so as it was
altogether impossible to make a bridge either of wood or stone. But the wit and
industry of the Indians invented a means to make a firm and assured bridge,
being only of straw, which seems fabulous, yet is it very true: For as we
have said before, they did bind together certain bundles of reeds, and
weeds, which do grow in the lake that they call Torora, and being a light
matter that sinkes not in the water, they cast it upon a great quantity of
reeds, then having tied those bundles of weeds to either side of the river,
both men and beasts go over it with ease: passing over this bridge I have
woondered, that of so common and easy a thing, they had made a bridge, better,
and more assured than the bridge of boats from Seville to Triane. I have
measured the length of this bridge, and as I remember, it was above three
hundred foot; and they say that the depth of this current is very great: and
it seems above, that the water has no motion, yet they say, that at the
bottom it has a violent and very furious course. And this shall suffice for
buildings.

Of the Inguas revenues, and the order of Tributes they imposed upon the
Indians. CHAP. 15.
THe Inguas riches was incomparable, for although no king did inherit the
riches and treasure of his predecessor, yet had he at command, all the riches
of his realms, as well silver and gold, as the stuff of Cumbi, and cattle,
wherein they abounded, and their greatest riches of all, was their innumerable
number of vassalles, which were all employed as it pleased the King. They
brought out of every province what he had chosen for tribute. The Chicas sent
him sweet and rich woods; the Lucanas sent Brancars to carry his Litter; The
Chumbilbicas, dauncers; and so the other provinces sent him what they had of
abundance, besides their general tribute, whereunto every one contributed.
The Indians that were noted to that end, labored in the mines of gold and
silver, which did abound in Peru, whom the Ingua entertained with all they
needed for their expenses: and whatsoever they drew of gold and silver, was for
him. By this means there were so great treasures in this kingdom, as it is
the opinion of many, that what fell in the hands of the Spaniardes, (although
it were very much) as we know) was it not the tenth part of that which they
hid and buried in the ground, the which they could never discover,
notwithstanding all the search covetousness had taught them. But the greatest
wealth of these barbarous people, was, that their vassalles were all slaves,
whose labor they used at their pleasure: and that which is admirable, they
employed them in such sort, as it was no servitude unto them, but rather a
pleasing life. But to understand the order of tributes which the Indians paid
unto their Lords, you must know, that when the Ingua conquered any cities,
he divided all the land into three parts, the first was, for religion and
ceremonies, so as the Pachayachaqui, which is the Creator, and the Sun, the
Chuquilla, which is the Thunder, the Pachamana, and the dead, and other Guacas
and sanctuaries, had every one their proper lands, the fruits whereof were
spoiled and consumed in sacrifices, and in the nourishing of ministers and
priests; for there were Indians appointed for every Guaca, and sanctuary, and
the greatest part of this revenue was spent in Cusco, where was the universal
and general sanctuary, and the rest in that city, where it was gathered:
for that after the imitation of Cusco, there were in every City, Guacas, and
Oratories of the same order, and with the same functions, which were served
after the same manner and ceremonies to that of Cusco, which is an admirable
thing, and they have found it by proof in above a hundred towns, some of them
distant above two hundred leagues from Cusco. That which they sowed or reapt
upon their land, was put into houses, as greniers, or storehouses, built for
that effect, and this was a great part of the Tribute which the Indians paid.
I can not say how much this part amounted unto, for that it was greater in
some parts than in other, and in some places it was in a manner all: and this
part was the first they put to profit. The second part of these lands and
inheritances was for the Iugua, wherewith he and his household were
entertained, with his kinsfolks, noblemen, garrisons and soldiers. And
therefore it was the greatest portion of these tributes, as it appears by the
quantity of gold, silver, and other tributes, which were in houses appointed
for that purpose, being longer and larger than those where they keep the
revenues of the Guacas. They brought this tribute very carefully to Cusco, or
unto such places where it was needful for the soldiers, and when there was
store, that kept it ten or twelve years, until a time of necessity. The
Indians tilled and put to profit the Inguas lands, next to those of the
Guacas; during which time they lived and were nourished at the charges of the
Ingua, of the Sun, or of the Guacas, according to the land they labored. But
the old men, women, and sick folks were reserved and exempt from this
tribute, and although whatsoever they gathered upon those lands were for the
Ingua, the Sun, or the Guac^s, yet the property appertayned unto the Indians
and their successors. The third part of these lands were given by the Ingua
for the comminaltie, and they have not yet discovered, whether this portion
were greater, or less, than that of the Ingua or Guacas. It is most certain
they had a care and regard, it might be sufficient for the nourishment of the
people. No particular man possessed any thing proper to himself of this third
portion, neither did the Indians ever possess any, if it were not by
special grace from the Ingua: and yet might it not be engaged nor divided
amongst his heirs. They every year divided these lands of the comminaltie,
in giving to every one, that which was needful for the nourishment of their
persons and families. And as the family increased or diminished, so did they
increase or decrease his portion, for there were measures appointed for every
person. The Indians paid no tribute of that which was apportioned unto them:
For all their tribute was to till and keep in good order the lands of the
Ingua, and the Guacas, and to lay the fruits thereof in their storehouses.
When the year was barren, they gave of these fruits thus reserved to the
needy, for that there is always superaboundance. The Ingua did likewise make
destribution of the cattle as of the lands, which was to number and divide
them; then to appoint the pastures and limits, for the cattle belonging to
the Guacas, and to the Ingua, and to every Town: and therefore one portion of
their revenues was for religion, another for the Ingua, and the third for the
Indians themselves. The like order was observed among the hunters, being
forbidden to take or kill any females. The troops of the Inguas and Guacas,
were in great numbers and very fruitful; for this cause they called them
Capaellama, but those of the common and public, were few in number and of
small value, and therefore they called them Bacchallama. The Ingua took great
care for the preservation of cattle, for that it has been, and is yet, all
the wealth of the Country, and as it is said, they did neither sacrifice any
females, nor kill them, neither did they take them when they hunted. If the
mangie or the scurvie which they call Carache take any beast, they were
presently commanded to bury it quick, lest it should infect others. They did
sheare their cattle in their season, and distributed to every one to spinne
and weave stuffes for the service of his family. They had searchers to examine
if they did employ themselves in these works, and to punish the negligent.
They made stuffes of the wool of the Inguas cattle, for him and for his
family, one sort very fine, which they called Cumbi, and another grosser,
which they likewise called Abasca. There was no certain number of these
stuffes and garments appointed, but what was delivered to every one. The wool
that remained was put into the storehouses, whereof the Spaniards found them
full, and with all other things necessary for the life of man. There are few men
of judgment but do admire at so excellent and well settled a government,
seeing the Indians (being neither religious, nor christians) maintained after
their manner, this perfection, nor to hold any thing proper, and to provide
for all their necessities, entertaining with such abundance matters of
religion, and that which concerned their King and Lord.

Of arts and offices which the Indians did exercise. CHAP. 16.
THe Indians of Peru had one perfection, which was, to teach their young
children all arts and occupations necessary for the life of man; for that
there were no particular tradesmen, as amongst us, taylers, shoomakers,
weavers, and the rest, but every one learned what was needful for their
persons and houses, and provided for themselves. All could weave and make
their garments, and therefore the Ingua furnishing them with wool, gave them
clothes. Every man could till the ground, and put it to profit, without hyring
of any laborers. All built their own houses, and the women understood most,
they were not bred up in delights, but served their husbands carefully. Other
arts and trades which were not ordinary and common for the life of man, had
their proper companies and workmen, as goldsmiths, painters, potters, watermen,
and players of instruments. There were also weavers and workmen for exquisite
works, which the noblemen used: but the common people, as has been said, had
in their houses all things necessary, having no need to buy. This continues to
this day, so as they have no need one of another for things necessary: touching
his person and family, as shoes and garments, and for their house, to sow and
reap, and to make iron works, and necessary instruments; the Indians herein
do imitate the institutions of the less ancient, whereof is entreated in the
life of the Fathers. In truth it is a people not greatly covetous, nor
curious, so as they are contented to pass their time quietly, and without
doubt, if they made choice of this manner of life, by election, and not by
custom or nature, we may say that it was a life of great perfection, being apt
to receive the doctrine of the holy Gospel, so contrary an enemy to pride,
covetousnes and delights. But the preachers give not always good example,
according to the doctrine they preach to the Indians. It is worthy
observation, although the Indians be simple in their manner and habites, yet do
we see great diversity amongst the provinces, especially in the attire of
their head, for in some places they carried a long piece of cloth which went
often about, in some places a large piece of cloth, which went but once about,
in some parts as it were little morters or hattes, in some others as it were
high and round bonets, and some like the bottom of sacks, with a thousand
other differences. They had a straight and inviolable law, that no man might
change the fashion of the garments of his province, although he went to live
in another. This the Ingua held to be of great importance for the order and
good government of his realm, and they do observe it to this day, though not
with so great a care as they were accustomed.

Of the Posts and Chasquis the Indians did use. CHAP. 17.
THere were many Posts and couriers which the Ingua maintened throughout his
realm, whom they called Chasquis, and they carried commandments to the
Governors, and returned their advises and advertisements to the Court. These
Chasquis were placed at every course, which was a league and a half one fro an
other in two small houses, where were four Indians of every country, and they
were changed monthly. Having received the packet or message, they ran with
all their force until they had delivered it to the other Chasquis, such as
were to run, being ready and watchful. They ran fifty leagues in a day and
night, although the greatest part of that country be very rough. They served
also to carry such things as the Ingua desired to have with speed. Therefore
they had always seafish in Cusco, of two days old or little more, although it
were above a hundred leagues off. Since the Spaniardes entered, they have used
of these Chasquis, in time of seditions whereof there was great need. Don
Martin the viceroy appointed ordinary posts at every four leagues, to carry
and recarry dispatches, which were very necessary in this realm, though they
run not so swiftly as the auntients did, neither are there so many, yet they
are well paid, and serve as the ordinaries of Spain, to whom they give
letters which they carry four or five leagues.

Of the justice, laws, and punishments which the Inguas have established, and
of their marriages. CHAP. 18.
EVen as such as had done any good service in war, or in the government of
the commonweal were honored and recompensed with public charges, with lands
given them in proper, with arms and titles of honor, and in marrying wives of
the Inguas lineage: Even so they gave severe punishments to such as were
disobedient and offenders. They punished murder, these and adultery, with
death, and such as committed incest with ascendants or descendants in direct
line, were likewise punished with death. But they held it no adultery to have
many wives or concubines, neither were the women subject to the punishment of
death, being found with any other, but only she that was the true and lawful
wife, with whom they contracted marriage; for they had but one whom they did
wed and receive with a particular solempnitie and ceremony, which was in this
manner: the bridegroom went to the brides house, and led her from thence with
him, having first put an Ottoya upon her foot. They call the shoe which they
use in those parts Ottoya, being open like to the Franciscan Friars. If the
bride were a maid, her Ottoya was of wool, but if she were not, it was of
reeds. All his other wives and concubines did honor and serve this as the
lawful wife, who alone after the decease of her husband carried a mourning weed
of black, for the space of a year; neither did she marry until that time
were past; and commonly she was younger than her husband. The Ingua himself
with his own hand gave this woman to his Governors and captains: and the
Governors or Caciques, assembled all the yongmen and maids, in one place of
the City, where they gave to every one his wife with the aforesaid ceremony,
in putting on the Ottoya, and in this manner they contracted their marriages.
If this woman were found with any other than her husband, she was punished
with death, and the adulterer likewise: and although the husband pardoned them,
yet were they punished, although dispensed withal from death. They inflicted
the like punishment on him that did committe^^^ with his mother, grandmother,
daughter, or grandchilde* for it was not prohibited for them to ma^^^ together,
or to have of their other kinsfolks for concubines; only the first degree was
defended, neither did they allow the brother to have the company of his sister,
wherein they of Peru were very much deceived, believing that their Inguas and
noble men might lawfully contract marriage with their sisters, yea by father
and mother: for in truth it has been always held unlawful among the
Indians, and defended to contract in the first degree; which continued until
the time of Topa Ingua Yupangui father to Guaynacapa, and grandfather to
Atahualpa, at such time as the Spaniards entered Peru, for that Topa Ingua
Yupangui, was the first that brake this custom, marrying with Mamaoello, his
sister by the fathers side, decreeing that the Inguas might marry with their
sisters by the fathers side, and no other.

This he did, and by that marriage he had Guaynacapa, and a daughter called
Coya Cussillimay: finding himself at the point of death, he commanded his
children by father and mother to marry together, and gave permission to the
noble men of his country, to marry with their sisters by the fathers side. And
for that this marriage was unlawful, and against the law of nature, God would
bring to an end this kingdom of the I^guas, during the reign of Guascar
Ingua, and Atalmalpa Ingua, which was the fruit that sprang from this
marriage. Whosoever will more exactly understand the manner of marriages among the
Indians of Peru, let him read the Treatise Polo has written, at the request
of Don Ieronimo Loaisa Archbishop of Kings: which P^^^ made a very curious
search, as he has done of di^ers other things at the Indies. The which
importes much to be known to avoyde the error and inconveniences whereinto
many fall (which know not which is the lawful wife or the concubine among the
Indians) causing the Indian that is baptized to marry with his concubine,
leaving the lawful wife: thereby also we may see the small reason some have
had, that pretended to say, that we ought to ratify the marriage of those
that were baptized, although they were brother and sister. The contrary has
been determined by the provincial Synod of Lyma, with much reason, seeing
among the Indians themselves this kind of marriage is unlawful.

Of the Original of the Inguas Lords of Peru, with their Conquests and
Victories. CHAP. 19.
BY the commandment of Don Phillip the Catholic King, they have made the most
dilligent and exact search that could be, of the beginning, customs, and
privileges of the Inguas, the which was not so perfectly done as was desired:
for that the Indians had no written records: yet they have recovered that
which I shall write, by means of their Quippos and registers. First there was
not in Peru in old time, any King or Lord to whom all obeyed, but they were
comminalties, as at this day there be in the realm of Chille, and in a manner,
in all the Provinces which the Spaniards have conquered in those western
Indies, except the realm of Mexico. You must therefore understand, that they
have found three manner of governments at the Indies. The first and best, was a
Monarchy, as that of the Inguas, and of Motecuma, although for the most part
they were tyrannous. The second was of Comminalties, where they were governed
by the advice and authority of many, which are as it were Counselors. These
in time of war, made choice of a Captain, to whom a whole Nation or
Province did obey, and in time of peace, every Town or Comminaltie did rule
and govern themselves, having some chief men whom the vulgar did respect, and
sometimes, (though not often,) some of them assemble together about matters of
importance, to consult what they should think necessary. The third kind of
government, is altogether barbarous, composed of Indians without law, without
King, and without any certain place of abode, but go in troops like savage
beasts. As far as I can conceive, the first inhabitants of the Indies, were
of this kind, as at this day a great part of the Bresillians, Chiraguanas,
Chunchos, Ysoycingas Pilcocones, and the greatest part of the Floridians, and
all the Chichimaquas in new Spain. Of this kind the other sort of government
by Comminalties was framed, by the industry and wisdom of some amongst them,
in which there is some more order, holding a more stayed place, as at this day
those of Auracano, and of Te^^pell in Chille, and in the new kingdom of
Grenado, the Moscas, and the Ottomittes in new Spain: and in all these there
is less fiercenes and incivilitie, and much more quiet then in the rest. Of
this kind, by the valor and knowledge of some excellent men, grew the other
government more mighty and potent, which did institute a Kingdom and
Monarchy. It appears by their registers, that their government has continued
above three hundred years, but not fully four, although their Seigniorie for
a long time, was not above five or (...) leagues compass about the City of
Cusco: their original and beginning was in the valley of Cusco, where by
little and little they conquered the lands which we call Peru, passing beyond
Quitto, unto the river of Pasto toward the North, stretching even unto
Chille, toward the South, which is almost a thousand leagues in length. It
extended in breadth unto the South sea toward the West, and unto the great
champains which are on the other side of the Andes, where at this day is to be
scene the Castle which is called the Pucara of the Ingua, the which is a
fortress built for the defense of the frontire toward the East. The Inguas
advanced no farther on that side, for the abundance of water, marshes, lakes,
and rivers, which run in those parts. These Inguas passed all the other
Nations of Amarica, in policy and government, and much more in valor and
arms, although the Canaries which were their mortal enemies, and favored the
Spaniardes, would never confess it, nor yield them this advantage: so as even
at this day, if they fall into any discourse or comparisons, and that they be a
little chased and incensed, they kill one another by thousands upon this
quarrel, which are the most valiant, as it has happened in Cusco. The
practice and means which the Inguas had to make themselves Lords of all this
Country, was in faining that since the general deluge, (whereof all the
Indians have knowledge,) the world had been preserved, restored, and peopled
by these Inguas, and that seven of them came forth of the cave of Pacaricambo,
by reason whereof, all other men ought them tribute and vassalage, as their
progenitors. Besides they said and affirmed, that they alone held the true
religion, and knew how God should be served and honored: and for this cause
they should instruct all men. It is a strange thing, the ground they give to
their customs and ceremonies. There were in Cusco above four hundred
Oratories, as in a holy land, and all places were filled with their mysteries:
As they continued in the conquests of Provinces, so they brought in the like
ceremonies and customs. In all this realm the chief idols they did worship,
were Viracocha, Pach^yac^achic, which signifies the Creator of the world, and
after him, the Sun. And therefore they said, that the Sun received his
virtue and being from the Creator, as the other idols do, and that they were
intercessors to him.

Of the first Ingua, and his Successors. CHAP. 20.
THe first man which the Indians report to be the beginning and first of the
Inguas, was Mangocapa, whom they imagine, after the deluge, to have issued
forth of the cave of Tambo, which is from Cusco about five or six leagues. They
say that he gave beginning to two principal races or families of the Inguas,
the one was called Hanancusco, and the other Vrincusco: of the first came the
Lords which subdued and governed this Province, and the first whom they make
the head and steame of this family, was called Ingaroca, who founded a family
or Aillo, as they call them, named Vicaquiquirao. This although he were no
great Lord, was served notwithstanding in vessel of gold and silver. And
dying, he appointed that all his treasure should be employed for the service of
his body, and for the feeding of his family. His successor did the like: and
this grew to a general custom, as I have said, that no Ingua might inherit
the goods and house of his predecessor, but did build a new palace. In the
time of this Inguar^ca, the Indians had images of gold; and to him succeeded
Yaguarguaque, a very old man: they say, he was called by this name, which
signifies tears of blood, for that being once vanquished and taken by his
enemies, for grief and sorrow he wept blood. He was buried in a village
called Paullo, which is upon the way to Omasugo: he founded a family called
Aocuillidanaca. To him succeeded his son Viracocha Ingua, who was very rich,
and made much vessel of gold and silver: he founded the lineage or family of
C^copanaca. GonZales PiZarre sought out his body, for the report of the great
treasure was buried with him, who after he had cruelly tormented many Indians,
in the end he found it in Xaquixaquana, whereas they said PiZarrewas afterward
vanquished, taken, and executed by the President Guasca. Gonsales Pizarre,
caused the body of Viracocha Ingua to be burnt; the Indians did afterward
take the ashes, the which they preserved in a small vessel, making great
sacrifices thereunto, until Pollo did reform it, and other idolatries which
they committed upon the bodies of their other Inguas, the which he suppressed
with an admirable diligence and dexterity, drawing these bodies out of their
hands, being whole, and much imbalmed, whereby he extinguished a great number
of idolatries which they committed. The Indians took it ill, that the Ingua
did entitle himself Viracocha, which is the name of their God: and he to
excuse himself, gave them to understand, that the same Viracocha appeared to
him in his dream, commanding him to take this name. To him succeeded Pachacuti
Ingua Yupangui, who was a very valiant conqueror, a great Politician, and an
inventer of a great part of the traditions and superstitions of their
idolatry, as I will presently show.

Of Pachacuti Ingua, Yupangui, and what happened in his time unto Guaynacapa.
CHAP. 21.
PAchacuti Ingua Yupangui, rained seventy years, and conquered many Countries.
The beginning of his conquests, was by means of his eldest brother, who having
held the government in his fathers time, and made war by his consent, was
over-throwne in a battle against the Changuas, a Nation which inhabites the
valley of Andaguayllas, thirty or forty leagues from Cusco, upon the way to
Lima. This elder brother thus defeated, retired himself with few men. The
which Ingua Yupangui, his younger brother seeing, devised and gave forth, that
being one day alone and melancholy, Viracocha the Creator spoke to him,
complaining, that though he were universal Lord and Creator of all things, and
that he had made the heaven, the Sun, the world, and men, and that all was
under his command, yet did they not yield him the obedience they ought, but
contrariwise did equally honor and worship the Sun, Thunder, Earth, and
other things, which had no virtue but what he imparted unto them: giving him to
understand, that in heaven where he was, they called him Viracocha
Pachayachachic, which signifies universal Creator; and to the end the Indians
might believe it to be true, he doubted not although he were alone, to faise men
under this title, which should give him victory against the Changuas, although
they were then victorious, and in great numbers; and make himself Lord of
those realms, for that he would send him men to his aid invisibly, whereby he
preva^led in such sort, that under this color and conceit, he began to
assemble a great number of people, whereof he made a mighty army, with the
which he obtained the victory, making himself Lord of the whole Realm,
taking the government from his father and brother. Then afterward he
conquered and overthrew the Changuas, and from that time commanded that
Viracocha should be held for universal Lord, and that the images of the Sun
and Thunder, should do him reverence and honor: And from that time they
began to set the image of Viracocha above that of the Sun and Thunder, and
the rest of the Guacas. And although this Ingua Yupangui had given farms,
lands, and cattle to the Sun, Thunder, and other Guacas, yet did he not
dedicate any thing to Viracocha, saying, that he had no need, being universal
Lord and Creator of all things. He informed his soldiers after this absolute
victory of the Changuas, that it was not they alone that had conquered them,
but certain bearded men, whom Viracocha had sent him, and that no man might
see them but himself, which were since converted into stones; it was therefore
necessary to seek them out, whom he would know well. By this means he
gathered together a multitude of stones in the mountains, whereof he made
choice, placing them for Guacas, or Idols they worshipped and sacrificed unto;
they called them P^ruraucas, and carried them to the war with great devotion,
believing for certain, that they had gotten the victory by their help. The
imagination and fiction of this Ingua was of such force, that by the means
thereof he obtained goodly victories: He founded the family called
Yuacapanaca, and made a great image of gold, which he called Indijllapa,
which he placed in a brancard of gold, very rich, and of great price, of the
which gold the Indians took great store to carry to Xaxamalca, for the
liberty and ransom of Atahulpa, when the Marquise Francis PiZarre held him
prisoner. The Licentiate Polo found in his house in Cusco, his servants and
Mamacomas, which did service to his memory, and found that the body had been
transported from Patallacta to Totocache, where the Spaniards have since
founded the parish of Saint Blaise. This body was so whole and preserved with a
certain rosin, that it seemed alive, he had his eyes made of a fine cloth of
gold, so artificially set, as they seemed very natural eyes, he had a blow
with a stone on the head, which he had received in the wars, he was all gray
and hairy, having lost no more hair than if he had died but the same day,
although it were seaventy and eight years since his decease. The foresaid Polo
sent this body with some others of the Inguas, to the city of Lima, by the
viceroyes command which was the Marquise of Canette, and the which was very
necessary to root out the idolatry of Cusco. Many Spaniards have seen this
body with others in the hospital of Saint Andrew, which the Marquise built,
but they were much decayed. Don Phillip Caritopa, who was grandchild or great
grandchild to this Ingua, affirmed that the treasure he left to his family
was great, which should be in the power of the Yanaconas, Amaro, Toto, and
others. To this Ingua succeeded Topaingua Yupangui, to whom his son of the same
name succeeded, who founded the family called Cupac Aillo.

Of the greatest and most famous Ingua called Guaynacapa. CHAP. 22.
TO this latter Ingua succeeded Guaynacapa, which is to say, a young man, rich
and valiant, and so was he in truth more than any of his predecessors, or
successors. He was very wise, planting good orders thorowout his whole realm,
he was a bold and resolute man, valiant, and very happy in war. He
therefore obtained great victories, and extended his dominions much farther
then all his predecessors had done before him; he died in the realm of Quitto,
the which he had conquered, four hundred leagues distant from his court. The
Indians opened him after his decease, leaving his heart and entrails in
Quitto, the body was carried to Cusco, the which was placed in the renowned
temple of the Sun. We see yet to this day many cawseies, buildings,
fortresses, and notable works of this king: he founded the family of Teme
Bamba. This Guaynacapa was worshipped of his subjects for a god, being yet
alive, as the old men affirm, which was not done to any of his
predecessors. When he died, they slew a thousand persons of his household, to
serve him in the other life, all which died willingly for his service, insomuch
that many of them offered themselves to death, besides such as were appointed:
his riches and treasure was admirable. And forasmuch as the Spaniards entered
soon after his death, the Indians labored much to conceal all, although a
great part thereof was carried to Xaxamalca, for the ransom of Atahulpa his
son. Some worthy of credit affirm that he had above three hundred sons
and grandchildren in Cusco. His mother called Mamaoella was much esteemed
amongst them. Polo sent her body with that of Guaynacapa very well imbalmed to
Lima, rooting out infinite idolatries. To Guaynacapa succeeded in Cusco a son
of his called Titocussigualpa, who since was called Guaspar Ingua, his body was
burned by the captains of Atahulpa, who was likewise son to Guaynacapa, and
rebelled in Quitto against his brother, marching against him with a mighty
army. It happened that Quisquits and Chilicuchi captains to Atahulpa, took
Guaspar Ingua in the city of Cusco, being received for Lord and king (for
that he was the lawful successor) which caused great sorrow throughout all
his kingdom, especially in his Court. And as always in their necessities they
had recourse to sacrifices, finding themselves unable to set their Lord at
liberty, as well for the great power the captains had that took him, as
also, for the great army that came with Atahulpa, they resolved (some say by
the commandment of this Ingua) to make a great and solemn sacrifice to
Viracocha Pachayachachic, which signifies universal Creator, desiring him,
that since they could not deliver their Lord, he would send men from heaven to
deliver him from prison. And as they were in this great hope, upon their
sacrifice, news came to them, that a certain people come by sea, was landed,
and had taken Atahulpa prisoner. Heerevpon they called the Spaniards
Viracochas, believing they were men sent from God, as well for the small number
they were to take Atahulpa in Xaxamalca, as also, for that it chanced after
their sacrifice done to Viracocha, and thereby they began to call the Spaniards
Viracochas, as they do at this day. And in truth, if we had given them good
example, and such as we ought, these Indians had well applied it, in saying
they were men sent from God. It is a thing very well worthy of consideration,
how the greatness and providence of God, disposed of the entry of our men at
Peru, which had been impossible, were not the dissension of the two brethren
and their partisans, and the great opinion they had of christians, as of men
sent from heaven, bound (by the taking of the Indians country) to labor to
win souls unto Almighty God.

Of the last Successors Inguas. CHAP. 23.
THe rest of this subject is handled at large by the Spanish Writers in the
histories of the Indies, and for that it is not my purpose, I will speak only
of the succession of the Inguas. Atahulpa being dead in Xaxamalca, and Guascar
in Cusco, and Francis Pizarre with his people having seized on the realm,
Mangocapa son to Guaynacapa besieged them in Cusco very straightly: but in
the end he abandoned the whole Country, and retired himself to Vilca Bamba,
where he kept himself in the mountains, by reason of the rough and difficult
access, and there the successors Inguas remained, until Amaro, who was taken
and executed in the market place of Cusco, to the Indians incredible grief and
sorrow, seeing justice done upon him publicly whom they held for their
Lord. After which time, they imprisoned others of the lineage of these Inguas.
I have known Don Charles grandchild to Guaynacapa, and son to Polo, who was
baptized, and always favored the Spaniards against Mangocapa his brother,
when the Marquise of Canette governed in this Country, Sarritopaingua, went
from Vilcabamba, and came upon assurance to the city of Kings, where there was
given to him the valley of Yucay, and other things, to whom succeeded a
daughter of his. Behold the succession which is known at this day of that
great and rich family of the Inguas, whose reign continued above three
hundred years, wherein they reckon eleaven successors, until it was wholly
extinguished. In the other lineage of Vrincusco, which (as we have said before)
had his beginning likewise from the first Mangocapa, they reckon eight
successors in this sort: To Mangocapa succeeded Cinchoraca, to him Capac
Yupangui, to him Lluqui Yupangui, to him Maytacapaest Tarcogumam, unto whom
succeeded his son, whom they name not, to this son succeeded Don Iean Tambo,
Maytapanaca. This suffices for the original and succession of the Inguas,
that governed the land of Peru, with that that I have spoken of their Laws
Government, and manner of life.

Of the manner of the Mexicaines commonweal. CHAP. 24.
ALthough you may see by the history which shall be written of the kingdom,
succession, and beginning of the Mexicaines, their manner of commonweal and
government, yet will I speak briefly what I shall think fit in general to
be most observed: Whereof I will discourse more amply in the history. The
first point whereby we may judge the Mexicaine government to be very politic,
is the order they had and kept inviolable in the election of their king: for
since their first, called Acamapach, unto their last, which was Motecuma, the
second of that name, there came none to the crown by right of succession, but
by a lawful nomination and election. This election in the beginning was by the
voice of the commons, although the chief men managed it. Since in the time of
Iscoalt the fourth king, by the advice and order of a wise and valiant man,
called Tlacael, there were four certain Electours appointed, which (with two
lords or kings subject to the Mexicaine, the one of Tescuco, and the other of
Tucuba) had power to make this election. They did commonly choose yoongmen for
their kings, because they went always to the wars, and this was in a manner
the chief cause why they desired them so. They had a special regard that they
should be fit for the wars, and take delight and glory therein. After the
election they made two kinds of feasts, the one in taking possession of the
royal estate, for the which they went to the Temple, making great ceremonies
and sacrifices upon the harth, called Divine, where there was a continual
fire before the Altar of the idol, and after some Rhethoritians practiced
therein, made many Orations and Speeches. The other feast, and the most
solemn, was at his coronation, for the which he must first overcome in
battle, and bring a certain number of captives, which they must sacrifice to
their gods; he entered in triumph with great pomp, making him a solemn
reception, as well they of the Temple, who went all in procession, sounding on
sundry sorts of instruments, giving incense, and singing like Secular men, as
also the Courtiers, who came forth with their devises to receive the victorious
king. The Crown or royal ensign was before like to a Myter, and behind it
was cut, so as it was not round, for the fore part was higher, and did rise
like a point. The king of Tescuco had the privilege to crown the king of
Mexico. The Mexicaines have been very duetifull and loyal unto their kings:
and, it has not been known that they have practiced any treason against
them; only their Histories report, that they sought to poison their king
called Ticocic, being a coward, and of small account: but it is not found that
there has been any dissentions or partialities amongst them for ambition,
though it be an ordinary thing in Comminalties: but contrariwise they report,
as you shall see hereafter, that a man, the best of the Mexicaines, refused
this realm, seeming unto him to be very expedient for the Commonweal to have
an other king. In the beginning when the Mexicaines were but poor and weak,
the kings were very moderate in their expenses and in their Court, but as they
increased in power, they increased likewise in pomp and state, until they
came to the greatness of Motecuma, who if he had had no other thing but his
house of beasts and birds, it had been a proud thing, the like whereof has
not been seen: for there was in this house all sorts of fish, birds of
Xacamamas, and beasts, as in an other Noah's Arc, for sea fish, there were
pooles of salt water, and for river fish, lakes of fresh water, birds that do
prey were fed, and likewise wild beasts in great abundance: there were
very many Indians employed for the keeping of these beasts: and when he found
an impossibility to nourish any sort of fish, foul, or wild beast, he
caused the image or likeness to be made, richly cut in precious stones,
silver, or gold, in marble, or in stone: and for all sorts of
entertainements, he had his several houses and palaces, some of pleasure,
others of sorrow and mourning, and others to treat of the affairs of the
realm. There was in this palace many chambers, according to the quality of
noble men that served him, with a strange order and distinction.

Of the titles and dignities the Indians used. CHAP. 25.
THe Mexicaines have been very curious, to divide the degrees and dignities
amongst the Noble men and Lords, that they might distinguish them to whom they
were to give the greatest honor. The dignity of these four Electors was the
greatest, and most honorable, next to the king, and they were chosen presently
after the kings election. They were commonly brothers, or very near kinsmen to
the king, and were called Tlacohecalcalt, which signifies prince of darts, the
which they cast, being a kind of arms they use much. The next dignity to
this, were those they do call Tlacatecati, which is to say, circumcisers or
cutters of men. The third dignity were of those which they called EZuahuacalt,
which signifies a sheader of blood. All the which Titles and Dignities were
exercised by men of war. There was another a fourth entitled, Tlilancalqui,
which is as much to say, as Lord of the black house, or of darkness, by
reason of certain incke wherewith the Priests anointed themselves, and did
serve in their idolatries. All these four dignities were of the great
Counsel, without whose advise the king might not do any thing of importance:
and the king being dead, they were to choose another in his place out of one of
those four dignities. Besides these, there were other Counsels and Audiences,
and some say there were as many as in Spain, and that there were diverse seats
and jurisdictions, with their Counselors and Judges of the Court, and others
that were under them, as Corrigidors, chief Judges, captains of Justice,
Lievetenants, and others, which were yet inferior to these, with a very goodly
order. All which depended on the four first Princes that assisted the king.
These four only had authority and power to condemn to death, and the rest
sent them instructions of the sentences they had given. By means whereof they
gave the king to understand what had passed in his Realm.

There was a good order and settled policy for the revenues of the Crown, for
there were officers divided throughout all the provinces, as Receivers and
Treasurers, which received the Tributes and royal revenews. And they carried
the Tribute to the Court, at the least every month; which Tribute was of all
things that do grow or engender on the land, or in the water, as well of
jewels and apparel, as of mear. They were very careful for the well
ordering of that which concerned their religion, superstition, and idolatries:
and for this occasion there were a great number of Ministers, to whom charge
was given to teach the people the custom and ceremonies of their Law.
Heerevppon one day a christian Priest made his complaint that the Indians were
no good Christians, and did not profit in the law of God; an old Indian
answered him very well to the purpose in these terms: Let the Priest (said
he) employ as much care and diligence to make the Indians christians, as the
ministers of Idolles did to teach them their ceremonies; for with half that
care they will make us the best christians in the world, for that the law of
Jesus Christ is much better; but the Indians learn it not, for want of men to
instruct them. Wherein he spoke the very truth, to our great shame and
confusion.

How the Mexicaines made War, and of their Orders of Knighthood CHAP. 26.
THe Mexicaines gave the first place of honor to the profession of arms, and
therefore the Noblemen are their chief soldiers, and others that were not
noble, by their valor and reputation gotten in wars, came to dignities and
honors, so as they were held for noblemen. They gave goodly recompenses to
such as had done valiantly, who inioyed priviledge^ that none else might have,
the which did much encourage them. Their arms were of rasors of sharp cutting
flints, which they set on either side of a staff, which was so furious a
weapon, as they affirmed that with one blow, they would cut off the neck of a
horse. They had strange and heavy clubbes, lances, fashioned like pikes, and
other manner of darts to cast, wherein they were very expert; but the greatest
part of their combat was performed with stones. For defensive arms they had
little rondaches or targets, and some kind of morions or head-peeces environed
with feathers. They were clad in the skins of Tigres, Lions, and other savage
beasts. They came presently to hands with the enemy, and were greatly
practiced to run and wrestle, for their chief manner of combat, was not so
much to kill, as to take captives, the which they used in their sacrifices, as
has been said. Motecuma set Knighthood in his highest splendour, ordaining
certain military orders, as Commanders, with certain marks and ensigns.
The most honorable amongst the Knights, were those that carried the Crown
of their hair, tied with a little red ribband, having a rich plume of
feathers, from the which, did hang branches of feathers upon their shoulders,
and roules of the same. They carried so many of these rowles, as they had done
worthy deeds in war. The King himself was of this order, as may be seen in
Chapultepec, where Motecuma and his sons were attyred with those kinds of
feathers, cut in the rock, the which is worthy the sight. There was another
order of Knighthood, which they called the Lions and the Tigres, the which were
commonly the most valiant and most noted in war, they went always with their
marks and armories. There were other Knights, as the gray Knights, the which
were not so much respected as the rest: they had their hair cut round about
the ear. They went to the war with marks like to the other Knights, yet they
were not armed, but to the girdle, and the most honorable were armed all over.
All Knights might carry gold and silver, and wear rich cotton, use painted
and gilt vessel, and carry shoes after their manner: but the common people
might use none but earthen vessel, neither might they carry shoes, nor attire
themselves but in Nequen, the which is a gross stuff. Every order of these
Knights had his lodging in the palace noted with their marks; the first was
called the Princes lodging, the second of Eagles, the third of Lions and
Tigres, and the fourth of the gray Knights. The other common officers, were
lodged underneath in meaner lodgings: if any one lodged out of his place, he
suffered death.

Of the great order and diligence the Mexicaines used to instruct their youth.
CHAP. 27.
THere is nothing that gives me more cause to admire, nor that I find more
worthy of commendations and memory, then the order and care the Mexicaines had
to nourish their youth: for they knew well, that all the good hope of a
commonweal, consisted in the nurture and institution of youth, whereof Plato
treates amply in his books De Legibus: and for this reason they labored and
took pains to sequester their children from delights and liberties, (which
are the two plagues of this age,) employing them in honest and profitable
exercises. For this cause there was in their Temples, a private house for
childeren, as schools, or colleges, which was separate from that of the young
men and maids of the Temple, whereof we have discoursed at largee. There were
in these schools a great number of children, whom their fathers did willingly
bring thither, and which had teachers and masters to instruct them in all
commendable exercises, to be of good behavior, to respect their superiors, to
serve and obey them, giving them to this end, certain precepts and
instructions. And to the end they might be pleasing to Noblemen, they taught
them to sing and dance, and did practice them in the exercise of war; some to
shoot an arrow, to cast a dart or a staff burnt at the end, and to handle
well a target and a sword. They suffered them not to sleep much, to the end
they might accustom themselves to labor in their youth, and were not men
given to delights. Besides the ordinary number of these children, there were
in the same colleges, other children of Lords and Noblemen, the which were
instructed more privately. They brought them their meat and ordinary from
their houses, and were recommended to ancients and old men to have care over
them, who continually did advise them to be virtuous and to live chastely; to
be sober in their diet, to fast, and to march gravely, and with measure. They
were accustomed to exercise them to travel, and in laborious exercises: and
when they see them instructed in all these things, they did carefully look
into their inclination: if they found any one addicted to the war, being of
sufficient years, they sought all occasions to make trial of them, sending
them to the war, under color to carry victuals and munition to the
soldiers, to the end they might there see what passed, and the labor they
suffered. And that they might abandon all fear, they were laden with heavy
burdens, that showing their courage therein, they might more easily be
admitted into the company of soldiers. By this means it happened, that many
went laden to the Army, and returned Captains with marks of honor. Some of
them were so desirous to be noted, as they were either taken, or slain: and
they held it less honorable to remain a prisoner. And therefore they sought
rather to be cut in pieces, then to fall captives into their enemies hands. See
how Noblemens children that were inclined to the wars were employed. The
others that had their inclination to matters of the Temple; and to speak after
our manner, to be Ecclesiastical men, having attained to sufficient years, they
were drawn out of the college, and placed in the temple, in the lodging
appointed for religious men, and then they gave them the orders of
Ecclesiastical men. There had they prelates and masters, to teach them that
which concerned their profession, where they should remain being destined
thereunto. These Mexicaines took great care to bring up their children: if at
this day they would follow this order, in building of houses and colleges for
the instruction of youth, without doubt Christianity should flourish much
amongst the Indians. Some godly persons have begun, and the King with his
Counsel have favored it: but for that it is a matter of no profit, they
advance little, and proceed coldly. God open our eyes, that we may see it to
our shame, seeing that we Christians do not that which the children of darkness
did to their perdition, wherein we forget our duties.

Of the Indians feasts and dances. CHAP. 28.
FOrasmuch as it is a thing which partly dependes of the good government of the
Commonweal, to have some plays and recreations when time serves; it shall
not be from the purpose, to relate what the Indians did herein, especially the
Mexicaines. We have not discovered any Nation at the Indies, that live in
comminalties, which have not their recreations, in plays, dances, and
exercises of pleasure. At Peru I have seen plays in manner of combats, where
the men of both sides were sometimes so chafed, that often their Paella (which
was the name of this exercise,) fell out to be dangerous. I have also seen
diverse sorts of dances, wherein they did counterfeit and represent certain
trades and offices, as sheepheards, laborers, fishers, and hunters, and
commonly they made all those dances, with a very grave sound and pase: there
were other dances and maskes, which they called Guacones, whose actions were
pure representations of the devil. There were also men that dance on the
shoulders one of another, as they do in Portugal, the which they call Paellas,
The greatest part of these dances, were superstitions, and kinds of
idolatries: for that they honored their idols and Guacas in that manner. For
this reason the Prelates have labored to take from them these dances, all they
could: but yet they suffer them, for that part of them are but sportes of
recreation, for always they dance after their manner. In these dances, they use
sundry sorts of instruments, whereof, some are like flutes, or little Canons,
others like drums, and others like cornets: but commonly they sing all with
the voice, and first one or two sing the song, then all the rest answer them.
Some of these songs were very wittily composed, containing histories, and
others were full of superstitions, and some were mere follies. Our men that
have conversed among them, have labored to reduce matters of our holy faith to
their tunes, the which has profited well: for that they employ whole days to
rehearse and sing them, for the great pleasure and content they take in their
tunes. They have likewise put our compositions of music into their language,
as Octaves, Songs, and Rondells, the which they have very aptly turned, and in
truth it is a goodly and very necessary means to instruct the people. In Peru,
they commonly called dances, Tagui, in other Provinces, Areittos, and in
Mexico, Mittottes. There has not been in any other place, any such curiosity
of plays and dances, as in new Spain, where at this day we see Indians so
excellent dancers, as it is admirable. Some dance upon a cord, some upon a long
and straight stake, in a thousand sundry sorts, others with the soles of
their feet and their hammes, do handle, cast up and receive again a very
heavy block, which seems incredible but in seeing it. They do make many other
shows of their great agilitie, in leaping, vaulting, and tumbling, sometimes
bearing a great and heavy burden, sometimes enduring blows able to break a
bar of iron. But the most usual exercise of recreation among the Mexicaines
is the solemn Mittotte, and that is a kind of dance they held so brave and
so honorable, that the king himself daunced, but not ordinarily, as the king
Don Pedro of Arragon with the Barber of Valencia. This dance or Mittotte was
commonly made in the Courts of the Temple, and in those of the kings houses,
which were more spacious. They did place in the midst of the Court two
instruments, one like to a drum, and the other like a barrel made of one
piece, and hollow within, which they set upon the form of a man, a beast, or
upon a pillar.

These two instruments were so well accorded together, that they made a good
harmony: and with these instruments they made many kinds of Aires, and Songs.
They did all sing and dance to the sound and measure of these instruments, with
so goodly an order and accord, both of their feet and voices, as it was a
pleasant thing to behold. In these daunces they made two circles or wheels,
the one was in the midst near to the instruments, wherein the Auntients and
Noblemen did sing and dance with a soft and slow motion; and the other was
of the rest of the people round about them, but a good distance from the first,
wherein they daunced two and two more lightly, making diverse kinds of pases,
with certain leapes to the measure. All which together made a very great
circle. They attired themselves for these dances with their most precious
apparel and iewelles, every one according to his ability, holding it for a
very honorable thing: for this cause they learned these daunces from their
infancy. And although the greatest part of them were done in honor of their
Idolles, yet was it not so instituted, as has bin said, but only as a
recreation and pastime for the people. Therefore it is not convenient to take
them quite from the Indians, but they must take good heed they mingle not their
superstitions amongst them. I have seen this Mittotte, in the court of the
Church of Topetzotlan, a village seven leagues from Mexico: and in my opinion,
it was a good thing to busy the Indians upon festival days, seeing they have
need of some recreation: and because it is public, and without the prejudice
of any other, there is less inconvenience, than in others which may be done
privately by themselves, if they took away these. We must therefore conclude,
following the counsel of pope Gregory, that it was very convenient to leave unto
the Indians, that which they have had usually of custom, so as they be not
mingled nor corrupt with their ancient errors, and that their feasts and
pastimes may be to the honor of God and of the Saints, whose feasts they
celebrate. This may suffice in general of the manners and politic customs of
the Mexicaines. And as for their beginning, increase, and Empire, for that it
is an ample matter, and will be pleasant to understand from the beginning, we
will entreat thereof in the Book following.

THE SEVENTH BOOK of the Natural and Moral History of the Indies.
That it is profitable to understand the acts and geasts of the Indians,
especially of the Mexicaines. CHAP. 1.
EVery History well written is profitable to the reader: For as the Wise man
says, That which has bin, is, Eccles. ^.
and that which shall be, is that which has been: Humane things have much
resemblance in themselves, and some grow wi^e by that which happneth to
others. There is no Nation, how barbarous soever, that have not something in
them, good, and worthy of commendation; nor Commonweal so well ordered, that
has not something blameworthy, and to be ^^n^roll^d. If therefore there were
no other fruit in the Historic and Narration of the deeds and gests of the
Indians, but this common utility, to be a Relation or Histori^ of things, the
which in the effect of truth have happened, it deserves to be received as a
profitable thing, neither ought it to be rejected, for that it concerns the
Indians. As we see that those Authors that treat of natural things, write not
only of generous beasts, notable and rare plants, and of precious stones, but
also of wild beasts, common herbs, and base and vulgar stones, for that there
is always in them some properties worthy observation. If therefore there were
nothing else in this Discourse, but that it is a History, and no fables nor
fictions, it were no unwoorthy subject to be written, or read. There is yet an
other more particular reason, which is, that we ought herein to esteem that
which is worthy of memory, both for that it is a Nation little esteemed, and
also a subject different from that of our Europe, as these Nations be, wherein
we should take most pleasure and content, to understand the ground of their
beginning, their manner of life, with their happy and unhappy adventures. And
this subject is not only pleasant and agreeable, but also profitable,
especially to such as have the charge to rule and govern them; for the
knowledge of their acts invites us to give credit, and does partly teach
how they ought to be entreated: yea it takes away much of that common and
foolish contempt wherein they of Europe hold them, supposing that those
Nations have no feeling of reason. For in truth we can not clear this error
better, than by the true report of the acts and deeds of this people. I will
therefore as briefly as I can, entreat of the beginning, proceedings and
notable deeds of the Mexicaines, whereby we may know the time and the
disposition that the high God would choose, to send unto these Nations the
light of the Gospel of Jesus Christ his only son our Lord, whom I beseech to
second our small labor, that it may be to the glory of his Divine greatness,
and some profit to these people, to whom he has imparted the law of his
holy gospel.

Of the ancient Inhabitants of New Spain, and how the Navatlacas came thither.
CHAP. 2.
THe ancient and first Inhabitants of those provinces, which we call New
Spain, were men very barbarous and savage, which lived only by hunting, for
this reason they were called Chichimecas. They did neither sow nor till the
ground, neither lived they together; for all their exercise was to hunt,
wherein they were very expert. They lived in the roughest parts of the
mountains beastlike, without any policy, and they went all naked. They
hunted wild beasts, hares, connies, weezles, mowles, wild cattes, and birds;
yea unclean beasts, as snakes, lizards, locusts and worms, whereon they fed,
with some herbs and roots. They slept in the mountains, in caves and in
bushes, and the wives likewise went a hunting with their husbands, leaving
their young children in a little panier of reeds, tied to the boughs of a tree,
which desired not to suck ^ntill they were returned from hunting. They had no
superiors, nor did acknowledge or worship any gods, neither had any manner of
ceremonies or religion.

There is yet to this day in New Spain of this kind of people, which live by
their bows and arrows, the which are very hurtful, for that they gather
together in troops to do mischief, and to rob: neither can the Spaniards
by force or cunning reduce them to any policy or obedience: for having no
towns nor places of residence, to sight with them, were properly to hunt after
savage beasts, which scatter and hide themselves in the most rough and covered
places of the mountains. Such is their manner of living eve^ to this day, in
many Provinces of the Indies. In the Books De procuranda Indiorum salute, they
discourse chiefly of this sort of Indians, where it is said that they are to
be constrained and subjected by some honest force, and that it is necessary
first to teach them, that they are men, and then to be Christians. Some will
say, that those in New Spain, which they call Ottomies, were of this sort,
being commonly poor Indians, inhabiting a rough and barren land, and yet they
are in good numbers, and live together with some order, and such as do know
them, find them no less apt and capable of matters of christian religion, than
others which are held to be more rich and better governed. Coming therefore to
our subject, the Chichimecas and Ottomies which were the first inhabitants of
New Spain, for that they did neither till nor sow the land, they left the
best* and most fertile of the country unpeopled, which, Nations that came from
far did possess, whom they called Navatalcas, for that it was a more civil
and politic Nation; this word signifies a people that speaks well, in re^pect
of other barbarous nations without reason. These second peoplers Navatalcas,
came from other ^arre countries, which lie toward the north, where now they
have discovered a kingdom they call New Mexico.

There are two provinces in this country, the one called AZtlan, which is to
say a place of Herons: the other Tuculhuacan, which signifies a land of such,
whose grandfathers were divine. The Inhabitants of these provinces have their
houses, their lands tilled, gods, customs, and ceremonies, with like order and
government to the Navatalcas, and are divided into seven Tribes or Nations:
and for that they have a custom in this province, that every one of these
linages has his place and private territory. The Navatalcas paint their
beginning and first territory in figure of a cave, and say that they came forth
of seven caves to come and people the land of Mexico, whereof they make
mention in their History, where they paint seven caves and men coming forth
of them. By the supputation of their books, it is above eight hundred years
since these Navatalcas came forth of their country, reducing which to our
account, was about the year of our Lord 720. when they left their country to
come to Mexico, they stayed four score years upon the way; and the cause of
this their long stay in their voyage, was, that their gods (which without doubt
were devils, and spoke visibly unto them) had persuaded them to seek new
lands that had certain signs. And therefore they came discovering the whole
land, to search for these tokens which their Idols had given them; and in
places where they found any good dwellings, they peopled it, and labored the
land, and as they discovered better countries, they left those which they had
first peopled; l^aving still some, especially the aged, sick folks, and the
weary; yea they did plant and build there, whereof we see the remainders at
this day. In the way where they passed, they spent fourscore years in this
manner of leisurely travel, the which they might have done in a month. By
this means they entered the land of Mexico, in the year nine hundred and two,
after our computation.

How the six Linages of Navatlacas peopled the land of Mexico. CHAP. 3.
THese seven Linages I have spoken of, came not forth all together: the first
were the Suchimilcos, which signify a Nation of the seeds of flowers. Those
peopled the banks of the great lake of Mexico toward the South, and did build
a city of their name, and many villages. Long time after came they of the
second lineage called Chalcas, which signifies people of mouths, who also built
a city of their name, dividing their limmits and territories with the
Suchimilcos. The third were the Tepanecans, which signifies people of the
bridge: they did inhabit upon the bank of the lake toward the West, and they
increased so, as they called the chief and Metropolitan of their Province,
AzcapuZalco, which is to say, an Ants nest, and they continued long time
mighty. After them came those that peopled Tescuco, which be those of Culhua,
which is to say, a crooked people: for that in their Country there was a
mountain much bending. And in this sort this lake was environed with these
four Nations, these inhabiting on the East, and the Tepanecas on the North.
These of Tescuco, were held for great Courtiers, for their tongue and
pronountiation is very sweet and pleasant. Then arrived the Tlalluicans, which
signifies men of the Sierre or mountain. Those were the most rude and gross
of all the rest, who finding all the plains about the lake possessed even unto
the Sierre, they passed to the other side of the mountain, where they found a
very fertile, spacious and warm country, where they built many great
villages, calling the Metropolitan of their province Quahunachua, which is as
much to say, as a place that sounds the voice of an Egle, which our common
people call by corruption, Quernavaca, and at this day they call this province,
the Marquisate. Those of the sixth generation, which are the Tlascaltecans,
which is to say, men of bread, passed the mountain toward the east, crossing
all the Sierre, or mountain of Menade, where that famous Vulcan is betwixt
Mexico and the city of Angels, where they did find a good country, making
many buildings. They built many towns and cities, whereof the Metropolitan
was called by their name Tlascala. This is the nation which favored the
Spaniards at their entry, by whos^ help they did win this country, and
therefore to this day they pay no tribute, but enjoy a general exemption. When
all these Nations peopled these countries, the Chinchimecans being the ancient
inhabitants, made no resistance, but fled, and as people amazed, they hid
themselves in the most obscure of the rocks. But those that inhabited on
the other side of the mountain where the Tlascaltecans had planted themselves,
did not suffer them in quiet, as the rest of the Chichimecans had done, but
they put themselves in def^nce to preserve their country, and being giants as
the Histories report, they sought to expel the last comers, but they were
vanquished by the policy of the Tlascaltecans, who counterfetting a peace with
them, they invited them to a great banquet, and when they were busiest in their
drunkenness, there were some laid in ambush, who secretly stole away their
weapons, which were great clubbes, targets, swords of wood, and other suc^
arms. Then did they suddenly set upon them, and the Chichimecas seeking to
defend themselves, they did want their arms, so as they fled to the mountains
and forests adjoining, where they pulled down trees, as if they had been
stalks of lettices. But in the end, the Tluscaltecans being armed, and
marching in order, they defeated all the giants, not leaving one alive. We must
not hold this of the giants to be strange, or a fable; for at this day we
find dead men's bones of an incredible bigness.

When I was in Mexico, in the year of our Lord, one thousand five hundred
eighty six, they found one of those giants buried in one of our farms, which
we call Jesus du Mont, of whom they brought a tooth to be seen, which (without
augmenting) was as big as the fist of a man, and according to this, all the
rest was proportionable, which I saw and admired at his deformed greatness. The
Tlascaltecans by this victory remained peaceable, and so did the rest of the
linages. These six linages did always entertain amity together, marrying
their children one with another, and dividing their limits quietly: then they
studied with an emulation to increase and beautify their commonweal. The
barbarous Chichimecans, seeing what passed, began to use some government,
and to apparel themselves, being ash^med of what had passed: for till then
they had no shame. And having abandoned fear by their communication with these
other people, they began to learn many things of them, building small
cottages, having some policy and government. They did also choose Lords,
whom they did acknowledge for their superiors, by means whereof they did in a
manner quite abandon this brutish life, yet did they always continue in the
Mountains divided from the rest.

Notwithstanding I hold it for certain, that this fear has grown from other
Nations and Provinces of the Indies, who at the first were savage men, who
living only by hunting, piercing the rockie and rough countries, discovering a
new world, the inhabitants whereof were almost like savage beasts, without
coverings or houses, without tilled lands, without cattle, without King, Law,
God, or Reason. Since, others seeking better and new lands, inhabited this
fertile Country, planting pollitike order, and a kind of commonweal,
although it were very barbarous. After the same men, or other Nations, that had
more understanding then the rest, labored to subdue and oppress the less
mighty, establishing Realms and great Empires. So it happened in Mexico, at
Peru, and in some parts where they find Cities and Commonweals planted
among these Barbarians. That which confirms me in my opinion, (whereof I have
amply discoursed in the first book,) that the first inhabitants of the West
Indies came by land, and so by consequence, that the first continent of the
Indies, ioynes with that of Asia, Europe, and Afsrike, and the new world with
the old, although they have not yet discovered any country that touches and
ioynes with the other world; or if there be any sea betwixt the two, it is so
narrow, that wild beasts may easily swim over, and men in small boats. But
leaving this Philosophy, let us return to our history.

Of the Mexicaines departure, of their journey and peopling the Province of
Mechovacan. CHA^. 4.
THree hundred and two years after the former two linages had left their
Country, to inhabit new Spain, the Country being now well peopled, and
reduced to some form of government. Those of the seventh cave or line
arrived, which is the Mexicaine Nation, the which like unto the rest, left the
Province of AZtlan, and Teuculhuacan, a pollitike, courtlike, and warlike
Nation. They did worship the idol VitZliputZli, whereof ample mention has
been made, and the devil that was in this idol spoke, and governed this
Nation easily. This idol commanded them to leave their Country, promising to
make them Princes and Lords over all the Provinces which the other six Nations
did possess, that he would give them a land abounding with gold, silver,
precious stones, feathers, and rich mantells: whereupon they went forth,
carrying their idol with them in a coffer of reeds, supported by four of
their principal priests, with whom he did talk and reveal unto them in
secret, the success of their way and voyage, advising them of what should
happen. He likewise gave them laws, and taught them the customs, ceremonies,
and sacrifices they should observe. They did not advance nor moove without
commandment from this idol. He gave them notice when to march, and when to
stay in any place, wherein they wholly obeyed him. The first thing they did
wheresoever they came, was to build a house or tabernacle for their false god,
which they set always in the midst of their Camp, and there placed the Arc
upon an altar, in the same manner as they have used in the holy Christian
Church. This done, they sowed their land for bread and pulses, which they used:
and they were so addicted to the obedience of their god, that if he commanded
them to gather, they gathered, but if he commanded them to raise their camp,
all was left there for the nourishment of the aged, sick, and weary, which
they lest purposely from place to place, that they might people it, pretending
by this means, that all the land should remain inhabited by their Nation.
This going forth and peregrination of the Mexicaines, will happily seem like
to that of Egypt, and to the way which the children of Israel made, seeing
that they, as well as those, were warned to go forth, and to seek the land of
promise, and both the one, and the other, carried their god for their guide,
consulted with the arc, and made him a tabernacle, and he advised them, giving
them laws and ceremonies, and both the one, and the other, spoke many years
in their voyage to their promised land, where we observe the resemblance of
many other things, as thehistories of the Mexicaines do report, and the holy
scripture testify of the Israelites. And without doubt it is a true thing,
that the Devil the prince of pride, has labored by the superstitions of this
Nation, to counterfaite and imitate that which the most high God did with this
Nation: for as is said before, Satan has a strange desire to compare and make
himself equal with God:so as this mortal enemy has pretended falsely to
usurp what communication and familiarity he has pleased with men. Was there
ever devil found so familiarly conversant with men, as this devil
VitzliputZli? We may well judge what he was, for that there was never seen nor
heard speak of customs more superstitious, nor sacrifices more cruel and
inhumane, then those which he taught them. To conclude, they were invented by
the enemy of mankind. The chief and Captain whom they followed, was called
Mexi, whence came the name of Mexico, and of the Mexicaine Nation. This people
marching thus at leisure, as the other six Nations had done, peopling and
tilling the land in diverse parts, whereof there is yet some shows and ruins:
and after they had endured many travells and dangers, in the end they came to
the Province of Mechovacan, which is as much to say, as a land of fish, for
there is great abundance in goodly great lakes, where contenting themselves
with the situation and temperature of the ground, they resolved to stay there.
Yet having consulted with their idol upon this point, and finding him
unwilling, they demanded license to leave some of their men to people so good a
land, the which he granted, teaching them the means how to do it, which was,
that when the men and women should be entered into a goodly lake called
Pascuaro, to bathe themselves, those which remained on land, should steal away
all their clothes, and then secretly raise their camp, and depart without any
brute, the which was effected, and the rest which dreamt not of this deceit,
(for the pleasure they took in bathing,) coming forth and finding themselves
spoiled of their garments, and thus mocked and left by their companions, they
remained discontented and vexed therewith: so as to make show of the hatred
they had conceived against them, they say that they changed their manner of life
and their language. At the least it is most certain, that the Me^hovacans have
been always enemies to the Mexicaines, and therefore they came to congratulate
the Marquise De Valle, after his victory obtained when he had conquered Mexico.

Of that which happened in Malinalco, Tula, and in Chapultepec. CHAP. 5.
FRom Mechovacan to Mexico, are above fifty leagues, and upon the way is
Malinalco, where it happened, that complaining to their idol of a woman that
was a notable witch, which came in their company carrying the name of their
sister to their god, for that with her wicked arts she did them much harm,
pretending by certain means to be worshipped of them as their goddess: the
idol spoke in a dream to one of those old men that carried the arc,
commanding him to comfort the people, making them new and great promises, and
that they should leave this his sister with her family, being cruel and bad,
raising their camp at midnight in great silence, leaving no show what way
they passed. So they did, and the witch remaining alone with her family, in
this sort peopled a town which they call Malinalco, the inhabitants whereof,
are held for great sorcerers, being issued from such a mother. The Mexicaines
for that they were greatly diminished by these divisions, and by the number of
sick and wearied persons, which they had left behind, meant to repair
themselves, and to stay in a place called Tula, which signifies a place of
reeds. There their idol commanded them to stop a great river, that it might
cover a great plain, and by the means he taught them, they did inviron a
little hill called Coatepec, making a great lake, the which they did plant
^ound about with willows, elmes, sapines and other trees. There began to
breed much fish, and many birds came thither: so as it became a very pleasant
place. The situation of this place, seeming pleasant unto them, and being
wearied with travel, many talked of peopling there, and to pass no farther:
wherewith the devil was much displeased, threatening the priests with death,
commanding them to return the river to her course, saying that he would that
night chastise those which had been disobedient as they had deserved. And as
to do ill is proper to the Devil, and that the divine Justice does often
suffer such to be delivered into the hands of such a tormentor, that choose him
for their god; It chanced that about midnight they heard a great noise in one
part of the camp, and in the morning going thither, they found those dead that
had talked of staying there. The manner of their death, was, that their
stomachs were opened, and their hearts pulled out. And by that means, this
good god taught these poor miserable creatures, the kinds of sacrifices that
pleased him, which was, in opening the stomach, to pull out the heart, as they
have since practiced in their horrible sacrifices. Seeing this punishment, and
that the plain was dried, the lake being emptied, they asked counsel of their
god what to do, who commanded them to pass on, the which they did by little
and little, until they came to Chapultepec, a league from Mexico, famous for
the pleasantnes thereof. They did fortisie themselves in these mountains,
fearing the Nations which inhabited that Country, the which were opposite unto
them, especially for that one named Copill, son to this sorceresse, left in
Malinalco, had blamed and spoken ill of the Mexicaines: for this Copill by the
commandment of his mother, awhile after followed the Mexicaines course,
laboring to incense the Tapanecas, and other neighbors against them, even
unto the Chalcas: so as they came with a strong army to destroy the Mexicaines.
Copill in the mean space stood upon a little hill in the midst of a lake
called Acopilco, attending the destruction of his enemies, and they by the advice of their idol, went against him, took him suddenly, and slew him,
carrying his heart to their god, who commanded them to cast it into the lake,
faining that thereof did grow a plant called Tunal, where since Mexico was
built. They came to fight with the Chalcas, and other Nations, having chosen
for their Captain, a valiant man called Vitzilonilti, who in an encounter, was
taken and slain by the enemies. But for all this, they were not discouraged,
but fought valiantly; and in dispight of their enemies they brake the
squadrons, and carrying their aged, their women, and young children in the midst
of their battle, they passed on to Atlacuyavaya, a town of the Culhuans,
whom they found solemnising of a feast, in which place they fortified. The
Chalcas nor the other Nations did not follow them, but grieved to be defeated
by so small a number of men; they being in so great multitudes retired to their
towns.

Of the Wars the Mexicaines had against them of Culhuacan. CHAP. 6.
THe Mexicaines, by the advice of their idol, sent their messengers to the
Lord o^ Culhuacan, to demand a place to dwell in, who after he had imparted it
to his people, granted them the place of Ticaapan, which signifies white
waters, to the end they should all perish there, being full of vipers, snakes,
and other venomous beasts which bred in a hill near adjoining. But being
persuaded and taught by their devil, they accepted willingly what was offered,
and by their divelish art, tamed these beasts, so as they did them no harm;
yea, they used them as meat, eating them with delight and appetite. The which
the Lord of Culhuacan seeing, and that they had tilled and sowed the land, he
resolved to receive them into the City, and to contract amity with them. But
the god whom the Mexicaines did worship, (as he is accustomed to do no good,
but ill,) said unto his priest^, that this was not the place where he would
have them stay, and that they must go forth making wars. Therefore they must
seek forth a woman, and name her the goddess of Discord. Whereupon they
resolved to send to the King of Culhuacan, to demand his daughter to be Queen
of the Mexicaines, and mother to their god, who received this Embassage
willingly, sending his daughter presently gorgeously attyred and well
accompanied. The same night she arrived, by order of the murderer whom they
worshipped, they killed her cruelly, and having fl^a^d her artificially as they
could do, they did clothe a young man with her skin, and thereupon her
apparel, placing him near their idol, dedicating him for^ goddess and the
mother of their god, and ever after did worship it, making an idol which they
called To^cy, which is to say, our grandmother. Not content with this cruelty,
they did maliciously invite the King of Culhuacan, the father of the young maid,
to come and worship his daughter, who was now consecrated ^ goddess, who
coming with great presents, and well accompanied with his people, he was led
into a very dark chapel where their idol was, that he might offer sacrifice
to his daughter that was in that place. But it chanced that the incense that
was upon the harth, according to their custom, kindled in such sort, as he
might discern his daughters hair, and having by this means discovered the
cruelty and deceit, he went forth crying alowde, and with all his men he fell
upon the Mexicaines, forcing them to retire to the lake, so as they were almost
drowned. The Mexicaines defended themselves, casting certain little darts,
which they used in the wars, wherewith they much galled their ennemies. But
in the end they got land, and leaving that place, they coasted along the lake,
very weary and wet; the women and little children crying and making great
exclamations against them and their god that had brought them into this
distress. They were enforced to pass a river that could not be waded through,
and therefore they advised to make small boats of their targets and of reeds,
wherein they passed. Then afterward, having left Culhuacan, they arived at
Iztacalco, and finally to the place where the hermitage of Saint Anthony now
is, at the entry of Mexico, and to that quarter which they now call S. Paul.
During which time their idol did comfort them in their travells and incoraged
them, promising great matters.

Of the Foundation of Mexico. CHAP. 7.
THe time being now come, that the father of lies should accomplish his promise
made to his people, who could no longer suffer so many turnings, travells, and
dangers, it happened that some old priests or sorcerers, being entered into a
place full of water lillies, they met with a very fair and clear current of
water, which seemed to be silver, and looking about, they found the trees,
meadows, fish, and all that they beheld to be very white: wondering heereat,
they remembered a prophecy of their god, whereby he had given them that for a
token of their place of rest, and to make them Lords of other Nations. Then
weeping for joy, they returned to the people with these good news. The night
following, VitzliputZli appeared in a dream to an ancient priest, saying, that
they should seek out a Tunal in the lake, which grew out of a stone, (which as
he told them, was the same place where by his commandment they had cast the
heart of Copil, son to the sorceresse their enemy,) and upon this Tunal they
should see a goodly Eagle, which fed on certain small birds. When they should
see this, they should believe it was the place where their City should be
built, the which should surmountal others, and be famous throughout the world.
Morning being come, the old man assembled the whole people, from the greatest
to the least, making a long speech unto them, how much they were bound unto
their god, and of the Revelation, which (although unworthy,) he had received
that night, concluding that all must seek out that happy place which was
promised them; which bred such devotion and joy in them all, that presently
they undertook the enterprise, and dividing themselves into bands, they
began to search, following the sign^s of the revelation of the desired place.
Amiddest the thickest of these water lillies in the lake, they met with the
same course of water they had seen the day before, but much differing, being
not white, but red, like blood, the which divided it self into two streams,
whereof the one was of a very obscure azure, the which bred admiration in them,
noting some great mystery as they said. After much search here and there, the
Tunal appeared growing on a stone, whereon was a royal Eagle, with the wings
displaied toward^s the Sun, receiving his heat. About this Eagle were many
rich feathers, white, red, yellow, blew, and green, of the same sort as they
make their images, which Eage held in his tallants a goodly bird. Those which
saw it and knew it to be the place fore-tolde by the Oracle, fell on their
knees, doing great worship to the Eagle, which bowed the head looking on every
side^^hen was their great cries, demonstrations, and thanks unto the Creator,
and to their great god Vitzliputzli, who was there father, and had always told
them truth. For this reason they called the city which they founded there,
Tenoxtiltan, which signifies Tunal on a stone, and to this day they carry in
their arms, an Eagle upon a Tunal, with a bird in his tallant, and standing
with the other upon the Tunal. The day following, by common consent they made
an hermitage adjoining to the Tunal of the Eagle, that the Arc of their god
might rest there, till they might have means to build him a sumptuous Temple:
and so they made this hermitage of flagges and turfes covered with straw; then
having consulted with their god, they resolved to buy of their neighbors,
stone, timber, lime, in exchange of fish, frogs, and young kids, and for
duckes, water-hennes, courlieus, and diverse other kinds of sea fowls. All
which things they did fish and hunt for in this Lake, whereof there is great
abundance. They went with these things to the markets of the Towns and
Cities of the Tapanecans, and of them of Tescuco their neighbors, and with
policy they gathered together by little and little, what was necessary for
the building of their City: so as they built a better Chapel for their
idol of lime and stone, and labored to fill up a great part of the lake with
rubbish. This done, the idol spoke one night to one of his priests in these
terms, Say unto the Mexicaines, that the Noblemen divide themselves every
one with their kinsfolks and friends, and that they divide themselves into
four principal quarters, about the house which you have built for my rest,
and let every quarter build in his quarter at his pleasure. The which was put
in execution: and those be the four principal quarters of Mexico, which are
called at this day S. Iean, S. Mary the round, S. Paul, and S. Sebastian. After
this, the Mexicaines being thus divided into these four quarters, their god
commanded them to divide amongst them the gods he should name to them, and
that they should give notice to every quarter, principal of the other four
particall quarters, where their gods should be worshipped. So as under every
one of these four principal quart^rs, there were many less comprehended,
according to the number of the idols which their god commanded them to
worship, which they called Calpultetco, which is as much to say, as god of the
quarters. In this manner the City of Mexico Tenoxtiltan was founded, and grew
great.

Of the sedition of those of Tlatelulco, and of the first Kings the Mexicaines
did choose. CHAP. 8.
THis division being made as aforesaid, some old men and Ancients held
opinion, that in the division, they had not respected them as they deserved:
for this cause, they and their kinsfolk, did mutine, and went to seek another
residence: and as they went thorough the lake, they found a small piece of
ground or terrasse, which they call Tloteloli, where they inhabited, calling it
Tlatellulco, which signifies place of a terrasse. This was the third division
of the Mexicaines, since they left their Country. That of Mechovacan being the
first, and that of Malinalco the second. Those which separated themselves and
went to Tlatellulco, were famous men, but of bad disposition: and therefore
they practiced against the Mexicaines their neighbors, all the ill
neighborhood they could. They had always quarrels against them, and to this
day continues their hatred and old leagues. They of Tenoxtiltan, seeing them
of Tlatellulco thus opposite unto them, and that they multiplied, feared that
in time they might surmount them: heerevpon they assembled in counsel, where
they thought it good to choose a King, whom they should obey, and strike
terror into their enemies, that by this means they should be more united and
stronger among themselves, and their enemies not presume too much against them.
Being thus resolved to choose a King, they took another advise very profitable
and assured, to choose none among themselves, for the avoiding of diffentions,
and to gain (by their new King) some other neighbor nations, by whom they
were environed, being destitute of all succors. All well considered, both to
pacify the King of Culhuacan, whom they had greatly offended, having slain
and flead the daughter of his predecessor, and done him so great a scorn, as
also to have a King of the Mexicaine blood, of which generation there were many
in Culhuacan, which continued there since the time they lived in peace amongst
them; they resolved to choose for their King, a young man called Acamapixtli,
son to a great Mexicaine Prince, and of a Lady, daughter to the King of
Culhuacan. Presently they sent Ambassadors with a great present to demand this
man, who delivered their Embassage in these terms, Great Lord, we your
vassalls and servants, placed and shut up in the weeds and reeds of the Lake,
alone and abandoned of all the Nations of the world, led only and guided by
our god to the place where we are, which falls in the jurisdiction of your
limits of Ascapusalco, and of Tescuco. Although you have suffered us to live
and remain there, yet will we not, neither is it reason to live without a head
and lord to command, correct, and govern us, instructing us in the course of
our life, and defending us from our enemies: Therefore we come to you, knowing
that in your Court and house, there are children of our generation, linckt and
alied with yours, issued from our entrails, and yours, of our blood and yours,
among ^he which we have knowledge of a grandchild of yours and ours, called
Acamapixtli. We beseech you therefore, to give him us for Lord, we will esteem
him as he deserves, seeing he is of the lineage of the Lords of Mexico, and
the Kings of Culhuacan.

The king having consulted upon this point, and finding it nothing
inconvenient to be alied to the Mexicaines, who were valiant men, made them
answer, that they should take his grandchilde in good time, adding thereunto,
that if he had been a woman, he would not have given her, noting the foul
fact before spoken of, ending his discourse with these words, Let my
grandchild go to serve your God, and be his lieutenant, to rule and gov^rne
his creatures, by whom we live, who is the Lord of night, day, and winds: Let
him go and be Lord of the water and land, and possess the Mexicaine Nation,
take him in good time, and use him as my son and grandchild. The Mexicaines
gave him thanks, all jointly desiring him to marry him with his own hand, so
as he gave him to wife, one of the noblest Ladies amongst them. They conducted
the new King and Queen with all honor possible, and made him a solemn
reception, going all in general forth to see the king, whom they led into
palaces which were then but mean; and having seated them in royal throanes,
presently one of the Ancients and an Orator much esteemed amongst them, did
rise up, speaking in this manner, My son, our Lord and King, thou art welcome
to this poor house and city, amongst these weeds and mudde, where thy poor
fathers, grandfathers, and kinsfolks, endure what it pleases the Lord of
things created. Remember Lord thou comm^st hither to be the defense and support
of the Mexicaine Nation, and to be the resemblance of our God Vitzliputzli,
whereupon the charge and government is given thee. Thou know we are not in
our country, seeing the land we possess at this day is another, neither know
we what shall become of us to morrow, or another day: Consider therefore that
thou come not to rest or recreate thy self, but rather to endure a new
charge under so heavy a burden: wherein thou must continually labor, being
slave to this multitude, which is fallen to thy lotte, and to all this
neighbor people, whom thou must strive to gratify, and give them
contentment, seeing thou know we live upon their lands, and within their
limits. And ending, he repeated these words; Thou art welcome, thou and the
Queen our Mistress, to this your realm. This was the speech of the old man,
which with other orations (which the Mexicaine histories do celebrate) the
children did use to learn by heart, and so they were kept by tradition, some of
them deserve well to be reported in their proper terms. The king aunswering,
thanked them, and offered them his care and diligence in their defense and aid
in all he could. After they gave him the oath, and after their mane^ set the
royal crown upon his head, the which is like to the Crown of the dukes of
Venice: the name of Acamapixtli their first king signifies a handful of reeds,
and therefore they carry in their armories a hand holding many arrows of reeds.

Of the strange tribute the Mexicaines paid to them of Azcapuzalco. CHAP. 9.
THe Mexicaines happened so well in the election of their new king, that in
short time they grew to have some form of a commonweal, and to be famous
among strangers; whereupon their neighbors moved with fear, practiced to
subdue them, especially the Tapane^ans, who had Azcapuzalco for their
metropolitan city, to whom the Mexicaines paid tribute, as strangers
dwelling in their land. For the king of AzcapuZalco fearing their power which
increased, soght to oppress the Mexicanes, and having consulted with his
subjects, he sent to tell king Acamapixtli, that the ordinary tribut they paid
was too little, and that from thencefoorth they should bring fur trees,
sapines, and willowes for the building of the city, and moreover they should
make him a garden in the water planted with diverse kinds of herbs and
pulses, which they should bring unto him yearly by water, dressed in this
manner, without failing; which if they did not, he declared them his enemies,
and would root them out. The Mexicaines were much troubled at this
commandment, holding it impossible: and that this demand was to no other
end, but to seek occasion to ruin them. But their god Vitzliputzli comforted
them, appearing that night to an old man, commanding him to say to the king
his son in his name, that he should make no difficulty to accept of this
tribute, he would help them and make the means easy, which after happened:
for the time of tribute being come, the Mexicanes carried the trees that were
required, and moreover, a garden made and floating in the water, and in it much
Mays, (which is their corn) already grained and in the ear: there was also
Indian pepper, beetes, Tomates, which is a great sappy and savourie grain,
french pease, f^gges, gourds, and many other things, al ripe, and in their
season. Such as have not seen the gardines in the lake of Mexico, in the
midst of the water, will not believe it, but will say it is an enchantment of
the Devil whom they worship: But in truth it is a matter to be done, and
there has been often seen of these gardens floating in the water; for they
cast earth upon reeds and grass, in such sort as it never wastes in the
water; they sow and plant this ground, so as the grain grows and ripens very
well, and then they remove it from place to place. But it is true, that to make
this great garden easily, and to have the fruits grow well, is a thing that
makes men judge there was the work of VitziliputZli, whom otherwise they call
Patillas, specially having never made nor seen the like. The king of
Azcapuzalco wondered much when he saw that accomplished which he held
impossible saying unto his subjects, that this people had a great god that made
all easy unto them, and he said unto the Mexicaines, that seeing their God
gave them all things perfect, he would the year following, at the time of
tribute, they should bring in their gardine a wild ducke, and a heron,
sitting on their eggs, in such sort, that they should hatch their young ones
as they should arrive, without failing of a minute, upon pain of his
indignation. The Mexicans were much troubled and heavy with this proud and
strict command: but their god, as he was accustomed, comforted them in the
night, by one of his priests, saying that he would take all that charge upon
him, willing them not to fear, but believe that the day would come, whenas the
Azcapuzalcos should pay with their lives this desire of new tributes. The time
being come, as the Mexicans carried all that was demanded of their gardins,
among the reeds and weeds of the gardin, they found a ducke and a heron
hatching their eggs, and at the same instant when they arived at AzcapuZalco
their young ones were disclosed. Whereat the king of AzcapuZalco wondering beyond
measure, he said again to his people, that these were more than humane things,
and that the Mexicans began as if they would make themselves lords over all
those provinces. Yet did he not diminish the order of this tribute, and the
Mexicans finding not themselves mighty enough, endured this subjection and
slavery the space of fifty years. In this time the king Acamapixtli died,
having beautified the City of Mexico with many goodly buildings, streets,
conduits of water, and great abundance of munition. He reigned in peace and
rest forty years, having bin always zealous for the good and increase of the
commonweal.

As he drew near his end, he did one memorable thing, that having lawful
children to whom he might leave the succession of the realm, yet would he not
do it, but contrariwise he spoke freely to the commonweal, that as they had
made a free election of him, so they should choose him that should seem
fittest for their good government, advising them therein to have a care to the
good of the commonweal, and seeming grieved that he left them not freed from
tribute and subjection, he died, having recommended his wife and children unto
them, he left all his people sorrowful for his death.

Of the second King, and what happened in his reign. CHAP. 10.
THe obsequies of the dead king performed, the Ancients, the chief of the
realm, and some part of the people assembled together, to choose a King, where
the Ancients propounded the necessity wherein they were, and that it was
needful to choose for chief of their city, a man that had pity of age, of
widows, and orphans, and to be a father of the commonweal: for in very deed
they should be the feathers of his wings, the eie-browes of his eyes, and the
beard of his face, that it was necessary he were valiant, being needful
shortly to use their forces, as their god had prophesied. Their resolution in
the end was to choose a son of the predecessor, using the like good office in
accepting his son for successor, as he had done to the commonweal, relying
thereon. This young man was called Vitzilovitli, which signifies a rich
feather, they set the royal crown upon his head, and anointed him, as they
have been accustomed to do to all their Kings, with an oint^^nt they call
Divine, being the same unction wherewith they did annoint their Idol.
Presently an Orator made an eloquent speech, exhorting him to arm himself
with courage, and free them from the travells, slavery and misery they
suffered, being oppressed by the AzcapuZalcos: which done, all did him homage.
This king was not married, and his Counsel held opinion, that it was good to
marry him with the daughter of the king of Azcapuzalco, to have him a frind by
this aliance, and to obtain some diminution of their heavy burden of tributes
imposed upon them, and yet they feared lest he should disdain to give them his
daughter, by reason they were his vassalls: yet the king of AzcapuZalco yielded
thereunto, having humbly required him, who with courteous words gave them his
daughter, called Ayanchigual, whom they led with great pomp and joy to
Mexico, and performed the ceremony and solemnity of marriage, which was to tie
a corner of the man's cloak to a part of the woman's veil in sign of the band
of marriage. This Queen brought forth a son, of whose name they demanded
advise of the king of AzcapuZalco, and casting lots as they had accustomed
(being greatly given to soothsayings, especially upon the names of their
children) he would have his grandchild called Chimalpopoca, which signifies a
target casting smoke. The Queen his daughter seeing the contentment the King
of AzcapuZalco had of his grandchild, took occasion to entreat him to releeve
the Mexicaines of the heavy burden of their tributes, seeing he had now a
grandchild Mexicaine, the which the King willingly yielded unto, by the advice
of his Counsel, granting (for the tribute which they paid,) to bring yearly a
couple of duckes and some fish, in sign of subjection, and that they dwelt in
his land. The Mexicaines by this means, remained much eased and content, but
it lasted little. For the Queen their Protectrix died soon after: and the
year following likewise Vitzilovitli the king of Mexico died, leaving his son
Chimalpopoca ten years old, he reigned thirteen years, and died thirty
years old, or little more. He was held for a good king, and careful in the
service of his gods, whose Images he held kings to be; and that the honor
done to their god, was done to the king who was his image. For this cause the
kings have been so affectionate to the service of their gods. This king was
careful to win the love of his neighbors, and to traffic with them,
whereby he augmented his city, exercising his men in warrelike actions in the
Lake, disposing them to that which he pretended, as you shall see presently.

Of Chimalpopoca the third king, and his cruel death, and the occasion of
war which the Mexicaines made. CHAP. 11.
THe Mexicaines for successor to their deceased king did choose his son
Chimalpopoca, by common consent, although he were a child of ten years old,
being of opinion that it was always necessary to keep the favor of the king
of AzcapuZalco, making his grandchilde king. They then set him in his throane,
giving him the ensigns of war, with a bow and arrows in one hand, and a
sword with rasours (which they commonly use) in the right, signifying thereby
(as they do say) that they pretended by arms to set themselves at liberty. The
Mexicaines had great want of water, that of the Lake being very thick and
muddy, and therefore ill to drink, so as they caused their infant king to
desire of his grandfather the king of Azcapuzalco, the water of the mountain
of Chapultepec, which is from Mexico a league, as is said before, which they
easily obtained, and by their industry made an aqueduct of faggots, weeds and
flagges, by the which they brought water to their city. But because the City
was built within the Lake, and the aqueduct did cross it, it did break forth
in many places, so as they could not enjoy the water, as they desired, and had
great scarcity: whereupon, whether they did expressly seek it, to quarrel with
the Tapanecans, or that they were moved upon small occasion, in the end they
sent a resolute embassage to the king of AzcapuZalco, saying, they could not
use the water which he had graciously granted them, and therefore they required
him to provide them wood, lime, and stone, and to send his workmen, that by
their means they might make a pipe of stone and lime that should not break.
This message nothing pleased the king, and much less his subjects, seeming to
be too presumptuous a message, and purposely insolent, for vassals to their
Lord. The chief of the Counsel disdaining thereat, said it was too bold, that
not content with permission to live in an others land, and to have water given
them, but they would have them go to serve them: what a matter was that? And
whereon presumed this fugitive nation, shut up in the mud? They would let them
know, how fit they were to work, and to abate their pride, in taking from them
their land and their lives.

In these terms and choler they left the king, whom they did somewhat suspect,
by reason of his grandchild, and consulted again anew, what they were to do,
where they resolved to make a general proclamation, that no Tapanecan should
have any commerce or traffic with any Mexicaine, that they should not go to
their City, nor receive any into theirs, upon pain of death. Whereby we may
understand that the king did not absolutely command over his people, and that
he governed more like a Consul, or a Duke, than a King. although since with
their power, the command of Kings increased, growing absolute Tyrants, as you
shall see in the last Kings. For it has been an ordinary thing among the
Barbarians, that such as their power has been, such has been their
command; yea in our Histories of Spain, we find in some ancient kings that
manner of rule which the Tapanecans used. Such were the first kings of the
Romans, but that Rome declined from Kings to Consuls, and a Senate, till that
after they came to be commanded by Emperors. But these Barbarians, of
temperate Kings became tyrants, of which governements a moderate monarchy is
the best and most assured. But return we now unto our history.

The king of Azcapuzalco seeing the resolution of his subjects, which was to
kill the Mexicans, entreated them first to steal away the young king his
grandchild, and afterward do what they pleased to the Mexicans. All in a
manner yielded hereunto, to give the king contentment, and for pity they had
of the child; but two of the chiefest were much opposite, inferring, that it
was bad counsel, for that Chimalpopoca, although he were of their blood, yet
was it but by the mothers side, and that the fathers was to be preferred, and
therefore they concluded that the first they must kill was Chimalpopoca king of
Mexico, protesting so to do. The king of AzcapuZalco was so troubled with this
contradiction, and the resolution they had taken, that soon after for very
grief he fell sick, and died. By whose death the Tapan^cans finishing their
consultation, committed a notable treason; for one night the young King of
Mexico sleeping without guard, or fear of any thing, they of Azcapuzalco
entered his palace, and slew him suddenly, returning unseen. The morning being
come, when the Nobles w^nt to salute the King, as they were accustomed, they
found him slain with great and cruel wounds; then they cried out and filled
all their city with tears: and transported with choler, they presently fell
to arms, with an intent to revenge their Kings death. As they ran up and
down full of fury and disorder, one of their chiefest knights stepped forth,
laboring to appease them, with a grave admonition: Whither go you (said he)
O ye Mexicaines, quiet your selves, consider that things done without
consideration ar^ not well guided, nor come to good end: suppress your grief,
considering that although your king be dead, the noble blood of the Mexicaines
is not extinct in him. We have children of our kings deceased, by whose
conduct, succeeding to the realm, you shall the better execute what you
pretend, having a leader to guide your enterprise, go not blindely, surcease,
and choose a king first, to guide and encourage you against your en^mies: In
the mean time dissemble discreetly, performing the funerals of your deceased
king, whose body you see here present, for hereafter you shall find better
means to take rev^nge. By this means the Mexicans passed no farther, but
stayed to make the obsequies of their King, whereunto they invited the Lords of
Tescuco, and Culhuacan, reporting unto them this foul and cruel fact, which
the Tapanecans had committed, moving them to have pity on them, and incensing
them against their ennemies, concluding that their resolution was to die, or to
be revenged of so great an indignity, entreating them not to favor so unjust
a fact of their enemies; and that for their part, they desired not their aid
of arms or men, but only to be lookers on of what should pass, and that for
their maintenance, they would not stop nor hinder the comerce, as the
Tapanecans had done. At these speeches they of Tescuco and Culhuacan made them
great shows of good will, and that they were well satisfied, off^ing them
their cities, and all the commerce they desired, that they might provide
vittaile and munition at their pleasure, both by land and water. After this,
the Mexicanes entreated them to stay with them, and assist at the election of
their King; the which they likewise granted, to give them contentment.

Of the fourth King called Izcoalt, and of the war against the Tapanecans.
CHAP. 12.
THe Electors being assembled, an old man that was held for a great Orator,
rose up, who (as the histories report,) spoke in this manner, The light of your
eyes O M^xicaines is darkened, but not of your hearts: for although you have
lost him that was the light and guide of the Mexicaine Commonweal, yet that
of the heart remains: to consider, that although they have slain one man, yet
there are others that may supply with advantage, the want we have of him: the
Mexicaine Nobility is not extinguished thereby, nor the blood royal decayed.
Turn your eyes and look about you, you shall see the Nobility of Mexico set
in order, not one nor two, but many and excellent Princes, sons to
Acamapixtli, our true and lawful King and Lord. Here you may choose at your
pleasure, saying, I will this man, and not that. If you have lost a father,
here you may find both father and mother: make account O Mexicaines, that the
Sun is eclipsed and darkened for a time, and will return suddenly. If Mexico
has been darkened by the death of your King, the Sun will soon show, in
choosing another King. Look to whom, and upon whom you shall cast your eyes,
and toward whom your heart is inclined, and this is he who^ your god
Vitzliputzli has chosen. And continuing a while this discourse, he ended to
the satisfaction of all men. In the end, by the consent of this Counsel,
Izcoalt was chosen King, which signifies a snake of rasors, who was son to
the first King Acamapixtli, by a slave of his: and although he were not
legitimate, yet they made choice of him, for that he exceeded the rest in
behavior, valor, and magnanimity of courage. All seemed very well satisfied,
and above all, these of Tescuco, for their king was m^rried to a sister of
Iscoalts. After the King had been crowned and set in his royal seat, another
Orator stepped up, discoursing how the king was bound to his Commonweal, and of
the courage he ought to show in travel, speaking thus, B^hold this day we
depend on thee, it may be thou will let fall the burden that lies upon thy
soldiers, and suffer the old man and woman, the orphlin and the widow to
perish. Take pity of the infants that go creeping in the air, who must
perish if our enemies surmount us: unfold then, and stretch forth thy cloak,
my Lord, to bear these infants upon thy shoulders, which be the poor and the
common people, who live assured under the shadow of thy wings, and of thy
bounty. Uttering many other words upon this subject, the which, (as I have
said,) they learn by heart, for the exercise of their children, and after did
teach them as a lesson to those that began to learn the faculty of Orators.
In the mean time, the Tapanecans were resolute to destroy the Mexicaines, and
to this end they had made great preparations. And therefore the new King took
counsel for the proclaiming of war, and to fight with those that had so much
wronged them. But the common people, seeing their adversaries to exceed them
far in numbers and munition for the war, they came amazed to their King,
pressing him not to undertake so dangerous a war, which would destroy their
poor City and Nation: whereupon being demanded what advise were fittest to
take, they made answer, that the King of AzcapuZalco was very pitiful, that
they should demand peace, and offer to serve him, drawing them forth those
marshes, and that he should give them houses and lands among his subjects, that
by this means they might depend all upon one Lord. And for the obtaining
hereof, they should carry their god in his litter for an intercessor. The
cries of the people were of such force, (having some Nobles that approved their
opinion,) as presently they called for the Priests, preparing the litter and
their god, to perform the voyage. As this was preparing, and every one yielded
to this treaty of peace, and to subject themselves to the Tapanecans, a
gallant young man, and of good sort, stepped out among the people, who with a
resolute countenance spoke thus unto them, What mean^s this O ye Mexicaines,
are ye mad? How has so great cowardice crept in among us? Shall we go and
yield our selves thus to the Azcapuzalcans. Then turning to the King he said,
How now my Lord, will you endure this? Speak to the people, that they may
suffer us to find out some means for our honor and defense, and not to
yield our selves so simply and shamefully into the hands of our enemies. This
young man was called Tlacaellec, nephew to the King, he was the most valiant
Captain and greatest Counselor that ever the Mexicaines had, as you shall see
hereafter. Izcoalt encouraged by that his nephew had so wisely spoken,
retained the people, saying they should first suffer him to try another better
means. Then turning toward his Nobility, he said unto them, You are all
here, my kinsmen, and the best of Mexico, he that has the courage to carry
a message to the Tapanecans, let him rise up. They looked one upon another, but
no man stirred nor offered himself to the word. Then this young man Tlacaellec
rising, offered himself to go, saying, that seeing he must die, it did import
little whether it were to day or to morrow: for what reason should he so
carefully preserve himself? he was therefore ready, let him command what he
pleased. And although all held this for a rash attempt, yet the King resolv^d
to send him, that he might thereon understand the will and disposition of the
King of Azcapuzalco and of his people; holding it better to hasten his neph^ws
death, then to hazard the honor of his Com^on-weale. Tlacaelies being ready,
took his way, and being come to the guards, who had commandment to kill any
Mexicaines that came toward them, by cunning or otherwise: he p^rswaded them
to suffer him to pass to the king, who wondered to see him, and hearing his
embassage, which was to demand peace of him under hon^st conditions, answered,
that he would impart it to his subjects, willing him to return the next day
for his answer, then Tlaca^llec demanded a pasport, yet could he not obtain
any, but that he should use his best skill: With this he returned to Mexico,
giving his words to the guards to return. And although the King of Azcapuzalco
desired peace, being of a mild disposition, yet his subjects did so incense
him, as his answer was open war. The which being heard by the messenger, he
did all his King commanded him, declaring by this ceremony, to give arms, and
anointing the King with the unction of the dead, that in his Kings behalf he
did defy him. Having ended all, the King of Azcapuzalco suffering himself to
be anointed and crowned with feathers, giving goodly arms in recompense to the
messenger, wishing him not to return by the palace gate, whereas many
attended to cut him in pieces, but to go out secretly by a little false
posterne that was open in one of the courts of the Palace. This young man did
so, and turning by secret ways, got away in safety in sight of the guards,
and there defied them saying, Tapanecans and Azcapuzalcans, you do your office
ill, understand you shall all die, and not one Tapanecan shall remain alive.
In the mean time the guardes fell upon him, where he behaved him self so
valiantly, that he ^lew some of them: and seeing many more of them come
running, he retired himself gallantly to the City, where he brought news,
that war was proclaimed with the Tapanecans, and that he had defied their
King.

Of the battle the Mexicaines gave to the Tapanecans, and of the vi^torie they
obtained. CHAP. 13.
THe defy being known to the Commons of Mexico, they came to the king,
according to their accustomed cowardice, demanding leave to depart the City,
holding their reign certain. The king did comfort and encourage them,
promising to give them liberty if they vanquished their enemies, willing them
not to fear. The people replied. And if we be vanquished, what shall we do?
If we be overcome (answered the king) we will be bound presently to yield our
selves into your hands to suffer death, eat our flesh in your dishes and be
revenged of us. It shall be so then (said they) if you loose the victory, and
if you obtain the victory, we do presently offer our selves to be your
Tributaries, to labor in your houses, to sow your ground, to carry your
arms and baggage when you go to the wars for ever, we and our descendants
after us. These accordes made betwixt the people and the nobility (which they
did after fully perform, either willingly, or by constraint, as they had
promised) the king namd for his captain general Tlacaellec, the whole camp
was put in order, and into squadrons, giving the places of captains to the
most valiant of his kinsfolks and friends: then did he make them a goodly
speech, whereby he did greatly incorage them, being now well prepared, charging
all men to obey the commandment of the General whom he had appointed: he
divided his men into two parts, commanding the most valiant and hardy, to
give the first charge with him, and that all the rest should remain with the
king Izcoalt, vn^il they should see the first assail their enemies. Marching
then in order, they were discovered by them of Azcapuzalco, who presently came
furiously forth the city, carrying great riches of gold, silver, and arms of
great value, as those which had the empire of all that country. IZcoalt gave
the signal to battle, with a little drum he carried on his shoulders, and
presently they raised a general showt, crying, Mexico, Mexico, they charged the
Tapanecans, and although they were far more in number, yet did they defeat
them, and force them to retire into their City; then advaunced they which
remained behind, crying, Tlacaellec, victory, victory, all suddenly entered
the City, where (by the Kings commandment) they pardoned not any man, no not
old men, women, nor children, for they slew them all, and spoiled the City
being very rich. And not content heerewith, they followed them that fled, and
were retired into the craggy rocks of the Sierres or near mountains, striking
and making a great slaughter of them. The Tapanecans being retired to a
mountain cast down their arms, demanding their lives, and offering to serve
the Mexicans, to give them lands and gardins, stone, lime and timber, and to
hold them always for their Lords. Upon this condition Tlacaell^c retired his
men and ceased the battle, granting them their lives upon the former
conditions, which they did solemnly swear. Then they return^d to AzcapuZalco,
and so with their rich and victorious spoils to the city of Mexico. The day
following the king assembled the nobility and the people, to whom he laid open
the accord the Commons had made, demanding of them, if they were content to
persist therein: the Commons made answer, that they had promised, and they had
well deserved it, and therefore they were content to serve them perpetually.
Whereupon they took an oath, which since they have kept without contradiction.

This done IZcoalt returned to Azcapuzalco, (by the advice of his counsel) he
divided all the lands and goods of the conquered among the conquerours, the
chiefest part fell to the King, then to Tlacaellec, and after to the rest of
the Nobles, as they best deserved in the battle. They also gave land to some
plebeians, having behaved themselves valiantly; to others they distributed the
pillage, making small account of them as of cowardes. They appointed lands in
common for the quarters of Mexico, to every one his part, for the service and
sacrifices of their gods. This was the order which after they always kept, in
the division of the lands and spoils of those they had vanquished and
subdewed. By this means they of AzcapuZalco remained so poor, as they had no
lands left them to labor, and (which was worse) they took their king from
them, and all power to choose any other then him of Mexico.

Of the war and victory the Mexicans had against the City of Cuyoacan.
CHAP. 14.
ALthough the chief City of the Tapanecans, was that of AzcapuZalco, yet had
they others with their private Lords, as T^cuba and Cuyoacan. These seeing the
storm passed, would gladly that they of Azcapuzalco had renewed the war
against the Mexicans, and seeing them danted, as a nation wholly broken and
defeated, they of Cuyoacan resolved to make war by themselves; to the which
they labored to draw the other neighbor nations, who would not stir nor
quarrel with the Mexicans. In the mean time the hatred and malice increasing,
they of Cuyoacan began to ill entreat the women that went to their markets,
mocking at them, and doing the like to the men over whom they had power: for
which cause the king of Mexico defended, that none of his should go to
Cuyoacan, and that they should receive none of them into Mexico, the which made
them of Cuyoacan resolve wholly to war: but first they would provoke them by
some shameful scorn, which was, that having invited them to one of their
solemn feasts, after they had made them a goodly banquet, and feasted them
with a great dance after their manner, they sent them for their fruit, women's
apparel, forcing them to put it on, and so to return home like women to their
city, reproching them, that they were cowards and effeminate, and that they
durst not take arms being sufficiently provoked. Those of Mexico say, that for
revenge they did unto them a foul scorn, laying at the gates of their City
of Cuyoacan certain things which smoaked, by means whereof many women were
delivered before their time, and many fell sick. In the end, all came to open
war, and there was a battle fought, wherein they employed all their forces,
in the which Tlacaellec, by his courage and policy in war, obtained the
victory. For having left king IZcoalt in fight with them of Cuyoacan, he put
himself in ambush with some of the most valiant soldiers, and so turning
about, charged them behind, and forced them to retire into their City. But
seeing their intent was to fly into a Temple, which was very strong. He with
three other valiant soldiers, pursued them eagerly, and got before them,
seizing on the temple and firing it, so as he forced them to fly to the
fields, where he made a great slaughter of the vanquished, pursuing them two
leagues into the Country, unto a little hill, where the vanquished casting away
their weapons and their arms acrosse, yielded to the Mexicans, and with many
tears craved pardon of their overweening folly, in using them like women,
offering to be their slaves: so as in the end the Mexicaines did pardon them.
Of this victory the Mexicanes carried away very rich spolles of garments,
arms, gold, silver, jewels, and rich feathers, with a great number of
captives. In this battle there were three of the principals of Culhuacan that
came to aid the Mexicaines, to win honor, the which were remarkable above
all. And since being known to Tlasaellec, and having made proof of their
fidelity, he gave them Mexicaine devises, and had them always by his side,
where they fought in all places very valiantly. It was apparent that the whole
victory was due to the General, and to these three; for among so many captives
taken, two third parts were won by these four, which was easily known by a
policy they used: for taking a captive, they presently cut off a little of his
hair, and gave it to others, so as it appeared that those which had their
hair cut, amounted to that number, whereby they won great reputation and
fame of valiant men. They were honored as conquerors, giving them good
portions of the spoils and lands, as the Mexicans have always used to do,
which gave occasion to those that did fight, to become famous, and to win
reputation by arms.

Of the war and victory which the Mexicans had against the Suchimilcos.
CHAP. 15
THe Nation of the Tapanecans being subdewed the Mexicaines had occasion to do
the like to the Suchimilcos, who (as it has been said) were the first of the
seven caves or linages that peopled this land. The Mexi^ans sought not the
occasion, although they might presume as conquerors to extend their limits, but
the Suchimilcos did moove them, to their own ruin, as it happens to men of
small judgment that have no foresight, who not preventing the mischefe they
imagined, fall into it. The Suchimilcos held opinion, that the Mexicans, by
reason of their victories past, should attempt to subdue them, and consulted
heereon among themselves. Some among them thought it good to acknowledge them
for superiors, and to applaude their good fortune, but the contrary was
allowed, and they went out to give them battle: which IZcoalt the king of
Mexico understanding, he sent his General Tlacael^ec against them, with his
army: the battle was fought in the same field that divides their limits,
which two armies were equal in men and arms, but very diverse in their order
and manner of fighting; for that the Suchimilcos charged all together on a
heap confusedly, and Tlacaellec divided his men into squadrons with a goodly
order, so as he presently brake his ennemies, forcing them to retire into their
city, into the which they entered, following them to the Temple whither they
fled, which they fiered, and forcing them to fly unto the mountains: in the
end they brought them to this point, that they yielded with their arms
acrosse. The General Tlacaellec returning in great triumph, the priests went
forth to receive him, with their music of flutes, and giving incense. The
chief Captains used other ceremonies and shows of joy, as they had bin
accustomed to do, and the king with all the troop went to the Temple, to give
thanks to their false god, for the devil has always been very desirous
hereof, to challenge to himself the honor which he deserves not, seeing it is
the true God which gives victories, and makes them to rule whom he pleases.
The day following, king Izcoalt went unto the City of Suchimilco, causing
himself to be sworn king of the Suchimilcos: and for their comfort he
promised to do them good. In token whereof he commanded them to make a great
cawsey stretching from Mexico, to Suchimilco, which is four leagues, to the
end there might be more commerce and traffic amongst them. Which the
Suchimilcos performed, and in short time the Mexicaine government seemed so
good unto them, as they held themselves happy to have changed their king and
commonweal. Some neighbors pricked forward by envy, or fear, to their ruins
were not yet made wise by others miseries.

Cuitlavaca was a city within the lake, which though the name and dwelling be
changed, continues yet. They were active to swim in the lake, and therefore
they thought they might much indomage and annoy the Mexicaines by water, which
the King understanding, he resolved to send his army presently to fight
against them. But Tlacaellec little esteeming this war, holding it
dishonorable to lead an army against them, made offer to conquer them with the
children only: which he performed in this manner: he went unto the Temple and
drew out of the Covent such children as he thought fittest for this action,
from ten to eighteen years of age, who knew how to guide their boats, or
canoes, teaching them certain policies. The order they held in this war,
was, that he went to Cuitlavaca with his children, where by his policy he
pressed the ennemy in such sort, that he made them to fly; and as he
followed them, the lord of Cuitlavaca met him and yielded unto him, himself,
his City, and his people, and by this means he stayed the pursuit. The
children returned with much spoil, and many captives for their sacrifices,
being solemnly received with a great procession, music and perfumes, and they
went to worship their gods, in taking of the earth which they did eat, and
drawing blood from the forepart of their legs with the Priests lancets, with
other superstitions which they were accustomed to use in the like solemnities.
The children were much honored and incoraged, and the king embraced and kissed
them, and his kinsmen and alies accompanied them. The brute of this victory
ran throughout all the country, how that Tlacaellec had subdued the city of
Cuitlavaca with children: the news and consideration whereof opened the eyes of
those of Tesc^co, a chief and very cunning Nation for their manner of life: So
as the king of Tescuco was first of opinion, that they should subject
themselves to the king of Mexico, and invite him thereunto with his city.
Therefore by the advice of his Counsel, they sent Ambassadors good Orators
with honorable presents, to offer themselves unto the Mexicans, as their
subjects, desiring peace and amity, which was graciously accepted; but by the advice of Tlacaellec he used a ceremony for the effecting thereof, which was
that those of Tescuco should come forth armed against the Mexicans, where they
should fight, and presently yield, which was an act and ceremony of war,
without any effusion of blood on either side. Thus the king of Mexico became
sovereign Lord of Tescuco, but he took not their king from them, but made
him of his privy counsel; so as they have always maintained themselves in
this manner until the time of Motecuma the second, during whose reign the
Spaniards entered. Having subdued the land and city of Tescuco, Mexico remained
Lady and Mistress of all the lands and cities about the Lake, where it is
built. Izcoalt having enjoyed this prosperity, and reigned twelve years,
died, leaving the realm which had been given him, much augmented by the
valor and counsel of his nephew Tlacaellec (as has before been said) who
held it best to choose an other king then himself, as shall hereafter be
showed.

Of the fifth King of Mexico, called Motecuma, the first of that name. CHAP. 16.
FOrasmuch as the election of the new King, belonged to four chief Electors,
(as has been said,) and to the King of Tescuco, and the King of Tacubu, by
especial privilege: Tlacaellec assembled these six personages, as he that had
the sovereign authority, and having propounded the matter unto them, they
made choice of Motecuma, the first of that name, nephew to the same Tlacaellec.
His election was very pleasing to them all, by reason whereof, they made most
solemn feasts, and more stately then the former. Presently after his election,
they conducted him to the Temple with a great train, where before the divine
harth, (as they call it,) where there is continual fire, they set him in his
royal throne, putting upon him his royal ornaments. Being there, the King
drew blood from his ears and legs with a griffons tallents, which was the
sacrifice wherein the devil delighted to be honored. The Priests, Ancients,
and Captains, made their orations, all congratulating his election. They were
accustomed in their elections to make great feasts and dances, where they
wasted many lights. In this Kings time the custom was brought in, that the
King should go in person to make war in some province, and bring captives to
solemnize the feast of his coronation, and for the solemn sacrifices of that
day. For this cause King Motecuma went into the province of Chalco, who had
declared themselves his enemies: from whence (having fought valiantly,) he
brought a great number of captives, whereof he did make a notable sacrifice the
day of his coronation, although at that time he did not subdue all the province
of Chalco, being a very warlike nation. Many came to this coronation from
diverse provinces, as well near as far off, to see the feast, at the which
all comers were very bountifully entertained and clad, especially the poor,
to whom they gave new garments. For this cause they brought that day into the
City, the Kings tributes, with a goodly order, which consisted in stuffes to
make garments of all sorts, in Cacao, gold, silver, rich feathers, great
burdens of cotton, cucumbers, sundry sorts of pulses, many kinds of sea
fish, and of the fresh water, great store of fruits, and venison without
number, not reckoning an infinite number of presents, which other kings and
Lords sent to the new king. All this tribute marched in order according to the
provinces, and before them the stewards and receivers, with diverse marks and
ensigns, in very goodly order: so as it was one of the goodliest things of the
feast, to see the entry of the tribute. The King being crowned, he employed
himself in the conquest of many provinces, and for that he was both valiant
and virtuous, he still increased more and mo^e, using in all his affairs the
counsel and industry of his general Tlacaellec, whom he did always love and
esteem very much, as he had good reason. The war wherein he was most
troubled and of greatest difficulty, was that of the province of Chalco,
wherein there happened great matters, whereof one was very remarkable, which
was, that they of Chalcas, had taken a brother of Motecuma^s in the wars,
whom they resolved to choose for their king, asking him very courteously, if he
would accept of this charge. He answered (after much importunity, still
persisting therein,) that if they meant plainly to choose him for their king,
they should plant in the market place, a tree or very high stake, on the top
whereof, they should make a little scaffold, and means to mount unto it. The
Chalcas supposing it had been some ceremony to make himself more apparent,
presently effected it: then assembling all his Mexicaines about the stake, he
went to the top with a garland of flowers in his hand, speaking to his men in
this manner, O valiant Mexicaines, these men will choose me for their King, but
the gods will not permit, that to be a King I should committee any treason
against my country, but contrariwise, I will that you learn by me, that it
behooves us rather, to endure death, then to aid our enemies. Saying these
words, he cast himself down, and was broken in a thousand pieces; at which
spectacle, the Chalcas had so great horror and dispits, that presently they
fell upon the Mexicaines and slew them all with their lances, as men whom they
held too proud and inexorable, saying, they had divelish hearts. It chanced
the night following, they heard two owls making a mornefull cry, which they
did interpret as an unfortunate sign, and a presage of their near
destruction, as it succeeded: for King Motecuma went against them in person
with all his power, where he vanquished them, and ruined all their kingdom:
and passing beyond the mountain Me^ade, he conquered still even unto the
North sea. Then returning toward the South sea, he subdued many provinces: so
as he became a mighty King: all by the help and counsel of Tlacaellec, who in
a manner conquered all the Mexicaine nation. Yet he held an opinion, (the
which was confirmed,) that it was not behoovefull to conquer the province of
Tlascalla, that the Mexicaines might have a fronter enemy, to keep the youth
of Mexico in exercise and alarm: and that they might have numbers of captives
to sacrifice to their idols, wherein they did waste (as has been said,)
infinite numbers of men, which should be taken by force in the wars. The
honor must be given to Motecuma, or to speak truly, to Tlacaellec his
General, for the good order and policy settled in the realm of Mexico, as also
for the counsels and goodly enterprises, which they did execute: and likewise
for the numbers of Judges and Magistrates, being as well ordered there, as in
any commonweal; yea, were it in the most flourishing of Europe. This King did
also greatly increase the Kings house, giving it great authority, and
appointing many and sundry officers, which served him with great pomp and
ceremony. He was no less remarkable touching the devotion and service of his
idols, increasing the number of his Ministers, and instituting new ceremonies,
whereunto he carried a great respect.

He built that great temple dedicated to their god Vitziliputzli, whereof is
spoken in the other book. He did sacrifice at the dedication of this temple, a
great number of men, taken in sundry victories: finally, inioying his Empire in
great prosperity, he fell sick, and died, having reigned twenty eight
years, (...) to his successor Ticoci^, who did not resemble him, neither in
valor, nor in good fortune.

How Tlacaellec refused to be King, and of the election and deeds of Ticocic.
CHAP. 17.
THE four Deputies assembled in counsel, with the lords of Tcscuc^ and
Tacuba, where Tlacaellec was President in the election, where by all their
voices Tlacaellec was chosen, as deserving this charge better then any other.
Yet he refused it, persuading them by pertinent reasons, that they should choose
another, saying, that it was better, and more expedient to have another king,
and he to be his instrument and assistant, as he had been till then, and not
to lay the whole burden upon him, for that he held himself no less bound for
the Commonweal, then if he were king. It is a rare* thing to refuse
principality and command, and to endure the pain and the care, and not to
reap the honor. There are few that will yield up the power and authority,
which they may hold, were it profitable to the commonweal. This Barbarian did
herein exceed the wisest amongst the Greeks and Romans, and it may be a
lesson to Alexander and Julius Caesar, whereof the one held it little to
command the whole world, putting his most dear and faithful servants to death
upon some small iealosies of rule and empire: and the other declared himself
enemy to his country, saying, that if it were lawful to do any thing against
law and reason, it was for a kingdom: such is the thirst and desire of
command. Although this act of Tlacael^e^^ might well proceed from too great
a confidence of himself, seeming to him, though he were not king, yet in a
manner, that he commanded kings, suffering him to carry certain marks, as a
Tiara or ornament for the head, which belonged only to themselves. Yet this
act deserves greater commendation, and to be well considered of, in that he
held opinion to be better able to serve his Commonweal as a subject, then
being a sovereign Lord. And as in a comedy he deserves most commendation,
that represents the personage that importes most, be it of a shepherd or a
peasant, and leaves the King or Captain to him that can perform it: So in
good Philosophy, men ought to have a special regard to the common good, and
apply themselves to that office and place which they best understand. But this
philosophy is far from that which is practiced at this day. But let us
return to our discourse, and say, that in recompense of his modesty, and for
the respect which the Mexicaine Electors bare him, they demanded of Tlacaellec,
(that seeing he would not reign,) whom he thought most fit: Whereupon he
gave his voice to a son of the deceased king, who was then very young, called
Ticocic: but they replied that his shoulders were very weak to bear so heavy
a burden. Tlacaellec answered, that his were there to help him to bear the
burden, as he had done to the deceased: by means whereof, they took their
resolution, and Tico^ic was chosen, to whom were done all the accustomed
ceremonies.

They pierced his nosthrils, and for an ornament put an Emerald therein: and
for this reason, in the Mexicane books, this king is noted by his nosthrills
pierced. He differed much from his father and predecessor, being noted for a
coward, and not valiant. He went to make war for his coronation, in a
province that was rebelled, where he lost more of his own men then he took
captives; yet he returned, saying, that he brought the number of captives
required for the sacrifice of his coronation, and so he was crowned with great
solemnity. But the Mexicaines discontented to have a king so little disposed
to war, practiced to hasten his death by poison. For this cause he continued
not above four years in the kingdom: whereby we see that the children do
not always follow the blood and valor of their fathers; and the greater the
glory of the predecessors has been, the more odious is the weakness and
cowardice of such that succeed them in command, and not in merit. But this
loss was well repaired by a brother of the deceased, who was also son to
great Motecuma, called Axayaca, who was likewise chosen by the advice of
Tlacacllec, wherein he happened better then before.

Of the death of Tlacaellec, and the deeds of Axayaca the seventh King of
Mexicaines. CHAP. 18.
NOw was Tlacaellec very old, who by reason of his age, he was carried in a
chair upon men's shoulders, to assist in counsel when business required. In the
end he fell sick, whenas the king (who was not yet crowned,) did visit him
often, sheading many tears, seeming to loose in him his father, and the father
of his country. Tlacaellec did most affectionately recommend his children unto
him, especially the eldest, who had showed himself valiant in the former
wars. The king promised to have regard unto him, and the more to comfort the
old man, in his presence he gave him the charge and ensigns of Captain
General, with all the preheminences of his father; wherewith the old man
remained so well satisfied, as with this content he ended his days. If he had
not passed to another life, they might have held themselves very happy, seeing
that of so poor and small a city, wherein he was borne, he established by
his valor and magnanimity, so great, so rich, and so potent a kingdom. The
Mexicans made his funeral as the founder of that Empire, more sumptuous and
stately, then they had done to any of their former kings. And presently after
Axayaca, (to appease the sorrow which all the people of Mexico showed for the
death of their captain,) he resolved to make the voyage necessary for his
coronation. He therefore led his army with great expedition into the province
of Tequantepec, two hundred leagues from Mexico, where he gave battle to a
mighty army and an infinite number of men assembled together, as well out of
that province, as from their neighbors, to oppose themselves against the
Mexicans. The first of his Camp that advanced himself, to the combat, was
the King himself, defying his ennemies, from whom he made show to fly when
they charged him, until he had drawn them into an ambuscadoe, where many
soldiers lay hidden under straw, who suddenly issued forth, and they which
fled, turned head: so as they of Tiquantepec remained in the midst of them,
whom they charged furiously, making a great slaughter of them: and following
their victory, they razed their city and temple, punishing all their
neighbors rigorously. Then went they on farther, and without any stay,
conquered to Guatulco, the which is a port at this day well known in the South
sea. Axayaca returned to Mexico with great and rich spoils, where he was
honorably crowned, with sumptuous and stately preparation of sacrifices,
tributes, and other things, whither many came to see his coronation. The Kings
of Mexico received the crown from the hands of the King of Tescuco, who had
the pre-eminence. He made many other enterprises, where he obtained great
victories, being always the first to lead the army, and to charge the enemy;
by the which he purchased the name of a most valiant captain: and not content
to subdue strangers, he also suppressed his subjects which had rebelled, which
never any of his predecessors ever could do, or durst attempt. We have
already showed how some seditious of Mexico had divided themselves from that
commonweal, and built a city near unto them, which they called Tlatelulco,
whereas now saint Jacques is.

These being revolted, held a faction aparte, and increased and multiplied
much, refusing to acknowledge the kings of Mexico, nor to yield them obedience.
The king Axayaca sent to advise them, not to live divided, but being of one
blood, and one people, to join together, and acknowledge the king of Mexico:
whereupon the Lord of Tlatelulco made an answer full of pride and disdain,
defieng the king of Mexico to single combat with himself: and presently
mustred his men, commanding some of them to hide themselves in the weeds of
the Lake; and the better to deceive the Mexicans, he commanded them to take
the shapes of ravens, geese, and other beasts, as frogs, and such like,
supposing by this means to surprise the Mexicans as they should pass by the
ways and cawsies of the Lake. Having knowledge of this defy, and of his
adversaries policy, he divided his army, giving a part to his general, the
son of Tlacaellec, commanding him to charge this ambuscadoe, in the Lake;
and he with the rest of his people, by an unfrequented way, went and encamped
before Tlatelulco. Presently he called him who had defied him, to perform his
promise, and as the two Lords of Mexico, and Tlatelulco advaunced, they
commanded their subjects not to moove, until they had seen who should be
conqueror, which was done, and presently the two Lords incountered valiantly,
where having fought long, in the end the Lord of Tlatelulco was forced to
turn his back, being unable to endure the furious charge of the king of
Mexico. Those of Tlatelulco seeing their captain fly, fainted, and fled
likewise, but the Mexicans following them at the heels, charged them
furiously; yet the Lord of Tlatelulco escaped not the hands of Axayaca, for
thinking to save himself, he fled to the top of the Temple, but Axayaca
followed him so near, as he seized on him with great force, and threw him from
the top to the bottom, and after set fire on the Temple, and the city.
Whilst this passed at Tlatelulco, the Mexicane general was very hot in the
revenge of those that pretended to defeat him by policy, and after he had
forced them to yield, and to cry for mercy, the General said he would not
pardon them, until they had first performed the offices of those figures they
represented, and therefore he would have them cry like frogs and ravens,
every one according to the figure which he had undertaken, else they had no
composition: which thing he did to mock them with their own policy. Fear
and necessity be perfect teachers, so as they did sing and cry with all the
differences of voices that were commanded them, to save their lives, although
they were much grieved at the sport their enemies made at them. They say that
unto this day, the Mexicans use to jest at the Tlatelulcans, which they bear
impatiently, when they put them in mind of this singing and crying of
beasts. King Axayaca took pleasure at this scorn and disgrace, and presently
after they returned to Mexico with great joy. This King was esteemed for one
of the best that had commanded in Mexico. He reigned eleaven years, and one
succeeded that was much inferior unto him in valor and virtue.

Of the deeds of Autzol the eight King of Mexico. CHAP. 19.
AMong the four Electors that had power to choose whom they pleased to be
king, there was one endued with many perfections, named Autzol. This man was
chosen by the rest, and this election was very pleasing to all the people: for
besides that he was valiant, all held him courteous and affable to every man,
which is one of the chief qualities required in them that command, to
purchase love and respect. To celebrate the feast of his coronation, he
resolved to make a voyage, and to punish the pride of those of Quaxulatlan, a
very rich and plentiful province, and at this day the chief of new Spain.
They had robbed his officers and stewards, that carried the tribute to Mexico,
and therwithall were rebelled. There was great difficulty to reduce this Nation
to obedience, lying in such sort, as an arm of the sea stopped the Mexicans
passage: to pass the which AutZol (with a strange device and industry) caused
an Island to be made in the water, of faggots, earth, and other matter; by
means whereof, both he and his men might pass to the enemy, where giving
them battle, he conquered them, and punished them at his pleasure. Then
returned he unto Mexico in triumph, and with great riches, to be crowned
King, according to their custom. Autzol extended the limits of his kingdom
far, by many conquests, even unto Guatimalla, which is three hundred leagues
from Mexico. He was no less liberal than valiant: for whenas the tributes
arrived, (which as I have said) came in great abundance, he went forth of
his palace, gathering together all the people into one place, then commanded
he to bring all the tributes, which he divided to those that had need. To the
poor he gave stuffes to make apparel, and meat, and whatsoever they had
need of in great abundance, and things of value, as gold, silver, jewels,
and feathers, were divided amongst the Captains, soldiers, and servants of
his house, according to every man's merit. This AutZol was likewise a great
politician, he pulled down the houses ill built, and built others very
sumptuous. It seemed unto him that the city of Mexico had too little water, and
that the Lake was very muddy, and therefore he resolved to let in a great
course of water, which they of Cuyoacan used. For this cause he called the
chief man of the city unto him, being a famous sorcerer, having propounded
his meaning unto him, the sorcerer wished him to be well advised what he did,
being a matter of great difficulty, and that he understood, if he drew the
river out of her ordinary course, making it pass to Mexico, he would drown
the city. The king supposed these excuses were but to frustrate the effect of
his desseigne, being therefore in choler, he dismissed him home; and a few
days after he sent a provost to Cuyoacan, to take this Sorcerer: who having
understanding for what intent the kings officers came, he caused them to enter
his house, and then he presented himself unto them in the form of a terrible
Eagle, wherewith the provost and his companions being terrified, they returned
without taking him. AutZol incensed herewith sent others, to whom he
presented himself in form of a furious tygre, so as they durst not touch him.
The third came, and they found him in the form of a horrible serpent, whereat
they were much afraid. The king moved the more with these doings, sent to
tell them of Cuyoacan, that if they brought not the sorcerer bound unto him, he
would raze their city. For fear whereof, or whether it were of his own free
will, or being forced by the people, he suffered himself to be led to the
king, who presently caused him to be strangled, and then did he put his
resolution in practice, forcing a channel whereby the water might pass to
Mexico, whereby he brought a great current of water into the Lake, which they
brought with great ceremonies and superstitions, having priests casting incense
along the banks, others sacrificed quails, and with the blood of them
sprinkled the channel banks, others sounding of cornets, accompanied the
water with their music. One of the chief went attired in a habit like to
their goddess of the water, and all saluted her, saying, that she was
welcome. All which things are painted in the Annals of Mexico: which book is
now at Rome in the holy Library, or Vaticane, where a father of our company,
that was come from Mexico, did see it, and other histories, the which he did
expound to the keeper of his Holiness Library, taking great delight to
understand this book, which before he could never comprehend. Finally, the
water was brought to Mexico, but it came in such abundance, that it had
welneere drowned the city, as was foretold: and in effect it did ruin a
great part thereof, but it was presently prevented by the industry of Autzol,
who caused an issue to be made to draw forth the water: by means whereof he
repaired the buildings that were fallen, with an exquisite work, being before
but poor cotages. Thus he left the city environed with water, like another
Venice, and very well built: he reigned eleaven years, and ended with the
last and greatest successor of all the Mexicans.

Of the election of great Motecuma, the last king of Mexico. CHAP. 20.
WHen the Spaniards entered new Spain, being in the year of our Lord one
thousand five hundred and eighteen, Motecuma second of that name, was the last
king of the Mexicaines, I say the last, although they of Mexico, after his
death, chose another king, yea in the life of the same Motecuma, whom they
declared an enemy to his country, as we shall see hereafter. But he that
succeeded him, and he that fell into the hands of the Marquise de Valle, had
but the names and titles of Kings, for that the kingdom was in a manner al
yielded to the Spaniards: so as with reason we account Motecuma for the last
king, and so he came to the periode of the Mexicaines power and greatness,
which is admirable being happened among Barbarians: for this cause, and for
that this was the season, that God had chosen to reveal unto them the
knowledge of his Gospel, and the kingdom of Jesus Christ, I will r^* late more
at large the acts of Motecuma, then of the rest.

Before he came to be king, he was by disposition, ve^ ry grave and stayed, and
spoke little, so as when he^ gave his opinion in the privy counsel, whereas he
assisted, his speeches and discourses made every one to admire him, so as even
then he was feared and respected. He retired himself usually into a Chapel,
appointed for him in the Temple of Vitziliputzli, where they said their Idol
spoke unto him; and for this cause he was held very religious and devout. For
these perfections then, being most noble and of great courage, his election was
short and easy, as a man upon whom al men's eyes were fixed, as worthy of such
a charge. Having intelligence of this election, he hid himself in this
chapel of the Temple, whether it were by judgment, (apprehending so heavy
and hard a burden) as to govern such a people) or rather as I believe through
hypocrisy, to show that he desired not Empery: In the end they found him,
leading him to the place of council, whither they accompanied him with all
possible joy: he marched with such a gravitie, as they all said the name of
Motecuma agreed very well with his nature, which is as much to say, as an angry
Lord. The electors did him great reverence, giving him notice, that he was
chosen king: from thence he was led before the harth of their gods, to give
incense, where he offered sacrifices in drawing blood from his ears, and the
calves of his legs, according to their custom. They attired him with the
royal ornaments, and pierced the gristle of his nosthrils, hanging thereat a
rich emerald, a barbarous and troublous custom, but the desire of rule, made
all pain light and easy. Being seated in his throne, he gave andience to the
Orations and Speeches that were made unto him, which according unto their
custom were eloquent and artificial. The first was pronounced by the king of
Tescuco, which being preserved, for that it was lately delivered, and very
worthy to be heard, I will set it down word by word, and thus he said: The
concordance and unity of voices upon thy election, is a sufficient testimony
(most noble young man) of the happiness the realm shall receive, as well
deserving to be commanded by thee, as also for the general applause which all
do show by means thereof. Wherein they have great reason, for the Empire of
Mexico does already so far extend it self, that to govern a world, as it
is, and to bear so heavy a burden, it requires no less dexterity and
courage, than that which is resident in thy firm and valiant heart, nor of
less wisdom and judgment than thine. I see and know plainly, that the
mighty God loves this City, seeing he has given understanding to choose
what was fit. For who will not believe that a Prince, who before his reign had
pierced the nine vaultes of heaven, should not likewise now obtain those
things that are earthly to releeve his people, aiding himself with his best
judgment, being thereunto bound by the duty and charge of a king. Who will
likewise believe that the great courage which thou have always valiantly
showed in matters of importance, should now fail thee in matters of greatest
need? Who will not persuade himself* but the Mexicane Empire is come to the
height of their soveraignetie, seeing the Lord of things created has imparted
so great graces unto thee, that with thy look only thou breedest admiration
in them that behold thee? Rejoice then, O happy land, to whom the Creator has
given a Prince, as a firm pillar to support thee, which shall be thy father
and thy defense, by whom thou shall be succored at need, who will be more than
a brother to his subjects, for his piety and clemency. Thou have a king, who
i^ regard of his estate is not inclined to delights, or will lie stretched out
upon his bed, occupied in pleasures and vices; but contrariwise in the midst
of his sweet and pleasant sleep, he will suddenly awake, for the care he
must have over thee, and will not feel the taste of the most savourie ^eates,
having his spirits transported with the imagination of thy good. Tell me then
(O happy realm) if I have not reason to say that (...) ought rejoice,
having found such a King: And th^^ ^^ble Young man, and our most mighty Lord,
be confident, and of ^ good courage, that seeing the Lord of things created
has given thee this charge, he will also give thee for^^ and courage to
manage it: and thou may well hope, th^^ he which in times past has used so
great bounty toward thee, will not now deny thee his greater gifts, seeing
he has given thee so great a charge, which I wish thee to enjoy ma^^ years.
King Motecuma was very attentive to this Discourse, which being ended, they say
he was so troubled, that indevouring thrice to answer him, he could not
speak, being overcome with tears, which joy and content do usually cause, in
sign of great humility. In the end being come to himself, he spoke brie^ly,
I were too blind, good king of Tescuco, if I did not know, that what thou
have spoken unto me, proceeded of mere favor, it pleases you to show me,
seeing among so m^nie noble and valiant men within this realm, you have made
ch^^^^ of the le^st sufficient: and in truth, I find my self so incapable of
a charge of so great importance, that I know not what to do, but to beseech
the Creator of all created things, that he will favor me, and I entreat you
all to pray unto him for me. These words uttered, he began again to weep.

How Motecuma ordered the service of his house, and of the war he made for
his coronation. CHA. 21
HE that in his election made such show of humility and mildenes, seeing
himself king, began presently to discover his aspiring thoughts. The first
was, he commanded that no plebeian should serve in his house, nor bear any
royal office, as his predecesfours had used till then; blaming them that would
be served by men of base condition, commanding that all the noble and most
famous men of his realm should live within his palace, and exercise the
offices of his court, and house. Whereunto an old man of great authority (who
had sometimes been his Schoolemaister) opposed himself, advising him, to be
careful what he did, and not to thrust himself into the danger of a great
inconvenience, in separating himself from the vulgar and common people, so as
they should not dare to look him in the face, seeing themselves so rejected by
him. He answered, that it was his resolution, and that he would not allow the
plebeians to go thus mingled among the Nobles, as they had do one, saying,
that the service they did, was according to their condition, so as the kings
got no reputation, and thus he continued firm in his resolution. He presently
commanded his counsel to dismiss all the pleb^ians from their charges and
offices, as well those of his household as of his court, and to provide
Knights, the which was done. After he went in person to an enterprise
necessary for his coronation. At that time a province lying far off toward
the North Ocean, was revolted from the crown, whether he led the flower of his
people, well appointed. There he warred with such valor and dexterity, that
in the end he subdued all the province, and punished the rebels severely,
returning with a great number of captives for the sacrifices, and many other
spoils. All the cities made him solemn receptions at his return, and the
Lords thereof gave him water to wash, performing the offices of servants, a
thing not used by any of his predecessors. Such was the fear and respect they
bare him. In Mexico, they made the feasts of his coronation with great
preparations of dances, comedies, banquets, lights, and other inventions for
many days. And there came so great a wealth of tributes from all his
countries, that strangers unknown came to Mexico, and their very enemies
resorted in great numbers disguised to see these feasts, as those of Tlascalla,
and Mechovacan: the which Motecuma having discovered, he commanded they should
be lodged and gently entreated, and honored as his own person. He also made
them goodly galleries like unto his own, where they might see and behold the
feasts. So they entered by night to those feasts, as the king himself, making
their sportes and maskes. And for that I have made mention of these provinces,
it shall not be from the purpose to understand, that the inhabitants of
Mechovacan, Tlascalla, and Tapeaca, would never yield to the Mexicans, but did
always fight valiantly against them; yea, sometimes the Mechovacans did
vanquish the Mexicans, as also those of Tapeaca did. In which place, the
Marquise Don Ferrand Cortes, after that he and the Spaniards were expelled
Mexico, pretended to build their first city, the which he called (as I well
remember,) Segura de la Frontiere: But this peopling continued little: for
having afterward reconquered Mexico, all the Spaniards went to inhabit there.
To conclude, those of Tapeaca, Tlascalla, and Mechovacan, have been always
enemies to the Mexicans, although Motocuma said unto Cortes, that he did
purposesy forbear to subdue them, to have occasion to exercise his men of
war, and to take numbers of captives.

Of the behavior and greatness of Motecuma. CHAP. 22.
THis King labored to be respected, yea, to be worshipped as a god. No Plebeian
might look him in the face; if he did, he was punished with death: he did
never set his foot on the ground, but was always carried on the shoulders of
Noblemen; and if he lighted, they laid rich tapestry whereon he did go. When
he made any voyage, he and the Noblemen went as it were in a park compassed
in for the nonce, and the rest of the people went without the park, invironing
it in on every side; he never put on a garment twice, nor did eat or drink
in one vessel or dish above once; all must be new, giving to his attendants
that which had once served him: so as commonly they were rich and sumptuous. He
was very careful to have his laws observed. And when he returned victor from
any wa^^e, he fained sometimes to go and take his pleasure, then would he
disguise himself, to see if his people (supposing if he wear absent,) would
omit any thing of the feast or reception: If there were any excess or
defect, he then did punish it rigorously. And also to discern how his
ministers did execute their offices, he often disguised himself, offering
guistes and presents to the judges, provoking them to do in justice. If they
offended, they were presently punished with death, without remission or
respect, were they Noblemen, or his kinsmen; yea, his own brethren. He was
little conversant with his people, and seldom seen, retyring himself most
commonly to care for the government of his realm. Besides that, he was a
great iusticier and very noble, he was very valiant and happy, by means
whereof, he obtained great victories, and came to this greatness, as is written
in the Spanish histories, whereon it seems needelesse to write more. I will
only have a care hereafter to write what the books and histories of the
Indies make mention of; the which the Spanish writers have not observed, having
not sufficiently understood the secrets of this country, the which are things
very worthy to be known, as we shall see hereafter.

Of the presages and strange prodigies which happened in Mexico before the fall
of their Empire. CHAP. 23.
ALthough the holy Scripture forbids us to give credit to signs and vain
prognostications, Deuteronomy. 28.
and that S. Jerome does admonish us not to fear tokens from heaven, Ier. 10.
as the Gentiles do: Yet the same Scripture teaches us, that monstrous and
prodigious signs are not altogether to be contemned, and that often they are
forerunners of some general changes and chasticements which God will take, as
Eusebius notes well of Cesarea: Lib. 9. de demo. Evan. demon. 1
For that the same Lord of heaven and earth, sendes such prodiges and new
things in heaven, in the elements, in beasts, and in his other creatures, that
this might partly serve as an advertisement to men, and to be the beginning of
the pain and chastisement, by the fear and amazement they bring. It is
written in the second book of Macabees, that before that great change and
persecution of the people of Israel: 2. Mac. 5.
which was caused by the tyranny of Antiochus surnamed Epiphanes, whom the
holy Scriptures call the root of sin, there were seen for forty days
together thorowout all Jerusalem, great squadrons of horsemen in the air, who
with their armor guilt, their lances and targets, and upon furious horses,
with their swords drawn did strike, 1. Mat. 1.
skirmish and encounter one against the other: and they say that the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem seeing this, they prayed to our Lord to appease his
wrath, and that these prodegies might turn to good. It is likewise written in
the book of Wisdom, Sap. 17.
That when God would draw his people out of Egypt, and punish the Egyptians,
some terrible and fearful visions appeared unto them, as fires seen out of
time in horrible forms. Joseph in his book of the Iewishwarres, shows many
and great wonders going before the destruction of Jerusalem, and the last
captivity of his wicked people, whom God justly abhorred: Eusebius. lib. 1. de
eccle. hist.
and Eusebius of Cesarea, with others, allege the same texts, authorizing
prognostications. The Histories are full of like observations in great changes
of states and commonweales, as Paulus Orosius witnesses of many: and without
doubt this observation is not vain nor unprofitable; for although it be
vanity, yea superstition, defended by the law of our God, lightly to believe
these signs and tokens: yet in matters of great moment, as in the changes of
nations, kingdoms, and notable laws. It is no vain thing, but rather certain
and assured, to believe that the wisdom of the most High does dispose and
suffer these things, fo retelling what should happen, to serve (as I have
said) for an advertisement to some, and a chasticement to others, and as a
witness to all, that the king of heaven has a care of man: who as he has
appointed great and fearful tokens of that great change of the world, which
shall be the day of judgment, so does it please him to send wonderful signs
to demonstrate lesser changes in diverse parts of the world, the which are
remarkable, whereof he disposes according to his eternal wisdom. We must
also understand, that although the devil be the father of lies; yet the King
of Glory makes him often to confess the truth against his will, which he
has often declared for very fear, Mat. 1. Luke. 4.
as he did in the desert by the mouth of the possessed, crying, that Jesus was
the Savior come to destroy him, as he did by the Pythonisse, who said that
Paul preached the true God, Act. 26.
as when he appeared and troubled Pilates wife, whom he made to mediate for
Jesus a just man. And as many other histories besides the holy Scripture gave
diverse testimonies of idols, in approbation of christian religion, whereof
Lactantius, Prosperus, and others make mention. Let them read Eusebius in his
books of the preparation of the Gospel; and those of his demonstrations where
he does amply treat of this matter. I have purposely spoken this, that no man
should contemn what is written in the Histories and Annals of the Indies,
touching Presages and strange signs, of the approaching end and ruin of their
kingdom, and of the Divelles tyranny, whom they worshipped altogether. Which
in my opinion is worthy of credit and belief, both for that it chanced late,
and the memory is yet fresh, as also for that it is likely, that the Devil
lamented at so great a change, and that God by the same means began to
chastise their cruel and abominable idolatries. I will therefore set them
down here as true things. It chanced that Motecuma having reigned many years
in great prosperity, and so pufft up in his conceit, as he caused himself to
be served and feared, yea to be worshipped as a god, that the Almighty Lord
began to chastise him, and also to admonish him, suffering even the very
Divelles whom he worshipped, to tell him these heavy tidings of the ruin of
his kingdom, and to torment him by visions, which had never bin seen;
wherewith he remained so melancholy and troubled, as he was void of
judgment. The idol of those of Cholola, which they called Quetzacoalt,
declared, that a strange people came to possess his kingdoms. The king of
Tescuco (who was a great Magitian, and had conference with the Devil) came one
day at an extraordinary house to visit Motecuma, assuring him that his gods
had told him, that there were great losses preparing for him, and for his
whole realm: many witches and sorcerers went and declared as much, amongst
which there was one did very particularly foretell him what should happen: and
as he was with him he told him that the pulses of his feet and hands failed
him. Motecuma troubled with these news, commanded all those sorcerers to be
apprehended: but they vanished presently in the prison, wherewith he grew
into such a rage, that he might not kill them, as he put their wives and
children to death, destroying their houses, and families. Seeing himself
importuned and troubled with these advertisements, he sought to appease the
anger of his gods: and for that cause he labored to bring a huge stone,
thereon to make great sacrifices: For the effecting whereof he sent a great
number of people with engines and instruments to bring it: which they could by
no means moove, although (being obstinate) they had broken many instruments.
But as they strove still to raise it, they heard a voice joining to the stone,
which said they labored in vain, and that they should not raise it, for that
the Lord of things created would no more suffer those things to be done
there. Motecuma understanding this, ommaunded the sacrifice to be performed in
that ^lace, and they say the voice spoke again: Have I not told you, that it
is not the pleasure of the Lord of things created, that it should be done: and
that you may well know that it is so, I will suffer myself to be transported
alittle, then after you shall not moove me. Which happened so indeed, for
presently they carried it a small distance with great facility, then afterward
they could not moove it, till that after many prayers, it suffered itself to
be transported to the entry of the city of Mexico, where suddenly it fell into
the Lake, where seeking for it, they could not find it, but it was afterward
found in the same place from whence they had remooved it, wherewith they
remained amazed and confounded. At the same time there appeared in the element
a great flame of fire, very bright, in the form of a Pyramide, which began
to appear at midnight, and went still mounting until the Sun rising in the
morning, where it stayed at the South, and then vanished away. It showed
itself in this sort the space of a whole year, and ever as it appeared the
people cast forth great cries as they were accustomed, believing it was a
presage of great misfortune. It happened also that fir^ took the Temple,
whenas no body was within it, nor near unto it, neither did there fall any
lightning or thunder: whereupon the guardes crying out, a number of people ran
with water, but nothing could help, so as it was all consumed; and they say
the fire seemed to come forth of pieces of timber, which kindled more by the
water that was cast upon it. There was a Comet seen in the day time, running
from the west to the east, casting an infinite number of sparkles, and they say
the form was like to a long tail, having three heads.

The great lake betwixt Mexico and Tescuco, without any wind, earthquake, or
any other apparent sign, began suddenly to swell, and the waves grew in
such sort, as all the buildings near unto it fell down to the ground. They
say at that time they heard many voices, as of a woman in pain, which said
sometimes, O my children, the time of your destruction is come, and otherwhiles
it said, O my children, whither shall I carry you, that you perish not
utterly? There appeared likewise many monsters with two heads, which being
carried before the king, suddenly vanished. There were two that exceeded all
other monsters, being very strange; the one was, the fishers of the lake took
a bird as big as a Crane, and of the same color, but of a strange and
unseen form. They carried it to Motecuma, who at that time was in the palace
of tears and mourning, which was all hanged with black, for as he had many
palaces for his recreation, so had he also others for times of affliction,
where with he was then heavily charged and tormented, by reason of the
threatenings his gods had given him by these sorrowful advertisements. The
fishers came about noone setting this bird before him, which had on the top
of his head a thing bright and transparent, in form of a looking glass,
wherein he did behold a warrelike nation coming from the east, armed,
fighting, and killing. He called his Divines and Astronomers (whereof there was
a great number) who having seen these things, and not able to yield any
reason of what was demanded of them, the bird vanished away, so as it was
never more seen: whereupon Motecuma remained very heavy and sorrowful. The
other which happened, was a laborer, who had the report of a very honest man,
came unto him, telling him, that being the day before at his work, a great
Eagle flew toward him, and took him up in his talants, without hurting
him, carrying him into a certain cave, where it left him; the Eagle pronouncing
these words, Most mighty Lord, I have brought him whom thou have commanded
me: This Indian laborer looked about on every side, to whom he spoke, but he
saw no man. Then he heard a voice which said unto him, Do thou not know
this man, whom thou see lying upon the ground: and looking thereon, he
perceived ^ man lie very heavy asleep, with royal ensigns, flowers in his
hand, and a staff of perfumes burning, as they are accustomed to use in that
country, whom the labourer beholding, knew it was the great king Motecuma,
and answered presently: Great Lord, this resembles our King Motecuma. The voice
said again, Thou say true, behold what he is, and how he lies asleep,
careless of the great miseries and afflictions prepared for him. It is now
time that he pay the great number of offenses he has done to God, and that
he receive the punishment of his tyrannies, and great pride, and yet thou see
how careless he lies, blind in his own miseries, and without any feling.
But to the end thou may the better see him, take the staff of perfumes he
holds burning in his hand, and put it to his face, thou shall then find him
without feeling. The poor laborer durstnot approach near him, nor do as he
was commanded, for the great fear they all had of this king. But the voice
said, Have no f^are, for I am without comparison greater than this King, I can
destroy him, and defend him, do therefore what I command thee. Whereupon the
laborer took the staff of perfumes out of the kings hand, and put it burning
to his nose, but he moved not, nor showed any feeling.

This done, the voice said unto him, that seeing he had found the king so
sleepy, he should go awake him, and tell him what he had seen. Then the Eagle
by the same commandment, took the man in his tallents, and set him in the
same place where he found him, and for accomplishment of that which it had
spoken, he came to advertise him. They say, that Motecuma looking on his face,
found that he was burnt, the which he had not felt till then, wherewith he
continued exceeding heavy and troubled. It may be, that what the laborer
reported, had happened unto him by imaginary vision: And it is not incredible,
that God appointed by the means of a good Angel, or suffered by a bad, that
this advertisement should be given to the labourer for the kings chasticement,
although an infidel, seeing that we read in the holy Scriptures, that
infidells and sinners have had the like apparations and revelations, as
Nabucadonosor, Balaam, and the Pithonisse of Saul. Dan 2. Number. 22. 3. Reg. 28.
And if some of these apparations did not so expressly happen, yet without
doubt, Motecuma had many great afflictions and discontentments, by reason of
sundry and diverse revelations which he had, that his kingdom and law should
soon end.

Of the news Motecuma received of the Spaniards arrival in his Country, and
of the Embassage he sent them. CHAP. 24.
IN the fourteenth year of the reign of Motecuma, which was in the year of
our Lord 1517. There appeared in the North seas, ships, and men landing,
whereat the subjects of Motecuma wondered much, and desirous to learn, and to
be better satisfied what they were, they went aboard in their canoes, carrying
many refreshings of meats and stuffes to make apparel, upon color to sell
them. The Spaniards received them into their ships, and in exchange of their
victuals and stuffes, which were acceptable unto them, they gave them chains
of false stones, red, blew, green, and yellow, which the Indians imagined to
be precious stones. The Spaniards informing themselves who was their king, and
of his great power, dismissed them, willing them to carry those stones unto
their lord, saying, that for that time they could not go to him, but they
would presently return and visit him. Those of the coast went presently to
Mexico with this message, carrying the representation of what they had seen,
painted on a cloth, both of the ships, men, and stones which they had given
them. King Motecuma remained very pensive with this message, commanding them
not to reveal it to any one. The day following, he assembled his counsel, and
having showed them the painted clothes, and the chains, he cousulted what was
to be done: where it was resolved to set good watches upon all the sea coasts,
to give present advertisement to the king of what they should discover. The
year following, which was in the beginning of the year 1518. they discovered
a fleet at sea, in the which was the Marquise of Valle Don Fernande Cortes,
with his companions, a news which much troubled Motecuma, and conferring with
his counsel, they all said, that without doubt, their great and ancient Lord
Queztzalcoalt was come, who had said, that he would return from the East,
whither he was gone. The Indians held opinion, that a great Prince had in times
past left them, and promised to return. Of the beginning and ground of which
opinion shall be spoken in another place. They therefore sent five principal
Ambassadors with rich presents, to congratulate his coming, saying, they knew
well that their great Lord QueztZalcoalt was come, and that his servant
Motecuma sent to visit him, for so he accounted himself. The Spaniards
understood this message by the means of Mar^^a, an Indian woman whom they
brought with them, and understood the Mexicane tongue. Fernande Cortes finding
this a good ocasion for his entry, commanded to deck his chamber richly, and
being set in great state and pomp, he caused the Ambassadors to enter, who
omitted no shows of humility, but to worship him as their god.

They delivered their charge, saying, that his servant Motecuma sent to visit
him, and that he held the country in his name as his lieutenant, that he knew
well it was the Topilcin which had been promised them many years since, who
should return again unto them. And therefore they brought him such garments
as he was wont to wear, when he did converce amongst them, beseeching him to
accept willingly of them, offering him many presents of great value. Cortes
receiving the presents, answered, that he was the same they spoke of, wherewith
they were greatly satisfied, seeing themselves to be courteously received and
entreated by him (for in that, as well as in other things, this valiant captain
deserved commendations) that if this course had been continued, to win them by
love, it seemed the best occasion was offered that might be devised, to draw
this country to the Gospel by peace and love: but the sins of these cruel
homicides and slaves of Satan, required punishment from heaven, as also those
of many Spaniards, which were not in small number. Thus the high judgments of
God disposed of the health of this nation, having first cut off the perished
roots: and as the Apostle says, Romans 11.
the wickedness and blindenes of some, has been the salvation of others. To
conclude, the day after this Embassage, all the Captains and Comm^^ders of the
fleet, came unto the Admiral, where understanding the matter, and that this
realm of Motecuma was mighty and rich; it seemed fit to gain the reputation
of brave and valiant men among this people, and that by this means, (although
they were few,) they should be feared and received into Mexico. To this end
they discharged all their artillery from their ships, which being a thing
the Indians had never heard, they were amazed, as if heaven had fallen upon
them. Then the Spaniards began to defy them to fight with them: but the
Indians not daring to hazard themselves, they did beat them and entreat them
ill, showing their swords, lances, pertuisans, and other arms, wherewith they
did terrify them much. The poor Indians were by reason hereof, so fearful
and amazed, as they changed their opinion, saying, that their Lord Topilcin
came not in this troup. But they were some gods, (their enemies) came to
destroy them. Whenas the Ambassadors returned to Mexico, Mo^^cu^a was in the
house of audience; but before he would hear them, this miserable man commanded
a great number of men to be sacrificed in his presence, and with their blood to
sprinkle the Ambassadors, (supposing by this ceremony, (which they were
accustomed to do in solemn Ambassages,) to receive a good answer. But
understanding the report and information of the manner of their ships, men,
and arms, he stood perplexed and confounded: then taking counsel thereon, he
found no better means, th^n to labor to stop the entry of these strangers,
by coniurations and magic Arts. They had accustomed often to use this
means, having great conference with the devil, by whose help they sometimes
obtained strange effects. They therefore assembled together all the Sorcerers,
Magitians, and Inchanters, who being persuaded by Motec^ma, they took it in
charge to force this people to return unto their country. For this
consideration, they went to a certain place which they thought fit for the
invocation of their devils, and practicing their arts, (a thing worthy of
consideration.) They wrought all they could; but seeing nothing could prevail
against the Christians, they went to the king, telling him that they were more
then men, for that nothing might hurt them, notwithstanding, all their
coniurations and enchantments. Then Motecuma advised him of another policy,
that faining to be very well contented with their coming, he commanded all his
countries to serve these celestial gods that were come into his land. The
whole people was in great heaviness and amazement, and often news came that
the Spaniards inquired for the King, of his manner of life, of his house and
means. He was exceedingly vexed herewith: some of the people and other
Negromanciers advised him to hide himself, offering to place him whereas no
creature should ever find him. This seemed base unto him, and therefore he
resolved to attend them, although it were dying. In the end he left his houses
and royal palaces to lodge in others, leaving them for these gods as he said.

Of the Spaniards entry into Mexico. CHAP. 25.
I Pretend not to entreat of the acts and deeds of the Spaniards, who
conquered New Spain, nor the strange adventures which happened unto them, nor
of the courage and invincible valor of their Captain Don Fernando Cortes: for
that there are many histories and relations thereof, as those which Fernando
Cortes himself, did write to the Emperor Charles the fifth, although they be
in a plain style, and far from arrogancy, the which do give a sufficient
testimony of what did pass, wherein he was worthy of eternal merry, but only
to accomplish my intention: I am to relate what the Indians report of this
action, the which has not to this day been written in our vulgar tongue*
Motecuma therefore, having notice of this Captains victories, that he advanced
for his conquest, that he was confederate and joined with them of Tlascalla,
his capital enemies, and that he had severely punished them of Cholola his
friends, he studied how to deceive him, or else to try him in sending a
principal man unto him, attyred with the like ornaments and royal ensigns,
the which should take upon him to be Motecuma, which fiction being discovered to
the Marquise by them of Tlascalla, (who did accompany him,) he sent him back,
after a mild and gentle reprehension, in seeking so to deceive him: whereupon
Motecuma was so confounded, that for the fear thereof, he returned to his
first imaginations and practices, to force the christians to retire, by the
invocation of coniure^s and witches. And therefore he assembled a greater
number then before, threatening them, that if they returned without effecting
what he had given them in charge, not any one should escape, whereunto they all
promised to obey. And for this cause, all the devils officers went to the way
of Chalco, by the which the Spaniards should pass, when mounting to the top of
a hill, Tezcalipuca, one of their principal gods, appeared unto them, as
coming from the Spaniards camp, in the habit of Chalcas, who had his pappes
bound about eight fold with a cord of reeds, he came like a man beside
himself, out of his wits, and drunk with rage and fury. Being come to this
troop of witches and coniurers, he stayed, and spoke to them in great choler,
Why come you hither, what does Motecuma pretend to do by your means? He has
advised himself too late: for it is now determined, that his Kingdom and
honor shall be taken from him, with all that he possesses, for punishment of
the great tyrannics he has committed against his subjects, having governed not
like a Lord, but like a traitor and tyrant. The inchanters and coniurers
hearing these words, knew it was their idol, and humbling themselves before
him, they presently built him an altar of stone in the same place, covering it
with flowers which they gathered thereaboutes, but he contrariwise, making no
account of these things, began again to chide them, saying, What come you
hither to do O ye traitors? Return presently and behold Mexico, that you may
understand what shall become thereof. And they say, that turning toward Mexico
to behold it, they did see it flaming on fire. Then the devil vanished away,
and they not daring to pass any farther, gave notice thereof to Motec^ma,
whereat he remained long without speaking, looking heavily on the ground; then
he said, what shall we do if god and our friends leave us, and contrariwise,
they help and favor our enemies? I am now resolute, and we ought all to
resolve in this point, that happen what may, we must not fly nor hide our
selves, or show any sign of cowardice. I only pity the aged and infants,
who have neither feet nor hands to defend themselves. Having spoken this, he
held his peace, being transported into an ecstasy. In the end, the Marqui^e
approaching to Mexico, Motecuma resolved to make of necessity a virtue, going
three or four leagues out of the city to receive him with a great ma^^^ty,
carried upon the shoulders of four Noblemen, under a rich canapie of gold and
feathers: when they met, Motecuma descended, and they saluted one another
very courteously. Don Fernando Cortes said unto him, that he should not care for
any thing, and that he came not to take away his real me, no^ to diminish his
authority. Motecuma lodged Cortes and his companions in his royal palace,
the which was very stately, and he himself lodged in other private houses.
This night the soldiers for joy discharged their artillery, wherewith the
Indians were much troubled, being unaccustomed to hear such music. The day
following, Cortes caused Mot^cuma and all the Nobles of his Court to assemble
in a great hall, where being set in a high chair, he said unto them, that he
was servant to a great prince, who had sent them into these countries to do
good works, and that having found them of Tl^scalla to be his friend^s, (who
complained of wrongs and greevances done unto them daily by them of Mexico,) he
would understand which of them was in the blame, and reconcile them, that
hereafter they might no more afflict and war one against another: and in the
mean time, he and his brethren (which were the Spaniards,) would remain
still there without hurting them: but contrariwise, they would help them all
they could. He labored to make them all understand this discourse, using his
interpterers and truchmen. The which being understood by the King and the
other Mexicane Lords, they were wonderfully well satisfied, and showed great
signs of love to Cortes and his company. Many hold opinion, that if they had
continued the course they began that day, they might easily have disposed of
the king and his kingdom, and given them the law of Christ, without any great
effusion of blood. But the judgments of God are great, and the sins of both
parties were infinite: so as not having followed this course, the business was
deferred: yet in the end, God showed mercy to this nation, imparting unto them
the light of his holy Gospel, after he had showed his judgment, and punished
them that had deserved it, and odiously offended his divine reverence. So it
is, that by some occasions, many complaints, griefs, and iealosies grew on
either side. The which Cortes finding, and that the Indians minds began to be
distracted from them, he thought it necessary to assure himself, in laying hand
upon king Motecuma, who was seized on, and his legs fettered. Truly this act
was strange unto all men, and like unto that other of his, to have burnt his
ships, and shut himself in the midst of his enemies, there to vanquish or to
die. The mischief was, that by reason of the unexpected arrival of Pamphilo
Narvaes at the true cross, drawing the country into mutiny, Cortes was forced
to absent himself from Mexico, and to leave poor Motecuma in the hands of
his companions, who wanted discretion nor had not moderation like unto him: so
as they grew to that discention, as there was no means to pacify it.

Of the death of Motecuma, and the Spaniards departure out of Mexico. CHAP. 26.
WHenas Cortes was absent from Mexico, he that remained his lieutenant,
resolved to punish the Mexicans severely, causing a great number of the
nobility to be slain at a mask which they made in the palace, the which did
so far exceed, as all the people mutined, and in a furious rage, took arms
to be revenged and to kill the Spaniards. They therefore besieged them in the
palace, pressing them so near, that all the hurt the Spaniards could do them
with their artillery and crosse-bowes, might not terrify them, nor force them
to retire from their enterprise, where they continued many days, stopping
their victuals, nor suffering any one to enter or issue forth. They did fight
with stones, and cast darts after their manner, with a kind of lances like
unto arrows, in the which there are four or six very sharp rasors, the which
are such, (as the histories report,) that in these wars, an Indian with one
blow of these rasors, almost cut off the neck of a horse, and as they did one
day fight with this resolution and fury, the Spaniards to make them cease,
showed forth Mot^cuma, with another of the chief Lords of Mexico, upon the top
of a platform of the house, covered with the targets of two soldiers that were
with them. The Mexicanes seeing their Lord Motecuma, stayed with great silence.
Then Motecuma caused the Lord to advise them to pacify themselves, and not to
war against the Spaniards, seeing that (he being a prisoner,) it could
little profit him. The which being understood by a young man called
Quicuxtemoc, whom they now resolved to make their king, spoke with a loud
voice to Motecuma, willing him to retire like a villain, that seeing he had
bin such a coward, as to suffer himself to be taken, they were no more bound
to obey him, but rather should punish him as he deserved, calling him woman for
the more reproach, and then he began to draw his bow and to shoot at him,
and the people began to cast stones at him, and to continue their combat.
Many say that Motecuma was then hurt with a stone whereof he died. The Indians
of Mexico affirm the contrary, and that he died as I will show hereafter.
Alvaro and the rest of the Spaniards seeing themselves thus pressed, gave
intelligence to Captain Cortes, of the great danger they were in: who having
with an admirable dexterity and valor, given order to Narvaes affairs, and
assembled the greatest part of his men, he returned with all speed to succor
them of Mexico, where observing the time the Indians rest, (for it was their
custom in war, to rest every fourth day:) He one day advanced with great policy
and courage, so as both he and his men entered the palace, whereas the
Spaniards had fortefied themselves: they then showed great signs of joy, in
discharging their artillery. But as the Mexicans fury increased, (being out of
hope to defend themselves,) Cortes resolved to pass away secretly in the night
without brute. Having therefore made bridges to pass two great and dangerous
passages, about midnight they issued forth as secretly as they could, the
greatest part of his people having passed the first bridge, they were
discovered by an Indian woman before they could pass. The second who cried out
their enemies fled, at the which voice all the people ran together with a
horrible fury: so as in passing, the second bridge, they were so charged and
pursued, as there remained above three hundred men slain and hurt in one
place; where at this day there is a small hermitage, which they improperly call
of Martyrs. Many Spaniards (to preserve the gold and jewels which they had
gotten,) perished, and others staying to carry it away, were taken by the
Mexicans, and cruelly sacrificed to their idols. The Mexicans found king
Motecuma dead, and wounded as they say with poiniards, and they hold opinion
that that night the Spaniards show him with other Noblemen. The Marquise in his
relation sent to the Emperor, writes the contrary, and that the Mexicans
killed him that night with a son of Motecuma, which he led with him amongst
other noblemen, saying, that all the treasure of gold, stones, and silver, fell
into the lake and was never more seen. But howsoever, Motecuma died miserably,
and paid his deserts to the just judgment of our Lord of heaven for his pride
and tyranny: his body falling into the Indians power, they would make him no
obsequies of a king, no not of an ordinary person, but cast it away in great
disdain and rage. A servant of his having pity of this Kings misery, (who
before had been feared and worshipped as a God) made a fire thereof, and put
the ashes in a contemptible place. Returning to the Spaniards that escaped,
they were greatly tired and turmoiled, the Indians following them two or three
days very resolutely, giving them no time of rest, being so distressed for
victuals, as a few grains of Mays were divided amongst them for their meat.
The relations both of the Spaniards and Indians agree, that God delivered them
here miraculously, the Virgin Mary defending them on a little hill, whereat
this day three leagues from Mexico, there is a Church built in remembrance
thereof, called our Lady of succor. They retired to their ancient friends of
Tlascalla, whence (by their aid, and the valor and policy of Cortes,) they
returned afterward to make war against Mexico, by water and land, with an
invention of brigantines, which they put into the lake, where after many
combats, and above threescore dangerous battles, they conquered Mexco, on S.
Hippolitus day, the 13. of August, 1521. The last king of the Mexicans, (having
obstinately maintained the wars,) was in the end taken in a great canoe,
whereinto he fled, who being brought with some other of the chiefest noblemen
before Fernando Cortes, this petty king with a strange resolution and courage,
drawing his dagger, came near to Cortes, and said unto him, Until this day I
have done my best endeavor for the defense of my people: now am I no farther
bound, but to give thee this dagger to kill me therewith. Cortes answered, that
he would not kill him, neither was it his intention to hurt them: but their
obstinate folly was guilty of all the misery and afflictions they had
suffered, neither were they ignorant how often he had required peace and amity
at their hands. He then commanded them to be entreated courteously. Many strange
and admirable things chanced in this conquest of Mexico: for I neither hold it
for an untruth, nor an addition, which many write, that God favored the
Spaniards by many miracles: for else it had bin impossible to surmount so many
difficulties, without the favor of heaven, and to subject this nation with so
few men. For although we were sinners, and unworthy so great a favor, yet the
cause of our God, the glory of our faith, the good of so many thousands
souls, as were in these countries, whom the Lord had predestinate, wrought
this change which we now see, by supernatural means, and proper to himself
which calls the blind and prisoners, to the knowledge of himself, giving
them light and liberty by his holy Gospel. And to the end you may the better
understand this, and give credit thereunto, I will aleadge some examples which
in my opinion are fit for this history.

Of some miracles which God has showed at the Indies, in favor of the faith,
beyond the desert of those that wrought them. CHAP. 27.
SAint Croix of the mountain, is a very great province, and far from the
Kingdom of Peru, neighbor to diverse infidel nations, which have not yet any
knowledge of the Gospel, if since my departure, the fathers of our company
which remane there, have not instructed them. Yet this province of S. Croix is
christened, and there are many Spaniards, and great numbers of Indians baptized.
The manner how Christianity entered, was thus. A soldier of a lewd life,
resident in the province of Charcas, fearing punishment, being pursued for his
offenses, went far up into the country, and was received courteously by this
barbarous people. The Spaniard seeing them in a great extremity for water, and
that to procure rain, they used many superstitious ceremonies, according to
their usual manner, he said unto them, that if they would do as he said, they
should presently have rain, the which they willingly offered to perform. Then
the soldier made a great cross, the which he planted on a high and eminent
place, commanding them to worship it, and to demand water, the which they did.
A wonderful thing to see, there presently fell such abundance of rain, as the
Indians took so great devotion to the holy cross, as they fled unto it in all
their necessities, and obtained all they demanded: so as they brake down their
idols, and began to carry the cross for their badge, demanding preachers to
instruct, and to baptize them. For this reason, the province to this day has
been called S. Croix de la Sierre. But to the end we may see by whom God
wrought these miracles, it shall not be unfit to show how that this soldier
after he had some years done these miracles, like an Apostle, and yet nothing
reformed in his lewd course of life, left the province of Charcas, and
continuing in his wicked courses, was publicly hanged at Potozi. Polo (who
knew him well) writes all this, as a notable thing happened in his time. Cabeca
de Vaca, who since was governor of Paraguey, writes what happened unto him in
his strange peregrination in Florida, with two or three other companions, the
only remainder of an army, where they continued ten years with these
Barbarians, traveling and searching even unto the South sea, being an author
worthy of credit: he says, that these Barbarians did force them to cure
certain diseases, threatening them with death if they did it not; they being
ignorant in any part of physic, and having nothing to apply, forced by
necessity, made evangelicall medicines, saying the prayers of the Church, and
making the sign of the cross, by means whereof, they cured these diseases,
which made them so famous, as they were forced to exercise this office in all
towns as they passed, the which were innumerable, wherein our Lord did aid
them miraculously, and they themselves were thereat amazed, being but of an
ordinary life; yea, one of them was a Negro. Lancero was a soldier of Peru,
of whom they knew no other merit, but to be a soldier: he spoke certain good
words upon wounds, and making the sign of the cross, did presently cure
them: so as they did say, (as in a proverb,) the psalm of Lancero. Being
examined by such as held authority in the Church, his office and works were
approved. Some men worthy of credit report, (and I have heard it spoken,) that
in the city of Cusco, whenas the Spaniards were besieged and so straightly
pressed, that without help from heaven, it was impossible to escape, the
Indians casting fire on the tops of the houses, whether the Spaniards were
retired, (in which place the great Church is now built,) and although the
covering were of a kind of straw, which they call Chicho, and that the fire
they cast, was of the wood of fat and slimy firretrees; yet nothing was set on
fire, nor burnt, for that there was a woman did quench it presently, the which
the Indians did visibly see, as they confessed afterward being much amazed. It
is most certain by the relations of many, and by the histories which are
written, that in diverse battles which the Spaniards had, as well in New
Spain, as in Peru, the Indians their enemies did see a horseman in the air,
mounted on a whit horse, with a sword in his hand, fighting for the Spaniards,
whence comes the great reverence they bear at the Indies to the glorious
Apostle Saint James. Other whiles they did see in some battles, the image of
our Lady, from whom the Christians have received in those parts incomparable
favors and benefits: if I should particularly relate all the works of
heaven, as they happened, it would make a very long discourse. It suffices to
have said this, by reason of the favor which the Queen of glory did to our
men, when they were pressed and pursued by the Mexicans, the which I have set
down, to the end we may know how our Lord has had a care to favor the faith
and Christian religion, defending those that maintained it, although happily by
their works they deserved not so great favors and benefits from heaven. And
therefore we ought not to condemn all these things of the first Conquerours of
the Indies, as some religious and learned men have done, doubtless with a good
zeal, but too much affected: For although for the most part they were covetous
men, cruel, and very ignorant in the course that was to be observed with the
Infidels, who had never offended the Christians, yet can we not deny, but on
their part there was much malice against God and our men, which forced them to
use rigor and chastisement. And moreover, the Lord of all (although the
faithful were sinners,) would favor their cause and party, even for the good
of the Infidells, who should be converted unto the holy Gospel by this means,
for the ways of God are high, and their paths admirable.

Of the manner how the Divine providence disposed of the Indies, to give an
entry to Christian Religion. CHAP. 28.
I Will make an end of this history of the Indies, showing the admirable
means whereby God made a passage for the Gospel in those parts, the which we
ought well to consider of, and acknowledge the providence and bounty of the
Creator. Every one may understand by the relation and discourse I have written
in these books, as well at Peru, as in New Spain, whenas the Christians first
set footing, that these Kingdoms and Monarchies were come to the height and
period of their power. The Inguas of Peru, possessing from the Realm of Chille
beyond Quitto, which are a thousand leagues, being most abundant in gold,
silver, sumptuous services, and other things: as also in Mexico, Motecuma
commanded from the North Ocean sea, unto the South, being feared and worshipped
not as a man, but rather as a god. Then was it, that the most high Lord had
determined that that stone of Daniel, which dissolved the Realms and Kingdoms
of the world, should also dissolve those of this new world. And as the law of
Christ came whenas the Roman Monarchy was at her greatness: so did it happen
at the West Indies, wherein we see the just providence of our Lord: For being
then in the world, I mean in Europe but one head and temporal Lord, as the
holy Doctors do note, whereby the Gospel might more easily beimparted to so
many people and nations. Even so has it happened at the Indies, where having
given the knowledge of Christ to the Monarkes of so many Kingdoms* it was a
means that afterward the knowledge of the gospel was imparted to all the
people: yea, there is herein a special thing to be observed, that as the
Lords of Cusco and Mexico conquered new lands, so they brought in their own
language, for although there were (as at this day) great diversity of tongues
yet the Courtly speech of Cusco, did and does at this day run above a
thousand leagues, and that of Mexico did not extend far less, which has not
been of small importance, but has much profited in making the preaching
easy, at such a time, when as the preachers had not the gift of many tongues,
as in old times. He that would know what a help it has been for the
conversion of this people in these two great Empyres, and the great
difficulty they have found to reduce those Indians to Christ, which
acknowledge no Sovereign Lord, let him go to Florida, Bresill, the Andes and
many other places, where they have not prevailed so much by their preaching in
fifty years, as they have done in Peru and new Spain in less then five. If
they will impute the cause to the riches of the country: I will not altogether
deny it. Yet were it impossible to have so great wealth, and to be able to
preserve it if there had not been a Monarchy. This is also a work of God in
this age, when as the Preachers of the gospel are so cold and without zeal,
and Merchants with the heat of covetousnes and desire of command, search and
discover new people whether we pass with our commodities, for as Saint
Austin says, the Prophecy of Esaie is fulfilled, in that the Church of Christ
is extended, August. lib. 2. de ^^^ovang. ^. 36.
not only to the right hand, but also to the left: which is, (as he
declares,) by human and earthly means, which they seek more commonly then
Jesus Christ. It was also a great providence of our Lord, that whenas the first
Spaniardes arrived there, they found aid from the Indians them selves, by
reason of their partialities and great divisions.

This is well known in Peru, that the division betwixt the two brothers
Atahulpa and Guasca, the great King Guanacapa their father being newly dead,
gave entry to the Marquise Don Francis Pizarre, and to the Spaniards, for that
either of them desired his alliance being busied in war one against the
other. The like experience has been in New Spain, that the aid of those of
the province of Tlascalla, by reason of their continual hatred against the
Mexicaines, gave the victory and siegniory of Mexico, to the Marquise Fernando
Cortes and his men, and without them it had been impossible to have won it,
yea, to have maintained themselves within the country.

They are much deceived that so little esteem the Indians, and judge that (by
the advantage the Spaniards have over them in their persons, horses, and arms,
both offencive and deffencive,) they might easily conquer any land or nation of
the Indies.

Chille stands yet, or to say better, Aranco and Tu^^^pel, which are two
cities, where our Spaniards could not yet win one foot of ground, although
they have made war there above five and twenty years, without sparing of any
cost. For this barbarous nation, having once lost the apprehention of horse and
shot, and knowing that the Spaniards fall as well as other men, with the blow
of a stone or of a dart, they hazard themselves desperately, entering the pikes
upon any enterprise. How many years have they levied men in New Spain, to
send against the Chychymequos, which are a small number of naked Indians, armed
only with bows and arrows: yet to this day they could not be vanquished,
but contrariwise, from day to day they grow more desperate and resolute. But
what shall we say of the Chucos, of the Chiraguanas, of the Piscocones, and
all the other people of the Andes? Has not all the flower of Peru been there,
bringing with them so great provision of arms and men as we have seen? What
did they? With what victories returned they? Surely they returned very happy in
saving of their lives, having lost their baggage and almost all their horses.
Let no man think (speaking of the Indians,) that they are men of nothing; but
if they think so, let them go and make trial. We must then attribute the
glory to whom it appertains, that is, principally to God, and to his admirable
disposition: for if Motecuma in Mexico, and the Ingua in Peru, had bin resolute
to resist the Spaniards, and to stop their entry, Cortes and Pizarre had
prevailed little in their landing, although they were excellent Captains. It
has also been a great help to induce the Indians to receive the law of
Christ, the subjection they were in to their Kings and Lords, and also the
servitude and slaverie they were held in by the devils tyrannies and
insupportable yoke. This was an excellent disposition of the Divine Wisdom,
the which draws profit from ill to a good end, and receives his good from an
others ill, which it has not sown. It is most certain that no people of the
West Indies have been more apt to receive the Gospel, then those which were
most subject to their Lords, and which have been charged with the heaviest
burdens, as well of tributes and services, as of customs and bloody
practices. All that which the Mexicane Kings and those of Peru did possess, is
at this day most planted with Christian religion, and where there is least
difficulty in the government and ecclesiastical discipline. The Indians were
so wearied with the heavy and insupportable yoke of Satan's laws, his
sacrifices and ceremonies, whereof we have formerly spoken, that they
consulted among themselves, to seek out a new law, and another God to serve.
And therefore the law of Christ seemed unto them, and does at this day seem
just, sweet, clean, good, and full of happiness.

And that which is difficult in our law, to believe so high and sovereign
Mysteries, has been easy among them, for that the Devil had made them
comprehend things of greater difficulty, and the selfsame things which he
had stolen from our Evangelicall law, as their manner of communion and
confession, their adoration of three in one, and such other like, the which
against the will of the enemy, have helped for the casie receiving of the truth
by those who before had embraced lies. God is wise and admirable in all his
works, vanquishing the adversatie even with his own weapon, he takes him in
his own snare, and kills him with his own sword. Finally, our God (who had
created this people, and who seemed to have thus long forgot them,) when the
hour^ was come, he would have the same devils, enemies to mankind, whom they
falsely held for gods, should give a testimony against their will, of the true
law, the power of Christ, and the triumph of the cross, as it plainly
appears by the presages, prophesies, signs, and prodiges, here before
mentioned, with many others happened in diverse parts, and that the same
Ministers of Satan, Sorcerers, Magitians, and other Indians have confessed it.
And we cannot deny it, (being most evident and known to all the world,) that
the Devil dares not hiss, and that the practices, oracles, answers, and
visible apparitions, which were so ordinary throughout all this infidelity,
have ceased, whereas the Cross of Christ has been planted, where there are
Churches, and where the name of Christ has been confessed. And if there be at
this day any cursed minister of his, that does participate thereof, it is in
caves, and on the tops of mountains, and in secret places, far from the
name and communion of Christians. The Sovereign Lord be blessed for his great
mercies, and for the glory of his holy name: And in truth, if they did govern
this people temporally and spiritually, in such sort as the law of Jesus Christ
has set it down, with a mild yoke and light burden, and that they would
impose no more upon them then they can well bear, as the letters pattents of
the good Emperor of happy memory do command, and that they would employ
half the care they have to make profit of these poor men's sweats and
labors, for the health of their souls, it were the most peaceable and happy
Christan part of all the world. But our sins are often an occasion that God
does not impart his graces so abundantly as he would. Yet I will say one thing
which I hold for truth, that although the first entry of the Gospel has not
been accompanied (in many places,) with such sincerity and christian means,
as they should have used: yet God of his bounty has drawn good from this
evil, and has made the subjection of the Indians, a perfect remedy for their
salvation. Let us consider a little, what has been newly converted in our
time to the Christian Religion, as well in the East, as in the West, and how
little surety and perseverance in the faith and Christian Religion there has
been, in places where the new converted have had full liberty to dispose of
themselves, according to their free will. Christianity without doubt augments
and increases, and brings forth daily more fruit among the Indian slaves: and
contrariwise decreaseth and threatens a ruin in other parts, where have been
more happy beginnings. And although the beginnings at the West Indies have
been laboursome, yet our Lord has speedily sent good worke-men and his
faithful Ministers, holy men and Apostolical, as Friar Martin of Valence, of
the order of S. Francis, Friar Dominicke de Gerancois, of the order of S.
Dominicke, Friar John de Roa, of the order of S. Austen, with other servants of
our Lord, which have lived holily, and have wrought more then human things.
Likewise, Prelates and holy Priests, worthy of memory, of whom we hear famous
miracles, and the very acts of the Apostles: yea, in our time we have known
and conferred with some of this quality.

But for that my intention has been only to touch that which concerns the
proper history of the Indians themselves, and to come unto the time that the
father of our Lord Jesus Christ would communicate the light of his word unto
them. I will pass no farther, leaving the discourse of the Gospel at the west
Indies for another time, and to a better understanding: Beseeching the
Sovereign Lord of all, and entreating his servants, humbly to pray unto his
Divine Majesty, that it would please hi^ of his bounty, often to visit and to
augment by the gifts of heaven this new Christendom, which these last ages
have planted in the farthest bounds of the earth. Glory, Honor, and Empery be
to the King of worlds for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

