HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms

Anno Primo and secundo Philippi and Mariae.

ACTS made at a Parliament, begone and holde^ at Westminster, the.xij. day of
November, in the first and second year of the reign of our soueraygne
Lord, and Lady Philip and Mary, by the grace of God, king and Queen of
England, France, Naples, Jerusalem, and Ireland, defendours of the faith,
Princes of Spain and Cycilie, Archedukes of Austria, dukes of Myllayn,
Burgondie, and Braband, counties of Haspurge, Flanders and Tyroll, and there
continued and kept to the dissolution of the same, being the.xvi. day of
Ianuarye then next ensuynge, were enacted as follows.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

engraved title page

The Table.
AN act touching letters patentes, and other writings to be sygned by the
queen's Majesty. Ca. i. An act for the reformation of excess in apparel. Cap.
ii. An act against seditious words and rumors. cap. iii. An act for the
punishment of certain persons calling themselves Egiptians. Cap. iiii. An
act to restrain caryinge of corn, victuals, and wood, over the Sea. Cap. v.
An act for the reuiuynge of three estatutes, made the punyshement of heresies.
Cap. vi. An act that persons dwelling in the country shall not sell diverse
wares in cytyes and Towns corporate by retayle. Cap. vii. An act repealing al
statutes, articles, and provisions, made against the sea apostolyke of Rome,
since the twenty year of king Henry theyght, and also for the establisheme^t
of al spiritual, and ecclesiastical possessions, and hereditamentes conveyed to
the laytye. Cap. viii. An act for the punishment of traiterous words against ye
queen's majesty. Cap. ix. An act whereby certain offenses be made treasons, and
also for the government of the kings and Queen's Maiestyes issue. Cap. x. An
act for the punishment of bringing in of counterfeyt coin of forreyne
realms, being curraunte within this realm, Cap. xi. An act touching the
impoundyng of distresses. Cap. xii. An act appoyntyng in order to Justices of
peace, touching ye bailement of prisoners. Cap, xiii. An act for the making of
russels satens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of Naples in Norwyche. Cap.
xiiii. An act to confirm the liberties of the lord Marchers in Wales. Cap.
xv. An act for the continuance of certain statutes. Cap. xvi. An act touching
leases hereafter to be made by certain spiritual persons. Cap. xvii.
An act touching letters patentes and other writings, to be signed by the
Queen's majesty.
The first Chapter.
WHere in the Parlymente begone and holden at Westminster, the second day of
Apryl in the first year of the reygne of our most dread and gracious
Soueraygne Lady the Queens majesty, and there continued and kept til ye
dissolutio^ of the same being the fifth day of May, the^ next following, one act
was made touching ye articles of her highness most noble marriage. In y^ which
act amongst other things it was enacted, ordered, and established by
thauctority of the said parliament, yt all and singular gifts, grauntes,
letters patentes, exchanges, confirmations, leases, and other writings, which
after the said marriage and during the same should pass, and be made of any
benefices, offices, lands, revenues, and fruits, or of any of them, should be
intiteled and made in the names of our Sovereign Lord the king, and of her
most excellent highness, whether his Majesty should be present within the
realms and dominions of her highness, or wtin any of them, or absent. An^ that
the same gifts, grantes, letters patentes, eschanges, confirmations, leases,
and other writings, so set forth and made, should be sealed, and firmed with
the sign manuel of her highness, and the same so signed and sealed with the
great seal of this realm or with such seal as has been accustomed, should be
by thauctoritie of the said parliament, demed, adjudged, declared, and
pronounced, to be as good perfect, and of like force, strength, and effect in
the law, to al intentes, constructions, and purposes, against our said
Sovereign Lord and Lady, the king and the Queens maiestyes, and her highness
heirs and successors, as if her majesty had been at the time of the making
thereof, sole and unmarried, and that al gifts, grauntes, letters patentes,
eschaunges, confirmatio^s leases, and other writings, which after the said
marriage, and during the time of the same, should pass and be made of the said
be nefices, offices, lands, revenues, and fruits, or of any of the^ where unto
the sign manuell, of her highness, should not be set made, or put, shall be by
thaucthoritye of the said parliament, from to time, demed, adjudged, accepted,
taken, and decreed, to be of no force, ne effect, but utterly frustrate and
boyde in the law, to all ententes, con structions and purposes, the said
marriage or any law, usage, or custom, to the contrary in any wise not
withstanding, as by the said act more at large does appear.

Sithence the making of which Statute, and the solemnisation of the said
marriage the queens most excellent majesty has been greatly molested, grieved,
and troubled with often signing of letters patentes, gifts, grauntes,
eschaunges, leases, and other writings, concerning and touching benefices,
offices, lands, revenues, and fruits, made and granted by, and from our said
soueraygne lord the king and her highness, to sundry of their most loving
subjects, to whom also it has been, and is, no small charge to atte^de, until
such time as they may procure and obtain the sign manuel of her highness, unto
their said letters patentes, gifts, grauntes, eschaunges, confirmations, and
leases, without which sign the same are utterly void by force of the said
statute, to the great danger, loss, and utter undoing of diverse persons, that
have lately bought purchased or obtained of our said sovereign Lord and Lady,
the king and Queen's majesty's, diverse lands, tenementes, and other
hereditamentes to their great costs and charges.

For remedy whereof be it enacted by the authority of this present parliament,
that the said branch or article touching or concerning only the signing of
letters patentes, gifts, grauntes, eschau^ges, confirmations leases, or of
other writings, for any lands, benefices, offices, revenues, fruits, or
other hereditamentes, shall be from henceforth clearly repelled, and made
frustrate, and void, to al intentes and purposes.

And be it further enacted by authority of this present parliament that al and
singular letters patentes, touching or concerning any gift, grannte,
eschaunge, confirmation, lease, or other writynge, the which sithence the
said marriage has passed, and be made of any benefices, offices, manours,
lands, tenementes, renenus, fruits, liberties, or other hereditamentes, or of
any of them in ye names of our most dread Soueraygne Lord and Lady, the
king and the Queen's majesty's (the waraunt or writing, or warauntes or
wrytynges whereof being signed with her highness sign manuel in such form
order and degree, as the same heretofore have been accustomed to be signed, when
her high nes was sole and unmarried) shall be by authority of this present
parliament of the same like force, strength and effect in the law, to al
intentes, constructions, and purposes, as if the same were or had been signed
by her highness sign manuel, and as if her majesty had been at the time of the
making there of, sole and unmarried, and as they were before the making of the
said act. The ^ayde estatute, or any branch, or article therein contained to
the contrary in any wise notwythstandynge.

An act for the reformation of excess in apparel. The second Chapter.
BE it enacted by thauctoritie of this present Parliament, that no person borne
wtin this realm, or the dominions of the same, other then the son and heir
apparaunt of a knight, or other then such, as may dispend.xx.li. by the year
in lands, offices, fees, or other yearly revenues for term of life, or be
worth in goods.ii. C. li. shall after the first day of Apryll next coming,
wear any manner of sylke in, or upon his hatte, bonet, night cappe, gyrdle,
scabberde, hose, shoes or spur leathers, upon pain of three months
imprysonment, and forfeytures of.x.li. for every days wearyng contrary to the
tenor of this act.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that Justices of
Assizes, in their circuities, Justices of peace in their sessio^s, sheriffs in
their turns, Stewardes in letes and law days, Majors, shieriffes, and
Baylyffes of cities Boroughes, and towns, corporate in their courts, shall,
and may enquire, here and determine from time to time, al and every the said
offenses, committed, or done within the lymites of their several
iurisdictio^s, and aucthorities, and where any such forfeytures shall happen to
be found within ye precinct of any city, bourough, town corporate, let or
law day, then the Mayor, sheriff, and Baylyffes of the said cities,
boroughes, and towns, and owner of the said let or law days, to have the
one moytie of the said forfeytures, and the other moytie to be to any subject of
this realm yt will sue for the same in any court of record by action
information, byll, or otherwise, in which no wager of law protection, or
assoigne shall be allowed. And where such for feyture shall be found out of any
city, boroughe, town, let, or law day that the moytie of al such
forfeytures, shall be to the king and Queen's majesty's, and the heirs of the
Queen, and the other moytie there of to any of their subjects, that will sue for
the same by byl, pl aint, action, informatio^, or otherwise in any court of
record as is aforesaid, in which no wager of law, protection, or essoygne,
shall be admitted or allowed. And that al and every such person and persons, as
have auctory tie by virtue of this act, to hear and determine the premysses
may upon the conviction of every such offender award process unto the shyrefe of
any shyre within this realm, for the apprehension of the said offender, which
being apprehended, shall be committed by the shyrefe unto the jail of the said
shyre, there to remain without bail or maynprise until the said offendoure
has paid the forfeyture wherein he is so convicted.

And be it further enacted by the aucthorytye aforesaid, that if any person or
persons of what estate condition or degree soener he or they he, after y^ said
first day of April next coming, knowing any servant or servants of his or
theirs to offend contrary to this act, do not put the same out of his or their
service, but shall keep in his or their service the same offendour of offenders
by the space of xiiii. days next after such knowledge had, or else being so put
out of his their service shall retain the same offendour or offenders to his
or their service again within one year next ensuing ye time of committyng of
any such offense, the same person or persons, so keeping or reteyning again in
or to his or their service, any such servant or servants offending contrary
to the tenor of this act as is aforesaid, shall for every his or their offense
forfeyt.c. li. of law full money of England, the moytye whereof to be to the
king and Queen's majesty's use, and the heirs and successors of the Queen and
the other moyte to him that will sue for the same in any court of record, by
action byl plaint information or otherwise, wherein no wager of law essoygne or
protection shall be admitted or allowed.

Provided always and be it enacted that this act, or any thing therein
contained, shall not extend to any person being of, or above the degree of a
knights son or daughter, or being wife to any of them, nor to such as have
been be, or shall be Maiour, Baylife Alderma^ or head officer in any city,
borough, or town corporate, or to the wife of any of them, nor to any of the
kings or Queen's servants in ordinary wages attendaunt, and wearyng the
kings or Queen's ordinary liueries, but that they and every of them, may use
and wear as they or any of them might lawfully use and wear be fore the
making of this act.

Provided also that no person shall be compelled by this act, to put away his
prentise or hired servant before the end of ye term before agreed between
the^, nor that any master shall forfeyt or lose any pain or forfeyture for the
keeping of his pre^tise or hired servant after his offense, contrary to this
act, unto thend of the term be fore agreed between them. Any thing above said
to the contraay notwythstandynge.

Provided also, that women may wear in their cappes, hattes, gyrdles, and
hoodes, as they or any of them might use and wear lawfully before the making
of this act.

An Act against seditious words and rumors. The third Chapter.
WHere it is contained as well in the Statute of Westminster. the first, as in the
Statute made at Gloucester the second year of the raygne of king Rychard the
second, that no man should be so hardye to contriue, speak, or tell any false
news, lies, or other such like false things of Prelates, Dukes, Earls,
Barous, and other Nobles and Pears of the realm, or of the Chaunceloure,
Treasurer, Clerk of the privy seal, Steward of the kings household,
Justices of the one bancke or of the other, or of any of the great officers of
this realm. And that every such offender should be taken and imprisoned, until
such time as he had brought him or the^forth which did speak the same. And
where also at a parliament holden at Cambridge in the.xii. year of the reygne
of the said king Richard, it was also enacted, that where any such offender
as is aforesaid should be taken and imprisoned, and could not find him of
whom he heard those news which he spoke, as is aforesaid, that then the same
speaker should be punished by thaduise of the counsel, as by the same acts
amongst other more plainly do and may appear.

Be it enacted by thauctoritye of this present parliament, that all and every
the said former acts and Statutes shall be and remain in their full force
strength and effect, toal intentes, constructions and purposes. And further
that Justices of ye peace in every Shire, city, and town corporate, within
the limittes of their several commissions, shall by auctoritye of this present
act, have full power to examine, hear and determine the causes above said, in
the said two first acts specified, and to put the said two first statutes and
every branch in them contained in due execution that from henceforth condign
punishment be not deferred from such offenders.

And for as much as diverse and sundry malicious and evil dysposed persons
maliciously, sediciously, rebelliously, and unnaturally contrary to the duty
of their fidelityes and allegiau^ces have now of late not only ymagined,
invented, practiced, spoken and spredde abroad diverse and sundry false,
seditious and sclaunderous news rumors, sayings, and tales against our most
dread Soueraygne Lord and king, and against our most natural Soueraygne
Lady and Queen, and against either of them, of whom we are forbidden to
think evil, and much more to speak evil, which offense sounds and is as well
to the great dishoner reproach and sclaunder of their most excellent
majesty's, as also to the great sclau^der of this their realm, and other their
dominions, but also have devised, made written printed published and set forth
diverse he ynous, sedicious and sclaunderous writings rimes ballades letters
papers and books, intending and practisyng thereby to move and stir seditio^s
discord disce^tion and rebellion within this realm, to ye great peril and
danger of the same.

For avoiding whereof, be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present
Parliament, that if any person or persons, after the.xx. day of February next
ensuing, and after open Proclamacion made of this Act, shall maliciously, of
his or their ymagination, speak any false sedicious, and slau^derous news,
rumors sayings, or tales of our said Sovereign Lord and king, or of our said
most natural Sovereign Lady and Queen, that then al and every such person and
persons so offe^ding, being thereof co^uicted or attainted, in form
hereafter, in this Act expressed, shall for every first offense, in some
markette place within the shyre, City or Borough, where, or near unto the
place, where the said words were, or shall be so spoken, be set openly upon the
pilory, by ye Sheriff or his ministers, if it shall fortune to be with out any
city or town corporate. And if it happen to be with in such cite or town
corporate, the^ by ye principal officer or officers of such city or town
corporate, or his or their ministers, and there to have both his ears cute
of, unless he pay one hundredth pounds to ye King and Queen's highness use
within one month next after judgment given of his said offense, and also shall
suffer imprisonment by the space of three months after such his or their
execution.

And it is likewise enacted by thaucroritye aforesaid, that al, and every
person and persons, which after the said day, and after Proclamation made of
this act, shall maliciously speak any false seditious and slanderous news,
rumors, or tales to the slander and reproach of our said Soueraygne lord the
king, or of our said most natural Soueraygne lady the Queen, of the
speaking or reportyng of any other, that then all, and every such person or
persons so speaking and reportyng, being thereof convict or atteynted, in form
hereafter in this act expressed, shall for every such offense in some market
place within the shyre, city, borough, or town, where or nere unto the place
where the said words were or shall be so spoken and reported, be set openly upon
ye pillory by the shyref or his ministers, if it shall fortune to be without any
city or town corporat. And if it shall happen to be wtin any city or town
corporate, then by the principal offycer or officers of such city or town
corporat, or his or their ministers, and there to have one of his ears cut of,
onles he pay one.C. marks to the kings and Queens hyghnes use, within one
month next after judgment given of his said offense, and also shall suffer
imprysonmente by the space of one month after his or their execution.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritye aforesaid, that if any person or
persons shall after the said day, and after Proclamation made as is aforesaid,
maliciously devise, writ, print, or set forth any manner of book time, ballade,
letter, or writing, containing any false matter, clause, or sentence of
sclaunder, reproach, and dishonor of the king and queen's majesty's, or of
either of them, or to the encouraging, sturring or moving of any insurrection
or rebellion, within this realm, or any dominions belongyng to the same. Or
whosoever shall maliciouslye procure, any such book, rhyme, ballade, letter, or
writing, written, prynted, or set forth, (and the said offense not being
punishable by the Statute, made in the.xxvi. year of ye reign of king Edward
the third, concerning treasons, or declaration of treason) that then and in
every such case the offender and offe^ders there in after his or their
conviction or attaynder, shall for his or their first offense, in some market
place within the shyre, city, or borow, where the said offense is, or shall be
committed or done, by the shirefe or his ministers, if it shall fortune to be
without any city or town corporate, and if within such city or town
corporate, then by the principal officer, or officers of such city or town
corporate or by his or their ministers, have his and their right hand strycken
of.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie asoresayd, that if any person or
persons, being once lawfully convicted of any of thoffe^ces aforesaid, now
provided to be punished by the execution of losses of ear, ears, or hand, as
is aforesaid, do afterward eftsoon offend in any of the offenses aforesaid,
that then he or they so offendynge shall suffer imprisonment during his or their
lives, without bail or maynprise, and forfeyte and ^ose to the king and queen's
maiestyes al his and their goods and cattels.

And be it also enacted by thauctority aforesaid, that al Justices of oyer and
determiner, within the limittes of their commission Justices of assise in their
several circuites, Justices of jail delyuerye, and Justices of peace, as well
within the liberties as without, within the limittes of their several
co^missions, in their general sessions, or other sessions, which they or two
of them whereof one of them to be of the Quorum, may and shall appoint at their
pleasure, where and when need shall require and shall by virtue hereof, have full
power and authority to enquire, here and determine, al and every thoffentes
aforesaid, as in cases and trial of felony. And that the party indicted and
arrained, shall have advantage of al manner of chalenges to the Jury
(peremptorye challenge only except) as in trial of felony.

And also that every Justice of peace within the limittes of his commission
shall have full power and auctoritye to commit any person being vehemently
suspected of any of the said offenses to ward, there to remain without bail
or mainprise, until he shall be delivered according to this act.

Provided always and be it enacted by thauctorytye aforesaid that no manner of
person or persons shall be molested, or impeched for any of thoffe^ces,
concerning speaking, or reporting as is aforesaid oneles he or they be thereof
accused and convicted within three months, next after his or their said
offense so committed or done. And in case any person shall be imprisoned for any
of the said offenses, concerning speaking or reportyng, and not thereof
convicted, within three months, next after his offense supposed to be by him
done and committed, that then the person so imprisoned shall be set at lyberty
and no longer deteyned in prison.

Provided also, and be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that every such
Maiour, Maiours, Bayliffes, and other heabe offycer and officers of cytyes,
borowes, and towns corporate which have or hereafter shall have jurisdiction
and authority, within the several limittes of thyr office or offices, to hold
and keep sessions as justice or justices of ye peace shall, and may by
auctority hereof, as well arrest and commit to ward, all and every person and
persons being vehemently suspected of any of thoffences aforesaid, as also to
proceed to the execution, hearing and determining of every y^ said offenses,
and to see, and make due execution thereof, according to the purporte, meaning
and effect of this present act. Any thing in the same act heretofore made to
the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, that the said Justice of peace, as well within liberties as
without, the which shall for any the offenses aforesaid, commit any person or
persons toward, as is aforesaid, shall within ten days next after such
committyng, with one other Justice whereof one of them to be of the Quorum,
direct their precepte to the Sheri^e or Sherifes of the county where
thoffence shall be committed, or to other ordinary officer, if it be within any
cyty, or town corporate, where the Sheriff can not intromit, commanding him or
them by the same impanel and return, as they shall assign.xxiiii. good and
lawful men of his or their bayliwike or bayliwikes to en quyre of the said
offense or offenses the which any such person or persons shall be so imprisoned
for. And thervpo^ within one moves after the date of the said precept to
proceed and determine, as above is expressed. Every one of the same Justices,
upon pain of.x.li. to be paid to the king and Queen's hyghnesses, as often as
they shall be founden in defaulte of any the same.

Provided also, and be it enacted, that this act shall be proclaimed in all the
shyres within this realm, before the.xij. day of February next coming to
the intent that al persons may have notice thereof and avoid the peril and danger
that might ensue by offe^dyng against the same. And this act to be only in
force, until the end, of the next parlyament, and no longer.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctorite aforesaid, that none of
the pears of this realm shall be arested or imprisoned for any of the said
offenses, but only by order or commandment, given from the king and queen's
priuye counsel, or of the heirs of the queen, and that the said pears, and
every of them, that shall hereafter fortune to be indicted of any thoffences
aforesaid, shall be tried by their pears, as before has been accustomed in
cases of treason or fellonye.

An act for the punishment of certain persons calling them selves Egiptians.
The fourth Chapter.
WHere in a parliament holden at Westminster in the.xxij. year of the reygne of
our late Soueraygne lord king Henry theyght (for the auoydinge and banyshyng
out o^ this realm of certain outla^dishe people, calling them selves
Egiptians, using no craft nor feate of marchaundises for to live by, but going
from place to place in great companies vsyng great, suttel, and crafty means,
to disceaue the kings Subjects, bearing them in hand, that they by palmestry
could tell men's and women's fortune, and so many times by craft and subteltie
disceyue the people of their money, and committed diverse great and heinous
fellonyes and robberies, to the great hurt and disceyt of the people). It was
amongst other things then enacted, that from the time of the making of the
said act, no such persons shou^de be suffered to come within this the
kings realm, upon pain of forfeyture to the king al their goods and catels,
and then to be commanded to avoid the realm within.xv. days next after the
commandment, upon pain of imprisonment, and such persons calling themselves
Egiptians, as then were within this realm, should depart within.xvi. days
next after proclamation of the said act upon pain of imprisonment and
forfeyture of all their goods and cattels with diverse other clauses and articles
contained in the said act, as by the said act more at large it appears. For
as much as diverse of the said company and such other like persons not fearing
the penalty of the said Statute, have enterprised to come over again into this
realm vsyng their old accustomed deuilysh and noughty practices and devises,
with such abominable living as is not in any Christian realm to be permited,
named, or known, and be not duly punyshed for the same, to the peryllous and
evil example of our soueraygne lord and lady the king and the Queens
Maiestyes most loving subjects, and to the utter and extreme undoing of
diverse and many of them as evidently does appear.

For reformation whereof be it ordained and enacted by the king and queen our
soueraygne Lord and Lady, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons
in present parliament assembled, and by thauctoritie of the same, that if any
person or persons after ye last day of January next coming, do willyngly
transport, bring and convey into this realm of England or Ways, any such
persons calling them selfs or co^monlye called Egiptians, that then he or
they, so transporting, bringing, or conueying in, any such persons, contrary
to the true meaning of this act, shall forfeyte and lose for every time so
offendyng.xl. pounds of lawful money of England.

And be it further ^nacted by thauctority aforesaid, that if any of the said
persons called Egiptians, which shall be transported and conveyed into this
realm of England or Wales, as is aforesaid, do continue and remain within the
same, by the space of one monethe, that then he or they so offending, shall by
virtue of this act, be demed and judged a fellon, and fellons, and shall
therefore suffer pains of death, loss of lands and goods, as in cases of
felony, by thorder of the common law of this realm, and shall upon the
trial of them, or any of them, therein, be tried in the county, and by
thinhabitauntes of the county or place, where they or he shall be apprehended or
taken, and not per medietatem linguae and shall lose the benefit and privilege
of sanctuary and clergy.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritye aforesaid, that if the Egiptians or
other persons commonly calling them selves Egiptians and every of them now
being within this realm of England or Wales, do not depart out of the same
within.xx. days next after proclamation of this present act shall be made, that
then he or they which shall not depart within the said time, according to the
true meaning of this act, shall forfeyte and lose al his and their goods and
cattels, and that then it shall be lawful to al and every the king and the
Queen's subjects to sease the same, the one moyte thereof to be to the use of our
soueraygne lord and lady the king and the queen and the other moyte thereof to be
to the use of him or the^ that shall so sease the same.

And be it also enacted by thauctority aforesaid, that if the Egiptians and
other persons commonly called Egiptians, and every of them now being within
this realm of England or Wales, do not depart out, and from the same,
within.xl. days next after proclamation shall be made of this act* that then he
or they, which shall not depart, and avoid within the said time of.xl. days
according to the true meaning of this act, shall be judged and demed according
to the laws of this realm of England a fellon and fellons and shall suffer
therefore pains of death, loss of lands and goods as in other cases of
felony and shall be tried as is aforesaid, and without having any benefit or
privilege of sanctuary and clergy.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any person after
the first day of Ianuarye next coming, shall sue for the obteyning of any
license, letter, or pasport, for any of the said persons called Egyptians, to
abide or continue, within this realm of England or Wales, contrary to the
tenoure of this act, that then every such person so suing, shall forfeyte and
lose for the same fortye ponnds of lawefull monye of England, and that every
such license, letter and pasporte, shall be by virtue of this act, void, to al
intentes and purposes, the one moytie of all which sums of money to be
forfeited, as is beforesayde, shall be to the king and Queen our Soueraygne Lord
and Lady, and the other moyte thereof to be to him or them, that will sue for the
same, in any court of record, by action of decte, byl, plaint, or
information, wherein any essoygne, wager of law, nor protectyon, shall be
admitted and allowed.

Provided always and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that this
present act, nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend, nor be
hurtefull to any of the said persons, commonly called Egyptians which within
the said time of twentye days next after the said proclamation to be made,
as is before said, shall leave that noughtye idle, and ungodly life, and
company e, and be placed in the service of some honest and able inhabitaunte
or inhabytauntes, within this realm, or that shall honestly exercise him self
in some law full work or occupation, but that he or they so continuing in
service or other lawful work or occupation, shall during such time as he or
they shall so continue, be discharged of all pains, and forfeytures contained
in this act.

Provided also and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, tha^ this act
shall not in any wise extend to any child or children, being not above the
age of.xiii. years, nor to any of the said persons, being now in prison so
that he or they so being in prison, do depart out of this realm,
within.xiiii. days next after his or their delivery out of prison, nor shall
extend to charge any manner of person or persons, as accessory to any offense
or offenses, contained or specified in this estatute.

An act to restrain carriing of corn, victuals, and woodde over the sea.
The.v. Chapyter.
WHere as sundry good estatutes and laws has been made within this realm in
the time of the Queens highness most noble progenitors that none should
tra^sporte, carye or conueye out of this realm into any place in the parties
beyond the seas any corn, butter chese* or other victual (except only for
the vitaling of the town of Caleys, Hames, and Guysnes, and the marches of the
same, upon diverse great pains and forfeytures in the same contained, that
notwithstanding many and sundry covetous and insatiable persons, sekyng their
only lucres, and gains, has, and dayelye does carry and conueigh innumerable
quantity, as well of corn, chese, butter, and other victual, as of wood out
this realm, into the parties beyond the seas. By reason whereof the said
corn, vyctuall and wood are grown unto a wonderful dearthe, and extreme
pryces, to the great detriment of the Commonwealth of this your hyghnes realm
and your faithful subjects of the same.

For remedy whereof, it may please your hyghnes that it may be enacted, and
be it enacted by your highness by thassente of the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present parlyament assembled, and by
thauctoritie of the same, that no manner of person or persons, after the.xx.
day of January next coming shall carye and transporte out of this realm by
any Ship, Craier, or other vessel, whatsoever, into any place in the
parties beyond the seas, or into the realm of Scotland, any wheat, rye,
barley, or other corn or grain, growing within this Realm, or any malte made
within the same, or any bear, butter, chese, herrynge, or wodde, except only
to and for the victualing and furniture of the towns of Callys, Hames, and
Guysnes, and to the town of Ba^wycke and the marches of the same, with out
sufficient and lawefull authority so to do, upon the pains and penalties
hereafter ensuinge, that is to say, thowner and owners of the said ships
and other vesseles, to forfeyte the said ships, craiers and other vesseles,
with all their apparels, to them and every of them belongyng, wherein the said
corn, butter, chese, herrynge, vyctuall, or wodde, shall be so transported and
carried, and the owners and owner of the said corn, butter, chese, hearing,
and wodde to forfeyte the double valewe of the same, so carried and conveyed,
and the master and mareners of every of the said ships craiers, and
vessels for every such offense, to forfeyte all their goods, and to be
imprisoned, by the space of one whole year without bail or maynepryse.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, after the said twenty day of January do carry and conueye away by
Boot, Crayer, or other vessel, or otherwise any wheat, rye, barleye, malte,
or other corn or grain, or any bear, butter, chese, herryng, or wodde to
any Ship or vessel being on the Seas, or within any Haven, creke, or other
place of the border of this Realm to be transported, carried, and conveyed into
any place in the parties beyond the Seas, or into the realm of Scotland,
without sufficient authority so to do, that then every owner of the said
vyctualls corn, and other things above said so transported or carried and
the owner and owners of every such bote or Vessel, and the botemen and
mareners of the same shall loose, forfeyte, and suffer all such forfaytures,
pains, and penaltyes as is above rehearsed, the one moytye of all, and every
which forfayture or forfaytures, to be to the King and Queens hyghnes,
their heirs and successors, and the other moytie to him or them, that will sue
for the same by byll, information, action of debte, or otherwise in any of the
King and Queens hyghnes courts of record, in which action, byll, or suite,
the defendaunte shall not wage his law, nor have any essoygne or protectyon to
him allowed.

And be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that if any person or persons
shall obtain of the king and Queens majesty's, their heirs or successoures,
or of any of them, any license to carry and transporte any corn, victual, or
wodde, into any parties beyond the seas, that if he or they, to whom any such
license, shall be granted, or any other, to whom such person or persons,
having such license, shall give, grant or ^ell his or their said license
unto, shall carry, and conueye or cause to be carried and conveyed any more
corn, victual, or woodde then shall be contained in his or their said license
shall forfeyte the treble value* of the said corn, victual, or wood so
carried and transported, without sufficient authority, and shall suffer
imprisonment for one whole year in the common jail, where he shall be
apprehended, there to remain without bail or maynepryse.

And be it further enacted by thaucthorite aforesaid, that no manner of person
or persons, after the said.xx. day of January, that shall obtain, or have
any such license for transportynge and carienge any corn victual or wodde,
into any parties beyond the seas, shall ship lade, and fraughte the same, or
any part thereof, at sondrye places within this realm, but at one place
certain, upon pain of forfeyture of the said corn, victual and wodde, and
all his goods and cattels the one moytie there of to the King and Queen's
majesty's, their heirs and successors, and the other moytie to him or them that
will sue for the same by action of debte, byll playnt information or otherwise,
wherein no wager of law, essoygne or protection shall be to him or them allowed.

And for the better executyon of this act, be it further enacted by the
aucthorytie aforesaid, that all and synguler Justices of peace, as well within
the liberties as without, within their several aucthorityes and commyssions
at any time, with in three years next after such offenses committed, shall
have full power and aucthorytie to enquire as well by the oaths of twelve
lawful men, as also to hear and examyne the master, maistres, and mareners
of the said ships, crayers, and other ^essels, and all, and every other
person and persons, of all, and synguler thoffenders against this present
Act, and to hear and determine the same offenses, as they may, and ought to
here and determine any other trespasses, or offenses.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that at all
time and times hereafter, when the common price of corn within this realm is,
that wheat shall not exceade the price of.vi. s. viii. d. the quarter, and
rye.iiii. s, the quarter, and bareleye. iii, shillings the quarter, it shall be
lawefull to every person and persoues to carry and transporte over the sea, to
any place beyond the seas at their pleasure of the said kinds of corn, so
that it be not to the King and Queen's enemies.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that this
Act, ne any thing therein contained, shall extend to any person or persons
for the necessary victeling of any ship, ships, or other vesseles, but that
they, and every of them, may victayle the said ships and vessels, as they
might have done before the making of this present act. This act or any
thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that this
act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be preiudicyall or hurtefull
unto the Lord great admiral of England, for the time being, or to the
King and Queens majesty's jurisdiction of the Admiraltie, but that the said
Lord Admiral, or his deputy, or deputies, may, and shall exercise, use, and
execute all kind of jurisdiction, belongyng to the sea according to his or
their co^missions, as they might lawefullye have done heretofore. This act, or
any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for the reviving of three Estatutes made for the punishment of
heresies. The.vi. Chapyter.
FOr the eschuing and auoydyng of errors and heresies, which of late have
risen, grown, and much increased within this realm, for that the Ordinaryes
have wanted authority to proceed against those, that were infected therewith.
Be it therefore ordained and enacted by the authority of this present
parliamente, that the Statute made in the fyfte year of the reign oi king
Richard the second, concerning the arresting and apprehension of erronyous
and heretical preachers, and one other Statute, made in the second year of
the reign of king Henry the fourth, concerning repressing of heresies, and
punyshmente of heretics, and also one other Estatute made in the Second year
of the raynge of King Henrye the fyfte, concerning the suppression of heresye
and lollardye, and every Article, Branch, and sentence conteigned in the
same three several acts, and every of them, shall from the twenty day of
January next coming, be revived, and be in full force, strength, and
effect, to all inintentes, constructions and purposes, for ever.

The tenor of the act, made in the fiueth year of king Richard, is as
follows. Chapter.v.
ITem forasmuch as it is openly known, that there be diverse evil persons
within the realm going from cou^tie to county, and from town to town, in
certain habites, under dyssimulation of great holiness, and without the
license of the Ordinaryes of the places, or other sufficient ancthoritie:
prechyng daily, not only in churches and churchyards, but also in markets,
Faires, and otheropen places where a great congregation of people is, diverse
sermones containing heresies, and notorius erroures, to the great
embleamishynge of the christen faith, and destruction of the Laws, and of the
estate of holy Church, to the great pericle of the souls of the people, and
of all the realm of England, as more plainly is found, and sufficientlye
prouyd, before the reverent father in God the Archbishop of Canterburye, and
the Bishops, and other prelates, masters of divinity, and doctoures, of
Canon and of civil, and a great part of the clergy of the said realm,
specially assembled for this cause, which persons do also preach diverse
matters of slander, to engender discord and dissension betwixt diverse
estates, of the said realm, aswelspiritual as temporal in exciting of the
people to the great peril of all the realm, which preachers cited or sommoned
before the ordinaries of the places, there to answer of that where of they be
impeched, will not obey to there summons and command ements, nor care not for
their monicions nor Sensures of the holy church, but expressly despise them.
And moreover, by their subtyl and ingenious words, do draw the people to here
their Sermons, and do maintain them in their errors by strong hand, and by
great routes. It is ordained and assented in this present Parliament that the
kings commissions be made and directed to the Sheryffes and other ministers of
our souer aygne Lord the king or other sufficient persons learned, and
according to the certificatio^s of ye prelates thereof to be made in the
Chauncery, from time to time to arrest al such preachers, and also their
fautours, mainteiners, and abbettours, and to hold them in arrest and strong
prison, till they will iustifye them, according to the law and reason of holy
Church. And the king will and commands, that the Chauncelloure make such
co^missyons at all times, that he by the prelates, or any of them shall be
certyfyed, and thereof required, as is aforesaid.

The tenor of the second act, made in the second year of king Henry
the.iiii. is as follows. Cha. xv.
ITem where as it is showed to our Soueraygne Lord the king, on the behalf
of the prelates and Clergy of his realm of England in this present
Parlyamente, that although the catholyke faith builded upon Christ and by his
Apostles, and the holy church suffycyentelye determined, declared, and
approved, has been hither to by good and holy, and most noble progenitoures
of our sovereign Lord the king in the said Realm, emongeste all the
realms of the world, most deuoutlye observed, and the Church of England,
by his said most noble progenitors and auncestoures, to the honor of God,
and the whole Realm aforesaid, laudablye endowed, and in her ryghtes and
lyberties sustained, without that that the same faith, or the said Church was
hurt or greuouslye oppressed, or else perturbed by any perverse doctrine, or
wicked heretical or erroneous opinions, yet nevertheless diverse false and
perverse people, of a certain new sect of the faith of, the Sacraments of
the Church, and the aucthorytye of the same, damuably thinking and against
the law of GOD, and of the church, vsurpyng the office of preaching do
peruerslye and maliciouslye, in diverse places within the said realm, under
the color of dissimuled holiness, preach and teach these days openly and
priuelye, diverse new doctryues, and mycked heretical and erroneous opinions
contrary to the same faith, and blessed determinacions of the holy Church.
And of such sect and wicked doctrine and opinions, they make unlawful
conuenticles, and confederacies, they hold and exercise schools, they make and
writ books, they do wickedly instruct and infourme people, and as much as
they may excite and stir them to sedition and insurrection, and makes great
strife and division emonge the people, and other enormities horrible to be
heard, daily do perpetrate and commit, in subuercion of the said catholyke
faith, and doctrine of the holy church, in diminucion of Gods honor, and
also in destruction of the estate, ryghtes, and liberties of the said church
of England, by which sect and wicked and false preachynges, doctrynes, and
opmions of the said false and perverse people, not only most greatest peril
of the souls, but also many more other hurtes, slanders, and peryles (which
God prohibit) might come to this realm unless it be the more ple^tifullye
and spedely helped by the kings majesty in this behalf, namely where as the
diocesans of the said realm cannot by their jurisdiction spiritual without
aid of the said royal Majesty, sufficientlye correct the said false and
perverse people, nor refrain their malice, because the said false and perverse
people do go from Dyoces to Dyoces, and will not appear before the said
Diocesans, but the same Diocesans, and their jurisdiction spiritual, and the
kayes of the church, with the censures of the same, do utterly contem^^e and
despise, and so their wicked preachynges and doctrines, does from day to
day continue and exercise, to the hatrede of right and reason, and utter
destruction order and good rule. Upon which nowelties and excesses above
rehearsed. The Prelates and clergy aforesaid, and also the commons of the said
realm, being in the same parliament, praying our sovereign Lord the king, ye
his roial highness would vouchesafe in the said parliamente to provide a
conueniente remedy, the same our soueraygne Lord the king, gratiouslye
co^sideryng the premises, and also the laudable steps of his said most
noble progenitiours and ancestors, for the conservation of the said catholyke
faith, and sustentation of Gods honor, and also the safegarde of the
estate, ryghtes, and liberties of the said Church of England, to the laud
of God, and mer^^e of our said soueraygne lord the king, and prosperity and
honor of all his said realm, and for the eschewinge of such dissentions,
divisions, hurtes, slanders, and peryles, in time to come, and that this
wicked sect, preachynges, doctrynes and opinions, should from hence for the
cease, and be utterly destroyed, by thassente of the states, and other
discrete men of the realm being in the said parliament, has granted,
stablished, and ordained from henceforth, fermely to be observed, that none
within ye said realm or any other dominions, subjects to his royal majesty,
presu^e to preach openly or priuelye without the license of the Diocesan of
the same place, fyrs^e required and obtained, curates in their own churches,
and persons hitherto priuileged, and other of the canon law granted, only
except. Nor that none from henceforthe any thing preach, hold teach, or
instruct, openly or priuelye, or make or writ any book contrary to the
catholyke faith or determination of the holy church^ nor of such sect and
wicked doctrines and opinions, shall make any conuenticles, or in any wise
hold or exercise Schools. And also that none from hence forth in any wise
favor such preacher, or maker of any such, and like conuenticles, or
holding or exercysynge schools, or making or writing such books, or so
teaching infourmynge, or exciting the people nor any of them maintain, or in
any wise sustain And that al, and singular having such books or any
wrytynges of such wicked doctrine and opinions, shall really with effect
deliver, or cause to be delivered al such books and writings to the Dyocesan
of the same (...) lace, within.xl. days from the time of the proclamation of
this ordinance and statute. And yfany person or persons, of whatsoever kind,
estate, or condition that he or they be from henceforth do or attempt against
the roial ordinance and statute aforesaid in the premises or in any of them
or such books in the form aforesaid do not deliver, then the diocesan of the
same place in his dioces, such person or persons in this behalf defamed,
or evidently suspected and every of the^ may by the authority of the said
ordinary and Statute, cause to be arrested, and under saufe custody in his
prisones to be detained, till he or they of the articles laid to him or them
in this behalf, do canonycallye purge him or themself, or else such wicked
sect, preachynges, doctrynes, and heretical and erromous opinions, do abjure,
according as the laws of the church, does require, so that the said dyocesan
by him self, or his commissaryes, do openly and iudicially proceed against
such persons so arrested, and remaining under his sause custodye to all
effect of the law, and determine that same business, according to the
Canonical decrees, within three months after the said arreste any lawefull
impediment ceassynge. And if any person in any case above expressed, be before
the diocesan of that place, or his commissaryes canonicallye conuicte, then the
same diocesan may do to be kept in his prison the said person so conuicte, for
the manner of his default, and after the quality of the offense, according and
as long as to his dyscretyon shall seem expediente, and moreover to put the
same person to the secular court, except in cases where he according to the
canonical decree ought to be left, to pay to our soueraygne lord the king,
his pecunier fine, according as the same fine shall seem competente to the
dyocesan, for the manner and quality of the offense, in which case the same
dyocesan, shall be bound to certifye the king of the same fine in his esche
ker, by his Lettre Patentes, sealed with his seal, to the effect that such
fine by the kings authority, may be required and leuyed to his use of the
goods of the same person so conuycte. And if any person within the said realm
and dominions, upon the said wicked preachynges, doctrynes, opinions,
schools, and heretical and erroneous informations, or any of them be before
the diocesan of the same place, or his commissaryes sentenciallye conuicte and
the same wicked sect, preachynges, doctrynes, and opinions, schools, and
informations, do refuse duelye to abjure, or by the dyocesan of the same place
or his commyssaryes after the abiuration made by the same person pronounced,
fall into relapse, ^o that according to the holy canons, he ought to be left
to the seculer court, whereupon credence shall be given to the Dyocesan of the
same place, or to his commissaryes, in this behalf, then the sheryffe of the
county of the same place, and Mayor and sheryffes or sheriff, or Mayor and
Baylyffes of the City, Town, and borowe of the same county next to the same
diocesan, or the said Commissaryes, shall be personallye present in preferrynge
of such sentences, when they by the same diocesan, or his commissaryes shall be
required, and they the same persons and every of them, after such sentence
promulgate, shall receive, and them before the people in an high place do to
be burnt: that such punyshmente may strike in fear to the minds of other,
whereby no such wicked doctrine and heretical, and erroneous opinions, nor
their abbettoures and fautoures in the said realm and dominions against the
catholic faith, christen law and determination of the holy church (which god
prohibit) be sustained, or in any wise suffered, in which al and singular the
premises, concerning the said ordinance and statute, the sheriffs, majors,
and baliffes of the said counties, cities, boroughes, and towns, shall be
tendyng, aydynge, and supportyng, to the said diocesans and their commissaries.

The tenor of the third act, made in the second year of king Henry the fifth,
is as follows. Cap. vii.
ITem forasmuch as great rumors, congregations, and insurrections here in the
realm of England by diverse of the kings liege people, as well by them which were
of the sect of heresies commonly called lollardry, as by other of their
confederatie, excitation, and abbetment, now of late were made to the intent to
adnul, distroy, and subuerte the christen faith, and the law of god and holy
Church within this same realm of England, and also to destroy the same our
soueraygne lord the king, and all other manner of estates of the same realm of
England, as well spiritual as temporal, and also al manner of policye and finally
the laws of the land. The same our soueraygne lord the king, to the honor of
god, and in conservation and fortification of the christen faith, and also in
salvation of his royal estate, and of the estate of al his realm, willing
against the malice of such heretics and lollardes to provide a more open
remedy and punishment then has been had and used in the case hertofore, so
that for fear of the same laws and punishment such heresies and lollardries
may y^ rather cease in time to come, by the advice and assent aforesaid, at the
prayer of the said commons has ordained and established: that first the
chaunceler, treasurer Justices of the one bench and of the other, Justices of
peace shirefes, majors, and baylifes of cities and towns, and al other
officers, having governance of people, which now be, or hereafter for the time
shall be, shall make an oath in taking of their charges and occupatio^s, to put
their hole power and diligence, to put out and do to be put out, cease, and
destroy al manner of heresies and errors, commonly called lollardries, wtin the
places where they exercise their offices and occupations from time to time with al
their power, and that they assiste the ordinaryes and their co^missaries and
them favor and maintain as often as they or any of the^ to ye shall be required
by the same ordinaries or their commissaries, so yt when the said officers and
ministers travail or ride to arrest any lollard, or to make assistence at ye
instance and request of the ordinaries or their co^missaries by virtue of this
statute ye the same ordinaries and co^missaries shall pay for their costs
reasonable. And yt the kings services to the which ye same officers be first
sworn, be preferred before al other statutes for ye liberty of holy church,
and the ministers of the same, and in espicial for the correction and
punishmente of the heretics and lollardes before this time made and not
repelled being in their force. And also ye al persons co^uict of heresy, of
what estate, condition or degree yt they be, by the said ordinaries or other
co^missaries left to the seculer power, according to the laws of holy church,
shall lose and forfeyt al their lands and tenementes, which they have in fee
simple in the manner as follows, that is to say, that the king have all the
lands and tenementes, which the said conuictes have in fee simple and holden of
him immediately as forfeyt, and that the other lords, of whom the lands and
tenementes of such conuictes be holden immediately, after yt the king is so
seaced and answered of the year the day, and the wast, have livery our of the
kings hands of ye lands and teneme^tes aforesaid of the^ so holde^, as it
has been used in ye case of attainder of felony, except ye lands and
teneme^tes, which be holden of t he ordinaries or their co^missaries, before
whom any such persons impeched of heresy be co^uict, which lands and
teneme^tes, i^^^^rly shall remain to ye king as forfayte. And moreover yt al ye
goods and cattels of these persons so co^uicted, be forfait to our soue raygne
lord the king, so yt no person convict of heresy, and left to ye seculer power
after the laws of holy church, shall for feyt his lands before yt he be dead.
And if any such person so co^uict be enfeffed be it by fine by deed, or without
deed in lands or tenementes, rentes or services in fee or otherwise, or has
any other possessions or catels by gift or grant of any person or persons to
another use the^ to ye use of such conuictes, ye the same lands nor
tenementes, re^tes nor services, nor such other possessions, nor catels shall be
forfeit to our soueraign lord the king in no wise. And moreover yt the justices
of ye kings bench, and justices of piece, and justices of assise, have full power
to enquire of al the^ which hold anierrors or heresies, as lollards, and which
be their main teine ^s, receyuers, favorers and susteyners common writers of
such books, as well of ye sermons, as of their scoles, conue^ticles,
congregatio^s and confede racies. And ye this clause be put in commissions of
ye justices of ye peace. And if any persons be indicted of any points aforesaid
ye said justices shall have power to award against the^ a capias and the shiref
shall be bound to arrest the person or persons so endicted as soon as he may
the^^ynd by him or by his officers. And forasmuch as the cognizance of heresy,
errors and lollardries, belongs to ye judges of holy church, and not to the
seculer Judges, such persons indicted shall be delivered to the ordinaries of ye
places or to their commyssaryes, by indentures betwyxt the^ to be made,
within.x. days after their arrest, or sooner if it may be, thereof to be acquit
or convict by ye laws of holy church, in case yt these persons be not indicted
o^ another thing, whereof ye cognysaunce belongs to the seculer judges and
officers, in which case, after that, that they be acquyte or delivered before
the seculer Judges of such things to the seculer Judges belongyng, they shall be
sent in safegarde to the said ordinaryes, or to their co^missaries, and to
them delivered by indentures as before, to be acquit or convict of such
lollardries, errors, or heresies, as is aforesaid, after the laws of holy
church, and that within the term aforesaid.

Provided always that the said endictementes be not taken in evidence but for
information before the spiritual Judges against such persons so endicted, but
that the ordinaries commence their process against such persons endicted in ye
same manner as though no endictment were, having no regard to such endictmentes.

And if any be endicted of heresye, error, or lollardrye, and taken by the
Shyreffe or other officer, he shall be let to maynpryce within the said ten
days by good suerty, for whom the said shyreffes or other officers will
answer, so that the said person or persons, which were so endicted, be ready
to be delivered to the said ordinaries or to their commissaries, before the
end of the said ten days, if he may by any means for syckenes. And every
ordinarye shall have sufficient commissaries, or commissary dwelling in every
county in a place notable, so that if any such person so endicted be taken,
that the said commissaryes or commissarie, may be warned in the notable place
where he dwells by the shyreffe, or some of his officers, to come to the
kings iayle in the same county, there to receive the same person so endicted
by indentures as before. And that in the inquest in this case to be taken, the
shyreffes and other officers, to whom it beloogeth shall do to be empanelled
good and sufficient persons, not suspected nor procured, that is to say, that
every of the^ which shall be so empanelled in such inquest, have within the
realm of England.C. s. of lands, tenementes, or of rent by year, upon pain
to lose to the kings use.x. li. and they which shall be empanelled in such
inquestes in Wales, every of them shall have to ye value of.xl. s. by year. And
if any such person be arrest, be it by the ordinary, or by the kings
officers or ministers, and escape or break the prison, before yt he be acquit
before the ordinary the goods and cattels which he had the day of such
arreste, shall be forfeyte to the king, and his lands and tenementes, which he
had the same day seized also into the kings hands, the king shall have the
profytes thereof from the said day, until he be yielded to the prison from which
he escaped. And that the foresaid Justices have full power to enquire of al such
escapes, breakyng of prison, and also of lands and tenementes, goods and
cattels of such persons so endicted.

Provided also that if any such person endicted do not return to the said
prison and dies not convict it shall be lawful to his heirs to enter into ye
lands and tenementes of their auncestre, without any other pursuyt making to
the king for this cause, and then al they which have libe^tyes and fraunchises
royal in England, as in the county of Chester, the county and liberty of
Durham, and other like, and also al ye Lords, which have jurisdiction and
fraunchisns royal in Wales, where the kings writtes do not run, have power to
execute and put in due execution these articles in all points by the^ or by
their officers, in like manner as the Justices and other the kings officers
before declared should do.

An act that persons dwelling in the country, shall not sell diverse wares in
cities or towns corporate by retayle. The.vii. Chapter.
Where before this time ye ancient cities, boroughes towns corporat, and
market towns within this realm of England, have been very populous, and
chiefly inhabited with marchantes, artificers, and handye crafts me^, during
which time ye children in the said cities, borowes, towns corporat, and market
towns were ciuilly brought up, and instructed, and also the said cities,
borowes and towns corporate, kept in good order and obeysaunce, and the
inhabiters of the same well set on work, and kept from idle nes. By reason
whereof the said cytyes, borowes and towns corporate, did then prosper in
riches and great wealth, and were as then not only able to serve and furnysh
the king and queen's majesty's, and other their noble progenitors kings of
this realm, as well with great numbers of good able persons, and well furnyshed
mete for the wares, as also then charged, and yet chargeable, with great fee
farms, quindemes, taxes, and diverse other paymentes to the king and Queen's
majesty's, which at this present they be not able to pay and bear, but to
their utter undoing, being few in number to pay and bear the same, but also
the same cities, boroughes, and towns corporat, are lyk to come very shortly
to utter dystruction ruin, and decay, by reason whereof the occupyers, linen
drapers woollen drapers haberdashars, and grocers, dwellinge in the countries
out of the said cities, boroughes, towns corporate, and market towns, do not
only occupye the art and mystery of the said sciences, in the places where they
dwell and inhabit, but also come unto the said cities, boroughes, towns
corporat and market towns and there sell their wares, and take away the releif
of the inhabitau^tes of the said cities, borowes, towns corporate, and market
towns, to the great decay, and utter undoing of the inhabitants of the same,
if spedy reformation therein be not had in time convenient. For remedy whereof,
and for the better amendment of the said citities, boroughes, towns
corporate, and market towns, and to thend the same cities, boroughes, and
towns corporat, may be the better able to pay the said fee farms, and also to
bear the other ordinary charges within the same cities, boroughes, and towns
corporate, and to furnyshe the king and queens maiestyes, with numbres of able
persons, like as they heretofore have done in times past, in times of war.

Be it therefore enacted by our soueraygne Lord and Lady, the king and Queen,
the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present parlyament
assembled, and by thauctoryty of same, that any person or persons which do now
inhabit and dwell, or hereafter shall inhabit or dwell in the country any where
or countye, with in this realm of England, out of any of the said cities,
boroughes, towns corporate, or market towns, from and after ye feast of S.
Michael tharchangel next coming, shall not sell or cause to be sold by
retayle, any woollen cloth, linen cloth, haberdashe wares grocery wares,
marcery wares, at or within any of the said cities, boroughes, towns corporat,
or market towns, or with in ye suburbs or liberties of the said cities,
boroughes, towns corporat, and market towns within the said realm of England
(except it be in open fayres) upon pain to forfeyt and lose for every time so
offending the sum of.vi. s. viii. d. and the whole wares so sold, proffered
and offered to be sold, contrary to the form, entente and effect of this
present act, as above is said, the one moyte of al which forfeytures to be to
the use of our say^ soue raygne lord and lady the king and queen's majesty's,
and the other half to him or them that shall sease and sue for the same in any
of the king and queens courts of record, by byl, playnt, action of debt,
information or otherwise, wherein no essoygne, proteccion or wager of law shall be
allowed.

Provided always, that this act shall not in any wise extend, nor be hurtful
to any person or persons, that bring any of the said woollen cloth, li^en cloth,
haberdash grocerye, mercery, ware or wares, to any of the said cities,
boroughes, towns corporate, or markette towns to be sold, or cause to be
sold, by whole sale, in gross and not by retayle, but they and every of the^
may lawfully sell the same, in as large and ample manner, form, and condition by
whole sale in gross, and not by retayle, as they and every of them might have
done at any time or times before the making of this act. Any thing herein to
the contrary not withstandinge.

Provided always that this present act shall not extend to any person or
persons, yt now dwell or inhabit in the country, or herafter shall dwell or
inhabit out of any of the said cities, borowes, towns corporate, or market
towns, but that they, and every of them at any time hereafter, when they or
any of them shall be fre of any the guyldes, and libertyes, of any the said
cities, borowes, towns corporate, or market towns, and dwell or inhabit within
any of the same cities, borowes, towns corporate, or markette towns, that
they and every of them so being free, shall and may sell or cause to be sold any
of the wares aforsayd, by retayle, in as ample and large manner as they and
every of them might have done, being free of the said cities, borowes, and
towns a^oresayd, before the making of this act. Any clause or article in this
act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauetoritye aforesaid that it shall be
laweful to al persons, to sell or cause to be sold by retayle or otherwise, al
manner of cloth, linen or woollen of their own making in every city, borough,
town corporat, and market town within the realm, as frelye and francklye as
they might have done before the making of this act. Any thing in the same
contained to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

Provided always that this act or any thing therein contained shall not be
prejudicial or hurtful to the liberties, and privileges of the universities of
Cambridge and Oxford, or either of them. Any thing in this act heretofore
mentioned to the contrary notwithstanding.

An act repealyng all Statutes, articles, and provisions made agayn^t the Sea
Apostolic of Rome, since the.xx. year of king Henry the eight, and also for
the establishment of al spiritual and ecclesistical possessions and
hereditamentes conveyed to the laytie. The eight Chapter.
Where as since the.xx. year of king Henry theight of famous memory, father
unto your majesty, our most natural soueraygne, and gracious Lady and
Queen, much false and erroneous doctrine, has been taught, preached, and
written partly by diverse the natural borne subjects of this realm and partly
being brought in hither from sundry other forreyne countries has been sown
and spread abroad within the same. By reason whereof as well the spirituality as ye
temporaltie of your highness realms and dominions have swerued from the
obedience of the sea Aposto like, and declined from the unity of Christ's
church, and so have continued until such time as your majesty being first
raised up by god, and set in the seat Royal over us, and then by his divine
and gracious providence knit in marriage with the most noble and virtuous
prince, the king our soueraygne lord your husband, the Popes holiness and
the Sea apostolyke sent hither unto your maiestyes (as unto persons undefiled,
and by gods goodness preserved from the common infection aforesaid) and to the
whole realm, the most reverend father in God, the lord Cardinal Poole
Legate de latere, to call us home again into the right way, from whence we have
al this long while, wa^dred and strayed abroad. And we after sundry long, and
grievous plagues and calamities, seeing by the goodness of god our own errors,
have knowledged the same unto the said most reverend father, and by him have
been, and are the rather at the contemplacion of your maiestyes, received and
embraced into the unity and bosom of Christ's church, and upon our humble
submission and promise made for a declaration of our repentance to repeal
and abrogate such acts and statutes as had been made in parliament since the
said.xx. year of the said king Henry theyght, against the supremacy of the Sea
apostolyke, as in our submission exhibited to the said most reverend father
in God, by your maiestyes appears. The tenor whereof ensues.

We the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons assembled in this
present parlyament, representyng the whole body of ye realm of England, and
the dominions of the same, in the name of our selves perticulerly and also of
the said body universally in this our supplication directed to your maiestyes
with most humble suit that it may by your graces intercession and mean be
exhibited to the most reverend father in God. the lord cardynall Poole
Legate, sent specially hither from our most holy father Pope July the
third, and the Sea apostolyke of Rome, do declare our selves very sorry and
repentaunte, of the scisme and disobedience, committed in this realm and
dominions aforesaid, against ye said Sea apostolic either by making, agreing,
or exec^yng any laws, ordinances, or commandments against the supremacy of
the said sea, or other wise doing or speaking, that might impugn the same:
offering ourselves, and promysing by this our supplication, that for a token
and knowledge of our said repentance, we be and shall be always ready under and
with thauctorities of your majesty's, to the uttermost of our powers, to do
that shall lie in us, for the abrogation and repealyng of the said laws and
ordinances in this present parlyament as well for our selves as for the whole
body, whom we represente, whereupon we most humblye desire your maiestyes as
personages undefiled in thoffence of his body toward the said Sea, which
nevertheless god by his providence, has made subject to you, so to set forth
this our most humble suyte, that we may obtain from the Sea apostolyke, by the
said most reverend father, as well perticulerly, as generally, absolution,
release, and discharge, from al danger of such censures, and sentences, as by
the laws of the church we be fallen into. And that we may as children
repentaunt, be received into the bosom and unity of Christ's church, so as
this noble realm with all the members thereof, may in this unity, and perfect
obedience to the Sea apostolyke, and Popes, for the time being, serve god and
your majesty's, to the furtherance and aduaunceme^t of his honor and glory. We
are at the intercession of your majesty's by thauctoritye of our holy father
Pope July the third, and of the Sea apostolic, assoiled, discharged and
delivered from excommunication, interdictions and other censures
ecclesiastical, which has hanged over our heads for our said defaultes since
the time of the said scisme mentioned in our supplication. The which time the
said lord Legate and we do al declare, recognize, and mean by this act to be
only since the.xx. year of the reign of your most noble father king Henry the
eight. It may now like your majesty's, that for the accomplishment of our
promise made in the said supplication, that is, to repeal al laws and
statutes mode contrary to the said supremacy and Sea apostolyke, during the
said scisme, the which is to be understand, since the.xx. year of the raygne
of the said late king Henry theyght, and so the said lord Legate does accept
and recognize the same.

Where in the parliament begone and holden at Westminster in the.xxi. year of
the raygne of the late king of most famous memory king Henry theyght, one act
was then and there made against pluralities of benefices, for taking of farms
by spiritual men and for none residence, in the which act amongst other
things it was ordained and enacted that if any person or persons, at any time
after the first day of Apryll in the year of our Lord God a thousand five
hundred and thirtye contrary to the same act, should procure and obtain at the
court of Rome, or else where any license or lycences, union, tolleration, or
dispensation, to receive or take any more benefices with cure, then was
limited and appointed by the same act, or else at any time after the said
day should put in execution any such license, tolleration, or dispensation,
before ye time obtained contrary to the said act, that then every such person
or persons so after the said day, suyng for himself, or receauynge, and taking
such benefice by force of such license or lycences, union, tolleration, or
dispensation, that is to say: the same person or persons only, and no another,
should for every such defaulte, incur the danger, pain and penalty of.xx.
li. sterling. and should also lose the whole profytes of every such benefice or
benefices, as he receaueth, or takes by force of any such license or licenses,
union, tolleration, or dispensation. And where also in the said act it was
ordained and enacted, that if any person or persons did procure, or obtain at
the court of Rome, or else where any manner of license or dispensation to be
none reside^ce at their dignities, prebend, or benefices, contrary to the said
act, that then every such person or persons putting in execution any such
dispensation, or license for him self from the said first day of Apryll, in
the said year of our Lord God, a M. five hundred and thirtye, should run
and encurre in the penalty damage, and pain of.xx. li. ster. for every time so
doing to be forfeyted and recovered, as by the said act is declared. And yet
such license or dispensation so procured, or to be put in execution, to be
void and of none effect, as by the same act more plainly it does and may
appear.

Be it enacted by thauctoritye of this present parlyament, that as much only of
the said act, as concerns the articles and clauses aforesaid, and al and
every the words and sentences contained in the said act, concerning the said
articles and clauses, and every of them, shall from hence forth be repealed,
adnulled, revoked, adnihilated, and utterly made void for ever. Any thing in
the said act to the contrary in any wise notwythstandyng.

And where also at the session of the same parliament holden upon prorogation,
in the.xxiii. year of the raygne of the said late king Henry theyght. one act
entitled: the act that no person shall be cited out of the diocese where he or
she dwells, except in certain caces And where also at the said parliament,
in the session holde^ at Westminster upon prorogacion the.xxiiii. year of the
raygne of the said late king Henry theyght, one act was made that appeals in
such cases as has been used to be pursued to the sea of Rome, should not from
hence forth be had nor used but within this realm. And where also at the said
parliament holde^ at Westminster, in the.xxi. year of the raygne of the said
late king Henry the eight, and there continued by diverse prorogations until
the.xxiiii. day of Apryll, in the xxvii. year of his reign, one act was made
concerning restraintes of paymentes of annaties, and first fruits of
archebyshopryckes, and byshopryckes of the Sea of Rome. And where at a Session
of the said parlyament, holden in the.xxv. year of the raygne of the said
late king, there was also one act made, in tituled, the submission of the
clergy to the kings majesty's, and one other act entitled, one act
restraining the said paymentes of annates, or first fruits to the bishop of
Rome, and of the electing and consecrating of the archbyshoppes and bishops
within this realm. And one other act was then and there made entitled: an act
concerning the exoneration of the kings subjects, from exactions and
impositions before that time paid to the Sea of Rome, and for having licenses
and dispensations within this realm, without suynge further for the same.

Be it enacted by thauctorytye of this present parlyament, yt the said
several acts made for the restraynt of payment of the said annates, and
first fruits, and all other the said acts made in the said.xxiiii. and.xxv.
years of the raygne of the said late king, and every of them and al and every
branch, article, matter, and sentence in them, and every of them contained,
shall be by auctorytye of this present parliament from hence forth utterly void,
made frustrate and repealed, to al intentes, constructions and purposes.

And be it further enacted by thauctority of this present parliament, that al
and every these acts following. That is to say: one act made at the session
of the said parliament holden upon prorogation at West. in the.xxvi. year of
the raygne of the said late king Henry theyght, entitled an act, concerning
ye kings highness to be supreme head of the church of England, and to have
auctorytye to reform and redress al errors heresies. and abuses in the same.
And one other act made in the same session of the same parliament entitled:
an act for nomination and consecration of Suffragans within this realm. And
one other act made in the.xxvii. year of the reign of the said late king
Henry the eight, entitled: an act whereby the king should have power to
nominate.xxxii. persons of his Clergy and Lay fee for the making of
Ecclesiastical laws. And also one other act, made at the parliament holden at
Westminster in the.xxviii. year of the raygne of the said late king Henry the
eyghte, entitled: an act extinguishynge thauctorytye of the Bishop of Rome.
And one other act made in the same parlyament, entitled: an act for the
release of such as then had obtained, pretended licenses, and dispensations
from the Sea of Rome. And also all that part of the act, made in the
said.xxviii. year of the said king, entitled: an act for the
establishement of the Succession of the imperial crown o^ the realm, that
concerns a prohibition to marrye within the degrees expressed in the said
act. And also one other act made at the parliamente holden at Westminster, in
the xxxi. year of the raygne of the said late king Henrye the eight,
entitled: an act auctorysynge the kings hyghnes to make bysshoppes by his
letters patentes. And one other act made in the session of the same parliament
begone in the said.xxx. yare, holden upon prorogation, the.xxxii. year of the
reygne of the said king Henry the eyghte, entitu^ed: an act concerning
precontractes of marryages, and touching degrees of consanguitie. And one other
act made in the parliament holden at Westminster, in the.xxxv. year of the
reygne of the said late king Henry theyght, entitled: an act for the
ratification of the kings majesty's style, shall henceforth be repealed, made
frustrate, void, and of none effect. And where also at the said parliament
holden at Westminster in the.xxxv. year of ye reign of the said late king
Henry theyght, one other act was made entiteled: an act concerning
thestablishment of the succession of the said king in the imperial crown of
this realm. In the which act there is a form of a corporal oath devised and
set forth, that every subject of this realm should be bound to take against
the power, authority and jurisdiction of the sea of Rome. Be it enacted by
thaucthoritie of this present parliament that so much of the said act as
touches the said oath against the supremacy, and al oaths there upon had, made,
and given shall be from henceforth utterly void, repealed and of none effect.
And where also one other act was made in the xxxvii. year of the reign of the
said late king Henry theyght entitled an act that doctors of the cyuyl law,
being married might exercise ecclesiastical jurisdiction. Be it enacted by
thauctority of this present parlyament, that the said act last before
mentioned, and all and every branch, article, sentence and matter, contained
in the same, shall from henceforth be repealed, and utterly made void, and of
none effect.

And where one other act was made at the first session of the parlyament,
holden at Westminster, in the first year of ye reign of king Edward the syxt,
entitled an act for the repeal of certain Statutes, concerning treasons,
fellonies. etc. In ye which act amongst other things there is contained
certain provisions, pains, penaltyes, and forfeytures for and against such,
as should by open preachynges, expres words, sayings, writing, pryntyng
ouert deed, or act affirm, or set forth, yt the king of this realm, for the
time being, is not or ought not to be supreme head in earth, of ye churches of
England and Ireland, ne of any of them, or that the bishop of Rome or any
other person or persons, other then the king of England for the time being, is
or ought to be supreme head of ye same churches, or any of the^, as in the
same act last before rehearsed, more at large is contained, and may appear. Be
it enacted by auctority of this present parlyament, that these clauses before
rehearsed, and other of the said act, concerning the supremacy, and all and
every branch, article, words, and sentence, in the same soundyng, or
te^dyng to the derogation of the supremacy of the Popes holiness, or the sea of
Rome, and al pains, penalties, and forfeytures, made against them that should
by any means set fur^h, or extol the said supremacy, shall be from henceforth
utterly boyde and of none effect.

And be it further enacted by thauctoryty aforesaid, that al clauses,
sentences, and articles of every other statute, or act of Parlyament made
sithence y^ said.xx. year of the raygne of king Henry theyght, against the
supreme auctoryty of the Popes holiness, or Sea apostolic of Rome, or
containing any other matter of ye same effect only, that is repealed in any of
the Statutes aforesaid, shall be also by authority here of from henceforth
utterly void, frustrate and of none effect.

And where we your most humble subjects, the lords spiritual and temporal,
and commons in this present parliament assembled, have exhibited to your
majesty's one other supplication in form following.

We the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
parlyament assembled representing the whole body of this realm, reduced and
received by your majesty's intercession to ye unity of Christ's church, and
the obedience of the Sea apostolyke of Rome, and the Popes holiness governing
the same, make most humble suite unto your majesty's, to be likewise means and
intercessors that all occasions of conte^tion, hatred, grudge, suspicion, and
trouble both outwardly and inwardlye in men's consciences, which might arise
amongst us, by reason of disobedience, may by authority of ye Popes holiness,
and by ministration of the same unto us, by ye most reverend father in god, the
lord Cardinal Poole, by dispensation to leration or permission respectively, as
the case shall require, be abolished and taken away, and by aucthoritye
sufficient these artycles following, and generally al others, when any occasion
shall so require may be provided for, and confyrmed.

First that al by shopryckes, c^thedral churches, hospitales, colleges,
schools, and other such foundations now continuing, made by auctoritye of
parlyament, or otherwise established, according to the order of the laws of
this realm, sithence this schism may be confirmed and continued for ever.

Item that marriages made infra gradus prohibitos consanguinitatis, affinitatis
cognatio^^s spiritualis, or which might be made void* proper impedimentu^
publicae honestatis iustitiae, or for any other cause prohibited by the canons
only may be confirmed, and children borne of those marriages declared
legittimate, so as those marriages were made according to the laws of the
realm for the time being, and be not directely against the laws of God, nor
in such case, as the Sea apostolic has not used to dispense wythal.

That institutions of benefices, and other promotions ecclesiastical and
dispensations made according to the form of the act of parliament, may be
likewise confyrmed.

That all judicial processes, made before any ordinaryes of this realm, or
before any delegates upon any apeales, according to thorder of ye laws of the
realm, may be likewise ratified and confirmed, And finally where certain
acts and statutes have been made in the time of the latescisme, concerning the
lands, and hereditamentes of Archbysshoprykes, and Bysshoprykes, the
suppression, and dyssolution of monasteries, Abbeyes, prioryes, chauntries,
colleges, and al other the goods and catteles of religious houses. Since yt
which time, the right, and dominion of certain lands, and hereditamentes,
goods, and catteles, belonging to the same, be dispersed abroad, and come to
the hands, and possessions of diverse and so^drye persons, who by gift,
purchase, exchange, and other means according to the order of the laws and
statutes of this realm, for the time being, have the same. For the auoydyng of
all scruples that might grow by any thoccasions aforesaid, or by any other
ways, or means, whatsoever: It may please your majesty's, to be
intercessours, and mediators, to the said most reverend father, Cardynall
Pole, that all such causes, and quarrels as by pretense of ye said scisme, or
by any other occasion, or mean whatsoever, might be moved by the Popes
holiness, or Sea Apostolyke, or by any other jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, may
be utterly removed, and taken away so as all persons having sufficient
conueyaunce of the said lands, and hereditamentes, goods and cattels, as is
aforesaid, by the common laws acts, or Statutes of this realm, may without
scruple of c^nscience, enjoy them without impechment or trouble by pretense of
any general counsel, Canons, or Ecclesiastical laws, and clear from all
dangers of the censures of the church.

And comformably here unto, the Bysshoppes and Clergy of the prouynce of
Cantorbury have presented to your majesty's a supplication, in this tenor that
follows.

Nos Episcopi and Clerus Cantuariensis prouinciae in hac Synodo more nostro
^olito, dum Regni parliame^tu^ celebratur, congregati, cum omni debita
humilitate and reuere^tia, exponimus Maiestatibus uestris, quod licet
Ecclesiaru^, quibus in Episcopos, Decanos, Archidiaconos, rectores, and
uicarios praefecti sumus, and animaru^, quae nobis and curae nostrae subiectae
sunt and earundem bonorum iurisdictionu^, and iurium, ex sacroru^ Canonum
dispositio^e, defensores, and curatores co^stituti sumus and propteria ip^^rum
bona iurisdictio^is, and iura in pernicioso huius Regni prae terito scismate
deperdita and amissa, omni studio, and totis nostris uiribus recuperare and ad
pristinum Ecclesiarum ius reuocare, iuris remedijs niti deberemus: Nichilominus
tamen habito prius per nos super hac re maturo Cons^^io, et deliberatio^e
ingenuefatemur, nos optime cognossere, quam haec bonor^ Ecclesiasticor^
difficilis and quasi impossibilisesset recuperatio propter multiplices ac pene
inextricabiles super hijs habit^s contracsitiones and quod si ea tentaretur,
quies et tranquillitas Regni facile perturbaretur, and unitas Ecclesiae
Catholicae, quae iam pietate, and aucthoritate Maiestatum uestrum hoc in regno
introducta est, cum maxima difficult ate suum debitu^ progressum, and sinem
sortiriposset. Ideo nos bonu^ and quietem publicam priuatis commoditatibus, and
salutem totanimaru^ praetioso Christi sanguine redemptarum terrenis bonis
antepone^tes, and non quae nostra, sed quae Jesus Christi su^t quaere^tes,
Maiestates uestras enixe rogamus, ^ius^ humiliter supplicamus, ut
reuerendissimo in Christo patri, domino Reginaldo Cardinali Polo, adipsas, and
uniuersum hoc Anglie regnum sanctissimi domini nostri, Domini Iulij, Papae
tertij, and Apostolicae sedis de latere legato, haec nomine nostro insinuare,
and apud eu^ intercedere digne^tur, ut in hiis bonis Ecclesiastisis in part,
uel into toarbitrio suo iuxta facultates sibi ab eodem sanctissimo domino
nostro Papaco^cessas eorundem bonorum detentoribus elargiendis et relax andis
publicum bonum priuato pacem et tra^quillitatem dissidijs, and
perturbationibus, atque animarum salutem bonis terrenis praeferre, and
anteponere uelit. Nos enim in omnibus quae ab ipso legato statuta, et ordina ta
circa haec bonafuerint exnunc, prout extunc, et eco^tra co^sensum nostrum
presta(...)us, imo etiam ut in premissis se difficilem aut restrictum reddere
non uelit, maiestates uestrae nostro nomine eum hortari, and rogare
dignabuntur. Insuper maiestatibus uestris supplicamus ut pro sua pietate
efficere dignentur, ut ea quae adiurisdictionem nostra^ et liberta tem
Ecclesiasticam pertinent, sine quibus debitum nostri pastoralis officij et
curae animarum nobis commissae exercere non possumus, uobis superiorum temporum
iniuria ablatarestituantur, et ea nobis, et Ecclesij perpetuo illes a et salua
perman^ant, et ut omnes leges, quae hanc nostra^ iurisdictionem, and libertatem
Ecclesiasticam tollunt, seu quouis modo impediunt, abrogentur ad bonorem dei,
et maiestatum uestraru^, et uniuersi huius Regni Spirituale, et temporale
commodum, and salutem, certam spem etiam habentes, Maiestates uestras, pro sua
singulari in ipsu^ deum pietate, proque multis et insignibus ab ipsius dei
bonitate acceptis beneficijs necessitatibus, and in commodis huius sui Regni
Ecclesiarum maxim curam animarum habentium nunqua^ defuturas esse, sed prout
opus fuerit, consulturas atque prouisuras.

Forasmuch as the said most reverend father, the Lord Legate, at the
intercession of your majesty's, has by thauctoritie of the Sea Apostolic,
sufficiently dispensed in the matters specified in the said several
supplications, as in his said letters of dispensation is contained more at
large. The tonor whereof ensues,

Reginaldus miseratione diuina Sanctae Mariae in Cosmodin Sanctae Romanae
Ecclesiae, Diaconus, Cardinalis Poluinuncupatus, ad Serenissimos Philippum and
Mariam, Angli^^ Reges, fidei de^e^sores, et uniuersum Angliae regnum,
Sanctissimi Domini nostri Papae, et sede^ Apostolicae de la ^^re legatus eisdem
Sere nissimis Philippo et Mariae Regibus salutem in Domino sempiternam. Cum
supremum co^silium istius Regni parlame^tu^ nun cupatum Maiestatibus uestris,
per suos supplices libellos exposuisset quod perniciocissimo scismate, in hoc
regno alias uigente, quod nunc dei misericordia, and maiestatum uestrarum
pietate extinctum est, authoritatem ipsius parlame^ti, non nulli Episcopatus
diuisi, and ex his aliquae inferiores Ecclesiae, in cathedrales ere stae, et
scholae, atque hospitalia fundata nec non plurimae dispensationes et
beneficiorum prouisiones factae fueru^t ac multae personae quibus persuasum
fuerat, luris Canonici dispositiones hoc in Regno amplius locum non habere,
inter ^e in gradibus consanguinitatis uel assinitatis de iure prohibitis, and
alijs impedimentis Canonicis sibi obstantibus matrimonia, per uerba de
praesenti co^traxerunt, et multis actus iudiciarij, and processus, tam in
primis, quam ulterioribus instantijs super rebus spiritualibus, and
Ecclesiasticis ^oram iudicibus tam Ordinarijs quam delegatis, qui au^t horitate
laicali procedebant, habiti and seruati, ad super eis etia^ s^te^tiaelatae, et
promulgatae fueru^t, et bona ecclesiactica per diuersas eiusdem regni personas
occupata, et apprehe^sa fuerunt. Quae quidem licet ex sacrorum Canonum
institutis irrita deolarari possent, tamen si ad alium statum, quam in quo nunc
sunt, reuocarentur, publica pax and quies uniuersi regni turbaretur, et maxima
confusio oriretur, presertim si dictorum honorum possessores molestarentur, et
propterea maiestati busuestris humiliter supplicauerint, ut apud nos
intercedere dignentur, ut premissarum rerum firmitari, et stabilitati, et simul
huius Regni quieti, et tranquillitati de benig^^tate Apoctolica prouidere
uelimus. Cumque Episcopi quoque deinde, ac reliquus prouinciae Cantuariensis
Clerus totu^ fere corpus Ecclesiasticorum regni representus, ad quos haec
bonorum Ecclesiasticorum causa maxim pertin et, exposuerint, quod haec bona ad
ius ecclesiarum reuocare non possu^t, quin pax vniuersalis, and quies huius
regni turbetur, et causa fidei atque unitatis Ecclesiae, iam toto omnium
consesu hoc in regno introducta, in maximum periculum adducatur, et propterea
ipsi quo que supplicauerint, ut apud nos intercedere uelint, ut in his bonis
Ecclesiasticis possessoribus relaxandus restricti et difficilis esse nollemus,
maiestates autem uestrae, ad quas maxim spectat prouidere, ut regnu^ ipsaru^
potestari regimini et curae commissum in pace et tranquillitate co^seruetur.
His supplicationibus et postulatis cognitis et mature co^sideratis iudicauerit
^a omnia, et maxim illa, quae in bonoru^ ecclesiasticorum causa petuntur, pro
causa fidei et pro pace publica* per nos debere sine ulla dilatio ne co^cedi,
et que^admodu^ rogatae fueru^t, apud nos intercedere dignatae fuerint, prout in
supplicationibus per idem supremum consilium, et episcopos ac clerum praefatum
maiestatibus uestris porrectis, atque in libello intercessiones per easdem
maiestates uestras nobis simulcum alijs supplicationibus exhibito, latius
apparet. Idcirco nos qui ad maiestates uestras, et hoc nobilissimum uestrum
regnum a Sanctissimo Domino nostro Iulio Pap^ tertio ipsius et sedis
Apostolicae de latere legati missi sumus, ut regnum istud, quod iamdiu ab
Ecclesiae Catholicae unitate separatum fuerat. Deo et Ecclesiae Christi,
eiusque in terris u^cario reconciliaremus: et ut ea omnia quae ad pace^ et
tranquillitatem huius regni pertinerent, omni studio procuraremus, postaua^ dei
benign itate, et maiestatem uestrarum pietate, per authoritatem eiusdem
Sanctissimi Domini nostri Papae, cuius uices hic sustinemus, reconciliatio iam
facta est, ut paci et tranquillitati regni prae fati consulamus, atque ut
unitas ecclesiae, ex qua salus tot animarum prae cioso Christi sanguine
redemptarum dependet, hoc in regno iam introducta corrobaretur, and salua
permaneat, cum utriusque rei stabilitatem in eo maxim consistere, si horum
Ecclesiasticorum bonorum possessoribus molestia nulla in feratur quo nimus ea
teneant, tot et tam grauia testimonia nob^s fidem faciant, et maiestatum
uestrarum intercessio, quae pro unitate Ecclesiae, et sedis Apostolicae
auctoritate hoc in regno instauranda tam studiose, et tam pie elaborarunt, eam
quam parest auctoritatem apud no^ habeat, et ut uniuersum hoc regnum sedis
Apostolicae maternam uere indulgentia^, et charitatem ergase agnoscat, et re
ipsa experiatur: quoscunque ad quos insra scripta pertinent, a quibusuis
excommunicationis, suspensionis, et interdicti, alijsque ecclesiasticis
se^tensiis, se^suris et paenis a iure uel ab homine quauis occasion uel causa
latis, si quibus quomodolibet innodati existunt, ad effectum praesentium dum
taxat consequendum harum serie absoluentes, et absolutos fore censentes,
aucthoritate Apostolica, per litte ras Sanctissimi domini noctri, domini Iulij
Papae tertij nobis concessa, and quafungimur in hac part, tenore praesentium
dispensamus, quod omnes et singulae Cathedralium Ecclesiarumerectiones,
hospitalium, et scholaru^, fundationes tempore praeteriti scismatis, licet de
facto et nulliter atte^tatae ineo statu, in quo nunc sunt, perpetuo firmae et
stabiles parmaneant, illis que Apostlicae firmitatis robur adijcimus, it a ut
non ea aucthoritate, qua prius, sed ea quam nunc eis tribuimus, factae ab
omnibus censeantur, and c^ omnibus et singulis personis regni praedicti, quae
in aliquo consanguinita it is uel affinitatis graduetiam multiplici, uel
cognationis spiritualie, seu publicae honestatis iusticiae impedimento de iure
positiuo introductis, and in quibus sanctissimus dominus noster Papa dispensare
consueu^t matri mo^ia scienter uel ignorantur de facto contraxerint ut alique
imped imen torum premissorum, non obstante in eorum matrimoniis, sic contractis
liber^ and licite remanere, seu illa de nouo contrahere possint, misericorditer
in domino dispensamus, prolem susceptam, suscipiendam legitima(...), de
cernentes, ita tamen ut qui scienter et malitiose contraxerint, a sententia
exco^municationis, et ab incestus seu sacreligij reatu, absolutione^ a suo
ordinario, uel curato, quibus id faciendi facultatem consedimus, obtineant, ac
omnes Ecclesiasticas seculares, seu quorumuis ordinum regulares personas quae
aliquas impetrationes, dispensationes, concessiones, gratias, et indulta tam
Ordines, quam beneficia Ecclesiastica, seu alias spirituales materias praetensa
aucthoritate supremitatis Ecclesiae* Anglicanae licet nulliter, e^ de facto
obtinuerint, et ad cor reuersae Ecclesiae unitati restitutae fuerint, in suis
Ordinibus, and beneficijs per nosipsos, seu a nobis ad id deputatos,
misericorditer recipiemus, prout iam multae receptae fuerunt, secumque super
his opportune in Domina dispensabimus: Ac omnes processus inquibusuis
instantijs coram quibusuis iudicibus, tam ordinariis quam dilig atisetia^
laicis super materijs spiritualibus habitos and formatos, and sententias super
eis latas, licet nulliter et de facto, quoad nullitatem ex defectu iurisdictio
nis praefato tantum insurgentem sanamus, illosque, et illas aucthoritate A^
postolica confirmamus: Ac quibusuis huius reg^ni personis, ad quarum ma nus
bona Ecclesiastica ex quocunque contractu seu titulo onorosouellucra tiuo iam
deuenerint, illaque ^enuerint, seu etiam teneant, omnes, and qous cumque
fructus ex eiusde^ bonis, licet indebite perceptos, in totu^ remittimus and
relaxamus. V^olentes ac decernentes, quod dictorum bonorum Ecclesiasticorum ta^
mobilium quam immobilium possessores praefati non possiut in presenti nec in
posterum, seu per consiliorum generalium, uel prouin cialium dispositiones, seu
decretales Romanorum pontificum Epistolas, seu aliam quamcunque censuram
ecclesiastica^ in dictis bonis seu eorunde^ possessione molestari, in quietari,
uel perturbari, nec eis aliquae se^surae uel paenae ecclesiasticae propter
huiusmodi detentionem, seu non restitutione^ irro gari uel infligi, and sic per
quoscunque iudices, and auditores sublata eis qua suis aliter iudicandi et
interpretandi facultate, et auctoritate iudicari et diffiniri debere, and
quicquid secus attemptari contigerit, irritum et inane fore decernimus, non
obstantibus praemissis defectibus, and quibusuis Apostolicis, ac in
prouincialibus, et ^sinodalibus concilijs editis, specialibus uel generalibus
constitutionis, and ordinationibus, caeterisque contrarijs quibuscunque,
Admonemus tamen cu^m diuisio Episcopatuum, and erectio Cathedraliu^^
Ecclesiarum fint de maioribus causis, quae summo pontifiei sunt reseruatae,
recurrendum esse ad suam sanctitatem, and ab ea suppliciter postulandum, ut
haec confirmare, seu de nouo facere dignetur. Et licet omnes res mobiles
Ecclesiarum indistincte ijs, qui eostenent relaxauerimus, eos tamen admonit^s
esse uolumus, ut aut oculos habentes diui ni iudicij seueritatem contra
Balthasarem Regem Babilonis, quiuasa sacra non a se sed a patre e templo ablata
in prophanos usus conuertit ea proprijs Ecclesijs si extant, uel aliis
restituant. Hortantes etiam, and per uiser a misericordiae Ius^ Christi
obtestantes eos omnes, quos haecres tangit, ut salutis suae non omnino
immemores, hoc saltem efficiant, ut ex bonis Ecclesiasticis, maxim ijs, quae
ratione personatuum et uicariatuum populi ministrorum sustentationi fuerint
spesialiter destinata, seu alijs Ca thedralibus, and alijs quae nunc extant,
inferioribus Ecclesijs curam anima rum exercentibus it a prouideatur, ut earum
pastores, personae et uicarii co^mode, and honest iuxta eorum qualitatem, and
statum sustentari possint, and curam an^marum laudabiliter exercere, and onera
incumbentia congrue supportare Datum Lambeth prope Londinum VV intonien^.
Diocese An* no Natiuitatis domini Millesimo, quingentesi(...)o, quinquagesimo
quarto Nono Call* Ianuarii Pontif* Sanctissimi in Christo patris, and Domini
nostri, Domini Iuli^, diuina prouidentia Papae tertij. Anno quinto.

Reginaldus Cardinalis Polus Legatus

We the said lords spiritual and temporal, and commons in this present
parliament assembled, rendering most humble thanks to your maiestyes, by whose
intercession and means we have obtained the said dyspensations of the popes
holiness by the said most reverend father in God, his legate, most humbly
besecheth the same, that it may be ordained as follows.

And therefore be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present parliament, that
al, and singular articles and clauses contained in the said dispensation as
well touching the establyshment of Bysshoprykes, and cathedral churches, as
also the confirmation of marriages in degrees prohibited by the canons of the
church, the legittimation of children, and the ratificatyon of process, and
of sentences in matters ecclesiastical, touching the inualiditie of them for
want of jurisdiction, and the institutions and destitutions, of, and in
benifices and promotyons ecclesiastical, dispensations, and graces, given by
such order, as the public laws of the realm then approned, and al other
things before contained in the said letters of dyspensations, shall remain and
be ^eputed and taken, to all intentes and co^structions in the laws of this
realm, lawful, good, and effectual to be alleged and pleaded in all courts
ecclesiastical and temporal, for good and sufficient matter, either for the
playntyfe or defendaunt, without any allegation, or objection, to be made
against the validity of them, by pretense of any general counsel, canon, or
decree, to the contrary made, or to be made in that behalf.

And where as diverse and sondrye late Monasteryes, Pryoryes, Commaundryes,
Nonneryes, Deaneries, Prebe^des, Colleges, Hospitales, Houses of friars,
Chaunteryes, and other religious and ecclesiastical houses and places, and the
manours, graunges, mesuages, lands, tenementes, rectoryes, tithes, pentione,
portions, vycareges churches, chapels, aduonsons, nominations patronages,
annuities, rentes, reuertions, seruyces, and other possessions, and here
ditamentes to the said late monasteries, priories, nonneries, commaundryes,
de^nryes, chauntryes, prebendes, houses of Friars, colleges, Hospytalles, and
other religious and ecclesiastical houses and places, and to sondrye
Archebysshop^ykes, and Bysshoprykes within this realm, late appertaynyng and
belongyng, came as well to the hands and possession of the snyd king of famous
memory Henrye the eyghte, father unto your majesty, our said soueraygne Lady
by dyssolution, gift, grant, surrendre, attaynder, or otherwise, as also to
the hands and possession of diverse and sundry other persons, and bodies
polytyke and corporate, by sundry means, conueyaunces, and assuraunces,
according to the order of the laws and statutes of this realm.

And where also diverse manours, lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes percell
of the possessions of Archbysshoprykes and Bysshoprykes, and many and sondrye
late deaneryes, colleges, chauntryes, rectories, Prebendes, Free chappeles,
Guyldes, and Fraternytyes, manours, houses, Graunges, lands, Tenementes,
rentes, seruyces, and other Ecclesiastical possessions, and hereditamentes,
goods, and catteles to the said Archebysshoprykes, Bysshoprykes, deanries,
colleges, chaunteryes, free chapels, tec^oryes guyldes, and fraternities late
appertayning and belonging or appointinge, to and for the finding ofpryestes
obyttes, lyghtes or other like purpose, came as well to the hands and
possession of the late noble king Edward the syxt brother unto your majesty
seueraygne Lady, by virtue of an act of parliament thereof made, or otherwise,
as also to the hands and possession of diverse and sundry other persons, and
bodies poly^yke and corporate by sundry means, conueyaunces, and assuraunces,
according to the order of the laws of this realm: a great number of which
said late monasteries priores, nonneries, commaundryes, deaneries, colleges,
hospytales, prebendes, chaunteryes, free chappeles, guylds, and fraternities,
and ye mannoures, graunges, mesuages, lands, tenementes, rentes, reuercions,
seruyces, tithes, pentions, portions vyca reges, churches, chappeles,
aduousons, nominations, patronages, annuities, and hereditamentes, goods, and
cattels, to the said monast^ ties, prioryes, nonneryes, commaundries,
deaueries, colleges, hospitalles, chaunteries, fre chappelles, guyldes,
fraternities, and other ecrlesiasticall houses. Archbysshopryckes, and
Bysshoprykes, belonging as well for great sommes of money, as for other good,
and reasonable causes, and considerations, have been conveyed and assured to
diverse the subjects, and bodies polytyke of this realm, as well by the said
king Henry theyght, the said king Edward the sixte, and by your hyghnes our
soueraygne Lady, and jointly by both your majesty's, as also by diverse the
owners of the said ecclesiastical possessions, which said conueyaunces, and
assuraunces by their sondrye letters patentes, and other wrytynges more
plainly do and may appear. Forasmuch as the said most reverend father has
also by the said dispensations, removed and taken away al matter of
empeachement, trouble, and danger, which by occasion of any general
counsel, canon, or degree ecclesiastical might touch and disquiete the
possessions of such goods moveable, lands, tenementes, possessions and
hereditamentes, as were of late belonging to any of the said
Archbysshoprykes Bysshoprykes, monasteryes, pryoryes, nonneries commaundries,
deaneryes, colleges, chauntryes, prebendes, rectoryes, hospita^es, houses of
friars, or other religious and ecclesyasticall houses, and places, of what
nature, name, kind, or quality soever they be of. Yet for that the title of al
lands, possessions, and hereditamentes in this your majesty's realm and
dominions, is grounded in the laws, statutes and customs, of the same, and by
your high jurisdiction, authority royal, and crown imperial, and in your
courts only to be impleaded, ordered, tried, and judged, and none otherwise,
and understanding, that the whole full, and most gracious intentes mind and
determination of your most excellent majesty's be, that all and every person
and persons, bodies polytyke, and corporate, their heirs, successors, and
assygnes, and every of them, shall have, keep, retain and enjoy all, and
every their estates ryghtes, possessions, and interestes, that they and every
of them now has, or hereafter shall have, of, and in all and every the
manoures, graunges, mesuages lands, tenementes, tithes, pentions, portions,
aduousons, nominatyons, patronages, annuities, rentes, reuersions, services,
hundredes, wapentakes, liberties, fraunchises, and other the possessyyus, and
hereditamentes of the said monasteries, abbeyes, pryoryes, nonneries
commaundries, deaneries colleges, prebendes, hospytales, houses of friars,
chauntryes, rectoryes, vycareges, churches, chappelles. Arch bysshoprykes, and
Bysshoprykes, and other religious or ecclesiastical houses and places, or of
any of them within this realm, or the dominions of the same by such laws and
statutes, as were enforce before the first day of this present Parliament, and
by other lawefull co^ueyaunce to them thereof made.

That it may be therefore enacted by thauctoritie of this present parliament,
that as well your majesty foueraigne Lady, your heirs and successors, as also
all, and every other person and persons bodies politic and corporate, their
heirs, successors, and assigns now having, or that hereafter shall have,
hold or enjoy any of the scites of the said late monasteries, and other the
religious or ecclesiastical houses or places, and all the said manours graunges,
mesuages lands, tenementes, tithes, pentions, portions, globe lands,
aduouso^s nominations, patronages, annuities, ^e^tes, reuersions, services
hu^dredes, wapentakes liberties, fraunchises, profits, commodities, and other
the possessions and hereditame^tes of the said late monasteries abbeyes,
pryories, nonneries, commaundries, deaneries, colleges, prebe^des, hospitals,
houses offriers, rectories, vicareges chau^teris churches, chapels,
archbishoprikes, bisshoprikes and other religious and ecclesiastical houses
and places, or of any of the^, of what name, nature or kind soever they be,
shall have, hold, possede, retain, keep and enjoy all and every the said
scites, mannours, graunges, mesuages, lands, tenementes, possessions,
profytes, commodities, and other hereditamentes, according to such interestes
and estates, as they and every of them now have, or hold, or hereafter shall
have or hold of and in the same by the dew order and course of the laws and
statutes of this realm, which now^ be, or were standinge in force before the
first day of this present Parliament, in manner and form, as they should have
done, if this act had never been had ne made This act or any thing herein
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Saving to you our said soueraygne Lady, your heirs and successors, and
every of them, and to all and every other person and persons subjects of this
realm, and bodies politic and corporate, and to their heirs and successors,
and to the heirs and successors of all, and every of them, other then such,
whose right, title, or interest is bounden, or taken away, undone, or extincte
by any act of parliament heretofore made, or otherwise al such right, title,
claim, possession, interestes, rentes, annuities, commodities, commons,
offices fees, leases, liueryes, lyuynges, pentions, portyons, dettes duties,
and other profits, which they, or any of them lawfully have, or of right ought
to have, or might to have had, in, of, or to any of the premises, or in, of
or to any part. or percell thereof, in such like manner and form and
condition, to all intentes, respects* constructions, and purposes, as if this
act had never been had ne made.

And that it may be further enacted by authority aforesaid, that al, and
every article, clause, senteuce, and prouiso, contained, or specylied in any
act, or acts of Parliament, concerning, or touching the assurance, or
conueiaunce of any the said monasteryes, priories, non neries, co^maundries,
deaneries, prebe^des, colleges, chauntryes, hospitales, houses, of friars,
rectories, vicarages, churches, chappeles Archbyshoprykes, and Bysshoprykes,
and other religious and ecclesiastical houses, and places, or any of them, or
in any wise concerning any ^annours, lands, tenementes, profits, commodities
hereditamentes, or other the things, before specified to the said king Henry
theyght, or king Edward the ^y^t, or either of them, or any other person or
persons, or body politic or corporate, and every of them and all, and every
writing, deed, and instrument, concerning the assurance of any the same,
shall stand, remain, and be in as good force, effect, and strength, and
shall be pleaded, and taken advantage of, to al intentes, constructions, and
purposes, as the same should, might, or could have been by the laws and
statutes of this realm in case this present act had never been had ne made.

And that al feoffamentes, fynes, surrenders, forfaytures, assuraunces,
conueyaunces, estates, and interestes, in any wise conveyed, had or made to our
said late soueraygne lord king Henry theight or to our said late sovereign
Lord king Edward the sixth, or either of them, or to any other person or
perso^es, bodies politic or corporate or to any of them by deed or deeds, act
or acts of Parliament, or otherwise of any the scites, mannours, lands,
tenementes, possessions profits, commodities, or hereditamentes of any the
said archebisshoprikes, Bisshoprikes, late monasteries, priories, nonneries
commaundries, deaueries, houses of friars, colleges, chaunteries, hospitalles,
prebendes, free chappeles, or of any mannours, lands, tenementes reuertions,
services, tithes, pentions, portio^s, annuities, or of any other
hereditamentes, of by, or from any ecclesiastical or spiritual person or
persons, or by, or from any spiritual or ecclesiastical corporation, or body
politic shall be as good and auailable in the law, to al intentes,
constructio^s, and purposes, as they were by the laws and statutes of this
realm standing in force before the first day of this present parliament. And
that the same may, and shall be pleaded, aleged and taken advantage of, in such
sort, and to such effect, as they should could, or might have be^ by the laws
and statutes of this realm, standing in force before the said first day of
this present parliament: And that all, and every clause, and article, of saving
contained in all and every the said acts and statutes, shall stand, remain,
and be in such force, strength, and effect, as they were before the said
first day of this present parliament. Any thing contained in this present
act to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And that it may be in like manner enacted by authority aforesaid that
whosoever shall by any process, obtained out of any ecclesiastical court within
this realm, or without, or by precence of any spiritual jurisdiction, or
otherwise, contrary to the laws of this realm inquiet or molest any person or
persons, or body politic, for any of ye said manours, lands, tenementes,
hereditamentes, or things above specified, contrary to the words, sentences,
and meaning of this act shall incur the danger of the act of preminire,
made in the.xvi. year of king Richard the second, and shall suffer and incur
the forfeytures and pains, contained in the same.

Provided always, that it shall and may be lefull to any person or persons,
body politic and corporate, to sue in any competent, ecclesiastical. or
spiritual court within this realm, for tithes, rightes, and duties, that they
or any of them shall pretend to have, of, or out of any the said mannours,
lands, tenementes, and other the premises and to have, full and perfect
remedy for the same, in such manner and form, as they or any of them, might,
or ought to have done, or had by the laws and Statutes of this realm, before
the making of this Act, and as though this act had never ben had or made.

And that it may be further provided and enacted, by thauctoritie aforesaid,
that albeit the title or style of supremacy, or supreme head of the church of
England and of Irelande, or either of them, never was, ne could be instly, or
lawefullye attributed or knowledged to any king, or Soueraygne gouernoure of
this realm, nor in any wise could, or might, ryghtfully, iustlye, or
lawefully, by any king or Sovereign gouernoure of this realm, be claymed,
challenged, or used. Yet forasmuch as the said title and style, since the
third day of November, in the.xxvi. year of the reign of the said king Henry
theight, has been used, and is mentioned and contained in diverse and fondry
wrytes, letters patentes, records, exemplificatyous, court rolls, Charters,
deeds, instruments, evidences, books and writings. It shall be lawful, as well
to, and for your majesty's and your soueraygne ladies heirs and successors,
as to, and for every other person, and persons, and bodies politic and
corporate, at all time and times hereafter, to have, retain, and keep the
said wryttes, letters (...), records, exemplifications, court rolls
Charters, deeds, instruments, evidences, books, and wrytynges* and them to
show, exhi^ite, use allege, and plead, in all times and places requisite or
needful without any danger, penalty, loss, for feyture, trouble, ve^ation,
or ^^peachement for the same, any thing in this act or many other (...) or
^^tes, to the contrary thereof in anywyse, notwithstanding.

And where your hyghnes Soueraygne Lady* since your coming to the crown of
this realm of a good and Chryste^ conscience, omit ted to write the said Style
of Supremacye, specified in one Act made in the parliament holden at
Westminster by prorogatio^ in the xxxv. year of the raygne of your late
father king Henry theyghte, as well in gifts, grauntes, letters patentes, as in
commissions, and other wrytinges, and also other have in their wrytynges done
the same as well in your time as before. And forasmuch as notwithstanding any
law made concerning the said Style of Supremacye, it was in the free choice,
liberty, and pleasure of the king of this realm, and of your hyghnes,
whether ye would express the same in the said Style or not.

Be it therefore declared and enacted by authority of this present
parliament, that all grauntes, letters patentes, commissions indite (...)entes,
records, and writings, made in your our Soueraygne Ladies name, or in the
names of yours Soueraygne Lord and Lady, or any other, wherein the said Style
of Supremacy is omitted is, and shall be, to all intentes and purposes, as good
and effectual, as y^ the same had been therein expressed, and may be detained,
kept, pleaded, and alleged, without any danger, pain, penalty, or forfaiture
to ensue to any person or persons, or body politic, for or co^cerninge the
omission of the same Style, or any part thereof, in any such writings, and
that no person ne persons, shall be impeached, molested, or dampnyfyed, for or by
reason of any such omission.

And where in an act of parliament made since the said.xx. year of King Henry
theyght, all Bulls, dispens^tions, and writings which were before that time
optained from the Sea of Rome, should be void, abolyshed, and extinguished,
with a clause, nevertheless yt the matter of them, by virtue of letters patentes
from the king the^ being should, and might be alleged, pleeded, and allowed, as
if the same had not been so abolyshed or extinguyshed. Forasmuch as the said
Act is here before amongst other repealed and made void.

Be it therefore enacted by authority of this present parliamente that all
Bulls, dispensations, and privileges, obtained before the said.xx. year, or
at any time sythence, or which shall hereafter be opteined of the Sea of Rome,
not containing matter contrary or prejudicial to the authority, dignity, or
pre-eminence Royal, or imperial of the realm, or to the laws of this realm,
now being in force, and not in this parliament repealed, may be put in
executyon, used and alleged in any court within this realm, or else where
whether the same remain yet hole, or can appear to have been ca^celled, in as
vayleable and effectual manner, to all intents, and purposes, as if the said
Act had never been had or made. Any objection by pretense of extinguyshment,
or ca^cellyng of the said Bulls, dispensations, or privileges, or of any
other matter or cause, by the pretente of the laws of this realm, whatsoever
in any wise notwithstanding.

And where as by dissolution of monasteries, and other religious houses,
certain paryshe churches and chappeles which were before exempte, from the
jurisdiction of the Archbishop and bishop of the diocese, and by special
exemption and priuelege from Rome, were under the government and order of the
Abbotes, and Prioures of those religious houses, which said churches, by
color of the said exemptions, be now of special grant from King Henry, and
king Edward, under the rule and government, and jurisdiction of te^porall
and lay men, who can no more enjoy, that supremacye, over those particular
churches, then the king might over the hole realm

Be it therefore enacted, that all Archbyshoppes, and byshopes in their dioces,
and all other spiritual person and persons, having jurisdiction, and their
ministers and officers, and no lay person, or persons in every Church and
place, within the precinct of ye same, being exempt, or not exempte, ^aye
freely, and without impediment execute their spiritual jurisdiction in all
points and articles, as though no such exemption or grant had never been made.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that this act extend not to take away, or
diminyshe the priueleges of the university of Cambrydge and Oxforde, ne the
privileges, or prerogatives granted heretofore to the churches of Westminster,
and Wyndesore, ne the Tower of London, ne prejudicial, to such temporal
Lords and possessioners in this realm, as by ancient custo^^ have enjoyed
probate of Testamentes, of their tenauntes or other.

And forasmuch, as after this reconsiliation, and unity of this noble realm,
to the body of Christ's church, it is to be trusted, that by the abundance of
Gods mercy, and grace, devotion shall encrese and grow in the hearts of many
Subjects of this realm, with desire to give and bestow their worldly
possessions, for the resuscitating of almose, prayer, and example of good life
in this realm, to thinte^t such godly motions and purposes should be advanced.

Be it therefore enacted by the authority of this present parliament that it
shall be lawefull to such as shall be sessed of any manours, lands tenementes,
personages tithes, pencions, portions, or other hereditame^tes, whatsoever in
fee simple, in possession, reuertio^, or remaynder, in their own ryghtes, not
being copy hold, may thereof make feoffamentes, grauntes, or any other
assuraunces, or by his last will and Testament, in writing, may be queath and
give in fe simple, al and every the said manours, lands, tenementes
personages, tithes pencions, portions, or other hereditamentes, to any
spiritual body politic, or corporate in this realm or dominions of the same,
now erected or founded, or hereafter to be erected or founded: without any
license of mortmayne therein to be opteyned: or any writ of ad quod dampnum
to be sued out for the same, the acts de terri ad manum mortuam non ponendis,
or any other act or statute, heretofore had or made in any wise
notwithstanding.

Saving to the Lords of the fee, all rentes, services, dew, or going out of
any of the said land or tenements, or hereditaments, so to be amortized, as is
aforesaid.

Provided always, that this clause of this act, for giving the liberty of, or
for the amortezing of lands or tenementes, shall continue for, and during the
space of.xx. years next, and immediatelye following, and no longer.

And forasmuch as we your majesty's humble and obedient subjects, the lords
spiritual and temporal, and commons in this present Parliament assembled,
neither by the making; or delivering of either the supplications aforesaid,
nor by any claufe, article or sentence thereof, or of any other clause article
or sentence of this, or any other Statute, or any of the pream^^es of the same,
made, or agreed upon in this session of this present parliament, by any manner
of interpretation, co^struction, implication or otherwise intend to derogate
empaire, or diminishe any of the prerogatives, liberties, fraunchisies
preheminences, or jurisdictions of your Croune Imperial of this realm, and
other the dominious to the same belonging, we do most humbly beseech your
majesty's, that it may be declared, and ordained, and be it enacted and
declared by authority of this present parliament, that neither the making,
exhibiting, or insertinge in this present statute, or in the preambles of the
same, of the supplications or promys aforesaid, or either of them, nor any
other thing or things, words, sentences, clauses, o^^rticles in the preambles
or body of the acts, aforesaid* shall be construed understood or expounded
to derogat, diminishe or take away any the liberties* privileges, prerogatives,
preheminences, auctorities, or jurisdictions, or any part or percel thereof,
which were in your imperial croune of this realm, or did belong to your said
imperial croune the twenty year of the reign of yours the Queen's majesty's
most noble father, or any other your most noble progenitors, before the said
twe^tye year, and the popes holiness, and Sea Apostolic, to be restored, and to
have and enjoy such authority, pre-eminence, and jurisdiction as his
holiness, used, and exercised, or might lawfully have used and exercised
biaucthoritie of his supremacy, the said twenty year of the reign of the
king your father, within this your realm of England, and other your
Dominions, without diminution, or enlargement of the same, and none other. And
the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the Archebyshoppes, Bishops, and
ordinaries, to be in the same state, for process of suites, punishment of
crimes, and execution of censures of the church, with knowledge of causes
belongyng to the same, and as large in these points* as the said jurisdiction
was the said.xx. year.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that in and
upon every such gifts and deuyses, to be made to such spiritual corporations,
or persons as is aforesaid, the donor feoffer, or divisor thereof may reserve
to him* and to his heirs for ever, a tenure in frank almaine, or a tenure by
divine service: and to have all remedies and actions, for and upon the said
gifts, or deuyses, and tenures in like manner and form, as was used before the
estatute of Westminster third (commonly called) Quia emptores terrarum. The
said estatute or any other law or custom now being to the contrary in any
wise notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it enacted, that all and every person and persons,
and bodies politic and corporate which now have or hereafter shall have any
estate of enheritaunce, freholde, term, or in trest, of, in, or to any
portion, pention, tithes, glebelandes, or other ecclesiastical or spiritual
profytte, which by this act, and lettres of dispensatio^ rehearsed in the
same, be permitted and suffered to remain and continue in lay men's
possessions, shall and may have like remedy for the recououery of the same,
and every part thereof as they and every of them might have had before the
first day of this present Parlyament. Any thing in this act contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for the punishment of traitorous words against the Queen's majesty.
The.ix. Chapter.
FOrasmuch as now of late diverse noughty sedicious malicious, and heretical
persons, not having the fere of god before their eyes, but in a deuillishe
sort, contrary to the duty of their allegiau^ce, have co^gregregated the^
selves together in co^uenticles, in diverse and sondr^ propha^e places with
this city of London esteming the^ selfs to be in the true faith, where in deed
they are in errors and here sies, and out of the true trade of Christ's
catholic religion, and in the same places at several times, using their
fantastical and scismaticall services, lately taken away, and abolyshed by
authority of parlyament, have of their most malicious and cankerde stomakes,
prayed against the Queen's maies^ie, that God would turn her heart from
Idolatrye to the true faith, or else to shorten her days, or take her quickly
out of the way, which prayer was never hard nor read to have been used by
any good Chrystian manne, against any Prince though he were a pagan, and
infidele, and much less against any christian Prince, and especially so
virtuous a Princes, as our soueraygne Lady that now is known to be, whose
faith is and always has been most true and catholic, and consonaunt and
agreing with Christ's catholic church, throughout the world dispersed.

For reformation whereof, be it enacted by thauctoritie of this present
parliament, that every such person and persons, which sense ye beginning of
this present parliament, have by express words and sayings, prayed, required,
or desired, as is aforesaid, or hereafter shall pray, by express words or
sayings, that God should shorten her days, or take her out of the way (whose
life almighty god long preserve) or any such like malicious prayer, amounting
to the same effect, their procurers and abbettours therein, shall be taken,
reputed and judged traitors, and every such praying, requiring, or desyryng
shall be judged, taken, and reputed high treason, and the offenders therein,
their procurers and abbettours, being thereof laufully conuicte, according to
the laws of this realm, shall have, suffer and forfeyte, as in cases of high
treason.

Provided always and be it enacted, that if any person or persons shall be
indicted for any the offenses aforesaid, done and perpetrated during this
session of this present parliament, and upon his or their arreignement, shall
show him or themselves penitent for there offense, and submit him or them
selves to the king and Queen's mercy, and humbly desire the same, before such
Justices or commissioners, before whom he or they shall be arraygned, that the^
no judgment of conviction or attayndour of treason, shall be given against any
such person or persons, so being penitent, and submittinge themselves, as is
aforesaid. And in every such case, the justices or commisioners, before whom
such person or persons shall be arraygned, shall have authority by virtue of
this act, to prescribe, adindge, and appoynte, such corporal punishment,
other then death, to such offe^der and offenders, as to them by their
discretion shall seem convenient, and upon that penance prescribed and done,
to be discharged of the said treason, comprised in that indictment.

An act whereby certain offenses be made treasons, and also for the
government of the kings and queen's Majesty's issue. The.x. Chapyter.
FOrasmuch as the great mercy and clemency heretofore declared by the ye
Queen's highness, in releasing the penal laws, made by her progenitors, has
given occasion to many cankarde and traitorous hearts to ymagine, practyse, and
attempt things, stirring ye people to disobedience, and rebellion against her
highness common polecy, and duty of subjects, require that some law be
eftsoon establyshed to restrain the malice of such wicked and evil doers,
whereby they may be prehibited to blow abroad such shameful slanders and
lies, as they daily inuente and imagine of her highness and the kings majesty
her most lawefull husband, which when they be hard can not be but odible, and
detested of all good me^ consyderyng they touch their majesty's, upon whom
depends the whole un itie, and universal wealth of this realm.

In consideration whereof be it ordained and enacted by the king and the queen's
majesty's, with thassente of the lords spiritual and temporal, and of the
commons in this present parliament assembled and by the authority of the same,
that if any person or persons after the first day of February next to come
during the marriage between the king, and the queen's majesty's, do compass or
imagine to deprive the kings majesty, that now is, from the having and
inioyning jointly together with the queen's hyghnes the style, honor, and
kinglye name of ye realms and dominions unto our said soueraygne Lady the
queen's highness appertaining, or to destroy the king that now is, during the
said matrimonye, or to destroy the queen's maiesti^ that now is, or the heirs
of her body begotten, being kings or Queens of this Realm, or to leauye
war within this Realm of England, or within any of the marches of the same,
against the kings majesty, that now is, during the said marriage or against
the queen's majesty that now is* or any of her said heirs, being kings or
queen's of this Realm, or to depose the queen's majesty that now is, or the
heirs of her body begotten, being kings or queen's of this realm, from the
Imperial croune of the Realms and dominions abouesayd. And ye same compasses,
or imaginations or any of the^ maliciously, advisedly, and directly, shall, or
do utter by open preaching, express words, or sayings or if any person or
persons after the said first day of February by preching express words or
sayings, shall maliciously, advisedly, and directlye, say publyshe, declare,
maintain or hold opinion, that the kings majesty, that now is during the
said matrimony, ought not to have or enjoy ioyntlye together with the queens
majesty, the style, honor, and kyngly name of this realm, or that any
person or persons, being neither the king or the queens majesty's that now
are during the said matrimony between them, ought to have or enjoy the style,
honor, and kyngelye name of this realm, or that the Queens majesty, that
now is, during her life, is not, or of right ought not to be queen of this
realm, or after her death, that the heirs of her highness body being kings or
queen's of this realm of right ought not to be kings or queen's of this realm,
or to have and enjoy ye same or that any person or persons, other then the
queen's majesty, that now is during her life, ought to be queen of this realm,
or after her death other then the hetres of her body being kings or queens of
this realm, as long as any of her said heirs of her body begotten, shall be in
life, or right ought to have and enjoy the imperial crown of this realm. That
then every such offendour, being there of duly convicted, or attainted by the
laws of this realm, their abbettours procurers, and counsailours, and all,
and every their comforters, kno wynge the said offenses, or any of them to
be done, and being thereof convicted or attaynded, as is abouesaid, for his or
their such offense, shall forfeite and lose to the queen's highness, her heirs
and successors, all his and their goods, and cattels, and the whole issues
and proffytes of his and their lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes,
for term of the life of every such offendoure or offenders, and also shall
have, and suffer, during his and their lives perpetual imprisonment.

Provided always and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid that all and
every ecclesiastical person being convicted or attainted in form aforesaid,
for every such his offense, shall be deprived by the ordinary from his promotion
spiritual or ecclesiastical, in such like manner and form, that it shall be
laweful for every patron, fou^der or giver thereof, to present, after such
deprivation had, some one other to the same, as though the said offendoure or
offenders, were decessed. And if any person or persons being hereafter
convicted, or attaynted of any the said offenses, in form aforesaid
committed shall after his or their conviction, or attainder, eftsoon commit or
perpetrate any of the said offenses, in form aforesaid. That then every such
second offense or offenses shall be demed, and adjudged high treason, and the
offendour or offenders therein, their abbettoures procurers, and
councelloures, and al, and every their aidours and co^forters, knowing the said
offenses, or any of them to be done, being thereof convicted or attainted,
according to the laws and statutes of this realm, shall be judged and demed
high traitors, and shall suffer pains of death, and lose and forfeyte all
their goods, and cattels lands, and tenementes, to the queen's majesty, her
heirs and successors, as in cases of high treason, by the laws of this
realm at this day, of right ought to be lost and forfeyted.

And be it further enacted by the said authority, yt if any person or
persons at any time after the said first dai of February next to come during
the said marriage, compass, or ymagine the death of ye kings majesty, that
now is, and the same maliciously, advisedly and directly shall utter and
attempt by any writing, printing, ouert deed or act, or if any person or
persons at any time after the said first dai of February next coming, shall
maliciously, advisedly, and directly by writing, printing, ouert deed, or act,
affirm that the kings majesty, that now is, during the said matrimony, ought
not to have or enjoy jointly togethers with the queen's hyghnes, the style,
honor and kyngly name of this realm, or that any person or persons, being
neither the king, or the Queen's majesty, that now is, during the said
matrimony between them ought to have and enjoy the style honor, and kyngly
name of this realm. Or if any person or persons, after the said day by any
writing, printing, ouert deed, or act, maliciously, advisedly, and directly, do
affirm, that the queen's majesty that now is, during her life is not, or
ought not to be queen of this realm, or after her death, that the heirs of
her highness body being kings* or queen's of this realm* of right ought not to
have and enjoy the imperial Crown of this realm, or that any person or
persons other then the queen's majesty that now is, during her life or after
her death, other the^ the heirs of her body begotten, being kings or queen's
of this realm, as long as any of her said heirs of her body shall be in life,
of right ought to have and enjoy the imperial crown of this realm. That
then every such offense and offenses shall be adjudged high treason, and the
offender and offe^ders there in, their abbettours, procurers, and cou^cellers,
and al and every their ayvours, and comforters, knowing the said offenses, or
any of the^ to be done, being thereof convicted, or attaynted by the laws and
statutes of this realm, shall be demed and adjudged high traytoures and shall
suffer pains of death, and loose and forfeyte al their goods and catteles,
lands, and tenementes to the Queen's majesty, her heirs and successors as in
cases of high treason, as is abouesayd.

And albeit we the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this
present parliament assembled, have firm hope and confidence in the goodness of
Almighty god, that like as he has hither to miraculously preserved the queen's
majesty from many great and imminent periles and dangers, even so he will of
his infinite goodness give her highness strength, the rather by our continual
prayers to pass well the danger of deliverance of child wherewith it has
pleased him* (to all our great comfortes) to bless her. Yet forasmuch as all
things of this world be uncertain, and having before our eyes the dolorus
experience of the inconstant government during the time of the reign of the
late king Edward the syxte, do plainly se the manifold inconveniences,
great dangers, and peryls, that may ensue to this hole realm, if foresyghte
be not used to prevent evil chances, if they should happen. For the eschewing
whereof, we the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
parliament assembled for and in consideration of a most special trust and
confidence, that we have and repose in the kings majesty, for and concerning
the good and politic government, order, and administration of this realm in
the time of the young yers of the issue or issues of her majesty's body to be
borne, if it should please God to call the queen's highness out of this present
life during the tender years of such issue or issues (which God forbyde)
according to such order and manner as hereafter in this present act, his
highness most gracious pleasure is should be declared and set forth, have made
our most humble suete by thassent of the queen's highness that his majesty would
vouchsafe to accept and take upon him the rule order, education, and
government of the said issue or issues to be borne, as is aforesaid, upon
which our suit being of his said majesty most graciously accepted. It has
pleased his highness not only to declare, that like as for the first part his
majesty verily trusts, y^ almighty God, who has hitherto preserved the
queen's majesty, to give this realm so good an hope of certain succession in
ye blud roial of the same realm, will assest her highness with his graces and
benedictions to see the fruit of her body well brought forth live, and able to
govern, where of nether all this realm ne all the world besides should or
could receive more comfort, then his majesty should and would. Yet if such
chance should happen, his majesty at our humble desirs is pleased and
contented, not alonely to except and take upon him ye cure and charg of the
education, rule, order, and government of such issues, as of this most happy
marriage shall be borne between the queen's highness and him, but also during the
time of such government, would by always and means study, travail and employe
himself to advance the weal, both public and private of this realm, and
dominions there unto belongyng, according to the said trust in his majesty
reposed, with no less good will and affection, then if his hyghnes had been
naturally borne amongst us.

In consideration whereof be ir enacted by the king and the queens most
excellent majesty's, by thassente of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and
the commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by thauctoritie of the
same* that if it shall so please God, to call the queen's majesty out of this
present life, which god forbydde, before the issue of her body, inheritable to
the crown of this realm if it be male shall accomplish the age of.xviii.
years, or if it be female, before it shall be of the age of.xv. years, and not
married after ye age of consent, and before the said age of.xv. years. That
then and immedialy after, and from the deceasse of our said Soueraygne Lady ye
queen, the kings majesty that now is, shall have the rule, order, education
and gouernemente of the person of such issue, or issues, and the rule, order,
and government (under such issue, or issues) of this realm, and the
dominions to the same belongyng, until the same issue or issues, inheritable to
the imperial croune of this realm, if it be male, shall accomplish the full
age of eightene years and if it be female, until such issue female, shall
accomplish the age of fiuetene years, and be married after the age of consent,
and before the said age of fiuetene years, if the said issue or issues, and
our said sovereign Lord the king, shall so long live together, and that
during, and by all the time of such government, all, and every the pactes,
couenauntes, articles, and agrementes, mentioned and comprised in the
treatises, and act of Parliament, and every of them made, and concluded, for
and concerning the honorable marriage, had and co^summate, between the King and
Queen's Matesties which on the behalf of his Majesty, been to be observed,
performed and kept, shall after the deceasse of the Queen's Majesty, during
the time of the said government, remain, continue, and be in as good, and full
force strength, and effect, to all intentes, and purposes, as they were at any
time, during the said Marriage, or now been, as if they were newly by apt
words, terms, and sentences, inserted and rehearsed in this present Act, and
newly made and enacted, to stand, remain continue, and to be observed, and
kept, during the time of the said government, and shall be by his Majesty,
during the said time inuiolably observed performed, maintained, and vpholden,
in such sort, and in as full large, and ample manner, to all respects, as
they should, and ought to be, during the time of the said marriage, or after,
and his highness, and the Queen's most excellent Majesty, are pleased and
contented, that it be enacted by this present Parliament that nothing shall be
done permitted, or assented unto by his Maieiestie to the contrary.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, during the time that our said sovereign lord the king that now is,
shall, and ought to have the order, rule, educacion, and government of such
issue, or issues, being king or Queen of this realm, according to the order
and provision aforesaid maliciously, advisedly, and directely, biwritynge,
prynting, ouert deed or act do compass, attempt, and go about to destroy
the person of our said soueraygne lord, or do deprive, or remove his said
highness from the order, rule education, and gouernemente of the same issue, or
issues, being King or queen of this realm, contrary to the tenoure, intent,
and true meaning of this present act, that then every such person or persons
so offendyng, their procurers and abettours, being thereof lawfully conuicte or
attainted by the laws of this realm, shall be demed and adjudged high
Traitors: And that all and every such offense and offenses, shall be demed and
adjudged high treason, And the offendour and offenders therein, their
procurers, counsaylours, and abbettours, shall incure the dangers,
forfeytures, and penalties of high treason.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid that al trials hereafter
to be had, awarded, or made, for any treason, shall be had, and used only,
according to the due order and course of the common laws of this realm, and
not otherwise. Saving to every person and persons, bodies poytyke and
corporate, their heirs, and successors other then the offenders, and their
heirs and such person and persons, as claim to any of their uses, al such
ryghtes, titles, interesses, possessions, leasses, rentes, reuertions, offices,
and other profits, which they or any of them shall have at the day of the
committing such treasones, or at any time before, in as large and ample manner,
as if this act had never been had nor made.

Provided always, and be it declared and enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid,
that conceylement, or keeping secret of any high treson, be demed and taken
only, misprisyon of treason and the offe^ders therein to forfeite and suffer,
as in cases of misprision of treason has heretofore been used. Any thing
above mentioned, to ye contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, that if it shall fortune hereafter any of the pears of this
realm, to be indicted of any of the offenses made treason or misprision of
treason by this act, that then the same pares, or pear, so being indicted,
shall be put to answer unto every such endictement, before the high steward
of England for the time being and to have his and their trial by his and
their pears, and to receive and have such like judgment upon the same trial
of his or their pears, or making open confession of the same offense, or
offenses as is used in other cases of high treason.

And it is further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that no person or
persons shall in any wise be impeched for any of the offenses abouesayde,
committed only by open preaching or words, unless the offe^der or offe^ders
be therefore indicted within six months, next after the same open preaching
or words. Any thing contained in this act to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid that upon the
arraygnement of any person, which hereafter shall for tune to be arraygned for
any treason, mentioned in this act, all and every such person and persons, or
two of the^ at the least, as shall hereafter write, declare, confess, or depose
any thing or things against the person to be arraygned, shall, if they be then
living, and within the realm be brought forth in person before the party
arraygned, if he require the same, and obiecte, and say openly in his hearing
what they or any of them can against him, for or con^ernyng any the treasones,
contained in the indictment, whereupon the party shall be so a^ rayg^ed, unless
the party arraygned for any such treason, shall will lyngly confess the same at
the time of his or their arraygnement.

Provided nevertheless, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid that in all cases of high treason, concerning coin curraunt within this realm, or for
counterfeytyng the king or Queen's sygnet* pryuie seal, great seal, or sign
manuel, such manner of trial, and none other be observed and kept, as heretofore
has been used by ye common laws of this realm. Any law statute, or any
other thing or things to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, that the councillors, procurers, co^forters, and abbettours
for his or their first offense shall suffer like punishment penalty, and
forfeyture, as is contained in this act against ye pryncipal offenders for
their first offense, and none other, And that the counselors, procurers,
comforters, and abbettoures, for his or their second offense shall sustain
like punishment, penalty, and forfeyture as is contained in this act against
the principal offendour or offendoures for their second offense, and none other.

An act for the punishment of brynging in of counterfeyte coin of forrayne
realms, being curraunte within this realm. The.xi. Chapter.
WHere diverse and sondrye coins of gold and silver of other realms, not
being of the propre coin of this realm of England, and yet by the
sufferaunce and consent of the king and queen our Sovereign Lord and Lady, be
curraunt in payment within this realm, many ill disposed persons for their own
corrupt lucre and aduau^tage, have now of late brought into this realm, from
the parties of beyond the sea, great quantity of forged and counterfayte
money, like to the said coin of other forreyne realms, and have uttered the
same here by marchaundising, and otherwise to diverse of the subjects of this
realm, to their great deceyt hurt and damage, because the said ill disposed
persons have perceived and understood, that there was not, nor yet is any
sufficient law or statute made or provided for the condign punishment of the
offenders in that behalf.

Wherefore be it enacted and established by the authority of this present
Parliament, that if any person or persons, after the twentye day of January
next coming, shall bring from the parties of beyond the sea into this realm,
or into any the dominions of the same any such false and counterfeyte coin or
money, being currau^t within this realm as is aforesaid, knowing the same
^oine or money to be false and counterfeite, to the intent to utter, or make
paime^t with the same within this realm, or any the dominions of the same, by
marchaundisyng, or otherwise, that all and every such person or persons so
offendyng, as is aforesaid, their counsaylours, procurours, aydours, and
abbettours in that be half shall be demed and judged to be offenders in high
treason, and shall suffer after lawefull conviction or attaynder thereof, such
pains of death, loss and forfaiture of lands, goods, and cattelles, as
other offendoures shall do, in cases of high treason.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that al, and every
person and persons, that shall at any time after the said.xx. day of January,
be accused or impeched of any of the offenses, contained and provided for in
this estatute, or of any other offense or offenses, concerning the impayrynge,
counterfeyting, or forgyng of any coin curraunte within this realm, shall and
may be endicted, arreyned, tried, convicted, or attaynted by such like
evidence, and in such manner and form as has been used and accustomed within
this realm, at any time before the first year of the raygne of our late
soueraygne lord king Edward the sixth. Any statute, custom law, or usage to
the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

An act for the impounding of distresses. The.xii. Chapyter.
FOr the auoydyng of grievous vexations, exactions, troubles, and disorder in
taking of distresses, and impoundynge of cattle, be it enacted by aucthoritye
of this present Parliament, that from, and after the first dai of Apryl next
coming, no distress of cattle shall be driven out of ye hundred, rape,
wapentake, or lath, where such dystresses is, or shall be taken, except it be to
a pound, ouertwithin the said shire, not above three miles distau^t, from the
place where the said dystresse is taken, and that no cattle, or other goods
distreined, or taken by way of distress, for any manner of cause: at one time
shall be impou^ded in several places, whereby the owner or owners of such
dystresse shall be constrained to sue several repleuis for the delivery of the
said distress, so taken at one time, upon pain every person offendyng
contrary to this act, shall forfeyte to the party grieved for every such offense
a hundred shyllynges, and treble damages.

And further be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that after the said
first day of Apryl, no person or persons shall take for kepin^ inpounde,
imponndyng, or pondage of any manner of distress, about the sum of.iiii.
pence for any one whole distress, yt shall be so impou^ded, and where less has
been used, there to take less, upon ye pain of fine pound to be paid to the
party grieved, over and besides such money as he shall take, above the some of
four pence. Any usage or prescription to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And for the more spedier delivery of cattle, taken by way of distress, it
is further enacted by the said authority, that every Shiriffe of shires,
being no cities nor towns made shyres, shall at his first county day, or
within two monethis next after he has received his patent of his office o^
shirifwike, shall depute, appoint and proclayme in the shyre town within his
baylyweke, four deputies at the least, dwelling not above twelve miles, one
dystaunt from another, which said deputies so appointed and proclaimed, shall
have authority in the sheriffs name to make repleuies, and deliverance of
such distresses, in such manner and four me, as the sheriff, may or ought to
do, upon pain that every Sheriff, for every month that he shall lack such
deputy, or deputies, shall forfeyte for every such offense five pounds, the
one half of which forfaytures shall be to the king and Queen's highness, her
heirs and successors, the other half to him that will sue for the same by
byll, playnt, information, or action of debt, in any the king and queen's
courts of record, in which no essoygne protection, nor wager of law shall be
admitted.

An Act appointing in order to justices of peace touching the baylment of
prisoners. The.xiii. Chapter.
WHere in the parliament holden at Westminster, in the. iii year of the reign
of the noble prince, king Henrye the seventh, it was among other things
ordained and enated, that no prisoner arrested for felony, should be lette^ to
bail or mainepryce, by any one Justice of peace, but by the hole Justices, or
at least by two of the^, whereof one to be of ye Querum, Since the making of
which estatute, one Justice of peace, in the name of him self and one other of
the Justices his co^pagnion not making the said Justice party nor privy unto
the case, where fore the prisoner should be bayled, has often times by
sinister labor and means, set at large the greatest, and notablest offenders,
such as be not repleuisable by the laws of this realm, and yet the rather to
hyde their affections in that behalf have signified the cause of their
apprehension to be put only for suspicion of felony, whereby ye said offenders
has escaped unpunished, and do daily, to the high displeasure of almighty
God, the great peril of the king and Queen's true subjects, and encoragement
of all thieves and evil doers.

For reformation whereof, be it ordained and enacted by the king and Queen's
majesty's, the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that from, and after the
first day of Apryll next coming no Justice or Justices of peace, shall let to
bail or mainepryce any such person or persons, which for any offense or
offenses, by them or any of them committed, be declared not to be repleuised or
bailed or be forbidden to be repl^ued, or bailed, by the estatute of Westmin.
prymer, made in the parliamente holden in the third year of the reygne of
king Edward the first. And furthermore, that any person or persons arrested
for manslaughter or felony, or suspectio^ of manslaughter or felony, being
bayleable by the law, shall not after the said first day of Apryll, be let to
bail or mayneprise, by any Justices of peace, if it be not in open Sessions,
except it be by two Justices of peace, at ye least, whereof one to be of the
Quorum, and the same justices to be present together, at the time of the said
bailme^t or main price, which hailement or mainprice they shall certify in
writynge, subscribed, or sygned with their own hands, at the next general
goal delivery, to be holden within the county, where the said person or
person shall be arrested or suspected. And that the said Justices, or one of
them being of the Quorum, when any such prisoner is brought before them, for
any manslaughter or felonye, before any baylement or maynepryce, shall take
the examination of the said pr^soner, and information of them that brynges him,
of the fact, and circumstaunces thereof, and the same, or as much thereof, as
shall be material to prove the felonye, shall put in writing before they make
the same bailement, which said examination together, with the said baylement,
the said Justices shall certify at the next general goal delyuery to be
holden within the lymittes of their commission, and that every Coroner, upon
any inquisition before him found, whereby any person or persons shall be in dicte
for murder, or ma^slaughter or as accessory or accessaries to the same, before
the murder or man slaughter committed, shall put in writing the effect of the
evidence given to the Iurye before him, being material, and as well the said
Iusti^es, as the said Coroner, shall have authority by this act, to bind al
such by recognisaunce, or obligation, as do declare any thing material, to
prove the said murder or manslaughter, offenses, or fellonies, or to be
accessory, or accessaries to the same, as is aforesaid to appear at the next
general goall delivery, to be holden within the County, city, or town
corporat, where the trial thereof shall be, then and there to give evidence against
the party so indicted at the time of his trial, and shall certifye as well the
same euydence, as such bond and bonds in writing, as he shall take together
with the inquisition or indictment before him taken and found, at, or before
the time, of his said trial thereof, to be had or made. And likewise, the said
Justices shall certifye all and every such bond, taken before them, in like
manner as before is said of baylementes and examination. And in case any Justice
of peace, or Quorum, or Coroner, shall after the said first day of Apryll,
offend in any thing contrary to the true intent, and meaning of this present
act: That then the Justices of jail delyuery, of the Shire, city, town, or
place, where such offense shall happen to be committed, upon due proof thereof,
by examination before them shall for every such offense, set such fine on
every of the same Justices of peace, and Coroner, as the same Justices o^
jail delivery shall think me te, and shall estrete the same as other fynes
and amerciamentes assessed before Justices of jail delivery ought to be.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by thauctoritye aforesaid, that
Justices of peace, and Coroners within the city of London and the countye of
Middelsex, and in other cities, boroughes, and towns corporat within this
realm and Wales, shall within their several jurisdictions, have auctorytye to
let to bail, fellons and prisonners, in such manner and form, as they have
been heretofore accustomed, this act or any thing therein contained, to the
contrary notwithstanding. And also shall take examinations and bonds, as is
aforesaid, upon every baylement by them or any of them to be made, and shall
certify every such baylementes, bonds, and examinations, by them or any of
them, taken or made at the next jail deliuerye to be holden within the shyre,
city, borough, or town, where their several jurisdictions extends, upon
like pain and forfeyture, as is before limited in this present act.

And be it also enacted by the auctorytye aforesaid, that no writers of Habeas
cor^us, or Certiorary, shall be hereafter granted to remove any prisoner out of
any jail, or to remove any recognisaunce, except the same writtes be sygned
with the proper hands of the chief Justice, or in his absence, one of the
Justices of the court, out of which the same writtes shall be awarded, or made,
upon pain that he that writes any such writtes, not being signed as is
aforesaid, to forfayt to our said soueraygne lord the king and the queen, for
every such writ and writtes five pounds.

An act for the making of russel sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of
Naples in Norwiche. The.xiiii. Chapter.
WHere of late years passed russels, called russels satte^s and sattens
reuerses, have been practiced to be made beyond the seas of the wolles bredde
in the county of Norfolk, and by reason thereof so great quantytye of the said
russelles sattens, sattens reuerses, have been brought into this realm, sold
and worn as well in every part of this realm, as in ye parts beyond ye seas
that thereby the mysteries of worstedes making and weuynge, whereby
merchants and inhabitauntes of the city of Norwiche, have heretofore ben well
maynteyned and relieved, is now at this present ^lmost wholly decayed and
brought out of estimation, and very lyt^^e worn, either within this realm,
or in any other forreyne realms to the great hynderance, and decay of the said
city, and Citezens of the same city. For remedy whereof Thomas Marsham, Maiour
o^ the city of Norwiche John Corbet Esquier, Austen Steward, Robert Leche,
Robert Rugge, John Ball, and Alexander Mather Aldermen of the said city.
Thomas Whal, Thomas Pecke, Raphe Marsham, Robert Henry, John Sutton, Richard
Tomson, Cytezins and merchants of the said city, at their great costs and
charges, as well in brynging of certain strangers from the parts beyond the
seas into the said city as also in making of Lombes, and all other provision
for the same, and also have called unto them eight persons of the most discrete
and worthy men of the misterye of Worstede weuyng, within the said city, that
is to say, John Cook, James Lyn, John Cross, Simo^ Pe^it, John Marshal,
Roger L^cke Edmond Barker, and Edmonde Selers, being the number of.xxi
persons, which have not only made Russels Sattens, and Sattens ^euerses, and
fustian o^ Naples within the said city of Norwich of (...) wolles, but also
have learned and taught other citezins and in(...)auntes of the said city to
make the same, in such good and perfect manner, that much better Russels
Sattens, Sattens reuerses, and fu^^^a^ of Naples, and such like, and for easier
prices, be now at this present wrought and made within the said city, then
hertofore has been, or now be made in any of the parties beyond the seas,
whereby the said city and inhabitauntes thereof may, and be like agayn^ to be
relieved and brought to the old estate, to the great advancement of the
commodities of this realm, and enrichynge the ^ame, if some good and polityke
laws and ordinances were made for the good continuance of the true making
of the said Russels Sattens, Sattens Reuerses, and Fustian of Naples, and
such like.

In consideration whereof be it enacted by the assent of the king and queen's
hyghnes, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of this present
Parliament assembled, and by thauctorytie of the same, that the said russels
sattens, and sattens reuerses, and fustian of Naples hereafter to be made only
within the said city, may from henceforth ^er^ the name, and be called by the
name of Norwiche sattens and Norwich fustians, and that the mayor and the before
mentioned citezens of ye same city* which before this time has been at the
costs and charges of the bringyng of the said strangers into the same city,
for ye making of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses and fustians of
Naples, and such the before mentioned eight persons, that they have called unto
them shall be a fellowship of themselves and shall yearly the third day of
February choose of their fellows, four wardens within the guilde hall of the
said city, or any other common and convenient place in the same city, and
the same wardens so being choosen, shall stand and be wardens of the same
fellowship during one whole year, next ensuing ye said election and that the
same wardeynes after the said election shall come before the mayor of the said
city for the time being, yearly the mondaye next after the said third day of
February, and before the said mayor shall be sworn diligently to view search,
and see all the russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of Naples, then
made or that shall be made within the said city, during the said year. And
such of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of Naples, as
shall apeare and be demed by them to be lawfully truly and workmanly wrought
shall seal with a seal of lead, bearing the arms of the city of Norwiche,
whereby it may be known to the merchant or buyer of them that the same be
allowed and truly made.

And that also it may be enacted by the auctorytye aforesaid, that the said
wardens and fellowship shall be a body corporate, and to be named and be enabled
by this act to sue, and be sued and to give, and to take by the name of
wardeynes and felowshyppe of the mysterye of russel sattens, sattens reuerses,
and fustian of Norwiche making within the said city of Norwiche. And if any
defaulte at any time shall be found in any of the said russels sattens, sattens
reuerses and fustian of Norwich, or in any of them by the said wardeynes, that
the same default shall be reformed and the offendour or offenders therein to be
punished according to such rules and ordinances, as hereafter from time to
time shall be made within ye said city by the mayor of the said city for the time
being, and by the said four wardeynes, and the fellowship of the said
occupation or mysterye, or the greatest number of the said felowshyppe for, and
concerning the same, and that the same defaultes from time to time, as
occasion shall serve shall be enquired of, and tried before the mayor of the said
city of Norwiche for the time being, by the oaths of twelve honest men of
the foresaid felowshyppe. And that the said four wardeynes so chosen and
sworn, shall have full power and auctorytye, to do execute, present, and
reform all and singular thing and things, of, for, and concerning the said
mystery, making workyng and occupiynge of the said russels sattens, sattens
reuersers and fustian of Norwich with in the said city in such manner and
form as in or by the said ordynances shall be expressed and declared, and that
^t al times hereafter and from time to time it shall lawful to the Mayor of the
said city for the time being, and to the before named fellowship and wardeynes
of the same mystery, and the more part of them, and to their successors, to
make and ordeyne from time to time rules, laws and ordinances mete and
necessary for the good order and governance of ye said mystery, and for the
true and well making of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian
of Norwiche, and the same ordinances so made to be at al times obeyed by all
thin habitaunce of the said city, or ^uburbes of the same and to be put in due
execution by the said mayor and wardeyns, and their successors for the time
being in such manner and form as by ye said ordinance shall be ordained and
declared. And ye such as now be and ye hereafter shall be makers of the said
russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwich, and every of them
within the said city shall not from hence forth occupy ye said mystery and
making of the said russels satte^s, sattens reuerses, and fustyan of Norwiche,
nor any of the^ within the said city by them selves, or by any other, before
he or they so occupying the said mystery within the said city be made free of
the said city, and admitted to be of ye said fellowship by the mayor of the
said city, and wardeyns and fellowship of the said mysterye for the time
being. And yt no person do occupy by him self or any other for him out of the
said city, the said mystery of making of russels sattens, sattens reuerses,
and fustians of Naples or of any of them, before he or they so occupiyng the
same, have been pre^tice to the said mystery by the term of seven years, or
else admitted by the said mayor and fellowship or ye more part of them, upon
pain of forfeyture of ye same russels satte^s, sattens reuerses, and fustia^
of Norwich by the^ or any of the^ to be made contrary to the form of this act.

Provided always and be it enacted by thauctoritye aforesaid, that the said
mayor and wardeyns for the time being shall not take any sum of money, or
reward to their own proper uses for the admitting of any person or persons, to
occupy the said mystery upon pain of forfeyture of treble the value of the
reward or sum of money so by them or any of them to be taken.

Provided also, that it shall be lawful to the said wardeynes, and to every of
them for ye time being, by all ways and means and at al lawful times,
diligently from time to time, to make search by dew and ordinary ways, for all
manner of the said russels sattens, sattens reuerses and fustian of Norwiche,
that shall happen to be found by them defective, for lack of good and true
workma^shyp. And that it shall be lawful to the said wardeynes and every of the^
for the time being by virtue of this act, to sease and take the said russels
sattens, sattens reuerses* and fustian, and bring and present the same clothes
so seized and taken, to the Mayor of ye said city for the time being, and unto
his successors* to the intent that twelve honest, lawful, and expert men of ye
said mystery, and fellowship being sworn before the said Mayor, may by virtue
of their oaths, make inquiry, and present the manner of the said defaultes
before the said Mayor, for the time being according to such good and holsom
ordinances and rules, as shall be ordained and made for the conservation and good
continuance of the said occupation and mystery, and the true making and
working of the said russels sattens, sattens, reuerses, and fustians of
Norwiche. And that al and every person and persons, that shall occupy, use, and
exercise the said mystery, or making of the said russels sattens, satte^s
reuerses, and fustians of Norwiche, or any of them, contrary to the form,
tenor, plain meaning* and intent of this act, and of the rules and
ordinances, that at any time hereafter by authority of this act shall be
ordained and made for ye continuance of the true and perfect making of the
said russels sattens, sattens reuerses and fustian of Norwiche, shall forfeyte
and lose for every time so offending, or making any russels sattens, sattens
reuerses, and fustian of Norwiche, contrary to the meaning, tenor and effect
of the said act, rules, and ordinances, concerning the same, such fines,
amerciamentes, and pains as shall be adjudged, assessed, and affered by twelve
expert men of the said fellowship upon their oaths, the same twelve persons to
be sworn before the said Mayor and wardeynes to enquire and make true verdict,
and presentment of such defaultes, the one half of al which forfeyture to be to
ye Mayor of the said city for ye time being, and his successors, and the other
moitie to the said wardeins for the time being, and there succssours, by action
of debt, bil playnt, or informatio^ in any court of record, in which action,
bil, plaint or information no wager of law, protection, inuencio^, or foreign
Ple, shall be allowed. And in case it shall fortune hereafter, yt any of the said
russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustian of Norwich shall lack of such
lengthes and bredes, or of the true and ensuing making or sorting of ye yarne
as shall be appointed, and set forth by the said rules and ordinances, and the
same so to be found defective by verdict of twelve men of ye said feloshyp
before the said Mayor and wardeins and their successors: That the^ the said
russels sattens, sattens reuerses, and fustians of Naples, and every of them so
found defective, to be cut in two pieces, and to pay such fine or fines as
shall be offered and affered by ye said twelve expert men by virtue of their
oaths, ye one moitie of which fine or fines to be to the Mayor of the said
city for the time being, and to his successors, and the other moytie to the
wardeynes of the said felowshype for the time being, and to their succcessours.

Provided always and be it further enacted by thauctoritie before said, that if
any wardeyne or wardeines for the time being of ye said mist erie or occupation
of making russels sattens, sat tens reuerses, and sustian of Naples, shall at
any time hereafter seal, or cause to be sealed any russels sattens, sattens
reuerses, or fustians of Naples, yt shall not be well sufficient and truly
wrought, and made according to the true intent and meaning of this present act,
shall forfeyt and loose for every piece so sealed, being not well sufficient and
truly wrought and made, the whole value of every such piece so sealed, the one
half of which forfeytures to be to the king and Queen's majesty's, her heirs
and successors, and the other moyte thereof to be to such person and persons as
shall sue for the same by byll, action, or information, in any of the kings
courts of record, in which byl, action, or information no essoygne
protection, or wager of law shall be allowed.

An act to confirm the liberties of the lord Marchers in Wales. The.xv.
Chapter.
HUmbly besechen your excellent majesty's, your true and faithful Subjects,
the lord Marchers both spiritual and temporal, within your highness dominion of
Wales, that where as in ye parliament holde^ at West. the.xxvii. year of the
raygne of king Henry theyght father unto you our natural Soueraygne lady,
amongst other things one act was made and established for laws and justice
to be ministered in the said dominion of Wales, in like form as it is in this
realm of England, in the which act one article is, yt for that the lords
Marchers before ye parliament had used to put their tenauntes within the
lordships Marchers, under common maynpryce and suerty of apparaunce, and have
had the forfeytures thereof, which for ever from and after the feast of al
saints then next ensuinge the said parliament should utterly sease, and be
determined. It was enacted that after the said feast of al saynctes, every lay
and temporal person the^ being alord Marcher, should have the moyte or half
of every forfeiture of al and every common mainprice, recognisance for the
peace or appearance, forfeited by any of their tenantes inhabiting within any of
their lordships marchers, and they to be paid the same moytie or half by the
hands of the shyreffe of every of the counties where such for feyture shall be,
if the shyriff can levy the same, and the same shyriffe to account to our said
late soueraygne lord the king for the other half or moytie, in such excheker
as they can be acco^tant. And further it was enacted by thauctoritie
aforesaid, that all and every lay, and temporal person or persons, then being
lords marchers and having any lordships marchers, or lordshyps royal should
from and after the said feast of al saints, have al such myses and profits of
their tenantes, as they have had or used to have at the first entrye into their
lands in times past. And also should have hold and keep, with in the precinct of
their lordshippes, courts Baron, courts let, and lawdayes, and al and every
thing to the said courts belonging, and also should have within the precinct of
their said lordshyps, or lawday wayf, strayf, infangthefe, outfangthefe,
treasure trouie, deodandes, goods and cattels of fellons, and of persons
condemned or outlawed of felony or murder, put in exigent for felony or
murder, and also wrecke de mer, wharfage, and customs o^ strangers, as they
have have had in time past, as though such privileges granted unto the^ by
point of charter, any thing in that act to the contrary notwythstanding, as in
ye said act of parliament more at large it may apeare.

And for as much as bishops, and other ecclesiastical persons being lords
marche^s, having ye like liberties, casualties, profyttes, and commodities,
within their lordships marchers, and lordshyps royal, within the said dominion,
or principality of Wales, were not provided for by the express letter of the
said statute, in like sort as the lay and temporal lords marchers were, but
rather of purpose as it should seem forgotten and left out of the said act,
against all reason, and good equity: And forasmuch also, as the heirs and
successors of the lay and temporallordes marchers, then being were not provided
for, by the limitation and express words of the said act, as well as their
auncesters and predecessors were, as reason would they should have been.

It may please your majesty's of your most gracious favor and benignity at
the humble suit and supplication of your said faithful subjects the lords
marchers that now are, in the said dominion of Wales, both spiritual and
temporal, to grant that it may by thassent of the lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled, be ordained,
established, and enacted, by thaue torytye of this present parliament, that
as well your said spiritual and ecclesiastical subjects, lords marchers, now
having lordships marchers, or lordships royal in Wales aforesaid, and their
successors, and the successors of every of them, as also the heirs and
successors of the lords temporal marchers, that then were or now be, and the
heirs or successors of every of them being, or which hereafter shall be ^ordes
marchers within their lordships marchers, and lordshyps royal in the dominion
or principality of Wales, shall have and enjoy to them and to their heirs and
successors, respectively and severally for ever the moytie and half of every
forfeyture, of al and every common mainprice recognisa^ce for the pea^e or
appearance forfeyted by any their tena^tes inhabiting wtin any of their
lordships marchers, or lordships royal. and they to be paid the same moytie or
half by ye hands of the shyriffe of the county, for the time being, after
such form and sor^^ as the said lay or temporal lords marchers have been or
ought to have been paid the same, by force of the said Sta tute.

And further, shall have all such mises, and profits of their tenan^es, as the
lords marchers, spiritual or temporal, respectively, or seuerallye had or used
to have at their first entry into their lands in times past before the making
of the said act or statute. And also shall have, hold, and keep within the
precinct of their said lordships, al such courts baron courts let, and
lawdayes, and al and every thing and things, to ye same courts belonging, and
also shall have within the precinct of their said several lordships, or
lawdayes, al such waif, strayf, infang thief, out fang thief, treasure trouis,
deodandes, goods, and cattels offellons, and of persons condemned or outlawed
of felony or murder, put in exigent for felony or murder, and also al such
wrecke demer, wha^fage, and customs of strangers, as the lords Marchers,
spiritual and temporal, respectively, and severally had and used in times
past, before the making of the said statute.

An act for the continuance of certain statutes. Cap. xvi.
Where in the parliament begone and holden at London the.iij. day of November,
in the.xxi. year of the raygne of our most dread sovereign lord of most
famous memory, king Henry theyght, and from thence adiourned to Westminster. and
there holden and continued by diverse prorogations, unto ye dissolution thereof,
one act was made and established for the restrainte of carriage, and conueynge
of horses, and mares out of this realm, and also one other act was there made
for the true windinge of wolles, and one other act was there made, to restrain
killyng of wailinges, bullockes, stieres, and heyfers, being under thage of.ii.
years which said several acts were then made to endure and continue to ye
next parliament, as by ye said several acts more plainly appears. And where
also in the said parliament, one other act was made and established for
attaintes to be sued for the punishment of perjury, upon untrue verdites, which
acts last before reherseb, were then made and ordained, to continue and endure
to the last day of the next parliament as by ye same act more plainly at large
is showed and may apeare. And where also in the parliament begone and holden at
Westminster. theyght day of June, in ye xxviii. year of the raygne of our said most
drad sovereign lord king Henry the.viii. and there continued and kept unto the
dissolution thereof ^t was ordained and enacted, that al and singular the said
acts above remembered, and every of them, should continue and endure in their
force and strength, and also be observed and kept until the last day of the
next parliament, as by the same act among other things therein contained more
plainly appears. And where also in the parliament begone and holden at West.
ye xxviii. day of Apryl in the.xxxi. year of the raygne of our saydlate most
dread sovereign lord king Henry the eight, and there continued until the,
xxviii, day of June then next following, it was ordained and enacted by
thauctoritie of the same parliament y^ al and singular the said several acts
above remembered and every of them and al clauses, articles, and provisions in
them, and ^uery of them contained, should continue and endure in their force
and strength, and also be observed and kept until the last day of the next
parliament, as by the same act a monges other things therein contained, more
playnelye appears. And where in the parliament holden at Westminster. in the.xxxv.
year of the reign of our said late soueraygne lord king Henry theight, one
act was made for the preservation of woods, to endure for. vi^, years then
next following, and from thence to thend of the next parliament, as by the same
act more plainly does and may appear. And where also at the parliament holden
at West. in the.xxxvii. year of the reign of ye said king Henry theight, and
there continued and kept until ye dissolutio^ thereof it was ordained and
enacted y^ al and singular the said acts above mentioned, and every of them
except the said act made for the preservation of wodes, as is aforesaid, should
continue and eudure in their force and strength, and also to be observed and
kept, until the last day of the next parliament then following, as by the same
act amongs other things therein contained more plainly appears. And where
also at the sessio^ of the parliament, ended at West. in the.xiiii. day of
March, in the third year of the reygne of our soueraygne Lord king Edward
the.vi. one act was made for the true currying of leather, which act was made
to endure to thend of the next parliament, as by the same act more plainly
appears. And where also at the sessyon of a Parlyament ended at at West. the
first day of February, in the fourth year of the reign of our said
latesoueraygne Lord king Edward the. vi one act was then and there made,
concerning the buying of to there beasts. And also one other act was then and
there made touching the buiing and sell of butter and chese, which said
several acts, were then and there made, to endure and continue, to the end
of the next parliament as by the same several acts more at large it does and
may appear. And where also at the session of a parliament by prorogation
holde^ at West. the, xxiii, day of January in the.v. year of the reign of our
said souer aygne lord, one other act was then and there made, against
regratours and forstallers to endure to thend of the next parlyament, which al
and singular the said acts above mentioned together, with ye said act
concerning the preservation of wodes, at a parliament holde^ at Westminster. the
first day of March, in the.vii. year of the raygne of our said soueraygne Lord
king Edward the.vi. and there continued and dyssolued the last day of the same
month of March, and all clauses articles and prouysions in the^, and every of
them contained were there revived and continued, to stand in their force and
strength, until the last day of the next parliament. And where also at the
session of a parliament holden by prorogatio^ at West. ye.xxiiii day of
October, in the.i. year of the raygne of our most gracious soueraygne lady ye
queen, and there continued and kept until ye dissolution thereof, one act was
there made and established against unlawful and rebellious asse^bles, to endure
to thend of ye next parliament as by ye same act more plainli does and may
appear. And where also at the same session of parliament, last before
mentio^ed, al and singular the acts above mentioned and before ye time
continued at ^undri parliamentes, as is aforesaid, and clauses, articles, and
provisions in them and every of them contained, were there revived, and continued
to stand in their force and strength, unto the last day of the next parliament
Forasmuch as al and singular the said several acts above mentioned be good
and beneficial for the common wealth of this realm Be it therefore enacted
ordained and established by the king and queen our soueraign lord and lady with
thassent of the lords spiritual and temporal and the commons in this present
parliamente assembled and by thauctoritie of the same y^ al and singular the
said several acts and estatutes above mentioned and rehearsed, and every of
them and al clauses articles, and provisions in the^ and every of them
contained, shall be revived, continued, stand and endure in their force and
strength, to al intentes, constructions, and purposes and shall be observed and
kept in all things, until ye last day of ye next parliament.

An act touching leases hereafter to be made by certain spiritual persons.
Cap.xvii.
WHere in the parliament begone and holden at West. the eight day of June, in
ye.xxviii. year of the raygne of our late king of famous memory Henry theight,
and there continued and kept until ye dissolution of the same parliament,
ye.xviii. dai of June next following, one act entitled, an act for restitution
of the first fruits in the ^^me of vacation, to the next incu^bent, was had
and made, wherein are certain clauses for leases the^ made, and to be made by
spiritual and ecclesiastical persons, to endure, and be in force for term of,
vi. years if ye incumbentes did resign there said spiritual promotio^s or if
ye same should otherwise become void by thonli act of the same thincu^be^tes, is
by ye same act more at large may appear. To the intent the persons and vycares
and others, having cure ofsoules, may ye better attend, and be the more
vigilaunt in their mystery and function.

Be it enacted by the king our soueraygne lord, and the queen our soueraygne
lady with thassentes of ye lords spiritual and temporal and ye commons in this
present parliament assembled and by thauctoritie of ye same yt as much of the
same act, as does concern the making good of ye said leases ne any clause,
sentente, provision, or article therein contained shall extend, or be construed,
or adjudged to extend to any lease, that shall be made by any person, vicar or
any other having any spiritual promotion, after the feast of the purificication
of our Lady next coming.

Excusum Londini in aedibus Iohannis Cawodi, Tipographi Regiae Maiestatis Anno
MDLV.


