AN ACT FOR CERTAIN Ordinances in the kings majesty's dominion and
principality of Wales.
Our sovereign lord the kings majesty of his tender zele and affection,
that he bears toward his louinge and obedient subjects of his dominion
principality and country of Wales, for good rule and order to be from
hensforth kept and maynteyned within the same, whereby his said subjects may
grow and rise to more wealth and prosperity, has devised and made diverse
sundry good and necessary ordinances, which his majesty, of his most
abundant goodness, at the humble suite and peticion of his said subjects of
Wales, is pleased and contented, to be enacted, by thassent of the lords
spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled,
and by the authority of the same, in manner and form, as here after ensues.

FIRST THAT his gracis said domynyon princypalite and country of Wales, be
from hensforth divided into.xii. shires, of the which.viii. have been shires of
long and ancient time, that is to say: the shires of Glamorgan, Carmarthin,
Pembroke, Cardigan, Flynt, Caernaruan, Anglesey, and Merionneth, And four of
the said twelve shires be newlye made and ordained to be shires, by an act
made at the parliament, holden at Westmynster, in the.xvij. year of our said
sovereign lords most noble reign: that is to say, the shires of Radnor,
Breknok, Mountgomery, and Denbigh, over and besides, the shire of Mommoth, and
diverse other dominions, lordshippes and manors, in the marches of Wales, united
and annexed to the shires of Salop^, Herforde, and Gloucestre, as by the said
late act more plainly appears.

Item that the lymytations of the hundredes, of late made within the said
shires, by virtue of his graces commission, directed out of his high court of
Chancery, and again returned into the same, shall stand in full strength,
force and effect, according to the said limitation: Except such of the same,
as sith that time have been altered or changed, by virtue of any act, or acts
of parliament al ready made, or that shall be altered or changed, by any act, or
acts, in this present session to be made.

Item that there shall be and remain a President and counsel in the said
dominion and principalite of Wales, and the marches of the same, with all
officers, clerks, and incidentes to the same, in manner and form as has been
hertofore used and accustomed. Which presydent and counsel shall have power
and authority, to here and determine by their wisdoms and discretions, such
causes and matters as be, or hereafter shall be assigned to them by the kings
majesty, as hertofore has been accustomed and used.

Item that there shall be holden and kept, Sessions twyse in every year, in every
of the said shires, in the said domynyon and principalitye of Wales: That is
to say, in the shires of Glamorgan, Breknok, Radnor, Caermerthin, Pembroke,
Cardigan, Mountgomerey, Denbigh, Flynt, Caernaruan, Merionneth, and Anglesey,
the which Sessions shall be called the kings great Sessions in Wales.

Item that the justice of Chestre, for the time being, shall hold and keep
Sessions twyse in every year, in the shires of Denbygh, Flynt, and Mountgomery,
and have nothing but his old fee of an hundred pounds yearly for the same.

Item that the justice of Northwales shall in likewise hold, and keep Sessions
twyse every year, in every of the said shires of Caernaruan, Merionneth, and
Anglesey, and shall have yearly of the kings majesty a yearly fee of fyfty
pounds for the same.

Item that one person, learned in the laws of this realm of England, by the
kings majesty to be named and appointed, shall be Justice of the shires of
Radnor, Breknok, and Glamorgan, and shall in likewise hold, and keep Sessions
twice in every year, in every of the same shires, and shall have yearly of the
kings majesty fyfty pounds for his fee.

Item that one other person, learned in the laws of this realm, to be
appointed, as is aforesaid, shall be Justice of the shires of Caermerthin,
Pembroke, and Cardigan, and shall in likewise hold and keep Sessions twice in
every year, in every of the same shires: and shall also have yearly of the
kings majesty fyftie pounds for his fee.

Item the said persons or Justices, and every of them now being, or that
herafter shall be, shall have several letters patentes and co^missions for their
offices, under the kings great seal of England, to be exercised by them
selves, or their sufficient deputies, according to the purposes and intentes,
in their ordinances specified.

PROVIDED always, that their commyssions, to them alredye granted, under the
said great seal, shall stand in force and effect, according to the tenor of
the same: unless it shall please the kings majesty herafter, to alter or
change them, or any of them, this present article last before expressed in any
wise not withstandinge.

Item that every of the said Justices, within the lymittes of their commissions
and auctorities, to them appointed as is before said, shall hold all manner of
plees of the Crown, at and in the said Sessions, in as large and ample manner,
as the kings chief Justice of England, and other the kings Justices of the
kings bench there, or any of them, may do in their places or else where
within the realm of England. And also to hold plees of assizes, and all
other plees and actions real personal and mixte, in as large and ample manner,
as the kings chief Justice of the common place in England, and other
Justices of the same place, or any of them, may do in the realm of England.

Item that every of the said Justices of Wales, shall have power and
authority, to enquire of all treasons, murders, felonies, riottes, routes,
unlawful assembles, extorcions, embraceries, maynteynaunces, reteynors,
concelementes* contemptes, and all other offenses and evil deeds, of what
natures, names, or qualities so ever they be, done, committed, or perpetrated,
within the limittes of their co^missions and auctorities, against the form of
the common law of the realm of England, or of any statutes of the same, and to
here and determine the premises, and every of them: and generally to minister
common justice to all and singular the kings subjects, within the limittes of
their commissions and auctorities, according to the laws statutes and
customs of the realm of England, and according to this present ordinance.

Item that every of the said sessions shall be kept and continued by the space
of.vi. days, in every of the said shires, at either of the said times as is
and has been used within the said three shires of North wales. And that the
said Justices shall cause open proclamations to be made in the shire tounes,
what time and place they purpose to keep their said sessions.xv. days at the
least, before they keep the same: to the intent the kings subjects may have
knowledge thereof.

Item that days shall be given in all plees plaintes process and adiournamentes
from day to day, and sessions to sessions, by the discretion of the said
Justices, within the limittes of their auctorities, for the good and spedy
ministracion of Justice, to all and singular the kings subjects, as is or
has been used in Northwales.

Item that one original seal, devised by the kings highness for justice to be
ministered in the said three shires of Northwales, That is to say, the shires of
Merionneth, Caernaruan, and Anglesey, shall be and remain in the charge keeping
and custody of the chamberleyne of Northwales. And that one other original
seal, devised by the kings majesty, for ministracion of justice to be used
in the said shires of Carmerthin, Pembroke, and Cardigan, shall be and remain in
the charge and keeping of the Chamberleyne of Southwales. And that likewise one
other original seal, devised by the kings majesty, for mynystracion of
justice to be used in the said three shires of Breknok, Radnor, and Glamorgan,
shall be and remain in the charge and custody of the steward and chamberleyn of
Breknok. And that also one other original seal, devised by the kings
majesty, for ministration of justice, to be ministered within the said shires
of Denbigh and Mountgomerie, shall be and remain in the charge keeping and
custody of the Steward and Chamberlein of Denbigh. And that the original
seal of Chester, shall be and stand for the original seal of Flint, for
justice to be ministered in the said shire of Flint: and shall be and remain in
the charge keeping and custody of the Chamberleine of Chester.

Item that the said Stewardes and Chamberleyns shall seal with the said
seals: that is to say, every one of them shall seal with the seal, to his
charge committed, all manner of original writtes and process, returnable before
the said Justices, at the sessions to be holden in every of the said shires, in
manner and form as is aforesaid: and shall severally account and answer the
kings majesty, for the profittes of the same seal. And that none of the said
stewardes, chamberleynes, or chauncellours, having the charge and kepinge of
the said seals, shall by occasion thereof, or by color of any of their
offices, compel or cause any person or persons, inhabited within any of the
said.xii. shires, to appear before them selfs or their deputies: ne shall have
power or authority, to here or determyne any plees of the crown, nor other
causes or matters of justice otherwise then in this ordinance is limited and
expressed: But shall have the charge and keeping of the said seals, to seal
all such original writtes and process, as shall be returnable before the said
justices, in their said sessions, as is before specified, and as here after
shall be declared, which writtes and process shall be used made sealed and
returned, in manner and form, as has been used before the Justice in North
wales.

Item that all such persons, as now be, or here after shall be the kings
highness stewardes, chamberleines, or chauncellours, within any of the said.xii.
shires, which by reason of their said offices, have charges for the recept
collection or account, of and for the kings rentes, revenues, fermes or
profittes, to be due to his majesty, within the said dominion of Wales, may
direct process, under the said seal, being in their charge and custody,
within the limittes of their auctorities only against bayliffes, reues,
fermours, and other ministers accomptant, to appear before them selfs, to
answer to and for any the kings revenues fermes rentes or profittes, and for
none other causes, nor against any other person or persons, in like manner and
form as they have been accustomed in that case to do.

Item that all stewardes of any lordships or manors in Wales, shall and may
keep and hold such leetes, lawdayes, and courtbarons, as apperteyneth and
belongs to the lordeships and manors, whereof they be stewardes, and to hold
plees by playnte, under the sum of.xls. in every such courtbaron: and have
and enjoy all other auctorities, commodities and profittes, as stewardes of
leetes, lawdayes and court barons in England commonly have, and ben used to
have, by reason of the said offices, and none other: any law usage or custom,
in the said dominion of Wales, hertofore had to the contrary hereof not
withstandinge.

Item provided always and be it enacted, that the said stewardes, nor any of
them* nor the shirefe of the said counties in Wales, shall have any power or
authority, to enquire of any manner of felonye, in any such leete, lawdaye, or
turn, within the said dominion to be holden.

And that from hensforth no leete nor lawday be kept by the Steward or other
officer, of any lordshippe or manor in the said dominion of Wales: but in such
lordshippes and places, where it was accustomed to be kept, before the making
of the act of parliament, concerning Wales, made in the.xxvi. year of our
said soueraygne lords reign. So always the place, where such court shall be
kept, be mete and convenient for that purpose.

Item that all Maires, Bailiffes and heed officers of corporate towns in
Wales, may hold plees, and determyne actions, and do every other thing,
concerning common justice, according to their lawful grauntes and laudable
customs of such towns: so always they follow the course trade and fascion, of
the laws and customs of the realm of England, and not of any walshe laws
or customs. And that in every of the said towns they may try all issues
joined, or herafter to be joined, in any action personal, by.vi. men,
according as hertofore in diverse places of the said country it has been
used: Any thing contained in this act to the contrary not withstanding.

PROVIDED always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for as
much as there be diverse and many small boroughes and towns corporate within
the said dominion of Wales: whereof many have their commenceme^t by grauntes,
made from the lords marchers, and some by other means: our said sovereign
lord shall from hensforth, by virtue of this act, have full power and
auctorytie, by his letters patentes, to be enrolled in his graces high court
of Chancery, at any time within seven years, hereafter next ensuynge to thend
of this present parliament, to repel, adnihilate, and dissolve such and as
many of the said boroughes and towns corporate, and all liberties and
customs of the same, as to his highness shall be thought expedient, to the intent
his majesty, at his graces pleasure, may newly erect, ordeyne and make, such
and as many other boroughes and towns corporate within the said domynyon,
being more apt and convenient for that purpose, and endue them with such
liberties and francheses, as to his most excellent wisdom shall be thought
necessary, for the wealth of the said country.

Item the kings majesty is pleased and contented, of his most gracious
goodness, that such as have patentes of any office of Stewardships,
chamberleynshyppes, chauncellourshippes, or Iusticeshippes, within the said
domynyon of Wales, for term of their lives, shall have and enjoy their
certain ordinary and annuell fees of money, used and accustomed to be paid
and borne by the kings highness, by virtue of any their letters patentes,
during their interest therein: but in no wise to take or claim any casual
fees, claymed by color of their offices, contrary to this present
ordinance: Any custom in Wales, or any thing in this act to the contrary
not withstanding.

Item over and besides the said original seals, there shall be four judicial
seals, devised by the kings majesty* whereof one shall remain with the
Justice of Chester, which is appointed by this act, to be Justice of the shires
of Flynt* Denbigh, and Mountgomerye, to be used within the said shires to seal
all judicial process and bylles, that shall be sued before the said justice, in
the sessio^s to be holden within the same shires. And that one other of the
said judicial seals, shall likewise remain, and be in the charge and
custody of the said Justice of Northwales. And that the third of the said
seals, shall be and remain in the custody and charge, of the Justice of the
three shires of Glamorgan, Breknok, and Radnor. And the fourth of the said
seals shall remain in the charge and custody of the Justice of the said
three shires, of Pembroke, Carmerthin, and Cardigan. And the said Justices shall
seal with the said judicial seals: that is to say, every of them with the
seal committed to his charge and custody, as well all bylles, as all other
judicial process, that shall be sued before them in the said sessions, upon
any oryginall bylles or wryttes: and all other process, that shall be awarded
from any of the said Justices, shall be sealed with the said judicial seal.

Item that every of the said Justices shall account and answer to the kings
majesty for the profittes of the said seal, being in his charge and custody,
in manner and form as herafter shall be declared.

Item that the Test of every byll and judicial process, that shall pass under
the said judicial seal, shall be under the name of such of the said Justices,
from whom such bill or judicial process shall pass, in like manner and form
as is used in the common place in England.

Item that all actions real and myxt, atteintes, conspiracies, assizes, and
quare impedit, appeles of murder and felonye, and all actions grounded upon
any statutes, shall be sued by original wryttes, to be opteyned and sealed
with the said original seal, returnable before the said Justices at their
sessions, within the lymittes of their auctorities, in manner and form as is
before mentioned.

Item that all manner of personal actions, as debt, detynue, trespass,
account, and such like, amounting to the sum of forty shillinges, or above
shall be sued by wryttes original, to be opteyned and sealed as is aforesaid, or
by bills, at the pleasure of the party suinge the same, before the said
Justices, within the lymittes of their auctorities, as is used in Northwales.
And that all personal actions, under the sum of forty shillinges, that is
to say, debt, trespass, detinue* account, and such like, shall and may be
sued, before any of the said Justices, in the said sessions, by bill as it is
used in Northwales. And that every original byll, concerning actions
personalles, shall be sealed with the kings judicial seal, being in the
custody of the said Justice, before whom such personal actions by bille
shall be brought, and commenced. And that such fees shall be paid for the
writing and sealyng of such original writtes and bylles, as herafter shall be
expressed: That is to say, for the sealyng of every original writ to be sued
in, and upon the causes aforesaid: and for every byll, to be pursued in
actions personal, whereof the debt, and damage amounts to the sum of
fourtye shillinges, or above, the parties pursuinge the same, shall pay for
the seal of every such writ or bylle, sex pens. And for every judicial
process, to be sued upon any such original writ, or bille, the parries
pursuinge such judicial process, shall pay for the sealinge thereof, seven pens:
whereof the kings majesty shall have sex pens, and the Justice, sealinge such
judicial process, shall have one penny.

Item that every bill in personal action, whereof the det, duitie or damage
amounts not to forty shillinges: and all manner judicial process to be sued
upon the same, shall also be sealed with the kings said judicial seal: and
the parties pursuynge the same, shall pay for the seal of every such byll, and
judicial process, theruppon to be sued, three pens, whereof the kings majesty
to have two pens and the Justice, sealinge such process, to have a penny.

Item that all writtes of Scire fac, and writtes of good aberinge, or for the
peax, or writtes of Supersede as upon the same, and all other process to be
sued from the said Justices, upon any record or suggestion, admitted by any
of the said Justices, within the limittes of their auctorities, shall also be
sealed with the said judicial seal. And that the parties, pursuinge for the
same, shall pay for the seal, of every such writ and process, seven pens:
whereof the kings highness shall have sex pens, and the Justice, by whom
such process shall be sealed, a penny. And that every exemplyfication, upon
any record, before any of the said Justices, shall be sealed with the kings
said judicial seal: and the parties pursuinge the same, shall pay for the
seal thereof, twenty pens whereof the kings highness shall have sextene pens,
and the Justices, sealynge the same, four pens.

Item that recoueries and fynes, concordes and Warrantes of attorney for the
same, shall and may be taken before every of the said Justices, of lands,
tenementes, and hereditamentes, within his authority, by force of his general
commission, without any writ of Dedimus potestatem, to be sued for the same,
in like manner and form as is used to be taken, before the kings chief
Justice, of his common place in England.

Item that all fynes, herafter to be levied before any of the said Justices,
with proclamation made the same sessions, that the said fine shall be
engrossed, and in two other great sessions then next to be holden within the
same country, shall be of the same force and strength to al purposes, as fynes
levied with proclamations be of, that be levied before the Justices of the
common place in England.

Item that every person, suinge Writtes of Entree in the Post, or Wryttes of
covenant, or any other Writtes, for any recouerye to be had, by assent of
parties, or otherwise, or for any fine to be levied, shall pay such fynes to
the kings use, for the same, as well fynes Pro licentia concordandi, as all
other manner of fynes, as is used in the kings Chauncery, or else where in any
of the kings Courts of England: which fines shall be paid to such
persons, as shall seal the original writtes for that purpose: And that they
shall account for the same in like form, as they shall do for the profittes
of the said original seal, as is aforesaid.

Item that the kings silver, upon every fine to be levied, shall be paid, as
is used in the common place in England: that is to say, two shillinges: which
kings silver shall be paid to the Justice, before whom such fine shall be
levied. Whereof the kings highness shall have twenty pens: and the Prenotarie,
entering the same, shall have two pens: and the Justice, before whom such fine
shall be levied, other two pens. And that the same Justice shall account for
the kings part thereof, like as he shall for the profittes of the kings
judicial seal, committed to his charge, in manner and form as is aforesaid.

Item there shall be four Prenotaries for the making of all judicial process,
and for the enteringe of all plees process and matters of record, in the
sessions to be holden before the said Justices: whereof one of the said
Prenotaries shall attend upon the said Justice appointed for the three shires
of Northwales: And one other shall attend upon the Justice, assigned for the
three shires of Flint, Denbigh, and Mountgomerie: And the third shall attend
upon the Justice assigned for the three shires of Caermerthin, Cardigan, and
Pembroke. And the fourth of the said Prenotaries shall attend upon the
Justice, assigned for the three shires of Glamorgan, Breknok, and Radnor. And
these four Prenotaries, as often as their said offices shall be void, shall
be named and appointed by the kings highness, by his majesty's letters
patentes, under his great seal of England. And where one John^ Arnolde
gentilman has thoffice of Prenotarie, and clerkeshippe of the Crown, by the
kings highness letters patentes, within the said three shires of Northwales:
And that one John^ Brekenhed, has thoffice of the Prenotarie and clerkeshippe
of the Crown by the kings letters patentes, within the said shire of Flynt:
And that likewise one John^ Lennerde has thoffice of the prenotary and
clerkeshippe of the crown, by the kings letters patentes, within all the
residue of the said dominion of Wales: The kings majesty is pleased and
contented, that the said three Prenotaries shall have, use, and enjoy, their said
offices according to the effect of the said letters patentes to them thereof
made, doing their duties and attendaunce by them selves, or their sufficient
deputies, at every of the said sessions, to be kept within the shires,
whereunto they be so appointed.

Item there shall be a Marshall and a Crier in every of the circuites and
lymyttis, allotted to the said Justices, which shall be named by the said
Justices, within the lymyttis of their authority and commyssiumlon, in like
manner and form as Justices of assyse do in England. And the said officers
shall attend upon the said Justices in their circuites, in their own propre
persons, and not by their deputies.

And that the Marshall shall have upon every judgment, and every fine four
pens: and the crier a penny. And upon the acquitalles of felons, and of them,
that shall be delivered by proclamation, or delivered out of common maynprise,
before any of the said Justices, the Marshall shall have four pens, and the
crier a penny.

Item that every of the said prenotaries, within the limittes of their
offices, shall take such fees, as hereafter shall be expressed: That is to say,
for the writing of plees, and ingrossynge of writtes of enter in the post,
writtes of right, Quod ei deforceat, or any other writtes, pursued by thassent
of the parties, five shillinges. And if it be with a duple voucher, then sex
shyllinges and.viii. d. and for the exemplification thereof, two shillinges. And
for the engrossing of fynes, to have for every fine three shillinges, and four
pens: And if it be with proclamations, then four shillinges.

Item for every bill of debte detinue trespass and all other actions
personalles, sued before the said Justices in their circuites, under the sum
of.xl. s. the Prenotaries shall have, for the first byll, iiii. d. for the
second byll, four. d. and for the third byll four. d. And for the enter of
every declaration, plee in bar, replication, and reioynder, in and upon every
such actions, so that he do enrolle the same in parchement, four pens. And for
every venite fac, tales, habeas corpora, et distr in the same actions, four
pens: and for the judgment, four pens. And for every writ of execution, in
every such action, sex pens: And for every warrant of attorney, in every such
action, as well for the playntiffes as for defendantes, four pens.

Item in all actions of detinue trespass and all other actions personal, wherein
the duty debte or damage, amounts to the sum of forty shillinges, or
above, which shall be sued by bills before the said Justices, the prenotarie
shall have for the first bill, four pens, for the second bill.iiii. d. for
the third byll four pens. And for every of the declaration, the answer,
replication, and reioynder, if it be enrolled in parchment, eight pens: And for
the venire fac, tales habeas corpora, et distr, for every of them, sex pens:
and for the judgment eight pens, and for the warrant of attorney, four pens:
and for every writ of execution upon the judgments in such bills, sex pens.

Item in original writtes, sued upon every action personal, returnable before
the said Justices, the prenotaries shall have for every iterum sum^, sex pens,
for every distres in trespass, sex pens, and for the declaration, eight pens:
for the answer, replication and reioynder, for every of them, if they be
enrolled and engrossed, as is before said, twelve pens. For the venire fac,
tales, habeas corpora, et distr, for every of them, sex pens: and the
prenotaries to have for the enter of the judgments in every such action,
twelve pens. And for every writ of execution, sued upon the same sex pens.
For the exemplification of every record, in any of the said actions, two
shillinges. For every warrant of attorney, four pens. In all actions Reals and
mixte, assizes, quare impedit, appeals of felony, murder, or mayme, the
Prenotarie to have for the declaration or playnte, two shillinges: and for the
plee in bar, replication, reioinder, surreioinder, for every of the^, if they
be enrolled, as is aforesaid, twelve pens: and for the writing of every venire
fac, Tales, habeas corpora and distr upon the same, for every of them sex pens:
and for the enter of the judgment, in every of the said actions and appeles,
two shillinges: And for ye writing of the writtes of execution, made upon every
of the said actions, appeles, and assizes, twelve pens: And for writtes of
graunde Cape and petie cape, and writtes of view, writtes upon voucher, and al
other writtes in every such action or actions, twelve pens: And for every
warrant of attorney, for the defendantes or for the demaundantes, or
playntiffes, in every such action real, assise appele, and quare impedit, four
pens: And for the essoynes in every such action, four pens: and for the
adiournament, two pens: and for the bail of every person of felonye, twelve
pens: and for the bail for trespass, sex pens: And for the apparaunce and
baylynge of common maynprise, two pens.

Item for writing of writtes for the peax, and good aberinge, granted by any
of the said Justices in their sessions, sex pens: and for the entering of every
Recognisaunce to be had and taken before the said Justices, for every cause of
causes, other then before is expressed, twelve pens: and if it be with
condition, then two shillinges. And upon every acquitall and delyucraunce of
felons or murderers by verdite or by allowance of perdon, the Prenotaries to
have two shillinges. And if it be upon inditementes, certified from the
Justices of the peax, before the Justices in the great sessions: the clerk of
the peax to have also twelve pens. And upon the delivery of any suspecte of
felony or murder, by proclamation, the said Prenotarie to have twelve pens.

Item that the kings majesty shall have al fines, issues, amercementes and all
forfaitures of Recognisaunces lost or forfaite before any of the said Justices,
in the session aforesaid. And that the said Prenotaries, wi^h in the limittes
of their offices, shall yearly extrete the same into the Eschequer, appointed
for that limit, to the intent that process from thens may be awarded to the
shireffes, to levy the same to the kings use, as apperteyneth: which
shireffes shall yearly make their accomptes, before the kings Auditors,
thereunto to be assigned and appointed.

Item over and besides the said president and counsel and Justices, there
shall be Justices of peax and quorum, and also one Custos rotulorum in every of
the said twelve shires.

Item that the said Justices of peax, Justices of quoru^, and custos rotuloru^
in the said shires, shall be named and appointed by the Chancellor of England, by
commission under the kings great seal of England, by thabuise of the
president counsel and Justices aforesaid, or three of them, of the which the
said president to be one, from time to time, as the case shall require.

Item that there shall not excede the number of.viii. Justices of the peax in
any of the said shires, over and besides the president counsalle and Justices
before said, and the kings attorney and Solicitour: which president counsel
Justices, and the kings attorney and Solicitour, shall be put in every
commission of peax, in every of the said twelve shires.

Item that such persons, as shall be named to be Justices of peax, within every
of the said shires, shall be of good name, and fame: and after they be assigned
by commyssion, may use and exercise thostice of the Justice of peax, al be it
they may not dispende twenty pound, nor be learned in the laws of the land,
without any loss damage or penalties, for insufficiency of their lands. And
that every of the said Justices of peax, before they shall execute their
commission, shall take their oaths before the Chancellor of England, or else
before the said presydent, or one of the said Justices in Wales, by virtue of
the kings writ of Dedimus potestatem, or before any other person, to be
lymited by the lord Chaunceloure of England for that purpose: The contents
of which oath, shall be after the form, as Justices of peax in England use to
make.

Item that the said Justices of peax, or two of them at the least, whereof one
to be of the quorum, shall and may keep their sessions, within the lymittes of
their commissions, four times in the year, and at other times upon urgent
causes, as Justices of peax in England use to do, and shall have like power
and authority in all things, and fees of the kings majesty, for the time of
their sitting, as well for the^ selves, as for their clerks: and shall be bound
to use and do their offices, in like manner as is used in England.

Item that no Justices of peax, clerk of the peax, nor other clerk of any
Justice of peax in Wales, shall take for the writing of any warrant of the
peax, or good aberynge, above sex pens, and for entering of pleges or borowes
to pay the kings fine upon any indictment, nine pens. And if it be with
protestation, than to take twelve pens: and for a Supersedeas, not above eight
pens: and for a Recognisaunce twelve pens. And that all the said Justices of
peax shall certify all Recognisaunces taken before any of them, for the peax,
or good aberynge, into their Sessions, next to be holden after the taking
thereof. And Recognisaunce taken before any of them, for suspicious of any manner
of felony, shall be certified before the Justices in the great sessions, next to
be holden after the taking thereof, without concelement deteignynge or
imbeselynge of the same, upon such penalties and dangers, as be therefore
ordained and establisshed.

Item that all fines and amerciamentes, before the said Justices of peax lost
and herafter to be lost, shall be taxed and afferred by two Justices of the peax
at the least, whereof one to be of the quorum. And that all such fynes and
amerciamentes shall be set truly and duly according to the quantite of the
offenses, without parcialitie or affection.

Item that the said fynes and amerciamentes, and also all issues lost before
the said Justices of peax, and all forfaitures of Recognylaunces, and other
forfaitures before the same Justices, shall be yearly extreted by the clerks
of the peax, into the Escheker, appointed for that lymit, to the intent that
process from thens may be awarded, for the leuyenge of the same forfaitures and
sommes of money to the kings use, to the shiref of every county, as shall
apperteigne, Who shall make thereof their accomptes, before such Auditors, as
thereunto shall be assygned, so that the kings majesty may thereof be truly
and duly answered and satysfied: which Auditors shall make due allowance to
the same shireffes, for the fees of the Justices and clerks of the peax, upon
their said accomptes, as is used in the realm of England.

Item that there shall be shireffes in every of the said shires yearly appointed
by the kings majesty. And that none of the said shireffes shall have their
office of Shirefwike, any longer time, than is used by the laws and statutes
of England. And for the yearly nominacion of the said shirefes, the said lord
president Counsel and Justices of Wales, or three of them at the least, whereof
the said president to be one, shall yearly nominate three substanciall persons,
in every of the said twelve shires, to be shirefes of the same, and shall
certify their names to the lords of the kings most honorable counsel,
atte^ding upon his graces person, Crastino animarum, to the intent the kings
majesty, being thereof advertised, may appoint one of them in every of the said
shires, to be shirefe for that year, at his most gracious will and pleasure,
like as his highness does for his realm of England. And thereupon the said
shireffes shall have their patentes, and commissio^s under the great seal of
England, as shireffes of England have, and shall make and take oaths and
knowledges of Recognisaunces, before the president and Justices, or one of
them, by virtue of the kings writ of Dedimus potestatem, to be directed for
the same, for the due execution of their offices, and for their just and true
accomptes before the kings Auditour or Auditors assigned for Wales.

Item that every of the said shireffes shall have full power and authority,
within the lymittes of their shirefwike, to do and use their offices, as
shireffes in England, and shall accomplisshe and execute, without any favor
dread or corruption, all manner of wryttes, process, judgments, and executions,
and all manner common Justice, apperteinynge to their offices of shireffes, and
all laufull commandments and precepts, of the said president, Counsel
and Justices of Wales, and also of the Justices of the peax, Eschetors, and
Crowners, and every of them, in all things apperteyning to their offices and
auctorities.

Item that the said shireffes shall do and be bound to do all and every other
thing and things for the ministration of Justice, and for the conservation of
the kings peax, and the apprehension and repress of traitors, mutherers,
thieves, felons, and other offenders, as shireffes of England do use, and be
bound to do within the realm of England.

Item that the said shireffes shall yearly account before such the kings
Auditor or Auditors, and shall be assigned and appointed by the kings majesty
for his said dominion of Wales. And that every of the said shireffes shall
have yearly for his fee, five pound.

Item that all maires, shireffes, stewardes, bailiffes, and other ministers and
officers of justice, of every county, lordship town and place, within the
said dominion of Wales, and all and singular the kings subjects of the same,
shall be always obedient attendant and assisting to the said president,
counsel and Justices of Wales, and every of them, and shall obey the kings
commandments and process, from them or any of them directed, and all the
laufull and reasonable precepts of the said president, counsel and
Justices, and every of them. And also shall be obedient to all the said Justices
of peax shireffes and Eschetors, within the limittes of their said
auctorities, as well for common administration and due execution of justice, as
in all other things apperteyning to their duties and offices.

Ite^ that Eschet ors shall be named in every of the said shires, by the lord
Tresourer of England, by thaduise of the said president, counsel, and
Justices, or three of them at the least, whereof the said president to be one:
which Eschetors shall make and take their oaths, and knowledge their
recognisau^ces before the said president, or one of the said Justices, by virtue
of the kings wryt of Dedimus potestatem, to be directed for the same, for the
due execution of their offices, and for their true account, to be made before
the kings auditor or auditors, to be assigned for the same: which oath and
recognisau^ce shall be agreeable to the oath and recognisau^ce, used for the
Eschetors in England. And the Eschetors shall yearly have their patentes and
commissions, under the great seal of England, and shall have power and
auctorite to exercise their offices, in like manner and form as Eschetours in
England, and shall be bound to all laws and statutes of England.

Item that all such persons, as shall be appointed to the said offices, shall and
may exercise their offices, if they may dispende yearly.v. li. of frehold: any
statutes of England to the contrary thereof not withstandinde. And that every
of the said Eschetors shall make their accomptes yearly before such auditour or
auditors, as shall be assigned by the kings majesty, to here and determyne his
highness account for his revenues and profittes of the said dominion of wales.

Item there shall be two crowners, to be elected in every of the said.xii.
shires as is used in England, by virtue of the kings writ, De coronatore
eligendo, to be awarded out of the kings chau^cery of England. And that the
said crowners shall have like power and auctorite, to do and exercise their of
fices, and have like fees, as is limited by the laws and statutes of England.

PROVIDED always, that the writ, De coronatore eligendo, to chose the
Crowners within the said county of Flint, shall be directed out of the Escheker
of Chester.

Ite^ that the said Justices of the peax, or two of them at the least, whereof
one of them to be of the quoru^, shall appoynte and name in every hundred,
within the limittes of their commission, two substa^ciall gentilmen or yemen,
to be the chief Constables of the hundred, wherein they inhabit: which two
constables of every hundred, shall have especial regard to the conservation
of the kings peax: and shall and may do and use their offices in all and
singular things, as is used by the high constables of the hundredes in
England: And shall be bound to all things, as high constables of the
hundredes in England be bound to do.

Item that every of the said shireffes shall have a gaile for prisoners within
some convenient place of the castles of the shire towns, where he is shirefe,
or in such other convenient place, as by the said president counsel and
Justices, or three of them, whereof the said president to be one, shall be
appointed: Any patent or grant heretofore made to any person or persons, of
the constableship, or kepinge of any of the said castelles, in any wise not
withstandinge. And that the shireffe shall make the Bayliffes of the hundredes:
and they to attend upon the Justices in every of their courts and sessions.

Provided always, that the constables of the kings castelles within every of
the said shire towns of Wales, shall not be charged with the gailes, and of all
the prisoners, that shall be committed to their ward, like as they have
hertofore ben, unto such time convenient places for that purpose, be assigned
to the said shireffe.

Item the said shireffes shall keep their counties monthly, and their hundred
courts, for plees under forty shillinges, as is used in England, and shall
take for the entringe of plaintes, process, plees and judgments, in the said
shire courts and hundredes, such small fees as is used to be taken in shires
and hundredes in England, and not above.

Item that all manner of trialles before them in their said courts, or before
any stewardes in court barons, shall be by wager of law, or verdict of vi. men,
at the pleasure of the party plaintiff or defendaunt, that pleded the plee.
And that every of the said shireffes shall keep and hold their Tournes yearly
after Easter and Michaelmas, as they have been used in England.

Item the kings highness shall have all manner of fines, issues, amerciamentes
and forfaitures, lost or forfaited in any of the said counties hundredes,
courts, and tournes, to his own use, and the shireffe to account for the same
accordingly.

Item that the extretes of the said tournes, counties, and hundredes shall be
viewed, and the fines issues and amerciamentes, afferred by the said Justices
of assizes of that circuit, before the leuieng of the same amerciamentes or
other forfaitures. And that no shireffe, or any of his officers, presume to
gather or levy any such amerciament, or other forfaiture before the said
extrete be so afferred, upon peine to forfaite to the kings use forty
shyllinges. And that the shireffe upon every judgment had before him in his
county or hundrede court, in any playnte under fourtye shyllynges, shall and
may awarde a Capias ad satisfaciendum to arrest the party condemned: or else
a Fieri fac, at the liberty of the party pursuant.

Item that all bylles sued before the said Justices, in personal actions,
whereof the debte, duty, or damage is under forty shyllinges: the shirefe
shall have for the return of every byll, two pens: And every venire fac,
Tales, habeas corpora, et distr, two pens. And for writtes of execution upon
the judgment, in any such byll, twelve pens.

Item in bills sued before the said Justices, in actions personalles, above
the sum of forty shillinges, the shirefe shall have for the return of
every such byll four pens: and for the return of every venire fac habeas
corpora distr et Tales, four pens: and for every writ of execution, two
shillinges. And in all personal actions, sued by original writtes returnable
before the said Justices, the shireffe shall have for every Iteru^sum^ distr et
alias distr four pens: and for every venire fac habeas corpora distr and
Tales, sex pens. And for every writ of execution to be executed upon the
judgment, in such actions, two shillinges: for the serving of every writ of
Elegit, sex shillinges and eight pens. And in all real actions or mixed,
pursued before the said Justices by origynall writ, for return of every
original, two willinges. And for the return of every other writ and
judicial process, dependynge upon the same, before judgment, two shyllinges:
And for every writ of execution, after judgment, upon every original, in
actions real or mixed, two shyllinges. And for seruinge of every writ of
habery fac seisinam, sex shillynges eight pens.

Item for attachementes upon Capias, or other process sued before the said
Justices, by original or judicial writ, if he return Cepi corpus, two
shillinges: and for a Reddit se, upon an exigent of felonye, in appele of
murder or mayme, or upon any indictament of felony or murder, two
shillinges. And upon a Reddit se, upon an exigent of debte, trespass, detinue
and all other actions personalles, twelve pens: And for the making of Repleg.
twelve pens, and withernam upon the same, twelve pens. For the turn of every
writ of appele or murder, felony or maime, twelve pens. And upon all ohter
process grown upon the same, as venire fac, Tales habeas corpora, et distr,
twelve pens. And in every action taken before the shireffes by Justices, for
the sum thereof four pens: and for every other process thereupon four pens.
And for every prisoner delivered by acquitali, or by proclamation, for any
manner of felony twelve pens.

Item that every shireffe, within the limittes of his authority, may and
shall put such persons under common maynpryse, as they have reasonable cause
of suspecte, according to the said act made for Wales, byndynge such as they
shall so put to common maynpryse, with two sufficient suretyes with them, by
Recognysaunce, to appear before the said Justices, within the limittes of
their auctoryties, at the next great sessions to be holden, next after the
taking of such bands: and shall certyfye the names of them, that be bound,
before the said Justices at the said sessions accordingly, without concelement
thereof, at their pleasure.

Item that every person, that the shireffe takes to common mainpryse, to
appear before the said Justices, as is before said, shall pay for his mainprise
two pens, and not above. And the said shirefe to put no man to common
mainprise, but such as he suspecte, and as shall be returned by them before the
said Justices at their sessions, as is before said. And also the said shireffe
shall have, for the return of a writ of false judgment, out of a base
court, before the said Justices, two shillinges. And that ye said shireffe
shall take no manner of fee, for the return of any of the said writtes of
execution before expressed, onles he return the same executed.

Item that in all and every such wryttes oryginall or indiciall, or other
process plees or writings, which be not expressed in this ordinance, the fees
thereof, as well for the seals as wrytinge, shall be rated by the said president
Counsel and justices, or three of them, whereof the said president to be one by
their discretions from time to time, as the case shall require: And that they
shall have full power and authority from time to time to assesse and appoint,
what fee the said shirefes, eschetors, and Crowners, and their ministers,
Prenotaries and their Clerks, and other ministers of justice in the said
shires: shall have, take, and receive of the kings subjects for any manner
writtes, playntes, plees, process, returns, or any other matter or thing,
concerning or belonging to the execution of their offices and rowmes: and to
augment or diminish any fee or fees above declared as shall be thought by their
discretions, to be conueniente and mete for the commonwealth of the kings
subjects of those parties of Wales: any thing contained in this act to the
contrary thereof not withstanding.

Item that from hensforth no manner of person or persons, for murder or felony,
shall be put to his fine, but suffer according to the laws of the realm of
England, Except it please the kings majesty to pardon him or them. And if
the said Justices se cause of pity or other consideration, they may reprie the
prisoner, till they have advertised the kings majesty of the matter.

Item that the act made in the parliament, holden in the.xxvi. year of the
most royal reygne of the kings majesty, concerning among other things
inquisitions and trialles of contrefeting, wasshyng, clipping, and minisshinge
of the kings Coin, murders, felons, and accessaries to the same, perpetrated
or done within Wales, to be had, made, and determined in the next shire, or
county within England adjoining, where the kings writ runs, and every
article therein contained, shall stand in his full strength and force,
according to the tenoure and effect of the same: Any thing in this said
ordinance, or any other act, cause, or matter hertofore had or made, to the
contrary thereof not withstandinge.

And all be it the same act as yet was never put in execution, for any of the
said offenses hertofore done or committed within any of the said three Shyres
of North Wales: That is to say, the countyes of Anglesey, Caernaruan, and
Merionneth, Be it now declared and enacted by thauctoritie before said, that the
said act, and every article therein contained, shall from hensforth take
effect, and be executed in all points, for and concerning any of the said
offenses perpetrated and done, or that here after shall be perpetrated or done,
within the said cou^tie of Merionneth, to be enquired of, herd, and determined,
within the county of Salop^, in lykemanner and form, as commonly is and has been used for any of the same or like offenses, committed or done within any
other county or place of Southwales: any matter or cause here tofore risen or
grown to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Item that the town or hamlet of Abertannad, and all the ground and soil
within the same, which before this time has been taken, reputed, and used as
percell of the said county of Merionneth, shall from the feast of Easter next
coming, by virtue of this act, be united, annexed and made percell of the
said county of Salop^: and so from thensforth to be reputed taken and used for
ever, and not to be of any other shire or county of Wales. And that the same
town or hamlet, and all the ground and soil with in the same town or
hamlet, be from and after the said feast accepted and taken as part and
percell of the hundred of Oswestre: and that the inhabitauntes thereof, from the
said feast, shall be attendant and do every thing and things, with the
inhabitauntes of the said hundred of Oswester, as the same inhabitauntes do or
ben bound to do, any laws or customs to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Item in case any foreign plee or voucher, be herafter pleded or made before any
of the said Justices of wales, between party and party, triable in any other
shire within Wales, tha^ where the same plee is pleded or voucher made: That
tha^ the said Justices, before whom the same plee or voucher is or shall be pleded
or made, shall and may send the kings writ, with a transcripte of the
record, mentioning the same foren matter of plee or voucher under the seal to
him committed, unto the Justice of the county, where the same matter is or
shall be triable, co^mau^ding the said Justices, by virtue of the said writ, to
percede to the trial thereof, according to the kings laws and statutes, which
trial so before him had, he shall remaunde with the hole record unto the
Justice, before who^ the said plee or voucher was pleded or made: who there
upon shall proceed to judgment, as the case shall require. Item in case the
same foren plee voucher or other matter so pleded, be triable within the realm
of England: that tha^ in every such case the justice before who^ the same ple or
voucher is or shall be pleded had or made, shall and may proceed to the trial
thereof, as shall apperteigne, wtin the same shire of Wales, where the same plee
voucher or matter was pleded, the said foren plee voucher, or any other thing
or matter to ye contrary thereof not wtsta^ding. Ite^ that no manner of person or
persons from hensforth, without lauful authority, shall make any rumors,
tumultes, unlawful assembles, or outcries at any of ye said courts or
sessions, nor any outcries or unlawful assembles in great nombres, at any other
time or times, except it be for the apprehension or pursuynge of murderers or
felons, upon pain of imprysonment and grievous fine to be taxed and set upon
them by the said president and counsel, or by the Justices or other officer,
before whom such misbehaui our shall happen to be committed.

Item that all manors lands tenementes meswages and other hereditamentes, and
all rightes and tytles to the same, in any of the said shires of Wales,
descended to any manner person or persons, sith the feast of the Natiuite of
saint John^ Baptist, in the.xxxiii. year of our said sovereign lords reign,
or that herafter shall desce^d, be taken, enioied, used and holden as Englyssh
tenure to all intentes, according to the common laws of this realm of
England, and not to be partable among heirs males, after the custom of
Gauelkind, as hertofore in diverse parts of Wales has been used and
accustomed. And that the same law, from and after the said feast of saint
John^ Baptist, in the said.xxxiii. year, be used, taken and exercised in the
said county of Mommoth, and in all such lordishyppes and other places, as by
virtue of the said act, made in the said.xxvii. year, or by any other act or
acts, made or to be made, were and shall be annexed, united, or knyt to any of
the shires of Salop^, Herford, Glouc, or other shires: any laws vsages or
customs, hertofore had or used to the contrary thereof not withstanding.

Item that no mortgages of lands, tenementes, or heredytamentes, made or had
after ye said feast of saint John^ Baptist, which was in ye said xxxiii. year
of the raygne of our said sovereign lord, or that herafter shall be had or
made, within any of the said shires or places, shall be herafter allowed or
admitted, otherwise then after the course of the common laws and statutes of
the realm of England: any usage or custom hertofore had to the contrary
thereof not withstandinge.

Item it shall be lefull to all persons, to alien, sell or otherwise put away
their lands tenementes, and heredytamentes within the said country or
dominion of Wales, the county of Mommoth, and other places annexed to any of
the shires in England, from them and their heirs, to any person or person, in
fee simple or fee tail, for term of life or for term of years, after the
manner, and according as is used by the laws, of the realm of England: Any
welshe law or custom, hertofore used in the said country or dominion of
wales, to the contrary hereof not withstandinge. This article to take effect
from and after the said feast of the Natiuite of saint John^ Baptist, which
was in the said.xxxiii. yereof our said sovereign lords reign. Item if any
person or persons, having lands or tenementes within the said dominion of
Wales, been or here after shall be bound within the realm of England by
obligation, upon the statute of the staple, or by recognysaunce, and pay not
the debt, as shall apperteyne: that then upon cognysaunce, and pay not the
debt, as shall apperteyne: that then upon certyficate thereof made into the
kings Chauncery of England, by the Clerk of the staple, or by any Justice of
record, before whom such recognysaunce shall be knowledged, process shall be made
to the shireffes of Wales, out of the Chauncery of England, after the form as
is used to be made upon statutes and recognysaunces, by the course of the
laws of England, for due leuyenge and payinge of the said debt.

PROVIDED always and be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that for such
recognisau^ces as be or herafter shall be taken and knowledged before the kings
Justices of his highness benche or common place in England, process shall be had
and pursued immediately, out from the said Justices, as is used upon
recognisaunces, taken before the said Justices, by the common course of the
laws of England.

Item that all such wryttes, bills, playntes, plees, process, chalenges, and
trialles, shall be used throughout all the shires before said, before the said
Justices in their sessions, as is used in Northwales, or as shall be devised by
the said presydent, counsel and Justices, or three of them, whereof the said
presydent to be one, for the good ministration of Justice to be had in every of
the said shyres.

Item where the lord ship of Hope, with diverse other lordshyps, parisshes,
towns and hamlettes, were by an act of Parliament, made in the xxxiii. year
of the reygne of our said sovereign lord, appointed and translated from the
said countye of Denbigh, to the countye of Flynt, and by the same act were
made part, parcel and members of the same countye of Flynt: before which
appointment or translation, diverse indictamentes and presentementes, as well
felonye as other offenses, were had and taken for the kings hyghnes, before
the Justice of the said county of Denbigh, in the great sessio^s there, and
some before the Justices of the peax, with in the same countye, for offenses
supposed to be done within diverse of the said lordshyppes so translated, and
also diverse judgments given ar suite of parties before the said Justices: and
some before the shirefe of the said countye of Denbigh, for matters risen and
grown within the procincte of the said lordships, or other places, before the
translation of the same. It is now ordained and enacted, that all the said
indictamentes and presentme^tes, shall be hard, tried and determmed within the
said county of Denbigh, by persons, as well of the said lordship or place,
where the said offenses were done, or committed, as of other place or places
within the said county of Denbigh, in manner and form as though the said
translation had never ben had ne made. And also that the said judgments as
before given or had between party and party, before any Justice of record,
or other officer, within the said county of Denbigh, for any matter or cause,
apperynge by the record of the same, to be grown and risen within any of the
said lordships, parishes, towns or hamlettes, so translated, shall and may be
executed by the shireffe of the said county of Denbigh within any of the same
lordshyps, or other place so translated, the said translation, or any other
cause or matter to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Item like law and order to be kept and ministered upon all other like
translations of any other lordshippes manners to wnes parisshes and other places
within Wales, had made or done in this present parliament, or any other before
or after the same translations, or any other cause or matter to the contrary
thereof not withstanding.

Item where there shall be diverse and many suits taken before the said Justices
in plees personal, which (as it is thought) can not be tried before them, in
the time of the said great sessions, for brevity of time: Therefore, and for
the spedye trial of these matters, thissues taken in the said suites, shall
and may be tried at a petie sessions before the deputy justices there as it is
and has been used in the said three shires of Northwales: Except such of the
said suites, as by the discretions of the said Justices shall be thought
necessary to be tried before them selves, within their lymittes. And that
there shall no suit be taken before any of the said Justices by byll, under the
sum of twenty shyllynges.

Item if any murder or felonye here after be committed or done within Wales:
that then the party or parties, to whom any such offense shall hap to be
committed, shall in no wise take any end or agreement with the oftenders in
that behalf, nor with any other in his name or behalf, onles the sad party
first make the said president and counsel, or one of the said Justices,
priuey unto the same, upon pain of imprisonment, and grievous fine to be set
and adiuged, at the discretion of the said president, counsel and justices,
or two of them, whereof the said president to be one: The same pain and
penalty to extend, as well to and against such, as shall labor, move, or
procure, any such end or agreement made although the same labor, motion, or
procurement never take effect, to make any end or agreement, as against him or
them, with whom such end or agreement shall be made, if the same happen to take
effect.

Item where diverse lordshyppes marchers, as well in Wales as in the borders of
the same, now being by act of parliament annexed to diverse shires of England,
be lately comen to the kings hands, by suppression of houses, by purchase or
atteyndors: and now be under the surueyour of the court of augmentations, or of
the kings general Surueyours, the liberties, frauncheses and customs of all
which lordships, be lately revived by act of parliament made in the.xxxii. year
of his most gracious reign: Nevertheless his majesty wills and commands,
that no other liberties, frauncheses or customs, shall from hensforth be used,
claymed or exercysed within the said lordshyps nor any other lordshyps within
Wales or the cou^tie of Mommoth, who so ever be lord or owner of the same: but
only such libertyes, frauncheses and customs, as be given and commaunder-to
the lords of the same lordshyps, by force and virtue of the said act of
parliament, made for Wales: in the said.xxvii. year of his graces reign, and
not altered ne taken away by his ordinance: the said act made in the
said.xxxii. year, or any other act grant law or custom to the contractye
thereof not withstandinge

Item that if any person or persons, their auncesters, or they whose estate the
same person, or persons have, or has in peaseable possession of any lands or
tenementes in Wales, by the space of five years, without let interrupcion or
lefull claim: That then the same person or persons shall still continue their
possession, until such time as it be lawfully recovered against them, by the
order of the kings laws, or by Decree of the president and counsel there.

Item in actions personalles, taken and pursued before the said Justices in
Wales by oryginall writ, or bill, if nine of the Jury be sworn, to try the
issue between the party playntyfe and the defendant, and the residue of the
said Jury make defaute, or be tried out: them the shireffes shall and may
immediately return other names in the said Jury, de circumsta^tibus unto such
time there be twelve men sworn, to try thissue between them, as before the
Justice of Northwales has been before used and accustomed in such cases.

Item that if any goods or cattelles be stolen by any person or persons and
sold in any fair or market, within the said dominion of Wales, that no such
sale shall change the property thereof from the owner of the same: but that he
may lefully cease take and have the same again, upon proof thereof made, the
said sale notwithstanding.

Item that no person or persons bargayne or bye any manner of beast, or other
quick cattle, in any place within Wales, out of the market or fair unless
he can bring forth suffycient and credible witness, of the name of the person,
what place, and time he bought the same: upon pain and danger of such
punisshement and fine, as shall be set upon him, by the said presydent and
counsel, or any of the said Justices in his circuit, for the said offense,
and as he will therefore answer at his farther peril.

Item if any goods or cattelles be stolen within the lymittes, of any of the
said shires in Wales: that then upon suite thereof had and made, the tracte
shall be followed from towneship to towneship, or lordship to lordship according
to the laws and customs in that behalf hertofore used in Wales upon such
penalty and danger, as heretofore has been accustomed.

Item that every person that has any lands or tenementes in fee simple, or
fee tail, or for term of life, or for term of any other man's life being
freholde, shall and may pass in all manner Iuries and trials, as well in case of
felonye or murder, as in all actions real, personal and mixte, what soever
they be, atteint only except: And also may be impanelled, and inquire of all
concelementes, forceble entres, and other causes of inquiry for the kings
majesty, all be it he may not dispende fourtye shillinges by year. Sauinge to
every man his lawful challenge for any other cause, according to the laws of
this realm of England.

Item that no iurrour shall pass in Atteint, onles he may dispend fourtye
shillinges by the year of estate of freholde.

Item the tenantes and resiauntes in Wales, shall pay their tallage at the
change of their lords, in such places, and after such form, as has been
hertofore accustomed in Wales.

Item that all the kings subjects and resiauntes in Wales, shall find at all
parliamentes herafter to be holden in England, knights for the shires, and
citezyns and burgesses for cities and towns, to be named and chosen by
auctoryte of the kings wryt, under the great seal of England, according to
the act in that case provided: and shall be charged and chargeable to all
subsides and other charges, to be granted, by the commons of any of the said
parliamentes, and pay all other their rentes, fermes customs and duties to the
kings hyghnes, as they have been accustomed here tofore, fines for rede^ptions
of sessions only excepted. which the kings marestie of his most gracious
goodness and liberality, is contented and pleased to remitte, at the humble
suite of his said louinge subjects of his said dominion of Wales.

Item that the town of Hauerford west, shall after the end of this present
parliament for ever, find one burges, for the said town, at every parliament
after that time to be holden: And the charges of the same burges to be always
borne, by the mayre, burgesses and inhabitauntes of the said town and none
other.

Item that the kings majesty shall have all felons goods, and goods of
persons outlawed, waif, straies, and all other forfaitures and eschetes what
soever they be, answered thereof by the hands of the shireffes: saving always
the ryghtes and interestes of every of his subjects having laufull title to
have the same.

Item that all errors and judgments, before any of the of the said Justices
at any time of the great sessions, in plees realles or mixed, shall be redressed
by writ of Error, to be sued out of the kings Chauncerye of England,
returnable before the kings Justice of his benche in England. as other
writtes of error be in England. And that all errors in plees personal,
shall be reformed by bylles, to be sued before the said president and counsel
of Wales, from time to time, as the party grieved will sue for the same. And if
in case the judgment be affirmed good, in any of the said writtes of error or
bills, then there to make execution and all other process thereupon, as is used
in the kings benche in England. And that the pursuantes in every such writ
of error or byll, do pay like fees therefore as is used in England.

Item that no execution of any judgment given or to be given in any base
court, be stayed or deferred by reason of any writ of false judgment, but
that execution shall and may be had and made at all times, before the reuersall
of the said judgment, the pursuyte of the said wryt notwithstanding. And in
case the said judgment happen after to be reuersed: then the party pursuant
to be restored to all that he has lost by the said judgment, according to
the laws of the realm.

Item that all process for urgent and weyghty causes, shall be made and directed
into Wales, by the special commandment of the Chancellor of England, for
the time being, or any of the kings counsel in England, as hertofore has been used: Any thing in this act to the contrary thereof not withstandinge.

Item that the town of Bewdley, which is within the parish of Ribbisforde, in
the county of Wigorn^, and all the ground and soil of the same town, shall
from hensforth be united, annexed, and made percell of the county of Wigorn^,
and to be within the hundred of Dodingtre. And that all the inhabitauntes of
the said town and parissh, shall from hensforth be attendaunt, and do every
thing and things, with the inhabitauntes of the said hundred, as the same
inhabitauntes be now bound to do, by the laws of this realm of England.
Sauinge always to the burges and inhabitauntes of the said town of Bewdley,
all such liberties and francheses, as they lawfully had and exercysed within
the same town, before the making of this act, in like manner and form, as
though this act had never ben had or made.

Item that the lordship of llanstiffan, Vsterloys, and Langham, and the members
of the same, and all manors, lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes in
the same lordshippe, and the members of the same, be from hensforth united
annexed joined named accepted and taken as part and parcel of the county of
Carmarthin, and reputed joined united named accepted and taken as part and
percell of the hundred of Derles in the said county of Carmarthin. And that
the tenantes and inhabitauntes of the said lordship and members, be attendant,
and do every thing and things, with the tenantes and inhabitants of the
said hundred of Derles, as the said inhabitauntes now be bound to do
according to the laws there used.

Item that the county or shire court of the county of Radnor, shall from
hensforth be holden, one time at new Radnor, and one other time at Presten
alternis vicibus, and never from hensforth to be kept or holden at Rather
Gowy: Any former act or other thing to the contrary thereof not withstandinge.

Item it is further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that the kings
most royal majesty, shall and may at all times here after, from time to
time change, add, alter, order, minisshe and refourme, all manner of things
before rehearsed, as to his most excellent wisdom and discretion shall be
thought convenient: And also to make laws and ordinances for the commonwealth and good quiet of his said domynyon of Wales, and his subjects of the
same, from time to time, at his majesty's pleasure: Any thing conteigned in
this act, or in the said act made for the shite ground of Wales, or any
other act or acts, thing or things, to the contrary thereof hertofore made
in any wise not withstandinge.

And all such alterations of the premises, or any part thereof. And that all
such laws and ordinances, to be herafter made, devised and publisshed by
authority of this act, by the kings majesty, in wrytinge under his highness
great seal, shall be of as good strength virtue and effect, as if they had been
had and made by authority of parliament.

Item be it further enacted and ordained, by authority before said, that where
the kings majesty that now is, by his letters patentes, bearinge date the.i.
day of May, in the.xxxiiii. year of his most prosperous reign, demised and
granted to William web, the subsidy and usage of all woollen clothes, made
or to be made in the county of Mommoth, and in the xij. shires in Wales, that
is to say, in the county of Breknok, Radnor, Mountgomery, Caermerthin,
Glamorgan, Pembroke, Cardigan, Anglesey Flint, Denbigh, Caernatuan, and
Merionneth, and in all and singular towns and other places, whatsoever they
be, within the precinct and limittes of the said counties, and else where
within the dominion of Wales: To have and to hold to the said William web,
and his assigns for certain years yet enduringe, that the said William
web, his deputies and assigns, shall have from hensforth full power and
authority by force of this act, to take for the sealinge of every woollen
cloth, herafter to be made in the said.xiii. shires, and else where, within the
said dominion of Wales, as herafter is declared, and none otherwise, that is to
say, for every hole piece of frise.i. d^. every half piece frise. ob. every piece
cotton and lininge, being.xxiiii. yardes and under, a halfpeny. And for every
piece of the same, being above.xxiiii. yardes, one penny: of every broad clothe,
one penny: Of every piece of karsey, being.xviii. yardes and above, one penny: Of
every piece of karsey, being under.xviii. yardes, a half penny.

Provided always, that this act, ne nothing therein contained, extend not to
charge any manner of person or persons, being or that herafter shall be
inhabitaunt, in any of the said.xiii. shires, or else where within the dominion
of Wales, for any clothes, frises, karseis, or lininges, made or herafter to be
made and occupied within their houses, and not put to sale to any person or
persons, but to their servants for their wearinge.

And further be it enacted by authority before said, that the said Aulnager
in Wales, by him self, or by his sufficient deputy or deputies shall in all
things to his office apperteyninge, do and be bound to do, and answer in
every case, like and according as all and every other Aulnager in the realm of
England do, or ought to do, according to the laws and statutes of the realm
of England. And for the contrary doing or exercisinge of the said office,
shall in every case and degree suffer, as by the said laws and statutes is
ordained, establisshed or enacted for Aulnagers under the lord Treasourer of
England for the time being.

And furthermore the kings majesty is contented and pleased, not
withstandinge the statute made in the.xxvii. year of his most gracious reign:
that where there should be but.xii. shires in Wales, that the town of
Hauerford west, shall be a county in it self, as it has been before this time
used, at the will and pleasure of the kings said majesty: and that it shall be
separated from the county of Pembroke, at the kings said pleasure. And that
the kings high Justice of the said county of Pembroke, shall be high Justice
of the said county and town of Hauerford west, and shall have like power and
auctorite, to and for the ministration of Justice, within the said county and
town of Hauerforde west, as is lymitted and appointed to the said Justice to
and for the administration of Justice in the said county of Pembroke. And
that the Mayre, shireffe, bayliffes, and burgesses of the said county and
town of Hauerford west, from time to time, shall be as well attendaunt, and
obey all precepts and commandments of the president and counsel of our
said sovereign lord the king in his marches of Wales, as also shall be
attendaunt to all precepts and process awarded or directed, by the said high
Justice, unto the shireffe of the said county and town of Hauerforde west:
and to make return thereof. And the said shireffe of the said county and
town, shall serve all precepts and process, directed from the said high
Justice, in like manner and form, as the shireffe of the said county of
Pembroke is bound to do, and according to the effect and purport of the kings
ordinances, in that behalf had made and provided. And that it shall be lefull
unto the said maire, shireffe, Bayliffes, and burgesses of the said county and
town of Hauerford west before said, to use and exercise all lefull liberties
and grauntes, by the kings majesty, or his noble progenitors, to them
granted and confirmed, at the kings majesty's will and pleasure, according
to the laws of the realm of England, and not other wise. And that the
judicial seal of the said shires of Pe^broke, Carmerthin, and Cardigan, be in
the custody and keeping of the kings high Justice there for the time being,
shall be used in the said county and town of Hauerford west, as the original
and judicial seal the same town and county. And that the said Justice of
the said shires, of Pembroke, Carmeden, and Cardigan, shall have like power and
authority, by virtue of the kings letters to him made, as well to do all and
every thing and things, concerning common justice to be ministered within the
said town and county of Hauerford west, as he has in his said letters
patentes, within any of the said shyres, of Pembroke, Carmerden, and Cardigan.

Provided always, that this article, touching and concerning the county and
town of Hauerford west, and all things therein contained, shall stand and
endure, but only at the kings majesty's will and pleasure, and none otherwise.

PROVIDED always that this act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be
prejudicial nor hurtful to any person or persons, or bodies politic, for or
concerning any lands, tenementes, rentes, services, bondmen, tolles or other
hereditame^tes, but that they and every of them, their heirs, successors and
assigns, and the heirs, successors and assigns of every of them, shall
have, hold, and enjoy their lands tenementes, rentes, seruyces, boundmen and
other their hereditamentes, in such like manner, form and condition, as they
had the same before the making of this act, and as if this act had never ben
had ne made.

PROVIDED also that this act, nor any thing therein contained, shall be hurtful
or prejudicial to any person or persons, for or concerning any office or
offices, which they or any of them have by virtue of any the kings letters
patentes, being now in force before the making of this act, nor to the fees
of money, used and accustomed to be paid for the exercise of any such offices:
but that every person and persons, having such offices and fees, and their
substitutes and deputyes, shall and may have and exercise their said offices,
as is lymitted by this act, and as they moughte have done before the making
of this act. And shall also have and perceive all such fees, for the exercise
of the said offices, in as large and ample manner, form and condition, as they
might before the making of this act, and as if this act had never ben had ne
made.

PROVIDED always, that all lands, tenementes, and hereditamentes, within the
said deminion of Wales, shall descend to the heirs, according to the course
of the common laws of the realm of England, according to the tenor and
effect of this act, and not to be used as Gauelkynde: any thing contained in
these provisions or any of them to the contrary thereof not withstandinge.

Provided always, that this act, ne any clause, article, or thing therein
contained, be in any wise prejudicial or hurtful to George Blunte esquyer,
son and heir of sir Iohu^ Blunte knight deceased, for or concerning the
offices of stewardshyps of the kings lordships or manours of Bewdley and
Clebury, or any other office or offices hertofore granted unto the said
George Blunte, by the kings letters patentes, sealed under the great seal of
England, for term of life of the same George or for or concerning any fees,
wages, rewards, annuites, profittes, commodities, aduauntages or emolumentes,
apperteyning or belonginge unto the said offices or any of them: but that the
said George, his deputy and deputies, shall and may at all time and times,
during the life of the same George, have, hold, exercise, and enjoy the same
offices and every of them, and also perceive, levy, and take the fees, wages,
rewards, and all other profyttes and commodities, to the same offices and
every of them, or to any of them belongyng: or in any wise apperteynyng, in as
large and ample manner, form, and condition, to all intentes, constructions and
purposes, as though this act had never ben had or made: any thing before in
this act contained to the contrary not withstanding.

Provided always that all libertyes, francheses and privileges of the duchy of
Lancastre, or in any wise apperteyning to the same, shall be of the same force
plyght quality, goodness and condition, and may be used in as large and ample
manner, as they were before the making of this act, and as if this act had
never ben had or made: any thing in this act to the contrary thereof not
withstanding.

FINIS.
Thomas Barthelet regis impressor excudebat, Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum
solum.:




