ANNO PRIMO REGINAE ELIZABETHE. At the Parliament begun at Westminster,
the.xxiij. of January, in the first year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady
Elizabeth, by the grace of God, of England, France, and Irelande, Queen,
defender of the faith. etc. And there proroged till the.xxv. of the same
month, and then and there holden, kept, and continued, until the dissolution
of the same, being the eight day of May then next ensuyng, were enacted as
follows. () 1559.

The Table.
AN act restoryng to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction, over the state
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all foreign power repugnaunt to
the same. Cap. i. An act for the uniformity of common prayer and service in
the Church, and the administration of the Sacraments. Cap. ii. An act of
recognition the Queens highness title, to the imperial crown of this Realm.
Cap. iii. An act for the restitution of the first fruits and tenthes, and
rentes reserved nomine decime, and of parsonages impropriate to the imperial
crown of this Realm. Cap. iiii. An act whereby certain offenses be made
treason. Cap. v. An act for the explanation of the statute of seditious words
and rumors. Cap. vi. An act to revive a statute made in the.xxiii. year of
the reign of king Henry the eight, touching the conueying of Horses,
Geldynges, and Mares into Scotland. Cap. vii. An act touching Shomakers and
Curriors. Cap. viii. An act touching Tanners, and the selling of tanned
lether. Cap. ix. An act that the carrying of leather, tallowe, or raw hydes
out of the Realm for marchaundize, shall be felony. Cap. x. An act limiting
the times for laying on land marchaundize, from beyond the seas, and touching
customs for sweet wines. Cap. xi. An act against the deceitful vsyng of
linen cloth. Cap. xii. An act for the shipping in English botomes. Cap.
xiii. An act for the continuance of the making of Woollen clothe in diverse
Towns in the County of Essex. Cap. xiiii. An act that timber shall not be
felled to make coals for the burning of iron. Cap. xv. An act to continue the
act made against rebellious assembles. Cap. xvi. An act for the preservation
of spawne and fry of fish. Cap. xvii. An act for the continuance of certain
statutes. Cap. xviii. An act of a Subsidy of Tonnage and Pondage. Cap. xix.
An act of a Subsidy, and two Fifteenes and Tenthes, granted by the
Temporaltie. Cap. xx.

An Act restoring to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction over the state
Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and abolishing all foreign power repugnaunt
to the same. The first Chapter.
Most humbly beseech your most excellent Majesty, your faithful and obedyent
subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this your
present parliament assembled, that where in time of the reign of your most
dear father of worthy memory King Henrye the eight, diverse good laws and
statutes were made and established, as well for the utter extinguishment and
putting away of all usurped and foreign powers and aucthorities out of this
your Realm, and other your highness dominions and countries, as also for the
restoring and uniting to the imperial Crown of this Realm, the ancient
jurisdictions, aucthorities, superiorities, and preheminences to the same of
right belongyng and apparteynyng, by reason whereof, we your most humble and
obedient subjects, from the.xxv. year of the reign of your said dear father,
were continually kept in good order, and were disburdened of diverse great and
intolerable charges and exactions, before that time unlawfully taken, and
exacted by such foreign power and authority as before that was usurped,
until such time as all the said good laws and statutes, by one act of
Parliament made in the first and second years of the reigns of the late king
Philippe and Queen Marie, your highness sister, entitled, An act repealing
all statutes, articles, and provisions made against the sea apostolic of
Rome, since the.xx. year of king Henry the eight, and also for the
establishment of al spyrituall and ecclesiastical possessions and
hereditamentes conveyed to the laytie, were all clearly repealed and made
void, as by the same act of repeal more at large does and may appear. By
reason of which act of repeal, your said humble subjects were eftsoons
brought under an usurped foreign power and authority, and yet do remain in
that bondage, to the intolerable charges of your loving subjects, if some
redress (by authority of this your high court of parliament, with thassent
of your highness) be not had and provided.

May it therefore please your highness, for the repressing of the said usurped
foreign power, and the restoring of the rightes, jurisdictions, and
preheminences apparteyning to the Imperial crown of this your Realm, that it
may be enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that the said act
made in the said first and second years of the reigns of the said late king
Philip and Queen Marie, and all and every branch, clauses, and articles
therein contained (other then such branches, clauses, and sentences, as
hereafter shall be excepted) may from the last day of this Session of Parliament,
by authority of this present Parliament, be repealed, and shall from
thencefoorth be utterly void, and of none effect.

And that also for the reuyuing of diverse of the said good laws and statutes
made in ye time of your said dear father, it may also please your highness,
that one act and statute made in the.xxiii. year of the reign of the said
late king Henry the eight, entitled, An act that no person shall be cyted out
of ye dioces where he or she dwells, except in certain cases. And one other
act made in the.xxiiii. year of the reign of the said late king, entitled,
An act that appeals in such cases as has been used to be pursued to the sea
of Rome, shall not be from henceforth had ne used, but within this Realm. And
one other act made in the.xxv. year of the said late king, concerning
restraynte of payment of annates and first fruits of Archbyshopprickes and
Byshoprickes to the sea of Rome. And one other act in the said, xxv. year,
entitled, An act concerning the submission of the Clergy to the kings
Majesty: and also one act made in the said.xxv. year, entitled, An act
restraining the payment of annates, or first fruits to the Bishop of Rome, and
of the electing and consecrating of Archbyshoppes, and Bishops within this
Realm. And one other act made in the said.xxv. year, entitled, An act
concerning the exoneration of the kings subjects from exactions and
impositions heretofore paid to the sea of Rome, and for having licenses and
dispensations within this Realm, without suyng further for the same. And one
other act made in the.xxvi. year of the said late king, entitled, An act for
nomination and consecration of Suffragans within this Realm. And also one
other act made in the.xxviii year of the reign of the said late king,
entitled, An act for the release of such as houe obtained pretended licenses
and dispensations from the sea of Rome, and all and every branches, words,
and sentences in the said several acts and statutes contained, by authority
of this present Parliament, from and at al times after the last day of this
session of Parliament, shall be revived, and shall stand and be in full force
and strength, to all intentes, constructions, and purposes. And that the
branches, sentences, and words of the said several acts, and every of
them, from thencefoorth shall and may be judged, deemed, and taken to extend to
your hyghnes, your heirs and successors, as fully and largely as ever the
same acts, or any of them did extend to the said late king Henry the eight,
your highness father.

And that it may also please your highness, that it may be enacted by
thaucthoritie of this present Parliament, that so much of one act or statute
made in the.xxxii. year of the reign of your said dear father king Henry the
eight; entytuled, An act concerning precontractes of maryages, and touching
degrees of consanguinitie, as in the time of the late king Edward the sixte,
your highness most dear brother, by one other act or statute was not
repealed. And also one act made in the.xxxvii. year of the raygne of the said
late king Henry the eight, entitled, An act that doctors of the Civil law,
being married, may exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and all and every
branches, and articles in the said two acts last mentioned, and not
repealed in the time of the said late king Edward the sixte, may from
henceforth likewise stand, and be revived, and remain in their full force
and strength, to all intentes and purposes: any thing contained in the said
act of repeal before mentioned, or any other matter or cause to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

And that it may also please your highness, that it may be further enacted by
thaucthoritie aforesaid, that all other laws and statutes, and the branches
and clauses of any act or statute repealed and made void by the said act
of repeal, made in the time of the said late king Philip and Queen Marie,
and not in this present act specially mentioned and revived, shall stand,
remain, and be repealed, and void, in such like manner and form, as they
were before the making of this act: any thing herein contained to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

And that it may also please your highness, that it may be enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that one act and statute made in the first year of the
reign of the late king Edward the sixte, your Majesty's most dear brother,
entytuled, An act against such persons as shall irreverently speak
against the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, commonly called the
Sacrament of the altar, and for the receiving thereof under both kinds, and
all and every branches, clauses, and sentences therein contained, shall and
may likewise from the last day of this Session of Parliamente, be reuyued, and
from thencefoorth sha and may stand, remain, and be in full force, strength,
and effect, to all intentes, constructions, and purposes, in such like manner
and form, as the same was at any time in the first year of the reign of ye
said late king Edward yt.vi. any law statute, or other matter to the contrary
in any wise, notwithstanding.

And that also it may please your highness, that it may be further established
and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that one act and statute made in the
first and second years of the said late king Philip and Queen Marie,
entytuled, An act for the reviving of three statutes, made for the punishment
of heresies, and also the said three statutes mentioned in the said act, and
by the same act revived, and al and every branches, articles, clauses, and
sentences, contained in the said several acts or statutes, and every of
them, shall be from the last day of this Session of Parliament, deemed, and
remain utterly repealed, void, and of none effect, to all intentes and
purposes: any thing in the said several acts, or any of them contained, or
any other matter or cause to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And to the intent that al usurped and foreign power and authority,
spiritual and temporal, may for ever be clearly extinguished, and never to
be used or obeyed within this Realm, or any other your Majesty's dominions or
countries: may it please your highness, that it may be further enacted by
thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no foreign prince, parson, prelates, state, or
potentate, spiritual or temporal, shall at any time after the last day of this
Session of Parliamente, use, enjoy, or exercise, any manner of power,
jurisdiction, superiority, authority, prehemine^ce, or privilege, spiritual
or ecclesiastical, within this realm, or within any other your Majesty's
dominions or countries, that now be, or hereafter shall be, but from the^ceforth
ye same shall be clearly abolished out of this realm, and al other your highness
dominions for ever: any statute, ordinance, custom, co^stitutions, or any
other matter or cause whatsoever to the contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

And that also it may likewise please your highness, that it may be
established and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that such
jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities, and preheminences spiritual and
ecclesiastical, as by any spiritual or ecclesiastical power or authority,
has heretofore ben, or may lawfullye be exercised or used, for the visitation
of the ecclesiastical state and persons, and for reformation, order, and
correction of the same, and of all manner errors, heresies, scismes, abuses,
offenses, contemptes, and enormities, shall for ever, by authority of this
present Parliamente, be united and annexed to the imperial Crown of this
Realm. And that your highness, your heirs and successors, kings or Queens
of this realm, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this act, by
letters patentes under the great Seal of England, to assign, name, and
aucthorize, when and as often as your highness, your heirs or successors shall
think meet and convenient, and for such and so long time as shall please
your hyghnes, your heirs or successors, such person or persons being
natural borne subjects to your highness, your heirs or successors, as your
Majesty, your heirs or successors shall think meet, to exercise, use,
occupy, and execute, under your highness, your heirs and successors, all manner
of jurisdictions, privileges, and preheminences, in any wise touching or
concerning any spiritual or ecclesiastical jurisdiction within these your
realms of England and Irelande, or any other your highness dominions or
countries, and to visit, refourme, redress, order, correct, and amend all
such errors, he resies, scismes, abuses, offenses, contemptes, and inormities
whatsoever, which by any manner spiritual or ecclesiastical power,
authority, or jurisdiction, can or may lawfully be reformed, ordered,
redressed, corrected, restrained, or amended, to the pleasure of almyghtie God,
the increase of virtue, and the conservation of the peace and unity of this
Realm: and that such person or persons so to be named, assigned, aucthorized,
and appointed by your hyghnes, your heirs or successors, after the said
letters patentes to him or them made and delivered, as is aforesaid, shall
have full power and authority by virtue of this act, and of the said letters
patentes, under your highness, your heirs or successors, to exercise, use,
and execute all the premises, according to the tenor and effect of the said
letters patentes: any matter or cause to the contrary in any wise,
notwithstanding.

And for the better observation and mayntenaunce of this act, may it please
your highness that it may be further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that all and every Archbyshoppe, Bishop, and all and every other
ecclesiastical person, and other ecclesiastical officer and minister, of what
estate, dignity, pre-eminence, or degree soever he or they be, or shall be, and
all and every temporal Judge, Iusticer, Mayor, and other lay or temporal
officer and minister, and every other person having your highness fees or
wages within this Realm, or any your highness dominions, shall make, take,
and receive a corporal oath upon the Evangelist, before such person or persons
as shall please your highness, your heirs or successors, under the great
Seal of England, to assign and name, to accept and take the same according
to the tenor and effect hereafter following: that is to say, I.A.B. do
utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Queens highness is
the only supreme governor of this realm, and of al other her highness
dominions and countries, as well in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things or
causes, as temporal, and that no foreign prince, parson, prelate, state, or
potentate, has or ought to have any jurisdiction, power, superiority,
pre-eminence, or authority, ecclesiastical or spiritual within this realm,
and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake al forrayne jurisdictions,
powers, superiorities, and aucthorities, and do promise that from henceforth I
shall bear faith and true allegiaunce to the Queens hyghnes, her heirs and
lawful successors, and to my power shall assiste and defend all
jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences, and aucthoties, granted or
belongyng to the Queens hyghnes, her heirs and successors, or united and
annexed to the imperial crown of this Realm, so help me God, and by the
contents of this book.

And that it may be also enacted, that if any such Archbyshoppe, Bishop, or
other Ecclesiastical officer or minister, or any of the said Temporal
Judges, Iusticiaries, or other lay officer or minister, shall peremptorily or
obstinately refuse to take or receive the said oath, that then he so refusyng,
shall forfeyte and lose only during his life, al and every Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual promotion, benefice, and office, and every temporal and lay
promotion and office, which he has solye at the time of such refusal made:
and that the whole title, interrest, and incumbencie, in every such promotion,
benefice, and other office, as against such person only so refusing, during
his life, shall clearly cease, and be void, as though the party so refusyng
were dead. And that also all and every such person and persons, so refusyng to
take the said oath, shall immediatlye after such refusal, be from
thencefoorth during his life, disabled to retain or exercise any office, or
other promotion, which he at the time of such refusal has jointly, or in
common with any other person or persons: and that all and every person and
persons, that at any time hereafter shall be preferred, promoted, or collated to
any Archbyshopricke or Byshopricke, or to any other Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical benefice, promotion, dignity, office, or ministry, or that
shall be by your highness, your heirs, or successors, preferred or promoted to
any temporal or lay office, ministerye, or service within this realm, or in
any your highness dominions, before he or they shall take upon him or them to
receive, use, exercise, supplye, or occupye any such Archbyshopricke,
Byshopricke, promotion, dignity, office, ministry, or service, shall likewise
make, take, and receive the said corporal oath before mentioned, upon the
Evangelist, before such persons as have or shall have authority to admit any
such person to any such office, ministry, or service, or else before such
person or persons, as by your highness, your heirs or successors, by
commission under the great Seal of England, shall be named, assigned, or
appointed, to minister the said oath. And that it may likewise be further
enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if any such person or persons, as at
any time hereafter shall be promoted, preferred, or collated to any such
promotion Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical benefice, office, or ministerye, or
that by your highness, your heirs or successors, shall be promoted or preferred
to any temporal or lay office, ministry, or service, shall and do
peremptorily and obstinatelye refuse to take the same oath so to him to be
offered, that then he or they so refusing, shall presently be judged disabled in
the law, to receive, take, or have the same promotion spyrituall, or
ecclesiastical, or the same temporal office, ministry, or service within
this realm, or any other your highness dominions, to all intentes,
constructions, and purposes.

And that it may be further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and
every person and persons temporal, suing liuerie, or oustre le maine, out of
the hands of your highness, your heirs or successors, before his or their
liuerie or oustre le maine sued forth and allowed, and every temporal person or
persons, doing any homage to your highness, your heirs or successors, or that
shall be received into service with your highness, your heirs or successors,
shall make, take, and receive the said corporal oath before mentioned, before
the Lord Chauncelour of England, or the Lord Keeper of the great seal for the
time being, or before such person or persons, as by your highness, your
heirs, or successors shall be named and appointed to accept or receive the
same. And that also all and every person and persons taking orders, and all and
every other person and persons, which shall be promoted or preferred to any
degree of learning in any University within this your Realm or dominions,
before he shall receive, or take any such orders, or be preferred to any such
degree of learning, shall make, take, and receive the said oath by this act
set forth and declared, as is aforesaid, before his or their Ordinary,
Commissarie, Chauncelour, or Vicechauncelour, or their sufficient deputies in
the said University.

Provided always, and that it may be further enacted by thaucthoritie
aforesaid, that if any person having any estate of inheritance, in any
temporal office or offices, shall hereafter obstinately and peremptorily
refuse to accept and take the said oath as is aforesaid, and after at any time
during his life shall wyllingly require to take and receive the said oath, and
so do take and accept the same oath before any person or persons that shall have
lawful authority to minister the same: that then every such person
immediately after he has so received the same oath, shall be vested, judged, and
deemed in like estate and possession of the said office, as he was before the
said refusal, and shall and may use and exercise the said office, in such
manner and form as he should or might have done before such refusal: any
thing in this act contained to the contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

And for the more sure observation of this act, and the utter extinguyshment
of al foreign and usurped power and authority, may it please your
highness, that it may be further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
if any person or persons, dwelling or inhabiting within this your Realm, or in
any other your highness Realms, or Dominions, of what estate, dignity, or
degree soever he or they be, after the end of.xxx. days next after the
determination of this session of this present Parliament, shall by writing,
printing, teaching, preaching, express words, deed, or act, advisedly,
maliciously, and dyrectly affirm, hold, stand with, set forth, maintain,
or defend the authority, pre-eminence, power, or jurisdiction Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical, of any foreign Prince, Prelate, Parson, State, or Potentate
whatsoever, heretofore claymed, used, or usurped within this Realm, or any
Dominion or Country, being within or under the power, dominion, or obeysaunce
of your highness: or shall advisedly, maliciously, and directly put in ure, or
execute any thing for the extolling, advancement, setting forth, mayntenance,
or defense of any such pretended, or usurped jurisdiction, power, pre-eminence,
or authority, or any part thereof: that then every such person and persons,
so doing and offendyng, their abbettours, aydours, procurers, and counsaylours,
being thereof lawfully convicted and attaynted, according to the true order and
course of the common laws of this Realm, for his or their first offense,
shall forfayte and lose unto your highness, your heirs and successors, all
his and their goods and cattels, as well real as personal. And if any such
person so convicted or attaynted, shall not have, or be worth of his proper
goods and cattels to the value of.xx.li. at the time of such his conviction
or attainder: that then every such person so convicted and attaynted, over and
besides the forfayture of all his said goods and cattels, shall have and
suffer imprisonment by the space of one whole year, without bail or
maineprise. And that also all and every the benefices, prebendes, and other
ecclesiastical promotions and dignities whatsoever, of every spiritual person
so offendyng, and being attaynted, shall immediately after such attayndour be
utterly void to all intentes and purposes, as though the incumbent thereof were
dead, and that the patron and donor of every such benefice, prebende,
spiritual promotion, and dignity, shall and may lawfully present unto the
same, or give the same, in such manner and form, as if the said incumbent
were dead. And if any such offendour or offenders, after such conviction or
attaynder, do eftsoon commit or do the said offenses, or any of them, in
manner and form aforesaid, and be thereof duly convicted and attaynted, as is
aforesaid: that then every such offendour and offenders, shall for the same
second offense, incur into the dangers, penalties, and forfeytures,
ordained and provided by the statute of provision and praemunire, made in
the.xvi. yereof the reign of king Richard the second. And if any such
offendour proffendours, at any time after the said second conviction and
attayndour; do the third time commit and do the said offenses, or any of
them, in manner and form aforesaid, and be thereof duly convicted and
attaynted as is aforesaid: that then every such offense or offenses, shall be
deemed and adjudged high treason, and that the offendour and offenders
therein, being thereof lawefullye convicted and attaynted, according to the
laws of this Realm, shall suffer pains of death, and other penalties,
forfeytures, and losses, as in cases of high treason by the laws of this
Realm.

And also that it may likewise please your highness, that it may be enacted
by the authority aforesaid, that no manner of person or persons, shall be
molested or impreached for any the offenses aforesaid, committed or
perpetrated only by preaching, teaching, or words, unless he or they be
thereof lawfullye indicted, within the space of one whole year next after his
or their offenses so committed. And in case any person or persons, shall
fortune to be imprisoned for any of the said offenses committed by preaching,
teaching, or words only, and be not thereof indicted within the space of one
half year, next after his or their such offense so committed and done: that
then the said person so imprisoned, shall be set at liberty, and be no
longer deteyned in prison for any such cause or offense.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this
act or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend to repeal
any clause, matter, or sentence contained or specified in the said act of
Repeal, made in the said first and second years of the reigns of the said
late king Philippe, and Queen Marie, as does in any wise touch or concern
any matter or cause of praemunire, or that does make or ordeyne any matter or
cause to be within the case of praemunire, but that the same, for so much only
as touches or concerns any case or matter of praemunire, shall stand and
remain in such force and effect, as the same was before the making of this
act: any thing in this act contained to the contrary in any wise,
notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this
act, or any thing therein contained, shall not in any wise extend or be
prejudicial to any person or persons for any offense or offenses committed
or done, or hereafter to be committed or done, contrary to the tenor and
effect of any act or statute now revived by this act, before the end
of.xxx. days next after thend of the session of this present Parliament: any
thing in this act contained, or any other matter or cause to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

And if it happen that any year of this Realm, shall fortune to be indicted
of, and for any offense that is revived or made praemunire, or treason by this
act, that then he so being indicted, shall have his trial by his peers, in
such like manner and form, as in other cases of treason has been used.

Provided always, and be it enacted as is aforesaid, that no manner of order,
act, or determination, for any matter of religion, or cause Ecclesiastical,
had or made by the authority of this present Parliament, shall be accepted,
deemed, interpretate, or adjudged at any time hereafter, to be any error,
heresye, schism, or schismatic opinion: any order, decree, sentence,
constitution, or law, whatsoever the same be to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that such
person or persons to whom your highness, your heirs or successors, shall
hereafter by letters patentes, under the great seal of England, give
authority to have or execute any jurisdiction, power, or authority
Spiritual, or to visit, reform, order, or correct any errors, heresies,
schisms, abuses, or enormities, by virtue of this act, shall not in any wise
have authority or power to order, determine, or adiudge any matter or cause
to be heresye, but only such as heretofore have been determined, ordered, or
adjudged to be heresy, by the authority of the canonical Scriptures, or by
the first four general counsayles, or any of them, or by any other general
counsel, wherein the same was declared heresy, by the express and plain
words of the said Canonical Scriptures, or such as hereafter shall be ordered,
judged, or determined to be heresy, by the high Court of Parliament of this
Realm, with the assent of the Clergy in their convocation: Any thing in this
act contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And be it further enucted by the authority aforesaid, that no person or
persons, shall be hereafter indicted or arraigned for any the offenses made,
ordained, revived, or adjudged by this act, unless there be two sufficient
witnesses or more, to testify and declare the said offenses, whereof he
shall be indicted or arraigned. And that the said witnesses, or so many of them
as shall be living, and within this Realm at the time of the arraignement of
such person so indicted, shall be brought forth in person, face to face, before
the party so arraigned, and there shall testify and declare, what they can say
against the party so arraigned, if he require the same.

Provided also, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if
any person or persons, shall hereafter happen to give any relief, aid, or
comfort, or in any wise be aydyng, helpyng, or comfortyng to the person or
persons of any that shall hereafter happen to be an offendour in any matter or
case of Primunire or treason, revived or made by this act: that then such
relief, aid, or comfort given, shall not be judged or taken to be any
offense, unless there be two sufficient witnesses at the least, that can and
will openly testify and declare, that the person or persons that so gave
such relief, aid, or comfort, had notice and knowledge of such offense
committed and done by the said offendour, at the time of such relief, aid,
or comfort, so to him given or ministered: any thing in this act contained, or
any other matter or cause to the contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

And where one pretensed sentence has heretofore ben given in the consystorye
in Powles, before certain Judges, de legate, by the authority Legantine of
the late Cardinal Poole, by reason of a foreign usurped power and
authority, against Richard Chetwod Esquire, and Agnes his wife, by the name of
Agnes Doodhul, at the suit of Charles Tyrrell gentleman, in a cause of
matrimony solemnised between the said Richard and Agnes, as by the same
pretensed sentence more plainly does appear, from which sentence the said
Richard and Agnes have appealed to the court of Rome, which appeal does
there remain, and yet is not determined: May it therefore please your hyghnes,
that it may be enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if sentence in the
said appeal, shall happen to be given at the said court of Rome, for and in
the behalf of the said Richard and Agnes, for the reuersing of the said
pretensed sentence, before the end of three score days next after the end of
this Session of this present Parliament: that then the same shall be judged and
taken to be good and effectual in the law, and shall, and may be used,
pleaded, and allowed in any court or place within this Realm: any thing in
this act, or in any other act or statute contained to the contrary,
notwithstanding. And if no sentence shall be given at the court of Rome in the
said appeal, for the reuersing of the said pretensed sentence, before the
end of the said three score days, that then it shall and may be lawful for
the said Richard and Agnes, and either of them, at any time hereafter to
commense, take, sue, and prosecute their said appeal from the said pretensed
sentence, and for the reuersyng of the said pretensed sentence within this
Realm, in such like manner and form as was used to be pursued, or might have been pursued within this realm, at any time since the.xxiiii. year of ye reign
of the said late king Henry the eight, upon sentences given in the court or
courts of any Archbishop within this Realm. And that such appeal as so
hereafter shall be taken or pursued by the said Richard Chetwood and Agnes, or
either of them, and the sentence that herein or thereupon shall hereafter be
given, shall be judged to be good and effectual in the law, to all intentes and
purposes: any law, custom, usage, canon, constitution, or any other matter or
cause to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that where
there is the like appeal now depending in the said court of Rome, between
one Robert Harcourt, Merchant of the Staple, and Elizabeth Harcourt, otherwise
called Elizabeth Robins of the one party, and Anthonye Fydell, Merchant
stranger, on the other party, that the said Robert, Elizabeth, and Anthonye,
and every of them, shall and may for the prosecutyng and trying of their said
appeal, have and enjoy the like remedy, benefit, and advantage, in like
manner and form as the said Richard and Agnes, or any of them, has, may, or
ought to have and enjoy: this act or any thing therein contained to the
contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

An Act for the uniformity of Common prayer, and service in the Church, and
the administration of the Sacraments. The.ii. Chapter.
WHere at the death of our late Sovereign Lord king Edward the sixth, there
remained one uniform order of common service and prayer, and of the
administration of Sacraments, rites, and ceremonies in the Church of England,
which was set forth in one book, entitled, The book of common prayer, and
administration of Sacraments, and other rites and ceremonies in the Church of
England, aucthorised by act of parliament, holden in the fifte and sixth years
of our said late Sovereign Lord king Edward the syxte, entitled, An act
for the uniformity of common prayer, and administration of the Sacraments:
the which was repealed and taken away by act of Parliament in the first year
of the reign of our late Sovereign Lady Queen Mary, to the great decay of
the due honor of God, and discomforte to the professors of the truth of
Christ's religion.

Be it further enacted by the authority of this present Parliamente, that
the said estatute of repeal, and every thing therein contained, only
concerning the said book, and the service, administration of Sacraments,
rites, and ceremonies, contained, or appointed in or by the said book, shall be
void and of none effect, from and after the feast of the Nativity of. S. John
Baptist next coming: And that the said book, with the order of service and
of thadministration of Sacraments, rites, and ceremonies, with the alteration
and additions therein added and appointed by this estatute, shall stand, and be
from and after the said feast of the Nativity of. S. John Baptist, in full
force and effect, according to the tenor and effect of this estatute: any
thing in the aforesaid estatute of repeal to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And further be it enacted by the Queens hyghnes, with thassent of the lords
and commons in this present parliament assembled, and by authority of the
same, that all and singular ministers in any Cathedral or parish church, or
other place within this Realm of England, Wales, and the marches of the same,
or other the Queens dominions, shall from and after the feast of the Nativity
of saint John Baptyste next coming, be bounden to say and use the Mattens,
Euensong, Celebration of the Lords Supper, and administration of each of the
sacraments, and all their common and open prayer, in such order and form as
is mentioned in the said book so aucthorised by parliament, in the said.v.
and.vi. years of the reign of king Edward the sixte, with one alteration or
addition of certain lessons to be used on every Sunday in the year, and the
form of the Letanye altered and corrected, and two sentences only added in
the delivery of the Sacrament to the communicants, and none other, or
otherwise. And that if any manner of Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever
Minister, that ought, or should sing or say common prayer, mentioned in the
said book, or minister the Sacraments, from and after the feast of the
Nativity of. S. John Baptist next coming, refuse to use the said common
prayers, or to minister the Sacraments in such Cathedral or parish Church,
or other places, as he should use to minister the same, in such order and
form as they be mentioned and set forth in the said book, or shall
wylfullye or obstinately, standing in the same, use any other ryte, ceremony,
order, form, or manner of celebrating of the lords supper, openly or privily,
or mattens, euensong, administration of the Sacraments, or other open prayers
then is mentioned and set forth in the said book (Open prayer in and
throughout this act, is meant that prayer which is for other to come unto, or
hear, either in common Churches or private Chapels, or Oratories, commonly
called the service of the Church) or shall preach, declare, or speak any thing
in the derogation or deprauing of the said book, or any thing therein
contained, or of any part thereof, and shall be thereof lawfully convicted,
according to the laws of this Realm, by verdict of twelve men, or by his own
confession, or by the notorious evidence of the fact, shall lose and forfayte
to the Queens highness, her heirs and successors, for his first offense, the
profit of all his spiritual benefices or promotions, coming or arysing in
one whole year next after this conviction. And also that the person so
convicted, shall for the same offense, suffer imprisonment by the space of.vi.
months, without bail or maynepryse. And if any such person once convict of
any offense concerning the premises, shall after his first conviction eftsoon
offend, and be thereof in form aforesaid lawfully conuicte, that then the
same person shall for his second offense suffer imprisonment by the space of
one whole year, and also shall therefore be deprived, ipso facto, of all his
spiritual promotions, and that it shall be lawful to al patrons or donors of al
and singular the same spiritual promotions, or of any of them, to present or
collate to the same, as though the person or persons so offendyng were dead.
And that if any such person and persons, after he shall be twyse convicted in
form aforesaid, shall offend against any of the premises the third time,
and shall be thereof in form aforesaid lawfully convicted, that then the person
so offendyng, and convicted the third time, shall be deprived ipso facto, of all
his spiritual promotions, and also shall suffer imprisonment during his life.
And if the person that shall offend, and be convicted in form aforesaid,
concerning any of the premises, shall not be beneficed, nor have any
spiritual promotion, that then the same person so offendyng and conuicte, shall
for the first offense suffer imprisonment during one whole year next after his
said conviction, without bail or mayneprise. And if any such person, not
having any spiritual promotion, after his first conviction, shall eftsoon
offend in any thing concerning the premises, and shall in form aforesaid
be thereof lawfully convicted, that then the same person shall for his second
offense suffer imprysonment during his life.

And it is ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any
person or persons whatsoever, after the said feast of the Nativity of saint
John Baptist next coming, shall in any enterludes, plays, songues, rymes, or
by other open words, declare or speak any thing in the derogation, deprauyng,
or despisyng of the same book, or of any thing therein contained, or any part
thereof, or shall by open fact, deed, or by open threatenings, compel or
cause, or otherwise procure or maynteyne any Parson, Vicar, or other Minister
in any Cathedral or Paryshe Church, or in Chapel, or in any other place, to
sing or say any common or open prayer, or to minister any Sacrament, otherwise,
or in any other manner and form then is mentioned in the said book, or that
by any of the said means shall unlawfully interrupt, or let any Parson, Vicar,
or other Minister in any Cathedral or Parish Church, Chapel, or any other
place, to sing or say common and open prayer, or to minister the Sacraments,
or any of them, in such manner and form, as is mentioned in the said book:
that then every such person being thereof lawfully convicted, in form
abouesayde, shall forfeyte to the Queen our Sovereign Lady, her heirs and
successors, for the first offense, a hundredth marks. And if any person or
persons, being once conuicte of any such offense, eftsoons offend against any
of the last recited offenses, and shall in form aforesaid be thereof
lawfully conuicte: that then the same person so offendyng and convict, shall
for the second offense forfayte to the Queen our Sovereign Lady, her heirs
and successors, four hundredth marks. And if any person, after he in form
aforesaid, shall have been twyse convict of any offense concerning any of the
last recited offenses, shall offend the third time, and be thereof in form
abouesayde lawfully convict: that then every person so offendyng and conuicte,
shall for his third offense, forfayte to our Sovereign Lady the Queen, all
his goods and cattels, and shall suffer imprisonment during his life. And if
any person or persons, that for his first offense concerning the premises
shall be conuicte in form aforesaid, do not pay the sum to be paid by
virtue of his conviction, in such manner and form as the same ought to be
paid, within.vi. weeks next after his conviction: that then every person so
convict, and so not paying the same, shall for the same first offense, insteede
of the said sum, suffer imprysonment by the space of.vi. months, without
bail or mainprise. And if any person or persons, that for his second offense
concerning the premises, shall be conuicte in form aforesaid, do not pay the
said sum to be paid by virtue of his conviction, and this estatute, in such
manner and form as the same ought to be paid, within.vi. weeks next after his
said second conviction: that then every person so convicted, and not so paying
the same, shall for the same second offense, in the steed of the said sum,
suffer imprisonmente during.xii. months, without bail or mayneprise. And
that from and after the said feast of the Nativity of.S. John Baptist next
coming, all and every person and persons, inhabiting within this realm, or
any other the Queens Majesty's dominions, shall diligently and faithfully,
having no lawful or reasonable excuse to be absent, endeavor them selves to
resort to their parish Church or Chapel accustomed, or upon reasonable let
thereof, to some usual place where common prayer and such service of God
shall be used, in such time of let upon every Sundaye, and other days ordained
and used to be kept as holy days, and then and there to abide orderlye and
soberlye, during the time of the common prayer, preachinges, or other service
of God, there to be used and ministered, upon pain of punishment by the
censures of the Church, and also upon pain that every person so offendyng,
shall forfeyte for every such offense.xii.d. to be levied by the Churchwardens
of the parish where such offense shall be done, to thuse of the poor of the
same parish, of the goods, lands, and tenementes of such offendour, by way
of distress. And for due execution hereof, the Queens most excellent
Majesty, the lords temporal, and all the commons in this present parliament
assembled, does in Gods name earnestly require and charge all the Archbyshopes,
Byshopes, and other Ordinaries, that they shall endeavor them selves to the
uttermost of their knowledges, that the due and true execution hereof, my be
had throughout their diocese and charges, as they will answer before God,
for such euilles and plagues wherewith almighty God may justly punish his people
for neglecting this good and wholesome law. And for their authority in this
behalf, be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and
singular the same Archbishops, Bishops, and all other their officers exercising
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, as well in place exempt, as not exempt, within
their diocese, shall have full power and authority by this act, to
refourme, correct, and punish by censures of the Church, all and singular
persons which shall offend within any their jurisdictions or diocese, after
the said feast of the Nativity of. S. John Baptist next coming, against
this act and statute: any other law, statute, privilege, liberty, or
provision, heretofore made, had, or suffered to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And it is ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and
every Justices of Oyer and determiner, or Justices of Assise, shall have full
power and authority in every of their open and general Sessions, to enquire,
hear, and determyne, all and all manner of offenses, that shall be committed or
done contrary to any article contained in this present act, within the
limits of the Commission to them directed, and to make process for the
execution of the same, as they may do against any person being indicted before
them of trespass, or lawfully convicted thereof.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all
and every Archbishop and Bishop, shall or may at all time and times, at his
liberty and pleasure, join and associate him self by virtue of this act, to
the said Justices of Oyer and determiner, or to the said Justices of Assise,
at every of the said open and general Sessions to be holden in any place
within his diocese, for and to the inquiry, hearing, and determining of the
offenses aforesaid.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
books concerning the said Services, shall at the costs and charges of the
parishioners of every parish, and Cathedral Church, be attained and gotten
before the said feast of the Nativity of Saint John Baptist next following,
and that all such parishes and Cathedral Churches, or other places, where the
said books shall be attained and gotten before the said feast of the Nativity
of Saint John Baptist, shall within three weeks next after the said books so
attained and gotten, use the said service, and put the same in ure, according
to this act.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person or
persons shall be at any time hereafter impeached, or otherwise molested, of, or
for any the offenses above mentioned, hereafter to be committed or done
contrary to this act, unless he or they so offendyng be thereof indicted at
the next general Sessions to be holden before any such Justices of Oyer and
determiner, or Justices of Assise, next after any offense committed or done
contrary to the tenor of this act.

Provided always, and be it ordained and enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid,
that all and singular Lords of the Parliamenet, for the third offense above
mentioned, shall be tried by their peers.

Provided also, and be it ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that the Mayor of London, and all other Majors, Bailiffes, and other head
officers, of all and singular Cities, Boroughes, and Towns corporate, within
this Realm, Wales, and the marches of the same, to the which Justices of
Assise do not commonly repair, shall have full power and authority by virtue
of this act, to enquire, hear, and determine the offenses abouesayde, and
every of them, yerelye within.xv. days after the feast of Easter, and. S.
Michaell tharchangell, in like manner and form as Justices of Assise and Oyer
and determiner may do.

Provided always, and be it ordained and enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid,
that all and singular Archbyshoppes and Bishops, and every of their
Chauncellours, Commissaries, Archdeacons, and other Ordinaries, having any
peculier Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, shall have full power and authority by
virtue of this act, as well to enquire in their visitation, Synodes, and elsewhere
within their jurisdiction at any other time and place, to take accusations and
informations of al and every the things above mentioned, done, committed, or
perpetrated, within the limits of their jurisdictions and authority, and to
punish the same by admonition, excommunication, sequestration, or deprivation,
and other censures and process, in like form as heretofore has been used in
like cases by ye Queens Ecclesiastical laws.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that whatsoever person offendyng in the
premises, shall for their offenses first receive punishment or the Ordinary,
having a testimonial thereof under the said Ordinaryes Seal, shall not for
the same offense eftsoons be convicted before the Justices. And likewise
receiving for the said first offense punishment by the Justices, he shall not
for the same offense eftsoons receive punishment of the Ordinary: any thing
contained in this act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it enacted, that such ornaments of the Church, and
of the ministers thereof, shall be retained and be in use, as was in this Church
of England, by authority of Parliament, in the second year of the reign of
king Edward the.vi. until other order shall be therein taken by the authority
of the Queens Majesty, with the advice of her Commissioners appointed and
aucthorized under the great Seal of England for causes Ecclesiastical, or of
the Metropolitan of this Realm. And also that if there shall happen any
contempt or irreuerence to be used in the ceremonies or rites of the Church,
by the misusyng of the orders appointed in this book: the Queens Majesty may
by the like advise of the said Commissioners or Metropolitan, ordain and
publishe such farther ceremonies or rites, as may be most for the
aduauncemente of Gods glory, the edifying of his Church, and the due
reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all laws,
statutes, and ordinances, wherein or whereby any other Service,
administration of Sacraments, or common Prayer, is limited, established, or
set forth to be used within this Realm, or any other the Queens dominions
or countries, shall from henceforth be utterly void, and of none effect.

An act of Recognition the Queens highness title to the imperial Crown of
this Realm. The.iij. Chapter.
AS there is nothing under God (most dread Sovereign Lady) where we your
most humble, faithful, and obedient subjects, the lords spiritual and
temporal, and commons in this present Parliamente assembled, have, may, or
ought to have more cause to rejoice, then in this only, that it has pleased
God of his merciful providence and goodness, toward us and this our realm,
not only to provide, but also to preserve and keep for us, and our wealths
your royal majesty, our most ryghtfull and lawful Sovereign liege Lady and
Queen, most happylye to reign over us, for the which we do give and yield
unto him from the bottomes of our hearts, our humble thanks, lauds, and
praises: Even so there is nothing that we your said subjects for our parties
can, may, or ought toward your highness, more firmly, entirely, and
assuredredly in the purity of our hearts think, or with our mouths declare
and confess to be true, then that your Majesty our said Sovereign Lady is,
and in very deed, and of most mere right ought to be by the laws of God,
and the laws and statutes of this Realm, our most rightful and lawful
sovereign liege Lady and Queen: and that your highness is rightly, lineally,
and lawfully descended, and come of the blood royal of this realm of
England, in and to whose princely person, and the heirs of your body
lawfullye to be begotten after you, without all doubt, ambiguitie, scruple, or
question, the imperial and royal estate, place, crown, and dignity of this
realm, with all honors, styles, titles, dignities, regalities, jurisdictions,
and preheminences to the same now belongyng and apparteining, are and shall be
most fully, rightfully, really, and entirely invested, and incorporated,
united, and annexed, as rightfully, and lawfully, to al intents, constructions,
and purposes, as the same were in the said late king Henry the eight, or in the
late king Edward the.vi. your highness brother, or in ye late Queen Marie your
highness sister, at any time since the act of parliament made in the.xxxv. year
of the reign of your said most noble father king Henry the eight, entitled,
An act concerning the stablishment of the kings majesty's succession in the
imperial crown of this realm. For which causes, we your said most loving,
faithful, and obedient subjects, representing the three estates of your
realm of England, as thereunto constrained by the law of god and man, except we
should overmuch forget our duties to your highness, and to the heirs of your
body lawfully begotten, can no less do, but most humbly beseech your highness,
that by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, it may be enacted,
established, and declared, that we do recognize, acknowledge, and confess the
same your estate, right, title, and succession, as is aforesaid, to be in and
to your highness, and the heirs of your body to be begotten, thorowoutly, and
in the whole, and in every part thereof, in such manner and form as before is
mentioned, declared, or confessed, and thereunto most humbly and faithfully we
do submit our selves, our heirs and posterities for ever. And further do make
our most hearty and humble petition unto your highness, that it may please
the same, not only to accept this our said recognition, but also our faithful
promises, that we, according to our duties, shall and will stand to assiste
and defend your royal Majesty, and the heirs of your body to be begotten,
being Kings and Queens of this Realm, and your said ryghtes, and titles in
and to the said imperial estate, place, crown, and dignity in all things
thereto belongyng, at all times to the uttermost of our possible powers, and
therein to spend our bodies, lands, and goods, against all persons
whatsoever, that any thing shall attempt to the contrary.

And that it may be enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that as well this our
declaration, confession, and recognition, as also the limitation and
declaration of the succession of the imperial crown of this realm, mentioned
and contained in the said act made in the said.xxxv. year of the reign of
your said most noble father, shall stand, remain, and be the law of this
realm for ever. And that all sentences, judgments, and decrees, had, made,
declared, set forth, published, and promulged, and also as much of every
clause, article, branch, matter, or thing, contained and expressed in any
act or acts of parliament, as be in any thing repugnaunt, contrary, or
derogatorie to this our said confession, declaration, and recognition, or to
any part or parcel thereof, or contrary to the said limitation of the
succession of the imperial crown, establyshed and made by the said act in the
said xxxv. year of the reign of the said late king Henry theight (by
whatsoever power or authority the same ben, or have been had or made) shall be
utterly frustrate, void, and of none effect: and also shall and may be
cancelled, defaced, and put in perpetual oblivion at your highness will and
pleasure, as if the same had never ben had, made, declared, set forth,
published, or promulged.

An act for the restitution of the first fruits and tenthes, and rentes
reserved nomine dicime, and of parsonages impropriate to the imperial crown
of this Realm. The.iiii. Chapter.
IN their most humble wise besechen your most excellent Majesty, your
faithful and humble subjects, the lords spiritual and temporal, and the
Commons of this your Realm in this present Parliament assembled, that where in
the Parliament of your most noble father of famous memory king Henry the
eight, holden at Westminster upon prorogation the third day of November, in
the.xxvi. year of his prosperous reign, it was enacted, ordained, and
established by thaucthoritie of the same parliament amongst other things, that
his highness, his heirs and successors, kings of this Realm, should have
and enjoy from time to time to endure for ever, of every person and persons,
which at any time after the first day of January then next ensuing, should be
nominated, elected, prefected, presented, collated, or by any other means
appointed to have any Archbishoprike, Byshopryke, Abbacye, Monasterye, Pryorye,
College, Hospital, Archdeconry, Deanerye, Prouostshyp, Prebend, Parsonage,
Vicarage, Chauntrie, Free Chapel, or other dignity, benefice, office, or
promotion spiritual, within this Realm or else where, within any of the kings
dominions, of what name, nature, or quality soever they were, or to whose
foundation, patronage, or gift soever they did belong, the first fruits,
revenues, and profytes, for one year of every such Archbyshopryke,
Byshoprike, Abbacie, Monastery, Pryorye, College, Hospital, Archdeaconry,
Deanery, Prouostshyppe, Prebende, Parsonage, Vicarage, Chauntrie, Free Chapel,
or other dignity, benefice, office, or promotion spiritual aforenamed,
whereunto any such person or persons should after the said first day of
January be nominated, elected, prefected, presented, collated, or by any other
means appointed. And that every such person and persons, before any actual or
real possession, or meddling with the profits of any such Archbishoprike,
Byshopryke, Abbacy, Monastery, College, Hospital, Deanery, Prouostshyp,
Prebend, Parsonage, Vicarage, Chauntrie, Free Chapel, Pryorye, or other
dignity, benefice, office, or promotion spiritual, should satisfy,
content, and pay, or compou^d, or agree to pay to the kings use, at reasonable
days, upon good suerties, the said first fruited and profits for one year.
And it was further enacted by authority aforesaid, that the first fruits of
benefices, before that time accustomed to be paid to the Bishop of Norwiche
within his Diocese, and to the Archdeacon of Rychemonde within his
Archdeaconrye, or any other person or persons within this Realm, or any other
the kings dominions, should from the said first day of January, cease and be
extincte, and no longer be paid but only to the kings highness, his heirs and
successors, in such form as is before mentioned. And further it was enacted
by authority aforesaid, that the kings Majesty, his heirs, and
successors, for more augmentation and mayntenaunce of the royal estate of his
imperial crown, should yerelye have, take, enjoy, and receive, united and
knytte to his imperial crown for ever, one yearly rent or pention, amounting
to the value of the tenthe part of all the revenues, rentes, farms, tithes,
offeringes, emolumentes, and of al other profits, as well called spiritual as
temporal, apparteining or belonging, or that from thenceforth should belong to
any Achebyshoprike, Byshoprike, Abbacye, Monasterye, Pryory, Archdeaconry,
Deanerye, Hospital, College, House Collegiate, Prebende, Cathedral Church,
Collegiate Church, Conuentual Church, Parsonage, Vicarage, Chauntry,
Freechappel, or other benefice, or promotion spiritual, of what name, nature,
or quality soever they were, within any diocese of this realm, or in Wales,
the said pention or annal rent, to be yearly paid for ever, to the said late
king, his heirs and successors, at the feast of the Nativity of our Lord God,
and the first payment thereof to begin at the feast of the Nativity of our
Lode God, which should be in the year of our Lord god, a thousand, five
hundred, thirty and five, and to be paid yearly by such as should be appointed
to have the collection thereof, before the first day of April next following,
after the said feast of the Nativity of our Lord God, as in the said act more
plainly it does appear. And where also one other act was made and established
in the said Parliament, the said.xxvi. year, that no farmour of spiritual
persons, should be compelled or charged to pay for their leassours first
fruits or yearly pention for the tenth granted unto the kings hyghnes,
notwithstanding any covenant, contracte, bond, or other thing made to the
contrary, as by the same act more plainly appears. And where also at one
other session of the same parliament, holden by prorogation at Westminster, in
the.xxvii. year of the reign of your said father, one other act was made and
establyshed, that the kings spiritual subjects, should be deducted and
allowed of the tenth of their spiritual promotions, for that first year for
which they should pay the first fruits, as in the said act also more at
large appears. And where also in one other Parliament of the said late king,
holden at Westminster, in the.xxviii. year of his reign, amongst other things
it was enacted and ordained, that the year in which the first fruits of
every benefice and spiritual promotion should be paid, should begin and be
accounted immediatlye after the aduoydaunce thereof. And that the tithes,
commodities, revenues, casualties, and profits thereof (Chauntries only
except) in the time of vacation, should belong and afferre to the next
incumbente, toward the payment of the first fruits, as by the same act more
at large appears. And where also in one other Parliament holden upon
prorogation at Westminster, in the.xxxii. year of the reign of the said late
king, one act was made and establyshed, that Bysshoppes upon their accomptes,
of, and for the said yerelye tenthe, should be discharged by their oaths of
payment of such sum or sums of money, of the said annal rent, or tenth, as
they could not lawfully leuy, and also an order appointed how the king should
be answered of the tenth of any benefice and spiritual promotion, omitted in
the original or former certificate of benefices and spiritual promotions,
made in the Exchequer, as by the same act last mentioned more at large
appears. And where also in the same session and Parliament holden in the
said.xxxii. year of the reign of your highness said noble father, and by
authority of the same Parliament, one court was erected, establyshed, and
made, for the better answering of the said first fruits and tenthes unto the
king, called the court of first fruits and tenthes, as in the same act of
erection thereof more fully appears. And where also in the same session and
Parliament one other act was made, whereby the Bishop of Norwich for the time
being (being before that discharged from the collection of the tenth within his
diocese) should be charged and chargeable for ever, for, and with the
collection of the same tenth within his dioces, and make payment thereof, as
other Bishops should or ought to do within their dioces, as by the same act
more plainly appears. And where also in one other Parliament of the said
late king, holden at Westminster upon prorogation, in the.xxiiii. year of his
reign, one act was establised and made concerning Collectours and Receauers,
to make payment of their receiptes within three months next after the same
should be due, and paid to the kings use, under certain penalties therein
expressed, as by ye same act more at large appears. And where also in the
same Session and Parliament it was enacted and established, taht the new
erected Bishops, of Chester, Gloucester, Peterborough, Bristoll, Oxford, and
their successors for ever, should pay their tenthes reserved upon their
letters patents, or their several erections, only in the said court of the
first fruits and tenthes for ever, as by the same act more at large
appears. And where also in the Parliament of the said late king, holden at
Westminster in the.xxxvii. year of his reign, one act entitled, An act for
the union of Churches, not exceedyng the value of.vi.li. was established and
made, wherein is contained a saving to the king of the first fruits and
tenthes of all Churches and Chapels, not exceeding the value of.vi.li. that
then were, or from thenceforth should be united and consolidate in one, as in
the same act and saving more largely appears. And where also in the
Parliament of your highness dearest brother of worthy memory king Edward the
sixth, holden at Westminster upon prorogation, in the second year of his
reign, one act was made, that by the certificat of the Bishop of any diocese
within this Realm, or any of the dominions of the same, of recusaunce or none
payment of any tenth of any benefice or spiritual promotion, the incumbente
should leese but the benefice or promotion only, as by the same act more
plainly appears.

And where also in one other Parliament of the said late king Edward, hold
at westminster in the seventh year of his reign, one act was made and
established, declaring how and in what sort the under Collectours of the tenth
in every dioces, appointed by the Bishop, should be bound to discharge the
Bishops of that collection, and a longer day given for the payment of the
tenth: and how the king should be answered of the tenth for the time of
vacation of every benefice and spiritual promotion, and that the patentes of
the collection of tenth, should be good only during the incumbentes of the
grauntours, as in the same act more at large is contained. And where also in
the second session of Parliament of our late sovereign Lady Queen Marie your
Majesty's dearest sister, holden at Westminster in the first year of her
reign, one act was made and established, whereby full power and authority
was given and appointed unto her highness at her will and pleasure, to alter,
change, unite, transport, dissolve, or determine, as well the said court of
first fruits and tenthes, as the court of augmentations of the revenues of the
kings crown, and other courts therein expressed, and to reduce the same
courts, or any of them, into one, two, or more court or courts, or to unite
and annexe the said courts, or any two or more of them, together, or to any
other of her Majesty's courts of records, as to her it should be thought
most convenient and best, for the better, sure, and more speedy aunswering of
her yearly revenues, casualties, and profits, then aunswerable in the said
courts, or any of them, as in the same act more at large is expressed: by
vigor and authority of which act, the said late Queen by her graces four
several letters patentes, whereof two bear date the.xxiii. day of January, in
the first year of her reign, and the other two the.xxiiii. day of January in
the same year, did not only dissolve, determine, and extinguishe the said
courts commonly called and entitled, The court of augmentations and revenues
of the kings crown, and, The court of the first fruits and tenth, and the
jurisdiction and authority thereof: but also did unite, transpose, and annex
the said courts of augmentations and revenues of the kings crown, and of
the first fruits and tenthes so dissolved, to the said court of the
Exchequer, there to be and continue as a member and parcel of the same court
of the Exchequer: and did appoint all and singular the revenues, casualties,
profits, and hereditamentes then aunswerable in the said courts, to the
order, rule, survey, and governance of the said court of the Exchequer, there
to be answered and accounted for ever, in such order, manner, and form, as
in the said later letters patentes, and in two Scedules unto the said letters
patentes annexed, is mentioned and declared, as by the tenor and purport of
the said letters patentes and Scedules, signed with her highness hand, more
plainly may appear. By reason of all which said premises, not only the
said perpetual revenues of the first fruits and tenthes, granted by the
said act in the.xxvi. year of the reign of your highness most noble father,
in augmentation and maintenance of the crown of this Realm, but also the
tenthes or yearly rentes reserved nomine decime, by any letters patentes, of
your said noble father, sithence the said.xxvi. year of his reign, and of
your said dearest brother and sister, or of any of them, made to any Bishop,
and his successors, or to any Cathedral Church, Deane and Chapter, College,
or any other Ecclesiastical and Spiritual person or persons, or corporations,
and their Successors for ever. And also all and every the rentes, revenues,
issues, and profits, of all and singular Rectories, personages, and benefices
impropriate, glebe lands, tithes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other
profits, and emolumentes ecclesiastical and spiritual to the same belonging,
being in the hands and possession of your said dearest sister, at the
said.xxiiii. day of January, were ordered, aunswerable, and accounted for in
the said court of the Exchequer, and were therein well and justly answered
and paid unto her highness use and behoof, like as the same had been unto the
said two noble kings, her said father and brother, by the space of.xx. years,
without grief or contradiction of the Prelates and Clergy of the Realm, to
the great aid, relief, and supportation of the inestimable charges of the
Crown of this Realm, which daily since the time of the making of the said
first act, have increased and grown more and more. Which thing although the
said late Queen might and did manyfestly feel and perceive to be most true:
yet she upon certain zealouse and inconvenient respects, not sufficiently,
nor politikely enough waying that matter, nor having due consyderation and
regard to the maintenance, and vpholdyng and good continuance of the state of
the Imperial Crown of this Realm in succession, which rather needed an
augmentation, then any diminution, procured and wylled an act of Parliament,
to be made and provided in the second and third years of the reign of king
Philip her late husband and her, that all paymentes of the said first
fruits, should from thencefoorth cease and be clearly extinct and determined
for ever. And that as well all the said benefices and spiritual promotions, as
the possessours, owners, and incumbentes thereof, and their successors,
should from and after the.viii. day of August, in the said second and third
years, and so from thencefoorth at all times for ever, be clearly exonerate,
acquitted, and discharged, against the said late king Philip and Queen Marie,
her heirs, and successors, of and from the payment and paymentes of all and
every the said first fruits, in as ample and large manner and form, as they
were before the making of the said act, of the first and original grant
thereof, in the said.xxvi. year of the reign of the said late king your noble
father, and as though the same had never ben had ne made. And further, that
neither the said perpetual pention, annall rent, or tenth, granted by the
said first act of the.xxvi. year of the said noble king Henry: nor also the
said several annall rentes, or tenthes, reserved nomine decime, by and upon
the said several letters patentes, of the said late King and Queen, made to
spiritual persons and corporations as is aforesaid, or any of them, from and
after the feast of S. Michael Tharchangell then last past, should any more be
paid or payable unto the said late king Philip and Queen Marie, her heirs,
or successors, but that as well all the said Archbyshoprickes, Bishoprics,
and other benefices, dignities, Deanes, and Chapters, Colleges, Corporations,
and Spiritual promotions aforesaid, as also the possessours, owners,
proprietaries, and incumbentes of the same, and their successors, from and
after the said feast of S. Michael Tharchangel, should be clearly exonerate,
acquitted and discharged of, and from the payment thereof, against them, and the
heirs, and successors of the same late Queen for ever. And furthermore, that
the said late king Philip and Queen Marie, her heirs, or successors, from
and after the said feast of S. Michael Tharchangell, should not receive,
perceive, take, and enjoy any the issues, revenues, profits, or commodities of
the said rectories, personages, benefices, glebe lands, tithes, oblations,
pentions, portions, and other profits and emolumentes ecclesiastical and
spiritual aforesaid, or of any of them, or of the reuertion or reuertions of
them, or any of them: but in and by the said act, the same late king and
Queen, clearly gave over, renounced, and relynquished as well the said
rectories, personages, benefices, glebe lands, tithes, oblations, pentions,
portions, and other profits and emolumentes ecclesiastical and spiritual
aforesaid, and every of them, and the reuertion and reuertions of them, and
every of them, and all their right, title, use, interest, and demand of, in,
or to the same, from them, and the heirs, and successors of the said late
Queen for ever, as also the said perpetual pention, annall rent, and tenth,
and also the said yearly rentes, reserved nomine decime, upon the said
several letters patentes, and all their right, title, and interest, which they
or either of them, or the heirs or successors of the said late Queen, had
or might have had, in or to the same. The same yearly pention, tenthes, yearly
rentes, parsonages, emolumentes, and profits, to be perceived, taken,
received, counted, employed, used, and disposed by the late reverend father in
God Reginald Poole, late Cardinal and Legate, and such other persons as he
should name and appoint, and such other as ben specially limited in the said
act, to and for certain uses, purposes, and intentes mentioned in the same
act, with diverse provisions, and a saving in the same expressed and contained,
as by the same more at large appears. We your said humble and obedient
subjects, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and commons in this your
present Parliament assembled, calling to our remembrance the huge,
innumerable, and inestimable charges of the royal estate, and imperial Crown
of this Realm, and how the same is left unto your Majesty, at this your
first entrye thereunto, greatly diminished, as well by reason of the said act
made in the said second and third year of the reign of the said king
Philip and Queen Marie, as otherwise, do conceive at the bottom of our
hearts great sorrow and heaviness, as subjects careful for their natural
and liege Sovereign Lady, upon whom depends the surety, worldly joy, and
wealth of us all: and being no less affected toward your Majesty's most
royal person, and the preservation and mayntenaunce of the same, and of the
estate and succession of your Majesty's said Crown, then were the first
grauntours of the said first fruits and tenthes toward your hyghnes most
noble father, and his said royal estate, at the time of their said grant to
him thereof made, do account of very right and good congruence no less then
our most bounden duty, to move your highness, and therewith most humblye to
beseech the same: that the great disherison and decay committed and done to
the crown and estate royal of this your Realm, and the succession thereof by
reason of the said act made in the said second and third years of the
reign of the said king Philip and Queen Marie, may at this Parliament be
reformed and avoided, and that with your highness favor and royal assente
it may be enacted, ordained, established, and provided by authority of this
Parliament, in manner and form hereafter ensuyng: That is to say, that the
said act made in the second and third years of the reign of the said late
king Philip and Queen Marie, and all articles, clauses, and sentences therein
contained, shall be form and after the first day of this present Parliament,
utterly and clearly repealed, made void, and of no force ne effect: and all
aucthorities and liberties granted, limited, and appointed in and by the said
act to the said late Cardinal Poole, or made or derived, by force, strength,
or color of the same act, by or from the said late Cardinal, to any other
person or persons, bodies politic or corporate, to cease and be utterly void
and determined: and that the said first fruits, and all paymentes thereof,
from and after the said first day of this Parliament, shall be revived, and have
their being and continuance again, and be deemed and adjudged to al intentes,
constructions, and purposes, in the Queens hyghnes most royal person, her
heirs, and successors, and united and annexed to the imperial crown of this
Realm, of and in such like, and the same estate, interest, title, quantity,
sort, degree, and condition, and in as ample and beneficial manner and form,
as the same was or were in the person or possession of the said late Queen
Marie, at and before the said eight day of August, in the said act of
extinguishment mentioned and expressed: the same act of extinguishment, or any
letters patentes, or any other matter or thing had, done, or suffered by the
said late Queen, to the contrary thereof in any wise, notwithstanding. And
also that as well so much of the said perpetual and annall tenth, and pention,
granted by the said act made in the said.xxvi. year of the reign of the
said late king Henrye the eight, as also so much of the said yearly rentes
reserved upon the said several letters patentes nomine decime, and also so
many of the said rectories, personages, and benefices, impropriate, glebe
lands, tithes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other profits and
emolumentes ecclesiastical and spiritual aforesaid, and the reuertion and
reuertions thereof: and all rentes, emolumentes, and profits incident to the
same, as were in the hands and possession of the said late Queen Marie, at
and before the said.viii. day of August, shall from the said feast of. S.
Michaell Tharchangell last past, be bested, adjudged, and deemed, actually and
really in the seasme and possession of our said sovereign lady Queen
Elizabeth, her heirs, and successors, to all intentes, constructions, and
purposes, of and in such like and the same estate, interest, order, degree,
quality, sort, and condition, and as fully, holy, largely, and beneficially,
as the same were in the seasme and possession of the said late queen Marie, at
and before the same eight day of August. And that as well the said first
fruits and tenthes, and the order thereof, as also the said annall rentes
reserved nomine decime, and the said rectories, personages, benefices, glebe
lands, tithes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other profits and
emolumentes ecclesiastical and spiritual aforesaid, and every of them, and
the reuertion and reuertions of them, and of all rentes and profits unto the
same, or any of them incident or belongyng, shall be within the said order,
survey, rule, and governance of the said court of Thexchequer, in every
degree, sort, and condition, as they were (at and) before the said eight day
of August: the said act made in the said second and third years, or any
other matter or thing to the contrary thereof, notwithstanding. And that so
much of all and every the said acts and statutes first recited, or of any
other act or statute, touching or concerning the order, leuying, true
aunsweryng and payment or qualification of the said first fruits and
tenthes, and of the said rectories, personages, and benefices improprietate,
and of the rentes, revenues, emolumentes and profits thereof, and of all other
the premises, and also the charge, discharge, or alteration of them, or any of
them, or any matter or thing in any wise soundyng or tendyng thereunto, which
were standing, and being in force, effect, and unrepealed at and before the
said eight day of August (except only the said acts of the erections of the
courts of augmentations and first fruits and tenthes) shall be, remain, and
continue in their full and perfect strengthes and forces, and be observed and
put in due execution, according to the tenours and purportes of the same, and
every of them. And that the Queens Majesty, her heirs, and successors, by
authority of this present Parliament shall from the said first day of this
present Parliament, have, hold, posseede, and enjoy for ever the aduousons,
gifts and patronages of all vicarages belongyng or incident to any of the
said rectories, and personages impropriate, in the same sort, quality,
condition, and degree, to all intentes and purposes, as the same were in the
person and possession of the said late Queen Marye, at and before the said
eight day of August: any thing or act done by the same late Cardinal, or any
grant or grauntes by letters patentes made by the said late Queen Marye, of
the said aduousons and patronages, or any of them, to any ecclesiastical or
spiritual person or persons, or any spiritual corporation, to the contrary
in any wise, notwithstanding.

Saving to all and every person and persons, bodies politic and corporate,
and their heirs, executours, successors, and assigns, and every of them,
other then such persons as be mentioned and named in any letters patentes,
made by the said Queen Marie, the said viii. day of August* or at any time
sithen, or clayming only by or under thaucthoritie, and strength of the same
act or letters patentes or any of them, all such right, title, interest,
estate, offices, leasses, grauntes, annuities, pentions, fees, corrodyes,
rentes, and other yearly profits and commodities, as they or any of them
ought or should have had perceived, or enjoyed, of, in, or by reason of any
the personages, rectories, or of any other the premises, in case the said
former act now repealed, and this present act of repeal had never ben had
ne made: any thing in the same acts, or either of them contained, or soundyng
to the contrary thereof in any wise, notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that from and after the
said feast of saint Michaell Tharchangell last past, and so from thencefoorth
from time to time, the said pentions, annuities, rentes, corrodies, fees, and
other yerelye paymentes, shall be paid and payable only by our said sovereign
Lady, her heirs, and successors, at the receipte of the Exchequer, or in
such other places as the Queens Majesty her heirs, and successors shall
appoint, to all and every person and persons, that ought to have and enjoy
the same, in such sort, order, and form as the same should or ought to have been paid and payable in case the said act now repealed had never ben had ne
made: any thing therein, or else in this act contained to the contrary thereof
in any wise, notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, that all and singular
incumbentes, proprietaries, tenauntes, farmours, leasses, and occupyers of the
premises, or any part thereof, their heirs, executours, and assigns, which
the said first day of this present Parliament, were behynd, or in any
arrerages of and with the rents, farms, tenthes, or other revenues, profits,
or duties, by them or any of them due, and payable, for or by reason of the
premises, or any of them, shall and may be by the authority of this act,
seuerallye chargeable, accomptable, and aunswerable to the Queens Maistie, her
heirs, and successors, in and at the said court of the Exchequer, of and for
the same arrerages and duties, as other accomptauntes be and shall be in the
same court: any thing in the said act, now repealed in this act, or any
other matter or cause to the contrary thereof in any wise, notwithstanding.

And yet nevertheless the Queens most excellent Majesty, at the humble
request of her said subjects, of her aboundaunt grace and bountefulnes, is
pleased and contented that it be enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
all and singular vicarages, not exceeding the yerelye value of ten pounds,
after the rate and value upon the records and books of the rates and values
for the first fruits and tenthes, now remaining in the Exchequer, or that
shall hereafter come and remain in the same court, and also all and singular
parsonages, not exceedyng the yearly value of ten marks, after the like rate
and valuation, and the incumbentes thereof, and every of them, their
executours, administratours, successors, and sureties, and every of them, from
the said feast of S. Michael Tharchangel last past, shall be free and clearly
discharged, and acquitted for ever, against the Queens Majesty, her heirs,
and successors, of and from the said first fruits: any thing in the said
act of first fruits and tenthes made in the said.xxvi. year of the reign of
the said late king Henrye the eight, or in this act of repeal, or any other
act or acts before recited to the contrary thereof in any wise,
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any
Incumbent of any such promotion spiritual, as is aforesaid, charged or
chargeable to the payment of the said first fruits, happen to live to thend
of one half year next after the last auoydance of the same promotion
spiritual, so as he has received, or without fraud or couin, might lawfully
have received or enjoyed the rentes or profits of that half year, and before
the end of the other half year, then next following, shall happen to dye, or
to be lawfullye euicted, removed, or put from the said promotion spiritual,
by judgment in any action at the common law, without fraud or couine: that
then every such incumbent, his heirs, executours, administratours, and
suerties, shall be charged and chargeable but only with the fourth part of the
first fruits due to be paid for such his promotion, and with no more of the
said first fruits: any thing in this act contained, or any bond or writing
to be made for the payment of the said first fruits, or any other matter or
cause to the contrary, notwithstanding. And if it shall shall happen any such
incumbent to live by the space of one whole year next after the last
aduoidaunce of the same promotion spiritual, and after before the end of one
half year then next following shall fortune to dye, or to be lawfully euicted,
removed, or put from the said promotion spiritual, by judgment in any action
at the common law, without fraud or couine: that then every such incumbent,
his heirs, executours, administratours and sureties, shall be charged and
chargeable but only with the moytie and one half of the first fruits due to
be paid; for such his promotion spiritual and with no more of the same first
fruits: any thing in this act contained, or any bond or writing obligatorie
to be made for the payment of the same first fruits, or any other matter or
cause to the contrary, notwithstanding. And if it shall happen any such
incumbent to live to the end of one whole year and a half, next after the
last auoydaunce of such promotion spiritual, and after and before the end of
six months then next following shall fortune to dye, or to be lawfully
euicted, removed, or put from the said promotion spiritual, by judgment in
any action at the common law, without fraud or couine: that then every such
incumbent, his heirs, executours, administratours, and sureties, shall be
charged and chargeable but only with three parts of the first fruits of the
same promotion spiritual, in four parts to be divided, and with no more: any
thing in this act contained, or any bond or writing obligatorie had or made
for the payment of the said first fruits, or any other matter or cause to the
contrary, notwithstanding. And if it shall happen any such incumbent to live
to the end of two whole years, next after the last auoydaunce of the same his
promotion spiritual, and not to be lawfully euicted; removed, or put from the
same promotion spiritual as is aforesaid, that then every such incumbent, his
heirs, executours, administratours, and sureties, shall content and pay to our
said Sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs, and successors, the whole first
fruits due to be paid for the same promotion spiritual, according to the
estatutes aforesaid.

Provided also, and be it enacted, that all grauntes, immunities, and
liberties, given to the Universities of Cambridge, and Oxforde, or to any
College or Hall in either of the said universities, and to the Colleges of
Eton and Winchester, and unto every or any of them, by our late Sovereign Lord
king Henry the eight, or any other of the Queens highness progenitors or
predecessors, or by act of Parliament, for or touching the release or
dischardge of the said first fruits and tenthes, or any part thereof, shall be
always and remain in their full strength and virtue: and that all such
lawful conueyaunces and assuraunces in the law, as were had or made before
the making of this act, to either of the said universities of Oxforde and
Cambridge, or to any College or Hall within any of them, by what name or names
soever they or any of them be incorporated or named, of any of the said
personages, or benefices impropriate, or of any part of the same, or of any
patronages, for the maintenance of students, or learning, shall be as good and
effectual in the law, to all intentes, constructions, and purposes, as though
this act had never ben made.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforsayde, that the Deane and
Canons of the free Chapel of S. George the Martyr, within the Castle of
Windsor, and all the possessions and hereditamentes of the same free Chapel,
Deanrie, and Canons, by whatsoever name or names they be incorporated or
known, shall be exonerated, and shall stand for ever discharged of the
tenthes and first fruits before mentioned: any thing in this act, or any
other act or statute before mentioned to the contrary thereof in any wise,
notwithstanding.

Provided also and be it enacted, that all leasses made before the twenty day
of December last past, for.xxi. years, or three lives at the most, by any
person or persons, bodies polytike or corporate, being lawfully seized of, or
in any of the said personages impropriate, or of, or in any other the
premises wont commonly to be let, or set to ferme, then being out of leasse,
or whereof there was not at the time of the making of the said leasse or
leasses, any former leasse to endure above one year then to come at the most:
and upon which new leasse or leasses, the old yearly rent, accustomably
wont to be paid for the same, by the space of.xx. years last before the making
of such leasse or leasses, or more yearly rent is reserved and payable during
the said term, and all other lawful grauntes, by them or any of them
heretofore made of any office or offices, in old time wont commonly to be
granted: and all gifts and grauntes of any personage or personages
impropriate, heretofore belongyng to the Archdeaconrie of Wells, in the
County of Somerset, or to the incumbent of the same office or dignity, or to
the incumbent of the same lately given and restored, shall be as good and
effectual in the law, as though this act or any thing therein contained had
not ben had or made.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
Archdeaconrie, and all Rectories and spiritual promotions, given, assigned,
lymited, or appointed to the same, and all and every incumbentes and incumbent,
which hereafter shall be presented, collated, preferred, and admitted unto the
said Archdeaconrie, and the Rectories and spiritual promotions thereunto
lymited and appointed, or apparteynyng and belongyng, shall stand, remain, and
be charged and chargeable with the payment of the first fruits and tenthes for
the same to the Queens highness, her heirs, and successors, in such like
manner and form as other spiritual promotions, and the incumbentes of the
same, be and shall be charged and chargeable by this act, or by any other act
or statute before specified.

Provided always and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that
so many of the said Rectories, personages, and benefices impropriate, glebe
lands, tithes, oblations, pentions, portions, and other profits, and
emoluments ecclesiastical and spiritual, and every of them, and the reuertion
and reuertions of them, and all rentes and profits unto the same or any of
them incident or belongyng, as were at and before the said eight day of August
in the hands or possessions of the said late Queen Marie, and within the
surueye, rule, and order of the court of the Duchy of Lancaster, shall be
again within the order, surueye, rule, and government of the said court, in
such and the same manner and form, to all intentes and purposes, as they were
at and before the said eight day of August, in the said second and third
years of the reign of the said late king and Queen: any thing in this act,
or in the said act of the same late king and Queen to the contrary thereof
in any wise, notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the thaucthoritie of this
Parliament, that no person or persons presented, instituted, or inducted, at
any time since the first day of this present Parliament, or that shall be
presented, instituted, or inducted on this side the feast of the Nativity of
S. John Baptist next coming, to any the said spiritual or ecclesiastical
promotions, chargeable to or with the payment of the first fruits or one years
profits of such promotion, shall incur any penalty or forfayture, by
entryng into any of the said spiritual or Ecclesiastical promotions, or by
taking the profits thereof, for the non payment or not compoundyng of or for
the first fruits thereof, so that he or any other for him, shall or do
compounde for the same first fruits, according to the true meaning of the
statute, before the said feast of the Nativity of S. John Babtist: any thing
in this act contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also, that this act, or any thing therein contained, shall not in any
wise extend to charge any hospital founded and used, and the possessions thereof
employed to and for the relief of poor people, or any Scoole or Scooles, or
the possessions or revenues of them, or any of them, with the paime^t of any
tenthes or first fruits: any thing in this act before mentioned to the
contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

An act whereby certain offenses be made Treason. Chapter.vj.
WHERE in the Parliament holden at Westminster the.xii. day of November, in the
second year of the reign of the late Queen Marie, sister unto our most
gracious Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty that now is, there was one act
or statute made for the better surety and preservation of the said late
Queen, entitled, An act whereby certain offenses be made treasons, as by the
same act more at large does appear. And for as much as the very words and
sentences of the said estatute, do extend no further but unto the said late
Queen Marie, and the heirs of her body, therefore if any such like offenses as
be mentioned and contained within the said statute, should hereafter happen to
be committed against our said Sovereign Lady that now is, there were no due
remedy, or condign punishment provided for the same.

In consyderation whereof, and to the intent that the malice of wicked and evil
doers may the better be restrained by thextendyng of the effect and benefit of
the matters contained in the said estatute, to our most dear Sovereign Lady
that now is, and for the more surety and preservation of her highness royal
estate, be it enacted by the Queens most excellent Majesty, with the assent
of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that if any person or
persons after the first day of May next to come, do maliciously, advisedly, and
directly, compass or imagine to deprive the Queens Majesty that now is, or
the heirs of her body to be begotten, being Kings or Queens of this Realm,
from the style, honor, and kingly name of the imperial Crown of this Realm,
or from any other the Realms and dominions unto our said Sovereign Lady
apparteyning and belongyng, or to destroy the Queens Majesty that now is,
or any the heirs of her body, being Kings or Queens of this Realm, or to
levy war within this Realm, or within any the marches or dominions to ye
same belonging, against the Queens Majesty that now is, or any the heirs of
her body, being Kings or Queens of this Realm, or to depose the Queens
Majesty that now is, or any the heirs of her body, being Kings or Queens
of this Realm, from the imperial crown of the Realms and Dominions
aforesaid, and the same compasses, or imaginations, or any of them,
maliciously, advisedly, and directly shall or do utter by open preaching,
express words or sayings: or if any person or persons, after the said first
day of May next coming, shall maliciously, advisedly, and dyrectly say,
publishe, declare, maintain, or hold opinion, that the Queens Majesty that
now is, during her life, is not, or ought not to be Queen of this Realm, or
after her death, that the heirs of her highness body, being kings or queens
of this realm, of right ought not to be kings or Queens of this Realm, or
that any other person or persons, other then the Queens highness that now is,
during her life, ought to be king or queen of this realm, or any other ye
Realms or dominions aforesaid, or after her death, other then the heirs of
her body, being kings or queens of this Realm, as long as any of her said
heirs of her body begotten shall be in life, of right ought to have and enjoy
the imperial crown of this Realm, or any the realms and dominions
aforesaid: that then every such offendour, being thereof duly convicted or
attaynted by the laws of this Realm, their abbettours, procurers, and
counsaylours, and all and every their comforters, knowing the said offenses, or
any of them, to be done, and being thereof duly convicted or attaynted, as is
abouesayde, for his or their such offense, shall forfaite and lose to the
Queens highness, her heirs and successors, al his and their goods and
cattels, and the whole issues and profits of his and their lands, tenementes,
and hereditamentes, for term of the life of every such offendour or
offenders, and also shall have and suffer during his and their lives
perpetual imprisonment.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that all and every ecclesiastical person, being convicted or attaynted in
form aforesaid, for every such his offense, shall immediately and presently
upon such attaynder had, be judged and remain in the law to all intentes,
deprived from all his benefices and promotions spiritual or ecclesiastical,
in such manner and form, that it shall be lawful for every patron, founder, or
geuer thereof, to present immediately after such attaynder had, some one other
to the same, as though the said offendour or offenders were deceassed.

And if any person or persons, being hereafter convicted or attainted of any
the said offenses, in form aforesaid committed, shall after his or their
conviction or attayndour eftsoon commit or perpetrate any of the said offenses
in form aforesaid, that then every such second offense or offenses, shall be
deemed and adjudged high treason, and the offendour or offenders therein, their
abbettours, procurers, and counsaylours, and all and every their aydours, and
comforters, knowing the said offenses, or any of them to be done, being thereof
convicted or attaynted, according to the laws and statutes of this Realm,
shall be judged and deemed high traitors, and shall suffer pains of death, and
lose and forfeite al their goods, cattels, lands, and tenementes, to the
Queens Majesty, her heirs, and successors, as in cases of high treason by
the laws of this Realm, at this day of right ought to be lost and forfeyted.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
person, at any time after the said first day of May next to come, by any
writing, printing, ouert deed, or act maliciously, advisedly, and directly,
do affirm that the Queens Majesty that now is, ought not to have and
enjoy, the style, honor, and kingly name of this Realm, or that any person
or persons, other then the Queens Majesty that now is, ought to have or enjoy
ye style, honor and kingly name of this Realm, or that ye Queens Majesty
that now is during her life, is not, or ought not to be Queen of this Realm,
or after her death, that the heirs of her highness body being Kings or
Queens of this Realm, of right ought not to have and enjoy the imperial
crown of this realm, or that any person or persons other then the Queens
majesty that now is, during her life, or after her death other then the heirs
of her body begotten, being kings or queens of this Realm, as long as any of
her said heirs of her body shall be in life, of right ought to have and enjoy
the imperial crown of this Realm, that then every such offense and offenses
shall be adjudged high treason, and the offendour and offenders therein, their
abbettours, procurers, and counsaylours, and all and every their aydours and
comforters, knowing the said offenses or any of them to be done, being thereof
lawfully convicted or attaynted by the laws of this Realm, shall be deemed and
adjudged high traitors, and shall suffer pains of death, and lose and forfaite
all their goods and cattels, lands and tenementes to the Queens Majesty,
her heirs, and successors, as in cases of high treason by the laws of this
Realm, at this day of right ought to be lost and forfayted.

Saving to every person and persons bodies politic and corporate their heirs
and successors (other then the offenders and their heirs, and such person
and persons as claim to any of their uses) all such rightes, titles,
interestes, possessions, leasses, rentes, reuertions, offices, and other
profits, which they or any of them shall have at the day of the committing
such treasons, or at any time before, in as large and ample manner, as if this
act had never ben had nor made.

Provided always, and be it declared and enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that concealment, or keeping secret of any high treasons, be deemed and taken
only misprision of treason, and the offenders therein to forfeyte and suffer,
as in cases of misprision of treason has heretofore ben used: any thing above
mentioned to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also that if it shall fortune hereafter any of the peers of this
Realm, to be indicted of any the offenses made treason, or misprision of
treason by this act, that then the same peers or peer so being indicted,
shall be put to answer to every such indytement before the high Steward of
England for the time being, and to have his and their trial of all his and
their peers, and to receive and have such like judgment upon the same trial
of his or their peers, or make open confession of the same offense or
offenses, as is used in other cases of high treason.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person or
persons, shall in any wise be impeached for any of the offenses abouesayd
committed, only by open preaching or words, unless the offendour or offenders
be thereof indicted within six months next after the same open preaching or
words: any thing mentioned in this act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always, that the counsaylours, procurers, comforters, and abbettours
mentioned in this act, for his or their first offense, shall suffer like
punishment, penalty, and forfeyture, as is contained in this act against the
principal offenders for their first offense, and none other: and that the
counsaylours, procurers, comforters, and abbettours, for his or their second
offense, shall sustain like punishment, penalty, and forfeyture, as is
contained in this act, against the principal offender or offenders, for their
second offense, and none other.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no
person or persons, shall be hereafter indicted or arraigned for any offense or
offenses made treason, or misprision of treason, by this act, unless the same
offense and offenses of treason and misprision of treason aforesaid, be proved
by the testimony, deposition, and oath of two lawful and sufficient witnesses,
at the time of his and their indictment, which said witnesses also at the time
of ye arraignement of the party so indicted (if they be then living) shall be
brought forth in person before the party so arraigned face to face, and there
shall auowe and openly declare al they can say against the said party so
indicted, unless the said party so indicted, shall wyllingly without violence
confess the same.

An act for the explanation of the statute of seditious words and rumors.
The.v. Chapter.
WHERE in the Parliament holden at Westminster, the.xxi. day of November, in
the first and second years of the reigns of the late king Philip and Queen
Marie (sister unto our Sovereign Lady the Queens highness that now is) and
there continued and kept, until the.xvi. day of January then next ensuing,
there was one act or statute then and there made, entitled, An act against
seditious words and rumors, which act was then made to endure to the end of
the next Parliament: and after in the next parliament holden at Westminster
the.xxi. day of October, in the second and third years of the reigns of the
said late king and queen, and there continued until the.ix. day of October
then next following, the said statute was then further continued until the
last day of the next Parliament: and after in one other Parliament holden at
Westminster the.xx. day of January, in the fourth and fifth years of the
reigns of the said late king and queen, and there continued until the.vii.
day of March, then next following, the said act and statute was then and there
further continued, revived, and enacted, to stand and be in full force and
strength, unto the last day of the next Parliament: in which act (amongst
other things) certain punishment is provided for such persons as should
maliciously utter or speak any false, seditious, and slanderous news,
rumors, or tales of the said late king and queen, as by the same act and
statute more at large it does and may appear.

And for as much as the said act and statute sithen the making thereof has been proved to be a very good and necessary law, for due correction and
punishment of such light and evil disposed persons, as most seditiously did
spread abroad very false and slanderous rumors and tales, to the great
disturbaunce of the common tranquillity of this Realm: and for that it is
doubtful whether the said statute, and the words and sentences of the same,
extend any further, then only to the said late king and queen, and whyther
the same statute give any remedy against such persons as shall maliciously
utter or speak any false, seditious, and slanderous rumors, news or tales,
against our Sovereign Lady the queens highness that now is, or not. For
remedy whereof, and for a plain declaration and explanation of the said
former act: be it therefore declared, ordained, and enacted by thaucthoritie
of this present parliament, that the said act and statute made in the said
first and second years of the reigns of the said late king and Queen, and
continued as is aforesaid, and all and every branch, article, words,
sentences, clauses, provisions, and things therein contained, shall from
henceforth by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, be expounded, judged,
taken and deemed in all things to extend to the Queens highness that now
is, as fully and largely, to all intentes, constructions, and purposes, as
though the same act had by express words extended to the heirs and
successors of the said late Queen: any question, ambiguitie, or doubt,
grown, risen, or made, or hereafter happenyng to grow, rise, or to be moved
to the contrary in any thing, notwithstanding. And that al and every person
and persons, which hereafter shall malitously utter or speak any false,
seditious, or slanderous news, rumors, sayings, or tales, of the Queens
highness that now is, or of the heirs of her body, being kings or queens
of this Realm, or shall commit or do any the offenses expressed in the said
act, against our said Sovereign Lady the Queen that now is, or the heirs
of her body, being kings or queens of this realm, and being thereof convicted
or attaynted according to the form and order in the said former act
expressed, shall from henceforth incur such pains and penalties, and have
such and the same trial, judgment, and punishment for the same offenses, as
in the said act is limited and appointed, and according to the form,
tenor, and effect of the same act, and none otherwise.

An act to revive a statute made in the xxiii. year of the reign of king
Henry the viij. touching the conueying of Horses, Geldinges, and Mares into
Scotland. The. vij. Chapter.
WHere in the Parliament holden at London the third day of November* in
the.xxi. year of the reign of the late King of most worthy memory King
Henrye the eight, and from thence adiourned and proroged to Westminster, and
there continued by diverse prorogations, until the.xv. day of Ianuarye in
the.xxiii. year of the reign of the said late king, amongst other things
there was one act or statute made, whereby the sellyng, exchaungyng, or
delivery of any horses, geldynges, or mares into Scotland, by any English
man, should be felony, which act or statute is entitled, An act that no
English man should sell, exchange, or deliver, to be conveyed into Scotland,
any horse, geldyng, or mare, without the kings license, as by the same act
and statute more at large it does and may appear. And although the same
estatute was a very good and necessary law for the mayntenaunce of the
strength of this Realm, and for the due preservation of the state of the same,
yet the said statute by certain acts repeal made, as well in the time of the
late king Edward the sixth, as also in the time of the late queen Marie, was by
certain general words repealed and made void, by reason whereof, diverse
wicked and evil disposed persons, have of late time for their own private
gain, conveyed diverse horses, geldinges, and mares out of this realm into
Scotland, to the great strength and boldening of the Scottishe, and much to the
detriment and hinderaunce of this realm.

Wherefore be it enacted by the Queens most excellent Majesty, with the
assent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of this present
parliament assembled, and by thaucthoritie of the same, that the said act and
statute made in the said.xxiii. year of the reign of the said late king Henry
the eight, and al and every branch, sentences, articles, words, matters, and
clauses therein contained, shall from the first day of May next coming, stand,
remain, and continue in full force and strength, to all intentes and purposes,
as fullye and as holy as ever the same was at any time heretofore: any act or
statute of repeal, or any other matter or cause whatsoever to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An act touching Shooemakers and Curriours. The.viij. Chapter.
WHere at a parliament holden at Westminster upon prorogation the.xv. day of
April, in the sixte year of the reign of our late sovereign lord king
Edward the sixth, brother to the Queen's majesty, it was enacted amongst other
things, against regratours of tanned Leather, that no person or persons, of
what estate, degree, or condition so ever he or they be, shall buy, ingrosse,
or cause to be bought or engrossed, any kind of tanned Leather, to the intent
to sell the same again, saving, only Sadlers, Gyrdlers, Cord wayners, and al
other artificers, which shall make thereof any kind of wares to be sold, as by
the same act more plainly at large may appear: which act was in the
Parliament holden at the Westminster the second day of April, in the first year
of the reign of our late sovereign lady Queen Marie, repealed, made void,
and of none effect: and one other act was then made, entytuled, touching the
buying and currying of Leather, the repealyng of which act, as experience
has sithen taught us, has brought shoes, boots, males, saddles, and all
other kind of wares made of tanned Leather, to great and unreasonable prices
to the undoing of a great number of the Queens Majesty's poor subjects.

For reformation whereof, be it ordained, enacted; and established, by the
Queens Majesty, the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of this
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that the
foresaid statute made in the.vi. year of the reign of the said late king
Edward the sixte, and entytuled, against all regratours of tanned Leather, and
every article, branch, sentence, and clause therein contained, shall be
reuyued and stand in effect from the first day of April next coming, in as
full force, strength, and effect, as though the foresaid act made in the
second day of April, in the first year of Queen Mary's reign, touching the
buying and currying of Leather, whereby the said former act is repealed, had
never ben had or made.

And be it also enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the said statute and
act made in the first year of Queen Mary's reign, sister to the Queens
Majesty, entytuled, An act touching the buying and currying of Leather, and
every branch, sentence, and article therein contained, shall from the said
first day of April not stand, but be utterly repealed, and be of no force
nor strength: any clause, sentence, or article therein contained to the
contrary in any wise, nothwithstandyng.

Provided always and be it enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that when
and as often as any Shoemaker or his deputy does bring any Leather
sufficientlye tanned, to any curryour to be curryed (deliueryng sufficient
liquor for well dressing of the same) the same shall be by every such Curryour
well and sufficientlye curryed and made redye for the Shoemaker, within the
space of five days in summer, that is to say: from the first day of March to
the last day of September. And also in like manner within the space of ten
days in winter, that is to say from the first day of October, unto the last
day of February, upon pain to forfeyte to the party grieved, for every hyde
not curryed and dressed in manner and form aforesaid, the sum of.x. s.

Provided further, that this prouiso shall not extend to bind any Curriour to
dress any leather, which by doing his best is not able to dress within every
of the times aforesaid, but shall extend to al such Leather as he conveniently
may dress, after the common rate of the dressyng.

And be it also enacted by the authority of this present Parliament that no
person or persons, vsyng or occupying the feate and mystery of Shoomakers, shall
from henceforth work or make any boots or shoes of Neates Leather, that
shall be myngled, made or wrought with any other Leather, but only Neates Leather
of it self, unless it be in the hemmes or lining of boots, shoes, or
slippers, and that they shall put in all and every boots, shoes, or
slippers, made of Neates Leather, innersoles made of wombes, which shall be well
and truly tanned and curryed, and also all such other boots, shoes, and
slippers, as shall be made of dry Neates Leather, or Calves Leather, not to be
myngled with any other kind of leather (saving in the soles) but only of it
self, unless it be in hemmes or lyninges of the same: that is to say, Neates
leather of it self, and Calves leather of it self, upon pain of forfeyture
of all such boots, shoes, and slippers made so to the contrary.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
one moytie of all such forfeytures before named, shall be to our Sovereign Lady
the Queens Majesty, and her highness heirs: and the other moytie to him or
them that sease or first sue for the same penalties in any the Queens
Majesty's courts of record, by action of debte, byll, complaynte, information,
or otherwise, wherein no wager of law, essoygne, protection, or iniunction,
shall be admitted or allowed for the defendaunt in that behalf.

An act touching Tanners and the selling of tanned Leather. The.ix. Chapter.
FOR sundry good causes and consyderations, be it enacted by the aucthorite of
this present Parliament, that no person or persons, having lands, tenementes,
or rentes of estate of inheritance, or for term of life, to the clear
yerelye value of.x.li. or above, except such person and persons as have any
tanhouse, and does occupye the mystery of tannyng at this present, and except
an apprentice and other brought by and taught, or to be brought up and taught
as a covenant servant, or hired for that purpose by the space of four years
in the mystery or craft or tannyng of Leather, shall use or have profit,
gain, or commodity, of or by the said mystery or craft of tannyng of
Leather, after the feast of S. Michaell tharchangell next coming, upon pain
of forfeyting of all such Leather so to be tanned, or the just value thereof.

Also be it further enacted, that from and after the feast Saint Michaell
tharchangell, which shall be in the year of our Lord God M.D.lx. no person or
persons shall use or exercise the feate, craft, or mystery of tannyng of
Leather, or shall by any means receive any profit, gain, or lucre by
tannyng of Leather, but only in a City, Borough, Town corporal, or market
town, where sellers shall be usually appointed, except he or they have been
apprentice exercised and brought up, as is aforesaid, in the said craft and
mystery, by the space of four years at the least, and also excepted the son
or heir and wife of every such Tanner, to their own use and uses, upon
pain of forfeyture of all the Leather so tanned contrary to this act, or the
value thereof.

And be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no manner of
person or persons whatsoever, shall after the first day of May next coming,
buy bargain, bespeke, or take promise of bargain of or for any raw Hide, or
Calves skin, but of, or for such and the same, as shall be present in fair
or market then to be sold, ne they shall put or cause to be put to sale any
kind of tanned Leather, read, and unwrought in any place within this Realm,
other then in open market or fair, in the place therefore commonly accustomed,
and therefore prepared, upon pain of forfeiture for every hide.iii.s.iiii.d.
for every dosen of Calves skins.iii.s.iii.d. and the Hide or Hides and
Leather in any otherwise sold or bought, or the value thereof.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person
whatsoever, shall or may after the feast of S. Michael tharchangel next
coming, buy, bargain, bespeke, or take promise of bargayne, of or for any
tanned Leather unwrought as is aforesaid, but only such person or persons as
have been, be, or shall be brought up in cutting of Leather into made wares, and
do will and shall work and convert the same into Leather, cut into made wares
wrought, upon pain of forfeyture of the Leather so bought, bargayned, or
bespoke, or the value thereof. And where as at a Parliament holden at
Westminster upon prorogation, the second and third years of the reign of king
Edward the sixth, brother to the queens highness, amongst other things in an
act, entitled, An act for true currying of Leather, upon diverse good
consyderations, it was enacted that every Tanner shall cut of every womb of
every Ox hide, six inches broad, and of every Steer hyde five inches
broad, and of every Cow hyde eight inches broad of assise in the narowe
place, as by the said act more at large appears: Sythens which time the
greedy and insatiable covetousness of many of the Tanners have been such, to
defraude the said good and godly act, that they will not cut of the wombes of
the Hydes, nor bring them to the market to be sold, so that the Cord wayners
can not have wombes to put into the inner soles of boots, shoes, stertovopes,
and slippers, according to the tenor of the said statute in that case
provided: be it therefore enacted by the Queens royal Majesty the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present parliament assembled,
and by thaucthoritie of the same, that al and every person and persons, that
does occupy, or shall hereafter occupy the tanning or barkyng of any Ox,
Steer, or Cow hide or hydes, to be converted for sole Leather, for or in ye
name of sole Leather, now commonly called backs, shall cut or cause to be cut
of every such Ox, Steer, or Cow hide or hides, that shall be tanned or wrought
for sole Leather, commonly called backs, two pieces, which is now called
wombes, of every such hyde or back that shall be wrought, barckte, or tanned for
backs, upon pain of forfeyting of every such hide or hides, back or backs
so tanned or wrought, the wombes being not cut of.vi.s.viii.d. for every hyde.

And be it also further enacted by the authority of this present parliament,
that every Tanner or Tanners, or any other person or persons that occupies, or
hereafter shall occupy the mystery of tanning of Leather, and that shall cut
of, or cause to be cut of those two pieces above named, called wombes, shall
begin upon ye two hinder shankes of every such hyde, and there cut two pieces,
and so cut throughout alongest the belly to the foreshanks, and there to cut of
both the foreshankes, and those two pieces so called wombes, to be well and
truly tanned, after the manner of inner sole leather, and to conteyne of good
and dry tanned leather, six inches broad of assise in the narrowest place,
according to the syse of the standerd in the Exchequer when they be tanned or
put to sale, or offered to be sold, promised, or bargayne made, upon pain of
forfeyture of.iii.s.iii.d. for every womb being cut less then so many inches
broad of assise in the narowest place, as above said.

And be it further enacted, that every Tanner or other person that occupies,
or hereafter shall occupy the mystery of tanning of Leather, which after the
feast of the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ next coming, shall put to sale, or
offer to be sold in any fair or markets, any back or backs, shall bring at
the self same time to the fair or markets, where he or they shall put such
back or backs to sale, for every back, the two forenamed pieces called
wombes, there to be sold with the backs, or otherwise as the fair or market
shall him best serve, so that they be sold in the open market; upon pain of
forfeyture of every such back or backs so brought to be sold, or offered to
be sold, or the value thereof, not having the wombes there in the open market
or fair as is abouesayde.

Be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no person or persons
shall after the first day of May next coming, sell, or cause to be sold any
manner of Leather (clout leather sold in small pieces only excepted) except he
or they regester, or cause to be regestred the said Leather, and every part and
parcel thereof, upon pain of forfeyture of the value of the leather so bought
and not regestred, and also the buyer to forfayte the said Leather so bought
and not regestred, as is aforesaid.

And be it further enacted that such person or persons as are, or hereafter
shall be assigned or appointed searchers, sealer or sealers of tanned Leather, by
virtue of any act or statute heretofore, or hereafter to be made, shall keep
one book or regester, to enter all such bargaynes as shall be made for leather,
hydes, or skins (clout leather sold in small pieces only excepted) by any
person or persons, during and by all the time of the fair or market, and shall
enter all such bargaynes, being thereunto required by the buier or the seller,
taking for his or their pain and travail therein to be taken: and for the
registring thereof, of the seller of every dicker of Leather so entered one
penie, for every six dosen of Calves skins one penie, and so after the rate,
and no more or greater sum or sums of money to be paid for entering of the
same, upon pain of forfeyture, for not entering and registring as is
aforesaid, for every dicker of Leather.iii.s iii.d. for every dosen of Calves
skins.iii.s.iiii.d. and so after the rate. And where also one other act,
entitled, An Act for true tannyng of Leather was made at a Parliament of the
said king Edward holden upon prorogation at Westminster, ye fourth day of
November, in the second year of his most gracious reign, which act was made
to endure unto the end of the next Parliament then following, and after the
same act was revived at one other Parliament holden at Westminster the first
day of March, in the.vii. year of the reign of the same king Edward the
sixth, to continue till the last day of the next Parliament then following: and
after the same act was continued in the second and last session of our
Sovereign Lady Queen Marie, holden upon prorogation at Westminster the
thirteen day of October, in the first year of her graces reign, to continue
till the last day of the next Parliament then following, which being expyred
and the same act never since continued, his force and efficacy is ended. And
for as much as the said act is good and beneficial for the common wealth of
this Realm: be it therefore enacted, ordained, and established by the Queen
our Sovereign Lady, with the assent of the lords spiritual and temporal, and
the commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the
same, that the said act made in the second year of ye said king Edward the
sixth, and all words, clauses, articles, and provisions in the same, (except
these words, Ash bark, Tap worte, Meal or Culuer dong) shall be revived,
continued, stand, and endure in his full force and strength, to all intentes,
constructions, and purposes, and that no Tanner in or about the tannyng of any
Leather, shall use or exercise any other kind of stuff, but only Ash bark,
Oak bark, Tap wort, Meal lime, or Culuer dong.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the one
moytie of all such forfeytures aforenamed, shall be to our Sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty, and her highness heirs, or successors, and the other moitie to
him or them that sease or first we for the same penalties in any of the Queens
Majesty's courts of record, by action of debt, bil, complaint, information,
or otherwise wherein no wager of law, essoigne, protection, or iniunction,
shall be admitted or allowed for the defendaunt in that behalf.

An act that the carrying of Leather, Tallowe, or raw Hides out of the Realm
for marchaundize, shall be felony. The.x. Chapter.
WHERE at this present time tanned Leather, Hydes, and Tallowe, and all things
thereof made, is grown and come unto such high and excessive price, as the
like within the time of man's memory has not ben seen within this Realm, by
reason that diverse and sundry covetous and greedy persons now of late, having
more regard unto their own singular lucres and gaynes, then unto the
mayntenaunce and preservation of the common and public weal of this the
Realm of England, have contrary to the laws and statutes of this Realm,
conveyed, or caused to be conveyed out of the same, unto the parties beyond
the seas, there to be uttered by way of marchaundize, such great store and
plenty thereof, that the same Leather, Hydes, and Tallowe, is more plentiful,
and to be had better cheap there, then here within this Realm, to the great
hurt, hinderaunce, and damage of all the Queens most loving subjects.

For reformation whereof, be it enacted by the Queen our Sovereign Lady, the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same, that no person or persons,
whatsoever he or they be, stranger or Denizen, from and after the first day of
June next coming, shall ship, convey, or abbet, procure, or cause to be
shipped or conveyed, in, or to any Ship, Boat, or other vessel, in, or upon
the sea, or in, or upon other Haven, River, Creke, or place within this Realm
of England, or Wales, or other the Queens dominions, any manner of Leather
tanned or vntanned, or any salt, or vntanned Hides, or any Leather called
Backs, or sole Leather, or any Tallowe, to the intent to transport or carry the
same into any ye parties beyond the sea, there to be uttered, bartered, or
sold by way of marchaundize, upon pain that every such offender, shall be
deemed, adjudged, and taken to be a fellone for every such offense. And that
every person and persons, being after the said first day of June lawfully
attaynted, by the due order of the common law of this realm, before such as
shall have power and authority to hear and determine felonies by the common
law, shall for every such offense suffer such pains of death, and
forfeytures of goods and cattels, as he or they should have done, if he or
they had been lawfully attainted for any offense being felonye by the common
law of this Realm: And also shall forfayte to the Queens highness, her
heirs, and successors, all his or their lands, tenements, and hereditaments,
during the life of every such offendour only. And for the better execution of
this law, and for the meetyng with the offenders therein: Be it also enacted
by the authority aforesaid, that all and every offense or offenses,
committed or done by any person or persons, contrary to this act, from and
after the said first day of June next coming, shall be enquired of, tried,
determined, and judged in such County of this Realm, or other the Queens
dominions, as shall be next adioynyng to the place where any such offense
shall be first committed: any jurisdiction, authority, or usage to the contrary
in any wise, notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this
act, nor any thing therein contained, shall in any wise extend or be
interpretated to make any corruption of blood of any such offendour, or of
any heir of any such offendour, but that every heir and heirs, of every such
offendour and offenders, in any of the cases aforesaid, and also the wife of
every such offendour, shall have after the death of every such offendour or
offenders, like title, interest, benefit, profit, commodity, action, and
advantage, as they or any of them should have had, if any such offense,
conviction, or attaynder had not ben had ne made: saving to al and every person
and persons, bodies politic and corporate, their heirs and successors, and
the heirs and successors of every of them, other then all and every such
offendour and offenders, which shall be convicted or attaynted by any such
offense, all such right, title, interest, rentes, leasses, commons, profits,
commodities, aduauntages, and hereditamentes, whatsoever they be, as they or
any of them might or ought to have had, in, or to any manours, lands,
tenementes, rentes, pentions, services, hereditamentes, or other things
whatsoever, or in, or to any part or parcel thereof, to all intentes,
constructions, and purposes, as he or they should have had, if such attaynder
had never ben had ne made: anythyng in this act contained to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

Provided also, that this act, or any thing therein contained, shall not be
hurtful nor prejudicial to any Captain of any Ship in the time of war,
being in the retinue and service of the Queens Majesty, or her heirs, or
successors, nor to any owner or master of any Ship, nor to any other being
the Queens subject, and trauaylyng to any foreign parts beyond the sea,
for the having carrying, and taking with him or them in time as well of war as
of peaces of any Hydes, Leather, or Tallowe, for their necessary uses about
their ship or ships, so that it be not to be uttered beyond the seas, by any
fraud or couin, by way of marchaundise: this act or any thing therein
contained to the contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that this act, or the
effect and substance thereof, shall be openly read, published, or declared, at
every quarter Sessions, and at every Let or Lawday, by the Justices that shall
give the charge at the Sessions, and by the Steward of the Let or Lawday, in
his charge when he keeps the Let or Lawday. This act to endure from the said
first day of June, and to continue the space of five years: and from thence
unto the end of the next Parliament, after the said five years.

An Act limiting the times for laying on land Marchaundize from beyond the
seas, and touching Customs for sweet wines. The.xi. Chapter.
Most humblye the wyng, besechen your highness, your Lords, and commons in
this present Parliament assembled, that where the sums of money, paid in the
name of Customs, Subsidies, of wares and marchaundizes transported out, and
brought into this your highness Realm of England, by any merchant stranger,
or denizen, is an ancient revenue annexed and united to your imperial crown,
and has in the time of king Edward the third, and other your most noble
progenitors, amounted to great and notable sums of money, till of late years
many greedye and covetous persons, respectyng more their private gain and
commodity, then their duty and allegiaunce, or the common profit of the
Realm, have and do daily as well by conueying the same their wares and
marchaundizes out of creekes and places where no customers resident, as also by
or through the negligence or corruption of the customer, searcher, or other
officer, where they be resident, as by diverse other fraudulent, undue, and
subtle practices and devises, convey their goods and marchaundizes, as well
brought from the parties beyond the sea, as transported out of this your
Realm of England, without payment, or agreeyng for the payment of the customs
and subsidies therefore due: whereby the yerelye revenue aforesaid, is very
much empayred and diminished, to the great loss and damage of your hyghnes,
and to the great burden and charge of your loving subjects, who by occasion
thereof have of late years ben more charged with subsidies, and payment for the
supplement of the said loss and damage, then else we should have been.

That it may therefore be enacted by authority of this present Parliament,
that it shall not be lawful to or for any person or persons whatsoever, from
and after the first day of September next coming, to lade, or put, or cause
to be laden, or put, of, or from any Wharfe, Key, or other place on the land,
into any ship, vessel, Crayer, Lyghter, or Bottom, any goods, wares, or
marchaundizes whatsoever, (fyshe taken by your highness subjects, only
excepted) to be transported into any place of the parties beyond the sea, or
into the Realm of Scotland, or to take up, discharge, and lay on land, or
cause, or procure to be taken up, or discharged out of any Lighter, ship,
Crayer, vessel, or Bottom, being not in a lecke, or wrack, and laid on
land, any goods, wares, or marchaundizes whatsoever (fyshe taken by any of
your highness subjects, and salt only excepted) to be brought from any the
parties beyond the sea, or the Realm of Scotland, by way of marchaundizes,
but only in the day light, that is to say, from the first of March, until the
last of September, betwixt the sun rysyng, and the sun setting, and from
the last of September, until the first of March, between the hours of seven
in the morning, and four at the after noone, and in, and upon some such open
place, Keye, or Wharfe, places, Keys, or Wharfes, as your hyghnes, your
heirs, or successors, shall on this side the said first day of September
therefore assign and appoint by virtue of your highness commission or
commissions, within your graces port of London, Southampton, Bristowe,
Westchester, Newcastell, and the suburbs of the same, and every of them, and
in some open place, Key, Wharfe, places, Keys, or Wharfes, in all other Ports,
Creekes, Havens, or Rodes, (Hul only excepted) where a Customer, Comptroller,
and searcher, of such Ports, Havens, Creekes, or Rodes, and every of them, or
the servants of any of them, have by the space often years last past ben
accustomably resident, or hereafter shall be resident, upon pain of forfayture
of all such goods, wares, or marchaundizes so laden and discharged contrary
to the true meaning of this act, or the value thereof.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no manner of
person or persons, after the said day, shall receive or take into any ship,
Crayer, or other vessel, any goods, wares, or marchaundizes (except before
excepted) to be transported into any place beyond the sea, or into the Realm
of Scotland, by way of marchaundize, nor shall discharge and lay on land,
out of any shypye, Crayer, or other vessel, any goods, wares, or
marchaundize (except before excepted) being brought from any place beyond the
sea, or out of the Realm of Scotland, by way of marchaundize, in any other
place or places, or at any other hours or times, then is before limited and
appointed, upon pain that the owner and owners, master and masters, or other
person or persons, which shall take charge or guydyng of any such ship,
Crayer, or vessel, or of the merchants goods, during and for that voyage,
shall forfaite and lose for every such offense. C. pound, of lawful money of
England.

And be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, that no master Shypper,
or Purser, or other person or persons taking charge of the voyage, or of the
merchants goods, shall after the said day receive or take into any Ship,
Crayer, or other vessel, any goods, wares, or marchaundize (except before
excepted) to be carried or transported into any of the parts beyond the sea,
or into the Realm of Scotland, before he shall have signified to the Customer
of the port where he ladeth, and other officers there, in ye open custom
house, if any such be there, or else where, the said officers, their deputies or
servants, or any of them, be or shall be usually resident, that he entendeth to
lade, and to what place he entendeth to pass, nor shall after his or their
full lading depart out of the Port, Creekes, or stream where he shall so
lade, before he do in like manner signify unto the Customer, and other officers
as is aforesaid, of his lading, and what marchaunts and other persons shall
have ladyng with him, or in his ship, crayer, vessel, or botome: and further
truly do answer to such questions as shall be ministered to him or them by the
customer or other officer, concerning such wares and marchaundizes as he shall
have laden, being examined upon his or their oath, or otherwise in the open
custom house, or otherwise, as is aforesaid, upon pain to forfaite for every
such default, not truly aduertisyng nor aunsweryng, as is aforesaid, a
hundred pound.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no owner, master,
purser, or other person, taking charge of any ship, crayer, vessel, or
botome, wherein any goods, wares, or marchaundizes (except before excepted)
shall be laden and brought, from any the parties beyond the sea, or the Realm
of Scotland, shall, after the said day, discharge into any lighter, or botome,
and lay on land, or procure, cause, or willingly suffer to be discharged into
any lyghter or botome, and to be laid on land, out of such ship, crayer,
vessel, or botome, any goods, wares, or marchaundize whatsoever, before such
owner, master, purser, or other person or persons, taking charge of the
ship, crayer, botome, or vessel, or the merchants goods, for that voyage,
shall have signified and declared to the customer, or other officer of the port,
haven, or creek, where he arriueth, the names of every of the merchants, or
laders, and shall have truly answered to such questions and interogatories,
touching or concerning such goods, wares, or marchaundize, as shall be then
laden in any such ship, vessel, or botome, as shall be to him ministered by
such customer or other officer, openly in the custom house, or in such other
places as is aforesaid, upon his or their oath, if need so require, upon pain
that every master, purser, or other person or persons, taking charge of such
ship, crayer, or other vessel for that voyage, shall forfayte and lose for
every such default, not truly aduertisyng nor aunswering as is aforesaid, an
hundredth pound.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and after
the said day, no person, denizen, ne stranger, do take upon him to enter, or
do, or cause to be entered into the books of any customer, or other officer or
officers of any port or haven within this Realm, or his or their deputy or
deputies, servant or servants, any manner goods, wares, or marchaundize
whatsoever, coming or brought into your highness Realm, from any the parts
beyond the sea, or from the Realm of Scotland, or going, or to be transported
out of the same your highness Realm, into any the parts beyond the sea, or
into the Realm of Scotland, in the name or names of any other person or
persons, then the very true owner or owners of the same goods, wares, or
marchaundizes, being not sold, bargayned, or contracted for, to or with any
person or persons, before such enter, or before the arrival of such goods,
wares, or marchaundize, in the parts beyond the sea, upon pain of forfayture
of the value of the goods so entered.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any
wharfinger, crane keeper, searcher, lighter man, weighter, or other officer,
parteynyng to the subsidy, custom, or custom house, do at any time after the
said day, consent or know any offense or thing to be committed or done
contrary to the true meaning of this act, or any article therein contained,
and do not within one month next after knowledge thereof had, disclose the
same to the chief customer or other officer of the port, where or within
whose office or charge any such offense shall be committed or done, or else to the
Lord Treasurer, Chancellor, under Treasurer, or one of the Barons of the
Exchequer, or the attorney general for the time being, shall for every such
concealment, or not disclosing such offense, as is aforesaid, forfaite and
lose a hundredth pound of good and lawful money of England.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the customer of
Hull shall have a servant or deputy continually resident at the city of
York, and every other customer, comptroller, and searcher of every port,
shall from and after the day aforesaid assigned and appointed to and in every
of the places above mentioned, and in all and every port, creek, or Road,
where the servant, or any of them have been continually resident by the space
of ten years, or hereafter shall be, as is aforesaid, one able and sufficient
deputy, or servant, at the least, and that as well all and every of the
customers, comptrollers, and searchers, as all and every his or their deputy
and deputies, servant and servants, shall from time to time, do his and
their diligent attendaunce, at the hours, times, and places before appointed,
as well in the custom house, as else where, as it shall be most expedient and
convenient, for the speedy dispatche of the merchant, and his goods, wares,
and marchaundize, and for the due execution of this Act, in such things as
to him or them shall apparteyne, without concealment or consentyng to any
thing or things which may be to the hurt or damage of your hyghnes, your
heirs, or successors, in the just aunsweryng of your hyghnes due customs and
subsidies, upon pain that every such customer, comptroller, and searcher,
shall forfayte and lose for every offense by him or them committed or done, his
or their several office or offices, and an hundredth pound of lawful money of
England: the moitie of all which forfayture shall be to your hyghnes, your
heirs, and successors, and the other moitie to him or them that will sue for
the same, in any your highness courts, wherein no essoigne, protection, wager
of law, or iniunction shall be admitted and allowed.

And where of late years there has been much greater quantity of sweet wines
brought into this Realm, then in time paste has been accustomed, which ben
also brought from the same place where the wine commonly called Maluesey is
brought, and is of the same nature of grape, and nevertheless, either by
negligence, ignorance, or corruption of the officers, there has not ben such
custom and subsidy received for the same, to the use of your highness, and
your progenitors, as is due, and ought of very right to be paid for such
sweet wines, coming through the strayghtes, commonly called the strayghtes of
Marrocke, otherwise, Mallegaye, to the great loss and hynderaunce of your
highness, and the burden of us your loving subjects.

For the auoydyng of all ambiguities and doubts, and to the intent the officers
may more certaynely know what they ought to receive for such kind and nature
of marchaundize: be it enacted and declared by this present act, and by the
authority aforesaid, that like custom and subsidy is of very right to be
paid, and shall from henceforth be paid, for such sweet wines as is
aforesaid, as is and has been accustomed to be paid for Malueseyes: any
negligence, none payment, usage, or custom to the contrary in any wise,
notwithstanding. Saving to all and every Lord Marcher, and other person and
persons whatsoever, body politic and corporate, all and every such right,
title, and interest, as they or any of them have, and of right ought to have in
the payment or having of any fraunchise, liberty, custom, and subsidy, or
any of them: any thing in this act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that it shall be lawful to ship, lade, and
transport into the ports beyond the sea, al manner of corn, and grain, out
of the Counties of Northfolke and Suffolk, and either of them, at such places
as heretofore has been accustomed, and between the hours in this act
appointed, when the same corn and grain shall not exceed the several prises
mentioned in the statute made in the fifth and syxth year of our late
Sovereign Lord king Edward the sixth, entitled, An act against regrators,
forestallers, and engrossers, the customs and subsidies therefore due, being
well and truly paid: any thing in this act, or any other act or statute to
the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this act, nor any thing therein contained, be not
prejudicial or hurtful to the Isle of Anglesey, the shyres of Carnaruon, and
Flint, in Northwales: but that the inhabitauntes thereof, and every of them,
may receive, lade, and discharge, according to their old ancient uses,
customs, or liberties, granted to them, or any of their predecessors, by the
late king of famous memory king Henry the eight, or any other his progenitors:
so that they, and every of them, pay the customs and subsidies that shall be
due, and discharge and lode within the times and hours before mentioned: any
thing in this present act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

An Act against the deceiptfull vsyng of lynnen Cloth. The.xii. Chapter.
WHere certain evil disposed and deceiptfull persons, vsyng to bye and
ingrosse into their hands great store of linen cloth, do use to cast the
pieces of cloth over a beam or piece of timber, made for their purpose, and do
by sundry devises rack, stretche, and draw the same both of length and
breadth, and that done, do then with batteldores, pieces of timber and wood,
and other things, sore beat the same, ever casting thereupon certain
deceiptful liquors, mingled with chalk, and other like things, whereby the said
cloth is not duly made to seem much finer and thicker to the eye then it is
in deed, but also the thredes thereof be so losed and made weak, that
after.iii. or.iiii. washinges, it will scarcely hold together, to the great
disceipt, hinderaunce, and loss of the subjects of this Realm: be it
therefore enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that if any
person or persons, shall hereafter wyllingly use, or cause to be used the
aforesaid deceytes, or any other act or acts, mean or means, to, in, or
with any kind of linen cloth, whereby the same shall be deceitful or worse,
to, and for the good use thereof: that then the said cloth shall be forfaited,
and thoffendour therein to be punished by one months imprisonment at the
least, and shall pay such fine as shall be assessed, for his or their offense or
offenses, by ye Justices, before whom he or they shall be condemned according to
the tenor of this act.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that al and every the
Justices of oyer and determiner, and Justices of assyses in all their sessions,
and all Justices of peace in every County and place of this Realm, or.iii. of
them at the least, whereof one to be of the Quorum, shall have full power and
authority to enquire, hear, and determine the offenses aforesaid, in their
sessions, by information, indictment, or upon the trauerse of any
presentment, or indictment, found before the said Justices, or any of them.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, shall at the next sessions of the peace (after the said seaser, to be
kept within the shire or place where the seaser was made, or before two
Justices of peace, whereof one to be of the Quoru^) make due information of the
offense, and of the seaser of the said cloth, or else shall procure the
offenders to be thereof indicted, at the said next sessions after the said
seaser, and shall also be bound before the said Justices by recognisaunce or
obligation, to the use of the Queens Majesty, her heirs, and successors, in
such form as the said Justices, or any of them, shall think meet for the
greatness of the matter, and to pursue the same matter with effect, and to give
evidence, as of right apparteyneth, and also to pay and give the moytye of all
that he or they shall so recover and receive, to the Sheriff, or other
accomptaunt; to the use of the Queens Majesty, her heirs, and successors:
and the one half of all the forfaytures and fynes of and for the premises to
be unto the Queens Majesty, her heirs, and successors, and the other moitie
to him or them that shall make information, or procure inditementes of and for
the premises, and shall follow the same with effect.

And further be it ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
Justices before whom any such offense shall be tried, shall certify the same by
their estreate into the Exchequer, at the least yearly at Michaelmas, as they
be bound to do other their estreates, and upon that certificate, the Barons of
the Exchequer to have full power and authority to make process for so much
thereof as by this estatute shall apparteyne to the Queens Majesty, in like
manner and form as they only do for any other fines and amerciamentes so
certified before them.

An Act for the shipping in English Botomes. The.xiii. Chapter.
WHere by diverse statutes made in the time of the Queens Majesty's most noble
progenitors, it has been enacted and provided, that no person borne within the
Realm of England, or being of the legiaunce of the prince of the said
Realm, or any the dominions of the same, should ship any manner of marchaundize
either out of the realm, or into the same, but only in a ship or botome whereof
the said prince, or some other of their subjects, were owners, possessioners,
proprietaries, and masters, and the mariners of the same vessel, for the more
part, to be also their subjects, upon diverse pains and penalties, as in the
said statutes more plainly appears. Since the making of which said statutes,
other foreign princes fyndyng them selves agreeued with the said several
acts, as thynkyng that the same were made to the hurt and prejudice of their
country and navy, have made like penal laws against such as should ship out
of their countries in any other vessels then of their several countries and
dominions: by reason whereof there has not only grown great displeasure
betwixt the foreign princes and the kings of this realm, but also the
merchants have been sore grieved and endomaged.

For reformation whereof, and for increase of continuance of amity, be it
enacted, that the several acts made in the fyfth year of king Richard the
second, the third Chapter, and in the fourth year of the late king of famous
memory king Henry the seventh, entitled, Of wine and tholouze ode, shall be from
henceforth clearly void and of none effect, And nevertheless for avoiding of
great disceyt practiced, and now a days used by sundry subjects borne within
this Realm of England, and dominions of the same, which enter in the
customers books, wares and marchaundize of aliens borne, in their own name,
whereby the Queens majesty is defrauded in her customs and subsidies, to the
great decay of the ancient revenues of the crown: be it enacted by the
authority of this present parliament, that all and every person and persons,
being owner or owners of any goods, wares, or marchaundizes, which after the
first day of January next ensuyng the sessions of this present Parliament,
shall in time of peace, and when there is no restraynt made of English
ships, embarke, ship, lade, or discharge by way of marchaundize, any
wares, or marchaundize (mastes, Raffe, Pitch, Tar, and Corn only excepted)
out of, or into any ship, bark, hoye, vessel, or botome, whereof our said
sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs, or successors, or some of her or
their subjects of this Realm, or the dominions of the same, be not
possessioners and proprietaries, and the masters under God, and the mariners
of the same ship or ships, for the most part, be not subjects of our said
Sovereign Lady, her heirs, and successors, shall answer, yield, and pay
to the use of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs, and successors,
such custom and subsidy, for such wares and marchaundizes so shipped, laden,
or discharged, as is aforesaid, rate and rate like, as strangers and aliens
borne out of the obeysaunce of our said Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty,
do, and ought to pay for wares and marchaundizes of like nature and kind.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no Hoy, or Plate,
whereof any English subject or subjects, is, be, or shall be owner or owners, at
any time after the first day of January aforesaid, from any port, creek, or
place of this said Realm of England, or any of the dominions of the same,
shall trauers or cross the seas, in, to, or for any of the ports beyond the
seas, with any wares, goods, or marchaundize, upon pain that the said owner
or owners shall forfaite and lose the same Hoy or Plate, with all and every the
munition, tacklyng, and other necessaries parteynyng thereunto: whereof the one
moitie to be to the use and behoof of the Queens said Majesty, her heirs,
and successors, and the other moitie to the person or persons which will sue
for the same, by byll, playnt, action, or information, in any her highness
courts at Westminster: in which case no wager of law, protection, or
essoigne shall be admitted.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that it shall be lawful to the marchaunts,
commonly called marchaunts adventurers, and marchaunts of the Staple, and every
of them, at their several Fleetes, or shippings of cloth, and woll, and every
of them, from and out of the River of Thames, only being made, twyse in one
year at the most, to embarke, ship and lade any goods, wares or marchaundize
in, or to any ship, vessel, or Bottom, belongyng or apparteining to any
stranger or alien borne, so long and at such time as there be not ships,
vessels, or Bottomes belonging to the Queens highness, her heirs, or
successors, or any of her subjects, in the said River of Thames, sufficient
in number, and apt and meet for the sure and safe conueyaunce of the wares
and marchaundize into the parts of Flaunders, Holland, Zelande, or Brabant, or
any of them, without paying any greater or more custom and subsidy, that
English men do, and ought to pay: any thing in this act to the contrary,
notwithstanding. This act to continue and stand in force for the space of
five years only next immediately following this present session of Parliament,
and from thence to the end of the Parliament then next following.

Provided, that forasmuch as the merchants of the City of Bristow, have
sustained of late great losses at the sea by the enemies, by reason of taking
of all their best ships, with much substance, so that they be not of
ability to provide sufficient shyps and vessels of their own within the
time limited in this present act: that they for lack of their own ships,
or any other vessels of the Queens dominions, within.xl. miles of the City
of Bristowe, may lode and embarke their own wares and marchaundizes in
strangers Bottomes, without paying any other custom, then for wares and
marchaundizes laden in English Bottomes: this act or any thing therein
contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

An Act for the continuance of the making of VVollen Cloth, in diverse Towns
in the County of Essex. The.xiiii. Chapter.
WHereas by a certain Act of Parliament begun of Westminster, the twenty day
of Ianuarye, in the fourth and fyfth years of the reigns of the late king
Philip and Queen Marie, and there continued till the seventh day of March, in
the said fourth and fifth years of the reigns of the said late king and
Queen, amongst other things it was enacted, that from and after the first day
of May then next following, no person or persons whatsoever, shall use or
exercise the feate or mystery of making, weauyng or rowyng of woollen clothes,
long or short, or Karseyes, pinned whites, or plain streightes, to the intent
to put the same to sale, but only in a market town where cloth has
continually ben used to be made by the space of.x. years then last past, or in
a City, Borough, or town corporate, upon pain of forfayture for every such
woollen cloth or Karsey made, wouen, or rowed, out of such city, borough,
town corporate, or market town five pounds.

And where also it is provided in the said act, that it shall be lawful to
any person, then vsyng or exercisyng the feate or mystery of making, weauing,
or rowyng of cloth or Karsey, to inhabit or dwell where he then did dwell and
there to use the making, weauyng, or rowyng of cloth or Karsey, as he has
heretofore: any thing in the said act, notwithstanding.

And where it is further provided by the said act, that it shall be lawful to
all and every person or persons, which then did, or after that time should
inhabit or dwell in any of the shyres of Northwales, or Southwales, Gheshyre,
or Kancashyre, Westmerlande, Gumberlande, Northumberlande, Byshoprike of
Durham, Corn, Suffolk, Kent, the Town of Goddelmine in the County of
Surrey, or Yorkeshyre, being not within.xii. miles of the City of York, or in
any of the Towns or Villages near adioynyng to the water of Strowde, in the
County of Gloucester, where clothes has been usually made by the space of
twenty years then last past, and having ben apprentice to the occupation of
cloth making, or used the same by the space of seven years, to set up, use, and
exercise the feate or mystery of making, weauing, or rowing of woollen cloth,
out of a city, borough, or market town, as before that time they might have
done: any thing in the said act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as the towns or villages of Bockyng, Westbarfolde, Dedham, and
Cockshall in the County of Essex, be fair large Towns, and as well planted
for cloth making, as the said town of Goddelmine, or better, and few towns
in this Realm better planted for that purpose, and have berrinhabited of a
long time with clothmakers, which have made, and daily do make good and true
cloth, to the great common weal of the Country there, and nothing
prejudicial to, or for the common wealth of this Realm: be it therefore
ordained and enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that it
shall be lawful to al and every such person and persons, which now do inhabit
or dwell, or hereafter shall dwell in the said towns or villages of Bockyng,
Westbarfolde, Cockshall, and Dedham, or in any of them, now vsyng or
exercisyng, or that hereafter shall use or exercise the feate or mystery of
making, weauing, or rowing of cloth or Karsey, by the space of seven years at
the least, or have been prentice thereto by the said space of seven years, to
inhabit and dwell in the said towns or villages of Bockyng, Westbarfolde,
Cockshall, and Dedham, and in every or any of them, and to use the making,
weauing, or rowyng of cloth or Karsey, as before this time they might have
done, if the said act had never ben made: any thing in the said act to the
contrary thereof made, or any other act, statute, or law heretofore made, or
hereafter to be made to the contrary hereof in any wise, notwithstanding.

An Act that timber shall not be felled to make coals for the burning of
iron. The.xv. Chapter.
FOR the auoydyng of destruction and wastyng of timber, be it enacted by our
sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, the Lords spiritual and temporal, and
the commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the
same, that no person or persons hereafter shall convert or employ, or cause to
be converted or employed to coal or other fuel, for the making of iron, any
timber tree or timber trees, of oak, beeche, or ash, or of any part thereof, of
the breadth of one foot square at the stub, and growing within.xiiii. miles of
the sea, or of any part of ye rivers of Thames, Seuerene, Wye, Humbre, Dee,
Tine, Teese, Trent, or any other river, creek, or stream, by the which
carriage is commonly used by boat, or other vessel, to any part of the sea,
upon pain of forfayture for every such tree, or any part thereof, so employed
or converted to coal, or other fuel, for the making of iron as is
aforesaid.xl.s. of lawful money of England; ye one half of all which
forfaytures to be to our sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty, and to her
heirs, and successors, and the other moytie to him or them that will sue for
the same, by original writ, byl, plaint, or information, wherein no essoigne,
protection, iniunction, or wager of law shall be admitted or allowed.

Provided always, that this act shall not extend to the county of Sussex,
nor to ye Weyld of Kent, nor to any the parishes of Charlewoode Newdigate, and
Lighe, in the Weylde of the county of Surrey: this acre to begin and take
effect from and after the feast of the Nativity of S. John Baptist next
coming, after this session of Parliament.

An act to continue the act made against rebellious assembles. Chapter.xvj.
WHERE in the Parliament holden at Westminster the xxiiii. day of October, in
the first year of the reign of the late Queen Marie, sister unto the Queens
highness that now is, there was one act and statute made against unlawful and
rebellious assembles, to endure and stand in force unto thend of the next
Parliament then following, as by the same act more plainly does appear. Which
said act and statute in the Parliament holden at Westminster the.xii. day of
November, in the first and second years of the reign of the late king Philip
and Queen Marie, amongst other things was then and there continued unto the
last day of the next Parliament: and after, at the next Parliament begun and
holden at Westminster the.xxi. day of October in the ii. and.iii. years of the
said late king Philip and Queen Marie, the said act and statute amongst
other things was also further continued to stand in force, until the last
day of the next Parliament then following: and also at the next Parliament
holden at Westminster the.xx. day of January in the.iiii. and.v. years of the
reigns of the said late king and Queen, the said act and statute amongst
other things was likewise further continued to stand and remain in force
until the last day of the next Parliament then following, which is this present
Parliament, and so the said act and statute by the acts of continuance
aforesaid, does stand in force but only unto the last day of this present
Parliament.

And forasmuch as the said act and statute, during all the time aforesaid, has been proved by experience to be a very good and beneficial law, and meet to be
continued and kept in force, as well for the preservation of the peace, as also
for the common wealth, and quietness of this Realm: be it therefore enacted
by authority of this present Parliament, that the said act and statute, and
every branch, clause, and article therein contained, shall stand, remain,
continue, and be in full force and strength, to all intentes and purposes, for
and during the natural life of the Queens most excellent Majesty that now
is (which almighty God long preserve and continue) and to thend of the
Parliament then next following: and that the said act and statute, and the
words and sentences mentioned and contained in the said act, shall extend and
be to the Queens highness that now is, as fully and amply as ever the same
did extend to the said late Queen Marie.

An act for the preservation of spawne and frye of Fish. Chapter.xvij.
FOr the preservation hereafter of spawne, frye, and young breed of Eles,
Samons, Pikes, and of all other fyshe, which heretofore has been much
destroyed in rivers and streams, salt and fresh within this Realm, in so much
that diverse places they feed swine and dogs with the frye and spawne of
fish, and otherwise (lamentable and horrible to be reported) destroy the same,
to the great hynderaunce and decay of the common wealth: Be it therefore enacted
by the Queens most excellent Majesty, the Lords spiritual and temporal,
and the commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, that no person or persons, or what estate, degree, or condition so
ever he or they be, from and after the first day of June next coming, with any
manner of net, we will, butte, tayning, kepper, lyme, crele, raw, fagnet,
trolnet, trymenet, trimbote, stalbote, weblister, seur, lammet, or with any
devise or engine made of hear, woll, line, or canuas, or shall use any heling
net, or trimle boat, or by any other devise, enginne, cawtell, ways or means
whatsoever, heretofore made or devised, or hereafter to be made or divised,
shall take and kill any young broad, spawne, or frye of Eles, Samon, Pike, or
Pickerell, or of any other fish, in any fludgate, pipe at the tail of any
myll, wear, or in any streites, streams, brokes, rivers, salt or fresh
within this Realm of England, Wales, Barwike, or the marches thereof, nor shall
from and after the first day of June next coming by any of the ways and
means aforesaid, or otherwise, in any river or place above specified, take
and kill any Samons, or Trowtes, not being in season, being kepper Samons, or
kepper Trowtes, shedder Samons, or shedder Trowtes.

And be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, that no person or
persons, of what estate, degree, or condition he or they shall be of, from and
after the said first day of June, by any of the means aforesaid, in any of
the rivers or places above named, shall take and kill any pike or pickerell,
not being in length.x. inches fish or more, nor any Samon not being in
length.xvi. inches fish and more, nor any Trowte, not being in length.viii.
inches or more, nor any Barbell, nor being in length.xii. inches or more.

And to the intent the said young frye, broad, or spawne, may be preserved
according to the true meaning hereof, be it further enacted by thaucthoritie
aforesaid, that no manner of person or persons, from and after the first day of
June next coming, shall fish or take fish with any manner of net, tramell,
keep, wore, hiuie, crele, or by any other ingin, devise, ways or means
whatsoever, in any river, or other places above mentioned, but only with net,
or tramell, whereof every meshe or mask shall be two inches and a half broad,
anglyng excepted.

Provided nevertheless, and be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that in
all such places where smeltes, loches, minneys, bulheades, gudgions, or eles
has been used to be taken and killed, that in all such places, it shall be lawful
only for thetaking of smeltes, loches, mineis, gudgions and eles, to use such
nets, lepes, and other ingines, devises, ways and means, as heretofore has been used for the taking of the same: so that such person or persons using or
occupiyng such nets, or other ingines, as is last before mentioned, do not take,
kill, or destroy any other fish, with the said nets, or ingines contrary
to the tenor and form above in this estatute contained.

And be it further enacted, that if any person or persons, after the aforesaid
day limited in this present act, offend in any of the points before rehearsed,
contrary to the tenor, form, and purpose of any part of the same: that then
every such person and persons so offendyng, shall lose and forfayte for every
time of his or their offense, the sum of.xx. s. ^ the fish so taken
contrary to the tenor hereof, and also the unlawful nets, ingines, devises,
and instruments whatsoever they be, wherewith or whereby such offense shall
fortune to be made, committed, or done.

And to the intent that a perfect execution may be had of this present act, be it
further ordained by authority aforesaid, that the lord Admiral of England,
and the Mayor of the City of London, for the time being, and all and every
other person and persons bodies politic and corporate, which by grant or
other lawful ways or means, lawfully have, or ought to have any conservation
or preservation, of any rivers, streams, or water, or punishments and
corrections of offenses committed in any of them, shall have full power and
authority by virtue of this act, to enquire of all the offenses to be
committed and done contrary to the effect and true meaning of this act,
within his or their such lawful rule, government, jurisdiction, and
conseruacie, by the oaths of.xii. men or more, and to hear and determine all
and every the same offenses, committed within his or their such jurisdiction,
conseruacie, rule, and government. And that all such pains and forfaytures,
as shall rise or grow by the reason of any such conviction for any the
offenses aforesaid, shall be to the use of every of the said person and
persons, being no body politic or corporate, nor head of any body politic
or corporate, before whom such conviction, as is aforesaid, shall be had, and
to the use of every such body politic and corporate, as heretofore have
lawfully had any fynes, forfaytures, and amerciamentes, for any offense
unlawfully committed or done, in any such their jurisdiction, or conseruacies,
upon conviction had before the head of any such body politic or corporate.
And that also the Lord of every leete within this Realm of England, and
Wales, or the dominions of the same, shall have full power and authority to
enquire of all thoffences contrary to the purport, tenor, and form of this
estatute, within the precinct of their said leete: such inquiry to be had, in
manner and form, and after such sort as common amerciamentes, or other
things, inquirable in their court leete, have been lawefully used and
accustomed to be had and made. And that upon every such presentme^t had in any
court or leete, by the oath of twelve men or more, as is aforesaid, of any
offense or offenses, made contrary to the tenor of this estatute: that then
all such forfayture above in this estatute limited and appointed for such
offense, shall be unto the lord of the said leete for the time being, to his
own use for ever, and shall be leuyed in such manner and form, as amerciament
for affrayes committed within the precinct of such leete have been used and
accustomed to be levied. And if any leete, after the said first day of June,
be kept within this Realm of England, or Wales, or the dominions thereof, and
the Steward of the said leete, for the time being, or other for him, do not
charge the Jury sworn in such leete to inquire of all the offenses done
within the precinct of the said leete, contrary to the tenor and form of this
estatute: that then the Steward of the said leete, to leese and
forfayte.xl.s. the one moitie of which forfaytures shall be to the Queens
Majesty, her heirs, and successors, and the other moitie to him that will sue
for the same. And if any Jury sworn in any leete, and being charged to
enquire of the offenses committed within the precinct of that leete, do
wylfully and willyngly conceal and make default in presentment, or do not
present the offense and offenders: that then it shall be lawful to the
steward, or bailey of the leete, or his or their deputy for the time being, to
empanell one other Jury within the said leete, and to enquire of such
concealment, default, and none presentment, and that upon such concealment,
default, or none presentment found and presented, every of the said Jurors
which so did conceal make default, or not present, shall loose and forfayte
for every such offense.xx.s. to the lord of the said leete, the same to be
levied in manner and form as is abouesayde, for the other offenses limited and
expressed.

And it is further enacted by authority aforesaid, that if the offenses
above mentioned, touching the taking, kylling, or destroying of fish, or frye
and Spawne, be not presented at the leete where they shall be committed, within
one year next after the offense committed, that the Justices of peace in their
sessions, Justices of Oyer and determiner, and Justices of assise in their
several circuites, shall have full power and authority to inquire thereof,
and to hear and determine all the offenses committed contrary to the tenor of
this estatute.

Saving always to al and every person and persons, bodies politic and
corporate, and every of them, all such right, title, interest, claim,
privilege, and conservation, and inquiry, and punishment of and for any the
offenses aforesaid, as they or any of them lawfully have and enjoy, or of right
ought to have and enjoy, by any manner of means: any thing in this act to the
contrary, notwithstanding. This act to endure to the end of the next
Parliament.

Provided always, that this act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend unto the fyshyng of the river or water of Tweede, nor to any river or
water whereof the Queens Majesty is answered of any yearly rent or profit,
nor to the owners, fermours and occupyers of the rivers of Vske, or Wye, in the
County of Monmouth, for any fish hereafter to be taken in any the rivers or
waters before mentioned and expressed, but that it may be lawful at al
seasonable time and times hereafter, for such as have or shall have any manner
of interest therein, to take and fish the said rivers and waters, in such
manner and form as heretofore has been used and accustomed, not using any net
or enginne, to the intent wylllingly to take, kill, and destroy the spawne,
breed, or frye, breedyng any kind of fish, within the said several rivers
or waters: this act or any thing therein mentioned or contained to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

An act for the continuance of certain Statutes. Chapter.xviij.
WHere in the Parliament begun and holden at London the.iii. day of November,
in the.xxi. year of the reign of our most dread Sovereign Lord of most
famous memory king Henry theight, and from thence adiourned to Westminster,
and there holden and continued by diverse prorogations unto the dissolution
thereof, one act was made for the true wyndyng of Wolles, and one other act
was there made to restrain kyllyng of waynelinges, bullockes, stires, and
heyfers, being under the age of two years: which said several acts were then
made to endure and continue unto the next Parliament, as by the said several
acts more plainly appears. And where also in the same Parliament one other
act was made and established for attayntes to be sued for the punishment of
perjury upon untrue verdites: which act last before rehearsed was then made
and ordained to continue and endure to the last day of the next Parliament, as
by the same act more plainly appears. And where also in the Parliament begun
and holden at Westminster the.viii. day of June, in the.xxviii. year of the
reign of our said most dread sovereign Lord king Henry the eight, and there
continued and kept until the dissolution thereof, it was ordained, and enacted,
that all and singular the said acts above remembered, and every of them,
should continue and endure in their force and strength, and also be observed
and kept until the last day of the next Parliament, as by the same act,
amongst other things therein contained, more plainly appears. And where also
in the Parliament begun and holde^ at Westminster the.xxviii. day of April, in
the.xxxi. year of ye reign of our said late most dread sovereign lord king
Henry theight, and there continued until the.xxviii. day of June then next
following, it was ordained and enacted by thaucthoritie of the same Parliament,
that all and singular the said several acts above remembered, and every of
them, and all articles, clauses, and provisions in them and every of them
contained, should continue and endure in their force and strength, and also be
observed and kept until the last day of the next Parliament, as by the same
act amongst other things therein contained, more plainly appears. And where
in the Parliament holde^ at Westminster, in the.xxxv. year of the reign of our
said late sovereign Lord king Henry the eight, one act was made for the
preservation of woods, to endure for.vii. years then next following, and from
thence to thend of the next Parliament, as by the same act more plainly it does
and may appear. And where also at the parliament holden at Westminster in
the.xxxvii. year of the reign of the said late king Henry theight, and there
continued and kept until the dissolution thereof, it was ordained and enacted,
that all and singular the said acts above remembered, and every of them (except
the said act made for the preservation of woods as is aforesaid) should
continue and endure in their force and strength, and also be observed and kept
until the last day of the next Parliament then next following, as by the same
act amongst other things therein contained more plainly appears. And where
also at the session of the Parliament ended at Westminster the.xiiii. day of
March, in the third year of the reign of our late sovereign lord king
Edward the sixth, one act was made for the true currying of leather, which
act was made to endure to the end of the next Parliament, as by the same act
more plainly appears. And where also at the session of a Parliament ended at
Westminster the first day of February, in the.iiii. year of the reign of our
said late sovereign lord king Edward the sixth, one act was then and there
made concerning the buying of rother beasts, and also one other act was then
and there made touching the buying and selling of butter and cheese: which said
several acts where then and there made to endure and continue unto the end of
the next Parlialiament, as by the same several acts more at large it does and
may appear. And where also at the session of a Parliament by prorogation
holden at Westminster the.xxiii. day of January, in the fifth year of the
reign of our said late sovereign lord king Edward the sixth, one other act
was then and there made against regratours and forestallers, to endure to the
end of the next Parliament: al and singular which said acts above mentioned,
together with the said act for the preservation of woods, at a Parliament
holden at Westminster the first day of March, in the.vii. year the reign of
our said late sovereign lord king Edward the sixth, and there continued and
dissolved the last day of the same month of March, and al clauses, articles,
and provisions in them and every of them contained, were there revived and
continued to stand in their force and strength until the last day of the next
Parliament. And where also at the session of a Parliament holden by prorogation
at Westminster ye.xxiiii. day of October, in the first year of the reign of
the late Queen Marie, sister to the Queens highness that now is, and there
continued and kept until the dissolution thereof, all and singular the acts
above mentioned, and before that time continued at sundry Parliamentes, as is
aforesaid, and all clauses, articles, and provisions in them and every of
them contained, were there reuyued and continued to stand in their force and
strength unto the last day of the next Parliament. And where also at a
Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the.xii. day of November, in the
first and second years of the reigns of the late king Philip and Queen
Marie, and there continued and kept until the dissolution of the same, being
the.xvi. day of January then next ensuyng, all and singular the acts above
remembered, that were before that time continued at sundry Parliamentes, as is
aforesaid, and all clauses, articles, and provisions in them and every of them
contained, were by the authority of the said Parliament there revived and
continued to stand in their force and strength unto the last day of the next
Parliament. And where also at a Parliament begun and holden at Westminster
the.xxi. day of October, in the second and third years of the reigns of the
said late king Philip and Queen Marie, and there continued until the
dissolution of the same, being the.ix. day of December then next ensuing, one
act was then and there made for the keeping of Milche kyne and for the breading
and rearyng of calves, and one other act for the reedifying of decayed houses
of husbandrye, and for the increase of tyllage, the said two several acts to
endure till the last day of the next Parliament, as by the same more at large
does appear.

And forasmuch as all and singular the said several acts above mentioned, be
good and beneficial for the common wealth of this Realm: be it therefore
enacted, ordained, and established by the Queens most excellent Majesty, with
the assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that all and
singular the said several acts and estatutes above mentioned and rehearsed,
and every of them, and all clauses, articles, and provisions in them and every
of them contained, shall be revived, continued, stand, and endure in their full
force and strength, to all intentes, constructions and purposes, and shall be
observed and kept in all things until the last day of the next Parliament.
And where in the Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the.xxi. day of
October, in the second and third years of the reigns of the said late king
Philip and Queen Marie, and there continues and kept until the.ix. day of
September then next ensuing, one act was then and there made, entitled, An
act for the relief of the poor, and to endure to the latter end of the first
session of the next Parliament. Forasmuch as the said act is good and
beneficial to the common wealth of this Realm: be it therefore enacted,
ordained, and established by the authority of this present Parliament, that
the said act last above mentioned and rehearsed, and all clauses, articles,
and provisions in the same contained, shall be revived, continued, stand, and
endure in full force and strength, to all intentes and purposes, and shall be
observed and kept in all things until the last day of the next Parliament.

An act of a subsidy of Tonnage and Pondage. Chapter.xix.
IN their most humble wise shown unto your most excellent Majesty, your
poor and obedient subjects and commons in his your present Parliament
assembled, that where as well your noble graundfather, of worthy memory, king
Henry the seventh; the most victorous and myghtie prince king Henry the eight
your most dear father, the late prince of worthy memory king Edward the
sixte, your most entirely beloved brother, and our late sovereign Lady
Queen Marie, your most dear sister, as other your right noble and famous
progenitors, kings of this your Realm of England, time out of mind, have
had and enjoyed unto them by authority of parliament, for the defense of the
same now your Realm, and the keeping and sauegarde of the seas, for the
intercourse or marchaundize, safely to come into, and to pass out of the same,
certain sums of money, named Subsidies, of all manner of goods and
marchaundize, coming in or going out of the same your Realm. And forasmuch
as we your said poor commons, undoubtedly and most assuredly do trust and
have sure confidence in your Majesty's good favor and will toward us your
said poor commons, in and for the keeping and sure defendyng of the seas,
against all persons, intendyng or that shall intend the disturbaunce of us
your said commons in the intercourse and the inuadyng of this your Realm, to
our modestation, inquietyng, and loss which at any time cannot be borne
without the great excess, and intolerable costs, charges, and expenses of
your Majesty, which is not (when need shall require in such cases) to be
lacked at any time. But rather we your said commons, wishyng that such
furniture of all things may be had in redynesse from time to time, when
necessity shall require, for the spedie indilayed provision and help for the
suppressing of such inconveniences, disturbances, and invasions, humbly desire
your most excellent Majesty, benignely and favorably to take, accept, and
receive these our poor grauntes hereafter ensuyng, as granted of true
hearts, and good wylles, which we bear unto your highness, toward your
said great costs, charges and expenses, which may be expended and laid out
by your Majesty for the causes aforesaid, when need shall require, as the
first fruits of our good wylles and hearts toward your highness, although
the same do, or hereafter shall nothing in effect counteruayle the same your
great charges, nor yet we your said poor commons able fully to gratify your
highness by any means: yet nevertheless we your said poor commons, by
thaduise and consent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, in this your
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, to the intent
aforesaid, give and grant to you our supreme liege Lady and sovereign, one
subsidy called Tonnage, that is to say, of every tun of wine coming, or
that shall or is come into this your realm, by way of marchaundize, the sum
of.iii.s. and so after the rate. And of every tun of sweet wine, alwell
maluesey as other, that shall or is come into the same your Realm, by every or
any merchant alien, as well by the merchants of Haunse, and Almanie, as by
any other merchant stranger, of what nation so ever he be.iii.s. and so after
the rate over and above the.iii.s. before granted. And of every aume of rennish
wine, coming or that shall or is come into this your Realm, by way of
marchaundize, by every or any merchant denizen, or alien, of what nation
soever he be.xii.d. And also one other subsidy called Pondage, that is to say,
of all manner of goods and marchaundizes, of every merchant denizen and alien,
whatsoever he be, carried and to be carried out of this your said Realm, or
brought or to be brought into the same, by way of marchaundize of the value of
every.xx.s. of the same goods and marchaundize.xii.d. and so after the rate.
And of every.xx.s. value of tynne and pewter vessel, carried out of this your
Realm, by any and every merchant alien.xii.d. over and above the.xii.d.
aforesaid. Except and always foreprised out of this grant of subsidy of
Pondage, al manner of woollen Cloth, made or wrought, or that shall be made and
wrought within this your Realm of England, and by every or any merchant
denizen, and not borne alien, carried or to be carried out of this your said
Realm: and all manner of wolles, molfelles, and hydes, and backs of leather,
also carried or to be carried out of this your Realm: and all wynes, and all
manner of fresh fish, and beshall, coming, or that is or shall come into the
same your realm. And further we your said poor commons, by the advice,
assent, and aucthoritfe aforesaid, give and grant unto you our said sovereign
liege Lady and sovereign, for the causes aforesaid, one other subsidy of al
manner of wolle, wolfelles, and leather, carried or to be carried out of this your
Realm, in manner and form following: That is to say of every merchant
denizen, of and for every sack of woll.xxxiii.s.iiii.d. and for every.xxxl.
wolfels.xxxiii.s.iiii.d. and of and for every last of hydes and backs of every
such merchant denizen.iii.l.vi.s.viii.d. And of every merchant stranger, not
horn your liegeman, as well those that be made denizens, as hereafter shall be
made by letters patentes, or otherwise, as all other merchant strangers, of
and for every sack of wol.iii li. vi.s. viii.d. and of and for every.ccxl.
wolfels.iii. li. vi.s. viii.d. and also for every last of hides and backs.iii.
li. xiii.s. iiii.d. And so of all the said wols, wolfelles, hydes, and backs,
and every of them, after the rate that so is or shall be carried, to have, take,
enjoy, and perceive the subsidies aforesaid, and every of them, and every part
and parcel of them, to your highness, from the.xvi. day of November last
past, during your life natural.

And further we your said poor commons, most humbly desire your Majesty,
that it may be enacted by your highness, by the advice and assent of the Lords
aforesaid, and us your said commons, and by the aforesaid authority of this
present Parliament assembled, that the gifts and graunts aforesaid, shall be
good and effectual according to the true meaning of the same. And that it may
be further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any wines, goods,
marchaundize, woll, wolfels, hides, and backs of leather aforesaid, or other
things before specified, whereof the subsidies aforesaid, or any of them, is
or shall be hereafter due, shall at any time hereafter during ye time aforesaid,
be shipped, or put into any boat, crayer, ship, or vessel, to the intent to
be carried into the parties of beyond the seas, or else be brought from the
parties of beyond the seas into any port, haven, creek, or other place of this
your Realm by way of marchaundize, and there laid on land (the subsidies
aforesaid of the premises due, or to be due, by the reason of this grant not
paid) or the collector of the same subsidy, or his deputy, with and by the
consent, knowledge, and agreement of the co^ptroller and surueyor, or one of
them at ye least, not agreed with for the same in the custom house, according
to the true meaning and intent of these aforesaid graunts and every of them:
that then from the said.xvi. day of November last past, and not before, all the
said wines; goods, marchaundize, wols, wolfels, hydes, and backs, and other
the premises aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof, so shipped, or else
put into any boats, crayer, or other vessel aforesaid, to the intent
aforesaid, or brought into this Realm, and there laid on land, as is also
aforesaid, shall be and remain forfait to your highness, during the time
aforesaid, the one moytie or the value thereof to your hyghnes, and the other
moitie to him or them that shall sease the sante, or sue for ye same. And that
it may please your highness, that all merchants, as well denizens as
strangers, coming into this your Realm, be well and honestly entreated and
demeaned, for such things as subsidy by this act is granted for, as they were
in ye time of your said noble progenitors, without oppression to the^ to be
done, paying the subsidies aforesaid.

And further that it be enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any
goods, marchaundizes, wolles, wolfelles, or leather aforesaid or any part
thereof, of any merchant denizen, naturally borne your liege man, which has
or shall pass out of this your said Realm, after the said.xvi. day of
November last past, during the term of this gift and grant, has or shall
happen to be taken with enemies or pirates upon the sea, or peryshed by
infortune in any ship or shyps that shall happen to be taken, or perished
within the time of the fayde grant, whereof the subsidies aforesaid, or any of
them, to your hyghnes due, or to be due, is or shall be in form aforesaid duly
paid or agreed for, without fraud or collusion, and such loss or losses as
ben before rehearsed, be found and proved before the Treasurer of England, or
the chief baron of your Exchequer for the time being, by the examination of
the same merchants if they be alive, or of their executours or
administratours if they be dead, or two true credible persons sworn, or other
reasonable witness and proves sworn, witnessing the same marchaundizes so to
be lost or perished: that then the same merchants denizens that were or
shall be owners of the aforesaid goods, marchaundizes, wol, wolfels, hides, or
other marchaundizes aforesaid, a shall be so perished or lost, if they be on
live, or their executours and administratours, if they be dead, and every of
them, by force and virtue of this act when them lyketh, during the said term,
shall or may newly ship as much wol, wolfels, hides, or other goods and
marchaundizes in the same port or ports in the which the same woll, wolfelles,
hydes, or other goods and marchaundizes aforesaid so lost and perished, were
or shall be shipped, without any, of the subsidies aforesaid now granted to be
had or paid therefore to your highness in any wise: and that al such
profits of the premises so to be lost or perished, be certified into your
chauncerie by your said treasurer or chief Baron, there to remain of record.
And after such certificat made, the chaunceler of England, or the Lord Keeper
of your great seal for the time being, shall make and deliver unto the said
merchants, their executours, or administratours, or any of them, or to their
attorney or atturneys in that behalf, or any of them, as many and such writtes
and warrauntes to be directed as well to the collectours of the subsidies
aforesaid, or any or every of them, for the time being, as to the treasurer
and Barons of your Exchequer for the time being shall be thought requisite and
needful, for the said merchants, their executours, or administratours, or
their attorney or atturneys, or any of them, or the said Collectours, or any
of them, to have for the obtaynyng as well of the shipping, as of the alowaunce
thereof.

And further that every merchant denizen that shall ship hereafter any woll,
wolfelles, hides, or any other goods and marchaundize in any Carricke, or
Galley, shall pay to your Majesty during the time aforesaid, all manner of
customs, and all the subsidies aforesaid, as any alien borne out of this your
Realm.

God save Queen.
An act of a subsidy and two Fifteenes and Tenth by the Temporaltie. The.xx.
Chapter.
THE care which we do perceive your Majesty has, most noble and redoubted
Sovereign, to reduce this Realm, and the imperial Crown thereof, now
lately so sore shaken, so impouerished, so infeabled and weakened into the
former estate, strength and glory, does make us not only to rejoice much in
the great bounteousnesse of almyghtie God, who has so marvelously, and beyond
all worldly expectation, preserved your Majesty, in these late difficult and
dangerous times: but also to study and bend all our wits and force of
understanding, how we may like loving and obedient subjects, follow our head,
in this so noble and so necessary an enterprise. And consydering with
ourselves, that the decay has been, besides many other things, especially in
these three. First, wasting of Treasure, abandonyng of strength, and in
diminishing of the ancient authority of your imperial Crown.

We do most earnestly and faithfully promise to your highness, that there
shall lack no good will, travel nor force on our behalf, to the redress of
all this: but we shall be ready with heart, will, strength, body, lives and
goods, not only to recover again that which is thus diminished: but if
need be, to recover farther (as far as right, and the will and pleasure of God
shall suffer) the old dignity and renownie of this Realm. The time and place
whereof does not rest in us, but as most reason is, in your most noble
Majesty, with the advice of your honorable Counsel. Nevertheless since it
does so manifestly appear to us all, what inestimable wastyng, and consumption
of the Treasure and ancient Revenues of this Realm has been of late days,
and what great new charges, and intolerable expenses, your highness is
forced now to sustain, by reason of the decay and loss of percell of your
ancient Crown. So being not ignorant that no worthy enterprise, no noble
attempt, no not so much as the preservation of a strong and puisaunt estate,
may be without some mass of Treasure presentlye to be had, and redye against
all occurrentes.

Therefore we your most obedient and loving subjects, the lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembed, to show
our wylling hearts and good minds, upon mature consultation had, have
condiscended and agreed with one voice, and most entire affections, to make
your highness at this time a present, not such in deed as in our affections we
do wish it, and as we know most certaynely ought to be. But yet of your
accustomed clemency which you do show to all men, we humbly on our knees pray
your highness not to reject it, but to accept our good wylles and hearty
desires therein, and that this our small gift may be by your highness, the
lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament
assembled, and by the authority of the same enacted.

And be it enacted that your highness toward the said great costs, and
inestimable charges, shall have by authority of this present Parliament, two
whole Fifteenes, and Tenthes, to be paid, taken, and levied of the moveable
goods, cattelles, and other things usual to such Fifteenes and Tenthes, to
be contributorie and chargeable within the Shires, Cities, Boroughes, Towns,
and other places of this your Majesty's Realm, in manner and form aforetime
used. Except the sum of twelve thousand pounds, thereof fully to be
deduced, that is to say.vi.M. pounds of either of the said whole Fifteenes and
Tenthes, of the sum that one whole Fifteen and Tenth attaineth unto, in
relief, comfort, and discharge of ye poor Towns, Cities, and Boroughes of
this your said Realm, wasted, desolate, or destroyed, or over greatly
impouerished, after such rate as was and has before this time ben had and made
unto every Shyre, and to be divided in such manner and form as heretofore for
one whole Fifteen and Tenth has been had and divided. And the said two whole
Fifteenes and Tenthes (thexceptions, and deductions aforesaid, thereupon had
deducted, and allowed) to be paid in manner and form following: that is to say,
the first whole Fifteen and Tenth, except before excepted, to be paid to your
highness in the receipt of of your highness Exchequer, before the tenth day of
November next coming. And the said.ii.xv. and.x. except before excepted, to be
paid to your highness in the receipt of your Exchequer before the.x. day of
November, in the year of our Lord God. M.D.lx.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the knights
elected and returned, of, and for the shyres within this realm for this
present parliament, citizens of cities, and Burgeses of boroghes and towns,
where Collectours have been used to be named and appointed for ye collection of
any Fifteen and Tenth before this time granted, shall name and appoint yearly
before the last day of August, in either of the said two years, sufficient and
able persons for the collection of the said Fifteenes and Tenthes, in every of
the said shires, cities, borowes and towns, the said persons the having
lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, in his or their own right of an
estate of enheritaunce, of the yearly value of ten pounds, or in goods
worth a hundredth pound at the least. And also such person or persons so by them
to be named and appointed, for the collection of either of the said Fifteenes
and Tenthes, shall be by them severally appointed, and allotted into Hundredes,
Rapes, Wapentakes, Cities, Boroughes, and Towns. And also the said persons so
named and appointed for the collection of the same Fifteenes and Tenthes,
shall be charged and chargeable upon his or their account or accomptes, in the
Exchequer to be made, with all such sum or sums of money, as the Hundredes,
Rapes, Wapentakes, Cities, Boroughes, and Towns, where he or they shall so
happen to be appointed, amount unto, and of no more sum or sums. And upon
the payment of such sums of money, as he or they shall be charged with, shall be
discharged, and have his and their Quietus est, the non accompting or non
payment of any other his fellows, or the insufficiency of them, or any of them
notwithstanding. And the names and surnames of every of the said Collectours,
for the said Fifteenes and Tenthes, during either of the said two years
together, with the place allotted to their collection and charge, the said
Knights, Citezins, and Burgesses for the Shires, Cities, and Boroughes,
whereunto they be elected, named, and returned, shall certify before the
Queen in her Chauncerie, before the.xiii. day of October, in every of the same
two years, according to the tenor of this act. And if default of any such
certifying be had or made in form as is aforesaid, then the Lord
Chauncelour of England, or keeper of the great seal for the time being, shall
immediately after, name and appoint Collectours, for the Collection of either of
the said Fifteenes and Tenthes, in manner and form as the said Knights of
the Shyre, Citizens of Cities, and Burgeses of Boroughes, should have done,
and as aforetime have been used. The which said Collectours and every of them,
shall have like alowaunce upon their accomptes, for their fees, wages, and
rewards for the collection of the said Fifteenes and Tenthes, in as large
manner and form as any Collectour or Collectours, of Fifteenes and Tenthes,
have had at any season in time past. And that the Barons of the Queens
Exchequer for the time being, shall and may from time to time, awarde such
process for the spedye payment thereof, against the Collectour and Collectours
for the same, as by their discretions shall be thought convenient.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, that the said Lord Chauncelour, or keeper of the great seal for
the time being Knights of the Shyres, Citizens of Cities, and Burgesses of
Boroughes, Towns and other places, having authority by this present act, to
name and nominate the said Collectours, of, or for the said Fifteenes and
Tenthes, shall upon their nomination and election, had, and made, take by
authority of this present parliament, sufficient recognisaunces, or by
obligation of every person so by them to be named, to be bound to the Queens
Maistie, in the double sum of the sum of their Collection, and to be
endorsed upon such condition, that if the said Collector or Collectors do
truly content and pay to the use of ye Queens highness, in her receipt of
thexchequer, before the tenth day of November, in every of the said two years,
so much of the sum of money alloted and appointed to his collection, as the
same Collectour shall have collected and gathered, and do likewise after the
said thenth day of ye month of November, in every of the said two years,
content and pay to the Queens Majesty's use, at the same receipt, ye residue
of his collection and charge within one month next after such time, as he shall
have gathered and collected the same residue that then ye said recognisance or
obligation to be void, or else to stand in his full strength and virtue, which
recognisance or obligation, so taken, the said knights of the Shyre, Citizens
and Burgesses, and every of them, taking any such recognisaunces or obligation,
shall certify and deliver to the lord Treasourer, and Barons of the same
Exchequer, before the said tenth day of November, in every of the said years,
upon pain of forfeyture often pound to the queens highness, for every
recognisaunce or obligation, so to be taken, and not certified. And that every
such Collectour upon request to him made, shall make and knowledge the same
recognisaunce or obligation accordingly* upon like pain and forfeyture of ten
pound to the Queen, for his refusal thereof. And that ye Treasurer or Barons
of thexchequer, upon the payment of the same collection, or at the said days,
shall cancel and deliver the said recognisaunce or obligation to the said
Collectour or Collectours, without any fee or reward, to be paid to any
person for the same.

And furthermore, for the great and weighty consyderations aforesaid, We the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament
assembled, do by our like assent and authority of this Parliament, give and
grant to your hyghnes, our said Sovereign Lady, the Queens Majesty, your
heirs and successors, one entire subsidy, to be rated, taxed levied, and
paid at two several paymentes, of every person, spiritual and temporal, of
what estate, or degree he or they be, according to the tenor of this act, in
manner and form following, that is to say, as well of every person borne within
this Realm of England, Wales, or other the Queens dominions, as of al and
every Fraternity, Guild, Corporation, Mystery, Brotherhead, and Cominaltie,
corporated, or not corporated within this realm of England, Wales, or other
the Queens domonions, being worth.v.li. for every pound, as well in coin and
the value of every pound that every such person, fraternite, guylde,
corporation, mystery, brotherhead, comminaltie, corporate, or not corporate,
has of his or their own, or any other to his or their use, as also stock of
marchaundizes, all manner of corn and blades, householde stuff, and of all
other goods moveable, as well within the Realm as without, and of all such
sums of money as to him or them is, or shall be owyng, whereof he or they trust
in his or their conscience surely to be paid (except and out of the premises
deducted) such sums of money as he or they owe, and in his or their
consciences intends truly to pay, and except also thapparrell of such
persons, their wives and children belongyng to their own bodies (saving
Jewels, gold, silver, stone, and pearl) shall pay to and for the first
payment of the said subsidy.xx.d. of every pound, and to and for the second
payment of the said subsidy.xii.d. of every pound. And also every alien and
stranger borne out of the Queens obeysaunce, as well denizen as others,
inhabiting within this Realm, of every pound that he or they have in coin,
and the value of every pound in plate, corn, grain, marchandizes, household
stuff, or other goods, jewels, cattels, moveable or immovable, as is
aforsayde, as well within this Realm as without, and of all sums of money to
him or them owyng, whereof he or they trust in his or their consciences to be
paid (except and of the same premises deducted, every such sum or sums
of money, which he or they do owe, and in his or their conscience or
consciences intend truly to pay) shall pay of and fore every pound, to and
for the first payment of the said subsidy.iii.s.iiii.d. and to and for the
second payment of the said subsidy.ii.s. of every pound. And also that every
alien and stranger, borne out of the Queens dominions, being denizen or not
denizen, not being contributorie to any the rates abouesayde, shall pay to and
for the first payment of the said subsidy.iiii.d. and to and for the second
payment of the said subsidy other.iiii.d. for every pole. And the master, or
he or she with whom the same alien is, or shall be abiding at the time of the
taxation or taxations thereof to be charged with the same for lack of payment
thereof.

AND be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every person
borne under the Queens obeisaunce, and every corporation fraternity, guylde,
mystery, brotherhead, and comminaltie corporate, or not corporate, for every
pound that every of the same person, and every corporation, fraternity,
guylde, mystery, brotherheade, and comminaltie, corporate or not corporate, or
any other to his or their use, has in fee simple, fee tail, for term of
life, term of years, by execution, wardeshippe, or by copy of court roll,
of, and in any Honors, Castles, Manours, Lands, Tenementes, Rentes,
services, hereditamentes, annuities, fees, corrodies, or other yerelye profits
of the yerelye value of.xx.s. as well within ancient demean and other places
privileged, or else where, and so vpwardes shall pay to and for the first
payment of the said subdie.ii.s.viii.d. of and for every pound, and to and
for the second payment of the said subsidy xvi.d. of and for every pound.
And every alien borne out of the Queens obeysaunce, in such case, to pay at
the first of the said paymentes v.s.iiii.d. of every pound, and at the second
payment.ii.s.viii.d. of and for every pound. And that all sums presented and
chargeable by this act either for goods, and debtes, or either of them, or
for lands and tenementes, and other the premises as is in this act
contained, shall be at either of the said paymentes, set and taxed after the
rate and portion, according to the true meaning of this act (lands and
tenementes chargeable to the dismes of the Clergy, and yerelye wages due to
servants for their yearly service, other then the Queens servants, taking
yerelye wages of five pounds or above, only excepted and foreprised.) And
that al plate, coin, jewels, goods, debtes, and cattelles personelles, being
in the rule and custody of any person and persons to the use of any
corporation, fraternity, guylde, mystery, brotherhead, or any comminaltie,
being corporate or not corporate, be and shall be rated, set, and charged by
reason of this act, as the value certified by the presenters of that
certificate, to be sworn of every pound in goods and debtes, as is
abouesayde. And of every pound in lands, tenementes, annuities, fees,
corrodyes, or other yearly profits as is abouesayde: and the sums that are
before rehearsed, set, and taxed, to be leuyed and taken of them that shall
have such goods in custody, or otherwise charged for lands as is before
rehearsed. And the same person or persons, and body corporate, by authority
of this act shall be discharged against him or them that shall or ought to have
the same, at the time of the payment or delivery thereof, or at his otherwise
departure from the custody or possession of the same. Except and always
foreprised from the charge and assessement of this subsidy, all goods,
cattelles, jewels, and ornaments of Churches and Chapels, which have been
ordained and used in Churches or Chapels, for the honor and service of
almyghtie God.

AND the first payment of the said subsidy, shall be by the authority
aforesaid, taxed, assessed, and rated according to this act, in every Shire,
Riding, Lathe, Wapentake, Rape, City, Borough, Town, and every other place
within this realm of England and Wales, and other the Queens dominions,
before the last day of April next coming. And the secon^d payment of the
said subsidy, shall be by thaucthoritie aforesaid, taxed, assessed, and rated,
before the.xx. day of January next coming. And ye particular sums of every
Shire, Riding, Borough, Town, and other places aforesaid, with the particular
names of such as are chargeable for and to the first payment of the said
subsidy, to be taxed and set by the Commissioners to the same limited, or two
of them at the least, with the names of the high Collectours, and in the same
form shall be certifed into the Queens Exchequer, before the last day of May
next coming. And the particular sums of every Shyre, Rydyng, Borough,
Town, and other places aforesaid, with the particular names of such as are
chargeable for and to the second payment of the said subsidy, to be taxed and
set by the Commissioners to the same to be limited, or two of them at the
least, with the names of the high Collectours, and in the same form shall be
certified into the Queens Exchequer, before the.xx. day of February, which
shall be in the year of our Lord God.M.D.lix. and the said sums in manner and
form aforesaid, to be taxed for the first payment of the said subsidy,
shall be paid into the Queens receipt of her Exchequer aforesaid, to the use
of our said sovereign Lady, before the.xxiiii. day of June next coming, and
the said sums in manner and form aforesaid, to be taxed for the second
payment of the said subsidy, shall be paid into the receipte aforesaid, to the
use aforesaid, before the first day of March, which shall be in the year of our
Lord God. M.D.lir. And the sum abouesayde, of and for the said subsidy,
shall be taxed, set, asked, and demanded, taken, gathered, levied, and paid to
thuse of our said sovereign Lady, her heirs, and successors, in form
abouesaid, as well within the liberties, fraunchises, sanctuaries, ancient
demean, and other whatsoever place exe^pt or not exempt, as without. Except
such Shyres, places, and persons as shall be foreprised in and by this present
act, any grant, charter, prescription, use, or liberty, by reason of any
letters patentes or other privilege, prescription, alowaunce, of the same or
whatsoever other matter of discharge heretofore to the contrary made, granted,
used, or obtained, notwithstanding.

AND it is further enacted by the authority of this present parliament, that
every such person, as well such as be borne under the Queens obeysaunce, as
every other person, strange borne, denizen, or not denizen, inhabiting within
this realm, or within Wales, or other the Queens dominions, which at the time
of the said assessinges, or taxations, or of either of them, to be had or made,
shall be out of this realm and out of Wales, and have goods or cattels, lands
or tenementes, fees or annuities, or other profits within this Realm, or in
Wales, shall be charged and chargeable for the same, by the certificate of the
inhabitauntes, or the parties where such goods, cattelles, lands, tenements,
or other the premises then shall be, or in such other place where such person or
his factour, deputy, or attorney, shall have his most resort unto, within this
realm, or in Wales, in like manner as if the said person were, or had been at
the time of the said assessing within this realm. And yt every person abiding
or dwelling within this realm or without this Realm shall be charged or
chargeable to the same subsidy granted by this act, according and after the
rate of such yearly substance or value of lands and tenementes, goods,
cattels, and other the premises, as every person so to be charged shall be set
at, in the time of the said assessyng or taxation upon him to be made, and in
none otherwise.

AND further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for thassessyng
and orderyng of the said subsidy to be duly had, the Lord Chancellor of
England, or the keeper of the great Seal, the the Lord Treasourer of England,
the Lord Steward of the Queens Majesty's household, the Lord president of the
Queens honorable counsel, and the Lord privy Seal for the time being, or
two them at the least, whereof the Lord Chancellor of England, or keeper of
the great Seal for the time being to be one, shall and may name and appoint,
of, and for every Shyre, and Riding, and other places, as well within this
Realm, as in Wales, and other the Queens dominions, and also of and for every
City and Town, being a County in it self, and of, and for the Isle of
Wight, such certain number of persons of every of the same Shyres, Rydynges,
Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Towns, and Isle of Wight, and every other
place, and other thinhabitaunts of the same, to be Commissioners of, and within
the same whereof they be inhabitauntes. And also, of and for the honorable
household of the Queens Majesty, in what Shyre or other places the said
household shall happen then to be. And the Lord Chancellor or keeper of the
great Seal, and other with him before named, in like manner may name and
appoynte of every other such Borough and Town corporate, as well in England as
in Wales, and other the Queens dominions, as they shall think
requisite.vi.v.iiii.iii. or.ii. of the head officers, and other sad honest
inhabitauntes of every of the said Cities, Boroughes, and Towns corporate,
according to the number and multitude of the people being in the same, the
which persons if any such be thereunto named, of the said inhabitauntes of
the said Boroughes and Towns corporate, not being Counties in them selves,
shall be joined and put in as Commissioners, with the persons named for such
Shyres and Rydynges, as the said Boroughes and Towns corporate, not being
Counties in them selves, be set and have their being, which persons so named
for and of the said Boroughes and Towns corporate, not being Counties, by
reason of their dwelling in the same, shall no take upon them, ne none of them,
to put any part of their commission in execution, for the premises out of the
said Boroughes and Towns corpoporate, wherein they being so named, only for
the same be dwelling. And also no to execute the said commission within the
Borough or Town corporat where they be so dwelling, but at such days and
times as the said other Commissioners, for the same Shire and Ryding shall
thereunto limit and appoint within the same Borough, or Town corporate, not
being County corporate, whereof they so be, and not out of such Borough or
Town, and in that manner to be ayding and assisting with the said other
Commissioners, in and for the good executing of theffect of the said
Commission, upon pain of every of the said Commissioners so named for every
such City, Borough, and Town corporate, not being a County, to make such
fine, as ye said other Commissionrs, in the commission of, and for the said
Shyre or Riding so named, or three of them at the least, shall by their
discretions, set and certify into the queens Exchequer, there to be levied to
the use of ye queens majesty, in like manner, as such or like sums had been
set and rated upon every such person for the said subsidy. The which
Commissioners so named of, and for the said Cities Boroughes, and Towns, not
being Counties, and only put in the said commission, by reason of their
dwelling in the same, shall not have any part of the portion, of the fees and
rewards of the Commissioners, and their Clerks, in this act afterward
specified. And the Lord Chauncelour of England, or keeper of the great seal
for the time being, shall make and dyrect out of the Court of Chauncerie, under
the great seal, several commissions, that is to say, To every Shyre, Ridyng;
Lath, Wapentake, Rape, City, Town, Borough, Isle, and household, unto such
person and persons, as by his discretion and other with him aforenamed and
aypoynted, in like manner and form as is before rehearsed, shall be thought
sufficient for the sessing and leuying of the said subsidy, in all Shires and
places, according to the true meaning of this act, which Commission for the
first payment of the said subsidy, shall be dyrected and delivered to the said
Commissioners, or to one of them, before the first day of April next coming.
And the Commission for the second payment of the said subsidy, shall be
dyrected and delivered to the said Commissioners, or one of them, before the
first day of January, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, a thousand,
five hundred, fifty and nine. And to every of the said Commissions, ten
scedules containing in them, the tenor of this act, shall be affiled. By which
commission the Commissioners in every such Commission, named according to this
act, and as many of them, as shall be appointed by the said Commission, shall
have full power and authority, to put theffect of the same commission in
execution. And that by authority of this act, after such Commission to them
directed, they may by their assentes and agreementes sever them selves for the
recution of their commission, in Hundredes, Lathes, Wards, Rapes, Wapentakes,
Towns, Parishes, and other places, within the limits of their said
commission, in such form as to them shall seem expedient to be ordered, and
between them to be co^moned and agreed, according to the tenor and effect of
the commission to them therein dyrected, upon which seueraunce every person of
this present Parliament, that shall be Commissioner shall be assigned in the
hundred where he dwells.

Provided always, that no person, be or shall be compelled to be any
Commissioner, to and for the execution of this present act, but only in the
Shyre, where he dwells and inhabiteth. And that any person being assigned to
the contrary thereof, in any wise shall not be compelled to put in execution
the effect of this act, or any part thereof. And it is also enacted by the
authority of this present Parliament, that the Commissioners and every of
them, which shall be named, limited, and appointed according to this act, to be
Commissioners in every such Shyre, Rydyng, Lath, Wapentake, Rape, City, Town,
Borough, Isle, and the said householde, or any other place, and none other,
shall truly, effectually, and diligently for their part, execute theffect of
this present act, according to the tenor thereof in every behalf, and none
otherwise, by any other means, without omission, favor, dread, malice, or
any other thing to be attempted, and done by them, or any of them to the
contrary thereof. And the said Commissioners, and as many of them as shall be
appointed by the said Commission, and none other, for thexecution of the said
commission and act, shall for the taxation of the said first payment of the
said subsidy, before the sixth day of April, next coming: and for the
taxation of the said second payment of the said Subsidy, shall before the
sixth day of January, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, a thousand,
five hundred, fifty and nine, by virtue of the commissions, delivered unto
them in form abouesayde: direct their several or joint precept
unto.viii.vii.vi.v. iiii. or.iii. or mo, as for the number of thinhabitants,
shall be requisite of the most substantial, discrete, and honest persons,
inhabitances, to be named by the said Commissioners, or by as many of them as
shall be appointed by the said Commission, of, and in Hundredes, Lathes, Rapes,
Wapentakes, Wards, Parishes, Towns, and other places, as well within
Liberties, Franchises, ancient demeanes, places exempted, and Sanctuaries, as
without, within the limits of the Shyres, Ridinges, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes,
Cities, Towns, Boroughes, or Isle aforesaid, and other places, within the
limits of their commission, and to ye Constables, Subconstables, Bayliffes, and
other like officers, or ministers of every of ye said Hu^dreds, Towns,
Wards, Lathes, Wape^takes, Parishes, and other places beforesaid, as to ye
said commisioners, and every number of them, or unto three, or two of them by
their discretion in division shall seem expedient, as by the manner and use of ye
parties shall be requisite, straightly by ye same precept, charging and
commaundyng the same inhabitants, constables, and other officers aforesaid,
to whom such precept shall be so directed to appear in their proper persons,
before ye said Commissioners, or such number of them as they shall divide them
selves, according to ye tenor of the said commission, at certain days and
places by the said commissioners or any number of them as is aforesaid, within
cities, boroughes, or towns corporate, or without, in any other place as is
aforesaid, by their discretions shall be limited thereunto to do and accomplish
all that to them on the parties of the queens Majesty, shall be enjoined
touching this act. Commaundyng further by ye same precept, that he to whose
hands such precept shall come, shall show or deliver the same to the other
inhabitauntes or officers named in the said precept, and that none of them
fail to accomplish the same, upon pain of forty shillinges, to be
forfeyted to the Queens Majesty.

And it is further ordained by the authority of this present parliament, that
the said day and place prefixed and limited in the said precept, every of the
Commisioners then being in the shyre, and having no sufficient excuse for his
absence, at ye day and place prefixed for that part whereunto he was limited,
shall appear in his proper person, and there the same commisioners being
present, or as many as shall be appointed by ye queens Majesty's commission,
shall call or cause to be called before them the said inhabitauntes and officers
to whom they have directed their said precepts; and which had in commandments
there to appear by ye said precept of the said Commisioners, and if any
person so warned make default, unless he then be let by sickness or lawful
excuse, and that let them be witnessed by ye oaths of two credible persons, or
if any appearing refuse to be sworn in form following, to forfeit to the
Queens Majesty.xl.s. And so at every time appointed by the said Commissioners
for the same taxation, unto such time the number of every such persons have
appeared and certified in form under written, and every of them so making
default, or refusing to be sworn, to forfeyte to the Queens Majesty.xl.s.
and upon the same appearaunce had, one of the most substanciall inhabitauntes
or officer so being warned, and appearing before the said Commissioners, shall be
sworn upon a book openly before ye Commissioners in form following. I shall
truly enquire with my fellows that shall be charged with me, of the Hundred,
Wapentake, Ward, Town, or other place of the best and most so alue of the
substance of every person dwelling and abydyng within the limits of the place
that I and my fellows shall be charged with, and of other which shall have his or
their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable with any sum
of money by this act of this said subsidy, and of all other articles that I
shall be charged with touching the said act, and according to the intent of the
same, and thereupon as nere as it may be, or shall come to my knowledge, truly
to present and certify before you the names, surnames, and the best and
vttermoste substance, and values of every of them, as well of lands,
tenementes, and other hereditaments, possessions, and profits, as of goods,
cattels, debtes, and other things, chargeable by the said act, without any
conceilement, love, favor, affection, dread, fear, or malice, as nere as God
will give me grace, so help me God, and the holy contents of this book. And
every other person that shall appear there by ye same precepts, from time to
time, shall make like oath, and upon the oath so taken as is aforesaid, by the
inhabitants and officers of every Hundredes, Ward, Wapentake, Town, or other
place, the said Commisioners shall openly there read or cause to be read unto
them the said rates, and openly declare theffect of their charge unto them, in
what manner and form they ought and should make their certificate, according
to the rates and sums thereof abouesayd. And of al manner of persons, as well of
aliens and strangers, denizens or not denizens, inhabiting within this Realm,
as of such persons as be borne under ye Queens obeisance, chargeable to this
act. And of the possessions, goods, and cattelles of Fraternities, Guyldes,
Corporations, Brotherheades, Mysteries, and Comminalties, and other as is
abouesayde. And of persons being in the parties of beyond the seas, having
goods or cattelles, lands, or Tenementes within this Realm, as is aforesaid.
And of al goods, being in the custody of any person or persons, to the use of
any other, as is abouesayde, by the which information and showing, the said
persons should have such plain knowledge of the true intent of this present
act, and of the manner of their certificate, that the same persons shall have no
reasonable cause to excuse them by ignorance, and after such oath, and the
statute of the said subsidy, and the manner of the said certificate to be
made in writing, containing the names and surnames of every person, and whether
he be borne without the queens obeysaunce, or within, and the best value of
every person, in every degree, as well of yearly value of lands, and
tenementes, and of such like possession and profits, as ye value of goods,
and cattels, debtes, and every thing to their certificat requisite and
necessary to them declared, the said commissioners there being, shall by their
discretions appoint and limit unto the said persons, another day and place to
appear before the said commissioners, and charging the said persons, that they
in the mean time shall make diligent inquiry by all ways and means of the
premises and then and there, every of them, upon pain of forfeyture of.xl.s.
to the queens Majesty, to appear at the said new prefixed day and place,
there to certify unto the said Commisioners in writing, according to their
said charge, and according to the true intent of the said grant of subsidy,
and as to them in manner aforesaid, has been declared and showed by the
Commissioners, at which day and place so to them prefixed, if any of the said
persons make dafault or appear and refuse to make the said certificate, that
then every of them so offending, to forfayt to ye Queens Majesty.xl.s. except
only a reasonable excuse of his default, by reason of sickness, or otherwise by
the oaths of two credible persons, there witnessed be had. And of such as
appear ready to make certificate as is aforesaid, the said Commissioners there
being, shall take and receive the same certificate, and every part thereof, and
the names, values, and substance of every person so certified, and if the same
Commissioners see cause reasonable, they shall examine the said presenters
thereof. And thereupon the said Commissioners, at the said days and place by
their agreement amongst them selves, shall from time to time, openly there
prefixe a day, at a certain place or places, within the limits of their
commission, by their discretion, for their further proceeding to the said
assessing of the same subsidy, and thereupon at the said day of the said
certificate, as is aforesaid taken, the same Commissioners shall make their
precept or precepted to the Constables, Subconstable, Baylyffes, or other
officers of such Hundredes, Wapentakes, Towns, or other places aforesaid, as
the same Commissioners shall be of, comprising and containing in the same
precept, the names, and surnames of all persons presented before them in the
said certificate, of whom if the said Commissioners, or as many of them, as
shall be thereunto appointed by the Queens commission, shall then have vehement
suspect to be of more greater value or substance in lands, goods, cattelles,
or sums of money owing to them, or other substance beforesayde, then upon
such person or persons shall be certified, the same Commissioners shall make
their precept or precepts, directed to the Constable, Baylyffes, or other
officers, commaundyng the same Constable, Bailiffes, or other officers, to whom
such precept shall be directed to warn such persons whose names shall be
comprised in the said precept, at their mansions, or to their persons, that the
same persons named in such precepts, and every of them, shall personally
appear before the said Commissioners, at the same new prefixed day and place
there to be examined by all ways and means, (other then by corporal oath) by
the said Commissioners, of their greatest substance, and best value, and of
all and every sums of money owyng to them, and other whatsoever matter
concerning the premises, or any of them according to this act, at which day
and place so prefixed, the said Commissioners, then and there being, or as
many of them as shall be thereunto appointed, by the Queens commission, shall
cause to be called the said persons, whose names shall be comprised in the said
precept, as is beforesayde, for their examination. And if any of those persons
which should be warned, as is beforesayde, to be examined, which at any time
after the warnyng, and before the prefixed day, shall be within such place,
where he may have knowledge of his said appearaunce to be made, make default,
and appear not, unless a reasonable cause, or else a reasonable excuse by the
oaths of two credible persons, before the said Commissioners, be truly
alleged for his discharge, that then every of them, so making default, to be
taxed and charged to the Queens Majesty, with and at the double sums of the
rate that he should or ought to have been set at, for and after the best value
of his land or substance, upon him certified, if he had appeared by the
discretion of the Commissioners there being, which Commissioners shall travel
with every of the other persons, so then and there appearing, whose names
shall be expressed in the said precept or precepts, and in whom any vehement
suspect was or shall be had in form abouesayde, by all such ways and means
they can, other then by corporal oath, for their better knowledge of their
best value, either in hereditamentes or possessions, either else in goods or
debts. And that every spiritual person, at either of the said taxations, of
the said subsidy, shall be rated and set according to the rate abouesayde, of,
and for every pound that the same spiritual person, or any other to his use,
has by descent, bargayne, or purchase, in fee simple, fee tail, term of
life, term of years, by execution, by ward or by copy of court roll, in any
manours, lands, tenementes, rentes, services, offices, fees, corrodies,
annuities, or hereditamentes, after the true just and yearly value thereof,
after and according as other the Queens Majesty's subjects borne within this
Realm, be charged in form above remembered, so that it extend to the yearly
value of.xx.s. or above. And if any person certified or rated by virtue of this
act, be he Commissioner, or other, to any manner of value, does find him self
grieved with the same presentment, sessing, of taxyng, and therevppon complain
to the Commissioners, before whom he shall be rated, sessed, or taxed, or before
two of them: That then the said Commissioners, shall by all ways and means,
examine perticulerly and distinctly the person so complaining, and other his
neighbors by their discretion, of every his lands, and tenementes above
specified, and of every his goods, cattelles, and debtes above mentioned, and
after due examination and perfect knowledge thereof, had and perceived by the
said Commissioners, which shall have power by the authority aforsayde: the
said Commissioners, or two of them, to whom any such complaynt shall be made, by
their discretions, upon the oath of the said person so complaynyng, may
abate, defaulke, increase, or enlarge the same assessement, according as it
shall appear unto them just, upon the same examination. And the same sum, so
abated, defaulked, increased, or enlarged, to be estreated in form as
hereafter ensues. So that he come before the estreates of the same assessing,
be delivered by the same Commissioners into the Queens Majesty's Exchequere.
And if it be proved by witness, his own confession, or other lawful ways or
means, within a year after any such oath made, that the same person so taxed
and sworn was of any better or greater value in lands, goods, or other
things above specified, at the time of his said oath, then the same person so
sworn did declare upon his said oath. That then every such person so offendyng
shall lose and forfayte to the Queens majesty so much in in lawful money of
England, as the same person so sworn was set at or taxed to pay, and all
persons, set, rated, and taxed as is abouesayd, shall be bound and charged by the
same, and the sum or sums upon him set, to be due toward the payment of
the said subsidy, and to be levied as hereafter shall be secified.

AND also it is enacted by the same authority, that every person to be rated
at the said taxation, as is aforesaid, shall be rated, taxed, and set, and the
sum on him set, to be levied at such place where he and his family, at the
time of the same presentment to be made, shall keep his house or dwelling, or
where he then shall be most conuersaunt, abiding, or restaunt, or shall have his
most resort, and shall be best known at the time of the said certificate to be
made, and no where else, and that no Commissioner for this subsidy, shall be
rated or taxed for his goods, or lands, but in the Shyre and other place
where he shall be Commissioner, and that if any person chargeable to this act,
at the time of the same assessing, happen to be out of this Realm, and out of
Wales, or far form the place where he shall be known, then he to be set where
he was last abydyng in this Realm, or within Wales, and best known, and
after the substance and value, and other profits of every person, known by
the examination, certificate, and other manner of wise as is aforesaid. The
said Commissioners or as many of them as shall be appointed by the Queens
Majesty's Commission, shall after the rate aforesaid, set, and tax every
person according to the rate of the substance and value of his lands, goods,
and other profits, whereby the greatest and most best sum according to his
most substance, by reason of this act, might or may be set or taxed.

Provided always that every such person, which shall be set or taxed for
payment of and to this subsidy, for and after the yearly value of his lands,
tenementes, and other real possessions or profits, at any of the said
taxation, shall not be set and taxed, for his goods and cattels, or other
moveable substance at the same taxations. And that he that shall be charged or
taxed for the same Subsidye, for his goods, cattels, and other moueables, at
any if the said taxations, shall not be charged, taxed or chargeable for his
lands, or other real possessions, and profits abouesayd, at the same
taxations, nor that any person be double charged for the said Subsidye,
neither set or taxed at several places by reason of this act: any thing
contained in this present act, notwithstanding.

AND that it be ordained by the said authority of this present Parliamente,
that no person having two mansions, or two places to resort unto, or calling
him self household servant, or wayghtyng servant to the Queens Majesty,
or other Lord or Laid, Master or Maistres, be excused upon his saying, from
the taxes of the said subsidy, in neither of the places where he may be set:
unless he bring a certificate in writing from the Commissioners, where that he
is so set in deed at one place. And if any person that ought to be set by
reason of his remouyng or resorting to two places, or by reason of his saying
that he else where was taxed, or by reason of any privilege by his dwelling or
abydyng in any place, not being forprised in this act, or otherwise by his
couin or craft, happen to escape from the said taxations, and be not set, and
that proved by presentment, examination, or information, before the said
Commissioners, or as many of them, as shall be by the same commission appointed,
or by the Barons of the Queens Majesty's Exchequer, or two Justices of the
peace, of the County where such person dwells, then every such person, that
by such means or otherwise willingly by couin shall happen to escape from the
said taxation or payment aforesaid, and not to be rated, taxed, and set,
shall be charged upon the knowledge and proof thereof, with and at the double
value, that he should or ought to have been set at before, according to his
bahauiour. The same double value to be leuyed, gathered, and paid of his goods
and cattels, lands, and tenementes, toward the said subsidy. And further
to be punished according to the discretions of the Barons, Justices, and
Commissioners, before whom he shall be convicted for his offense and deceipte in
that behalf.

AND further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
Commissioners or every commission shall according to their divisions, and
after they be divided, have full power and authority by this act, to set,
tax, and sesse every other Commissioner, joined with them in every such
commission and division. And shall also assesse every assessour, within their
division, for his and their goods, lands, and other the premises, as is
abouseayde. By the which said Commission, the said Commissioners shall
indifferentlye set, tax, and assesse them selves, and the said assessours.
And that as well the sums upon every of the said Commissioners and assessours
so sessed, rated and taxed, as the sums made and presented by the presenters,
sworn as is abouesayde, shall be written, certified, set, and estreated, and the
estreates thereof to be made, with other the inhabitauntes of that parties,
within the limits of the same commission, and division, so to be gathered and
leuyed, in like manner as it ought or should have been, if the said
Commissioner had not ben in the said commission. And that all persons of the
estate of a Baron or Barons, and every estate above, shall be charged with their
free hold and value as is abouesayde, by the Chancellor, or keeper of the
great Seal, Treasurer of England, Lord President of the Queens Majesty's
privy counsel, and Lord privy Seal for the time being, or other persons by
the Queens Majesty's authority to be limited, and they to be charged for the
said several paymentes of the said subsidy, after the form of the said
grant, according to the taxation aforesaid, and the sums upon them set,
with the names of the Colloctours appointed for the gathering and paying of the
same, to be estreated, delivered, and certified at days and places above
specified, by the Lord Chancellor or keeper of the great Seal, Treasurer,
Lord president of the counsel, and Lord privy Seal for the time being, or
such other persons as shall be limited by the Queens Majesty. And after the
taxes and assesses of the said sums upon and the said assessing and
certificate as is aforesaid made, the said Commissioners, or as many of them
as shall be thereunto appointed by the Queens Majesty's commission, shall with
all speed and without delay, by the writing estreated of the said tax
thereof, under the seals and signs manuel of the said Commissioners, or as
may of them as shall be appointed at the least to be made, shall be delivered unto
sufficient and substantial inhabitauntes, Constables, Subconstables, Bayliffes
and other officers, jointly of Hundredes, Towns, Parishes, and other places
aforesaid, within their limits, or to other sufficient persons inhabitauntes
of the same only, by the discretion of the said Commissioners, and as the
place and parties shall require, as well the particular names and surnames, as
the remembrance of all sums of money, taxed and set, of, and upon every
person, as well man as woman, chargeable to this act, householder, and all other
inhabitauntes and dwellers within the said Parishes, Towns, and places
contributorie to this act of subsidy. By aucthorite of which writing or
estreat so delivered, the said officers and other persons so named and deputed
seuerallye, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this act,
immediately after the delivery of the said writing or estreat, to demand,
leuy, and gather of every person therein specified, the sum or sums in the
same writing or estreate comprised. And for none payment thereof, to distrayne
the same person or persons so being behind by their goods and cattels, and
the distress so taken, to keep by the space of.viii. days, at the costs and
charges of the owner thereof. And if the said owner do not pay such sum of
money as shall be taxed by this act, within the same viii. days, then the same
distress to be appraysed by.iiii.iii. or.ii. of the inhabitauntes where such
distress is taken, and also to be sold by the said Constable or other
Collectour for the payment of the said money, and the overplus coming of the
sale and keeping thereof (if any be) to be immediately restored to the owner of
the same distress, which said officers and other persons, so deputed to
ask, take, gather, and leuye the said sums, shall answer and be charged
for the portion only to them assigned or limited to be gathered, levied, and
comprysed in the said writing or estreate so to them (as is aforesaid)
delivered, to the use of our sovereign Lady the Queens majesty, her heirs,
and successors. And the said sum in that writing or estreat comprised to pay
unto the high Collectour or Collectours of that place for the collection of the
same, in manner and form under written, thereunto to be named and deputed, and
the same inhabitauntes and officers so gathering ye same particular sums for
their collectio^ thereof, shall retain for every.xx.s. so by them received and
paid.ii.d. and that to be allowed at the payment of their collection by the^ to
be made to the high collectour or collectours.

AND further be it enacted by the said authority, that the said
Commissioners, or the more part of them as shall take upon them the execution
and business of the said commission, shall for either of the same paymentes
of the said subsidy, name such sufficient and albe persons which then shall
have and possede lands and other hereditaments, in their own right, of the
yearly value of.xx.li. or goods to the value of.CC. marks at the least. And
the persons seuerallye be the discretions of the same Commissioners in Shires,
Ridings, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Towns corporat, and other
whatsoever places, as well within places privileged as without, not being
foreprised within this act to be high Collectours, and have the collection and
receipt of the said sums, set and leuiable within the precinct, limit, and
bonds, where they shall be so limited to gather, and receive, to every of the
which Collectours so severally named, the said Commissioners, or.ii. of them at
least, shall with all speed, and without delay, after the said whole su^me of
the said subsidy, be set by all the limits of the same their commission or in
such limits as the high Collectours shall be so severally assigned, shall under
their seals and signs manuel, deliver one estreat indented in parchment to
every of the said high Collectours, comprysing in it the names of al such
persons as were assigned to levy the said particular sums, and the sums of
every Hundred, Wapentake, Town, or other place aforesaid, with the names and
surnames of the persons so chargeable, according to the estreat so first
thereof, made as is aforesaid, and delivered, and the Collectour so to be
assigned, shall be charged to answer the whole sum comprised in the said
estreate limited to his collection, as is aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
said Commissioners having authority by this act to name and nominate the
said high Collectours, of the said subsidy, shall immediately upon the
nomination and election, take by authority of this present parliament,
sufficient recognisaunces, or obligations, without any fee, or reward to be
paid therefore of every person so by them to be named to be high Collectour, to
be bounden to the Queens majesty in the double sum of the sum of his
collection, and to be endorsed and made upon such condition: that is to say,
for the collection of the said first payment of ye said subsidy, that if the
said Collectour his heirs or executors, do truly content and pay, to thuse of
the Queens majesty, her heirs or executors, in the receipt of the said
Exchequer, before the said.xxiiii. day of June next coming, so much of the
said sum of money allotted and appointed to his collection, as he shall collect
and gather, and content and pay the residue of his collection and charge,
within one month next after such time as he has gathered and collected the
same residue, that then the said recognisaunce or obligation to be void, or
else to stand in full strength and virtue. And for the collection of the second
payment of the said subsidy, upon condition that if the said Collectour,
his heirs or executours, do truly content and pay, to the use of the Queens
majesty, her heirs or executours, in her receipt of the Exchequer, before the
first day of March, which shall be in the year of our Lord God.M.D.lix. so much
of the said sum of money allotted and appointed to his collection, as he
shall collect and gather, and content and pay the residue of his collection and
charge, within one month next after such time as he has gathered and
collected the same residue, that then the said recognisaunce or obligation to
be void, or else to stand in full strength and virtue, which said several
recognisaunces or obligations so taken, the said Commissioners shall severally
certify, and deliver into the Queens majesty's Exchequer, with the several
certificates of the said taxations and rates of the paymentes of the said
subsidy, at and by the time to them prescribed and appointed by this act for
the certificate of the said several taxations of the said subsidy, upon pain
of forfeiture of.x.li. to the Queens majesty, for every recognisaunce or
obligation not certified. And that every such Collectour so elected, named,
and chosen, upon request to him made, shall knowledge and make the said
recognisaunce or obligation, upon like pain and forfayture of.x.li. to the
Queens Majesty, for the refusal thereof, and every Collectour so deputed,
having the said estreate in parchement, as is aforesaid, shall have
aucthorite by this act, to appoint days and places within the circuit of his
collection, for the payment of the said subsidy to him to be made, and thereof
to give warnyng, by proclamation or otherwise, to all the Constables, or other
persons or inhabitauntes, having the charge of the particular collection,
within the Hundredes, Parishes, Towns, or other places, by him or them
limited, to make payment for their said particular collectio^ of every sum as
to them shall apparteyne. And if at the said day and place so limited and
prefixed by the said Collectour, the said Constable, Officers, or other
persons or inhabitauntes, as is aforesaid, for the said particular collection
assigned and appointed within such Hundred, City, Town, or other places, do
not pay unto the said Collectours, the sum within their several Hundredes,
Towns, Parishes, and other places, due and comprised in the said estreate
thereof to them delivered by the said Commissioners, or some of them as is
aforesaid, or so much thereof as they have by any mean received.ii.d. of every
pound for the said particular collection as is aforesaid, always to be
thereof allowed, excepted, and abated: that then it shall be lawful to the said
high Collectours and every of them, and to their assigns, to distrayne every
of the said Constables, Officers, and other inhabitauntes for their said
several and particular collection of the said sums comprised in the said
estreate, and writing thereof, to them and every of them, as is before
expressed, delivered, or forasmuch of the same sum as so then shall happen to
be gathered and leuyed, and behynd and unpaid by the goods and cattels of
every of them so being behind. And the distress so taken, to be kept,
appraysed and sold as is aforesaid, and thereof to take and leuye the sums
so then being behind and unpaid. And the overplus coming of the sale of the
said distress (if any be) to be restored and delivered unto the owner, in
form above remembered.

Provided always, that no person inhabiting in any City, Borough, or Town
corporate, shall be compelled to be an assessour or Collectour, of, or for any
part of the said subsidy, in any place or places out of the said City,
Borough, or Town corporate where he dwells.

AND it is also by the said authority enacted, that if any inhabitaunt or
officer, or whatsoever person or persons, charged to and for the collection or
receipt of any part of portion of the said subsidy, by any manner of means,
according to this act, or any person or persons for them selves, or as keeper,
guardian, deputy, factour, or attorney, of or for any other person or persons,
of any goods and cattels of the owner thereof at the time of the said
assessing to be made, being out of this Realm, or in any other parties not
known, or of, and for the goods and cattels, of any other person or persons,
of any corporation, fraternity, mystery, or other whatsoever comminaltie,
being incorporate or not incorporate, and all persons having in their rule,
governance and custody, any goods, or cattels, at the time of the said
assessyng, or any of them to be made, or which for any cause, for and by
collection, or for him self, or for any other, or by reason that he has the
rule, governance, or custody of any goods or cattels, of any other person
or persons, corporation, comminaltie, fraternite, guilde, or mystery, or any
such other like, or as factour, deputy, or attorney, of or for any person,
shall be taxed, rated, valued, and set to any sum or sums by reason of this
act, and after the taxation or assessing upon any such person or persons as
shall be charged with the receipt of the same, happen to dye, or depart from the
place where he was so taxed and set, or his goods or cattels be so eloyned, or
in such privy and covert manner kept, as the said person or persons, charged
with the same, by estreates, or other wrytinges, from the said Commissioners,
or as many of them as shall be thereunto appointed by the said commission, as is
aforesaid, can ne may levy the same sum or sums comprysed within the same
estreates, by distress, within the limits of their collection, as is
aforesaid, or can not sell such distress or distresses, as be taken for any
of the said paymentes, before the time limited to the high Collectour for his
paymente to be made in the Queens Majesty's receipt, then upon relation
thereof, with due examination, by the oath or examination of such person or
persons, as shall be charged with and for the receipte and collection of the
same, before the said Commissioners, or as many of them as by the said
commission shall be thereunto appointed, where such person or persons, or other
as is aforesaid, their goods and cattels, were set and taxed, and upon
plain certificate thereof made in the Queens Majesty's Exchequer by the same
Commissioners, as well of the dwelling place, names, and sums of the said
persons, of whom the said sums can not be levied and had as is aforesaid,
then as well the Constables and other inhabitauntes appointed for the said
particular collection, against the high Collectours, as the high Collectour
upon his account and oath in the said Exchequer to be discharged thereof,
and process to be made for the Queens majesty, out of the said Exchequer, by
the discretion of the Barons of the said Exchequer, against such person, his
heirs or executors, so being behind with his payment. And over that the same
commissioners to whom any such declaration of the premises shall be made in
form aforesaid, from time to time shall have full power and authority to
direct their precept or precepts unto the said person or persons, charged
with any sum, of for or upon any such person or persons, or other as is
aforesaid, or to any Sheriff, Steward, Bayliffe or other whatsoever officer,
minister, person or persons, of such place or places where any such person or
persons, so owing such sum or sums, shall have lands, and tenements, or
other hereditamentes, or real possessions, goods and cattels, whereby any such
person or persons so indebted, his heirs, executours, or assigns, or other
having the custody, governance, or disposition, of any goods, cattels,
lands, or tenementes, or other hereditamentes, which ought or may by this act
lawfully be distrayned, or taken for the same, has as shall have goods,
cattels, lands, tenementes, or other possessions, whereof such sum or
sums, which by any such person or persons, may or ought to be leuyed, be it
within the limits of such Commission, where such person or persons was and
were taxed, or without in any place within this Realm of England, Wales, or
other the Queens Majesty's dominions, marches, or territories, by which
precepte as well such person or persons as shall be charged to leuye such money,
as the officers of the place or places, where such distress may be taken,
shall have full power and authority, to distrayne every such person,
indebted, charged and chargeable by this act, or his executours or
administratours of his goods and cattels, his gardians, factours, deputies,
leasses, farmours, and assigns, and all other persons by whose hands, or out
of whose lands, any such person should have rent, see, annuitie, or other
profit, or which at the time of the said assessinges, shall have goods, or
cattels, or any other thing moveable, of any such person or persons, being
indebted, or owyng such sum: and the distress so taken, caused to be kept,
appraysed and sold, in like manner and form as is aforesaid, for the
distress to be taken upon such persons, to be taxed to the said subsidy,
and being sufficient to distrayne within the limits of the Collectours
inhabitauntes, or other officers, charged, with or for the same sums, so upon
them to be taxed. And if any such distress for non payment, happen to be taken
out of the limit of the said persons, charged and assigned to leuye the same,
the persons so charged for the leuy of any such sum by distress, shall
perceive and take of the same distress, for the labor of every person, going
for the execution thereof, for every mile that any such person so labors
for the same.ii.d. And every farmour, tenant, guardian, factour, or other
whatsoever person, being distrayned or otherwise charged for payment of any
such sum or sums, or any other sum, by reason of this act, shall be of
such sum or sums, of him or them so levied, and taken, discharged, and
acquitted at his next day of payment of the same, or at the delivery of such
goods and cattels, as he that is so distrayned had in his custody and
governance, against him or them, that shall be so taxed and set, any grant or
writing, obligatorie or other whatsoever matter to the contrary made
heretofore, notwithstanding. And if any such person, that should be so
distrained have no lands or tenementes, sufficient, whereby he or his
tenauntes, and farmours, may be distrayned, or has eloyned, aliened, or hyd
his goods, and cattels, whereby he should or might be distrayned in such manner,
that such goods and cattels shall not be known or found, so that the sum,
of, or by him to be paid in the said form shall ne can be conveniently
leuyed. Then upon relation thereof to the Commissioners, or to as many of
them, as by the said commission shall be thereunto appointed, where such person
or persons was taxed and set, by the oaths of him or them, that shall be charged
with the levy and payment of that sum or sums, the same Commissioners,
shall make a precept in such manner as is aforesaid, for to attache, take and
arrest the body of such person or persons, that ought to pay the said sums,
and by this act shall be charged with, and for the said sum and sums, and
them so taken, safely to keep in prison, with in the shire, or other place,
where any such person or persons shall be taken, and attached, there to remain
without bail or maynprise, until he has paid the same sum or sums, that
such person for him self or for any other by this act, shall be chargeable or
ought to be charged withal. And also for the fees of every such arrest, to him
or them that shall execute such precept.xx.d. and that every officer unto whom
such precept shall be directed, do his true diligence, and execute the same, upon
every person, so being indebted, upon pain to forfait to the Queens
Majesty's, for every default in that behalf.xx.s. And that no keeper of any
jail, from his jail suffer any such person to go at large, by letting to
bail, or otherwise to depart out of his prison, before he have paid his said
debt, and the said.xx.d. for the said arrest, upon pain to forfayte to the
Queens Majesty.xl.s. And the same Jailer to pay unto the Queens Majesty,
the double value, as well of the rate which the said person so imprisoned was
taxed at, as of the said.xx.d. for the fees, and like process, and remedy,
in like form shall be granted by the said Commissioners, or as many of them,
as by the said commission shall be thereunto appointed, at like information of
every person or persons, being charged with any sum of money, for any other
person or persons, by reason of the said Subsidy, and not thereof paid, but
wylfullye withdrawn, ne the same leuyable within the limits where such
persons were thereunto taxed. And if the sum or sums, being behind unpaid,
by any person or persons, as is aforesaid, be levied and gathered by force of
the said process, to be made the said Commissioners, or if in default or for
lack of payment thereof, the person or persons so owing the said sum or
sums of money, by process of the same Commissioners, to be made as is
aforesaid, be committed to prison in form abouesayde, that then the said
Commissioners which shall awarde such process, shall make certificate thereof
in the said Exchequer, of that shall be done in ye premises, in the term next
following after such sum or sums of money, so being behind shall be levied and
gathered, or such person or persons for none payment of the same committed to
prison. And if it happen any of the said Collectours to be assigned, or any
Majors, Shiriffes, Steward, Constable, the headborrowe, householder, Bayliffe,
or any other officer, or minister, or other whatsoever person or persons, to
disobey the said Commissioners, or any of them, in the reasonable request, to
them made by the said Commissioners, for execution of the said commission, or
if any of the officers or other persons, do refuse that to them shall
apparteyne and belong to do, by reason of any precept to him or them to be
directed, or any reasonable commandment, instaunce or request, touching the
premises, or other default in any appearaunce or collection to make, or if any
person being suspect, or not to be indifferently taxed, as is aforesaid, do
refuse to be examined according to the tenor of this act, before the said
Commissioners, or as many of them, as shall be there unto assigned, as is
aforesaid, or will not appear before the same Commissioners, upon warnyng to
him made, or else make resistaunce or rescous, upon any distress upon him to
be taken, for any parcel of the said subsidy, or commit any misbehauiour in
any manner of wise, contrary to this act, or commit any wylfull omission, or
other whatsoever wylfull, not doing or misdoyng, contrary to the tenor of this
act or grant, the same commissioners, and every number of them, above
remembered, or two of them at the least, upon probable knowledge of any such
misdemeanors, had by information or examination, shall and may set upon every
such offendour for every such offense, in name of a fine, by the same offendour
to be forfayted.xl.s. or under, by the discretion of the same Commissioners.
And further the same Commissioners, and every number of them, or two of them at
the least, shall have authority by this present act, to punish every such
offendour, by imprisonment, there to remain and to be delivered by their
discretion, as shall seem to them convenient, the said fines, if any such be,
to be certified by the said commissioners that so assessed the same, into the
Queens Majesty's said Exchequer, there to be levied and paid by the
Collectours of that parties for the said Subsidy, returned into the said
Exchequer, to be therewith charged with the payment of the said subsidy, in
such manner as if the said fynes had been set and taxed upon the said
offenders of the said subsidy.

It is also enacted by the said authority of this Parliament, that every of
the said high collectours, which shall account for any part of the said
subsidy, in the said Exchequer, upon their several said accomptes to be
yielded, shall be allowed at every of the said paymentes of the said subsidy, for
every pound limited to his collection whereof any such collectour shall be
charged and yield account, six pence; as parcel of their charge: that is to
say, of every pound thereof, for such person as then have had the particular
collection in the towns and other places, as is aforesaid, specified in his
collection two pence, and other two pence of every pound thereof, every of the
said chief, collectours, or their accomptauntes, to retain to their own use
for their labor and charge in and about the premises, and two pence of every
pound residue, to be delivered, allowed, and paid by the said collectours so
being thereof allowed, to such of the commissioners as shall take upon them the
business and labor, for, and about the premises, that is to say, every
collectour to pay that commissioner or commissioners, which had the ordering of
the wrytynges, of, and for the said subsidy where the said collectour or
collectours had their collection, for expenses of the said commissioners, so
taking upon them the said business, and labor of their clerks writing the
said precepts and estreates of the said collections, the same last two pence
of every pound to be divided amongst the said commissioners, having regard
to their labor and business taken by them or their said clerks in and about
the premises, for the which part so to the said commissioners attaynyng, the
said commissioners.vi.v.iiii. iii. or as many of them as shall be thereunto
appointed by the Queens majesty's commission, and every of them jointly and
severally for his and their said part, may have his remidie against the said
collectour or collectours, which there of ben, and might have been allowed, by
action of debt, in which the defendaunt shall not wage his law, neither
protection, neither iniunction, or other essoigne shall be allowed. And that no
person now being of the number of the company of this present parliament, nor
any commissioner, shall be named or assigned to be any collector, or
subcollector, or presentor of the said subsidy, or of any part thereof, nor no
commissioners shall be compelled to make any presentment or certificate, other
then in the Queens majesty's said Exchequer, of, for or concerning the said
subsidy, or any part thereof. And likewise that none other person that shall be
named or assigned to be commissioners in any place, to and for the execution of
this act of subsidy, be, or shall be assigned, or named head collectours of any
of the paimentes of the said subsidy, neither of any part thereof. And that
every such person and persons which shall be named and appointed as is aforesaid,
to be head collectours, in and for the first payment of this subsidy, shall not
be compelled to be collectour for the second payment of the said subsidy, or
for any part thereof. And the said collectours which shall be assigned for the
collection of the said subsidy, or for any part thereof, and every of them,
be and shall be acquitted and discharged of all manner fees, rewards, and of every
other charges in the Queens Majesty's Exchequer, or else where, of them or any
of them, by reason of that collection, payment, or accomptes, or any thing
concerning the same to be asked. And that if any persons receive and take any
fees, rewards, or pleasures of any such accomptant: That then he shall forfait
to the Queens Majesty, for every penny value of penny so taken, five
shillinges, and suffer imprisonment at the Queens majesty's pleasure. And
after the taxing and assessing of the said subsidies, as is aforesaid, had or
made, and the said estreates thereof in parchment unto the collectour, in manner
and form before rehearsed, delivered, the said commissioners which shall
take upon them thexecution of this act, within the limits of their commission
by their agreementes, shall have meeting together, at which meeting every of the
said commissioners which then shall have taken upon them thexecution of any
part of the said commission, shall by him self or by his sufficient deputy,
truly certify and bring forth unto the said commissioners named in the said
commission, the certificate and presentment made before him, and such other
commissioners as were limited with him in one limite, so that the same
certificate may be accounted and cast with the other certificates of the other
limits within the same commission. And then the said commissioners and every
number of them, unto two at the least, as is aforesaid, if any be in life, or
their executors or administrators of their goods, if they then he dead, shall
iontly and severally as they were divided within their limits, under their
seals by their discretion, make one or several writings indented, containing
in it as well the names of the said collectours by the commissioners, for such
collection and account in the Exchequer, and payment in the said receipt,
deputed and assigned, as the gross and several sums written unto every such
collectour, to receive the said subsidy. And also all fines, amerciaments,
and other forfaitures, if any such by reason of this act, happen to be within
the precinct and limite of their commission, to be certified into the Queens
majesty's said Exchequer by the said commissioners, in which writing or
writings indented so to be certified, shall be plainly declared and expressed,
the whole and entire sum or sums of the said subsidy severally limited to
the collection of the said collectours, severally deputed and assigned to the
collection of the said sums. So that none of the said collectours so
certified in the said Exchequer, shall be compelled there to account or to be
charged, but only to and for the sum limited to his collection, and not to or
for any sum limited to the collection of his fellow, but that every of them
shall be severally charged for their part, limited to their collection. And if
the said commissioners joined in one commission amongst them selves, in that
matter can not agree, or if any of them be not ready, or refuse to make
certificate with other of the same commissioners, that then the same
commissioners, may make several indentures in form aforesaid, of their
several limits or separations of collectours, within the limits of their
commission, upon, and in the Hundredes, Wards, Wapentakes, Lathes, Rapes, or
such other like divisions within their said several limits of their
commission, as the places there shall require to be severed and divided, and as
to the same commissioners shall seem good, to make divisions of their limits
or collections, for the several charges of the same collectours. So that always
one collectour, shall be charged and account for his part to him to be limited
only by him self, and not for any sum limited to the part of any of his
fellows, and the charges of every of the collectours, to be set and certified
severally upon them, and every such collectour upon his account and payment of
the sum of money limited within his collection, to be seuerallye by him
self acquitted and discharged in the said Exchequer, without payyng any manner
fees or rewards to any person or persons for the same, upon the pain and
penalty last abouesayde, and not to be charged for any portion of any other
collectour. And if any commissioner after he has taken certificate of them,
that, as is aforesaid, shall before any such commissioner be examined, and the
sums rated and set, and the books and wrytynges thereof being in his hands,
or if any collectour or other person charged with any receipt of any part of
the said subsidy, or any other person, taxed or otherwise by this act
charged, with and for any parcel of the said subsidy, or with any other
sum or fine, amerciament, penalty, or other forfayture, happen to dye before
the commissioner, collectour, or other whatsoever person or persons, have
executed, accomplyshed, satisfied, or sufficiently discharged, that which to
every such person shall apparteyne or belong to do, according to this act;
then the executours, and heirs of every such person, and all other seized of
any lands, or tenementes, that any such person being charged by this act,
and disceaslyng before he be discharged thereof, or any other to his use only
had of estate of inheritance, at the time that any such person was named
commissioner, collectour, or otherwise charged with and for any manner of thing
to be done, satisfied, or paid by reason of this act, and all those that have
in their possessions or hands, any goods, or cattels, leasses, or other
things that were to any such person or persons, at the time of his death, or
any lands or tenementes, that were the same persons, at the time he was (as is
aforesaid) charged by this act, shall be by the same compelled and charged to do
and accomplish, to do in every case as the same person so being charged,
should have done and might have been compelled to do, if he had been in plain
life, after such rate of the lands and goods of the said commissioner, or
collectour as the party shall have in his hand. And if the said commissioners
for causes reasonable then moving, shall think it not convenient to join in
one certificate, as is aforesaid, the^ the said person or persons that shall
first join together, or he that shall first certify the said writing,
indented as is aforesaid, shall certify all the names of the commissioners of
that commission, whereupon such wrytynges shall be there, then to be certified,
with division of the Hundredes, Wapentakes, Wards, tythynges, or other places,
to and among such commissioners, of the same commission, with the names of the
same commissiners, where such separations and division shall be, with the gross
sums of money, as well of and for the said subsidy, taxed, or set, of, or
within the said Hundredes, Wards, Wapentakes, or other places to him or them
divided or assigned, that shall so certify the said first writing, as of
fines, amerciaments, penalties, or other forfaitures, if any happen to be
within the same limits, whereof the same wrytynges shall be certified, and after
such writing indented, which as is aforesaid, shall be certified, and not
conteyne in it the whole and full sums, set and taxed within the limits of
the same commission, the other commissioners of the same, before the day of
payment of the said subsidy, shall certify into the said Exchequer, by their
writing or wrytynges, indented to be made as is aforesaid, the gross and
several sums, set and taxed within the places to them limited for the said
subsidy, and other fines, amerciamentes, penalties, and forfaytures, with the
names of the Hundredes, Wards, Wapentakes, and other places to them assigned,
or else by their said wrytinges indented, to certify at the said place, before
the said day of payment, such reasonable causes for their excuses, why they
may not make such certificate, of, and for the said subsidy, fines,
amerciamentes, and other forfaytures, growying or set by reason of the causes
of their lettes, or of their none certifiyng as is abouesayde, or else in
default thereof, process to be made out of the Queens Majesty's said Exchequer,
against the said commissioners, and every of them, not makying certificate as
is aforesaid, by the discretion of the Treasurer, or Barons of the said
Exchequer.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
inhabitauntes of the parish of saint Martin, called Stampforde Baron, in the
Suburbs of the Borough, and Town of Stampforde, in the South part of the
water, there called Welland, which hereafter shall be contributory to the payment
of this present subsidy, granted to the Queens Majesty, her heirs, and
successors, shall be assessed, rated, and taxed for this time, by such
commissioners, which shall be appointed for the taxyng, ratyng, and sessing of
such subsidy, or tax within the County of Lyncolne, and shall be for this
time contributory, and pay the said subsidy, to the collectour or
collectours, which shall be assigned and appointed for the leuying and gatheryng
of the same, with the Aldermen and Burgesses of the said Borough and Town of
Stampforde.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all
and every person and persons, having manours, lands, tenementes, and other
hereditamentes, chargeable to the payment of the subsidy, granted to the
Queens Majesty, by this act, and also having spiritual possessions,
chargeable to her said Majesty, by the grant made by the Clergy of this
realm, in their convocation: And over this having substance in goods and
cattels chargeable by this said act, that then if any of the said person or
persons, be hereafter charged, assessed, and taxed for the said manours,
lands, and tenementes, and spiritual possessions, and also assessed, charged,
and taxed, for his or their goods and cattelles, that then he or they shall be
only charged by virtue of this act, for his and their said manours, lands,
tenementes, hereditamentes, and spiritual possessions, or only for his said
goods and cattels, the best thereof to be taken for the Queens Majesty, and
not to be charged for both, or double charged for any of them: any thing in
this act contained to the contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this grant of subsidy, nor any thing therein
contained, in any wise extend to charge the inhabitauntes or dwellers in
Irelande, Iernesey, and Garnesey, or any of them, of, or concerning any
manours, lands, tenements, or other possessions, goods, cattels, or other
moveable substance, which the said inhabitauntes or dwellers, or any other to
their use, have within Ireland, Iernsey, and Garnsey, or in any of them, or of,
for or concerning any fees or wages, which any of the said inhabitaunts or
dwellers, have of ye Queens Majesty for their attendaunce and doing service
to our sovereign Lady, in Ireland, Iernesey, and Garnesey, or in any of them:
any thing in this present act, to ye contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

Provided also, that this present act of subsidy ne any thing therein
contained, extend to any of the English inhabitauntes or resiauntes in any
of the Counties of Northumberlande, Cumberland, Westmerland, the Town of
Barwicke, the Town of Newcastell upon Tine, and the Byshoprike of Durham, nor
to any of them, of, for, or concerning any manours, lands, tenementes, or
other possessions, goods, cattelles, or other moveable substance which the
same inhabitauntes or dwellers, or any other to their use, have within the
said Counties of Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerlande, or the Town of
Barwicke, the Town of Newcastel upon Tine, or the Byshoprike of Durham, or any
of them, or of, for or concerning any fees or wages which any of the said
inhabitauntes or dwellers, have of the Queens Majesty, for their attendaunce
and doing service to the Queens Majesty, for, or within the said Counties of
Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmerland, the Town of Barwicke, the Town of
Newcastell upon Tine, and the Byshoprike of Durham, or any of them, to, or for
the said taxyng, leuiyng, gatheryng, or payment, but that the English
inhabitants or resiauntes, and every of them, of the said Counties,
Byshoprikes, and Towns, and every of them, shall be of and from the said
subsidy, and every parcel thereof, and for their manours, lands, tenementes,
fees, wages, goods, and cattelles, lying and being in the said Counties,
Towns, and Byshoprike, or any of them, utterly acquitted and discharged: any
thing in this present act before rehearsed to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also, that al letters patentes granted by the Queens Majesty, or
any of her most noble progenitors, to any Cities, Boroughes, or Towns within
this Realm, of any manner of liberties, privileges, or exemptions, from the
burden and charge of any such grauntes of subsidies, which be at this present
time in force and vayleable, shall remain good and effectual to the said
Cities, Boroughes, and Towns hereafter, according to the purportes thereof,
though the inhabitauntes of the same, shall upon the great and weighty
consyderation of the grant abouesayd, be for this grant charged and
contributory, in like manner, form, and sort as other Cities, Boroughes, and
Towns, which be not in any wise priuileged, be from such grant of subsidy
excepted.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no
Orphant or Infant, within the age of twenty and one years, borne within any
of the Queens Majesty's dominions, shall be charged to any payment of this
subsidy, for his or her goods and cattelles, to him or her left or
bequeathed: any thing in this act contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also, that this act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend
to the goods or lands of any College, Hall, or Ostell, within the
universities of Oxenford and Cambridge, or any of them, or to the goods or
lands of the College of Winton, founded by Bishop of Wyckeham, or to the
goods or lands of the college of Eton next Wyndsor, or to the goods or
lands or any common free grammar scoole within the realm of England or Wales
or to the goods of any Reader, Scoolemaister, or Scoller, or any graduate
within the said universities and colleges, or any of them there remaynying for
study, without fraud or couin, or to the goods and lands of any hospital
measondue, or spittelhouse, prepared and used for the sustentation and relief
of poor people: any thing in this act contained to the contrary in any wise,
notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it enacted, that forasmuch as diverse and sundry the
Queens Majesty's tenauntes, and other inhabitauntes and dwellers within the
Counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen, Cardigan, Glamorgan, Brecknocke, Radnouce,
Mongomerye, Denbigh, Flint, Merioneth, Anglesey, Carnaruon, and of the County
Palentine of Chester, be at this present time charged and chargeable with the
several paymentes of diverse great sums of money, by the name of Mise due to
her Majesty, according to the several customs of the said Counties.

Be it therefore ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this
act of subsidy, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to charge
any of the Queens tenauntes, and other inhabitants and dwellers, within any
of the said Counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen, Cardigan, Glamorgan, Brecknocke,
Radnoure, Mongomerye, Denbigh, Flinte, Merioneth; Anglesey, Carnaruon, and the
County Palentine of Chester, being charged or chargeable with the said Mise,
for, or in any of the paymentes of the said subsidy granted to the Queens
Majesty by this act, until the said several days and times for the payment
of the said Mises shall be expired, and until the days and times of the several
subsidies, lately granted to our late sovereign lord and sovereign lady,
King Philip and Queen Mary be also past and expired, and that then the first
payment of the said subsidy granted by this present act, shall be made at the
receypt of the Queens Exchequer, before the first day of March next following
after the last days of the last payment to be had or appointed of the said
Mises, and of the payment of the said former subsidies. And the second payment
of this subsidy, to be made by, or before the first day of March next after
the said first payment of the said subsidy.

Furthermore be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the tenauntes
and dwellers of every of the said Counties in this prouiso remembered, shall
severally before the feast of Pentecost next ensuing, certify into the said
court of the Exchequer, under the seals of two Justices of peace of every of
the said Counties, whereof one to be of the Quorum, when and what day the last
payment of the said several Mises now due in any of the said Counties, shall
end and expire.

Provided also, that the said grant of subsidy, or any other thing therein
contained, do not in any wise extend to be prejudicial or hurtful to the
inhabitauntes or resiauntes at this present time, within the five ports
corporate, or to any of their members incorporate, or united to the same five
ports, or to any of the same five ports, of, or for any part or parcel of
the said sums granted in this parliament, of the said inhabitauntes now
resiaunt, or any of them, to be taxed, set, asked levied, or paid. But the
said inhabitauntes and resiauntes in the said five ports, and their members,
be and shall be of, and from the said grant and payment of the said subsidy,
during their resiauncie there, and no longer, clearly acquitted and discharged:
any matter, or whatsoever thing in this present act had or made to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

God save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queens Majesty. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


