A right Christian Treatise, entitled S. AUGUSTINES PRAYERS: Published in more
ample sort than yet it has bin in the English tongue; purged from diverse
superstitious points; and adorned with manifold places of the S. Scripture, by
THOMAS ROGERS. Whereunto is annexed Saint AUGUSTINES PSALTER: Translated and
quoted by the same T. R.

1. These. 5, 17. RRAIE CONTINVALIE. Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham,
dwelling in Paternoster Row, at the sign of the Star. 1581.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestati^.

To the Christian Reader. S.
IN this place both to satisfy thee, beloved, and that thou also the better
may, if it please thee, answer mine adversaries, I think it my part to show
the reasons of my translating, correcting, and adorning this book. For some
perhaps, to translate that which is once done already, will think it vanity;
to amend that which no godly man would ever enterprise to correct, will judge
it presumption; and to adorn that which was, though often imprinted, yet never
so put-forth, will deem it curiosity. And so I shall be counted vane for my
translating; ouer-bold for my correcting; and very curious for my quoting this
book. It stands me therefore upon to show the causes of doing what I have
done; wherein I will be the more brief, because elsewhere In the Epistle
dedicatorie before S. Augustines Private talk with God: and also in the second
Epistle before the Imitation of Christ.
I have somewhat touched these general points, and what there I have spoken has
apt relation unto this place.

And first for my translating (to ouer-passe in silence the well acceptance of
S. Augustines Private talk with God, Causes why this book was translated,
being in English before.
by the godly zealous, for whose sake I did bestow my pains; and the
approbation of the same by the Honorable of famous memory master Secretary
Wilson, for whose judgment sake chiefly, which I knew was very learned and
sound, I choase him to be Patron thereof: sufficient causes both to encourage
me to go forward, and to clear me from al suspicion either of vanity,
presumption, or curiosity for doing as I have done) I say, the rather I put
this book into English, for that I saw the other, before in our vulgar tongue
(whosoever was the translator of the same, or what copy soever the Printer
followed) was very imperfect; as by comparing this my translation with the
other in English, and both with the Latin copy, may easily appear. And
therefore that neither the adversary might have just occasion to carpe; nor the
godly to complain hence-foorth that it is not perfected, I thought good
faithfulie to translate the same. Furthermore were nothing at al, as more than
half was left-out, yet good cause I had to translate it, both because of the
errors therein contained, which were necessarily to be corrected; and of the
manifold sentences of holy scripture comprehended therein, which were needful
to be quoted. So that, both that the godly might not be either infected, or
offended by the one; and that many might be allured to read, and in reading
confirmed by the other, I took the translation thereof upon me, for otherwise
neither could the faults be rightly amended, nor the places duly applied.

Secundarilie, Causes of correcting this book.
my correcting of this book, I have hope no good man will mislike. For I did it
not rashly of presumption, but with the testimony of a good conscience; with
the warrant of God his word; and after the example too of such, who for doing
the like are not dispraised. For if the Spirit of God command us, To try
every Spirit 1. John. 4, ^
; to try al things, and to keep that which is good 1. These. 5. verse. 21.
; to do al things unto edification 1. Cor. 14. verse. 26.
, not unto the destruction of souls; and, if both those noble and good men of
Berea did examine the doctrine even of the Apostles themselves Act. 17, 10. 11.
; and diverse godly men in our age have tried, and purged the writings of other
men, and that to the great benefit of the Church, and their own commendation:
I trust I am not blame worthy for trieng, and for choosing that which good is,
and refusing that which either might infect, or be offensive to the godly, but
should do very il, both against God, against man, and against my conscience
too, if I did not so, having both so holy a commander to obeie, and so worthy
examples to imitate. Again, by the censure even of any indifferent judge, I
may with as good, and better authority either quite-omit, or Christianlie
convert that which il is unto good purpose, than some evil disposed persons
either altogether leaue-out, or wickedlie change that which good is to the
ingraffing of il opinions; as did both Io. Baptist a Ficklerus a Papist in his
handeling that book entitled, De iure Magistratus in Subditos; and also
Johan. de Ales another Papist in corrupting the holy Psalms of David, and
applieng them most sacrilegiouslie unto the virgin Marie. And thus briefly
for my correction in general.

Now furthermore would be showed particularly what I have corrected; What
things corrected.
how I have corrected the same; and why. The places which I have corrected, be
either manifestly erroneous; or scapes unwittingly, for so charity and
circumstances will me to judge, committed.

Of the former sort be prayers which tend either to make works meritorious,
Faults manifestly erroneous.
as where among other things petition is made by the Auctor, that he may Amando
mala sua red^nere Med. cap. 1
; and have tears granted, Quae peccatorum possint dissoluere vincula Medit.
cap. 40.
: or to make Saints intercessors for us, as does this prayer unto the House of
God, Tu d^c, tu roga Deum, vt dignum me faciat participatione gloriae tuae
Medit. cap. 20.
; again unto the same House of God, Ad^u^ent me merita tua, subueniant
prauitati meae sanctae and purissimae orationes tuae, quae inefficaces apud
Deum nullatenus esse possint Medit. cap. 20.
; so does this, Da mihi effectum petitionis, and desiderij mei intercedente,
and orante, and impetrante gloriosa virgin, genetrice tua Maria, Domina mea,
cum omnibus sanctis Med. cap. 35. and ca. 36.
; and this, Da mihi gratiam lachrimarum, etc. propter merita, and orationes
little, qui tibi placuerunt, and deuotissime s^ruierunt Medit. cap. 36.
; and this especialie, Exa^di nos Trinitas sancta, and conserua ab omni malo,
etc. per orationes Patriarcharum, per merita Prophetarum, per suffragia
Apostolorum, per constantiam Martyrum, per fidem Consessorum, per cast^tatem
Virginum, and per intercessionem omnium Sanctorum, qui tibi placuerunt ab mitio
mundi Medit. cap. 40.
: or prayers finalie either unto the dead, as is both the whole 24. Chapter
after the Latin copy; and these also in another place Medit. cap. 40.
, Sancta, and immaculata virgo, Dei genetrix, Maria, and Matter Domini nostri
Jesus Christi, interuenire pro me digneris apud illum cuius meruisti effici
templum. S. Michael, S. Gabriel, S. Raphael, S. chori Angelorum, Archangelorum,
Patriarcharum, atque Prophetarum, etc. vos rogare praesumo, vt pro me culpabili
ipsi Deo supplicare dignemini, quatenus de faucibus Diaboli, and de morte
perpetua merear liberari: or prayers for the dead, as this is, Praesta Domine,
etc. defunctis fidelibus requiem sempiternam Medit. cap. 40.
, Again Medit. cap. 40.
, Omnibus etiam Christianis defunctis adiutorium praestare digneris, and
defunctis fidelibus absolutionem, and requiem sempiternam per aeterna saecula.

Of the later sort be these especialie, Seapes unwittingly committed.
and such like words in one chapter Medit. cap. 6.
, Respice clementissime Rex, qui patitur, and reminiscere benignus pro quo
patitur, etc. Candet nudum pectus, rubet cruentum latus, tensa arent vescera
etc. and these, and such like in another Medit. cap. 7.
, Ego inique egi, tu poena mulctaris, ego crimen edidi, tu torturae subijceris;
ego superb^ui, tu humiliaris; ego tumui, tu attenu^ris, etc. Such is the whole
19. Chap. in a manner after the Latin copy, and finalie, so be these, and such
like, (for to recite all the words, I think it not convenient) in another
Medit. cap. 41.
, Hei mihi, quia videre non potui Dominum angelorum, humiliatum ad
co^uersationem hominu^, etc. Vtinam cum felice Joseph Dominu^ meu^ de cruce
deposuissem, aromatibus condijssem, in sepulchro collocassem, etc.

In which my correction, I have had special care to leave as little out as
might be, Manner of correcting this Book.
and therefore did I think it better to change unto good purpose that which is
contrary unto the Christian faith, where aptly I could so do, than quite to
omit whatsoever was amiss. In which respect I have changed the 24. Chapter
after the Latin copy in my traslation, the 23. which is a prayer unto
Saints, as also these words, Propter merita, and orationes, etc. Medit. cap.
36.
, and applied them unto Christ. The other errors I have quite left out.
Likewise among the scapes, some things I have omitted, and some things I have
changed. I have omitted the whole 19. Chap. in the Latin copy, which is the
cause I have one Chapter less in my translation, than is in the Latin: and
also these words, and the rest tending to the like effect Medit. cap. 41.
, Hei mihi quia videre non potui Dominum angelorum, humiliatum ad
conuersationem hominum, etc. vtinam cum felice Joseph Dominum meu^ de cruce
deposuissem, aromatibus codijssem, in sepulchro collocassem, etc. That which I
have altered, are ye rest specified before: the only difference between the
Latin copy and mine in those places is, for that I turn the present tence
into the preterperfect tence, which agrees to ye truth.

It remains now that I do yield the reasons why I have corrected these
faults. Special reasons of correcting the errors and scapes in this book.
And first for the errors: the chiefest causes of my correcting them was, for
that they be contrary to Scripture, and might both infect the simple, and
cool the zeal even of the strong; but another was, because I saw many places
in this book did overthrow them quite. As first the places for merits are
overthrown, as by other, so especialie by these, I acknowledge that no penance
can satisfy for my sins August. prayers. chapter 38. pa. 198.
, and again, If thou examinest my righteousness, lo, I stink like dead carrion
August. prayers. chapter 39. pa. 206.
. Secondly, intercession unto Saints, with praieng unto the dead, is
overthrown by these and such like places, What other intercessor should I
direct unto thee, but even him August. prayers. chapter ^. page 23.
, who is the reconciliation for our sins, and sits at thy right hand,
making request for us. For, what is it to call unto the truth in truth August.
in the same cha. pa. 21.
, but even to call unto the Father in the name of the Son (not of Saints
reversed?) There is nothing behind to add, for I have sent mine whole hope
unto thee August. prayers. chapter 8. page 35.
. I have directed thy beloved Son mine advocate, unto thee, and have sent thy
glorious child to be a mediator between me and thee: I have sent I say an
intercessor, through whom (not through Marie, or any other Saint) I hope to
get pardon. For what is more acceptable August. prayers. chapter 5. page 21.
, than to call upon the begetter in the name of his only begotten? to move the
Father unto mercy, in the recordation of his Son? to mitigate the wrath of
the King, through naming of his dear child? etc. Thirdly, praieng that the
faithful departed out of this life, may have rest, is also in diverse places
overthrown, as where it is said August. prayers. chapter 22. page 90.
, Happy is the soul; which departing from the earthly body, goes directly
into heaven, secure it is, and quiet, etc! Oh happy are al thy Saints, o
Christ, which have passed over the sea of this mortality August. prayers. chapter
23. page 93.
, and attained unto the haven of perpetual quietness, security, and peace,
where they are at rest, and alwaie ioiful, and merry! And therefore considering
this contrariety in ye Auctor, I thought it best to publish those things which
were consonant to ye true faith, and to omit whatsoever sauored either of
heresy, or superstition.

And for the scapes, I am to yield the same reason, which I have given for my
correcting the errors. For as they, for the most part, be contrary unto the
Scriptures: so be diverse places in this book, as easelie I could show,
against them. I except only the scapes contained in the 41. Chapter after the
Latin copy: the which, as also the other scapes and errors, I am persuaded,
were the Auctor liuiug, he would gladly either amend himself, or suffer them
to be reformed. I often make mention of the Latin copy, because that has one
Chapter more than this has, which comes to pass by leaving out the 19.
Chapter.

Thirdly, Causes of quoting this book with places of Scripture.
and last of al, I have adorned this book with places of Scripture, both to
show from whence that which good is both is, and ought to be taken: and also to
move the zealous Christian the more earnestly to read this book. For when it
is apparent, that prayers, and meditations be derived out of the pure fountane
of Gods holy word, many are not a little not only pricked forward unto the
reading, but also strengthened and comforted much in mind, when they do read
them.

Which being so, I trust thou will accept my travel in good part, and at the
leastwise read this book as diligently now, being both made perfect,
corrected, and adorned, a^ erst thou have done when it neither had so many
prayers in it by half as now it has; nor was so pure fro error^; nor so
auctorized with the warrant of Gods word for the comfort of thy soul, as now
it is.

And thus I commend both thee and my self into his hands who has not only
made, but also redeemed us for his own glory, and praise.

The tenth of June. An. 1581. Yours in the Lord, THO. ROGERS.

A right Christian Treatise, containing many holy and heavenly Meditations,
written, as it is thought by that reverend Father S. AUGUSTINE.
Chap. 1.
A prayer unto Almighty God for grace to lead a new life according to Gods
holy Word.
O LORD my God Psalm. 7, 1. 3. Psalm. 18, 1. 2.
, give me grace from the very bottom of mine heart to desire thee; in desiring
to seek thee; in seeking to find thee; in finding to love thee; in loving
utterly to loath my former wickedness.

O Lord my God, give I beseech thee to mine heart repentance; to my spirit
contrition; to mine eyes a fountain of tears; to mine hands liberality upon
the poor.

O my King Psalm. 5, 2.
, quench in me the desires of the flesh; and inflame within my breast the fire
of thy love.

Drive away fro me the spirit of pride Eccles. 23, verse. 4.
, o my redeemer Matthew. 20, verse. 28. Romans 3, 24. 1. Cor. 1, 30. 1. Tim. 2, 6.
; and of thy mercy bestow upon me the treasure of thine humility Matthew. 11,
verse. 29. Philip. 2, 5. 6, etc.
.

O my savior Luke 9, 56. John. 3, 17. Acts. 4, 10, 11. 12.
, remove fro my mind the rage of wrath; and graciously give me the shield of
patience.

Pluck even from the very root of mine heart the rancor of malice o my
Creator Genesis 1, 26. 27. Psalm. 100, 3. Psalm. 119, 73.
; and make me to enioie the sweetenes of a quiet mind.

Give me, o most loving father Matt. 6, 9. 14. Romans 8, 15. Coloss. 1, 2.
, a sound faith; a right hope; and a constant love.

O my governor Eccl. 23, 1. 4, etc.
, drive away far fro me al vanity; and suffer me to have neither an
unconstant mind; nor a wandering heart; nor a scurrilous mouth; nor a proud
look; nor a greedy belly; nor a slandering tongue; nor itching ears after
curiosity; nor a covetous mind after riches Psalm. 119. verse. 36.
; nor polling hands to abuse my power; nor ambitious motions to get vain
glory; let both curssed hypocrisy; and poisoned flattery; and proud
contempt of the poor; and violent oppression of the weak; let both burning
covetousness, and cankred envy, with damnable blaspheming of thy name, be
always far from me thy servant.

O my maker Psalm. 139, verse. 13. 14. 15.
, make a large distance between me and rashness; between me and wickedness;
between me and frowardnes; between me and unquietness; between me and
idleness; between me and drousines; between me and blockishnes;

Grant that my heart prove not blinded, my senses obstinate, my manners savage:
but let me delight in goodness, and follow counsel, and never loose the bridle
to my tongue; nor cruelly make a pray of the poor; nor violently oppress the
weak; nor unjustly slander the innocent; nor negligentlie regard inferiors
committed to my charge;

Finalie, let me use neither cruelty toward my servants, nor treachery toward
my friends, nor violence upon my neighbors.

O my God, my merciful God Psalm. 59, verse. 17.
, even through thy beloved son Ephesians. 2, 18. Colos. 3, 17.
I beseech thee, give me grace to exercise my self in the works of mercy,
and in godly cogitations, namely, to weep with them that weep To. 12, 15.
1. Pet. 3, 8.
; to instruct such as go astraie Iam. 5, 19.
; to help the afflicted Math. 25, verse. 35. 36, etc.
; to cherish the poor Esaias. 58, 7. Ezec. 18, 7.
; to comfort the sorrowful Matthew, 25, verse. 35. 36. 37, etc.
; to relieve the oppressed; to nourish the hungry; to refresh them which
mourn; to forgive my debtors Matt. 6, 12. Matt. 18, 23. 24, etc. 35.
; to pardon them which have hurt me To. 12, 19.
; to love them which hate me Mat. 5, 44. 45, etc.
; to render for evil, good To. 12, 19. 20. 21. 1. Peter. 3, 8. 9.
; to despise none Pro. 14, 21. Prou. 17, 5.
, but to honor al To. 12, 10.
; to imitate the virtuous 1. Cor. 11, 1. 1. These. 3, 7. 9. Hebr. 6, 12.
; to shun the wicked Prou. 4, verse. 14. Prou. 11, verse. 19. Prou. 24, 1. 2.
; to embrace virtue Psalm. 5, verse. 9.
, to fly sin 1. Peter. 3, verse. 9.
; in adversity to be patient Romans 5, 3. Hebr. 10, verse. 36.
, in prosperity to be continent; to set a watch before my mouth Eccle. 22, 26.
, and a seal of wisdom before my lips; to despise earthly Phil. 3, verse.
7. 8.
, and to covet after heavenly things Coloss. 3, verse. 1. 2.
, Amen.

Chap. 2.
An accusation of man's unworthiness; and a commendation of Gods infinite mercy.
THus, my maker Genesis 1, 26. 27.
, I have asked much, and yet have deserved naught.

I confess, yea alas, I confess, that not only I deserve not those
blessings which I do require, but also do deserve many and exquisite torments
Job. 10, 8.
.

Notwithstanding, even publicanes Mat. 21, 31. Mark. 2, 15.
, harlots, and thieves Lu. 23, 40. 41. 42. 43.
, who in a moment plucked from out the jaws of the enemy, are taken into the
arms of the shepherd, do embolden me to do as I do.

For albe thou, o God, maker of al things Genes. 1, 1. 2. 3, etc. Psalm. 148, 1,
2, etc. 5. Hebr. 1, 1. 2.
, art woonderful in all thy works Reave. 15, 3.
: yet art thou most wonderful in the works of mercy: therefore did thou
say by one of thy servants Psa. 145, 9.
, His mercies are over al his works.

And although thou spakest this but of one, yet we trust it is meant of thy
whole people: My loving kindness will I not take from him 2. Sam. 7, verse. 14.
15. Psalm. 89, 33.
. For thou despisest none, thou castest none away, thou abhorrest no man,
unless it be him which madlie abhors thee. Hence it is, that being moved,
thou strikest not; but, if they surcesse, thou powrest thy blessings upon them
which provoke thee.

O my God, the horn of my salvation Ps^
, and my refuge I, wretch that I am, I have provoked thee; I have done evil in
thy sight; I have stirred up thine anger; I have deserved thy displeasure. I
have sinned, and thou have suffered; I have offended, yet thou bear with me.

If I repent, thou sparest Eze. 18, 21. 22. Eze. 33, 14. 15. 16.
; if I return, thou embracest Luke 15, 20.
; yea, beside all this, though I differ, thou waitest.

Thou reclaimest him which wandereth; thou inuitest him that resists; thou
look for him that sleeps; and him thou embracest which returns.

Thou teach the ignorant; thou comfortest the pensive; thou liftest up from
destruction after a fall; thou give to him that asks Matt. 7, 7.
; he that seeks, finds thee, and thou openest to him which knocks.

Lo, o Lord, God of my salvation Psa. 18, 46. Psalm. 51, 14.
, what I should say for my self I know not, and how I may answer, I am
ignorant: without thee there is no refuge, from thy sight no secret place can
hide Psa. 139, 7. 8. 9, etc. Eccl. 23, 19.
; thou have shown me a way to live well Deu. 10, 12 Deu. 11, 22. 28.
, and given me knowledge how to walk; thou have threatened me hell fire Eze.
18, 13 Romans 2, 8. 9. Romans 11, 15.
, and thou have promised the glory of Paradise. Romans 2, 10. Revel. 2, 7. Reave.
22, 14.
.

Now, o Father of mercies, and the God of al comfort 2. Cor. 1, 3.
, pearce my flesh with thy fear, so that by fearing, I may escape such things
as thou do threaten; and restore to me the joy of thy salvation Psalm. 51,
12.
, that by loving I may taste the felicity which thou have promised 1. Cor. 2,
9.
.

O Lord, my rock and my fortress Psalm. 71, 3.
; my God, my refuge, and my savior Psalm. 18, 2.
; put thou into my remembrance the things which I should conceive of thee;
teach me by what words I may call upon thee; instruct me with what good works I
may please thee.

For I know, indeed I know one good work, wherein thou art much delighted;
and another which thou do not despise. Thy sacrifice is a contrite spirit
Psalm. 51, 17.
, a contrite and a broken heart, o God, thou do not despise.

O my God, mine helper Psalm. 18, 2.
, enrich me with these thy gifts: with these defenses arm thou me against the
enemy; let this be the water to quench the flames of sin; reach out of thy
goodness this refuge against the passions of my desires.

O Lord God, the strength of my salvation Psa. 140, 7.
, let me not be of that number which for a time believe, but when temptation
comes, go back Psa. 140, 7.
.

Cover thou mine head in the day of battle Luke 8, 13.
, o mine hope in affliction, and my salvation in the time of trouble.

Thus, o Lord, my light Psalm. 27, 1.
, and my salvation, what I need, I have asked; and what I fear, thou art
privy of: but my conscience gnaweth, and the secret cogitations of the heart
reprooueth my boldness, and what love ministers, fear scatreth; zeal stirs
up, fear checketh; my wicked deeds strike a terror, but thy goodness makes
bold; thy mercy encourages, my wickedness keeps me back: and to say more
truly, the fantasies of vices come fresh into my remembrance, which beat
back the boldness of presumptuous minds.

Chap. 3.
A complaint of a sinner, whose prayer God hears not in respect of his
disobedience.
FOr he that is worthy hatred, how can he require mercy! he which has
deserved pain, how can he desire glory!

He provoke the judge, that laieng satisfaction for his offense apart, sueth
to be honored with rewards. Who so is condemned to punishment, is too bold with
the King, if he seek to be crowned with an undeserved garland. That foolish
child does provoke the sweet affection of his loving father unto wrath, that
after reproaches offered, will usurp the dignity of inheritance, before he have
repented him of his fault.

O my Father Mal. 2, 10. Math. 5, 48.
, why call I into mind what I have done? I have deserved death, and I beg life.
I have moved my King Psalm. 5, 2. Psalm. 44, 4.
, whose assistance impudentlie I do crave. I have despised the judge Job. 9,
15. Psalm. 50, 6. Esai. 33, 22.
, and yet rashly I beseech him to be mine helper. Proudly I have refused to
hear my father, whom notwithstanding I presume to have mine helper.

Woe is me, how late do I come; alas, alas, how slowly do I hasten; woe is me,
because I run after wounds, refusing being whole to avoid the darts.

I have neglected to foresee the darts, but now am troubled standing at
deaths door.

I have increased my wounds, because I have not feared to add sin unto sin.

With a fresh wound I have embrued my scars, because I have augmented mine old
sins by my daily transgressions; and what God by his medicines had healed, I
by my frantike scratching have opened.

The skin which going over the wounds, did hide the disease, through ye
breaking out of the corruption, is become rotten, in as much as wickedness used
again, made ye mercy once granted to be of none effect.

For I know it is written, At what time soever the righteous man shall commit
wickedness, al his righteousness which he has done shall not be mentioned Ezech.
18, verse. 24.
. Now if the righteousness of a righteous man through sin shall be forgotten; how
much more shall the repentance of a sinner turning again unto wickedness!

How often have I a dog returned unto the vomit Pro 26, 11.
; and like a sow wallowed in the mire 2. Pet. 2, verse. 22.
!

I acknowledge, because for me particularly to remember al it is impossible, I
have taught many to sin, which knew not what sin meant; many that were bent
to sin, I have persuaded thereunto; such as have resisted, I have compelled; and
have consented to the^ as have gone about wickedness. Snares I have laid for
them which have kept the right way; and made a pit for such as have sought the
same: yea I made no conscience of committing sin, and feared not to forget thy
laws.

But thou a righteous judge 2. Esdr. 14, verse. 32.
, sealing mine iniquity up as in a bag Job. 14, 17.
, look narowlie unto al my paths, and numberest al my steps.

Thou have held thy peace, thou have alwaie bin silent Psa. 50, 21
, thou have bin patient a long time: but, out alas, one day thou will cry
like a woman in travel Esa. 42, 14
.

Chap. 4.
How God the righteous judge should de feared.
O Lord, God of gods Deu. 10, 17
, of great kindness Joel. 2, 13.
, I know how thou will one day appear Acts. 1, 11. Acts. 10, 42. 2. Tim. 4,
1. 8.
; I know thou will not keep silence Psa. 50, 3. 4.
, at what time the fire shall devour before thy face, and a mighty tempest
increase about thee; when thou will call the heaven above, and the earth to
judge thy people; and lo, al my sins shall be laid open 1. Cor. 4, 5.
before so many thousand people; and not only al my wicked deeds, but also
al mine evil thoughts, and words shall be manifest before all the companies of
Angels.

So many judges then shall I wretch stand before, as have excelled me in
well-doing. So many shall give sentence to my confusion, as have showed me
examples to live vprightlie. So many shall be witnesses to convince me, as have
both instructed me with their godly exhortations, and provoked me unto
imitation by their righteous dealing.

O my Lord, I know not what to say; I can not tell what answer to make: and
being now in extreme peril, my conscience trobleth; my secret cogitations
torment; my covetousness fettereth; my pride accuses; mine envy eats; my
lust inflameth; my riotousnes trobleth; my gluttony shameth; my drunkenness
confuteth; my detraction teareth; my discord parts; mine anger disquieteth;
my lightness dissolueth; my sloth oppresses; mine hypocrisy deceaueth: my
flattery breaks; my favor lifts up; my slander pricketh me.

Behold my deliverer from the fierce nations; behold, with whom I have lived,
with whom I have studied, with whom also I have kept promise from the day of
my birth!

The studies which I delighted in, do now condemn me; which once I praised,
dispraise me now.

These are the friends upon whom I rested; the teachers to whom I listened; the
masters whom I served; the counselers whom I believed; the citizens with whom I
dwelled; the companions, whom I consented unto.

Alack, my King and my God Psalm. 5, 2.
that my freedom is so long kept fro me. Alack, o my light Psalm. 27, 1.
, that I have remained with the dwellers of Kedar Ps. 120, 5.
. And seeing holy David has said Too long Psa. 120, 6.
, how much more may I wretch say, My soul has too long bin a stranger!

O God, my strength Psalm. 18, 1. 2.
, in thy sight shall none that lives be justified Psa. 143, 2.
. My trust is not in the sons of men. Whom will thou find righteous Romans 3,
verse. 20.
, if thou judge without mercy! And unless in favor thou prevent the wicked,
there will not be to glorify the good.

For I do believe, o my salvation Psa. 88, 1.
, which thing I have heard, how that thy bountifulnes leads me unto
repentance Romans 2, 4.
: the sweet words of thy mouth have sounded in mine ears, No man can come
unto me, except the Father, which has sent me draw him Ioh. 6, 44.
.

Now because thou have taught me, and mercifulie endued me with this knowledge,
from the bottom of mine heart, and with all the power of my mind, I humbly
pray thee, o almighty Father, with thy most well-beloved son Mat. 3, 17.
; and thee, sweet Son with the most cheerful comforter John 14, 16 26.
, I beseech thee draw me Sal. songs. 1, verse. 1. 2. 3.
, so that I may run after thee by the savor of thy good ointments.

Chap. 5.
A prayer unto God the Father, through his son Jesus Christ.
Unto thee do I call Psalm. 18, 3. 6.
, o GOD, even unto thee do I call. For thou art near unto all that call upon
thee, to all that call upon thee in truth Ps. 145, 18.
.

Because thou art the truth Ioh. 14, 6.
, teach me I beseech thee of thy goodness; o holy truth teach me to call upon
thee in truth. For of my self I am ignorant how to do so Romans 8, verse. 26.
, but mine humble request is, o blessed verity, to be taught of thee.

For to be wise without thee, is but foolishnes 1. Cor. 1, 20.
; but to know thee John. 17, 3
, is perfect wisdom.

Instruct me in thine heavenly wisdom; and teach me thy statutes Psa. 119,
1^.
. For I verelie do believe that he is blessed, whom thou chastisest, o Lord,
and teach in thy law Psa. 94. 12.
.

My desire is to call unto thee; now grant, I pray thee, I may do so in truth.

What is it to call unto the truth in truth; but even to call unto the Father in
the name of the Son Ioh. 15, 16.
? Then, holy Father, thy word is the truth Ioh. 17, 17.
; the beginning of thy word is truth Ps. 119, 160.
, for this is the beginning of thy words, that the word was in the beginning
John. 1, 1.
.

In that very beginning I worship thee the chief beginning. In that same very
word of truth, I call unto thee the perfect truth; in which thou, the very same
truth, direct me in thy truth, and teach me.

For what is more acceptable than to call upon the begetter, in the name of his
only begotten? to move the Father unto mercy in the recordation of the
Son? to mitigate the wrath of the King through naming of his dear child?

So have the guilty bin wont to be delivered out of prison; the fettered
loased; and such as have bin adjudged to the death, have not only bin
pardoned, but gotten beside extraordinary favor, while they have expressed the
tender affection toward a deerlie beloved child to angry princes; finalie, so
have trespassing servants escaped punishment at their masters hands even
through the intercession of their sweet sons.

Even after the like sort by the tender love of thine almighty Son, I
humbly beseech thee, o almighty Father, bring my soul out of prison Psa.
142, 7
, that I may praise thy Name. By thy coeternal, and only Son Ioh. 3, 16.
18. 1. John. 4, 9.
, I pray thee, deliver me from the chains of sin; and through the
intercession of thy Son that sits now at thy right hand, restore me unto
life, to whom mine own deserts do threaten a deadly sentence.

For what other intercessor should I direct unto thee, but even him which is
the reconciliation for our sins 1. Ioh. 2, 2.
; and sits at thy right hand making request for us Romans 8, verse. 34.
!

Behold mine advocate with thee God the Father 1. John. 2, 1.
; behold the most hie Priest Hebr. 8, 1.
, which needs not to be sanctified by the blood of any thing Heb. 9, 11. 12.
, but shines gloriously embrued with his own blood; behold the sacrifice
holy, acceptable, and perfect Heb. 9, 24. 25, etc.
, offered and received for a sweet smelling savor Ephesians. 5, 2.
; behold the lamb undefiled 1. Pet. 1, 19.
, that as a sheep before his shearers opened not his mouth Esai. 53, 7.
; neither spoke a word when he was buffeted with fists Mark. 14, verse. 65.
, spit upon Matt. 26, verse. 67.
, and obraided; finalie, which did no sin 1. Pet. 2, 22
, and yet bare our sins 1. Pet. 2, 24
, by whose stripes we are healed.

Chap. 6.
A prayer unto God the Father for mercy, in respect of the bitter pains of
his dear Son.
BEhold, loving Father Mat. 5, 45.
, thy most loving Son which has endured such wicked things for my sake.

O most gracious Prince Eccl. 23, 1. 4, etc. Psalm. 5, 2.
, behold him which has suffered; and of thy goodness call him into mind for whom
he has suffered.

Is not he that innocent one 2. Cor. 5, verse. 21. 1. Pet. 2, 22.
, o my Lord, even thy Son Romans 8, verse. 32. John. 3, 17.
whom thou gave, to redeem thy servants Gal. 3, 13. Galat. 4, 1. 2, etc. 5.
6, etc.
! Is not this the author of life Ioh. 11, 25.
, that, being brought as a sheep to the slaughter Esa. 53, 7.
, and showing himself obedient to thee, even unto the death Phil. 2, 8.
, dreaded not to end his life with a most cruel death Galat. 3, 13
!

Remember, o worker of al salvation, how this is he, whom thy will was should be
partaker of mine infirmity Esai. 53, 3. 4.
, notwithstanding thou had begotten him of thine own power Psalm. 1, 7. Heb.
1. 5.
. Out of doubt he is God with thee Matt. 16, verse. 16. John. 1, 1. 2.
, which took my nature upon him John. 1, 14
, and in that flesh ascended upon the cross Luke. 23, verse. 33.
, and suffered a most grievous punishment.

O Lord my God Psalm. 7, 1.
, cast the eyes of thy Majesty upon the work of thine unspeakable mercy.

Behold thy sweet Son, whose whole body was stretched forth Mark. 15,
verse. 22. 23. 24. Luke 23, 33.
.

Behold his harmeles hands John. 20, verse. 20. 25.
distilling forth godly blood; and being pacified, forgive the sins which
mine hands have committed.

Behold his naked side pierced through with a sharp spear Ioh. 19, 34.
; and renew me with the holy fountain, which I believe flowed from his side.

Behold his undefiled feet, that have never stood in the way of sinners Psalm.
1, 1.
, but ever walked in thy law, dented-through with cruel nails John. 20,
verse. 20. 25.
, and make my paths perfect in thy ways; give me grace to abhor al wicked
steps; take fro me the way of lieng Ps. 119, 29.
, and grant me graciously to choose the way of truth.

O King of saints, by this most holy Saint, by this my redeemer Col. 1, 14. 1.
Tim. 2, 6.
, I beseech thee, make me to run the way of thy commandments Ps. 119, 32.
, that in spirit I may be knit unto him, which abhorred not to be clothed with
my flesh John. 1, 14.
.

O merciful Father, remember how the same thy most dear Son, being a young man,
bowed his white neck with his head, and gave up the ghost Ioh. 19, 30
.

Behold, o most gracious maker Psa. 100, 3. Psalm. 119, 73.
, the humanity of thy beloved Son; and have pity upon the weakness of thy
frail workmanship.

Behold how his breast became white; his side bloody; his bowels dry; his
sight dim; his countenance pale; his arms stiff; how his legs hoong; and
the stream of blessed blood watered his pierced feet.

Behold, o glorious Father Psalm. 1, 7. Heb. 1, 5.
, the torn members of thy tenderly beloved Son; and graciously remember
what my substance is.

Behold the pains of God become man John. 1, 14.
; and release the misery of man thy creature Genesis 1, 26. 27. Job. 10, 8.
.

Behold the punishment of the redeemer Gal. 3, 13.
; and forgive the sins of the redeemed 1. Pet. 1, 18. 19.
.

Even this is he, o my Lord, whom thou have plaged for the sins of thy people
Esai. 53, 8.
, notwithstanding he be thy beloved Son, in whom thou art well pleased Mat.
3, 17. Matthew. 17, 5. 2. Pet. 1, 17.
. This is that innocent person, in whom there was found no deceit Esai. 53, 9.
1. Pet. 2, 22.
, and yet was he reckoned with the transgressors Esa. 53, 12 Mark. ^5, 28 Luke
22, 37.
.

Chap. 7.
A prayer wherein man confesses, how he was the cause why Christ suffered.
O Sweet Christ, what sin did thou commit, yt thou should be so judged?
What did thou commit, that thou should be so cruely handled? What was thy
sin; what was thy fault; what was the cause of thy death; what was the
occasion of thy damnation?

For I, alas, I did the sin, for which thou did suffer Esai. 53, 4. 5. 6.
1. Pet. 2, 24.
; I deserved the torments which thou did endure. O strange judgment, o
unspeakable disposition of the mystery!

The sinner offends, the just is punished Mat. 27, 24 Luke 23, 41. 47.
; the guilty transgresses, the innocent is beaten Esai. 53, 5.
; the wicked sins, the godly is damned: That which the evil deserves, the
good suffers; the servant does amiss, the master makes amends; man
commits sin, and God bears the punishment!

O ah, how, o Son of God Mat. 3, 17.
, how have thou debased thy self Phil. 2, 8. Heb. 2, 9.
! How have thou burned in affection!

Ioh. 15, 13. Ephesians. 5, 2. 1. Ioh. 3, 16.
! How far is thy mercy stretched! How great is thy kindness! whither extends
thy love! whither is thy compassion come!

For I did wickedlie, but thou wart punished Matt. 8, 17
; I sinned, and thou wart afflicted Gal. 3, 13.
; I offended, thou wart tormented Mark. 15, verse. 20. 21, etc. 1. Cor. 2, 7.
8.
; I lifted up my self, thou wart humbled Phil. 2, 8.
; I swelled, thou wart brought low Heb. 2, 9.
; I was disobedient, but thou obedientlie barest the punishment of disobedience
Phil. 2, 8.
; I served the belly, but thou enduredst hunger Matt. 4, 2.
. The tree allured me unto unlawful concupiscence: but perfect charity led
thee unto the cross Ephe. 5, 2. 1. John. 3, 16
. I tasted presumptuously the forbidden fruit; thou sufferedst torments. I
delight in meat; thou did hang Gal. 3, 13.
. I enioie pleasure; thou wart pierced with nails Ioh. 20, 25
. I feel the sweetenes of the apple, but thou tastest the bitterness of gal
Matthew. 27, verse. 34.
. Eua smiling is merry with me; Marie weeping had compassion upon thee Matthew.
27, verse. 55. 56.
. Lo, King of glory Psalm. 24. 7. 8. 9. 10.
, thus is mine ungodliness, and thy mercy manifest; thus mine unrighteousness,
and thine innocence is evident.

Now, o my King and my God, what shall I render to thee for all thy benefits
toward me Psa. 116, 12
? For man's heart can not conceive the thing which may worthily recompense these
thy ample rewards. Can the wit of man find out any thing answereable to Gods
mercy? No, it is not for a creature to enterprise to make God amends.

Notwithstanding, o Son of God, in this so wonderful dispensation, something
my frailty is able to do, namely, if thorough thy visitation the mind being
pricked, it crucify the flesh, with the affections and the lusts Gal. 5, 24.
; which thou having granted, it then begins as it were to suffer for thee,
because thou also have vouchsafed to die for my sin Matt. 8, 17 1. Pet. 2, 24.
. And so through the conquest of the inner man, it shall be armed, thou being
captain, unto the attaining of the outward victory, inasmuch as it fears
not, having overcome the spiritual battle, to be subject, for thy sake, to the
material sword. In which respect ye weakness of my condition, if it like thy
goodness, shall be able, according to the power it has, to answer to the
greatness of the Creator. And this is heavenly physic, o sweet Jesus, this is
the preservative of thy love.

Now I beseech thee, by thy wonted mercies, power that into my wounds, which,
the melancholy humor of venomous contagion being thrown away, may restore me
again to my former health; and, having tasted the nectar of thy sweetness, may
make me from the very heart to despise the inticements of the world, and to
fear none adversity of the same for thy Name sake; finalie, that I may be
always mindful of thine everlasting glory, and in that respect abhor the
trobles of this transitory world.

I beseech thee let nothing seem sweet to me without thee; let nothing
please me, no worldly thing like me beside thee. Let me not love that, which
thou do abhor; and let thy good pleasure, be al my desire continualie.

Let it grieve me to rejoice without thee Ier. 9, 23. 24. 1. Cor. 1, 31.
; and let me glad to be afflicted for thy Name sake Act. 5, 41.
.

Let thy Name be my joy; and the remembrance of thee my consolation.

Let my tears be my meat night and day Psalm. 42, 3.
, in seeking after thy righteousness.

Let the Law of thy mouth be better unto me, than thousands of gold and silver
Psalm. 119, verse. 72.
.

Finalie, let al my care be to please thee; and to resist thy will, let me
utterly detest.

O mine hope Col. 1, 27. 1. Tim. 1, 1.
, by all thy mercies I beseech thee, be merciful to my sins Psalm. 65, 3.
.

Open mine ears to thy laws, and incline not mine heart, I pray thee by
thine holy Name, unto evil Psa. 141, 4.
, that I do not commit wicked works with men that work iniquity.

Last of al I beseech thee by thy wonderful humility, let not the foot of
pride come against me Psa. 36, 11.
, and let not the hand of the wicked move me.

Chap. 8.
A prayer unto God the Father, showing how the passion of his Son was for the
reconciliation of man.
LO, almighty God 2. Cor. 6, verse. 18.
, Father of my Lord Ephe. 1, 2. 3. Philip. 1, 2.
, deal graciously, and have mercy on me, I beseech thee.

For I have deuoutelie offered that which I found most precious; and humbly
presented him, which I saw was most dear unto thee.

I have concealed naught, which I have not revealed to thy Majesty; there is
nothing behind to add, for I have sent mine whole hope Col. 1, 27. 1. Tim. 1,
1.
unto thee.

I have directed thy beloved Son Mat. 3, 17. Matthew. 17, 5. 2. Pet. 1, 17.
, mine advocate 1. Ioh. 2, 1.
unto thee; and have sent thy glorious child to be a mediator between me and
thee 2. Tim. 2, 5. Heb. 9, 14. 15. Heb. 12, 24.
: I have sent, I say, an intercessor, through whom I hope to get pardon.

In words I have sent the Word John. 1, 1.
, which, I said, was sent for my sake John. 3, 17.
; I have recited also the whole passion of thy most holy Son, which, I
believe, suffered to save me Esai. 56, 4. 5. 6. Matthew. 8, 17. 1. Pet. 2, 24.
.

I believe the Godhead sent of thee Matthew. 21, verse. 37. John. 17, 3.
, took upon him mine humanity John. 1. 14.
, wherein he thought good to suffer himself to be buffeted Matt. 27, verse.
30. 31, etc.
, bound, spit on, mocked, yea, and crucified, nailed, and pierced too.

I believe also the same very Manhood, which was trobled with the crieng of
infancy, wrapped with the swaddling clothes of children Luke. 2, 6. 7.
; vexed with the labors of youth; weakened with fasting Matt. 4, 2.
; afflicted with watching Luke 6, 12.
; weried with traueling Ioh. 4, 6.
; with scourging whipped Matthew. 27, verse. 26. John. 19, 1.
; torn with punishment Mar. 15, 15. 16. 17, etc.
; counted with transgressors Esa. 53, 12. Luke. 22, 37.
; he has gloriously raised from the dead, carried into the ioies of heaven
Acts. 1. 9. 10. 11.
, and placed the same at ye right hand of thy Majesty Mark. 16, verse. 19.
Romans 8, 34.
.

He is both my reconciler, and thy reconciliation 1. Ioh. 2, 2.
.

Consider now both who is thy Son, whom thou have begot Hebr. 1, 5. Hebr. 5.
5.
; and who is the servant whom thou have redeemed Gal. 3, 13. Gala. 4. 5. Ti^
2, 14.
. Behold the maker John. 1, 1. 2. 3. Hebr. 1, 2.
; and despise not the workmanship Psa. 100, 3.
. Graciously embrace the shepherd Ioh. 10, 11. 14.
, and favorably respect the sheep brought upon his own shoulders Luke. 15, 5
6.
.

This is that good shepherd, which with much and great labor sought the
wandering sheep over steep hills, and dangerous low valies; and having found
the same welnigh dead through long estraieng, with great joy stoupeth himself
down, and lovingly tieng it about himself, does lift it out of the deep of
confusion, and carries it al ioifullie which was lost, unto the ninety and
nine Luke 15, 4. 5. 6, etc.
.

Behold, o Lord my king Psalm. 5, 2.
, God almighty 2. Cor. 6. verse. 18.
; behold, the good shepherd Luke 15, 4. 5, etc. John. 10, 11. 14.
brings that unto thee which thou did commit unto his charge.

He took upon him through thine appointment to save man John. 3, 17
, and behold, he has restored the same to thee void of al spot of sin 1
Tit. 2, 14.
.

Behold, thy dear Son has reconciled the workmanship 1. John. 2, verse. 3.
, which was estraied far from thee: the merciful pastor fetches that to the
fold, which the greedy deuourer 1. Pet. 5, 8.
had hunted away. He brings him into thy presence, which fled Genesis 3, 8.
out of sight through a guilty conscience, yt by his maker he might obtain
pardon 1. Cor. 1, verse. 30.
, which of himself deserved wrath Ephesians. 2, 3.
; and that through such a Captain he might have hope to be called home into
his country, to whom nothing was due but hell fire in respect of his sin.

I could, holy Father Matt. 6, 10.
, offend thee of my self; but so could I not of my self please thee. And
therefore thy beloved Son Matt. 3, 17. 2. Pet. 1, 17.
, my God, became mine helper, and took my nature upon him John. 1, 14. Matthew.
1, 23.
, thereby to heal mine infirmities Esai. 53, 4. 5.
, that thence he might offer to thee the sacrifice of praise, whence the cause
of sin did first spring out; and might by that thing bring me into thy favor,
whereby sitting now at thy right hand he would show that he is partaker of my
substance Mar. 16, 19 Acts. 1, 9. 10. 11. Romans 8, 34.
.

Lo, this is mine hope Col. 1, 27. 1. Tim. 1, 1.
, this is al my confidence.

Wherefore if you despise me, as you may right well, in respect of my sin; yet
regard me at the least of thy goodness in respect of the great love Ephesians. 5, 2.
1. John. 3, 16
of thy beloved Son: behold that in thy Son, which may move thee to show
mercy upon thy servant: behold the sacrament of his flesh, and remit the
sins of the flesh.

As often as thou look upon ye wounds of thy blessed Son; so often, I
pray thee, let my sins be covered. As often as thou remembrest the precious
blood of his holy side; so often, I beseech thee, let the spots of my
filthiness be washed away. And because flesh has provoked thee unto anger, my
humble suit is, that flesh also may move thee unto mercy; that as flesh
seduced man to offend, so flesh may bring man to pardon.

For much it is, I grant, which my wickedness has deserved: yet far much more
is it, which the love of my redeemer may lawfulie challenge. For though great be
mine unrighteousness: yet is the righteousness of Christ my redeemer much greater
Romans 5. 15
.

Because by how much God is better than man: by so much is my wickedness
inferior to his goodness, both in quality, and also in quantity.

For what has man committed, which the Son of God, made man John. 1, 14.
has not redeemed! who in pride can so swel, that by his woonderful humility
may not be overthrown! what power of death can there be so great, but the
passion of ye Son of God on the cross will destroy ye same!

Truly, o my God Psalm. 7, 1. 3. John. 20, 17.
, were both the sins of wicked man, and the mercy of my redeemer waied
together in equal balance, surely neither the east would so differ from the
west, nor the lower most part of hell from the uppermost top of heaven.

Now therefore, o most glorious Creator of the light Genesis 1, 3.
, for the exceeding great pains of thy beloved Son, forgive my sins: set his
godliness against my wickedness; his trobles against my crookednes; his meekenes
against my frowardnes. Let his humility Phil. 2, 8.
for mine hautines; his patience 1. Pet. 2, 21 22. 23.
for mine impatiencie; his gentleness Mat. 11, 29
for my cruelty; his obedience Phil. 2, 8.
for my rebellion; his quietness Esai. 53, 7.
for my crabednes; his sweetness for my bitterness; his mildnes for my rage; and
his love Ephesians. 5, 2. 1. John. 3. 16
for mine hatred make amends.

Chap. 9.
Unto the holy Spirit a godly prayer.
THerefore almighty and holy Ghost, which art the love of the deity,
proceeding both from the almighty Father Ioh. 20, 17
, and his blessed Son Psalm. 1, 7. Matthew. 3, 17. Hebr. 1, 5.
, the most gracious comforter Ioh. 14, 16. 17. John. 15, 26.
of the trobled souls, slide thou down into the secret parlor of mine heart by
thy mighty power, and lighten every privy corner of the neglected house by
the brightness of thy glittering light; and such places as wither through long
drines, by visiting with thine abundant showers of rain make thou to spring.

The privy places of the inner man heal thou with the dart of thy love; and
kindle by piercing with thy healthful flames the intrals of my nummed liver;
and with the lightsome fire of thine holy and fervent love feed thou every
secret part both of my mind and body.

Give me drink out of the river of thy pleasures Psalm. 36, 8.
; that I may now covet no more to taste of ye poisoned sweetenes of worldly
things.

Judge me o Lord Psalm. 43, 1.
, and defend my cause against the ungodly people; teach me to do thy will Psa.
143, 10
, for thou art my God.

Wherefore I do verelie believe, that in whom soever thou dwell, thou do
build the house both of the Father, and the Son.

Blessed is that man which can get such a guest; because through thee, both the
Father and the Son will dwell with him Ioh. 14, 23
. Come then, o thou most gracious comforter of the trobled soul Ioh. 15, 26
, which art a protector in due time Psalm. 9, 9.
, and an helper in affliction, come. O come thou purger of wickedness, and curer
of wounds. Come, thou which art the fortitude of the weak, and the stay of
such as are falling. Come thou instructor of the humble Luke 12, 12
, and the destroier of the proud. Come thou loving father of the fatherles, and
thou merciful judge of the widows Psalm. 68, 5.
. Come thou hope of the poor, and refresher of them, which be ready to faint.
Come thou guide of seafaring men; and haven to avoid shipwreck. Thou singular
glory of such as live; thou only salvation of them at ye point of death,
come. Come, o most holy spirit, come and have mercy upon me, knit me to thee;
and mercifulie grant after the multitude of thy mercies, that my slendernes may
please thy greatness; and my weakness thy strength, through Jesus Christ my
Savior Ioh. 4, 42. Phil. 3, 20. 1. Tim. 4, 10. 1. John. 4, 14.
, who in thy unity with the Father lives and reigns for evermore, Amen.

Chap. 10.
A devout prayer of an humble servant of God.
I Know LORD, I know, and confess, how I am unworthy to be loved of thee:
yet art not thou unworthy to be loved of me. I am unworthy to serve thee:
yet art not thou unworthy to have my service. Make me therefore worthy of
that which thou art worthy of; so shall I be worthy of that, of which now I
am unworthy. Make me, as thy will is, to cesse from sin; that as my duty
binds, I may serve thee.

Grant that I may so keep, and govern, and end my life, that I may sleep in
peace, and rest in thee.

Stick to me even to the end, that sleep with rest; and rest with quietness;
and quietness with euerlastingnes Reu. 7, 15. 16. 17. Reu. 21, 4. 23. 24.
may receive me, Amen.

Chap. 11.
A prayer unto the blessed Trinity.
BOth with heart and mouth we confess, we praise, and bless thee God the
Father Mat. 11, 25 Mark. 13, 32 John. 20, 17.
unbegotten; thee, God the Son only begotten John. 1, 14. 18. John. 3, 16.
18. 1. John. 4, 9.
; thee, God the holy Ghost the comforter Ioh. 14, 16 17. 26. John. 15, 26.
, an holy and inseparable Trinity; to thee be glory worlds without end 1.
Tim. 1, 17 2. Tim. 4, 18. Reu. 7, 12.
, Amen.

Chap. 12.
A confession of Gods almightines, and majesty.
O Our GOD Psalm. 90, 1. 2. Psalm. 95, 7.
, o almighty God Genesis 35, 11 Ezech. 10, 5 Eccl. 42, 17. Revel. 15, 3.
, o holy Trinity, one power, and vnparted Majesty.

I praise thee, yea, even I ye basest of thy servants, and a simple member of
thy Church, I praise thee; and with a due sacrifice of praise Psalm. 50, 14
Psalm. 116, 17.
, according to the knowledge and power, which thou have vouchsafed to impart
upon me, I glorify thee.

And because I lack outward gifts to offer, behold, that which is in me, even
the vows of thanksgiving Psa. 116, 14 17. 18.
, gladly and ioifulie do I offer out of a good conscience 1. Tim. 1, 5.
, and faith unfeigned.

With mine heart therefore I do believe Romans 10, 10
, o King of heaven Mat. ^1, 25
, and Lord of the earth, and with my mouth I confess, the Father Mar. 13, 32
John. 20, 17
, the Son John 1, 18. Romans 8, 3. 17.
, and the holy Ghost Mar. 12, 36 Acts. 1, 5. 8. 16.
, three in persons Matt. 3, 16. 17. Mark. 1, 10. 11. Luke. 3, 21. 22.
, yet but one in substance, to be a very Ier. 10, 10. John. 17, 3.
, and almighty 2. Co. 6, 18 Reu. 11, 17.
God, of one simple, spiritual Ioh. 4, 24. 2. Cor. 3, 17.
, invisible 1. Tim. 1, 17
, and incomprehensible Psa. 139, 7. 8, etc.
nature, in which none is either higher, or lower, or greater than other, but
are altogether perfect Matt. 5, 48
without deformity; big without quantity Job. 2, 3 8. 9.
; good Mat. 19, 17.
without quality; without any time everlasting Eccl. 18, 1 Lamen. 5, 19
; without dieng immortal 1. Tim. 1, 17
; strong Psalm. 7, 10. 12. 13. Esaie. 1, 24.
without faintnes; true Reu. 6, 10.
without falsehood; without any abode present every where Psa. 139, 6. 7. 8.
; without any place wholly every where; filling al things without stretching;
going every where without stop or let; passing over al things, and yet moouest
not; abiding in all places, and yet stand not; creating al things Psa. 124,
8. Psalm. 134, 3. Eccl. 43, 1. 2, etc.
without need; governing al things Mat. 11, 25.
without labor; giving beginnings to al things Hab. 1, 12.
, and yet had no beginning Pro. 8, 22. 23, etc.
; changing al things 2. Pet. 3, 10
, and yet never changed Mal. 3, 6. Dan. 6, 26. Romans 16, 26
; in greatness infinite Job. 23, 8. 9.
; in power almighty Psalm. 115, 3 Revel. 1, 8.
; in goodness sovereign Mar. 10, 18 James. 1, 17.
; in wisdom wonderful Wisd. 9, 1. 4. 5, etc. Eccles. 1, 1. 2, etc. Iam. 1, 17.
; in counsels terrible Psalm. 66, 5
; in judgments righteous Ps. 119, 137
; in cogitations, secret Psalm. 92, 5.
; in promise, true Psa. 86, 15.
; in works, holy Esaie. 6, 3. Esai. 43, 15. Revel. 4, 8.
; in mercy, rich Psalm. 130. verse. 7.
; toward sinners, most patient Psalm. 86, verse. 15.
; toward the penitent, most merciful Ierem. 18, verse. 8. Ezec. 18, verse. 21.
Luke 13, verse. 3, 5. Luke 15, verse. 18, 19, 20.
; alwaie ye same Mal. 3, verse. 6.
, eternal Psalm. 102, verse. 11, 12.
, and everlasting, and immortal 1. Tim. 1, 17.
, and unchangeable, whom neither widenes of place makes bigger, nor
straightnes lesser, nor corners wring; whose will does not vary; nor friendship
alter; whom neither adversity makes out of quiet; neither prosperity over
iocund; nor obliuio^ brings aught out of thy mind, nor memory into thy
remembrance; neither things passed go away, nor things to come succeed where
thou art: with the beginning thou begannest not; with times thou encreasest not
Ps. 10^, 25 26. 27.
; with the end thou take not an end, but both before al worlds and in the
world, and worlds without end thou live, and enioiest perpetual praise,
eternal glory 2. Tim. 4, verse. 18. Revel. 7, 12.
, sovereign authority, singular honor, an everlasting kingdom, and infinite
power, for ever and ever, Amen.

Chap. 13.
A Zealous prayer wherein is declared how God the Father has saved mankind;
and how the Word became flesh; with a prayer for remission of sins.
HItherto, o GOD almighty Genesis 35, ^^ Eccl. 46, 16.
, which see and searchest mine heart 1. Sam. 16, verse. 7. Psalm. 7, 9.
, hitherto I have confessed the almightines of thy Majesty, and the Majesty
of thine almightines: but now, as I believe in mine heart unto righteousness Romans
10, verse. 10.
, so will I confess with mouth unto salvation, how thou have vouchsafed to
help mankind in the end of the world.

Touching thee, God the Father, thou art never read to be sent; but of thy
Son the Apostle writes on this wise, Gal. 4, 4.
When the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son. When he says, He
sent, he plainly shows how he came being sent into this world, when, being
borne of the virgin Marie Matt. x, 18 19, etc. Luke. 2, 6. 7.
, he showed himself in the flesh to be very GOD and perfect man John. 1, 14.
.

But what means that principal of all the other Evangelists when he says
John. 1, 10
, He was in the world, and the world was made by him. Thither truly he was
sent by his humanity, where he was alwaie and is by his divinity. Which
embassage of his, I verelie do believe with mine heart, and acknowledge with my
mouth, was the work of the whole sacred Trinity.

Now then how have thou loved us John. 3, 16
, o heavenly and loving Father Ioh. 20, 17.
! how have thou loved us, o gracious maker Ps. 100, 3.
, which have not spared thine own Son Romans 8, 32
, but given him to the death for us ungodly wretches! He was obedient to thee,
even unto the death, yea the death of the cross Phil. 2, 8.
, taking out of the way the handwriting of our sins, and fastening it upon
the cross Col. 2, 14.
, he has crucified sin, and killed death. He only is free among the dead
Psalm. 88, 5.
, having power to lay down his life Ioh. 10, 18.
, and power to take it again for our sakes.

And therefore he was both a conqueror and an oblation Heb. 9, 26.
: and because an oblation, therefore a conqueror. For our behoof he was to
thee both a priest and a sacrifice; and because a sacrifice therefore a priest
Heb. 5, 5. 6, etc. Heb. 7, 25. 26. Heb. 9, 11. 12, etc.
. Well may I then repose a strong hope in him Col. 1, 27. 1. Tim. 1, 1.
, because through him that sits at thy right hand Romans 8, 34 Heb. 7, 25.
Heb. 8, 6.
, making intercession for us, thou will heal al mine infirmities Esai. 53, 5.
.

For, Lord, great be my diseases, and manifold; yea, manifold and very great
be they. For the prince of this world, I know, and I confess has much to
lay against me: but for his sake that sits at thy right hand Mar. 16, 19
Acts. 1, 9. 10. 11.
, even for my redemers sake Romans 3, 24 Ephesians. 1, 7. 14.
, in whom he could find none evil Ioh. 14, 30
, deliver me.

For his sake, who did no sin 1. Pet. 2, 22
, and in whose mouth there was found no guile, justify me.

For his sake, who is our head Ephesians. 4, 15. Ephesians. 5, 23.
, wherein there is no blemish, save a member of his, though poor and weak.

Pardon I pray thee, al my sins, vices, faults, and offenses. Indue me with
thine holy virtues; make me to live godly, and to continue even to the end in
good works, according to thy will, even for thine holy Name sake, Amen.

Chap. 14.
A thanksgiving of a faithful mind unto God for sending his dear, and only
Son to save mankind.
I Might utterly despair in consideration of my manifold sins, and infinite
offenses, had not thy word, o God, bin made flesh John. 1, 14.
, and dwelled among us.

But now I dare not despair. For, if when we were enemies Romans 5, 10
, we were reconciled unto thee by the death of thy Son; how much more being
reconciled, are we saved by his life!

For all mine hope 1. Tim. 1, 1.
, and al my confidence is reposed in that precious blood, which was shed for
us, and for our salvation 1. Pet. 1, 18. 19.
. In it I take heart again, and resting thereupon I covet to come unto thee,
not having mine own righteousness Phil. 3, 9.
, but that which is through the faith of my Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherefore, o most gracious and merciful God, lover of mankind Wisd. 11, 21 23.
John. 3, 16.
, which, through Jesus Christ thy Son and our Lord Romans 1, 4. 7. 1. Cor. 1,
3. 7. etc.
, even when we were in the state of damnation by reason of sin Romans 5, 7. 8,
etc.
, have delivered and saved us: I thank thy goodness, yea from the very bottom
of mine heart I do highly thank thee, for sending of thy great love Ephesians. 2.
4. 5.
wherewith thou have loved us, miserable wretches unworthy al favor, the same
thy only begotten Son John. 3, 16 1. John. 4, 9.
from thine own bosom into the world, to save us great sinners 1. Tim. 1, 15
, the children of wrath Ephesians. 2, 3.
.

I thank thee for his holy incarnation and birth of his glorious mother, of
whom he vouchsafed to take flesh for us men and for our salvation: that as he
was very God of God Matt. 1, 23 Matt. 16, 16.
; so he might be very man of man John. 1, 14.
.

I thank thee for his passion Luke. 23, verse. 26. 33, etc.
, cross, and death; for his resurrection, and ascension into heaven, and
sitting at thy right hand. For the forty day after his resurrection Acts. 1,
3. 9.
, in the sight of his disciples he ascended up above all the heavens, where he
sitting on thy right hand, powered down the holy Spirit Acts. 2, 1. 2, etc.
, according to his promise Ioh. 15, 26. Luke 24, 49.
, upon the children of adoption.

I thank thee both for that shedding of his precious blood wherewithal we be
redeemed 1. Pet. 1, 18. 19.
: and also for his instituting the holy and lively sacrament of his body and
blood Matt. 26, verse. 26. 27. 28. Luke. 22, 19. 1. Cor. 11, 23. 24, etc.
, where withal in thy Church we be daily nourished, refreshed, washed,
sanctified, and made partakers of one heavenly, and divine nature.

Finalie, once again I thank thee for thy great love Ephesians. 2, 4.
wherewith thou have so loved us wretches through thine only 1. Ioh. 4, 9.
, and well-beloved son Matt. 3, 17
. For so thou did love the world John. 3, 16
, that thou gave thine only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on
him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. And this is eternal life
Ioh. 17, 3.
, that we know thee to be the true God, and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ,
through a right faith, and works agreeable to our faith.

Chap. 15.
Of the incomprehensible good will of God the Father toward mankind.
OPitie unmeasurable! o wonderful love! To save a servant, thou have given thy
Son John. 3, 16
. God was made man John. 1, 14.
, that wretched man might be plucked out of the power of devils.

How deerlie has thy Son, o God, loved man, which thought he did not humble
himself enough, if he were only borne of the virgin Marie, unless for us and
for our salvation 1. Pet. 1, 18 1. Pet. 2, 24.
, he shed his blood also upon the cross!

He came a merciful God, he came of mere compassion and goodness, yea to seek
and to save that which was lost Luke 19, 10 Matthew. 18, 11
, he did come. He sought the lost sheep Luke 15, 4. 5. 6.
; he sought and found it; and, like a gracious Lord, and right good shepherd
Ioh. 10, 11 14.
, on his shoulders he carried it unto his flock.

O rare love! o tender kindness! who at any time has heard the like! who but
will be amazed at such bowels of mercy! who but will wonder! who but must needs
rejoice at his abundant love, wherewith he has loved us Ephesians. 2, 4. 5, etc.
!

Thou did send thy Son in the similitude of sinful flesh Romans 8, 3. 4.
, that of sin he might condemn sin, and that we might be thy righteousness in
him.

For he is the lamb undefiled 1. Pet. 1, 19
, which has taken away the sins of the world Ioh. 1, 29.
, abolished death by his death 2. Tim. 1, 10
, and brought life again by his resurrection.

But what may we render unto thee, our God, for these so great benefits Ps.
116, 12
of thy mercy? What praises, what thanks may we ascribe?

Surely had we the knowledge and power of the blessed Angels: yet could our
amends be nothing correspondent to thy mercy, and goodness. And were al our
members converted into tongues: yet should we never extol thee sufficiently
enough.

For thy great love, extended graciously of thy mere goodness to us ward,
reaches beyond al knowledge. For thy Son, o our God John. 17, 3
, took in no sort the Angels Heb. 2, 16.
, but he took the seed of Abraham; and was like to us in all things, yet
without sin Heb. 4, 15.
.

So that taking man's nature, not Angels upon him; and glorifieng it with the
robe of holy resurrection and immortality Acts. 1, 9.
, he has carried the same over al heavens, over all the quires of Angels, over
al Cherubs, and Seraphims, and placed the same at thy right hand.

The which both Angels do praise, and dominions worship; and all the powers of
heaven do bow Phi. 2, 9. 10. 11.
at man God over them. This verelie is al mine hope, and mine whole confidence.

For every of us has a portion of blood and flesh, in the body of Jesus
Christ our Lord. Therefore where a piece of my self is, there, I trust, I do
reign; where my flesh is glorified, there I know I am glorious; where my
flesh does rule, there I perceive I have dominion.

And although I am yet a sinner: yet I doubt not of this participation of
grace; although my sins do hinder me; yet my substance does require it; and
although mine offenses exclude me; yet the communion of nature does not repel
me.

For God is not so hard hearted that he can forget flesh and blood which he
bears; which for my sake he has taken; which on my behalf he requires.

But the Lord our God is mild, and very gentle Ioe^l. 2, 23.
; he loves his own flesh, his members, and his bowels.

In very God, and our sweet, gracious, and most gentle Lord, even Jesus
Christ, in whom we have risen, ascended now into heaven, and now sit together
in the heavenly places Ephesians. 2, 5. 6.
, our flesh does love us.

In him we have the prerogative of our blood: we are his members, and his
flesh: finalie, he is our head Ephesians. 4, 15. 16. Ephesians. 5, 23.
, of which the whole body depends.

As it is written, This now is bone of my bones Genesis 2, 23. 24.
, and flesh of my flesh; and they shall be one flesh. And no man ever yet hated
his own flesh Ephesians. 5, 29.
, but nourishes, and cherishes it. This is a great secret Ephesians. 5, 32.
, but I speak concerning Christ, and concerning the Church, says the Apostle.

Chap. 16.
A thanksgiving unto God, for his mercy extended toward man, in the
incarnation of his Son Jesus Christ.
I Therefore, o Lord our God Psalm. 90, 1. 2.
, with my lips, and with mine heart, and with all my power do thank thy mercy
for all mercies, whereby thou have miraculouslie redeemed us thy wretched
servants Ephesians. 2, 4. 5.
, and that through the same thy Son our Savior 1 Pet. 2, 24
, and redeemer Gal. 3, 13.
, which was delivered to death for our sins Romans 4, 25
, and is risen again for our justification, and sits living without end at
thy right hand Romans 8, 34
, making request for us, and showing mercy with thee upon us. Because of thee
the Father Ioh. 8, 42. John. 13, 3.
he is an eternal God, of one substance with thee in all respects. Whereby he
can save us at al times.

But in that he is a man, whereby he is inferior to thee, Al power is given him
in heaven and in earth Matthew. 28, verse. 18.
, that at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow Phil. 2, 10.
both of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth; and
that every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, unto thy
glory, o God the Father.

Him thou have ordained a judge of quick and dead Act. 10, 42.
. For thou iudgest no man John. 5, 22
, but have committed al judgment to thy Son, in whose breast are hid Col. 2,
3.
all the treasures of wisdom, and knowledge.

And he is the witness and the judge Act. 10, 42
, I say the judge and the witness, whose presence no guilty conscience shall
escape 1. Cor. 4, 5.
. For all things are naked and open to his sight Heb. 4, 13.
. And he which unjustly was condemned Matt. 27, verse. 24. 25, etc.
, he even he will judge the world with righteousness Psa. 96, 13
, and the people in truth.

Wherefore I bless thine holy Name for evermore, and with mine whole heart, o
almighty and gracious Lord, I glorify thee, for that unspeakable and
wonderful uniting together of thy Godhead and manhood in one person, so that
one was not God, and another man, but one and the same person was both God and
man, or man and God.

But although of thy great goodness the Word was made flesh John. 1, 14.
; yet neither of those two natures was converted into another substance.

To the mystery of the Trinity there is not a fourth person added. For the
substance both of the Word of God, and of man is united, but not confounded:
that unto the Godhed that thing which was taken of us might approach, and that
thing which never had bin, might remain the same which alwaie it was.

O woonderful mystery 1. Tim. 3, 16
! o unspeakable fellowship! o strange goodness of Gods mercy, ever to be
marueled at, ever to be loved! We were not worthy to be servants; and lo, we
are made the sons of GOD, even the heirs of God Romans 8, 17
, and heirs annexed with Christ! How came this to pass? who has brought us
here unto?

But, o God merciful Father, by this thine inestimable goodness, mercy, and
good will, I beseech thee, make us worthy so great and so manifold promises of
the same thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ 1. Cor. 1, 3. 7. 8, etc.
.

Appoint thy strength, stablish o God, that which thou have wrought in us Psa.
68, 28
; finish what thou have begun, that we may be able to come into the fulness of
thy mercy.

Make us through the holy spirit to understand; and through thy Son to
discern; and with due honor to reverence this high mystery of godliness 1.
Tim. 3, verse. 16.
, which is, how God was manifested in the flesh; justified in the Spirit; seen
of Angels; preached unto the Gentiles; believed on in the world; and received up
in glory.

Chap. 17.
Another thanksgiving for the benefit of our redemption.
O Lord our GOD Psa. 90, 1. 2. Psalm. 95, 7.
, how much are we bound unto thee, which be redeemed with such a price 1. Pet.
1, 18 19.
; salued with such a gift John. 3, 16.
; and preserved by so heavenly a benefit!

O how greatly are we wretches bound to fear thee; to love thee; to bless
thee; to praise thee; to honor thee; and to glorify thee, seeing we are so
saved, so sanctified, and so glorified of thee Romans 8, verse. 30.
!

For we are indebted to thee, both for all that we can do, and for all our life
Act. 17, 28.
, and for all our wisdom Iam. 1, 17.
. And who has any thing of himself not from thee 1. Cor. 4, 7
?

Wherefore, o Lord our God, from whom every good gift does proceed Iam. 1,
17.
, even for thine own sake, and for thine holy name sake, give us grace of thy
goods and gifts to serve thee, and in truth to please thee, and evermore for
so great benefits of thy mercy to thank thee.

For by none other means can we either serve or please thee, but by thine own
gift. For every good giving and every perfect gift is from above Iam. 1. 17.
, and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variablenes,
neither shadowing by turning.

O Lord our God Ioh. 20, 17
; o gracious Esai. 6, 3. Esai. 43, 15.
God; o good Matt. 19, verse. 17.
God; o God almighty 2. Cor. 6, verse. 18. Reu. 11. 17.
; GOD whose nature can be neither uttered by words, nor contained in any place
Job. 23, 8. 9. Psalm. 139, 6. 7. 8, etc.
; GOD Creator of al things Genesis 1, 1. 2, etc. Psalm. 135, 6.
, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ Gal. 1, 1. 3.
, which have from thine own bosom sent the same thy beloved Son Matt. 3, 17.
into the world for our common welfare 1. Tim. 1, 15
; to take our nature upon him John. 1, 15.
, that he might give us his; and be as perfect God of thee his Father, so
perfect man of his mother, a very God and a very man, yet but one and the
same Christ, both eternal and temporal, immortal and mortal, a Creator and a
creature, strong and weak, a conqueror and conquered, a nourisher and
nourished, a shepherd and a sheep; temporalie dead, and yet living eternalie
with thee, who promised to his friends a city of life; and said to his
disciples, Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name Ioh. 10, 23
, he will give it you.

By the same high Priest Heb. 8, 1.
, and right Bishop Heb. 9, 11. 12, etc.
, and good Shepherd Ioh. 10, 10 11.
, who has offered himself for a sacrifice, giving his life for his sheep; I
beseech thee, even by him which sits at thy right hand Romans 8, 34
, and makes request for us, our redeemer 1. Pet. 1, 18 19.
, and advocate 1. John. 2, 1 2.
; I say of thy mercy and goodness I humbly beseech thee, o most gentle, most
loving, and most gracious God, lover of mankind John. 3, 16
, give me grace with the same thy Son, and the holy Ghost, in all things to
bless thee, and with much sorrow of heart to glorify thy Name; finalie, give
me a fountain of tears with great reverence and fear. For they have power to
give alike, whose substance is al one.

But for so much as a corruptible body Wisd. 9, 15
is heavy unto the soul: quicken me, I pray thee, by thy spurs: and make me
valiantly to persevere in thy precepts, and praises day and night Psa. 35, 28
. Make mine heart hot within me Psa. 39, 3.
; and in my musing let the fire be kindled.

And because thy beloved, and only Son has said, No man can come to me Ioh. 6,
44.
, except the Father which has sent me, draw him; and again, No man comes
unto the Father, but by me Ioh. 14, 6.
; I pray and humbly beseech thee, draw me always unto him, that he at
length may bring me unto thee, even thither where he is sitting at thy right
hand Romans 8, 34
, whereas life everlasting Reu. 7, 15. 16. 17.
, and everlastingly blessed is; whereas perfect love, and no fear is Reu. 21,
4
; whereas day alwaie, and one spirit of al is; whereas sovereign and sure
security, and secure quietness, and quiet joyfulness, and ioiful blessedness, and
blessed euerlastingnes, and everlasting happiness, and the happy sight Reu. 22,
4.
, and praising of thee is without end; where thou with him, and he in the
communion of the holy Spirit, lives and reigns a God for ever and ever,
Amen.

Chap. 18.
A most godly prayer unto our Savior Christ.
O GOD Christ, thou most kind lover of mankind Ephesians. 5, 2. 1. Ioh. 3, 16.
, mine hope Col. 1, 27. 1. Tim. 1, 1.
, the light John. 1, 4. 5, etc.
, the way Ioh. 14, 6.
, the life Ioh. 11, 25
, the salvation 1. Pet. 2, 24
, the honor, and the glory of al thy people Luke 2, 32.
. Call into thy remembrance for whose sake thou would endure and suffer bands
Matt. 27, 2
, the cross Mar. 15, 15. 16, etc. Gal. 3, 13.
, wounds Ioh. 19, 34
, death and the grave Ioh. 19, 41. 42.
, I beseech thee; for whose cause, having ouercom death after three days thou
rosest again Mat. 28, 5 6.
, appeeredst to thy Disciples Mar. 16, 14 Luke 24, 13. 14, etc. 25. 26, etc.
instructing their wavering minds; and forty days after thy resurrection thou
ascendedst into heaven Luke. 24, verse. 51. Acts. 1, 9.
, where thou live, and shall reign for evermore Reu. 4, 8. 9. 10. 11.
.

Thou art my GOD, a living Romans 8, verse. 34.
, and a true God Matt. 4, 7. 10.
, mine holy Father, my loving Lord Act. 7, 59.
, my puissant Prince Reu. 4, 9. 10. 11. Reu. 5, 11. 12. 13.
, my good shepherd John. 10, 11 14.
, mine only master Mat. 23, 8
, my best helper Heb. 13, 6.
, my faithfullest friend Ioh. 15. 15.
, my living bread John. 6, 35 48. 51.
, mine everlasting Priest Heb. 7, 24, 25.
, my guide unto my contrie, my true light John. 1, 4, 7, etc. John. 8, 12.
, my holy sweetness Phil. 3, 7, 8. Romans 8, 35, 36, etc.
, my ready way John. 14, 6.
, my noble wisdom 1. Cor. 1, 30.
, my pure simplicity, my peacemaking quietness Ephesians. 2, 14.
, my sure safety, my good portion Romans 8, 32.
, mine eternal salvation Heb. 2, 9. 1. Pet. 2, 24.
, my great mercy, my mighty patience, mine unspotted sacrifice Heb. 9, 14. 1.
Pet. 1, 18. 19.
, mine holy redemption 1. Cor. 1, 30
, my strong hope Col. 1, 27. 1. Tim. 1, 1.
, my perfect charity Romans 5, 8.
, my true resurrection Ioh 11, 25.
, mine everlasting life John. 14, 6 Col. 3, 4.
, my blessed joy and contemplation 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
, continuing evermore Reu. 7, 15. 16. Reu. 21, 4.
.

Unto thee do I pray, cry, and bend my suit, that through thee I may walk,
unto thee I may come, in thee I may rest, who art the way, the truth, and the
life John. 14, 6
, beside whom no man comes unto the Father.

For I desire thee Psalm. 42. 1. 2.
, a most gracious and a glorious Lord, the very brightness of the fathers
glory, which sit upon the Cherubins, and beholdest the deepes, which art
ye true light John. 1, 4. 5. 9, etc.
, the light inlightening, the lasting light, whom the very Angels desire to
behold 1. Pet. 1, 12.
.

Lo, mine heart is before thee; expel the darkness of the same, that more fully
it may be endued with the cleerenes of thy light.

Give me thy self, o my God, restore me thy self; lo, I love thee, and if not
entirely enough, I would love thee more. I can by no means discern how much
I lack of loving thee as I should, that my life may run into thine arms, and
be at no time alienated, til it be hid in the secret place of thy countenance.

Notwithstanding, this do I know, that il is it with me without thee, o Lord,
not only outwardly to my body, but also in wardlie to my soul. For all
plenty, being not my GOD, is but poverty.

But the good, which no way can be altered, either into the better or worse,
thou alone art Mal. 3, 6.
, which art simply alone Psa 86, 10 Esai. 37, 16. 20.
, to whom it is not one thing to live, and another to live happily: for thou
art thine own happiness. But thy creature to whom it is one thing to live, and
another to live happily, can ascribe both his life and his blessed life, to
none other thing; but only to thy mercy. And therefore we stand in need of
thee, but not thou of us. For were not we at al, nothing were wanting to thy
felicity, which thou art. So that we have great cause to cleave unto thee our
Lord God, that through thy continual help we may lead an holy, godly, and
upright life.

For by reason of the weight of our weakness, we are drawn down ward Wis.
11, 15.
; but through thy gift we are inflamed, and carried upward, we burn and we go;
we do mount, and ascend in our hearts, and we sing a song of degrees; with thy
good fire we burn, and we go forward.

Whether do we now ascend upward unto the peace of Jerusalem? For I reioiced,
when they said unto me, We will go into ye house of the Lord Psa. 122, ^.
. There has he placed us, we will good, that wish nothing else, but there to
abide for evermore.

But for so much as while we are in the body, we be absent from thee 2. Cor. 5, 6
, o Lord; we have here no continuing city Heb. 13, 14
, but we seek one to come; and our freedom is in heaven: therefore through
thy grace I do enter into the closet of my heart, and there do I sing the songs
of love to thee, o my King and my God, fetching unspeakable sighings in this
house of my pilgrimage Psalm. 119, verse. 54.
, where I sing out thy righteousness. And calling Jerusalem into mind, I stretch
the sense of mine heart toward the same, even toward Jerusalem my country,
Jerusalem I say my mother Gal. 4, 26.
; and also toward thee her King, her inlightener, her father, defender,
protector and governor, her pure and strong delight, her constant joy, and al
goodness else whatsoever 1. Cor. 2, 9 Reu. 7, 15. 16. Reu. 21, 4. 3. 24, etc.
. For thou art the sovereign and the true happiness. From whence I will not be
turned away, until in the peace of that my dear mother, whereas the first
fruits of my spirit are, thou gather all that I am from scattering and
deformity, and so conform and confirm me for ever, o my God, and my mercy.

Chap. 19.
A longing after the ioies in Heaven.
O Lightsome and glorious house of God, I have loved thy goodlines, and the
place where the glory of the Lord God, who both enioieth, and has created
thee, does dwell Psalm. 26, 8.
.

In mine exile I sigh after thee both night and day; mine heart longs, my
mind coueteth, and my soul desires to come unto the society of your happiness.

My prayer unto him which has made me, is, that he would possess me in thee;
because he has made both me Genesis 1, 26. 27. Psalm. 100, 3. Psa. 129, 73.
, and you.

For I desire your holy fellowship, and wonderful glory, not for any merit of
mine own; but I trust to atteine thereunto through the price of his blood,
namely of Jesus Christ, whereby we be redeemed 1. Pet. 1, verse. 18. 19.
.

I confess, I have gone astraie like a lost sheep Psalm. 119, verse. 176.
, and have too long dwelled out of my native soil, and am far away cast from
the face of the Lord my God into this blindness of banishment, where, driven out
of the ioies of paradise, I bewail with my self daily the misery of my
captivity; and sing a woeful song with great lamentation, when I remember you,
o mother Jerusalem Gal. 4, 26.
; while my feet do but stand in thy courts, o sacred and comely Zion, and I
am not able plainly to look into thy inner places.

Notwithstanding, I have good hope upon the shoulders of my good shepherd Luke
15, 5. John. 10, 11. 14.
, thy Creator, to be brought back unto thee, that I may triumph again with
that unspeakable joy, wherewithal they be cheered which dwell with you before
God his majesty Reu. 22, 4.
, and our Savior Christ, which has abrogated through his flesh the hatred
Ephesians. 2, 15.
, and pacified al things both which are in heaven, and which are in earth by
his blood Colo. 1, 14.
. For he is our peace which made of both one Ephesians. 2, 14.
, and ioining the two contrary walls together, has promised that he will give
the everlasting felicity of your happiness in himself, after the like manner
and measure, when he said, They shall be like the Angels of God in heaven Matthew.
22, verse. 30.
.

Chap. 20.
A bewailing of the miseries of this life.
O My Lord, I am even weary of this life, and of this troublesome pilgrimage
Psa. 39, 12. Hebr. 11, 13.
. This life is a miserable life Job. 14, 1.
, a transitory Romans 6, 12. 2. Cor. 4, 11.
life; an uncertain life 1. Chr. 29. verse. 15. Psalm. 102, 11.
, a laborsome life Genesis 3, 17, 18. 19.
, a polluted life Genesis 6, 5.
, a life which is the mistres of wickedness, the Queen of pride, replenished
with error and miseries, not to be called a life, but a death, wherein every
moment we die, both by sundry defects of nature, and manifold diversities of
deaths.

Can we therefore call it a life that we live in this world? the which both
humors puff up, and sorrows pluck down; and heat withers, and the aer
infecteth; which both eating makes fat, and fasting makes lean; mirth makes
dissolute, sadness consumes; care shortneth, security dulleth; wealth makes
proud, poverty brings out of heart; youth extolleth, age crooketh; sickness
breaks, sorrow depresseth: and after al these things comes raging death,
and brings an end at once to all the ioies of this miserable life! which being
past, a man would not think it had ever bin at all.

This vital death, and mortal life, albe it be replenished with these and other
miseries, yet a grief to tell, how many does it catch with her snares! how
many be deceived by her false promises!

And although it be so deceitful and bitter of it self, that her blindest
lovers cannot choose but perceive the same, yet with her golden cup, which she
carries in her hand, she makes an infinite company of fools utterly drunk.

Oh happy are they, and those very rare, which avoid her familiarity 1.
John. 2, verse. 15. 16. 17.
, which despise her momentanie pleasure, and her company, least with the
perishing deceauer, they also be compelled to perish.

Chap. 21.
Of the felicity of that life which God has prepared for such as love him.
But, o thou life, which God has prepared for them that love him 1. Cor. 2, 9.
, thou art a lively life, a blessed life Reu. 7, 15. 16. 17.
, a secure life Reu. 21, 4. 23. 24.
, a goodly life, a pure life, chaste life, an holy life; a life ignorant what
death means, void of sorrow; a life without spot, without grief, without
trouble, without corruption, without perturbation, without change and
alteration; a life replenished with all goodlines and glory, where neither
adversary to impugn, nor inticement of sin is to carry away; but perfect
love, no fear is, where the day lasts ever, and one spirit of al is; even
where God is beholden face to face 1. Cor. 13. verse. 12.
, and with this food of life the mind is fed abundantly.

It does me good to meditate of thy glory; thy good things do exceedingly
delight me.

The more I remember, the more I long for thee. Greatly do I desire;
marvelously am I delighted with the sweet memory of thy Name.

It does me good therefore, to lift up the eyes of mine heart; to stir up the
state of my mind; to bend mine affection toward thee.

Truly it does me much good to talk of thee, to hear of thee, to write of
thee, to confer of thee, to read every day of thy glory and blessedness, and
to meditate often of that I read; that so at least wise from the heat,
perils, and sweatings of this mortal and transitory life, I may pass unto the
delectable cool of the lively aer, and so when I go to sleep may somewhat
lay down my weary head in thy bosom.

For which cause I walk many times into the pleasant fields of the holy
Scriptures, where I pluck up the goodly green herbs of sentences by
pruning; eat them by reading; chawe them by using; and lay them up at the
length in the hie seat of memory by gathering them together; that so having
tasted thy sweetenes, I may the less perceive the bitterness of this miserable
life.

O thou most happy life; o right blessed kingdom, void of death Reu. 21, 4.
everlasting; where no times succeed by ages; where the continual day without
night has none end; where the conquering soldier joined to that ioiful quier
of angels, and crowned with the crown 1. Pet. 5, 4. Revel. 4, 4.
of everlasting glory, does sing to his God a song among the songs of Zion.

Oh that I might, my sins being pardoned, and this burden of the flesh
laid-awaie forthwith, o that I might enter into thy ioies Matt. 25, verse. 21.
23.
to enioie everlasting rest; that I might pass into the goodly and glorious
walls of thy city, to receive a crown of life at the hands of my Lord Reu. 2,
10.
; that I might be among that holy quier; that I might stand with the blessed
spirits before the majesty of the Creator Reu. 22, 4.
; that I might behold the present countenance of Christ 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
; that I might see that sovereign, and unspeakable, and vncompassed light;
and finalie, that I might be never tuched with any fear of death Reu. 21, 4.
, but rejoice everlastingly for the gift of perpetual incorruption.

Chap. 22.
Of the happiness of the good soul hence departing.
Happy is the soul, which departing from the earthly body goes directly
into heaven; secure it is and quiet, and fears neither enemy, nor death Reu.
21, 4.
. For it enioieth continualie thy presence 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
, o God, and vncessantlie beholds the most glorious Lord, whom she has
served, and loved 1. Cor. 2, 9.
, and whom now at the length full ioifulie and gloriously she has attained
unto.

And this glory of so great blessedness, neither time shall diminish, nor any
wicked person take away Matt. 6, 19 20. Luke 12, 33.
.

The daughters of Zion have seen her, and counted her blessed Sal. songs. 6,
verse. ^.
, even the Queens and the concubines have praised her, saying:

Who is she that comes up out of the desert Sal. songs. 8, verse. 5.
, abounding in pleasure, leaning upon her well-beloved?

Who is she that looks forth as the morning Sal. songs 6, verse. 9.
, fair as the moon, pure as the sun, terrible as an army with banners?

How cheerefulie goes she out, hasteneth, runs, when al amazed she hears
her beloved saying unto her on this wise Sal. songs. 2, verse. 10.
: Arise my love, my fair one, and come away. For behold, 11.
the winter now is past; the rain is changed, and gone away.

The flowers appear in our earth; 12.
the time of the singing of the bird is come, and the voice of the turtle is
heard in our land.

The fig tree has brought forth her young figs; Sal. songs. 2, verse. 13.
and the vines* with their small grapes have cast a savor; arise my love, my
fair one, and come away.

My dove that art in the holes of the rock, 14.
in the secret places of the staiers, show me thy sight, let me hear thy
voice, for thy voice is sweet, and thy sight comely.

Come away my chosen, my fair one, my dove, mine unspotted one, my spouse
come away, and I will put thee into my bed chamber: because I have longed after
thy beauty.

Come away, that thou may triumph in my presence with mine Angels, whose
company I have promised thee.

After many perils and labor Acts. 14, 22
come away, enter into thy masters joy Matt. 25, verse. 21. 23.
, the which no man shall take from thee Ioh. 16, 22.
.

Chap. 23.
A prayer unto Jesus Christ, that he would vouchsafe in troubles to help us.
OH happy are al thy Saints, o Christ, which have passed over the sea of this
mortality, and attained unto the haven of perpetual quietness Esa. 35, 10. Reave
7, 15. 16. 17. Reave. 21, 4. 23. 24, etc.
, security, and peace, where they are at rest, and alwaie ioiful, and merry.

Wherefore of thy tender love, I beseech thee, o Christ, who art without care
of thy self, be careful of us; who need not to care for incorruptible
glory, have thou a consideration of our manifold miseries.

O our God, who have chosen a people to thy self Romans 8, verse. 30.
, and endued them with glory, making them both immortal of thine immortality,
and ioiful through thy blessed sight 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
, I beseech thee, be thou always mindful of us, and help us, who as yet in
the salt seas of this life are tossed with the surges about us.

O thou goodly gate, who art raised into a marvelous highness, help us, vile
pauiment, lieng much beneath thee.

Give us thine hand, and raise up such as lie upon the ground, that waxing
strong out of weakness, we may be made courageous in battle.

Make thou 1. Tim. 2. verse. 5. 1. John. 2, 1. 2.
intercession for us continually; and vncessantlie pray for us wretches, and
most negligent sinners; that through thy prayers, we may be conioined to the
holy company of Saints, for otherwise we shall never be saved.

For, alas, we are very frail weaklings of no courage, creatures given to the
service of the belly and flesh, having in us almost no spark of virtue.

And yet placed under thy confession, o Christ, we are borne by ye wood of the
cross through this great and wide sea Psalm. 104. verse. 25.
, wherein are things creeping innumerable, both small beasts and great; wherein
the most cruel Dracon is Reu. 12, 9.
, alwaie prepared to devour us 1. Pet. 5, 8.
; wherein be the dangerous rocks, Scylla, and Carybdis, with other such like
innumerable things, whereby the heedles, and wavering in faith Iam. 1, 6.
, make shipwreck.

Wherefore, o Christ pray for us, o good Christ, pray thou, we say, for us,
that through thy good prayers and merits, we may deserve, ship and merchandise
being saved, to attain unto the port of perpetual salvation, quietness, peace,
and security, which never shall have end, Amen.

Chap. 24.
A desire of the soul after the supernal Jerusalem.
O Mother Jerusalem Gal. 4, 26.
, the holy City of God Revel. 21, verse. 10.
, and the dearly beloved spouse of Christ Ephesians. 5, 23. 24. 25, etc.
, after thee does mine heart covet; and my soul exceedingly is in love with
thy beauty.

Oh how comely, how gloririous, how honorable art thou! thou art al fair, and
there is no sport in thee Sal. songs. 4, verse. 7.
.

Triumph and rejoice, o beautiful daughter of the Prince; for the king has a
pleasure in thy fairenes Psa. 45, 11.
, and loves thy goodly personage, o thou fairer than the children of men Psalm.
45, 2.
.

But what is thy well-beloved, o thou fairest among women Sal. songs. 5, verse.
9. 10.
, of the well-beloved? my well-beloved is white and ruddie, the chiefest of ten
thousand.

Like as the apple tree among the trees of the forest Sal. songs. 2, verse. 3.
, so is my well-beloved among the sons of men. Under his shadow had I delight;
lo now I sit, and his fruit is sweet unto my mouth.

My well-beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door Sal. songs. 5, verse. 4.
, and mine heart was affectioned toward him.

In my bed by night I sought him that my soul loved Sal. songs. 3, verse. 1. 4.
, I sought, and I found him: I hold, and will not let him go, until he bring me
into my mothers house, into the chamber of her that conceived me.

For there thou will give me thy teates most abundantly, and perfectly, and
wilt satisfy mine heart with a marvelous satietie, so that I shall neither
hunger nor thirst any more Reu. 7, 15. 16. 17. Reave. 21, 4.
.

Oh, happy shall my soul be, yea happy and always happy shall I be, could I
once get to behold thy glory, thine happiness 1. Cor. 2, verse 9.
, thy beauty, thy gates, and thy walls Reu. 21, 23 25.
, and thy streets, and thy manifold mansions Ioh. 14, 2.
, thy noble citizens, and thy mighty king in his majesty 1. Cor. 13, verse.
12. Reave. 22, 4.
.

For thy walls are of precious stones Reu. 21, 18. 19, etc.
; thy gates of the richest pearls Reu. 21, 21.
; and thy streets of the purest gold Reu. 21, 21.
, wherein is soong the ioieful Halleluiah Reu. 19, 1. 3, etc.
without intermission; thy manifold buildings are founded upon squared stones,
builded upon Saphires, enclosed with golden walls, whereinto none shall enter,
but the clean, and it no unclean person shall inhabit Revel. 21, verse. 27.
.

Beautiful art thou become, o mother Jerusalem Gal. 4, 26.
, and sweet in thy comforts, no such thing is in thee, as we suffer in this
world; and as we behold in this wretched life.

There is neither darkness nor night, nor any change of times in thee Esa. 35,
10. Reu. 21, 23. 24. 25. Reu. 22, 5.
.

There shines not in thee either the light of the candle, or ye brightness of
the moon, or the glitteringnes of the stars; but the God of God, light of
light, even the son of righteousness evermore does lighten thee.

The white and unspotted lamb, is thy pure and clear light, thy sun, thy
cleerenes, and everlasting contemplation 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. Revel. 22, 4.
of this most glorious King is al thine happiness.

He is the King of kings in the mids of thee; and you are his ministers about
him.

There be the singing quires of Angels Reave. 5, 11. 12.
; there the companies of supernal citizens Ephesians. 2, 19.
; there the solemnity of al which have returned from this woeful peregrination
unto thy ioies.

There be the prudent Prophets; the twelve Apostles Reu. 21, 14.
; the victorious host of infinite Martyrs Reu. 7, 14.
; and the sacred convent of holic confessors is there Reu. 12, 11. Revel. 19,
1. 2. 4.
.

There be both upright men, and holy matrones, which have overcome the
pleasures of this world, and the weakness of sex; there be those young men, and
maidens, which have spent their time in godly conversation.

There be the sheep Matthew. 25, verse. 32. 33.
and lambs that have escaped the snares of this world, where they now triumph
in their several mansions: the glory of each particular man differs; but
common is the joy of them al.

There full and perfect charity does reign 1. Cor. 13, verse. 13.
, for God there is al in all 1. Cor. 15, verse. 28.
; whom they do always behold Reu. 22, 4.
; and by beholding him, continualie they burn the more in love toward him.

They love, and they praise him; they praise and they love him: al their work
is to praise God without ending, without fainting, without toiling.

Oh happy, yea, and evermore happy shall I be, if after the resolution of this
mortal body, I may hear those celestial songs of melody, which are soong
unto the praise of the eternal king, by those citizens of the supernal country
Heb. 11. 16.
, and by the companies of the blessed spirits!

Happy then, yea much happy should I be, might I be counted worthy to sing
those songs, and to wait on my King, my God, and my Captain; to behold him in
his glory, according as he has promised, saying Ioh. 17, 24.
, Father, I will that they whom thou have given me, be with me even where I am,
that they may behold my glory, which I had with thee, before the foundation of
the world.

And in another place John. 12, verse. 26.
, If any man serve me, let him follow me; for where I am, there shall also my
servant be. And again John. 14, verse. 21.
, He that loves me, shall be loved of my father, and I will love him, and will
show mine own self to him.

Chap. 25.
A Psalm, concerning the glory of Paradise, paraphrasticallie made v^on the
words of Saint Augustine.
Unto the well of life endless,
My soul, ah dry, my soul does thirst,
Wherein it lies in great distres,
The flesh her gaile she would have birst.
She stirs, she strives, she sues amain.
Her country to enioie again.
Her present case while she does ^ourne,
Subject to grief, she thinks upon
The glorious state she had beforne,
Which now through sin is quite igon.
The evils wherein we be tossed,
Bring into mind the bliss we lost.
For who can tell what joy it is 1. Cor. 2, 9.
,
For to enioie the sovereign peace Phil. 4, 7.
?
Where the foundations of ho^ses
With precious stones Reu. 21, 19.
rise and increase!
With gold the roofes are al set out:
With gold the parlors shine about.
Of jewels only precious,
This goodly buildin rected was!
The street whereof is glorious,
Paued with gold as shining glass Reu. 21, 2^
.
There is no slime, there is no lane:
There is no sickness for to pain Reu. 21, 4.
.
No winter cold, no summer hot,
At no time there do men annoie.
Fresh roases alwaie may be got,
The spring alwaie men there enioie.
The saffron red, the lilies white,
The balm gives sent men to delight.
The fields are fresh, the seed does spring.
With honey sweet the rivers flow.
The pleasant odors comfort bring,
And sauors good from spices go.
The apples alwaie hang on tree,
And evermore the woods green be.
The Moon does rise ne yet decline,
Nor stars, nor sun do alter race,
The Lamb continualie does shine
In that same town and blessed place.
There is no time, nor any night Reu. 22, 5.
,
But evermore the day is bright.
For all the saints shine gloriously,
As does the sin Matt. 13, verse. 34.
, even they do so,
After the triumph mutualie,
They sing together on a row.
And make report with hearts al glad,
Of every fight which they have had.
They Are freed from sin, and rid from strife
Of blood and sprite: the flesh and eke
The mind enioie the spiritual life,
And each one thing do think and seek.
There Is none offenses to molest,
They now possessing perfect rest.
Full gladly they do mention make,
Being rid from change of former case,
And comfort much they alwaie take,
Of pleasant truth seeing the face Reu. 22, 4
.
Hence lively joy from living spring:
Thence being rid they skip and sing.
They noble, strong, they iocund are,
From trobles now they be set free.
The healthful there right well do fare:
And youth dreads naught old age to see.
Hence too and thence they spring, and last:
For frailty now is gone and past.
Their state divine does up swalowe,
The mighty force of death so fell.
God knowing al things they which know*
Al other things most know right well.
For each man's heart to each man's sight
Is open. In one they do delight.
One thing they loath, one thing they like,
Their hearts, and mind, and will are one:
Albe they are not crowned alike,
For those good deeds which they have done.
Love works so that each man's blis.
To al men due, and common is.
The Egles meet where carcass lies Matthew. 24, verse. 28.
.
That holy souls with Angels good,
May be renewed in the skies:
In every place they eat one food,
They filled are, and yet do crave.
They would those things the which they have.
Yet loath they naught: though full they be.
Their hunger does them move nothing.
They eat and that full greedily:
And eating pricks them to eating.
The pleasant songs expel sad fears,
And organe pipes do please the ears.
Due praise they yield unto the King,
Through whom they do triumph in blis.
O happy soul is such, seeing
Before the Lord it present is,
And from his seat with look^ full bold*
How earth is ruled does behold!
And how the Stars, the Sun, and Moon,
With Planets al their place do keep!
After my fight, o let ^e soon
Approach unto this fellowship.
O Christ, my suit do thou regard,
Of striuers who art the reward.
And make me to receive apart
Of that same blis which they possess.
Give strength that with courageous hare,
I may endure the fight easelesse.
That battle fought, I then may find
Long rest, thee Christ, even to my mind.
Amen.
Chap. 26.
The praise which the soul continualie does ascribe unto God, through the
contemplation of his supernal blessedness.
MY soul, praise thou ye Lord Psa. 103, 1.
and all that is within me, praise his holy Name.

My soul, Psalm. 103, 2. 22.
praise thou the Lord, and forget not al his benefits.

Praise ye Lord, al ye his works, in all places of his dominion: my soul praise
thou the Lord.

Praise we the Lord, whom Angels praise Reu. 7, 11. 12.
, dominions adore Phil. 2, 9. 10.
, powers do reverence; to whom the Cherubims, and Scraphims continualie do
cry Esaie. 6, 3.
, Holy, Holy, Holy.

Join we therefore our voices to the voices of the holy Angels; and according
to our ability, let us praise the GOD which we both have. For they, whose eyes
evermore be fixed upon the Lord, whom they behold not through a glass darkly
1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
but face unto face; they do most purelie and without ceasing praise the Lord.

But who can, yea so much as in thought comprehend, much less in words
express, what an infinite multitude of those blessed spirits, and celestial
powers are in the presence of the Lord God almighty! Or what continual joy
they receive by the sight of God! what everlasting mirth! what heat of love,
not to their grief, but to their delectation! what a desire is in them of the
sight of God with satietie; and a satietie with desire, in whom neither desire
ingendreth grief, nor satietie brings loathing! How blessed they are by
cleaving to thy sovereign blessedness! How they be made light, joined to the
true light! Finalie, alwaie beholding the unchangeable Trinity, they be
converted into an unchangeable nature!

But when shall we be able to comprehend the glorious condition of the Angels;
when we are not able to search out the nature of our own souls!

What is this thing which can quicken the flesh; and yet voluntarily can not
bind it self to holy cogitations! what kind of thing is this which is so
strong, and yet so weak; so small, and yet so mighty, that it searches out
the secrets of God, and beholds celestial things; which for man's behoof is
well known to have, through sharpenes of wit, invented the knowledge of many
sciences? what kind of thing is this then which knows so much of other
things, and yet is utterly ignorant how it self was made?

For although much be spoken doubtfulie of some, concerning the beginning of
the soul: yet we find how it is a certain intellectual spirit made through
the power of the Creator; living everlastingly in her kind; quickening the
mortal body which it sustaineth; subject to alteration; prone to forgetfulness;
which fear many times trobleth, and mirth puffs up.

O strange thing, most worthy to be woondred at! Of God the Creator of al
things Genesis 1, 1. 2, etc. John. 1, 1. 2. 3. Heb. 1, 1. 2.
, who is incomprehensible 1. Kin. 8, 27
, and unutterable, al doubtfulnes laid apart, we read great things and very
marvelous, we speak, and write also: yet whatsoever we say, either of Angels,
or of the souls of men, we can not so easily approve the same.

But omit we these things, and mount we; leave we, and ouerpasse we whatsoever
is created; and let us direct the eyes of our faith upon him who has made al
things.

Wherefore I will make degrees of ascension in mine heart; and thereby mount up
unto my soul; and by my soul and understanding ascend unto my Lord, who
abides above over mine head.

Let whatsoever is either visiblie seen, or spiritualie imagined, with a
strong hand be far away removed from the sight of mine heart and mind: only
let the pure understanding, going on plainly, attain swiftly unto him who
is the Creator both of Angels Psa. 148, 1. 2. 5.
, and of souls Genesis 1, 26. 27. 1. Cor. 11, 7. Col. 3, 10.
, and of al things beside Genesis 1, 1. 2. 3, etc. Heb. 1, 2
.

Blessed is that mind which forsakes base things below; and seeks after hie
things; which makes a nest in the rock, and from the high cliffe with Egles
eyes beholds the Son of righteousness.

For nothing is so goodly, and so comfortable, as with the sight of the mind,
and desire of heart to behold the very Lord alone; and after a marvelous manner
invisibly to behold the invisible 1. Tim. 1, 17:
and so to taste another, not this sweetenes; and to see another, not this
light.

Because this light, which is enclosed in a place, is ended by time, and
changed by the interruption of nights, and is common with us to worms and
beasts; and, to say the truth, in comparison of that sovereign light, can not
be called light indeed, but night rather.

Chap. 27.
What it is to hold, and to behold God in part; and how we are to conceive of
God.
AND although that sovereign and unchangeable essence, that true light, that
lasting light, that light of Angels can be seen of none in this life (for that
preeminence is reserved for the Saints in celestial glory:) yet firmly to
believe, and to understand, and to mark, and zealouslie to covet for the same,
is after a sort to hold, and to behold the same.

Let the voice therefore sound above the Angels; and let man with an intentive
mind behold God, and praise him with words as well as he can.

For it is meet that the creature do praise his Creator. Because he has made
us to praise him Esai. 43, 7.
, who stands not in need of our praise.

And he is an inco^prehensible virtue, wanting naught 2. Mac. 14, verse. 35.
: great is our Lord God and al sufficient to himself, great also is his power,
his wisdom is infinite Psa. 147, 5.
. Great is our Lord GOD, and much to be praised 1. Chro. 16 verse. 25. Psalm.
48, 2. Psalm. 96, 4.
.

Him therefore let the mind love Deuteronomy. 6, 5. Matt. 22, 37
, the tongue praise, ye hand write; and in these holy cogitations let the
faithful soul wholly exercise her self.

With these pleasant iunkates of celestial contemplation let the zealous man,
and the beholder of heavenly matters refresh himself day by day, that being
fattened with this celestial food, he may cry with a great voice, he may cry
from his heart root, with gladness he may cry, and with a most earnest desire
of the mind, say on this wise.

Chap. 28.
A prayer expressing the manifold properties of God.
O Most hie Tob. 4, 11. Heb. 7, 1.
, most holy Esai. 6, 4. 5.
, most mighty Genesis 17, 1. Revel. 4, 8.
, most merciful Psa. 145, 9 Matt. 5, 45.
, most righteous Psalm. 11, 5. 6. 7.
, most secret Matthew. 6, 4 6.
, present Ecc. 15, 18 19. Eccl. 23, 18. 19. 20.
, beutiful Sal. songs. 5, verse. 10. 11. 12, etc.
, and most strong God Psalm. 24, 8. Esai. 26, 4.
;

Stable Psalm. 90, 1. 2, etc. Psa. 102, 25. 26. 27.
, incomprehensible Psa. 139, 7. 8, etc.
, invisible 1. Tim. 1, 17
, yet beholding al things Ecc. 23, 19 20.
; immutable Mal. 3, 6.
, yet altering al things Ps. 102, 25. 26.
; immortal 1. Tim. 6, verse. 16.
, vnplaced Job. 23, 8. 9, etc.
, unmeasured Baru. 3, 24 25.
, vncomprehended Psa. 139, 7. 8, etc.
, without end Lam. 3, 19 Dan. 6, 26.
;

Inestimable Exo. 15, 11
, unutterable Job. 11, 7.
, wonderful Psa. 139, 6.
, immovable, moving al things Ps. 102, 24 25, etc.
, unsearchable To. 11, 33.
, unspeakable, fearful and terrible Deu. 7, 21. Nehem. 1, 5.
, to be honored Mal. 1, 6.
, served Psalm. 33, 8.
, worshipped Deuteronomy. 6, 13. Matthew. 4, 10.
, and reverenced;

Never young and never old Psalm. 90, 1. 2, etc. Psa. 102, 25. 26. 27.
; renewing al things Wis. 7, 27.
; rooting out the houses of the proud, yet mark they not so much:

Always working John. 5, 17
, and yet ever at rest; gathering and yet never wanting; bearing-vp al things
Heb. 1, 3.
and yet not burdened; filling al things Ecc. 23, 18, 19.
and yet not included; the creator Genesis 1, 1, 2, etc. Iudi. 9, 12.
, protector, nourisher Ps. 104, 27, 28
, and maintainer of al things:

Seeking Luke 15, 4. 5, etc.
, when thou lackest naught; loving Wis. 11, 23
, yet not inflamed; ielous Exo. 20. 5 Esaie. 9, 7.
, and yet unmoved; thou repentest Genesis 6, 6. 7, Ierem. 26, 3
, and yet art not grieved; thou art angry Psalm. 79, 5.
, and yet not disquieted;

Thou changest thy works Wi^. 7, 27. 2. Pet. 3, 6. 7.
, but not thy counsel Psa. 33, 11.
; thou receauest what thou find not, and never loasedst:

Thou art never poor, yet art thou glad when thou gettest; at no time
covetous, yet exactest usury:

Many are bountiful to bind thee unto them; yet who has aught which is not
thine 1. Cor. 4, verse. 7. Iam. 1, 17.
?

Thou paiest debts, owing naught; thou forgiuest debts Matthew. 18, verse. 23.
27, etc. 35.
, and yet forgoest nothing:

Thou quickenest al things 1. Tim. 6, verse. 13.
; thou have created al things John. 1, 1. 3. Hebr. 1, 1. 2.
, thou art euerie-where Eccles. 16, verse. 18. 19.
, and euerie-where whole:

Thou may be understood, but not seen 1. Tim. 1. verse. 17.
; and art no where wanting Psalm. 139, verse. 7. 8, etc.
; yet art thou far from the cogitations of the wicked Pro. 15, 29.
:

There are thou, where thou seem not to be; for where thou art not to show
favor, thou art to execute vengeance:

Thou touchest al things, yet not al alike; for somethings thou touchest, that
they may only be, and not live, perceive, and discern:

Some things thou touchest that they may live, and have sense, but not discern:

And somethings also thou touchest, that they may be, and perceive, and
discern too:

And although at no time thou art unlike to thy self; yet touchest thou diverse
things diversely:

Thou art present always eueriewhere; yet art thou hardly to be found out:

We follow thee standing, yet can we not lay hold upon thee:

Thou possessest al things Psa. 50, 9. 10. 11. 12.
; fillest al things Psalm. 139, 7. 8, etc.
; compassest al things; ouerpassest al things; and bear up al things Hebr.,
3.
:

And yet thou bear not of one part, and of another art ouerpassed; neither
of one part fillest thou, and of another compassest: but in compassing thou
fillest, and filling compassest; in bearing thou ouerpassest, and in
ouerpassing bear: Again, thou teach the hearts of the faithful Esa. 54,
13. John. 6, 45.
, without noise of words:

Thou reachest from one end to another mightily Wisd. 8, 1.
, and comely do thou order al things:

Thou art neither enlarged by places, nor changed by time Psalm. 102, verse. 24.
26. 27.
:

Neither is there any recesse, or access unto thee, but thou dwell in the
light that none can attain unto 1. Tim. 6, verse. 16.
, whom never man saw, neither can see:

Abiding in thy self quiet, thou go about the whole world, euerie-where,
being altogether al whole euerie-where.

For thou can neither be cut nor divided, because thou art truly one Deuteronomy.
6, 4. Mala. 2, 10.
; nor yet be brought in parts, in as much as al whole thou keep the whole,
fillest the whole, lightenest and possessest the whole.

The bottomless deapth of this mystery neither the mind of man can conceive,
nor the tongue of orators express, nor the most learned books in any
library make evident. Were the whole world replenished with books, yet could
not thine unspeakable knowledge be uttered, because thou art indeed
unutterable: thou can by no means be either written or concluded, being the
fountain of Gods heavenly light, and the sun of eternal brightness.

For thou art great without quantity, and therefore unmeasurable; good without
quality, and therefore in deed and soueraignlie good; yea, to say the truth,
there is none good but thou alone Matthew. 19, verse. 16. 17. Mar. 10, 17. Luke
18, 18. 19.
, whose will is a work, and whose will is ability:

Who have of nothing created al things Genesis 1, 1. 2, etc. Hebr. 1, 1. 2.
; the which thou made, even only because thou would:

Who possessest al thy creatures without any lack; gouernest them without
labor; and rulest them without pain: for there is nothing either of things on
high, or of things below, that can disturb the order of thy government:

Who art in all places without any place; and containest al things without
enclosure; and remainest euerie-where Eccle. 23, verse. 18. 19. 20.
without seat, or motion:

Who neither art the author of sin Eccles. 15, verse. 20.
, (which thing only thou can not do Psalm. 11, 5. 6. 7.
, who can do al things Exodus 6, 3. Genesis 35, 11.
) neither have thou bin sorry for aught which thou have done; neither art thou
disturbed with any commotion of the mind, nor have any loss by the
destruction of the whole world:

Who neither commendest Psalm. 5, 4. 5. 6. Romans 6, 16. 17, etc.
, nor command wickedness Eccles. 15, verse. 20.
; who at no time lie Romans 3, 4. 1. Ioh. 1, 10.
, because thou art the everlasting truth Psalm. 117, 2.
:

By whose goodness we were created Genesis 1, 26. 27. Psalm. 100, 3.
; by whose justice we are punished Dan. 9, 4. 5. 6, etc.
; by whose mercy we are saved Psa. 103, 1. 2. 3. 4, etc.
.

For we are to worship in steed of God nothing Exo. 20, 3. 4. 5.
, be it celestial, or of the substance of the fire, or earthly, or else
howsoever sensible.

For thou art what thou art Exo. 3, 14.
, and changest not Mal. 3, 6.
. To whom chiefly belongs that which the Greeks call On, the Latins Ens,
because thou art always the same Ps. 102, 27
, and thy years shall not fail.

These, and much mo things have I learned of the holy mother the Church Gal.
4, 26.
, whereof through thy grace I am made a member.

Of her have I learned how thou the alone Psa. 86, 10. Esai. 37, 16. 20.
, and true God Ioh. 17, 3. 1. These. 1, 9.
, both have no body Ioh. 4, 24.
, and also art vnsubiect to passions; and how nothing of thy substance or
nature is any way violable, or changeable, or compounded, or created: and
therefore certain it is, how thou can neither be perceived by any bodily
eyes 2. Tim. 1, verse. 17.
, nor could ever be seen in thy proper nature of any mortal man Ioh. 1, 18.
.

For hence it may evidently be gathered, that where Angels do now behold thee:
there we also after this life shall see thee Reu. 22, 4.
.

Naie, the very Angels neither are able to see thee as thou art in thy self.

Naie, to conclude, the almighty Trinity is known to none, but to thy self
only.

Chap. 29.
Of the unity of persons, and plurality in God.
ANd thou an unity of the Godhead, through the plurality of persons
manifold, art in number infinite, and therefore measurablie unmeasurable, and
waightilie vnwaiable.

For we acknowledge no beginning of the sovereign goodness, the which thou art;
of whom, through whom, in whom al things; but through participation thereof
we say al good things are 1. Cor. 4, 7. Iam. 1, 17.
.

For thy divine essence has always bin, and yet is without matter; although
it lack no form, to wit, informed, the form of forms, the most welformed
form, the which while thou imprintest as a seal to every particular thing,
thou make them doubtless to differ from thy self without any either of your
augmenting, or diminishing; but whatsoever is in the world, it is thy creature
John. 1, 1. 3. Hebr. 1, 1. 2.
.

O simple Trinity, and triple unity, God, whose almightines both possesses,
and rules, and replenisheth al things which thou have created.

Neither in saying how thou fillest al things, mean we that they contain
thee, but rather that thou conteinest them; neither by parts fillest thou al
things; nor yet may it be thought, that every thing, according to the greatness
of the portion it has, receaueth thee, that is, the greatest thing more, and
the smallest thing less: thou rather being in all things, or more truly al
things in thee Act. 17, 28.
, whose omnipotency includes al things; neither can any man find a way to
escape thy power Psa. 139, 7. 8, etc.
.

For whosoever has not thy favor, can by no means avoid thy displeasure, as
it is written Psalm. 75, 6. 7.
, Neither from the East, nor from the Weast, nor from the South, but God is the
Judge: and again Psa. 139, 7. 8, etc.
, Whither shall I go from thy spirit, or whither shall I go from thy presence?

The immensitie of thy divine greatness is this, that we know thee to be within
al things, not as included; and without al things, yet not as excluded. And
therefore thou art within, yt thou may contain al; and therefore without, that
al things may be comprehended within the immensitie of thy circumscribed
greatness.

So then by that thou art within, thou art known to be a Creator; by that thou
art without, we perceive how thou art the governor of al things.

And least al things which are created, might be without thee, thou art within,
and without, that al things may be included of thee, not by local greatness, but
by thy mighty presence, who are euerie-where present, and al things present
before thee Eccle. 15, verse. 18. Eccl. 23, 18. 19. 20.
: although some understand these things, yet some do not.

The unity then of thine inseparable nature, cannot have separable persons;
because as thou art a trinity in unity, and a unity in trinity, so can you
not have a separation of persons.

Sometime indeed those persons are particularly named Mat. 3, 16. 17. 1.
John. 5, 7.
, but so thou would, o God the Trinity, declare thy self inseparable in
persons; that there is no name in any one person, but may be referred unto
another, according to the rule of relation.

As the Father unto the Son, and the Son unto the Father; so has the Son
true relation both unto the Father and the Son.

Also those names which signify either your substance, o God, or person, or
power, or essence, or else what, which properly is caled God, do equalie agree
to all the persons: as great God, almighty, eternal, and generalie al things,
which naturalie are spoken of God.

So that there is no name of nature, which so may agree unto thee God the
Father, but the same also may fitly be referred unto the Son, and holy
Ghost.

We say how thou the Father art naturalie God, so is the Son naturalie God,
and the holy Ghost naturalie; and yet not three Gods, but one God naturalie,
ye Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost.

And therefore, o God holy Trinity, in persons thou art inseparable, in sense
are they to be understood, though in sound you have separable names: for you
receive no plural number in the names of nature.

For hereby is it declared, how the persons in the holy Trinity, which is one
Psa. 86, 10. Esaic. 37, 16. 20.
, very God John. 17, 3. 1. These. 1, 9.
, can not be divided: for that the name of every person, respects alwaie
another person.

If I say the Father, I point unto the Son; if I name the Son, I
presuppose a Father; if I mention the holy spirit, I must necessarily
understand of whom he is the Spirit, namely of the Father and of the Son.

For this is the true faith, proceeding from sound doctrine: this undoubtedly
is the catholic and right faith, which God of his goodness has taught me in
the bosom of the mother Church Gal. 4, 26.
.

Chap. 30.
A zealous prayer unto the blessed Trinity.
WHerefore, o Lord, my faith, which thou have given me to my salvation, calls
unto thee.

For the faithful soul lives by faith Romans 1, 17.
: he enioieth in hope 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. 13.
, which one day he shall behold in thee.

O my God, unto thee cries my pure conscience, and the sweet love of my
faith, which, the darkness of ignorance being driven away, thou have brought
unto ye knowledge of the truth; which also thou have plucked from the foolish
bitterness of this world, and made comfortable and pleasant to me through thy
sweet love.

Unto thee, o blessed Trinity, does the clear voice, and sincere love of my
faith call, the which, nurishing the same from the cradle, thou have enlightened
alwaie by the light of thy grace; and confirmed mightily in me through the
instructions of our mother the Church.

Unto thee, do I call, o happy, and blessed, and glorious, and single
Trinity, Father Mat. 11, 25 Mark. 13, 32
, and Son John. 3, 16 18. 1. John. 4, 3.
, and holy Ghost 2. Cor. 13, verse. 13. 1. John. 5, 7.
.

God Dent. 6, 4. 1. Tim. 1, 17.
, Lord Deuteronomy. 6, 13 Matthew. 4, 10.
, and Comforter Ioh. 14, 16. 17.
: love, grace, and communion 2. Cor. 13, verse. 13.
: the begetter Heb. 1, 5.
, the begotten Act. 13, 33.
, the renuer Titus. 3, 5
:

The very light of the very light John. 1, 4. 5. 9.
, the very illumination:

The spring, the flud, and the watering:

Of one, al; through one, al; in one, al things:

Of whom Act. 17, 28.
, through whom, in whom are al things:

The living life, the life from the living, the quickener of such as live John.
5, 21 1. Tim. 6, 13.
.

One of himself; one of one; one of two:

A Being of himself; a Being of another; a Being from both:

The Father is true 1. Ioh. 5, 9. 10.
, the Son truth John. 14, 6
, and the holy Ghost truth 1. John. 5, 6
:

So that the Father, the Word, and the Comforter, are one essence 1. John. 5, 7
, one power, one goodness, and one blessedness; of whom, through whom, and in
whom are al things blessed, whatsoever things are blessed.

Chap. 31.
How that God is the true, and the sovereign life.
O God, the true and the sovereign life; of whom, through whom, and in whom al
things do live Act. 17, 28
, whatsoever things do live truly, and in happy state:

O God, even goodness and goodlines; from whom Iam. 1, 17.
, through whom, and in whom are al good and goodly things, which are good and
goodly:

God, whose faith quickens, hope erecteth, and love linketh us:

God, who have commanded us to pray unto thee Matt. 7, 7.
; and make thy self to be found; and openest to him which knocks:

God, whom none forgoeth but the deceived; none seeks but the admonished Ioh.
6, 44.
; and no man finds, but the purged Matt. 5, 8.
:

God, whom to know is life John. 17, 3.
; whom to serve is to reign; and whom to love is the salvation and joy of
the soul:

Thee, both with my lips, and with mine heart, and with all my strength, I do
praise, bless, and worship; to thy clemency and goodness I do yield humble
thanks for all thy benefits, and to thy Majesty do I sing, Holy, Holy, Holy
Esai. 6, 3.
.

O blessed Trinity, I beseech thee, vouchsafe to come into me, and to make me
a meet temple for thine holiness.

I do pray the Father through the Son; I pray the Son through the
Father; I pray the holy Spirit by the Father and the Son, that al wickedness
may be set far-awaie fro me; and that all the holy virtues may be implanted
within me.

O infinite GOD, of whom, through whom, and in whom are al things made, both
visible and invisible Col. 1, 16.
, which enclosest thine outward works, and fillest thine inward; gouernest them
above, and bear them below Heb. 1, 3.
, keep me the work of thine hands Psa. 100, 3. Psalm. 119, 73.
, which trust in thee, and hope only in thy mercy. Keep me, I beseech thee,
both here and euerie-where; now and alwaie; within and without; before and
behind; above and beneath; round-about, so that there be no place for the
snares of the enemy against me.

Thou art God almighty Genesis 35, 11 Psalm. 115, 3. Revel. 11, 17
, the keeper and protector of all that trust in thee Psa. 18, 30
; without whom none is in safety, no man is free from danger.

Thou art God, and beside thee there is none other Deu. 4, 39 Psalm. 86, 10.
, either in heaven above, or in earth below; which do great things and
unsearchable Job. 5, 9.
, and marvelous things without number.

Meet is it that thou be praised, that thou be honored, that thou be magnified
with commendations:

To thee the whole troop of Angels; to thee the heavens and all the powers do
sing, and continualie yield praises, as creatures to the Creator, servants to
the Lord, soldiers to their King:

Every creature does extol, and every soul does glorify thee the holy, and
undivided Trinity.

Chap. 32.
A form of thanksgiving unto God.
TO thee the holy and humble men of heart Song of ye three children. ver. 87 86.
; to thee the spirits and souls of the righteous; to thee do all the supernal
citizens, together with all the orders of blessed spirits, yield humble praise,
and glory, and exalt thee above al things for ever.

O Lord, gloriously and honorably do those heavenly citizens adorn thee
with praises. Man also, the most excellent among thy creatures, does magnify
thee.

Yea and I too a miserable sinner do exceedingly desire to praise thee; and
greatly do I love to love thee above al things.

O my God Psalm. 7, 1. 3.
, my life Psalm. 42, 8.
, my strength Psa. 18, 1. 2.
, and my praise Psa. 118, 14 Esaie. 12, 2.
, give me grace to praise thee.

Put thy light in mine heart, and thy word into my mouth; that both mine heart
may think upon thy glory, and my tongue sing out thy praises every day
Psalm. 71, 8.
.

But for so much as praise is not seemly in the mouth of a sinner Ecc. 15, 9.
, and I am a man of polluted lips Esai. 6, 5.
: purge mine heart, I beseech thee, from al iniquity Psalm. 51, 7. 8.
; sanctify me both within and without, o almighty sanctifier, and make me
worthy to sound forth thy praise.

Receive in good part from the hand of the heart, and from the love of the mind,
receive, I pray thee, the sacrifice of my lips, and let it be acceptable in
thy sight, and ascend-vp unto thee like a sweet smelling savor.

Let thine holy memory, and thy blessed sweetenes possess my whole soul,
and ravish me with desire of invisible things.

Let my soul, I beseech thee, pass from visible unto invisible; from
terrestrial unto heavenly; unto eternal from transitory things; let it pass
I say, and see thy woonderful vision.

O eternal verity Psalm. 117, 2.
, and true charity 1. John. 4, 8 9.
, and dear eternity 1. Tim. 1, verse. 17.
, thou art my God Psa. 31, 14.
, unto thee do I sigh, after thee do I covet, on thee do I think, unto thee
do I desire to come night and day: who so knows thee, knows the truth
John. 14, 6
, knows eternity.

Thou, o truth, bear the preeminence above al things, whom we shall behold
even as thou art 1. Ioh. 3, 2.
, when as this blind and mortal life is passed-awaie; wherein it is said unto
us, Where is thy God Psa. 42, 3.
? And I say, Thou art my God Psalm. 31, 14.
.

Som-what I breath after thee, when I powre-out my soul upon thee in the voice
of joy and confession, as one that makes good-cheere, and keeps a feast, and
as yet is pensive, because it slideth-backe, and becomes a deep, or more
truly perceaueth it self as yet to be a very deep indeed.

My faith, which thou have inflamed in the night before my feet, says to it,
Why art thou cast down, my soul Psalm. 43, 5.
; and why art thou disquieted within me? Wait on God; his word is a lantern
unto my feet Ps. 119, 105
. Wait and persevere, until the night, even the mother of the wicked, be
gone-awaie; until the wrath of God, whose children we sometime were Ephesians. 2, 3.
, be passed-awaie.

For we have bin ere-this darkness Ephesians. 5, 8.
, until this stream of waters flowe-awaie, we carry yet the remnants in the
body* dead in respect of sin, until the day do rise, and shadows depart;
wait on God, in the morning I shall stand before him, and behold, and always
praise him.

In the morning I will direct me unto thee Psalm. 5, 3.
, and behold the health of my countenance, even my God, who shall quicken our
mortal bodies Romans 8, 11.
, because of the Spirit dwelling in us, that now we may be light Ephesians. 5, 8.
, while yet we are saved by hope Romans 8, 24
, and are the children of light, and the children of the day 1. These. 5, 5
, not of the night, neither of darkness.

For we were once darkness Ephesians. 5, 8.
, but are now light in the Lord, and yet through faith 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
13.
, not as we shall be. Hope that is seen is none hope Romans 8, 24
.

O Lord, that immortal people of thine Angels do praise thee, and the
celestial powers do magnify thy Name Esaie. 6, 1. 2. 3.
, who have no need either to read this our scripture, or to know thee the
holy and single Trinity.

For they always behold thy face Matt. 18, verse. 10.
, where they read without syllables of time, what thine eternal pleasure is:
they read, they choose, and they love; yea, always they read, and what they
read, they forget not.

By choosing, and loving, they read this constancy of thy counsel, and their
book shall at no time be shut and folded, because thy self art, and wilt
everlastingly be this to them.

O much blessed are those heavenly powers, that can religiously and purelie
with an exceeding delight and unspeakable joy magnify thee with praises!

Thence they praise, whence they rejoice, for so much as always they behold that
which offers them continual occasion both to praise, and rejoice.

But we, pressed down with the weight of flesh Wis. 9, 15.
, and placed far away from thy countenance 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
in this exile Heb. 11, 13. 14, etc. 1. Pet. 2, 11.
, and distracted through varieties of the world, we alas, are not able
worthily to praise thee; through faith we praise thee; not of perfect
knowledge 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. 13.
.

But those Angelical spirits praise thee of knowledge Matthew. 18, verse. 10.
, not through faith: for our flesh is the cause, why we praise thee otherwise
than they do.

Notwithstanding, albeit we sing praises to thee after diverse sorts, yet thou
art but one God Deuteronomy. 6, 4. Mala. 2, 10.
, creator of al things Genesis 1, 1. 2, etc. John. 1, 1. 3. Hebr. 1, 1. 2.
, to whom is offered the sacrifice of praise both in heaven and in earth, but
one day we shall come unto their company, with whom always we shall see thee 1.
Cor. 13, verse. 12. Reave. 22, 4.
, and praise thee without cessing.

Now then, o Lord, grant that while I do live in this frail body, both mine
heart, and my tongue, and al my bones may glorify thee, and say Psalm. 35,
verse. 10.
, Lord, who is like unto thee!

Thou art God almighty Exodus 6, 3. Revel. 4, 8.
, whom, three in persons Matt. 3, 16. 17. Mark. 1, 10. 11.
, yet but one in ye substance of the Godhead, we serve and worship, namely,
the Father unbegotten, the Son only begotten of the Father Ioh. 3, 16. 18.
1. John. 4, 9.
, the holy Spirit both proceeding from, and remaining in them both, an holy
and a single Trinity, one God almighty:

Which, when we were not, did mightily make us Genesis 1, 26. 27. Psalm. 100,
3. Psalm. 119, 73.
, and when, through our own default, we were lost, mercifully and
marvelously have delivered us Psalm. 103, 1. 2, etc. 9. 10, etc. 1. Pet. 2, 24.
.

Oh suffer us not to prove neither ungrateful for so great benefits, nor
unworthy so manifold mercies.

Unto thee do I pray, sue, and beseech, increase my faith, increase mine hope,
yea, and increase my love also.

Through that same thy goodness, make us to be evermore stable in faith Colo. 1,
23.
, and fruitful in all good works Col. 1, 10.
, that by a right faith and works agreeable unto faith, we may come through
thy mercy unto everlasting life, where, seeing thy perfect and full glory even
as it is 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. Reave. 22, 4.
, we may worship thy majesty, and, made worthy to behold thy glory, sing:

Glory to the Father which has made us Psalm. 136, 1. 2. 3. etc.
, glory to the Son who has redeemed us Gal. 3, 13. Gala. 4, 1. 2, etc. 1.
Timo. 2, 6.
, glory to the holy Ghost that has sanctified us Romans 15, verse. 26. 1. Cor.
6, 9. 10. 11.
, glory to the sovereign and single Trinity, whose works are inseperable,
and whose kingdom has none end Reu. 11, 15.
.

Unto thee belongs al praise, al commendation, al honor, blessing, and love,
honor, and power, and might be unto thee our God for evermore Reu. 7, 12.
, Amen.

Chap. 33.
A complaint, that man is not moved in heart through contemplation, when as the
Angels, who see God, tremble thereat.
PArdon, o Lord, o merciful God pardon, pardon and show mercy, forgive mine
ignorance, and my great imperfection.

O reject me not, for that I dare be so bold with thee, who am thy servant, not
thy good servant, whom would I were, but thine unprofitable and evil, and
therefore very evil, because I presume without any contrition of the heart,
and fluds of tears, and without due reverence and fear, to praise, bless,
and worship thee our almighty Genesis 17, 1. Genesis 35, 11. Reave. 11, 17.
God, terrible, and much to be feared Reu. 15, 1. 2. 3.
.

For if the Angels in honoring and praising thee do tremble, filled with a
marvelous reioicing; why do not I, when I come into thy presence to praise
thee, and to offer sacrifice, why do not I even quake at the very heart; why
blush I not in countenance, why do not I stammer in my speech, and why shed I
not plentiful tears fro mine eyes?

Alack, I would, but I am unable, because I cannot do as I would. Hence it is
that I marvel much with my self, while with the eyes of my faith I behold
thee, who art very terrible.

But who can do this without the help of thy grace? for it is thy mercy which
does save us al Romans 9, verse. 23. 24. Romans 11, 31.
.

O wretch that I am, how senseles is my soul become, that it is not much
dismayed, while it stands before God, and sounds out his praises!

O wretch that I am, how is mine heart hardened, that mine eyes do not power out
even floods of tears, while I felowe-seruant reason before my Lord Mal. 1, 6.
; a man with God Exo. 20, 1. 2. 3, etc.
; a creature with the Creator Psa. 100, 3.
; I who am made of the slime of the earth Genesis 1, 26. 27.
, with him who has created al things of nothing Hebr. 1, 1. 2. John. 1, 1. 3.
!

Behold, o my Lord, I place my self before thine eyes, and what I think
secretly of my self in mine heart, I make others to know.

But, o God, who art rich in mercy Ephe. 2, 4.
, and liberal in thy rewards, give me of thy riches, that through them I may
serve thee. For none otherwise can we either serve, or please thee, but of thy
gift Iam. 1, 17.
; pierce, I beseech thee, my flesh with thy fear; let mine heart rejoice, that
I may fear thy Name.

Oh that my sinful soul did so fear thee, as did that holy man, who said,
Gods punishment was fearful unto me Job. 31, 23.
.

Wherefore, o God, who art the giver of al good things Iam. 1, 17.
, give me among thy praises a well of tears, together with a pure heart, and
ioiful mind, that loving thee perfectly, and lauding thee worthily, in the
very palate of mine heart, I may perceive, taste, and savor, how sweet thou
art, and pleasant, o Lord; as it is written, Taste ye and see how gracious the
Lord is Psa. 34, 8.
, blessed is the man that trusts in him.

Blessed is the people that can rejoice in thee Psa. 89, 15.
: blessed is the man whose strength is in thee Psalm. 84, 5.
, and in whose heart are thy ways in the vale of tears, in the place which he
has appointed.

Blessed are the pure in heart Matt. 5, 8.
, for they shall see God.

Blessed are they which dwell in thine house, o Lord, for ever and ever, they
will praise thee Psalm. 84, 4.
.

Chap. 34.
A prayer very forceable, to move the mind unto Religion, and the love of God.
O Jesus, who art our redemption Gala. 4, 1. 2. Colos. 1, 14. 1. Tim. 2, 6.
, our love, and desire, God of God Ioh. 8, 42. Ioh. 16, 27. 30.
, help me thy servant.

Upon thee do I call, unto thee do I cry from the very bottom of mine heart.

For thee do I call into my soul, o enter thereinto, and join it to thee, that
thou may possess the same without spot or wrinkle Ephesians. 5, 27.
.

For a most clean Lord must have a clean habitation.

O then sanctify me thy vessel which thou have made Job. 10, 8.
, purge me from al wickedness, fill me with thy grace, and being replenished
keep me so, that I may be a meet temple 1. Cor. 3, verse. 16. 17.
for thy dwelling both here and for ever.

O most good, most gracious, loving, dear, mighty, desired, precious,
amiable, and glorious God, thou art to me than honey sweeter, than milk or
snow fairer, than nectar pleasant, than gold and jewels more precious, and
deerer than all the wealth and promotions of the world.

What do I say, o my GOD, mine only hope, and so infinite mercy? what do I
say, o happy and quiet sweetenes? what do I say, when I say these things? I
say what I am able, but I say not all that I should, would to God I could
say, as the melodious quires of Angels do say!

Oh how willingly would I power out my self wholly in thy praises! how
deuoutelie without ceassing would I sing forth those Psalms of heavenly
music, unto the laud and praise of thy Name, in the mids of thy congregation!

Notwithstanding, because I cannot do so, shall I be still? woe to them which
talk not of thee, who openest the mouth of the dumb Wis. 10, 21.
, and make the tongs of babes eloquent. Woe to them which talk not of thee,
for they which babble much are dumb, when they sing not thy praises.

Who can praise thee worthily enough, o unutterable power, and wisdom of the
Father!

And albeit I can not find words, where withal I may sufficiently express
the almighty, and al-skilful word; yet until thou call me unto thee, where I
may praise thee as I should, and ought, I will say what I am able. Wherefore,
mine humble request is, that thou would respect, not that which I now do
say, but that which I desire to say.

For in deed, I do mightily desire to speak of thee as I ought, and as
becomes me, because to thee praise, to thee Psalms, to thee al honor, and
glory is due 1. Tim. 1, verse. 17. Revel. 4, 9.
.

Then know thou, o God, who know the secret cogitations of the heart Psalm.
7, 9. Acts. 15, 8. Romans 2, 16. 1. Cor. 14, 25
, thou know how to me thou art more acceptable and dear, than either
heaven, or earth, or any thing contained in heaven or earth. For I do love
thee above heaven, and above earth, and more than any things which are in
heaven or earth; yea, for the love of thy Name, no transitory things 1. Cor.
7, 31 1. Ioh. 2, 15. 16. 17.
doubtless are to be loved.

O my God, exceedingly do I love thee; and more and more I desire to love
thee.

Grant, I beseech thee, that I may love thee evermore, not only as I would,
but also as I should, that thou only may be in my thought and meditation.

Of thee let me meditate in the day time, and cease not; of thee let me think
in the night when I am asleep; with thee let my spirit reason; and my soul
let it talk with thee.

With the light of thine holy contemplation let mine heart be enlightened, that
through thy direction I may go from strength unto strength Psalm. 84, 7.
, and so at length behold thee the God of gods in Zion, whom now I see indeed
through a glass darkly 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12.
: but then face to face, where I shall know thee even as I am known.

Blessed are the pure in heart Matt. 5, 8.
: for they shall see God. Blessed are they which dwell in thine House Psalm. 84, 4.
, o Lord, for ever and ever they will praise thee.

Wherefore by all thy mercies, wherewithal we be delivered from everlasting
damnation Romans 9, 23 24.
, I beseech thee, o Lord, mollify mine hard, and stony, and flintie, and iron
heart, with thine holy, and mighty ointment; and through ye fire of
compunction make me at al hours to seem a living sacrifice in thy sight Romans
12, 1.
.

Cause me to have always a contrite, and an humbled heart with a flud of tears
in mine eyes.

Cause me from the bottom of mine heart utterly to die to this world, and
through the greatness of thy fear and love so to forget transitory things,
that I may neither weep nor rejoice at; neither fear nor love any worldly
thing; neither be corrupted with prosperity, nor be overthrown by adversity.

And for so much as thy love is strong as death Sal. songs. 8, verse. 6.
, let the fiery and pleasant force of thy love swalowe up mine heart, I beseech
thee, from al things that are under heaven, that I may cleave unto thee alone,
and be fed with the only remembrance of thy sweetenes.

Let thy sweet savor, o Lord, let the sweet savor of thee, I pray thee
descend, yea let it descend into mine heart; and let the comfortable love of
thine holy Name enter even into my soul.

O let the marvelous and unspeakable sweetenes of thy savor come unto me,
which may both raise up in my breast a continual desire after thee, and fro mine
heart bring the veins of water springing-vp into everlasting life John. 4, 14.
.

Thou art unmeasurable, o Lord, and therefore without measure thou should
be loved, and praised of them, whom thou have redeemed with thy precious blood
1. Pet. 1, 18. 19.
.

O most gracious lover of mankind 1. Ioh. 3, 16
, most merciful Lord, and righteous judge, to whom (...) judgment is
committed by the Father Ioh. 5, 22.
, by the most wise judgment of thine equity thou ha^^ giuen-out, how the
children of this world Luke 16, 8.
, of night, and of darkness, with a more earnest desire, endeavor, and study do
love and seek after transitory riches and fleeting promotion; than we thy
servants can love our God, by whom we are both made Genesis 1, 26. 27. Job. 10, 8.
Psalm. 119, 73.
, and redeemed Gal. 3, 13. 1. Tim. 2, 8.
.

For if one man do so entirely love another, that he can hardly bear the
absence of his friend; if the wife with so great a fire of goodwil be joined to
her husband, that in respect thereof, she can at no time be at rest til she
have his company: with what a goodwil, with what a care, with what a zeal
ought the soul, which through faith of her part, and through mercy on your
part betrothed to thee, to love thee the true Matt. 1, 23 Matt. 16, 16.
GOD, the fairest spouse 2. Cor. 11, 2 Ephesians. 5, 22. 23, etc.
, who have so loved, and saved us; who have done so many, such and so great
things for our sakes!

And although these weak things have their comforts, and their loves: yet do
they not so delight, as thou our God do. For in thee do the righteous
rejoice: because thy love is sweet, and quiet. For thou do replenish the
hearts, which thou possessest, both with sweetness, with joy, and with
tranquillity.

Contrariwise the love of this world, and of the flesh is troblesome and
unquiet, neither suffers it the minds whom it enters into at any time to
be at rest. For continualie it moves them with suspicions, and with
perturbations, and with manifold fears.

So that thou art the joy of the righteous: and good cause why. For with thee
is an assured quietness, with thee is the life void of al trobles.

O gracious God, who so enters into thee, enters into his masters joy Mat.
25, 2^
, and shall fear no more: but shall fare well in the place of happiness, saying,
This is my rest for ever Ps. 132, 14.
: here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein; and again, The Lord is my
shepherd Psalm. 23, 1. 2.
, I shall not want: he makes me to rest in green pastures.

O dear Christ, o sweet Jesus, replenish mine heart, I beseech thee, with the
unquenchable fire of thy love, with a continual remembrance of thee; so that as
a burning flame I may so burn with the love of thee, that no water, be it
never so much, may quench the same.

O most gracious Lord, make thou me unfeignedly to love thee, and through
desire of thee to laie-downe the burden of al fleshly desires, and the
importable weight of earthly affections, which beats, and peiseth down my
soul, that by the savor of thine ointments running amain after thee, I may
the more speedily discern, by the conduction of thee my Captain, to come
unto the contemplation of thy fairenes, there to be thoroughly satisfied.

For two sorts of love, whereof the one is good, and the other naught; the one
sweet, and the other uncomfortable; can not abide at one time together in one
body.

And therefore, who so besides thee loves any thing Mat. 10, 37
, thy love o God, is not in him 1. Ioh. 2, 15
; thy love, I say, even the love of sweetenes, and the sweetenes of love; the
love which trobleth not, but delights; the sincere and chaste love abiding
everlastingly; the love, which always burnest, and never go out.

O dear Christ, o sweet Jesus, who art the very love 1. Ioh. 4, 8.
, and my God Matt. 4, 10.
, inflame me wholly with thy fire, with thy love, with thy sweetness and
delectation, with thy joy and mirth, with the delight and desire of thee, the
which is both holy and good, chaste and pure, quiet and secure, that filled
even topful with the sweetenes of thy love, and wholly set on fire by the
flames of thy friendship, I may love thee, my God, with all mine heart Deuteronomy. 6.
5. Luke. 10, 27.
, and with all my strength, having thee always, and in all places both in mine
heart, and in my mouth, and before mine eyes, so that strange loves may find no
place at al in me.

Hear me, o my God; hear me, o light of mine eyes; hear my petition, and
grant my petition, that thou may hear me. Gracious, and most merciful God,
stop not thine ears against me, because of my sins; but of, thy woonted
goodness receive the prayers of thy servant, and grant me the effect of my
petition, and request; Amen.

Chap. 35.
A devout prayer for grace, to praise and to thank the Lord duly for his
benefits.
O Lord, Christ, word of the Father John. 1, 1. 2, etc. Heb. 1, 1. 2.
, who came into this world to save sinners 1. Tim. 1, 15
, through the tender bowels of thy mercy I beseech thee, amend my life, change
my dealings, and reform my manners: take-awaie fro me such things as hurt my
soul, and displease thee; and give me that which thou know is pleasing to
thee and profitable for my souls health.

Who can bring a clean thing out of filthiness Job. 14, 4.
, but thou alone? Thou art God almighty Genesis 35, verse. 11. Reu. 11, 17.
, of infinite mercy Psa. 145, 9.
, which iustifiest the ungodly Romans 4, 5.
, and quickenest the dead in respect of sin, who changest sinners, and they
are not.

Remove therefore fro me whatsoever in me displeases thee. For thine eyes
do behold my manifold imperfections.

Send thine hand of mercy, I pray thee, upon me: and take away from
whatsoever within me does offend the eyes of thy goodness.

O Lord, thou know both how sound, and how sick I am. Heal my sickness,
and maintain my health, I beseech thee.

O Lord, thou which helpest the weak, and preseruest the healthful; thou, at a
beck amendest the things which are broken and decayed, heal thou me, and I
shall be whole Ier. 17, 14.
, save me, and I shall be saved.

For do thou vouchsafe in mine heart, thy field, to sow the good seed, it must
needs be, that first thou will plucke-out the thorns of my wickedness by the
hand of thy mercy.

O most gracious, most gentle, most loving, desired, amiable, and lovely of al
others, power, I pray thee, upon mine heart, the streams of thy sweetenes, and
goodwil, that I may neither desire, nor think upon any earthly, or fleshly
thing Matthew. 10, verse. 37. 1. John. 2, 15 16.
, but love thee alone, and have thee only both in mine heart, and mouth.

By thine own finger write thou within my breast a sweet remembrance of thy
comfortable Name, never to be blot-out by forgetfulness.

Write thy will, and thy iustifications also upon the tables of mine heart, that
alwaie, and euerie-where I may set both thee, the Lord of infinite sweetenes,
and thy laws before my face.

Inflame my mind with that thy fire, which thou sendest upon the earth Luke 12,
49.
, and would have increased very much, that day by day with abundance of
tears I may offer unto thee the sacrifice of a contrite spirit Psalm. 51, 17.
, and of a broken heart.

According as I desire, and as from mine heart I crave, o sweet Christ, o good
Jesus, give me thine holy and chaste love, that it may replenish, and hold, and
possess me altogether.

And give me too a continual watering stream of tears, which is an evident
sign of thy love, that they also may testify to the world thy love within me,
that they may declare, and tell, how greatly my soul does love thee, seeing
for the exceeding pleasure it receaueth from thy love, it cannot refrain from
shedding tears.

O good Lord, sometime I remember that good woman Anna 1. Sam. 1, verse. 18.
, which came unto the tabernacle to beg a son of God, of whom the Scripture
testifies, how after her tears and prayers, she looked no more sad: but when
I remember so great virtue, and such constancy of that woman, I am troubled in
mind, and do blush again, because I behold how I wretch do grouel too much
downward.

For if a woman did so weep, and continue in weeping, and that for a son;
how should my soul weep, yea and persist in weeping, which seeks, and
loves God, yea and longs too for to come unto him! How should the soul both
groan, and be grieved, that seeks after God night and day! which esteems
al things as naught beside Christ! for it is much marvel, if tears be not the
meat of such a soul day and night.

Regard therefore, and show mercy upon me, for the dolors of mine heart be
increased.

Give me thine heavenly comfort, and despise not the sinful soul for which
thou diedst 1. Tim. 1, verse. 15.
.

O give, I beseech thee, the inward tears of hearty affection, which may both
lose the fetters of my sins, and also replenish my soul evermore with thy
celestial comfort.

Gladly would I atteine some portion in thy kingdom, if not among men
aforetime, whose steps I am unable to imitate, yet at the least among religious
women.

And here comes into my remembrance the woonderful devotion of other women,
that with a godly affection sought thee in the grave Matt. 28, verse. 1. 5.
Mark. 16, 1. 2, etc.
, that, albe thy disciples departed, yet went not from the sepulcher, that sat
there heavy lamenting, and weeping much and a long while, and rising again,
with many tears oftentimes went and peeped into the holes of the sepulcher,
and very diligently sought if any where they could see thee, whom
earnestly they sought for.

Many times went they unto the grave, but to the lovers too much was not often
enough; for the virtue of a good work is perseverance: and because above the
rest they loved, both in loving they wept, and in weeping they sought, and in
seeking they perseuered, and therefore they before al did find thee, saw thee,
and talk with thee.

And not only so, but also they carried the tidings of your glorious
resurrection to ye disciples themselves, according as you bad, and warned them,
saying, Go and tell my brethren, that they go into Galile, and there shall they
see me Matt. 28, verse. 10.
.

If then the women so wept, and in weeping perseuered, that sought the living
among the dead, and by faith touched thee; how should the soul bewail, and in
bewailing continue, which in heart believes, and with mouth confesses, how
thou her Savior do rule in heaven, and govern euerie-where! how should that
soul weep and lament, which with her heart loves, and with all her whole
desire longs for thee!

O thou only refuge, and hope of the distressed, to whom no man sueth,
without hope of mercy, give me this grace for thine own sake, and for thine
holy Name sake, that as often as I think of thee, speak of thee, write of
thee, read of thee, confer of thee, as often as I remember thee, serve thee,
offer the sacrifice of praise unto thee, so often I may shed abundance of
tears sweetly before thy face, that my tears may become my meat day and
night Psalm. 42, 3.
.

Thou, o king of glory Psa. 24. 7. 8, etc.
, and master of al virtues Matthew. 23. 10.
, have taught us both by word and example to weep and to mourn, saying;
Blessed are they which mourn, for they shall be comforted Matthew. 5, verse. 5.
. Again, thou did mourn for thy friend departed John. 11, verse. 33. 34,
etc.
, and weep over Jerusalem ready to come unto desolation Luke 19, 41 42.
.

O good Jesus, by those most precious tears of thine, and by all thy manifold
mercies, wherewithal thou have vouchsafed wonderfully to help us miserable
sinners, give me grace to bewail my transgressions, the which my soul does
much long for, and desire, because without thou give it, I cannot get the same
Iam. 1, 17.
, but even through the holy Ghost, which mollifieth the hearts of sinners, and
provoke them unto the tears of repentance.

Give me grace to mourn for my sins, as our forefathers did, whose
footesteps I am bound to imitate, that I may bewail mine offenses al my life
long, as they have mourned day and night.

Even for thine intercession sake, and for all thy merits sake, have mercy upon
me thy miserable and unworthy servant; and give me grace to bewail my sins.

Water thou my plants both from above, and from beneath, that my tears may be
my meat day and night Psalm. 42, 3.
; and I through the fire of compunction may be made a fat burning sacrifice in
thy sight, and be killed altogether upon the altar of mine heart, and be taken
as a fat burnt sacrifice for a sweet smelling savor in thy nostrels.

O sweet Lord, give me a watering fountain, and a clear fountain, wherein
daily this defiled sacrifice may be cleansed.

For although through the assistance of thy grace I have offered my self
wholly to thee; yet in many things for all that I do sin Iam. 3, 2.
, by reason of my too too great weakness.

Wherefore, o blessed and loving God, give me grace especially of the great
sweetness of thy love, and remembrance of thy mercies, make ready this table
for thy servant in thy presence, and give me power, that when I will, I may be
satisfied of it.

Of thy mercy and goodness grant, that this inebriating and goodly cup may
quench my thirst, that my spirit may covet after thee, and my mind burn with
thy love, forgetting al vanity and misery.

Hear, o my God, hear o light of mine eyes, hear my petition, and grant that
I may beg that thing, which thou may grant.

Gracious, and merciful God, stop not thine ears against me, because of my
sins, but of thy woonted goodness grant me the effect of my petition and
desire; Amen.

Chap. 36.
A very effectual prayer to the stirring up of the mind unto godliness being
zelouslie uttered.
O Lord Jesus, o pitiful Jesus, o good Jesus, who both have voutsafed to suffer
death for our sins, and art risen again for our justification Romans 4, 25
.

I humbly beseech thee by thy glorious resurrection, raise me out of ye
sepulcher of my sins, and of al my vices, and give me daily a part in the
first resurrection Reu. 20, 6.
, that truly I may receive a portion in the resurrection at the last day.

O sweet, and most blessed Jesus, thou have ascended into heaven with a
glorious triumph, and sit at the right hand of the Father Romans 8, verse. 34.
, o almighty Prince, draw me upward unto thee, that I may run after thee
Sal. songs. 1, verse. 2. 3.
, through the savor of thine ointments, that I may run and tire not, thou
drawing and conducting me in my race: draw the mouth of my soul thirsting
after thee, unto the supernal rivers of eternal satietie, yea, draw me unto
thee the well of life Psalm. 36, 9.
, that according to my power I may from thence take my drink, whence I may
live for evermore, o my God, my life Ioh. 14, 6. Ioh. 11, 25.
.

For thine holy and blessed mouth has said, If any man thirst Ioh. 7, 37.
, let him come unto me, and drink.

Now grant, o fountain of life, that the thirsty soul may drink of thee
continualie, that according to thine holy and true promise, out of my belie
may flow even rivers of water of life Ioh. 7, 38.
.

O fountain of life, replenish my soul with the river of thy pleasure, make
mine heart thoroughly drunk with the sober drunkenness of thy love, so that I
may utterly forget whatsoever is vain and earthly, and evermore have thee
alone in my remembrance, as it is written; I remembered God, and mine heart was
glad. Give me thine holy spirit, signified by those waters, which thou
promisest to give to such as thirst.

O, I beseech thee, give me grace with all my desire, and with all my care, to go
on toward that place, whither we believe thou ascendedst the forty day after
thy resurrection Acts. 1, 3. 4. 9, etc.
, that only in the flesh I may be held in this wretched world, but in thought
and desire may be with thee, that there mine heart may be Matthew. 6, verse. 21.
, where thou my desired, and incomparable, and much lovely treasure art.

For in the great deluge of this life, where we are tossed with raging storms
on al sides, and no good footing, and hie place can be found, where the dove
may somewhat rest her self Genesis 8, 9.
, there is no where either sure peace, or secure quietness, but wars in all
places, contention, and enemies: abroad fightings, within fears.

And for so much as one part of us is heavenly, and the other earthly, the
corruptible body is heavy unto the soul Wi. 9, 15.
.

Therefore my mind, my friend and companion, being wearied coming out of the
way is sick, and lies, al too rent and torn of those vanities which it has
passed-by: it is very hungry, and feign would drink, but I have nothing to
set before it: because I am in poverty, and in beggerie.

But, o Lord my God, who aboundest in all good thing Iam. 1, 17.
, and art a liberal bestower of the dainties of heavenly satietie, give thou
meat to the wearied, gather together the dispersed, amend that which is torn.

Lo, he stands at the door, and knocks: through the bowels of thy mercy,
whereby thou the day spring from on high has visited us Luke 1, 78.
, I beseech thee, open the hand of thy pity to the distressed which knocks;
and graciously command that he come-in unto thee, rest in thee, and be
refreshed of thy lively and heavenly bread, wherewithal being satisfied, and
strengthened, he may from this vale of tears mount aloft unto celestial
things; and carried on high by the wing of holy desire, may fly unto the
kingdom of heaven.

O Lord, let my spirit take, let it take I beseech thee, wings to it self as
an Egle, that it may fly amain, and faint not: that it may ascend even unto
the glory of thine house, and to the where thine honor dwells Psa. 26, 8.
, there at the table, where thine heavenly citizens do repast themselves, to
be refreshed of thy secrets in the places of thy green pasture nigh the still
waters.

O my God, let mine heart, mine heart, an huge sea swelling with waves, rest in
thee.

Thou, which rebukedst the wind Matthew. 8, verse. 26. Mark. 4, 39. Luke. 8, 24.
, and the sea, whereby there came a great calm: come thou, and go upon the
waves of mine heart, that every thing which I have may be calm and clear,
that I may embrace thee mine only good, and behold thee, the sweet light of
mine eyes, without any blind darkness of troblesome cogitations.

O Lord, let my mind from the parching heat of worldly cares fly under the
shadow of thy wings, that being hid in thy temperate coolenes, it may ioifulie
sing, and say, I will lay me down, and also sleep in peace Psalm. 4, 8.
.

Let my memory sleep, o Lord my God Psalm. 7, 1. 3.
, I pray thee, let it sleep from al evil; righteousness let it love Heb. 1, 9.
, but hate iniquity.

For indeed, in the mids of the darkness and trobles of this life, what
goodlier, and what sweeter thing can there be, than to covet after the
sweetenes of heaven, and to sigh for eternal happiness; than to have the mind
there fixed, where it is most assured to have true ioies!

O most sweet, most lovely, and blessed Jesus, when shall I behold thee? when
shall I come, and appear before thy presence Psalm. 42, 1. 2.
? when shall I be satisfied with thine image Psa. 17, 15.
? when will thou bring my soul out of prison Psa. 142, 7.
, that I may praise thy Name; and be grieved no more? when shall I pass into
that glorious, and goodly house of thine Psalm. 84, 1. 2.
, whereas the voice of singing and praise is in the tabernacles of the righteous?

Blessed are they which dwell in thine House, o Lord, they will ever praise thee
Psalm. 84, 4.
. Blessed, and blessed indeed are they, whom thou have chosen, and taken into
that celestial inheritance.

Behold, Lord, thy saints flourish before thee as the Lilie. Because they are
satisfied with the fatnes of thine House Psalm. 36, 8. 9.
; and thou give them drink out of the river of thy pleasures. For with thee
is the well of life, and in thy light they do see light; so that they, to wit,
the light enlightened of thee, God inlightening John. 1, 9.
, do now shine as the Sun Matthew. 13, 43.
in thy presence.

Oh, how marvelous, how glorious, how amiable are thy tabernacles, o Lord of
hosts Psalm. 84, 1. 2.
! my sinful soul longs to enter thereinto.

O Lord, I have loved the habitation of thine house Psalm. 26, 8.
, and the place where thine Honor dwells.

One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that I will require, even that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life Psalm. 27, 4.
.

As the Heart braieth for the rivers of water Psalm. 42, 1.
: so pants my soul after thee, o God.

When shall I come, 2.
and appear before thy presence! when shall I see my God, whom my soul so
thirsts for!

When shall I see him in the land of the living Psa. 27, 13.
! For in this land of the dieng, he can not be seen with mortal eyes John. 1,
18. 1. Tim. 6, 16. 1. John. 4, 12
.

What shall I wretch do, being fettered with the gieues of this mortal flesh
Wisd. 9, 15
? what shall I do? while we are in the body, we are absent from the Lord 2.
Cor. 5, 6
. Here we have no continuing city Heb. 13, 14
, but we seek one to come. And, our freedom is in heaven 2. Cor. 5, 1.
.

Woe is me, that I am a stranger so long; and that I dwell in the tents of Kedar
Psa. 120, 5. 6.
. My soul has too long dwelled in a strange place.

Oh that I had wings like a dove Psalm. 55, 6.
; then would I flie-awaie and rest! Nothing is so pleasant to me, as to be with
my God. It is good for me to draw near unto God Psa. 73, 28
.

O Lord, grant, while I live in this mortal body, that I may cleave to thee,
as it is written, He that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit 1. Cor. 6, 17
.

Give me the wings of contemplation, I beseech thee, that endued there withal I
may fly aloft unto thee.

And seeing every sinister thing lies downward, hold thou my mind, that it
fall not down unto the bottom of the darkesome vale; and that, by reason of
the shade of earth coming between, it be not separated from thee the true Sun
of righteousness, and be hindered from beholding things on hie through the cloud
of darkness.

For which cause I do soar upward unto the ioies of peace Phil. 4, 7.
, and unto the delectable, and pleasant state of light Reu. 21, 23 24, etc.
.

Hold thou mine heart by thine hand: because without thee it can not be carried
aloft. Thither I do hasten, whereas sovereign peace reigns, and everlasting
quietness does shine Reu. 7, 16. 17.
.

Hold, and govern thou my spirit, and take it unto thee according to thy will,
that thou being guide, it may ascend into that region of plenty, where thou
feedest Israel everlastingly with the food of truth: that at the least with
swift cogitation it may attain unto thee the sovereign wisdom, abounding
above al, surpassing al, and governing al things.

But, alas, many things do mutter against my soul flieng unto thee.
Notwithstanding, at thy commandment, o Lord, let them not overthwart me. Yea,
let my very soul be silent, let her ouer-passe al things; mount over al
things that are created, and come unto thee, fixing the eyes of faith upon thee
alone the Creator of al things, for thee let her long; to thee let her covet;
on thee let her think; thee let her behold; be thou in her sight, and evermore
meditate she in her heart of thee, the true and sovereign goodness Iam. 1, 17.
, and the joy abiding for evermore Matt. 25, verse. 21.
.

To conclude, though many are the contemplations, wherewithal the godly soul
is marvelously fed, and refreshed: yet in none is she so delighted, and
rests, as in thee, and when thou alone art in her thought, and eyes.

O Lord, how great is the goodness, which woonderfulie thou inspirest into the
hearts of them, which love thee! How marvelous is the sweetness of thy love,
which they enioie, who love nothing, seek nothing, yea desire nothing beside
thee!

Oh, happy are they, whose hope is only in thee; and whose only work is
prayer!

Blessed is he who sits solitary, and silent; and watches himself day
and night continualie, that, placed as yet in this mortal body, he may have
some fore-taste of thy celestial sweetness!

O Lord, by those health-bringing wounds, which on the cross thou suffredst for
our sakes, from which gushed-out that precious blood wherewith we be redeemed
1. Pet. 1, 18. 19.
, wound, I beseech thee, this my sinful soul, for which also thou have
vouchsafed to die 1. Pet. 2, 24
: wound her by the fiery and mighty dart of thine abundant love Ioh. 15, 12.
13. 1. John. 3, 16
.

For the word of God is liueliue Heb. 4, 12.
, and mighty in operation, and sharper than any two edged sword.

O thou, the elected dart, and the most piercing sword, who art of power able
to pierce the hard buckler of man's heart: prick thou mine heart with the dart of
thy love, that my soul may say to thee, I am wounded with thy love; so that
from that wound of thy love, tears abundantly may issue day and night Psalm.
42, 3.
.

Strike, o Lord, strike, I beseech thee, this mine hard mind with the godly
and mighty spear of thy love, and with a stout courage pierce thou even the
most secret parts of my soul, and there-withal fetch thou a stream of water
from out mine head, and out of mine eyes a true fountane of tears flowing
forth continualie from an hearty affection, and desire to behold thy beauty;
that night and day I may mourn in this present life, receiving no comfort,
until in thy celestial bride-chamber, I be thought worthy to see my beloved,
and beautiful spouse, even my Lord and God, that beholding there thy glorious,
wonderful, and most beautiful countenance 1. Cor. 13, verse. 12. Reave. 22, 4.
, full of al sweetness, I may with those whom thou have elected Romans 8. verse.
30.
, humbly adore thy majesty, and replenished at the length with heavenly and
unspeakable joy of everlasting mirth, may with lovers and friends cry out,
saying.

Behold, I see now what I so desired; I enioie now what I so hoped for; I have
that which I loved so. For I am now joined to him in heaven, whom in earth I
loved with all my strength, embraced with right good will, and claue unto from my
very heart: him I praise, him I bless, and I worship him, who lives and
rules God for evermore, Amen.

Chap. 37.
A prayer in the time of trouble.
Have mercy on me, o Lord, have mercy on me, o gracious God, have mercy on
me a most wretched sinner offending hainouslie, and suffering justly; sinning
daily, and feeling continualie thy correction.

If I weigh the evil which daily I have committed, my punishment is but small;
much wickedness have I done, and little correction do I feel.

Righteous art thou, o Lord, and just are thy judgments Psalm. 119, verse. 137.
. Thy judgments are truth Psalm. 19, 9.
, they be righteous altogether. O Lord my God thou art righteous Psa. 92, 15.
, neither is there any iniquity in thee.

For neither unjustly, nor cruelie do thou afflict us sinners Dan. 9, 4. 5.
6, etc.
, o almighty, and merciful Lord Exo. 34, 6.
, who when we were not, did mightily make us Job. 10, 8. Psalm. 100, 3.
, and when through our sins we were in the state of damnation, have both
mercifully, and miraculouslie repared us Gal. 3, 13. 1. Tim. 2, 6.
.

I know, and am assured, how that our life is not governed by all adventures,
but that it is disposed and ruled by thee Pro. 16, 9.
, o Lord our God.

Whence it is that thou carest for all things Wis. 12, 13.
, but chiefly for thy servants 1. Pet. 5, 7.
, who have put al their confidence in thine only mercy.

Wherefore I pray, and humbly beseech thee, o Lord, deal not with me
according to my sins, whereby I have deserved thy just displeasure, but
according to thy great mercy, which is more than all the sins even of the
whole world.

O God, who outwardly do afflict the body, grant inwardly to my mind
continual patience, so that thy praise at no time depart out of my mouth.

Have mercy on me, o Lord, have mercy on me, and help me, according as thou
know I have need, both in my body, and mind, thou know al things
Eccle. 23, verse. 19. 20.
, and can do al things Genesis 35, verse. 11. Reave. 15, 3.
, who live everlastingly 1. Tim. 1. 17
, Amen.

Chap. 38.
A very godly prayer unto the Son.
O Lord Jesus Christ 1. Tim. 1, 1.
, son of the living God Matt. 16, verse. 16.
, which upon the cross with outstretched arms, drankest the cup of bitter
passion for the redemption of al mankind 1. Pet. 2, verse. 24.
, vouchsafe to defend me this day.

Behold, I a poor wretch unto thee who art rich, I miserable unto thee who art
merciful, do approach, suffer me not to depart empty, and despised.

I begin hungerlie, let me not go from thee fasting; I come even hunger-starued
as it were, o let me not depart vnrefreshed. And though before I eat, I do
sigh, yet grant that after my sighing I may eat.

Especialie before thy glorious magnificence, o sweet Jesus, I acknowledge to
thee my sins against my self Psalm. 32. 5.
.

Behold, I was borne in iniquity Psalm. 51, 5.
, but thou did wash, and sanctify me Ephesians. 5, 25. 26.
, yet have I defiled my self sithence with greater sins.

For I was borne in necessary sins, but afterward I wallowed in voluntary
wickedness.

But, thou, o Lord, not unmindful of thy woonted mercy, tookedst me from out
of the house of my carnal father, and from the tabernacles of the wicked, and
gauedst me a mind to follow thee with the generation of them which seek thy
face, which tread the right path, which abide among the lilies of a chaste
life, and sit with thee in the parlor of greatest poverty.

Yet I, ungrateful for so many benefits, since mine entrance into thy service,
have done many an unlawful fact, and committed many a foul sin; and where
I should have repented me of my sins, I added sins unto sins.

These are the evils, o Lord, whereby I have both dishonored thee, and stained
my self, (whom thou did create after thine own likeness Genesis 1, 26. 27. 1.
Cor. 11, 7. Colo. 3, 10.
) with pride, vain glory, and such other manifold sins, whereby the
wretched soul is vexed, and afflicted, and rent asunder and destroyed.

Behold, o Lord, mine iniquities are gone over mine head Psalm. 38, 4.
, and as a weighty burden, they are too heavy for me, and, do not thou,
whose property is to show mercy, and to spare, lay under the right hand of
thy majesty, I shall be enforced to sink even to the very bottom.

O Lord my God, attend, and consider because thou art holy, lo, mine enemy
insulteth against me, saying Psalm. 71, 1^.
, God has forsaken him, I will pursue and take him, for there is none to
deliver him.

But Lord, how long will thou delaie? Return, deliver my soul, save me for
thy mercy sake Psalm. 61 4.
.

Take mercy upon thy son, whom thou broughtest forth into this world, and
respect not so mine evil which I have done, that thou forget the good which
thou have made.

What father is there but would save his son? or what son, whom the
father, with the rod of mercy, will not correct?

Wherefore, o Father, and Lord, although I be a sinner, yet I cannot but be thy
son, because thou have both made me Job. 10, 8. Psalm. 119, 75.
, and renewed me Col. 3, 9. 10.
.

As I have sinned, amend me, but first deliver me to thy son being reformed
with ye scourge. Can a woman forget her child Esa. 49, 15
? notwithstanding, though she should, yet thou father, have promised never to
forget.

Behold I cry, and thou hear me not; I am vexed with sorrow, and yet find no
comfort.

What shall I say, or what shall I do wretch that I am? I destitute of such
consolation, am cast from the sight of thine eyes.

Woe is me, from what felicity into what misery am I fallen? whether did I
bend my self, and to what pass am I come? where am I, wretch, and where am I
not? unto whom did I aspire, and wherein do I now sigh?

I sought after good things, but behold vexation!

Lo, I now labor, and Jesus is not with me.

Doubtless, better were it for me not to be at al, than to be without Jesus.
Better is it not to live, than to live without life.

And now, o Lord Jesus, where be thy former mercies Ps. 89, 49.
? will thou be angry with me for ever Psa. 85, 5.
?

Be pacified at the length I beseech thee, and have mercy upon me, neither
hide away thy face fro me Psa. 27, 9.
, who for my redemption, did not turn thy face from such as reproved, and
spat upon thee Matt. 27, verse. 27, etc. 30.
.

I confess in deed, I have sinned, and that my conscience deserves
damnation; I acknowledge also that no penance can satisfy for my sins, but
certain it is, that thy mercy is more than al my sins.

O most gracious Lord, write not thou bitter things against me Job. 13, 26.
, neither enter thou into judgment with thy servant Psa. 143, 2.
, but according to the multitude of thy compassions, put away mine iniquities
Psalm. 51, 1.
.

Woe to me wretch, when the day of judgment shall come, and the books of each
man's conscience be opened Reu. 20, verse. 12. 13.
, when it shall be said of me, Behold the man, and his works.

What shall I then do, o Lord my God, when the very heavens shall reveal mine
iniquity, and the earth rise up against me? Surely I shall be able to say
nothing, but hang-downe mine head for very grief of heart, and stand trembling
and confounded before thy presence.

Alack wretch, what may I say? shall I cry unto thee my Lord God, wherefore
am I consumed saying naught? but though I do speak, yet will not my grief have
end; and if I be still silent, I shall be vexed inwardly with most bitter sorrow.

O my soul, mourn thou like a virgin for the husband of her youth Joel. 1, 8.
; howl thou miserable wretch, and weep, because thine husband even Christ
Ephesians. 5, 25.
has forsaken thee.

O wrath of the almighty, fall not thou upon me, for I cannot bear thee,
because there is not that strength in me, that I can endure thee.

But have mercy on me, o God, that I despair not, but in despair let me hope
again.

And although I have done that which deserves damnation; yet have not thou
forgone that whereby thou art wont to salve.

O Lord, thou will not the death of sinners, neither do thou rejoice in the
destruction Eze. 18, 23.
of the dieng: but that the dead might live thou diedst Romans 4, 25
; and thy death has killed the death of sinners; and if they through thy death
were again brought unto life, o Lord, grant, I beseech thee, that I may not
die, now thou art alive.

Send down from heaven Psa. 57, 3.
, and save me from the power of mine enemies, least they triumph over me, and
say, We have devoured him.

O good Jesus, who at any time can doubt of thy mercy, who, even when we were
thine enemies Romans 5, 10
did redeem us with thy precious blood, and reconcile us to God!

Lo, thus protected under the shadow of thy mercy I do run unto the throne
of grace Heb. 4, 16.
, requiring mercy, crieng and knocking until thou take compassion upon me.

For if thou calledst us unto mercy, when we asked none: how can we miss of
mercy, craving the same!

O sweet Jesus, think not upon thy justice against a sinner; but remember thy
goodness toward thy creature. Think not upon thy displeasure against a
transgressor; but remember thy mercy toward the miserable. Forget me when I
was proud, provoking thee unto wrath; and regard me now in distress, crieng
unto thee for mercy.

For what is Jesus, but a Savior Matt. 1, 21.
? Therefore, o Jesus, by thy self arise to help me, and say unto my soul
Psa. 35, 3.
, I am thy salvation.

Much do I presume of thy goodness, o Lord, the rather because thy self thou
teach us to ask, to seek, and to knock Matt. 7, 7.
. And therefore admonished thereby, I do ask, seek, and knock.

But thou, Lord, who command to ask, grant I may receive; who counselest to
ask, give grace to find; who teach to knock, open to the knocker, and
strengthen me a sinner, save me a wretch, raise me that am dead, and vouchsafe
to direct and govern al my senses, cogitations, and works after thy good
pleasure, that henceforth I may serve thee, live to thee, and be wholly thine.

I know, Lord, I do owe my self to thee, even because thou have made me; and
for that thou have redeemed me 1. Pet. 1, 18. 19.
, and taken humane flesh upon thee for my sake Matt. 1, 21 Luke. 1, 31. 69.
, I do owe so much more beside my self, as thou art greater than he for whom
thou have given thy self.

Lo I have no more; neither can I give that which I have too without thee: but
accept thou me, and draw me unto thee John. 6, 44
, that I may be thine by imitation and love, as I am thine by condition, and
creation, who live 1. Tim. 1, 17
, and rulest Psalm. 45, 6.
now and evermore, Amen.

Chap. 39.
A godly prayer unto the blessed Trinity, meet oftentimes to be repeated.
O Lord, God almighty Exo. 6, 3. Revel. 4, 8.
, three in persons Math. 3, 16 17. Luke. 3, 21. 22.
, yet but one God Deuteronomy. 6, 4. Mal. 2, 10.
, who both art in all, and wart before al Ecc. 42, 21
, and wilt be in all things, a blessed God for evermore Reu. 4, 11.
.

Now, and always into thine hand I doc commend, both my soul, my body, my
sight, hearing, tasting, smelling, and feeling, with all my cogitations,
affections, actions, outward and inward things, my sense, and understanding, my
memory, my faith and belief, and perseverance, that thou may keep them
day and night, every hour, and moment.

O sacred Trinity, hear my petition, and save me from al evil Matt. 6, 13
, from offending, and from sinning any manner of way; from al snares and
pursutes of Satan, and of enemies visible, and invisible.

Expel far fro me the hautinesse of mind, and increase within me the sorrow of
heart; diminish my pride, and establish true humility within my breast; fetch
tears from mine eyes, mollify mine hard and stony heart; and save Lord, both
me and my soul from al traps of the enemy; and continue me in thy pleasure.

Teach me to do thy will Ps. 143, 10.
, for thou art my God.

Give me perfect sense, and understanding, o Lord, that I may be able to
conceive the deepenes of thy mercy.

Grant me grace to beg that at thine hands, which may both be ioiful for thee
to grant, and behooueful for me to receive.

Make me unfeignedly to bewail my sins, and manifold offenses.

Hear, o my Lord, and my God Psalm. 7, 1. 3.
; hear, o light of mine eyes John. 1, 9.
; hear my petition, and grant that what I request, I may obtain.

If thou despise, I am utterly undone; if thou hear me, I take heart again.
If thou examinest my righteousness, lo I stink like a dead carrion; but if in
mercy thou respect me, thou raisest him that stinketh out of the grave.

What thou hate in me, remove far fro me; and ingraffe the spirit of
chastity and of a clean life in my mind, that in asking any thing at thine
hands I may not offend thee in asking the same.

Take fro me whatsoever is hurtful to my soul, and give what is behooueful.

O Lord, give me a salve, to heal my grievous wounds.

Indue me, good Lord, with thy fear Psalm. 2, 11.
, with sorrow of heart Psa. 51, 17.
, with humility of mind Ecc. 23, 4.
, and with a pure conscience Psalm. 24, 4.
.

Give me grace, Lord, to keep brotherly concord evermore Romans 12, verse. 10.
1. Pet. 2, 17.
; to remember my transgressions; not to meddle with the dealings of other men.

Pardon my soul; pardon my sins; my wickedness pardon; o pardon mine offenses
Psalm. 51, 2. 9.
.

Visit me that am weak; cure me that am sick; heal me that does languish,
and raise me which am dead.

O Lord, give me both an heart to dread thee; a mind to love thee; sense to
know thee; ears to hear thee; eyes to see thee.

Have mercy on me, o God, have mercy on me; look upon me from the holy
seat of thy Majesty; and illuminate the darkness of mine heart with the beam
of thy brightness.

Give me wisdom, o Lord, to discern between good and evil; and grant me a
watchful understanding.

Forgive al my sins I beseech thee; and in the time of necessity and troble
Ps. 37, 39.
, be thou good and gracious to me, I only beseech thee. After thy woonted
mercy, and most loving kindness, o Lord, I beseech thee, vouchsafe to give me
ye life which ever shall endure.

O Lord Jesus Christ, give both to thy ministers unity of mind; and to
magistrates judging vprightlie, peace and tranquillity.

Furthermore, o Lord, my request is for the whole catholic, and holy Church,
for men and women; for religious and for secular men; for all Christian
governors, and people believing in thy Name, which labor for thine holy love,
that they may have grace to continue in well doing.

O Lord, eternal King, give to virgins, chastity; to the unmarried,
continency; to the wedded, purity; to repenters, mercy; to widows and
orphans, comfort; to the poor, protection; to trauelers, a safe return; to
mourners, consolation; to seafaring men, a ioiful haven; to the good, zeal to
persist; to the well inclined, a mind to prove better; to the wicked and
sinful, as to me wretch, grace with speed to repent.

O sweet Lord, and most merciful, Jesus Christ, Son of the living God Mat.
16, 16
, redeemer of the world Tit. 2, 14. Col. 1, 14. 1. Pet. 2, 22. 24.
, I acknowledge that among al, and above al sinners I am wretched: but thou
most gracious, and hie Father, who take mercy upon al, can not suffer me
to be utterly destitute of thy mercy.

O thou, Lord, King of kings 1. Tim. 6, verse. 15. Reu. 19, 16.
, who grantest truce of life, stir in me a mind alwaie, and above al things to
seek, to desire, to love, to fear thee, and to do thy will, who art
euerie-where al whole Job. 23, 8. 9, etc. Eccl. 23, 18. 19.
, a Trinity, and but one God Mal. 2, 10.
.

Especialie, o Lord holy Father, who art blessed and glorious for evermore, I
beseech thee in most humble sort, vouchsafe to govern and keep them from
destruction, who either do make mention of me in their prayers; or have
commended themselves to mine unworthy supplication, or have done good whether
it be unto my body with temporal benefits, or to my soul with profitable
instructions; or be linked unto me either in kindred, friendship, or goodwil.

Furthermore, both for all Christians which are alive, I pray thee, stand thou
at their elbowe to assist them; and for such also as are dead, and
everlastingly do rest from their labors Reu. 14, 13
, I yield thee immortal praise.

Finalie, this one thing more, grant me, o Lord, I do earnestly beseech thee,
who art Alpha and Omega Revel. 1, 8. Revel. 21, 6.
, that when the uttermost day, and end of my life shall come, thou will be a
merciful judge to me against that malicious accuser Reu. 12, 10
the devil; and that thou will continualie protect me against the snares of the
old serpent Reu. 12, 2.
; and finalie conduct me into the society of Angels, and of al Saints in thy
holy paradise, who art blessed now, and evermore, Amen.

Chap. 40.
A devout prayer in memory of the passion of Christ.
O Lord Jesus Christ, my redemption Col. 1, 14.
, my mercy, and my salvation Matt. 1, 21.
, I do praise thee, and yield thee thanks, although far vnanswereable, I
confess, to thy benefits, although not zealous enough, although very lean from
the desired fatnes of thy sweet affection: yet such as it has, not as I know
it owes, and as it is able, my soul paieth unto thee.

O thou hope of mine heart, and strength of my soul, let thy divine power
fulfill, what my luke warm weakness endeuoreth to bring to pass; o my life, and
thou end of my thought.

And though I have not hitherto deserved so greatly to love, as I am bound,
yet my desire is to love, even as I ought to do.

O light of mine eyes John. 1, 9.
, thou beholdest mine heart, for my sighing is not hid from thee Psalm. 38, 9.
, and it is thy gift 1. Cor. 4, 7. Iam. 1, 17.
, if I do mind any thing that good is.

If it be good which thou do enspire, yea, because it is good yt I would
love thee, grant that which through thee I would.

Give me grace so greatly to love thee, as thou command. Praise and thanks
I do offer, o let not thy gift, which voluntarily thou have imparted upon me,
be unfruitful to me.

Perform what thou have begun, and give the thing, which of thy goodness
preventing me, undeserving the same, thou have made me to desire.

Convert, o gracious God, my security into the burning love of thy Name.

For, merciful Father, hitherto tends this my prayer, this remembrance and
meditation of thy benefits is, to the end that thy love may be inflamed within
my breast.

Thy goodness, o Lord, has created me Genesis 1, 26. 27. Job. 10, 8. Psalm. 100, 3.
, thy mercy has cleansed me 1. Cor. 6, verse. 11.
, and thy patience wallowing in other filthiness of sins after my purification
of baptism hitherto, has tolerated, nourished, and looked for my conversion
2. Pet. 3, 8. 9.
.

O good Lord, thou look for mine amendment, and that I may repent, and lead
an upright life, my soul does look for the inspiration of thy grace.

O my God Psalm. 7, 1. 3.
, my creator Psa. 119, 73
, forbearer Wis. 11, 20.
, and my nourisher, after thee do I thirst, after thee do I long, after thee do
I sigh and covet.

And as a tender Orphane bereft of the presence of his loving Father, weeping
and lamenting incessantly, does embrace his sweet countenance with all his
heart, so I, not as I should, but as I am able, am mindful of thy passion, of
thy blows Matt. 27, verse. 27. 28. 29.
, of thy wounds, how thou wart killed for my sake Gal. 3, 13. 1. Pet. 2, 22.
, how buried Luke 23. verse. 53.
, and laid in the grave, finalie, how gloriously thou did arise, and
triumphantly ascend into heaven Acts. 1, 9.
.

These things I do hold by an undoubted faith, I hope for the only comfort of
thy return Matt. 16, verse. 27. Mar. 13, 26.
, and from mine heart I desire the glorious contemplation of thy countenance.

Woe is me, that I cannot see the Lord of Angels, who was humbled unto ye
condition of men Phil. 2, 5. 6. 7, etc.
, yt he might exalt men unto the dignity of Angels, when God offended would
suffer death, that sinful man might enjoy life.

What shall I say? what shall I do? whether may I go? where shall I seek? or
when shall I find him? of whom shall I ask? who will tell my beloved how I
languish for love?

The joy of mine heart decaieth, my laughter is turned into mourning, my flesh
fails, and mine heart also Psa. 73, 26.
, God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. My soul refuses
comfort Psalm, 77, 2.
of any besides thee, o my sweetenes. For whom have I in heaven but thee Psa.
73, 25.
? and I have desired none in the earth but only thee.

Thee I would, thee I long for, thee do I seek, to thee has mine heart said, I
have sought after thy face, o Lord I require, turn not thy face fro me, o most
merciful lover of mankind Wis. 11, 23.
, the poor commits himself to thee, thou art the helper of the fatherles
Psa. 10, 14.
.

O mine assured advocate 1. Ioh. 2, 1. 2.
, have mercy on me a forsaken orphane, I am become a fatherles child, my soul
is like a widow.

Look upon the tears of my misery and widowhood, which I offer to thee,
until thou return.

Oh my Lord, now, ah show thy self to me, and I shall be comforted. Let me
behold thee, and I shall atteine ye end of my desire. Reveal thy glory, and my
joy shall be perfect.

My soul thirsts for thee Psalm. 63, 1^.
, my flesh longs greatly after thee.

My soul thirsts for God Psalm. 42, 2^.
, even for the living Well, when shall I come and appear before the presence of
God? O my comforter, whom I so look for, when will thou come?

Oh that I might see the joy, that I so desire! oh that I were satisfied with
the presence of the glory Psa. 17, 15.
, for which I do hunger! oh that once I were satisfied with the fatnes of thine
house Psa. 36, 8.
, whereunto I do sigh, and had drunk out of ye river of thy pleasures, which
so much I thirst for!

In the mean while, o Lord, let tears be my meat day and night Psa. 42, 3.
, until it be said unto me, Behold thy God, until my soul do hear, Behold thy
spouse.

In the mean while, I say, feed me with sighings, refresh me with my sorrows.

Happily my redeemer will come full soon, because he is good, and will not
linger Heb. 10, verse. 37.
, for that he is merciful: to him be glory now and for evermore Reu. 5, 13.
, Amen.

The end of S. AUGUSTINE his PRAYERS.
FINIS.
THE PSALTER-WHICH S. AUGUSTINE COMPOSED FOR THE USE OF HIS MOTHER; ENGLISHED
FOR A MORE GENERAL COMMODITY.
O Lord GOD almighty, and King of eternal glory, who do acknowledge him to
be a blessed man Psalm. 1, 1. 2.
, that abhors the way of sinners, and does meditate in thy Law day and
night:

Teach thou me, a wretched sinner, faithfulie to serve thee Psalm. 2, 1^
with fear and trembling of the heart.

And seeing with all humility of heart, I do call unto thee with my voice, hear
me Psalm. 3, 4.
; have mercy upon me, and so harken unto my prayer Psalm. 4, 1. Psalm. 5, 1. 2.
, that neither thou for thy part rebuke me in thy wrath Psalm. 6, 1.
, nor that old enemy to mankind, lieng in wait for his part to devour my
soul like a Lion Psalm. 7, 2.
, and tear it in pieces, while there is none to help.

But Lord, whose Name is excellent in all the world Psalm. 8, 1. 9.
, turn thou mine enemy back Psalm. 9, 3.
, that he fall again, and perish at thy presence.

Let him not entrap my soul Psalm. 10, 8. 9.
with his fiery snares; and suffer not brimstone Psalm. 11, 6.
, and stormy tempests to torment me.

But for the oppression of the needy Psalm. 12, 5.
, and for the sighings of the poor, now thou do arise, behold, and hear me
Psa, 13, 3.
, o Lord my God, because thou art the counsel, and trust of the poor Psalm. 14,
6.
.

Make me to walk vprightlie, Psalm. 15, 2.
, and to work righteousness that thy favorable kindness may be the portion of
mine inheritance Psalm. 16, 5.
.

Keep me as the apple of the eye Psalm. 17, 8.
; hide me under the shadow of thy wings, because thou art my strength Psalm.
18, 1. 2.
, my rock, and my refuge.

Cleanse me fro my secret faults Psalm. 19, 12. 13.
; and keep thy servant from presumptuous sins.

Send me help from the Sanctuary Psalm. 20, 2.
; and give me mine hearts desire Psalm. 21, 2.
.

Save me from the Lions mouth Psa. 22, 21.
; and lead me in the paths of righteousness Psalm. 23, 3.
, that I may ascend into thy mountain Psa. 24, 3. 4.
, and stand in thine holy place, having innocent hands, and a pure heart.

Remember not the sins of my youth Psalm. 25, 7.
, nor my rebellions.

Gather not my soul with the sinners Psalm. 26, 9.
; neither give me unto the lust of mine adversaries Psa. 27, 12.
:

But so favorably harken thou unto the voice of my petitions Psa. 28, 2.
, that calling upon the glory of thine holy Name Psalm. 29, 2.
, thou do hear me Psa. 30, 10.
, and have mercy upon me.

And so trusting in thee, let me never be confounded Psalm. 31, 1.
; but forgive the punishment of my sin Psalm. 32, 5.
.

Let thy mercy, o Lord, be upon me, as I trust in thee Psa. 33, 22.
: and delivering me out of al my fear Psalm. 34, 4.
, say unto my soul Psalm. 35, 3.
, I am thy salvation.

And because I trust under the shadow of thy wings Psa. 36, 7.
, give me mine hearts desire Psalm. 37, 4.
; and have thee to help me Psa. 38, 22
, o my Lord, my salvation.

Lord, let me know mine end Psalm. 39, 4.
, and the measure of my days what it is; let me know how long I have to live.

Incline unto me Psalm. 40, 1. 2.
, and hear my cry. Bring me out of the lake of misery, out of the mirie
claie, and set my feet upon the rock, and order my goings.

Deliver me in the time of trouble Psalm. 41, 1.
, that I may go into thy glorious house Psalm. 42, 4.
; for thou art the God of my strength Psalm. 43, 2.
.

Let not my steps go out of thy paths Psa. 44, 18
; that I may love righteousness, and hate iniquity Psa. 45, 7.
.

Be thou mine hope and strength Psalm. 46, 1.
: for thou art a great King over all the earth Psalm. 47, 2.
.

Thou which art a God for ever Psa. 48, 14
, deliver my soul out of the power of Hell Psa. 49, 59
, for it has received me.

And when thou shall appear to judge us Psalm. 50, verse. 1, etc.
, have mercy upon me Psa. 51, 1. 11.
, according to the multitude of thy mercies, and take not thine holy Spirit
fro me.

O most gracious God, 9.
in that hour hide thy face fro my sins, and put away al mine iniquities.

Create in me a clean heart, 10.
o God, renew a right spirit within me. That I may appear like a green Olive
tree, in the House of my God Psalm. 52, 8
; and there with Iaacob rejoice Psalm. 53, 6.
, and everlastingly be glad with Israel.

Save me, o God, by thy name Psalm. 54, 1.
, and by thy power judge me.

Hide not thy self fro my supplication Psalm. 55, 1.
, but be merciful unto me Psalm. 56, 1.
.

Send thou from heaven Psalm. 57, 3.
, and save me from the reproof of them that would swalowe me up.

Break their teeth, o God, in their mouths Psalm. 58, 6.
; break ye jaws of the young Lions, o Lord.

Thou art my defense, and my merciful God Psa. 59, 17
.

Help me with thy right hand Psalm. 60, 5.
, and under the covering of thy wings let me be protected Psalm. 61, 4.
, when thou art to render every man according to his works Psa. 62, 12.
.

While my soul thirsts for thee Psalm. 63, 1.
, hide me from the conspiracy of the wicked Psalm. 64, 2.
.

Since al flesh shall come unto thee Psalm. 65, 2.
, put not back thy mercy from Psa. 66, 20.
.

Neither take from me thine holy Spirit, but cause thy face to shine upon me
Psalm. 67, 1.
.

Send me a good passage, o our God which sauest us Psa. 68, 20
, that the deep swalowe me not up Psa. 69, 15.
, nor the pit shut her mouth upon me.

Be thou mine helper, and my deliverer Psalm. 70, 5.
; o Lord, make no tarieng.

Since in thee, o Lord, I do trust, let me never be confounded Psalm. 7^, ^.
, when thou shall judge thy people Psalm. 71, 2.
.

Lo, they which withdraw themselves from thee, shall perish Psa. 73, 27
; oh let not me oppressed return ashamed Psa. 74, 21
.

Because thou art a righteous judge Psa. 75, 7.
, thou make low, and thou exaltest; and who shall stand in thy sight when
thou art angry Psalm. 76, 7.
!

Thou art the God that do wonders Psa. 77, 14
.

As thou nourishedst thy people with bread in ye wilderness Psa. 78, 20 21, etc.
30.
, and did not turn them from their lust: so let thy grace refresh me an
hungry soul, make have, and let thy tender mercies prevent me Psalm. 79, 8.
.

And thou my defender, give me the bread of tears Psalm. 80, 5.
, and the bitterness of a troubled mind in the time of tribulation; and grant
withal, that from the honey out of the rock Psalm. 81, 16.
, I may taste the sweetenes of inward consolation.

O God, who iudgest between the innocent and the sinners Psalm. 82, 1
, who alone art the most high over all the earth Psa. 83, 18
, have mercy upon me, and give grace and glory Psa. 84, 11.
, who have ordained a law.

Forgive the iniquity Psalm. 85, 2
, of mine heart, cover al my sins, and save thou thy servant, that trusts in
thee Psai. 86, 2
.

O God, who laiest the foundations of thy Church upon the holy mountains
Psalm. 87, 1.
, incline thine ear unto my cry Psalm. 88, 2.
.

Let thine hand therefore establish me Psa. 89, 21.
, and turn me not unto destruction Psa. 90, 3.
, but deliver me from the snare of the hunter Psalm. 91, 3.
, from the pestilence, and from the plague that destroieth at noone day: that
being planted in thine house Psa. 92, 13. 12. 14.
, I may flourish like a Palm tree, and grow like a Cedar in Libanon, bringing
out fruit even in mine old age.

Be thou my refuge, o my God, the rock of mine hope Psa. 94, 22
: for thou Lord, art a great God, and a great King above al Gods Psalm. 95, 3.
.

When thou will judge the world with righteousness, and thy people in truth Psa.
96, 13
, I shall enioie light with the righteous Psalm. 97, 11
, and joy with the upright in heart.

Let thy right hand Psa. 98, 1.
, and thine holy arm preserve me.

Thou which sit upon the Cherubims Psalm. 99, 1.
, make me to come before thy presence with joyfulness Psa. 100, 2.
, that I may walk in the vprightnes of mine heart in the mids of mine house
Psa. 101, 2. 4. 6. 8.
.

Let a froward heart depart fro me; but cause mine eyes to be turned unto thy
faithful, that I may sit with them walking in a perfect way, when through thy
judgment thou shall cut off all the workers of wickedness from thy City.

O Lord hear my prayer Psa. 102, 1 2.
, and let my cry come unto thee.

Hide not thy face fro me, in the time of trouble incline thine ears unto me.

Pardon al my sins Psa. 103, 3. 4. 5.
, and redeem my soul from destruction.

Satisfy my longing with good things, thou which look upon the earth, and
it trembles Ps. 104, 32
; and broughtest forth thy people with joy, and thy chosen with gladness Ps.
105, 43.
.

Make me to keep judgment, and to work righteousness at al times Psa. 106, 3
.

Bring me out of darkness, and out of the shadow of death Ps. 107, 14
, that with a prepared heart I may sing and give praise Psa. 108, 1.
.

Save me, o Lord, according to thy mercy Ps. 109, 26
, that in the glory of Saints Psa. 110, 3.
, in the assembly and congregation of the just Psa. 111, 1. 3.
, my righteousness may endure for ever; and mine horn be exalted with glory
Psa. 112, 9.
, that while thou raisest the needy out of the dust, and liftest up the poor
out of the dung Psa. 113, 7.
, I may bless thee, o Lord, from henceforth, and for ever, Psa. 115, 18
, then I shall walk before the Lord in the land of the living Psa. 116, 9. 16.
.

Break thou my bonds; and confirm thy mercy toward me Psa. 117, 2.
. When I call upon thee in my trouble, o Lord, hear me Psa 118, 5.
, and set me at large.

Teach me, o Lord, the way of thy statutes Ps. 119, 33.
, that I may live and keep it unto the end.

Give me understanding both to search thy Law, 34.
and to observe it also with mine whole heart.

I have gone astraie like a lost sheep, 176.
o seek thy servant, and deliver my soul Psa. 120, 2.
.

Preserve my going out, and my coming in Psa. 121, 8.
, that my feet may stand in the courts of Jerusalem Psa. 122, 2.
.

I lift up mine eyes unto thee, that dwell in the heavens Psa. 123, 1.
.

Deliver my soul out of the snare of the foulers Psa. 124, 7.
, least I put forth mine hands unto wickedness Psa. 125, 3.
.

Fill my mouth with laughter, and my tongue with joy Psa. 126, 2.
; replenish my longing with good things, and bless me out of Zion Psa. 128, 5.
, that I may see the wealth of Jerusalem, having escaped the cords of wickedness
Psa. 129, 4.
.

Let thine ears attend unto the voice of my prayers Psa. 130, 2.
, o Lord.

Let not mine heart be hautie, nor mine eyes lofty Psa. 131, 1.
; but give me grace to think humbly, until I find a place for the Lord, an
habitation for the mighty God of Iaacob Psa. 132, 5.
.

There the Lord has appointed the blessing, and life forever Psa. 133, 3.
. There will I lift up mine hands to the Sanctuary, and praise thee Psa. 134, 2.
, who iudgest thy people Psalm. 135, verse. 14.
, and art pacified toward thy servants.

O God of Gods Psa. 136, 2. 3.
, and Lord of Lords, now weeping Psa. 137, 1.
, and worshipping toward thine holy Temple Psa. 138, 2.
, try me, and know me Psalm. 139, verse. 23. 24.
; mark, and consider my paths, and lead me in thy way for ever.

Deliver me, o Lord, from the evil man Psa. 140, 1.
, and preserve me from the cruel man.

Let my prayer be directed in thy sight as incense Psa. 141, 2.
.

Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy Name Psa. 142, 7.
.

Hear my prayer, o Lord, in thy righteousness Psa. 143, 1. 2.
: and enter not into judgment with thy servant.

Hear me speedily, 7.
o Lord, least my spirit fail me: for thou, God art my refuge, and my
deliverer Psa. 144, 2.
.

And for so much as thou art great, and most worthy to be praised Psa. 145, 3.
, and thy greatness is incomprehensible; raise up the crooked Psa. 146, 8.
, loase the shacled, and give sight to the blind, thou which do build up
Jerusalem Psa. 147, 2.
.

And when thou have made the bars of thy gates strong, 13.
let me be copled to thy children within.

As the Angels, and all the powers in the kingdom of heaven do praise thee Psa.
148, 1. 2.
, there let me triumphing gloriously in the congregation of ye Saints Psa.
149, 1.
, with the sounding cymbals Psa. 150, 5.
of my lips, praise and magnify thy Name, the which is holy, and glorious,
and reigns now and everlastingly, Amen.

Luke. 2, verse. 14. GLORY TO GOD ON HIGH. FINIS.
(...) God, tremble thereat, page 145.

34 A prayer very forceable to move the mind unto religion, and the love of
God, page 149.

35 A devout prayer for grace, to praise and to thank the Lord duly for his
benefits, page 162.

36 A very effectual prayer to the stirring-vp of the mind unto godliness
being zealouslie uttered, page 174.

37 A prayer in the time of troble, page 190.

38 A very godly prayer unto the Son, page 192.

39 A godly prayer unto the Trinity, meet oftentimes to be repeated, page
204.

40 A devout prayer upon the recordation of the passion of Christ. page 212.

Afterward follows S. Augustine his Psalter.

FINIS.
A TABLE EXPRESSING THE SUNDRY KINDS OF MEDITATIONS IN THIS BOOK.
This book contains special 1. Confessions. 2. Thankes-giuings. 3. Prayers.
And therefore Use, if thou would 1. Confess, and acknoledge either the
omnipotency, wisdom, and goodness of God, chap. 12, page 48; chapter 28, page 114;
chapter 31, page 132. A sacred Trinity, cha. 11, page 47; chapter 29. page 123; chapter
30. page 129. the blessedness of the life to come; chap. 21, page 86; chapter 22,
page 90; chapter 24, page 96; chapter 32, page 141. the wretchedness of this life, chap.
20, page 83. the misery of man before Christ suffered, chap. 7, page 28. the
mercy of God in saving mankind, chapter 8, page 35; chapter 15, page 59.
2. give God hearty thanks for all his benefits in general, chapter 26, page 106;
chapter 27, page 112; chapter 32, page 136. for thy salvation through Jesus Christ, chapter
14, p. 55; chapter 16, page 64; chapter 17, page 69.
3. Pray unto God, either for grace to pray aright, chapter 5, page 20; chapter 33,
p. 145. unfeignedly to repent, chapter 35, page 162. to know the divine mystery
of our redemption, c. 16. p. 64. to thank God duly for the benefit of thy
salvation, chapter 17, p. 69. to serve God zealouslie, chap. 4, page 15; chap. 7,
page 28; chapter 9, page 43; chap. 10, pa. 46; chap. 31, pa. 132; cha. 34, page 149;
chapter 36, page 174; cha. 39, page 204. to lead a good life, chap. 1, page 1; chapter
18, page 74.
for the forgiveness of sins, chap. 6, page 24; chap. 8, page 35; chap. 13,
page 51; chap. 37, page 190; chapter 38, page 192; chap. 39, page 204. the whole
church of Christ, chap. 39, page 204. help in troble, chapter 23, page 93. the
attainement of everlasting happiness, chap. 21, page 86; chap. 25, p. 103; chap.
36, page 174; chap. 40, page 212.




FAVLTS ESCAPED.
Page. Line. Fault. Correction. 26 2 distilling which distilled. 31 1 tastest
tastedst. 88 10 pruning praieng. 127 19 the Son the holy Spirit. 150 23
nectar pleasant nectar more pleasant.

1581.

OS HOMINI SVBLIME DEDIT



Printed by Henry Denham, dwelling in Pater noster Row, at the sign of the
Star.

Cum priuilegie Regiae Maiestatie.


