ANNO QVINTO REGINAE ELIZABETHE. At the Parliament holden at Westmynster
the.xii. of January, in the fyfth year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady,
Elizabeth by the grace of God, of England, France, and Irelande, Queen,
defendour of the faith. etc. To the high pleasure of Almyghtye God, and the
weal public of this Realm, were enacted as follows. ANNO. 1563.

The Table,
AN Act for thassuraunce of the Queen's Majesty's royal power over all states
and subjects within her hyghnes dominions. Cap. i. An Act for the
mayntenaunce and increase of Tyllage. Cap. ii. An Act for the relief of the
poor. Cap. iii. An Act touching diverse orders for Artificers, Laborers,
Servants of husbandry, and apprentises. Cap. iiii. An act touching certain
politic constitutions, made for the mayntenaunce of the Nauye. Cap. v. An
act against such as shall sell any ware for Apparel without redye money.
Cap. vi. An act for the auoydyng of diverse forreyne wares, made by handy
crafts men beyond the seas. Cap. vii. An act touching Tanners, Curryours,
Shoemakers, and other Artificers occupying the cuttyng of Leather. Cap. viii.
An act for the punishment of such persons as shall procure or commit any
wylfull perjury. Cap. ix. An act to reuyue a Statute made Anno.xxi.H.viii.
touching servants embeaselyng their masters goods. Cap. x. An act against
the clipping, washing, rounding, or fylyng of the coins. Ca. xi An act
touching badgers of corn, and drouers of cattle to be licensed. Cap. xii. An
act for the reuyuyng of a Statute, made An. ii. and.iii. Phil. and Marie. for
the amendyng of high ways. Cap. xiii. An act against the forgyng of Evidences
and wrytynges. Cap. xiiii. An act against fond and fantastical prophesies.
Cap. xv. An act against coniurations, enchauntmentes, and witchcraftes. Cap.
xvi. An act for the punishment of the vice of Bogorye. Cap. xvii. An act
declaryng thauctoritie of the Lord keeper of the great Seal of England and the
Lord Chauncelour, to be one. Cap. xviii. An act for the repeal of a branch
of a Statute, made. An. i. Ed. vi. touching the conueying of Horses and
Geldynges out of the Realm. Cap. xix. An act for the punishment of
vagaboundes, calling them selves Egiptians. Cap. xx. An act for the
punyshement of unlawful taking of Fyshe, Dear, or Hawks. Cap. xxi. An act
against the carrying of Sheep skins and Peltes over the Sea, not being Staple
ware. Cap. xxii. An act for the due execution of the wrytt de exco^municato
capiendo. Cap. xxiii. An act for the reuyuyng of a Statute, made An.
xxiii.H.viii. touching the repayryng of Gaoles. Cap. xxiiii. An act to fill up
Iuries de circumstantibus, lackyng in Wales. Cap. xxv. An act for the
enrollment of Indentures of bargayne and sale, in the Queen's Majesty's courts
of Record at Lancaster, Chester, and Durham. Cap. xxvi An act touching fines
to be levied in the cou^tie palatine of Durham. Cap. xxvii An act for the
translating of the Bible and the divine service into the Welshe tongue. Cap.
xxviii. An act for the confirmation of a Subsedy granted by the Clergy. Cap.
xxix. An act of a Subsedye and two Fystenes and Tenthes, granted by the
Temporaltie. Cap. xxx. An act of the Queen's Majesty's most gracious general
and free pardon. Cap. xxxi.
An Act for thassuraunce of the Queen's Majesty's royal power over all states
and subjects within her highness dominions.
FOr preservation of the Queens most excellent hyghnes, her heirs, and
successors, and the dignity of the imperial crown of this Realm of England,
and for auoydyng both of such hurtes, perils, dishonors, and inconveniences as
have before time befallen, as well to the Queen's Majesty's noble progenitors,
Kings of this Realm, as for the whole estate thereof, by means of the
jurisdiction and power of the Sea of Rome, unjustly claymed and usurped, within
this Realm, and the dominions thereof, and also of the dangers by the fawters
of the said usurped power, at this time grown to marvelous outrage and
licentious boldness, and now requyryng more sharp restraynt and correction of
laws, then hitherto in the time of the Queen's Majesty's most mylde and
merciful reign have been had, used, or establyshed:

Be it therefore enacted, ordained, and establyshed, by the Queen our
sovereign Lady, and the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in
this present Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that if any
person or persons, dwelling, inhabityng, or resiant within this Realm, or
within any other the Queen's dominions, seignories, or countries, or the Marches
of the same, or else where, within or under her obeysaunce and power, of what
estate, dignity, preeminence, order, degree, or condition soever he or they
be, after the first day of Apryll, which shall be in the year of our Lord God.
M.D.lxiii. shall by wryryng, ciphering, printing, preaching, or teaching, deed
or act, advisedly and wittyngly, hold or stand with, to extol, set forth,
maintain, or defend, the authority, jurisdiction, or power of the Bishop
of Rome, or of his See, heretofore claymed, used, or usurped within this
Realm, or in any dominion or country, being of, within, or under the Queen's
power or obeysaunce, or by any speech, open deed, or act, advisedly and
wyttyngly attribute any such manner of jurisdiction, authority, or preeminence
to the said See of Rome, or to any Bishop of the same See for the time being,
within this Realm, or in any the Queen's dominions or countries: that then
every such person or persons so doing or offendyng, their abettours, procurers
and counselors, and also their aydours, assistentes, and comfortours, upon
purpose and to the intent to set forth, further, and extol, the said usurped
power, authority or jurisdiction of any of the said Bishop or Bishops of
Rome, and every of them, being thereof lawfully indicted or presented within one
year next after any such offenses by him or them committed, and being lawfully
convicted or attaynted at any time after, according to the laws of this
Realm, for every such default and offense, shall incur into the dangers,
penalties, pains, and forfaitures, ordained and provided by the Statute of
provision and praemunire, made in the xvi. year of the reign of king Richard
the second.

And it is also enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that as well Justices of
Assise in their circuites, as Justices of peace within the limittes of their
Commission and aucthorities, or two of every such Justices of peace at the
least, whereof one to be of the Quoru^, shall have full power and authority by
virtue of this Act, in their quarter or open sessions, to enquire of all
offenses, contemptes, and transgressions perpetrated, committed, or done,
contrary to the true meaning of the premises, in like manner and form as they
may of other offenses against the Queen's peace, and shall certify every
presentment before them or any of them, had or made, concerning the same or any
part thereof, before the Queen, her heirs, and successors, in her or their
court commonly called the kings Bench, within. xl. days next after any such
presentment had or made, if the Term be then open, and if not, at the first
day of the full Term next following the said.xl. days, upon pain that every
of the Iusticiers of Assise, or Iusticiers of the peace, before whom such
presentment shall be made, making default of such certificat contrary to this
Statute, to lose and forfait for every such default one hundredth pounds to
the Queen's hyghnes, her heirs, and successors.

AND it is enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Justices of the
kings Benche, as well upon every such certificat, as by inquiry before them
selves, within the limittes of their aucthorities, shall have full power and
authority to hear, order, and determine every such offense, done or
committed contrary to the true meaning of this present Act, according to the
laws of this Realm, in such like manner and form to all intentes and
purposes, as if the person or persons against whom any presentment shall be had
upon this estatute, had been presented upon any matter or offense expressed in
the said estatute, made in the said.xvi. year of king Richard the second.

And moreover, be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that as well all
manner of persons, expressed and appointed, in, and by the Act made in the first
year of the Queen's Majesty's reign that now is, entitled (an Act restoryng
to the Crown the ancient jurisdiction over the estate Ecclesiastical and
Spiritual, and abolyshyng all forreyne powers repugnaunt to the same) to take
the oath expressed and set forth in the same, as all other persons which have
taken or shall take orders, commonly called ordines Sacros, or Ecclesiastical
orders, have been or shall be promoted, preferred, or admitted to any degree of
learning, in any university within this Realm, or dominions to the same
belongyng, and all Scolemasters, and public and private teachers of children,
as also all manner of person and persons, that have taken, or hereafter shall
take any degree of learning, in, or at the common laws of this Realm, as well
Vtterbarresters, as Benchers, Reders, Auncientes in any house or houses of
Court, and all principal treasorers, and such as be of the graunde company in
every Inn of Chauncery, and al Atturneys, Prothonotaries, and Philizers
toward the laws of this Realm, and all manner of Sheriffs, Eschetours, and
Feodaries, and all other person and persons which have taken, or shall take
upon him or them, or have been, or shall be admitted to any ministry or office,
in, at, or belongyng to the common law, or any other law or laws, or to, or
for the execution of them, or any of them, used or allowed, or at any time
hereafter to be used or allowed within this Realm, or any of the dominions or
countries belonging, or which hereafter shall happen to belong to the Crown or
dignity of the same, and all other officers or ministers, of, or toward any
Court, whatsoever and every of them: shall take and pronounce a corporal oath
upon the Evangelists, before he or they shall be admitted, allowed, or suffered to
take upon him or them to use, exercise, supplye, or occupye any such vocation,
office, degree, ministry, room, or service, as is aforesaid, and that in the
open court whereunto he does or shall serve or belong. And if he or they do not
or shall not serve or belong to any ordinary or open Court, then he or they
shall take and pronounce the oath aforesaid, in an open place before a
convenient assemble to witness the same, and before such person or persons as
have or shall have authority by common use or otherwise, to admit or call
any such person or persons as is aforesaid, to any such vocation, office,
ministerye, room or service: or else before such person or persons, as by the
Queen's hyghnes, her heirs, or successors, by Commission under the great Seal
of England shall be named or assigned, to accept and take the same, according to
the tenor, effect, and form of the same oath, verbatim, which is, and as it
is already set forth, to be taken in the foresaid Act made in the first year of
the Queen's Majesty's reign.

And also be it enacted by the authority of this persent parliament, that
every Archbishop and Bishop, within this Realm and dominions of the same,
shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act, to tender or
minister the oath aforesaid, to every or any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
person within their proper dioces, as well in places and jurisdictions exempt,
as else where.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Lord Chancellor
or keeper of the great Seal of England for the time being, shall and may at all
times hereafter, by virtue of this Act without further warraunt, make and
direct Commission or Commissions, under the great Seal of England, to any
person or persons, geuyng them or some of them thereby authority to tender and
minister the oath aforesaid, to such person or persons as by the aforesaid
Commission or Commissions, the said Commissioners shall be aucthorised to tender
the same oath unto.

And be it also further enacted by thaucthoritie of this present Parliament,
that if any person or persons, appointed or compellable by this Act, or by the
said Act made in the said first year, to take the said oath, or if any
person or persons, to whom the said oath by any such Commission or Co^missions,
shall be limited and appointed, to be tendered as is aforesaid, do or shall at
the time of the said oath so tendered, refuse to take or pronounce the said
oath, in manner and form aforesaid: that then the party so refusyng, and
being thereof lawfullye indicted or presented, within one year next after any
such refusal, and convicted or attainted at any time after, according to the
laws of this Realm, shall suffer and incur the dangers, penalties, pains,
and forfaitures ordained and provided by the statute of provision and praemunire
aforesaid, made in the.xvi. year of the reign of king Richard the second.

And furthermore, be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that all and every
such person and persons, having authority to tender the oath aforesaid, shall
within.xl. days next after such refusal or refusals of the said oath, if the
Term be then open, and if not, then at the first day of the full Term next
following the said.xl. days, make true certificat under his or their seal or
seals, of the names, places, and degrees of the person or persons so refusyng
the same oath, before the Queen, her heirs, or successors, in her or their
court commonly called the kings Benche, upon pain that every of the said
persons, having such authority to tender the said oath, making default of
such certificat, shall for every such default forfait.C.li. to the Queen's
highness, her heirs, or successors. And that the Sheriff of the county,
where the said court commonly called the kings Benche, shall for the time be
holden, shall or may by virtue of this Act, empanel a Jury of the same county,
to enquire of, and upon every such refusal and refusals: which Jury shall or
may, upon every such certificat and other evidence to them in that behalf to
be given by virtue of this Act, proceade to endite the person and persons so
offendyng, in such sort and degree, to all intentes and purposes, as the same
Jury may do of any offense or offenses against the Queen's Majesty's peace,
perpetrated, committed or done within the same County, of, and for the which
the same Jury is so impanelled.

AND for stronger defense and maintenance of this Act: It is further ordained,
enacted, and established by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if any such offendour
or offenders, as is aforesaid, of the first part or branch of this estatute,
that is to say, by writing, cypheryng, printing, preaching, or teaching, deed,
or act, advisedly and wyttyngly, hold or stand with, to extol, set forth,
maintain, or defend, the authority, jurisdiction or power of the Bishop of
Rome, or of his See, heretofore claymed, used, or usurped, within this Realm,
or in any dominion or country, being of, within, or under the Queen's power or
obeysaunce: or by any speech, open deed, or act, advisedly and wyttyngly
attribute any such manner of jurisdiction, authority, or preeminence to the
said See of Rome, or to any Bishop of the same See for the time being, within
this Realm, or in any the Queen's dominions or cou^tryes, or be to any such
offendour or offenders, abettyng, procuryng, or counsellyng, or aydyng
assistyng, or comfortyng, upon purpose and to the intent to set forth, further,
and extol the said usurped power, authority, or jurisdiction, after such
conviction and attendour, as is aforesaid, do eftsoon commit or do the said
offenses, or any of them, in manner and form aforesaid, and be thereof duly
convicted and attainted, as is aforesaid, and also, that if any the persons
above named, and appointed by this Act to take the oath aforesaid, do after
the space of three months next after the first tendour thereof, the second
time refuse to take and pronounce, or do not take or pronounce the same, in
form aforesaid, to be tendered: that then every such offendour and
offenders, for the same second offense and offenses, shall forfait, lose, and
suffer such like, and the same pains, forfaitures, judgment, and execution,
as is used in cases of high treason.

Provided always, that this Act nor any thing therein contained, nor any
atteindour to be had by force and virtue of this Act, shall not extend to make
any corruption of blood, the disherytyng of any heir, forfaiture of dower,
nor to the prejudice of the right or title of any person or persons, other then
the right or title of the offendour or offenders, during his, her, or their
natural lives only. And that it shall and may be lawful to every person and
persons, to whom the right or interest of any lands, tenementes, or
hereditamentes, after the death of any such offendour or offenders should or
might have apperteyned, if no such atteyndour had been, to enter into the same
without any Ouster le main to be sued, in such sort as he or they might have
done if this Act had never ben had ne made.

Provided also, that the oath expressed in the said Act made in the said
first year, shall be taken and expounded in such form as is set forth in an
admonition annexed to the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions, publyshed in the first
year of her Majesty's reign, that is to say, to confess and acknowledge in
her Majesty, her heirs and successors, none other authority, then that was
challenged and lately used by the noble king Henry the eight, and king Edward
the sixth, as in the said Admonition more plainly may appear.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this Act shall be openly
read, and publyshed, and declared at every quarter Sessions by the Clarke of
the peace, and at every Let and Laweday by the Steward of the Court, and once
in every Term in the open hall of every house and houses of Court and
Chauncery, at the times and by the persons thereunto to be limited and
appointed by the Lord Chauncelour or keeper of the great Seal for the time
being.

And be it further enacted, that every person, which hereafter shall be elected
or appointed a Knight, Citezin, or Burgess, or Baron for any of the five
ports, for any Parliament or Parliamentes hereafter to be holden: shall from
henceforth before he shall enter into the Parliament house, or have any voice
there, openly receive and pronounce the said oath before the Lord Steward for
the time being, or his deputy or deputies for that time to be appointed. And
that he which shall enter into the Parliament house without taking the said
oath, shall be demed no Knight, Citezin, Burgess, nor Baron for that Parliament,
nor shall have any voice: But shall be to all intentes, constructions, and
purposes, as if he had never ben returned nor elected Knight, Citezin,
Burgess, or Baron for that Parliament, and shall suffer such pains and
penalties, as if he had presumed to sytte in the same without election,
return, or authority.

Provided always, that forasmuch as the Queen's Majesty is otherwise
sufficiently assured of the faith and loyalty of the Temporal Lords of her
high court of Parliament: therefore this Act nor any thing therein contained,
shall not extend to compel any Temporal person, of, or above the degree of a
Baron of this Realm, to take or pronounce the oath abouesayde, nor to incur
any penalty limited by this Act, for not taking or refusyng the same: Any
thing in this Act to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that charitable
geuyng of reasonable alms to any of the offendour or offenders above
specified, without fraud or couin, shall not be taken or interpreted to be any
such abetment, procuryng, counsellyng, aydyng, assisting, or comfortyng, as
thereby the geuer of such alms shall incur any pain, penalty, or forfaiture
appointed in this Act.

Provided also, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie of this present Parliament,
that if any peer of this Realm, shall hereafter offend contrary to this
Act, or any branch or article thereof, that in that and all such case and
cases, they shall be tried by their peers, in such manner and form as in other
cases of treasons they have used to be tried, and by none other means.

Provided also further and be it enacted, that no person shall be compelled by
virtue of this Act to take the oath above mentioned, at or upon the second
time of offering of the same, according to the form appointed by this
statute, except the same person has been, is, or shall be an ecclesiastical
person, that had, has, or shall have in the time of one of the reigns of the
Queen's majesty's most noble father, brother, or sister, or in the time of the
reign of the Queen's Majesty, her heirs or successors, charge, cure, or
office in the Church, or such person or persons as had, has, or hereafter
shall have any office or ministry in any Ecclesiastical Court of this Realm,
under any Archbishop, or Bishop, in any the times or reigns aforesaid: or
such person or persons as shall wylfully refuse to observe the orders and rites
for divine service, that be aucthorised to be used and observed in the Church
of England, after that he or they shall be publicly by the Ordinary or some of
his officers for ecclesiastical causes, admonished to keep and observe the
same: or such as shall openly and advisedly deprave by words, writings, or
any other open fact, any of the Rites and Ceremonies at any time used, and
aucthorised to be used in the Church of England: or that shall say or hear the
private Mass prohibited by the laws of this Realm, and that all such persons
shall be compellable to take the oath upon the second tender or offer of the
same, and incur the penalties for not taking of the said oath, and none
other.

AND forasmuch as it is doubtful whether by the laws of this Realm there be
any punishment for such as kill or slay any person or persons attainted in or
upon a praemunire: Be it therefore enacted by authority aforesaid, that it
shall not be lawful to any person or persons, to slay or kill any person or
persons in any manner attaynted, or hereafter to be attaynted, of, in, or upon
any praemunire, by pretense, reason, or authority of any judgment given or
hereafter to be given, in, or upon the same, or by pretense, reason or force of
any word or words, thing or things contained or specified in any statute or
law of provision and praemunire, or in any of them: Any law or statute, or
opinion, or exposition of any law or Statute to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Saving always the due execution of all and every person and persons,
attaynted or to be attaynted, for any offense whereupon judgment of death now
is, or ought to be, or hereafter may lawfully be given by reason of this
Statute or otherwise: And saving always all and every such pain of death, or
other hurt or punishment, as heretofore might without danger of law be done
upon any person or persons that shall send or bring into this Realm, or any
other the Queen's dominions, or within the same shall execute any summons,
sentence, excommunication, or other process, against any person or persons, from
the Bishop of Rome for the time being, or by and from the Sea of Rome, or
thaucthoritie or jurisdiction of the same See.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no
person or persons, shall hereafter be endyted for assisting, aydyng,
mainteynyng, comfortyng or abettyng of any person or persons for any the said
offenses, in extollyng, setting forth, or defending of the usurped power and
authority of the Bishop of Rome, unless he or they be thereof lawfully
accused by such good and sufficient testimony or proof, as by the Iurye by
whom he shall so be endyted, shall be thought good, lawful, and sufficient to
prove him or them gylty of the said offenses.

An Act for the maintenance and increase of Tyllage. The.ii. Chapter.
FOrasmuch as the Statute made in the fourth year of the reign of the late
prince of worthy memory King Henry the seventh, for the keeping up of houses of
husbandry, and one other Statute made in the.vii. year of the reign of the
late King of most famous memory King Henry the eight, entitled an Act to
avoid lettyng down of Towns, and also one other Act made in the.xxvii. year
of the reign of the same late king Henry the eight, entitled an Act
concerning the decay of houses and enclosures, are very good and profitable
laws for the common wealth of this Realm.

It is therefore ordained and establyshed by the Queen our Sovereign Lady,
with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that the
said Acts, and every of them, and every branch and article in the same, and
every of them contained, shall from henceforth be put in due execution, and
remain and continue in force for evermore.

And also, where by an Act made in the.xxvii. year of the reign of our said
late Sovereign Lord King Henry the eight, whereby diverse and sundry
religious houses of Monks, Channons, and Nuns, which might not dispende in
lands, tenements, and hereditamentes above the clear yearly value of two
hundredth pounds, were given to the said late King Henry the eight, his
heirs, and successors for ever: It is among other things enacted and
ordained, that all and singular persons, and bodies polytyke and corporate, to
whom the said late king Henry the eight, his heirs or successors, after the
making of the same Act, should give, grant, let, or demyse any Site or
precinct, with the houses thervppon builded, together with the demeanes of any
Monasteries, Priories, or other religious houses, that should be dissolved or
given to the said late king Henry the eight by that Act, and the heirs,
successors, or assigns of every such person, body polytyke and corporate,
should keep or cause to be kept an honest contynuall house and householde in
the same Site or precinct, and should occupye or cause to be occupied
yerelye, as much of the demeanes in ploughyng and tyllyng of husbandrye (that
is to say) as much of the said demeanes which then were commonly used to
be kept in tyllage by the Governors, Abbottes, or Pryours of the same houses,
Monasteries, or Priories, or by their fermour or fermours occupying the same,
within the time of twenty years next before that Act, upon pain to
forfayte to the kings highness, for every month so offendynge.vi. li. xiii.
s. iiii. d. to be recovered to his use in any of his Courts of Record. And
over that, by the same Statute it is enacted, that all Justices of peace in
every Shyre where any such offense should be committed and done, contrary to
the true meaning and intent of that Act or statute, should in every quarter
and general Sessyons within the limittes of their Commission, enquire of the
premises, and should have full power and authority, to hear and determine
the same, and to tax and assesse no less fine for every the said offenses,
then is before limited for the said offense, and estreates thereof to be made
and certified into the Kings Exchequer, according and at such time and
form, as other estreates of fynes, issues, and amerciamentes be made by the
same Justices, as by the same Act more at large does appear. Which part of
the said Act concerning keeping of house and householde in the said Scites
and precinctes, and occupying of such demeanes of the same in tyllage, as is
aforesaid, then was, and yet is thought very beneficial to the common wealth,
and most needful to be put in due execution.

BE IT therefore enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
branches and articles of the said estatute last above mentioned, made in the
said.xxvii. year of our said late Sovereign Lord King Henrye the eight,
and every penalty and thing touching the same, be also from henceforth put in
due execution, and shall remain and continue in their full force and virtue,
according to the good entente and meaning of the same last recited Statute:
Any thing in this present Act to be hereafter contained to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

AND forasmuch as there have been sythens the making of the said Statute,
certain other laws and Statutes made in the time of our late Sovereign Lord
king Edward the syxte, and in the time of our late Sovereign King Phillip
and Queen Mary, for the reedifying of decayed houses of husbandrye, and for the
increase of tyllage, which being in some parts thereof imperfect, and in
some places to mylde and gentle, have not brought to the decayed state of
tyllage, and of houses of husbandrye, that long looked for remedy, which was
then hoped for: Be it therefore enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
said laws and Statutes made in the times of the said late king Edward the
syxt, and King Phillip and Queen Marye, touching and concerning the decay
of houses of husbandrye, and for the increase of Tyllage, and every article
and thing in them and every of them contained, shall be form henceforth
repelled and made void to all intentes and purposes.

And be it also further enacted and established by thaucthoritie aforesaid,
that from and after the feast of Thannunciation of our Lady, which shall be in
the year of our Lord God, a thousand five hundred threscore and four: all such
lands and grounds, or so much in quantity as in any Town, Village,
Hamlette, Lordshyp, place known, or paryshe within the Realm of England or
Wales, have been eared, ploughed, and put in tyllage in any one year, and so
kept in tillage by the space of four years, any time since the feast of S.
George the Martyr in the.xx. year of the reign of King Henry theight (other
then the said demeanes of the said late Monasteries, Priories, and religious
houses, given as is above rehearsed to the said late king Henry theight in
the said.xxvii. year of his reign) shall be eared, ploughed, used and kept in
tillage, or caused to be eared, ploughed, used, and kept in tyllage for ever,
according to the nature of the soil and custom of the country, by the
occupyer or occupiers thereof, without fraud or collusion, upon pain that
every offendour contrary to this Act, shall lose and forfayte yearly for every
acre ten shillinges, which forfayture, shall go and be in manner and form
following. That is to say, to such person or persons as ben next in reuertion
or remaynder thereof, for term of life, lives, or in tail, their executours
or administratours. And that by thaucthoritie of this Act, it shall be lawful
for him or them to leuye the same penalty and forfayture of.x.s. for every
acre by distres, and to justify or make their aduouries or cognisaunces for
the same, in such manner and form, as any person or persons may do for rentes
reserved upon estate or estates made for term of years, of any lands or
tenementes, or otherwise, shall and may sue for the same penalty and
forfayture by action of debt, byll, playnt, or information in any Court of
record of the Queen our sovereign Lady, her heirs or successors, wherein no
wager of law, essoygne or protection, shall be allowed or admitted for the party
defendant. And if they, or any of them do not distrayne, or otherwise claim or
demand the said penalty and forfayture by any the ways or means
aforesaid, within the space of one whole year next after the offense done in
form aforesaid, and pursue for the same with effect, without fraud or
couyn, and do not recover (and might have recovered the same) with such speed
as may be by the due order of the law: That then after such default, it
shall be lawefull for him or them to whom the reuertion or remaynder of the fee
simple of the said lands shall appertain, their executours or
administratours to distrayne, auowe, or make cognisaunce, and justify, or
otherwise to sue for the said forfayture and pains in form aforesaid, at any
time within one year next ensuynge any such default. And in his or their
default, the said penalty or forfayture, to go and be to the immediate Lord
or Lords of the fee or fees, of whom the said lands ben holden, to be
recovered in manner and form aforesaid, so that he or they do take and sue
for his or their remedy therein, within one year next ensuinge any such
default, in manner and form aforesaid. And in his and their default, the said
penalty and forfayture to go and be to the Queen's highness, her heirs, and
successors, to be recovered by any of the means or remedies aforesaid, at any
time or times, at her or their wylles and pleasures, or otherwise to any other
person or persons that will sue, as well for the Queen's Majesty, her heirs,
and successors, as for him or them selves for the same pains and forfaytures,
upon which suite, the one moytie shall be and go to the Queen's Majesty, her
heirs or successors: and the other, to him or them that so will sue for the
same, by action of debte, byll, playnt, or information, in any of the Queen's
Courts of record, wherein no essoyne, protection, or wager of law, shall be
admitted or allowed for the party defendaunt.

AND be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, being an occupier and owner of any such lands and grounds as is
aforesaid, of any estate of inheritance, shall offend against the form of
this Act: That then the said penalty and forfayture, shall go and be to the
next immediate Lord, or Lords of the fee or fees thereof, his or their
executours or administratours, to be recovered by such ways and means, as
before is limited and appointed, so that he or they do pursue and take their
remedy for the same in form aforesaid, within one year next after such
offense committed. And if any such occupier and owner, shall be a Coppyholder,
or a customary tenant, that then the said penalty or forfayture, to go and
be to the Lord or Lords of the manor, of whom the same Coppye or customary
tenementes been holden, their executours or administratours, so that he or they
do pursue and take their remedy for the same, in such manner and form, and
within the time last before limited. And in every such default of the said
Lord or Lords of the fee or fees, and of the Lord or Lords of the said
manor or manours as is aforesaid, or of any of them, the said penalties and
forfaytures to go and be to the Queen's Majesty, her heirs and successors,
or to such other person or persons as will sue for the same, as well for the
Queen, her heirs or successors, as for him or them selves, in such manner and
form, as before is declared. In every which suite, none essoygne,
protection, or wager of law, shall be admitted or allowed for the party
defendaunt.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that
this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not be prejudicial, ne shall
extend to charge any person or persons, that has or shall turn any ground
from tillage to pasture, and shall keep such ground in pasture hole and not
converted to tyllage, for the only maintenance and kepinge of his or their
own Horses, Geldinges, Mares, or draught Oxen, or for the mayntenaunce or
keeping of kyne or other cattle, for the only victuelles to be spent in his
or their own houses, so that the same person or persons has, or shall not
have in his or their possession, occupation, or disposition, other sufficient
pasture ground for that purpose, within v. miles of his or their mansion house.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person
or persons, that shall commonly feed and sell yearly beefes or muttons, to a
greater number then he or they shall yearly spend in victuel, in his or their
own mansion house or houses, or that shall be a common fatter of beefes or
muttons, or any of them, as a common grasier or shepemaster, to be commonly
sold in markettes and fayres, or to common Butchers, shall be taken, expounded,
or understand to be such person or persons, as by this prouiso last above
mentioned, may keep any ground or pasture hole, and not converted to tyllage
for the maintenance and kepinge of kyne or other cattle, for the only
victuell to be spent in his or their own houses, but ben and shall be excepted
out of ye same prouiso: Any thing in the same prouiso contained to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it likewise enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend unto any lawful
Park or Parkes, or ancient warrens now used with Dear or Connyes, or to any
Park or Parkes heretofore lawefully used as Parkes, and being now disparked,
or to any other grou^des that heretofore have been by any her highness
progenitors, or hereafter shall fortune to be made parkes or warrens by
license of our sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs or successors, with
sufficient clause of dispensation for converting of tyllage into pasture, and
ben or shall be laid, bestowed and employed to the maintenance and keeping of
Dear or Connyes, without fraud or couyn, and not to the feeding or keeping
of any other cattle or beasts, but only mylche kyne for him or them selves,
or his or their keeper of such Park or Warren, for the provision of his or
their house or houses, or for the keeping of his or their horses, geldynges,
mares, coltes, or swyne, ne shall extend to any waste grounds, commons,
heathes, downs, fennes, moors, commonly used as common, nor to any heathes,
fennes, moors, maryshes, being now used in seueraltie, and not commonly used
to be sown and put in tyllage sense the said feast of Saint George, in the
said twenty year of the reign of king Henrye the.viii. nor to any fresh
marshes being surrounded with water within the space of six years next before
the first day of this present Parliament, nor to any Orchard, Garden, Poole,
or pondyarde, nor to any ground set or sown with Saffron, Hoppes, Garlyke,
Onyons, Flax, Ode, or Madder, or being without fraud or guyle sown with
Acornes, or set with any kind of young woods, nor to any wood grounds
which be not stubbed, or wherein the wood has been felled, or hereafter shall be
felled, and the rotes and stubbes thereof yet remaynyng vndygged up, nor any
meadows or other grounds without fraud or couyn, accustomably used to be
mowen for Hay once in the year at the least, during such time as all and every
the same shall be used or put to the uses and intentes before specified: Any
thing in this Act contained to the contrary notwithstanding. And where in the
said first prouiso it is mentioned that this Act or any thing therein contained
shall not extend or be prejudicial to any person or persons for keeping of any
ground in pasture or medowe for the only mayntenaunce or keeping of his or their
own horses, mares, geldynges, or draught oxen, or for the maintenance or
keeping of kyne or other cattle for the only provision or victuellyng of his
or their mansion, or dwelling house or houses: Be it declared and enacted by
thauctoritie aforesaid, that if it shall fortune any such person or persons to
be absent, and not resident, at, or upon his or their usual mansion or
dwelling house or houses, with his family or household, for and by occasion of
service or attendau^ce to be done by any such person or persons, by the
express commandment of the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, or successors,
within the Realm or without, or else having two or three mansion or dwelling
houses, and shall be resident and dwelling with his family but at one of them,
or shall be within age: That then during and for the time of such service,
attendaunce, minority, and absence (and one year next after) from any his said
dwelling houses, or during and for the time that he or they shall be resident and
dwelling with his family, but at or upon one of them, shall and may keep such
grounds in pasture or medowe, belongyng or usually occupied with any of the
said two or three houses, and with no mo nor others, in his or their own
hands or occupation, or let it out to any other person or persons, without
incurryng of any danger or forfaiture by virtue of this Act, so that the same
person or persons, shall and do keep the same mansion and dwelling house or
houses vnletten, and in good and sufficient reparations, and mete and
convenient for him or them to repair and resort unto at all times for his or
their dwelling and abode: Any thing in the said prouiso, or in any part of
this Act, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that the repeal of any Act or Statute now repelled by this present Act, nor
any other matter or thing herein contained, shall in any wise extend, or be
interpreted, judged, or expounded, to hinder, hurt, or take away any suite,
information or informations exhibited, and now depending in the Queen's
Majesty's court of Exchequer, or in any other court of Record, for, or in any
wise concerning the decay of any houses or tenementes of husbandry, or for the
converting of any lands or tenements from tyllage into pasture, contrary to
the form and effect of any Statute or Statutes heretofore made: But that all
and every such suites and informations, shall stand, remain, and be of as
good force and effect in the law, to all intentes, constructions, and
purposes, as the same and every of them were before the making of this Act.
And that the said Acts and Statutes now by this present Act repelled, shall
for and in respect only of the said informations and suites, and every of them
so now dependynge, stand, remain, and be in such like force and effect, as
they and every of them were before the making of this Act: Any thing herein
contained to the contrary thereof, notwithstanding.

And where as some doubt and question, has heretofore risen and ben moved,
upon certain words contained in the said Statute, made in the said fourth
year of the reign of the late King Henry the seventh, that is to say, upon
these words: house or houses letten to ferme, with.xx. acres of land at
least, or more, lying in tyllage and husbandrye: whether the same.xx. acres of
land or more, should be accounted and taken to be all earable land, and
wholly put in tyllage or not, and also what quantity and measure every acre
should be of, and conteyne.

For a plain and perfect declaration and interpretation whereof: Be it enacted
and declared by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, that the said
Statute is, and shall be expounded and taken, to extend to house or houses, that
now have, or has, or at any time heretofore sythens the first year of the
reign of the said late king Henry the.vii. have or has had, or that
hereafter shall have.xx. acres of ground to the same house or houses lying or
belongyng, or with the same commonly occupied or used, although the same
ground has not ben, is, or shall be all whollye used as earable land and put
in tyllage, but only some part thereof, and that the content of every acre,
shall be taken and rated after the rate and measure limited and appointed in the
ordinance or treatise De terris mensurandis: Any ambiguitie, doubt, or thing,
whatsoever to the contrary thereof, notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that if any person or persons has, or at any time hereafter shall sustain any
penalty, forfaiture, or loss, for or by reason of any offense committed or
done contrary to the tenor or effect of this Act, or any other of the Acts
before recited and confirmed: that then he or they shall not be eftsoon sued,
vexed, or impeched for the same offense: Any thing in this Act, or in any
other of the Acts aforesaid, had or made to the contrary thereof,
notwithstanding.

And to the intent that the offendour of this Act, or of any the Acts before
specified, and by this Act confirmed, and thoffences committed and done against
any of the same, may be the better known, and that the more due execution
thereof may be had: Be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the Lord
Chau^cellour, or Lord keeper of the great Seal of England for the time being,
shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act; from time to time to
awarde and direct a Commission or Co^missions under the great Seal of
England, into every shire or county within this Realm and Wales, to such
persons, as by his wisdom and discression shall be thought most mete and
convenient, aucthorising them, or four of the^ at the least, by virtue thereof,
and of this Act, to enquire and search out within every Town, Vyllage,
Parish, and Hamlet within their Commission, by the oaths of.vi. lawful and
indifferent persons, or otherwise, according to their good discressions, of the
offenses committed or done against this Statute, or any other the Statutes
before mentioned, and by this Act confirmed, and whether any person or persons
to whom any penalty or forfaiture is given, limited, or appointed by the
same, or any of them, have taken the benefit or advantage of the said
forfaitures and pains, or not, according to the same laws and statutes. And
that within three months next after every such enquitie and search, the said
Commisioners, or four of them at the least, shall make certificat thereof, and
of their doings by virtue of the said Commission, under their hands and
seals, into the high Court of Chauncery, upon pain of forfaiture of every
such Co^missioner.xx.li. sterlyng to the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, and
successors. And that the same Commisioners, or two of them at the least,
shall have authority and power by virtue of this act, to direct their precept
to the Sheriffs of the county, being within the limittes of their Commission,
to warn as many honest men of his Baylywyke, as the said Commissioners shall
appoint, by whom the truth in the premises may be best known, to enquire,
and true presentment make, of all and every offenses committed or done contrary
to the said Acts, or any of them, and to set such reasonable fines and
amerciamentes upon such persons as shall make default of their apparaunces, or
making their apparaunces, shall neglect to do their duties in and about the
execution of the premises, as to the same Commisioners or four of them,
shall be by their discressions thought mete and convenient, so that the same
fines or amerciamentes for any one default, excede not the su^me of.xx.s. And
that the same fines and amerciamentes so by them taxed and set, shall be yearly
well and truly estreated into the court of the Exchequer, and there to be
levied to the use of our Sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs, and
successors, as other fines and amerciaments have been there accustomed and used
to be levied. And that if the Sheriff to who^ such precept shall be awarded,
shall be remiss or negligent in serving of the precept, and returnyng of the
same at the time and place appointed and prefixed in the said precept: that
then the said Commisioners or four of them, shall for every such default,
assesse and tax upon the said Sheriff.x. li. and shall estreate the same
into the said Court of Exchequer, to be levied to the Queen's Majesty's use,
her heirs, and successors, as is aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that it shall
not be lawful to any Sheriff, under Sheriff, or Sheriffs deputy, to
infringe or enter into any liberty or frau^ches for thexecution of any such
precept: But shall make his mandatum to the Baylyffe of the fraunches or
liberty for thexecutyng and serving of the same, and that the Baylyffe of
every such fraunches or liberty, shall serve and execute the said precept
according to the tenor thereof, in such like manner and form as the Sheriff
should or ought to have done, if it had been within his Baylywyke, upon pain of
forfaiture of.v.li. to be estreated and leuyed as is aforesaid.

Provided also, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the puttyng
of any lands or tenementes hereafter from pasture to tyllage, according to the
tenor and effect of this Act, shall not in any wise extend to be any cause of
breach or forfaiture of any bond, covenant, payment, or condition made, or
hereafter to be made between any person or persons, bodies politic or
corporate, which in any wise is or shall be repugnaunt or contrariaunt to this
Act.

Provided always and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to give any benefit,
advantage or liberty to any person or persons, which at any time sythens the
said feast of S. George the Martyr, has converted or employed, or hereafter
shall convert or employ any more ground to the keeping of Connyes, not being
lawful warren, then five acres at the most, and the same to be within one
mile of his dwelling house, and also not noisome or hurtful to the corn of
any person or persons, other then of the owner of the same ground, so that he
or they put and keep in tyllage, as much or as many acres of his own proper
ground, lying within the said Manor, Lordship, or Paryshe, as the said
Conygree shall conteyne above the said number of five acres, that has not
heretofore ben liable to be continued in tyllage by force of any law or
Statute: Any thing in this Act before mentioned to the contrary thereof,
notwithstanding.

And where also by the said estatute of Henry the.vii. the meaning of the
makers thereof appears to be, that every house of husbandrye having.xx. acres
of land or more, belongyng or lying thereunto, or with the same commonly
occupied, used, or demysed: the same.xx. acres or more, should not be severed
or divided from the said house or houses, but should be demysed, occupied, or
used together, for the better maintenance of every such house and houses, and
of tyllage and husbandry.

Be it therefore enacted and declared by authority of this present Parliament,
that no person or persons whatsoever, having or that hereafter shall have any
such houses or house of husbandry, with.xx. acres of land or more, belongyng
or lying thereunto, or with the same commonly occupied, used, or demysed:
shall from and after the first day of this present Parliament, sever or divide
the said.xx. Acres of land or more, nor any part thereof, from any of the
said house or houses, unless the same be kept in tyllage, or otherwise for
the profit of husbandry, according to the nature of the ground, or according
to the custom of the Manours where the same land shall so be, upon the pains
and forfaitures contained in the said estatute of Henry the.vii. to be taken
in such form as by the same statute appears, except he or they shall lay
and assign to the said house or houses, or to any other house or houses being
within the same Parish or Lordeship, or within two miles of the said houses,
being also not bound to be maintained and vpholden by form of the said
statute of king Henry the.vii. as much other land within the same Paryshe,
Lordship, or within two miles, as is abouesaid, for and in liew of such or so
much of the former land, as ought to have continued by force of the said
statute, with the former house, and can not conveniently be returned to the
same former house.

And be it further enacted by authority aforesaid, that if any such house or
houses of husbandrye, and land, be divided or severed the one from the other,
by reason of any lease or leases, for term of life, lives, or for term of
years, made or granted before the first day of this present Parliament: that
then whenever the said lease or leases shall end or determine by any manner of
means, so as the same house or houses, and lands thereunto belongyng, shall be
discharged of all such leases, the same house and houses and lands so demised,
shall not afterward be severed or divided the one from the other, but shall go, be
kept, and occupied together at all times after, according to the declaration
before mentioned, upon the pains and forfaitures last before specified, and to
be taken also, as in the said Statute is mentioned: Except by the returnyng
or reuniting of the same land to the said house, there shall or may grow any
manifest decay of any other houses newly edified, or of any other farms that
has been by means of distribution or seueraunce of the same land or lands,
or any part thereof, made or assigned to be several tenementes or holds.

And where in the said Statute made in the said.vii. year of the reign of
the said king Henry the.viii. among other things in the same, it is
enacted, that if sythens the first day of the same Parliament, any lands,
which at the same first day, or sythens the same first day, were commonly
used in tyllage, were enclosed, or from thenceforth should be enclosed and
turned only to pasture, whereby any house of husbandry then was or thereafter
should be decayed: that then all such lands should be by the owner or owners
thereof, their heirs, successors, or assigns, or other for them, within one
year next ensuing the same decay, put in tyllage, and exercised, used, and
occupied in husbandry and tyllage, as they were the first day of the same
Parliament, or at any time sythens, and after the manner and usage of the
country where such lands did lie, as by the said Act more plainly may
appear.

And forasmuch as upon the said part of the said statute, diverse doubts and
questions have been moved heretofore: Be it therefore enacted and declared by the
authority aforesaid, that if at any time sythens the making of the said Act,
and before the said feast of S. George, in the said.xx. year of the reign
of the said late king Henry the.viii. any lands belongyng to any such house
of husbandry as is aforesaid, have been turned from tyllage to pasture by any
person or persons: that then the same lands, or so much other lands being
within the same Paryshe, Lordship, or Manor, that heretofore was not liable or
bound by any law or statute to be kept in tyllage, shall be turned again into
tyllage within one year next after the session of this present parliament, and
kept in tyllage for ever, according to the custom of the country, and nature
of the soil, whether the said house whereunto the said lands did belong be
decayed or no, or whether the same lands were enclosed or not enclosed, or
whether some part thereof, and not the whole, were kept in tyllage or not, upon
the pains contained in the same statute made in the said.vii. year of the
reign of the said late king Henry the.viii.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that
if any person or persons whatsoever, having any pasture, heath, wast, or barren
ground, which has not ben heretofore commonly used to be eared or tylled for
corn, and yet nevertheless the same person or persons, to the intent to better
and amend the said ground, and not to use the same for tyllage, have, or has
at any time heretofore turned or put the same into tyllage, or at any time
hereafter shall turn or put the same into tyllage, and has or shall keep the
same ground for that cause only in tyllage by the space of four years
togethers, that this Act or any thing therein contained shall not compel any
person or persons to continue or put in tyllage the said pasture, heath, barren
or wast ground so eared: Any thing before expressed in this act to the
contrary thereof notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this Act, or any provision, clause, or article therein
contained, shall not be understand or expounded to extend or be in any wise
prejudicial to those parts or porcions of grounds, wherein any ower of Lead,
Tin, or Iron, or Coals comely called sea cole, stone cole, or moore cole, have been, are, or hereafter shall be usually gotten, by means whereof, the same
grou^des can not conveniently be put and kept in tyllage: This Act, or any
other law, usage, or custom to the contrary, in any wise notwtstanding.

Provided also that this Act, nor any thing therein contained, shall extend to
compel any person or persons to put in tyllage any lands or grounds within
any forest or chase, except the forest of Snowden in Northwales, otherwise
then before the making of this Statute, he or they ought, or were bound to do.
This Act to endure to the end of the next session of Parliament.

Provided always, yt this statute or any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to compel any inhabitant of ye cou^ties of Northumberland, Westmerland, or
Cu^berland, to reedifie, maintein, or to keep in manurance any house or ground
yt shall be overthrown, burned, destroyed, wasted, or decayed by enemies, or by
any occasion of wars or inuasio^s, during ye wars, or win.iiii. years after
ye conclusion of peace next following such overthrowing, burning, destruction,
wasting, or other thing in this present Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as this Act shall continue but to the end of the next session
of Parliament: Be it therefore enacted by auctoriritie aforesaid, that no
person or persons, shall from henceforth convert from tillage to pasture, any
ground which was in tillage the first day of this Parliament, other then
such as they might lawfully have converted from tyllage to pasture, before the
making of this Act: Any thing contained in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Act for the relief of the poor. The.iii. Chapter.
TO the intent that idle and loyterynge persons and valiant beggars may be
avoided, and thimpotent, feeble, and lame, which are the poor in very deed,
should be hereafter relieved and well provided for:

Be it enacted by the Queen our soueraygne Lady, with thassent of the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament assembled,
and by thaucthoritie of the same, that the statute made in the.xxii. year of
the late king of famous memory, king Henry theight, and also the statute made
in the third and fourth years of the reign of the famous king Edward the
syxt, concerning beggars, vagaboundes, and idle persons, and every article,
clause, branch, sentence, and other things contained in them, and either of
them, other then such things as shall be by this present Act otherwise
ordained and provided for: shall stand, remain, and be in their full force
and effect, and shall be also from henceforth, justly and truly put in
execution, according to the true meaning of the said several statutes, and
every of them.

AND further be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that yearly upon the
Sunday next before the feast day of the Nativity of S. John Baptist, commonly
called Midsomer day, in every City, Borough, and Town corporate, the Mayor,
Bayliefes, or other head officers for the time being: and in every other
paryshe of the country, the Parson, Vicar, or Curate and churchwardens, shall
have written in a Register or book to be provided by them, as well the names of
the inhabitau^tes and householders within their city, Borough, Town corporate,
or paryshe: as also the names of all such impotent, aged, and nedy persons, as
be within their city, Borough, Town corporate, or paryshe, which are not
hable to live of them selves, nor with their own labor, and shall openly in
the church and quietly after divine service, call ye said householders and
inhabitants together, among who^ ye Mayor or other head officers, and two of
the chief inhabitauntes in every such City, Borough, and Town corporate,
such as the Mayor or other head officers shall think meet. And the Parson,
Vycar, or Curate, and Churchwardens in every other paryshe, shall elect,
nominate and appoint yearly two hable persons or mo, to be gatherers and
Collectours of the charitable alms of all the residue of the people inhabytyng
in the paryshe, whereof they be chosen Collectours for the relief of the poor,
Which Collectours, the Sunday next after their election, or the Sundaye
following if need require, when the people are at the Church at divine service:
shall gentelly ask and demand of every man and woman, what they of their
charity will be contented to give wekely toward the relief of the poor, and
the same to be written in the said Regester or book. And the said gatherers
so being elected and chosen, shall justly gather and truly distribute the same
charitable alms wekely by them selves or their assigns, to the said poor
and impotent persons of the said Cities, Boroughes, Towns corporate, and
Paryshes, without fraud or couin, favor or affection, and after such sort,
that the more impotent, may have the more help, and such as can get part of
their living, to have the less, and by the discression of the Collectours, to
be put in such labor as they be fyt and hable to do, but none to go or sit
openly a beggyng, upon pain limited in the aforesaid Statutes. And if the
said Majors, Baylyffes, head officers, Parson, Vicar, Curate and Churchwarden,
or any of them, fail in the doing and executyng of the premises in form
above declared, he or they so making default, to forfeyte for every such
default.xl.s. to be employed to the use of the poor of that paryshe, where he
or they do inhabit, to be leuyed by the Collectours of the same paryshe by way
of distress, or otherwise, as is appointed in this Act for leuying of like
forfaitures.

And be it enacted by thauctoritie aforesaid, that no person or persons so
elected, nominated, and appointed to be gatherer or gatherers as is aforesaid,
shall refuse the said office, but shall iustlye and truly execute the same,
by the space of one whole year next ensuyng such election, upon pain to
forfaite.x.li. the one moitie thereof to the Churchwardens of the paryshe where he
or they shall be elected Collectour, and the other moitie thereof, to the use and
relief of the poor of the said parish, to be levied by the Churchwardens
where they or he dwells, of the goods of the said gatherer or gatherers so
refusyng, by distress, or else by action of debte, byll, playnt, or
information, to be brought or pursued by the said Churchwardens of the said
Paryshe, where they shall dwell, in any court of Record, or in the court of
any Lord of any Manor within the said paryshe where the said gatherer
shall be so chosen. In which suite, no protection or wager of law shall be allowed
or admitted for the party defendaunt.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if the said
Churchwardens, or either of them, shall refuse to sue for the said forfayture,
or within two months next after the same cause of forfayture shall be given,
shall not sue or take the remedy for the recovery thereof, in such manner and
form as before in this present Act is limited and appointed: that then the
same Churchwardens so making default of suite, shall forfayte and lose xx.li.
of lawful money of England, the one moitie thereof to him or them that will
sue for the same by action of debt, byll, playnt, or information, in any court
of Record, or in the court of any Lord of any Manor, within the paryshe
where the said Churchwardens shall dwell, and the other moitie to the use of
the poor of the said paryshe. In which suite, no essoigne, protection, or
wager of law shall be admitted or allowed for the party defendaunt.

And for the better execution of this Act, touching the election of the
Collectours for the poor: Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
every Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Minister, of every paryshe within this Realm,
shall yearly for evermore, upon the Sunday before Midsomer day, in the Pulpit
or some other convenient place in the Church, give knowledge and warnyng at
thend of some of the morning service, to the parishioners then and there
present, to prepare them selves on the Sunday next after Midsomer day then next
following, to come to the Church, and there to elect and chose Collectours and
gatherers for the poor, according to the tenor of this Act. And if the
Parson, Vicar, Curate, or Minister, shall make default in geuyng of the said
knowledge: that then he or they so making default, to forfaite and lose.xl.s.
toward the reparations of the said Church. And the Churchwardens of the
said paryshe, to sue and distrayne for the same, in such form as before is
appointed for the other forfaitures.

AND further be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the said
gatherers or Collectours for the poor, so to be chosen as is aforesaid, shall
make their just account quarterly, to the Majors or chief officers of the
said Cities, Boroughes, and Towns corporate: and in every parish of the
said Country, to the Parson, Vicar, or Curate, and Churchwardens of the
paryshe, at which account, such of the paryshe as will, may be present. And
when they go out of their office, they shall deliver or cause to be delivered
forthwith upon the end of their accomptes, all such surplusage of money, as then
shall remain of their collection vndistributed, to be put in their common
chest of the Church, or in some other safe place, to the use of the poor, at
the ouersyght and discression of the Mayor, officers, and others before
mentioned. And if the said Collectours, or any of them, do refuse to make their
said account within.viii. days next after request made to them for the
same, then the Bishop of the dioces, or the Ordinary of the place,
Chauncelours, or their Co^missaries, together with a Justice of peace, and the
Churchwardens of the said parish, or one of them, shall have authority by
virtue of this Act, upon complaynt to them made, to commit the said person or
persons so refusyng, to ward, there to remain without bail or maynpryse,
until he or they so refusyng, shall make their said accomptes, before such
persons as the said Bishop, Ordinary, Chauncellours, or Commissaries and
Justice of peace shall appoint, and to make immediate payment of the sums
wherewith by determination of ye said account they shall be charged.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, being able to further this charitable work, do obstinatly and
frowardely refuse, reasonablye to give toward the help and relief of the
poor, or do wylfully discourage other from so charitable a deed, ye Parson,
Vicar, or Curate, and Churchwardens of the parish wherein he dwells, shall
then gentelly exhort him or them toward the relief of the poor, and if he
or they will not so be persuaded, then upon the certificat of the Parson,
Vicar, or Curate of the parish, to the Bishop of the dioces, or Ordinary of
the place, Chauncelours, or their Co^missaries, or Guardian of the
Spiritualties, the same Bishop, Ordinary, Chauncelours or Co^missaries, or
Guardian of the Spiritualties, shall send for him or them, to induce or
persuade him or them by charitable means and ways, to extend their charity
to the poor, as in this Act is well meant and intended. And if the person or
persons so sent for, of his or their froward or wylfull mind, shall
obstinately refuse to give wekely for the relief of the poor, according to
his or their habilities: that then the Bishop or Ordinary of the diocese,
Chauncelours or their Commissaries, shall have full power and authority by
virtue of this Act, to bind the said obstinate and wylfull persons so
refusing, unto the Queen by recognisaunce, in the su^me of ten pou^des, with
condition thereupon to be indorsed, that the said obstinate person so
refusyng, shall personally appear before the Justices of peace, of the County
where the same person shall then inhabit and dwell, if it be out of any City,
Borough, or Town corporate: and if it be within any City, Borough, or Town
corporate, then before the Majors, Baylyffes, or other head officers of every
such City, Borough or Town corporate, at the next general sessions to be
holden before the said Justices within the said County, or at the next Court
to be holden before the said Mayor, Baylyffes, or other head officers within
every such City, Borough, or Town corporate, and that the same obstinate
person shall not from thence depart without license of the said Justices, if he
dwell out of any City, Borough, or Town corporate: or of the said Mayor,
Baylyffes, or other head officers, if he dwell within any such City,
Borough, or Town corporate. And if any such obstinate person shall refuse to
be bound as is aforesaid: that then the said Bishop, Ordinary, Chancellor,
or Commissary, shall have authority by this Act, to commit the said
obstinate person to prison, there to remain without bail or maynprise, until
the said obstinate person shall become bound, as is aforesaid,

AND further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
Justices, or such of them as shall be at the said Sessions, or the Mayor,
Baylyffes, or other head officers of every such City, Borough, or Town
corporate, if the said obstinate person do appear before them: shall
charitablye and gentelly persuade and move the said obstinate persons, to
extend his or their charity toward the relief of the poor of the paryshe
where he or she inhabiteth and dwells, and if he or she shall obstinately and
wylfully stand in the same, and will not be persuaded therein by the said
Justices, Mayor, Baylyffes, or other head officers: that then it shall and may
be lawful to and for the said Justices, if it be out of any City, Borough, or
Town corporate, and if it be within any City, Borough, or Town corporate,
for the Mayor, Bayliffes or other head officers of the same City, Borough, or
Town corporate, with the Churchwardens where the said obstinate person shall
inhabit, or one of them, to sesse, tax, and limit upon every such obstinate
person so refusyng, according to their good discressions, what sum the said
obstinate person shall pay wekely toward the relief of the poor within the
said paryshe where he or she shall inhabit and dwell. And if the said person
so sessed and taxed, shall refuse to pay the sum that shall be so reasonablye
limited, taxed, and appointed: then the said Justices of peace, or two of
them, whereof the one to be of the Quorum, or the said Mayor, Baylyffes, or
other head officers of every such City, Borough, or Town corporate, shall
have full power and authority by virtue of this Act, upon complaynt and
certificate to them by the Collectours and Churchwardens of the same paryshe,
where the said obstinate person shall dwell, to commit the said obstinate
person and persons so refusyng to pay, to prison to the next jail, there to
remain without bail or mainprise, till he or they have paid the said su^me
so appointed, taxed, and limited, together with tharrerages thereof, if any
such shall fortune to be.

And for the better maintenance of this charitable Act and work, it is
ordained and establyshed by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that where as the late
king of famous memory king Henry the viii. his heirs or successors, or any
other person or persons, by his or their several and lawful erections and
foundations, has or have ordained and appointed any su^me or su^mes of money
to the use of the poor, or for the repayryng or amendyng of high ways or
bridges, not being taken away otherwise by Act of Parliament, whether the same
be in any Cathedral Church, College, or else where, the Bishop of the
diocese, or Chauncelour for the time being, shall from time to time, examine
how and after what manner the said money is bestowed, and to call to account
the parties which retain the said money, and thereupon to take such order, as
the same from thenceforth be distributed to the poor, according to the good
intent and purpose of the said noble king that granted the same. And if they
shall fail yearly to call to account the persons aforesaid, in form
aforesaid, and after account, to order the distribution of the said money in
manner before declared, to forfait for every such default.xx.li. to be employed
to the use of the poor, by the oversight of three Justices of the peace,
within the said county where the person that so should account dwells, to be
levied by way of distress, or otherwise, as other forfaitures in this estatute
are appointed to be levied.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, if it shall chance any
paryshe to have in it mo poor and impotent folks not able to labor, then the
said parish is able to relief: that then in every such paryshe, not standing
in any City or Town corporate, the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the said
paryshe, and two or three of the chief inhabitauntes of the same parish, and
in every City and Town corporate, the Mayor or chief officers of the same
City or Town corporat, and the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of the said paryshe,
calling to them two or three of the chief parishioners of the same parish,
such as the said Mayor or head officers shall think mete: shall certify unto
the Justices of peace of the county where the same paryshe is, the nombre and
names of the persons with which they be surcharged, and upon such certificat,
the said Justices of the peace in the same county, or two of them, whereof one
to be of the Quoru^, shall consider and examine the said certificat, as well by
the oath of those that so certified inspection of the said poor persons, to be
taken and viewed, at such day, time, and place, as to them shall be thought mete,
as by all other ways and means: and fynding the same true, after such oath
and alowaunce by inspection, shall then grant unto such and as many of the
said poor folks as by their discression they shall think good, a sufficient
license under the seal appointed for the limit, to go abroad, to beg, get,
and receive the charitable alms of the inhabitauntes of the country, out of
the said Paryshes, Cities, and Towns so surcharged: in which license,
thinfirmitie of the person, the places, towns, and paryshes to which such
poor folks are by that license licensed to resort, shall in the same license
be named, limited, and appointed, be it one Hundred or mo, in the said
County, at the said discression of the same Justices. And if any of the said
poor folks so licensed, shall transgress the limittes to them appointed, and
resort to beg at other places then is in the said license named, the party
so transgressyng and offendyng, to be taken for a valiant beggar, and punished
according to the statute made in the said.xxii. year of king Henry the eight,
and his or their license to be taken from them. And if the said Justices of
the peace shall fail to appoint a day and time for inspection of the said
poor, and examination of the said certificatours, within one month next
ensuyng the day of receipt of the said certificat, or shall grant or give
license to any person or persons so certified, to go abroad and beg, before
such time as they shall have viewed and seen the said poor persons, and have
received oath of the persons that so certified, that the said poor persons for
age, impotencie, or sickness, in their consciences, and to their knowledge, are
not able by any work or labor to earne them necessary meat, drink, and
cloth, and the same deposition put in writing, subscribed or marked by the
persons deposed, to forfaite for every such default, ten pounds, to be
employed to the use of the poor of any paryshe or paryshes within the said
County where the said Justices dwell, at the ouersyght and appointment of the
Bishop or his Chauncelour of the same diocese, to be levied in sort and form
as other forfaitures in this Statute are appointed.

And be it further enacted, that where any of the said Cities, Boroughes,
Towns corporate, or paryshe, so charged, is situate and standing in one
county or two cou^ties of this Realm, or situate and standing in one, and
immediately adioynyng to another county of the Realm, as the City of
Brystoll, and the Towns of Ludloo and Stamforde stand: that in those Cities,
the Parson, Vicar, and Curate of the said paryshe, and the said Mayor, head
officers, and inhabitauntes of every such City, Borough, Town corporate, and
paryshe, shall make certificat unto the Justices of the said counties
adioynyng to the same Cities, Boroughes, Towns corporate, and paryshes, and
the same Justices of the said adioynyng County or Counties, to do, give
license, and follow the order above remembered, according as other Justices of
the Counties in which the paryshe surcharged stands, is limited and
aucthorised to do.

And be it also enacted, that in all Cities, Boroughes, and Towns corporate,
within which be diverse paryshes, the Mayor and head officers of every the same
Cities, Boroughes, and Towns corporat, shall consider the state and ability of
every such parish. And if the same Mayor and officers shall understand by
their discretion, that the parishioners of any one of the said paryshes is of
such wealth and hauor, that they have no poverty amongst them, or be hable
sufficiently to relief the poverty of the paryshe where they inhabit and
dwell, and also to help and succor poverty else where further: that then the
said Mayor and officers, with thassent of two of the most honest and
substaunciall inhabitauntes of every such wealthy paryshe, shall consider the
nedynesse of thinhabitauntes of the other parish or parishes within the same
City or Town corporate, and move, induce, and persuade the paryshioners of
the wealthyer paryshe, charitably to contribute somewhat, according to their
ability, toward the wekely relief, succor and consolation of the poor and
nedy within the other paryshe or parishes aforesaid, where need is.

And be it also enacted, that all and every such poor folks as by any such
license, are to be licensed and aucthorised to resort out of the limittes,
liberties, and frauncheses, of all and every such City, Borough, and Town
corporate, into any the said Counties, to beg, get, and gather the
charitable alms of good people, shall at all times when the same goes abroad
to beg, wear openly upon him or them, both on the breast and the back of
his or their uppermost garment, some notable badge or token, to be assigned
unto him by the Mayor or head officers of the same City, Borough, and Town
corporate, or Paryshe, with thassent of the Justices of the peace that shall
grant the same license, upon pain to be taken for a valiant beggar, and to
be punyshed as before is remembered, and shall also carry his license with him,
upon the like pain. This Act to endure to the latter end of the first
session of the next Parliament.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that all and
every sum and sums of money, from henceforth to be collected or gathered
within the City of London and the liberties of the same, by virtue of this
Act, shall be paid over to the governors of the Hospytall called the Hospytall
of Christ's Church, within the said City of London, for the time being, and
shall be by them from time to time distributed and bestowed for the relief of
the poor of the said City, according to their wisdom and discressions: Any
thing in this Act mentioned to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that all and
every su^me and su^mes of money, from henceforth to be collected or gathered
within the City of Couentrie, and the liberties of the same, by virtue of this
Act, toward the maintenance and relief of the Hospytall of poor people,
erected in the said City, shall be paid over to such governor or governors
of the said Hospital, as now is or hereafter shall be admitted and appointed
by the Mayor and Aldermen of the said City of Couentrie, or the more part of
them, for the time being. And such governor or governors so admitted and
appointed as aforesaid, shall from time to time, distribute and bestow, for
the relief of thaforesayde poor within the said City, the said sum or
sums of money, according to their wysdomes and discressions: Any thing
mentioned in this Act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, that the Curate, Minister, or
Reader, together with the Wardens of every Chapel of ease, and where no
Wardens are, the Warden or two of the chiefest of the inhabitauntes resortyng
and frequentyng the said Chapel of ease for hearing divine service, the same
inhabitauntes to be nominated and chosen by the same Curate, Minister, or
Reader: And also the Collectours, and all and every other person and persons to
whom in this behalf it shall appertain by force of this estatute, shall do,
execute, perform, and be liable to all and every such ordinance, clause,
article, sentence, and penalties specified and contained in this present Act,
for and toward the relief of the poor, in like manner and form, as the
Vicar, Curate, Churchwardens, and Collectours of every paryshe Church, shall,
may, or ought to do by force of this Act, according to the purport and true
meaning of the same, and not to be compellable to come or resort to their
Paryshe Church for the same only purpose or intent: Any thing in this Act
before specified to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also that this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not in any
wise extend or be prejudicial to any gift, legacy, conueyaunce or
assignement of any manner of lands or other profit heretofore given, assigned,
or bequeathed to the relief of the poor, reparation of high ways, or
bridges, upon any manner of condition: but that the same shall be employed,
converted, bestowed, and accounted for, in such manner and form, and upon such
condition, as the same lawfully was or ought to be, before the making of this
Act.

An Act touching diverse orders for Artificers, Laborers, servants of
husbandry, and apprentises. The.iiii. Chapter.
ALthough there remain and stand in force presently a great number of Acts
and statutes concerning the reteynyng, departing, wages, and orders of
apprentices, servants, and laborers, as well in husbandry as in diverse other
arts, mysteries and occupations: yet partly for the imperfection and
contrariety that is found and do appear in sundry of the said laws, and for
the variety and number of them, and chiefly for that the wages and alowaunces
limited and rated in many of the said statutes, are in diverse places to small,
and not aunswerable to this time, respecting the advancement of prices of all
things belonging to the said servants and laborers, the said laws can not
conuenie^tly, without the great grief and burden of the poor labourer and
hired man, be put in good and due execution. And as the said several acts and
statutes were at the time of ye making of the^, thought to be very good and
beneficial for the common wealth of this Realm: (as diverse of the^ yet are)
So if the substance of as many of the said laws as are mete to be continued,
shall be digested and reduced into one sole law and statute, and in the same an
uniform order prescribed and limited, concerning the wages and other orders
for appre^tises, servants, and laborers, there is good hope yt it will come
to pass, that ye same law (being duly executed) should banyshe ydlenes,
advance husbandry, and yield unto the hired person both in the time of
scarsitie, and in the time of plenty, a convenient proportion of wages.

Be it therefore enacted by thaucthoritie of this present parliament, that as
much of all the estatutes heretofore made, and every branch of the^, as touch
or concern the hiring, keeping, departing, working, wages, or order of
servants, workmen, artificers, apprentices and laborers, or any of them, and
the penalties and forfaitures concerning the same, shall be from and after the
last day of September next ensuing, repealed and utterly void and of none
effect, and that all the said statutes and every branch thereof, for any matter
contained in them, and not repealed by this statute, shall remain and be in
full force and effect: Any thing in this statute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AND be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no manner of
person or persons after the foresaid last day of September now next ensuyng,
shall reteyne, hyre, or take into service, or cause to be retained, hired, or
taken into service, nor any person shall be retained or hired, or taken into
service by any means or color, to work for any less, time or term, then
for one hole year, in any of the sciences, crafts, mysteries, or arts of
Clothyers, Woollen cloth weauers, Tuckers, Fullers, Clotheworkers, Sheremen,
Dyers, Hosiers, Taillers, Shomakers, Tanners, Pewterers, Bakers, Brewers,
Glouers, Cutlers, Smythes, Farrors, Curryers, Sadlers, Spurryers, Turners,
Cappers, Hatmakers, or Felt makers, Bowyers, Fletchers, Arrowhead makers,
Butchers, Cooks, or Myllers.

And be it further enacted, that every person being unmarried, and every other
person being under the age of.xxx. years, that after the feast of Easter next
shall marry, and having ben brought up in any of the said arts, crafts, or
sciences, or that has used or exercised any of them by the space of three
years or more, and not having lands, tenementes, rentes, or hereditamentes,
copy hold, or free hold, of one estate of inheritance, or for term of any
life or lives, of the clear yearly value of.xl.s. nor being worth of his own
goods the clear value of.x.li. and so allowed by two Justices of the peace, of
the county where he has most commonly inhabited by the space of one hole
year, and under their hands and seals, or by the Mayor or other head officer
of the city, borough, or town corporate, where such person has most commonly
dwelled by the space of one whole year, and two Aldermen, or two other discrete
Burgesses of the same city, borough, or town corporate if there be no
Aldermen, under their hands and seals, nor being retained with any person in
husbandry, or in any of the aforesaid arts and sciences, according to this
Statute, nor lawfully retained in any other art or science, nor being lawfully
retained in householde, or in any office with any noble man, gentelman, or
others, according to the laws of this Realm, nor having a convenient ferme,
or other holdyng in tyllage, whereupon he may employ his labor: shall (during
the time that he or they shall so be unmarried, or under the said age of.xxx.
years, upon request made by any person vsyng the art or mystery wherein the said
person so required has been exercised, as is aforesaid) be retained, and shall
not refuse to serve, according to the tenor of this Statute, upon the pain and
penalty hereafter mentioned.

And be it further enacted, that no person which shall reteyne any servant,
shall put away his or her said servant, and that no person retained according
to this Statute, shall depart from his master, maistres, or dame, before the
end of his or her term, upon the pain hereafter mentioned, unless it be
for some reasonable and sufficient cause or matter, to be allowed before two
Justices of peace, or one at the least, within the said County, or before the
Mayor or other chief officer of the City, Borough, or Town corporate,
wherein the said master, maistres, or dame inhabiteth, to whom any of the
parties grieved shall complain, which said Justices or Justice, Mayor, or
chief office, shall have, and take upon them or him, the hearing and orderyng
of the matter, betwixt the said master, maistres, or dame, and servant,
according to the equity of the cause. And that no such master, maistres, or
dame, shall put away any such servant at the end of his term, or that any such
servant shall depart from his said master, maistres or dame, at the end of his
term, without one quarter warnyng given before the end of his said term,
either by the said master, maistres, or dame, or servant, the one to the
other, upon the pain hereafter ensuyng.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that every person
between the age of.xii. years, and the age of threescore years, not being
lawfully retained, nor apprentice with any Fysherman or Mariner haunting the
seas, nor being in service with any kyddyer or carier of any corn, grain, or
meal, for provision of the City of London, nor with any husbandman in
husbandrye, nor in any City, Town corporate, or market Town, in any of the
arts or sciences limited or appointed by this estatute to have or take
apprentices, nor being retained by the year, or half the year at the least,
for the dyggyng, sekyng, fyndyng, gettyng, meltyng, fynyng, working, trying,
making of any Silver, Tin, Lead, Iron, Copper, Stone, Sea cole, Stone cole,
Moore cole, or Cherk cole, nor being occupied in or about ye making of any
glass, nor being a gentelma^ borne, nor being a student or scoller in any of
the universities, or in any scoole, nor having lands, tenements, rentes, or
hereditamentes, for term of life, or of one estate of inheritance, of the
clear yearly value of.xl.s. nor being worth in goods and cattels to the value
of.x.li. nor having a father or mother then living, or other auncestour, whose
heir apparaunt he is, then having lands, tenementes, or hereditaments, of the
yearly value of.x.li. or above, or goods or cattels of the value of.xl. li.
nor being a necessary or convenient officer, or servant lawfully retained as
is aforesaid, nor having a convenient ferme, or holdyng whereupon he may or
shall employe his labor, nor being otherwise lawefully retained, according to
the true meaning of this statute: shall after the foresaid last day of
September now next ensuing, by virtue of this estatute, be compelled to be
retained to serve in husbandrye by the year, with any person that keeps
husbandry, and will require any such person so to serve, within the same shire
where he shall be so required.

AND be it further enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that
if any person after he has retained any servant, shall put away the same
servant before the end of his term, unless it be for some reasonable and
sufficient cause, to be allowed as is aforesaid, or if any such master,
maistres, or dame, shall put away any such servant at the end of his term,
without one quarters warnyng given before the said end, as is above remembered:
that then every such master, maistres, or dame so offending, unless he or
they be able to prove by two sufficient witnesses such reasonable and
sufficient cause of putting away of their servant or servants during their
term, or a quarters warnyng given before the end of the said term, as is
beforesaid, before the Justices of Oyer and terminer, Justices of assise,
Justices of the peace in the quarter Sessions, or before the Mayor or other
head officer of any city, borough, or town corporate, and two Aldermen, or
two other discrete Burgeses of the same city, borough or town corporate, if
there be no Aldermen, or before the Lord president and counsel established in
the marches of Wales, or before the Lord president and counsel for the time
being established in the North parties, shall forfait the su^me of xl.s. And if
any servant retained according to the form of this estatute, depart from his
master, mastres, or dames service before the end of his term, unless it be
for some reasonable and sufficient cause to be allowed as is aforesaid, or if
any servant at thend of his term depart from his said master, mastres, or
dames service, without one quarters warning given before thend of his said
term, in form aforsaid, and before.ii. lawful witnesses, or if any person or
persons co^pelable and bounden to be retained and to serve in husbandry, or in
any other the arts, sciences or mysteries above remembered, by the year or
otherwise, do (upon request made) refuse to serve for the wages yt shall be
limited, rated, and appointed, according to ye form of this statute, or
promise or covenant to serve, and do not serve according to ye tenor of ye
same: that the^ every servant so departing away, and every person so refusing
to serve for such wages, upon complaint thereof made by the master, mastres or
dame of ye said servant, or by the party, to or with who^ ye said refusal is
made, or promis not kept, to.ii. Justices of the peace of the county, or to ye
Mayor or other head officer of the city, borough, town corporate, and.ii.
Aldermen, or.ii. other discrete Burgesses of ye same city, borough or town
corporat, if there be no Alderme^, where the said master, mastres, or dame, or
the said party to or with who^ ye said refusal is made and promis not kept
dwells, or to either of the said Lords presidentes and counsel of Wales, and
the North, the said Justices, lords presidentes and counsels, and also the
said Majors or other head officers, and other persons of cities, boroughes or
towns corporate, or any of the^, as is aforesaid, shall have power by force of
this statute, to hear and examine the matter, and fyndyng the said servant
or the said party so refusyng, faulty in the premises, upon such proufes and
good matter, as to their discressio^s shall be thought sufficient, to commit him
or them to ward, there to remain without bail or maynpryse, until the said
servant or party so offendyng, shall be bound to the party to whom thoffence
shall be made, to serve and continue with him for the wages that then shall be
limited and appointed, according to the tenor and fourm of this estatute, and
to be discharged upon his delyuery, without paying any fee to the gayler where
he or they shall be so imprisoned.

AND be it likewise enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that none of the said
retained persons in husbandry, or in any the arts or sciences above remembered,
after the time of his reteynour expired, shall depart forth of one City, Town,
or Parish, to another, nor out of the Lathe, Rape, Wapentake, or Hundred, nor
out of the County or Shire where he last served, to serve in any other City,
Town corporate, Lathe, Rape, Wapentake, Hundred, Shire, or County, unless he
have a testimonial under the Seal of the said City or Town corporate, or of
the Constable or Constables, or other head officer or officers, and of two
other honest householders of the City, Town, or Paryshe where he last served,
declaring his lawefull departure, and the name of the Shire and place where he
dwelled last before his departure, according to the form hereafter expressed
in this Act, which certificat or testimonial shall be written and delivered
unto the said servant, and also registered by the Parson, Vicar, or Curate of
the paryshe where such master, maistres, or dame does or shall dwell, taking
for the doing thereof ii.d. and not above, and the form thereof shall be as
follows: Memorand. that A B. late servant to C D. of E. husbandman, or
Taillour.etc. in the said County, is licensed to depart from his said
master, and is at his liberty to serve else where, according to the Statute in
that case made and provided. In witness whereof.etc. dated the day, month,
year, and place.etc. of the making thereof.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no person or
persons that shall depart out of service, shall be retained or accepted into any
other service, without showing before his reteinor such testimonial as is above
remembered, to the chief officer of the town corporate: and in every other
town and place, to the Constable, Curate, Churchwarden or other head officer
of the same where he shall be retained to serve, upon the pain that every such
servant so departing without such certificat or testimonial, shall be
imprisoned, until he procure a testimonial or certificat, the which if he
cannot do within the space of.xxi. days next after the first day of his
imprisonment: then the said person to be whipped and used as a vacanbond,
according to ye laws in such cases provided. And that every person reteyning
any such servant without showing such testimonyall of certificat, as is
aforesaid, shall forfeyte for every such offense five pounds. And if any
such person shall be taken with any counterfeyte or forged testimonial, then to
be whipped as a vagabound.

And be it further enacted, by the auctoritye aforesaid, that all artificers
and laborers, being hired for wages, by the day or week, shall betwixt the
mids of the months of March and September, be and continue at their work,
at or before five of the cloak in the morning, and continue at work, and not
depart, until betwixt seven and eight of the clock at night (except it be in
the time of breakefast, dynner, or drinking, the which times at the most,
shall not excede above two hours and a half in the day, that is to say, at
every drinking, one half hour, for his dynner one hour, and for his sleep
when he is allowed to sleep, the which is from the myddest of May, to the
myddest of August, half an hour at the most, and at every breakefast one
half hour, and all the said artifiters and laborers, between the myddest of
September, and the midst of March, shall be and continue at their work, from
the spring of the day in the morning, until the night of the same day,
except it be in time before appointed for breakefast and dynner, upon pain to
lose and forfeyte one penny for every hours absence; to be deducted and
defaulked out of his wages, that shall so offend.

And be it also enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every artificer and
laborer, that shall be lawfully retained in, or for the buyldyng or reparyng of
any Church, House, Ship, Mylne, or every other piece of work taken in great,
in task or in gross, or that shall hereafter take upon him to make or
fynyshe any such thing or work, shall continue, and not depart from the
fame, onles it be for not payinge of his wages or hyer agreed on, or otherwise
lawefully taken or appointed to serve the Queen's Majesty, her heirs or
successors, or for other lawful cause, or without lycense of the master or
owner of the work, or of him that has the charge thereof, before the finishyng
of the said work, upon pain of imprisonment by one month without bail or
mainprise, and the forfeyture of the sum of five pounds to the party, from
whom he shall so depart, for the which the said party may have his action
of debte against him that shall so depart, in any of the Queen's Majesty's
courts of record, over and besides such ordinary costs and damages, as may or
ought to be recovered, by the comen laws, for or concerning any such
offense. In which action, no protection, wager of law; or essoygne, shall be
admitted. And that no other artificer or laborer retained in any service, to
work with the Queen's Majesty, or any other person, depart not from her said
Majesty, or from the said other person, until such time as the work be
fynished, if the person so reteynynge the artificer or laborer so long will
have him and pay him his wages, or other duties, upon pain of imprisonment of
every person, so departing, by the space of one month.

And for the declaration and lymitation, what wages servants, laborers and
artificers, either by the year or day, or otherwise shall have and receive:
Be it enacted, by the auctoritye of this present Parliamente, that the Justices
of peace of every shyre, riding, and liberty, within the lymittes of their
several commissions, or the more part of them, being then resyant within the
same, and the Sheriff of that County, if he conveniently may, and every
Mayor, Baylyfe, or other head officer within any City or town corporate,
wherein is any Justice of peace within the lymittes of the said City, or
town corporate, and of the said corporation, shall before the tenth day of
June, next coming, and afterward, shall yearly at every general Sessions
first to beeholden and kept after Easter, or at sometime convenient, within
six wekes next following every of the said feasts of Easter, assemble them
selves together, and they (so assembled) calling unto them such discrete and
grave persons of the said County, or of the said City or town corporate, as
they shall think mete, and confetrynge together, respectynge the plenty or
scarsitie of the time, and other circumstaunces necessaryly to be considered,
shall have auctoritye by virtue hereof, within the lymittes and precinctes of
their several commissions, to lymit, rate, and appointe the wages, as well of
such and so many of the said artificers, handy crafts men, husbandmen, or
any other laborer, servant, or woorkemen, whose wages in time past has been
by any law or statute rated and appointed, as also the wages of all other
laborers, artificers, workmen, or apprentices of husbandry, which have not
ben rated, as they the same Justices, Majors, or head officers within their
several commissions or liberties, shall think mete, by their discressions to
be rated, lymitted or appointed, by the year, or by the day, weke, monethe,
or otherwise, with meat and drink, or without meat and drink, and what
wages every workman or laborer shall take by the great, for mowynge, reapynge
or thresshynge of corn and grain, and for mowynge or making of hey, or for
ditchinge, palynge, raylynge, or hedgynge, by the rod, perch, lugge, yard,
pole, rope, or foot, and for any other kind of reasonable labors or service,
and shall yerelye before the xii. day of Iulye, next after the said
assessement and rates so appointed and made, certify the same, ingrosed in
parchement with ye considerations and causes thereof, under their hands and
seals, into the Queen's most honorable Court of Chauncery, whereupon it shall be
lawefull to the lord Chauncelour of England, or L. keeper of the great seal
for the time being, upon declaration thereof, to the Queen's Majesty, her
heirs or successors, or to the Lords and others of the pryuye Council, for
the time being, attendaunt upon their persons, to cause to be printed and sent
down before the first day of September next after the said certificat,
into every Countye, to the Sheriff, and Justices of peace there, and to the
said Mayor, bayliffes and head officers, ten or twelve proclamations or
more, conteynyng in every of them; the several rates appointed by the said
Justices, and other head officers as is aforesaid, with commandment by the
said proclamations to all persons, in the name of the Queen's Majesty, her
heirs or successors, straightlye to observe the same, and to all Justices,
Sheriffs, and other officers, to see the same duly and severely observed,
upon the danger of the punishment and forfeytures lymitted and appointed by
this estatute. Upon receypte whereof, the said Sherifes, Justices of peace,
and the Mayor and head officer in every City or town corporate, shall cause
the same proclamation to be entered of record, by the clerk of the peace, or by
the clerk of the City or town corporate: and the said Sheriffs, Justices,
and other the said Mayor and head officers, shall forthwith in open
markettes, upon the market days before Michelmas then ensuynge, cause the same
proclamation to be proclaimed in every City or market town, within the
lymittes of their Commission, and the same proclamation to be fixed in some
convenient place of the said City and town, or in such of the most occupied
market towns, as to the said Sherifes, Justices of peace, and to the said
Mayor and head officer, shall be thought mete.

And if the said Sherifes, Justices of peace, or the Mayor and head officers,
shall at their said general Sessions, or at any time after, within six
weeks then following, upon their assembly and conference together, think it
convenient to reteyne and keep for the year then to come, the rates and
proportion of wages, that they certifyed the year before, or to change or
reform them, or some part of them: then they shall before the said.xii. day
of July, yearly certify into the said Court of Chauncerye their resolutions
and determinations therein, to the intent that proclamations may accordynglye
be renewed and sent down. And if it shall happen that there be no need of any
reformation or alteration of the rates of the said wages, but that the former
shall be thought mete to be continued: then the proclamations for the year past,
shall remain in force until new proclamations, upon new rates concerning
the said wages, shall be sent down, according to the form of this Estatute.

And be it further enacted by authority of this present Parlyament, that if
all the said Justices of peace, resiant within Countyes, where they are or
shall be Justices of peace, Majors and head officers, do not before the tenth
day of June next coming, and afterward, yearelye appear and assemble at
the said general Sessions, or within six weeks next after the said
general Sessions, and lymitte, and rate the wages of the said servants and
laborers, or shall not consider whether the former rates made, be mete to be
continued, or to be altered, and reformed in manner and form aforesaid, or
be negligent, or remiss in the certificat thereof in form above written: that
then every Justice of peace of the County, and every Mayor and head officer of
the City or town corporate, in whom any such defaulte or negligence shall be
found, being within the said county, City or town corporate, at the time
of the said next assemblye, or at the time of the said Sessions, or at the
times of the said rates of wages to be set, within six wekes next after
every such Sessions, and not visited with any such sickness, as he could
not travel thither without peril and danger of his life, or not having any
other lawful and good excuse to be allowed by the Justices, then assembled for
the ratinge and taxynge of wages, as is aforesaid, or by the more part of
them, upon a corporal oath and affidauit to be taken and made openly before
the said Justices upon the holy Evangelists, by some credyble person,
assessed and taxed in the book of Subsedye of that County, to the clear
value of five pounds at the least, or by such other person as the most part
of such Justices shall allow and accept to take such oath: shall for such
defaulte or negligence, forfeyte unto the Queens Majesty, her heirs and
successors, ten pounds of laweful money of England.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person,
after the said proclamation shall be so sent down, and published, shall by any
secret ways or means, directly, or indirectly, reteyne, or keep any servant,
workman or laborer, or shall give any more, or greater wages, or other
commodity contrary to the true intent and purporte of this statute, or
contrary to the rates or wages that shall be assessed or appointed in the said
proclamations: that then every person that shall so offend, and be thereof
lawfully convicted before any the Justices, or other head officers above
remembered, or either of the said Presidentes and Councelles, shall suffer
imprisonment by the space of ten days, without bail or maynepryce, and
shall lose and forfeyte five pounds, of lawful money of England. And that
every person, that shall be so retained and take wages, contrary to this
estatute, or any branch thereof, or of the said proclamation, and shall be
thereof convicted before the Justices aforesaid, or any two of them, or before
the Mayor, or other head officers aforesaid, shall suffer imprisonment, by the
space of.xxi. days, without bail or mayneprice. And that every reteyner,
promise, gift, or payment of wages, or other thing whatsoever, contrary to
the true meaning of this estatute, and every writing and bond to be made for
that purpose, shall be utterly void, and of none effect.

And be it enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that if any servant,
workman, or laborer, shall wilfully or maliciously make any assault, or
affray, upon his Master, Maistres, or dame, or upon any other, that shall at
the time of such assault or affray, have the charge or oversight of any such
servant, workman, or laborer, or of the work wherein the said servant,
workman, or laborer is appointed or hyered to work, and being thereof
convicted before any two of the Justices, Mayor, or head officer aforesaid,
where the said offense is committed, or before either of the said Lords
Presidents, and Council before remembered, by confession of the said servant,
workman, or laborer, or by the testimony, witness, and oath of two honest
men: that then every such offender, shall suffer imprisonment by the space of
one hole year or less, by the discression of two Justices of peace, if it be
without a town corporate: and if it be within any town corporate, then by the
discression of the Mayor, or head officer of the same town corporate, with two
others of the discretest persons of the same corporation at the least. And if
the offense shall require further punishment, then to receive such other open
punishment, so as it extend not to life, nor lymme, as the Justices of peace in
open Sessions, or the more part of them, or the said Mayor, or head officer,
and six, or four at the least, of the discretest persons of the same
corparation, before whom the offense shall be examined, shall think convenient
for the quality of the said offense so done and committed.

Provided always, and be it enacted, by the aucthoritye aforesaid, that in
the time of hey or corn harvest, the Justices of peace, and every of them, and
also the Constable or other head officer of every towneship, upon request, and
for the avoiding of the loss of any corn, grain, or hey, shall and may cause
all such artificers and persons, as be mete to labor, by the discressions of
the said Justices or Constables, or other head officers, or by any of them, to
serve by the day, for the mowing, reapyng, shearing, gettyng, or Innyng of
corn, grain and hey, according to the skill and qualitye of the person, and
that none of the said persons shall refuse so to do, upon pain to suffer
imprisonment in the stocks, by the space of two days and one night. And the
Constable of the town, or other head officer of the same, where the said
refusal shall be made, upon complainte to him made, shall have auctoritye by
virtue hereof, to set the said offendour in the stocks, for the time
aforesaid, and shall punish him accordingly, upon pain to lose and forfeyte
for not doing thereof, the sum of.xl.s.

Provided also, that all persons of the counties where they have accustomed to
go into other Shires for harvest work, and having at that time no harvest
work sufficient in the same town nor county, where he or they dwelt in the
winter then last past, bringing with him or them a testimonial under the hand
and seal of one Justice of the peace of the shyre, or other head officer of
the town or place that he or they come from, testifiynge the same, for the
which he shall pay not above one penny (other then such persons as shall be
retained in service, according to the form of this estatute) may repair and
resort in harvest of hey or corn, from the countries wherein their dwelling
places are, into any other place or County, for the only mowynge, reapynge and
getting of hey, corn and grain, and for the only workyng of harvest works,
as they might have done before the making of this estatute: Any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the auctoritye aforesaid, that two Justices of
peace, ye Mayor, or other head officer of any city, borough or town
corporate, and two Aldermen: or two other discrete Burgeses of the same City,
borough, or town corporate, if there be no Aldermen, shall and may by virtue
hereof, appoint any such woman, as is of the age of.xii. years, and under the
age of.xl. years, and unmarried, and forth of service, as they shall think
meet to serve, to be retained or serve by the year, or by the weke or day, for
such wages, and in such reasonable sort and manner, as they shall think mete.
And if any such woman shall refuse so to serve, then it shall be lawful for the
said Justices of peace, Mayor or head officers, to commit such woman to ward,
until she shall be bounden to serve, as is aforesaid.

And for the better advancement of husbandry and tillage, and to the intent
that such as are fyt to be made apprentices to husbandry, may be bounden
thereunto: Be it enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that
every person being an householder, and having, and using half a ploughe land
at the least in tillage: may have and receive as an apprentice, any person
above the age of ten years, and under the age of.xviii. years, to serve in
husbandry, until his age of xxi. years at the least, or until the age
of.xxiiii. years, as the parties can agree, and the said reteynour and taking
of an apprentice, to be made and done by indenture.

And be it further enacted, that every person being an householder, and.xxiiii.
years old at the least, dwelling, or inhabityng, or which shall dwell and
inhabit in any city or town corporate, and using, and exercisyng any art,
mystery or manuell occupation there, shall and may after the feast of Saint
John Baptist next coming, during the time that he shall so dwell or
inhabit, in any such City or town corporate, and use, and exercise any such
art, mystery or manuell occupacion: have and reteyne the son of any free man,
not occupying husbandry, nor being a labourer, and inhabiting in the same, or
in any other City or town, that now is, or hereafter shall be, and continue
incorporate, to serve and be bound as an apprentice, after the custom and
order of the City of London, for seven years at the least, so as the term and
years of such apprentice, do not expire or determine, before such apprentice
shall be of the age of.xxiiii. years at the least.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that it shall not be lawful to any
person dwelling in any City or town corporate, using or exercisynge any of
the mysteries, or crafts of a merchant trafficquinge by trafficque, or trade
into any the parts beyond the Sea, Mercer, Draper, Goldsmyth, Irenmonger,
Inbroderer, or Clothear, that does or shall put clothe to making and sale, to
take any apprentice or servant, to be enstructed or taught in any of the
arts, occupations, crafts or mysteries, which they or any of them do use or
exercise, except such servant or apprentice be his son, or else that the
father or mother of such apprentice or servant, shall have at the time of
taking of such apprentice or servant, lands, tenements, or other
hereditamentes, of the clear yearly value of.xl.s. of one estate of
enheritaunce, or free hold at the least, to be certified under the hands and
seals of three Justices of the peace, of the shire or Shires, where the said
lands, tenementes, or other hereditamentes, do or shall lie, to the Mayor,
Bailyf, or other head officers of such City or town corporate, and to be
enrowled among the records there.

And be it further enacted, that from and after the said feast of Saint John
the Baptist next, it shall be lawful to every person being an householder,
and.xxiiii. years old at the least, and not occupying husbandry, nor being a
laborer, dwellinge or inhabitynge, or that shall hereafter dwell, or inhabit in
any town, not being incorporate, that now is, or hereafter shall be a market
town, so long as the same shall be wekely used and kept as a market town, and
vsyng or exercisynge any art, mysterye, or manuell occupation, during the
time of his abode there, and so vsyng, and exercisyng such art, mystery, or
manuell occupation as aforesaid, to have in like manner to apprentice, or
apprentices, the child or children of any other artificer, or artificers, not
occupying husbandry, nor being laborer, which now do, or hereafter shall
inhabyte or dwell in the same, or in any other such market town, within the
same Shyre, to serve as apprentice, or apprentices, as is aforesaid, to any
such art, mystery, or manuell occupation, as has been usually exercised in
any such market town, where such apprentice shall be bound in manner and form
above said.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that it shall not be lawful to any
person, dwelling or inhabitynge in any such market town, vsinge or
exercisynge the feate, mystery, or art of a merchant, trafficquinge or trading
into the parties beyond the Seas, Mercer, Draper, Goldsmith, Irenmonger,
Imbroderer, or Clothear, that does, or shall put cloth to making and sale, to
take any apprentice, or in any wise to teach or instruct any person in the
arts, sciences, or mysteries last before recited, after the feast of Saint
John Baptist aforesaid, except such servant or apprentice shall be his son, or
else that the father or mother of such apprentice, shall have lands,
tenementes, or other hereditamentes, at the time of taking of such apprentice,
of the clear yearly value of three pounds, of one estate of inheritance, or
freeholde, at the least, to be certifyed under the hands and seals of three
Justices of the peace, of the Shyre or shyres where the said lands,
tenementes, and other hereditamentes, do or shall lie, to the head officers, or
head officer of such market town, where such apprentice or servant shall be
taken, there to be enrolled by such head officer, always to remain of
record.

And be it further enacted, that from and after the said feast, it shall be
lawful to any person, using or exercisinge the art or occupation of a Smith,
whelewright, Plowewright, Mylwright, Carpenter, Rough mason, Plasterer, Sawyer,
Lyme burner, Brycke maker, Bricklayer, Tyler, Slater, Helyer, Tylemaker, Linen
weuer, Turner, Couper, Myllers, Earthen potters, Woollen weuer, weuinge huswyfes
or household cloth only, and none other cloth, Fuller, otherwise called Tucker,
or walker, burner of ore and woade ashes, Thatcher, or Shingler, wheresoever he
or they shall dwell, or inhabit, to have or receive the son of any person,
as apprentice, in manner and form aforesaid, to be taught and instructed in
these occupations only, and in none other, albeit the father or mother of any
such apprentice have not any lands, tenementes, nor hereditamentes.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that after the first
day of May, next coming, it shall not be lawful to any person or persons,
other then such as now do lawfully use or exercise any art, mystery, or
manuell occupation, to set up, occupye, use, or exercise any craft, mystery or
occupation, now used or occupied within the Realm of England, or Wales,
except he shall have been brought up therein seven years at the least as
apprentice, in manner and form above said, nor to set any person on work in
such mystery, art, or occupation, being not a workman at this day, except he
shall have been apprentice, as is aforesaid, or else having served as an
apprentice, as is aforesaid, shall or will become a Iorneyman, or be hired by
the year, upon pain that every person willingly offendinge, or doing the
contrary, shall forfeit and lose for every default.xl.s. for every month.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that
no person or persons, using or exercisyng the art or mystery of a woollen cloth
weuer, other then such as be inhabityng within the counties of Cumberland,
Westmerland, Lancaster, and Wales, weauing Fryzes, Cottons, or houswyfes cloth
only, making and weauing woollen cloth, commonly sold, or to be sold by any
clothe man or clothear: shall take and have any apprentice, or shall teach, or
in any wise instruct any person or persons, in the science, art or occupation
of weauinge aforesaid, in any village, town or place (Cities, towns
corporate, and market towns only except) unless such person be his son, or
else that the father or mother of such apprentice or servant, shall at the
time of the taking of such person or persons to be an apprentice or servant,
or to be so instructed, have lands and tenementes, or other hereditamentes, to
the clear yearly value of three pounds, at the least, of an estate of
inheritance or frehold, to be certifyed under the hands and seals of three
Justices of the peace, of the Shire or shires where the said lands,
tenementes, and other hereditamentes, do or shall lie. The effect of the
indenture, to be registered within three months, in the parish where such
master shall dwell, and to pay for such registringe.iiii.v. upon pain of
forfeyture of.xx.s. for every month that any person shall otherwise take any
apprentice, or set any such person on work, contrary to the meaning of this
article.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that all and every
person or persons, that shall have three apprentices in any of the said
crafts, mysteries, or occupations, of a clothmaker, Fuller, Shereman, Weuer,
Tailor, or shomaker, shall reteyne and keep one Iorneyman, and for every other
apprentice, above the number of the said three apprentices, one other
Iorneyman, upon pain for every default therein ten pounds.

Provided always, that this act nor any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to prejudice or hinder any liberties heretofore granted by any act of
Parliament, to or for the company and occupation of Worsted makers, and
Worsted weuers within the City of Norwych, and else where within the County of
Northfolck, which liberties be in force, until the beginning of this present
Parlyament: Any thing herein contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, that if any person shall be required by any
householder, having and using half a ploughe land, at the least in tyllage,
to be an apprentice, and to serve in husbandry, or in any other kind of art,
mystery, or science before expressed, and shall refuse so to do: that then upon
the complaint of such housekeeper, made to one Justice of the peace, of the
County wherein the said refusal is or shall be made, or of such householder
inhabitinge in any City, town corporate, or market town, to the Mayor,
Bayliffes, or head officer of the said City, town corporat, or market town,
if any such refusal shall there be, they shall have full power and authority
by virtue hereof, to send for the same person so refusyng: And if the said
Justice, or the said Mayor or head officer, shall think the said person mete
and convenient to serve as an apprentice in that art, labor, science, or
mystery, wherein he shall be so then required to serve: That then the said
Justice, or the said Mayor or head officer, shall have power and auctoritye by
virtue hereof, if the said person refuse to be bound as an apprentice, to
commit him unto ward, there to remain until he be contented, and will be
bounden to serve as an apprentice should serve, according to the true intent
and meaning of this present act.

And if any such master shall mysuse or evil entreat his apprentice, or
that the said apprentice shall have any just cause to complain, or the
apprentice do not his duty to his master: Then the said master, or
prentice, being grieved and having cause to complain, shall repair unto one
Justice of peace, within the said County, or to the Mayor or other head
officer of the City, town corporate, market town, or other place where the
said master dwells, who shall by his wisdom and discretion take such order
and direction between the said master and his apprentice, as the equity of
the cause shall require. And if for want of good conformity in the said
master, the said Justice of the peace, or the said Mayor or head officer,
can not compound, and agree the matter between him and his apprentice: then the
said Justice, or the said Mayor, or other head officer, shall take band of
the said master, to appear at the next Sessions, then to be holden in the
said County, or within the said City, town corporat, or market town, to be
before the Justices of the said County, or the Mayor or head officer of the
said town corporate, or market town, if the said master dwell within any
such, and upon his apparaunce, and hearing of the matter before the said
Justices, or the said Mayor, or other head officer, if it be thought mete unto
them, to discharge the said apprentice of his apprenticehod, that then the
said Justices or four of them at the least, whereof one to be of them Quoru^,
or the said Mayor or other head officer, with the consent of three other of his
brethren, or men of best reputation within the said City, town corporate or
market town, shall have power by authority hereof, in writing under their
hands and seals, to pronounce and declare, that they have discharged the
said apprentice of his apprenticehode, and they cause thereof, and the said
writing so being made and enrolled by the clerk of the peace, or town clerk,
among the records that he keeps, shall be a sufficient discharge for the said
apprentice against his master, his executours and administratours, the
indenture of the said apprenticehode, or any law or custom to the contrary
notwithstanding. And if the defaulte shall be found to be in the apprentice,
then the said Justices, or the said Mayor, or other head officer, with the
assistentes aforesaid, shall cause such due correction, and punishment to be
ministered unto him, as by their wisdom and discretions shall be thought mete.

Provided always, and be it enacted, by authority of this present
Parlyament, that no person shall by force or color of this estatute, be
bounden to enter into any apprenticeship, other then such as be under the age
of.xxi. years. And to the end that this estatute, may from time to time be
carefully diligently put in good execution, according to the tenure and true
meaning thereof:

Be it enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that the Justices of
peace of every County, deuidyng them selves into several lymittes, and
likewise every Mayor and head officer of any City, or town corporat, shall
yearly between the feast of Saint Michaell the Archangel, and the Nativity of
our Lord, and between the feast of the Annunciation of our Lady, and the feast
of the Nativity of Saint John the Baptist, by all such ways and means, as to
their wysdomes shall be thought most mete, make a special and diligent inquiry
of the branches and articles of this estatute, and of the good execution of
the same, and where they shall find any defaultes, to see the same severely
corrected and punished, without favor, affection, malice or displeasure.

And in consideration of the pains and travel that the said Justices of
peace, and the said Mayor, and head officer, shall take and sustain, in, and
about the execution of this estatute, it is further ordained and enacted, by
authority of this present Parlyament, that every Justice of peace, Mayor, or
head officer, for every day that he shall sit in, and about the execution of
this estatute, shall have allowed unto him five shyllinges, to be allowed and
paid unto him, or unto the said Mayor or head officer, of the fynes and
forfeitours of the pains and penalties that shall be forfeited, and due unto the
Queens Majesty, her heirs or successors, by force of this estatute, in such
manner and form, as the said Justices have been heretofore commonly paid, for
their coming and charges at the quarter Sessions, so that the sytting of the
said Justices, or Mayor, or head officer, be not at any one time above.iii.
days, and for the matters contained in this estatute.

And be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that the one half of all
forfeytures and penalties, expressed and mentioned in this statute, other then
such as are expressly otherwise appointed, shall be to our sovereign Lady the
Queen's Majesty, her heirs and successors; and the other moytie to him or them
that shall sue for the same, in any of the Queen's Majesty's Courts of record,
or before any of the Justices of Oyer and terminer, or before any other
Justices, or President and Counsel before remembered, by action of debte,
Information, bill of complainte, or otherwise: in which actions or suites, no
protection, wager of law or, essoygne shall be allowed, and that the said
Justices, or two of them, whereof one to be of the Quorum, and the said
Presidentes and Counsel as is aforesaid, and the said Majors, or other head
officers of Cities or towns corporate, shall have full power and authority to
hear and determine al and every offense and offenses, that shall be committed or
done against this estatute, or against any branch thereof, as well upon
indictment to be taken before them, in the Sessions of the peace, as upon
Information, action of debte, or bill of complaint, to be sued, or exhibited by
any person. And shall, and may by virtue hereof, make process against the
defendaunt, and award execution, as in any other case they lawfully may by any
the laws and statutes of this Realm, and shall yearly in Michelmas term,
certify by estreate the fynes and forfeitours of every the offenses contained
in this estatute, that shall be found before them, into the court of the
Exchequer, in like sort and form, as they be bound to certify the
estreates for other offenses and forfeitours to be lost, before them: Any
thing in this statute, contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this act or any thing therein contained or mentioned,
shall not be prejudicial or hurtful to the Cities of London, and Norwych, or
to the lawful liberties, vsages, customs, or privileges of the same Cities,
for or concerning the having, or taking of any apprentice or apprentices, but
that the Citezins and Freemen of the same Cities, shall and may take, have and
reteyne apprentices there, in such manner and form, as they might lawfully
have done before the making of this statute: This act or any thing therein
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it also further enacted, that all Indentures, couenauntes, promyses,
and bargaynes, of, or for the having, taking, or keeping of any apprentice,
otherwise hereafter to be made or taken, then is by this statute lymitted,
ordained and appointed, shall be clearly void in the law to all intentes and
purposes, and that every person, that shall from henceforth take, or newly
reteyne any apprentice, contrary to the tenor and true meaning of this act,
shall forfeit and lose for every apprentice so by him taken, the sum of.x. li.

And because there has been, and is some question and scrupule moved, whether
any person, being within the age of.xxi. years, and bounden to serve as an
apprentice, in any other place then in the said City of London, should be
bounden, accepted, and taken as an apprentice.

For the resolution of the said scruple and doubt: Be it enacted, by
authority of this present Parlyament, that all and every such person or
persons, that at any time or times, from henceforth shall be bounden by
Indenture, to serve as an apprentice, in any art, science, occupation or
labor, according to the tenor of this estatute, and in manner and form
aforesaid, albeit the same apprentice, or any of them, shall be within the age
of.xxi. years, at the time of making of their several Indentures: shall be
bounden to serve, for the years in their several Indentures contained, as
amply and largely to every intent, as if the same apprentice were of full age
at the time of the making of such Indentures: Any law, usage or custom to
the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
inhabitaunts now dwelling or inhabitynge, or that hereafter shall dwell, or
inhabit within the town of Godalmynge, within the County of Surray, within
the lymittes of the Watch of the said town, may use and exercise such
arts, mysteries and occupations, and take, and use apprentices and servants,
in such manner and form, as the inhabitauntes within market towns by this
statute may lawfully do.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all
manner amerciamentes, fynes, issues and forfeitures, which shall rise, grow,
or come by reason of any offenses or defaultes mentioned in this act, or any
branch thereof, within any City, or town corporate, shall be leuyed, gathered
and received, by such person or persons of the same City or town corporate,
as shall be appointed by the Mayor, or other head officers mentioned in this
said act, to the use and maintenance of the same City or town corporate, in
such case and condition, as any manner other amerciamentes, fynes, issues or
forfeitures have been used to be leuyed and employed, within the same City or
town corporate, by reason of any grant or charter from the Queen's Majesty
that now is, or of any her graces noble progenitors, made and granted to the
same City, borowe, or town corporate, any thing or clause before mentioned
and expressed in this act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this act, or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to any lawful reteyninges or couenauntes, had or made before the
making of this act, but that all and every the parties to such reteyninges
or couenauntes, shall and may have the same and like auantages of such
reteyninges and couenauntes, and of the statutes heretofore in that behalf
provided, as if this act had never ben had, nor made: Any clause of repeal or
other matter whatsoever in this act to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any servant
or apprentice of husbandry, or of any art, science, or occupation aforesaid,
unlawfully depart or flee into any other Shire, that it shall be lawful to the
said Justices of peace, and to the said Majors, Bayliffes, and other head
officers of Cities and towns corporate, for the time being Justices of peace
there, to make and grant writtes of Capias, so many and such as shall be
nedeful to be directed to the Sheriffs of the Counties, or to other head
officers of the places, whyther such servants or apprentices shall so
depart or flee, to take their bodies returnable before them, at what time
shall please them, so that if they come by such process, that they be put in
prison till they shall find sufficient suertie, well and honestly to serve
their masters, maistresses, or dames, from whom they so departed or fled,
according to the order of the law.

Provided always, that it shall be lawful to the high Constables of hundredes
in every Shire, to hold, keep, and continue petie Sessions, otherwise called
statute Sessions within the lymittes of their auctorities, in all Shires
wherein such Sessions have been used to be kept, in such manner and form as
heretofore has been used and accustomed, so as nothing be by them done therein
contrary or repugnaunt to this present Act.

An Act touching certain politic constitutions, made for the maintenance
of the Nauye. The.v. Chapter.
FOr the better maintenance and increase of the Nauye of this Realm of
England: Be it enacted by the Queen's most excellent Majesty, with the assent
of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority aforesaid, that from the first
day of April, Anno Domini.M.D.lxiiii. and so from thense fourth, it shall be
lawful to all and every of the subjects of our sovereign Lady the Queen, her
heirs and successors, at his and their will and pleasure to carry and
transporte out of this Realm, in the Ships or other vessels of any the
subjects aforesaid, all and every kinds of hearring and other Sea fish, to
be taken upon the Seas by any of the subjects aforesaid (and act of
Parlyament or law to the contrary notwithstanding) and that all and every
person and persons, which shall by virtue of this act transporte or carry any
hearringes, or other Sea fish, from or out of any port or harborough of this
Realm, to any place out of the dominions of the Queen's Majesty, her heirs or
successors, shall be free from payment of any custom, subsedie or pondage monye
for the same fyshe so carried or transported, duringe the space of.iiii. whole
years, beginning at the said first day of April, M.D.lxiiii. and so further,
during her Majesty's pleasure.

And be it further enacted, by the auctoritye aforesaid, that from the first
day of May next coming, it shall not be lawful to any person or persons in
any port, City, town, market, or other place within this Realm, to set
price, make any restraynte, or take, or demand toll or tax of any Sea fish
to be brought into this Realm or any part hereof, being taken by any of the
subjects aforesaid, in the Ships or other vessels of the same subjects,
upon pain to every person offendyng contrary to the meaning hereof, to
forfeite the value of the fyshe so restrained, prysed, tolled, or taxed: Any
liberty, custom, grant, pryuiledge or other matter whatsoever to the
contrary in any wise, notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this present act, nor any thing therein contained,
shall be prejudicial or hurtful to the Mayor and Burgesses of the Kings town
upon Hull, or their successors Majors and Burgesses of the same town, or to
any other officer, or minister of the same town at any time hereafter: but
that they and every of them may receive, have, and take all and every such
toll, customs, and sums of money of all and every such person and
persons, as is lymitted, appointed and set fourth by them to be taken, in an
act of Parlyament made in the.xxxiii. year of the reign of our late
Sovereign lord King Henry the eight. And that neither the said Mayor and
Burgesses of Kyngston upon Hull, nor any inhabitaunte there, or any of them,
shall take any advantage of that article of this Estatute, for the carriage of
any hearrynges or salted fish to any the parties beyond the Sea: Any thing in
this present act mentioned, contained, specified, or declared in any wise to
the contrary, notwithstanding.

Be it also enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no purueyour or other
person whatsoever, shall from the said first day of May, by virtue of any
commission, or otherwise, take any hearring or Sea fish from any of the
subjects before mentioned, that shall take the same in the Ships or other
vessels of the said subjects, as it is abouesaid, otherwise then by agreement
of the owners or sellers of the same fish, upon pain for every purueyour and
other person whatsoever offending contrary to the tenor of this act, to
forfeite the double value of the hearringes or fish so to be taken. And it
shall be lawful for any person, being owner or seller of any such Sea fish so
taken, as is aforesaid, to withstand any person that will (by any color of
purueying or otherwise) demand any such fyshe, or the toll of any such
fish without the good will of the owner or seller as aforesaid.

Provided, that the fyshe called Composition fish, heretofore granted to the
Queen's Majesty by the subjects of this Realm, trauelyng into Iseland, shall be
taken by her Majesty's officers and purueyours, in such sort as the same has been lawfully used to be taken before the making of this act: and saving to the
Queen's Majesty, her heirs and successors, and to all other persons, such
fyshes as be known and used to be called Regal fishes, whereunto her Majesty,
or the said other persons, have, or shall have right or interest, for such
recompense as heretofore has been accustomed.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that from the said
first day of April, which shall be in the year of our Lord God, M.D.lxiiii. it
shall not be lawful to any person or persons, to bye of any stranger borne out
of the Queen's Majesty's obeysaunce, or out of any strangers bottom, any
hearringe, being not sufficiently salted packed and Casked, upon pain to
every person and persons so bying, to forfeyte the hearringes so by him or them
to be bought, or the value thereof. Provided always, that this branch of
this act shall not extend to any hearringes to be bought, which by reason of
shipwreck shall be brought into this Realm, but that it shall be lawful to al and
every person and persons, to bye all such hearringes so brought in by Shipwreck
as aforesaid, as he or they lawfully might have done before the making of this
act: Any thing in this act contained to the contrary in any wise,
notwithstanding.

Be it also further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from the feast
of saint John Baptiste next ensuinge, it shall not be lawefull to any person
or persons, to cause to be laden and carried in any bottom or bottoms whereof any
stranger or strangers borne, then be owners, ship masters, or part owners,
any kind of fish, victual, wares, or things, of what kind or nature so ever
the same shall be, from one Port or creke of this Realm, to an other port or
creke of the same Realm, upon pain to every one that shall offend, contrary
to the true meaning of this branch of this present Act, to forfeyt all the
goods so laden or carried, or the value thereof. And that from hencefourth al
English hoyes and plates may cross the Seas, as far as Cane in Normandy,
and Estward as far as Norwey: the statute made in the first year of the
Queen's Majesty's reign, to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as there is much deceiptful packing, used in Codde and Lynges,
brought in Barrelles or other caske into this Realm: Be it therefore enacted,
by the authority aforesaid, that from and after the first day of April, in
the year of our Lord God. M.D.lxiiii. it shall not be lawful to any person or
persons, to bring into this Realm, any Codde or Lynges in barelles, or other
caskes, but louse in bulk, and by tale to be sold within this Realm, upon
pain for every one that shall offend contrary to the tenor hereof, to
forfaite all the Codde and Lynges, so to be brought in, or the value thereof.

And be it further enacted, that from the feast of S. Michaell tharchaungell
next following, no person of persons whatsoever, shall bring into this Realm
of England, or any part of the same, any wine coming out of any of the
dominions or countries belonging to the Crown of France, or any woade called
Tholosse woade in any other vessel or vessels, but only in such vessel
and vessels, whereof some Subject or Subjects of the Queen's Majesty, her
heirs or Successors, shall be then only owner, or part owner, upon pain to
forfayt al wynes and woade, brought contrary to the meaning hereof, according
to the meaning of an Estatute, made in the time of the reign of King Henry
the seventh, concerning wine of the Duchy of Gascoyn and Guyon (Except that
there may be brought into Wales, or any port within the Countye of Monmouth,
Rochell wines.)

Be it also enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from henceforth it
shall be lawful to all and every owner and owners of ships or vessels, and to
every houshoulder vsinge and exercisynge the trade of the Seas, by fyshinge, or
otherwise, and to every Gonner or Gonners, commonly called Canoners, and to
every Shipwright, to take and keep one or more apprentice, or apprentices, to
be brought up in the said trade or trades, every of the same apprentice, or
apprentices, to be to them bound for ten years or under. And every
apprentice so taken, being above vii. years of age, shall be by the same
couenauntes bound, ordered, and used to all ententes, according to the
custom of the City of London, so that the same covenant or bond of
Apprentishippe be made by writing, indented and enrolled in the town where
the same apprentice shall be then inhabited, if it be a town corporate: and if
the town be not encorporate, then to be enrolled in the next town encorporate
to the habitacion of every such Apprentice. And that the officers of every
such town corporate, shall take for every such enrolement, not above.xii.d.
Any law, statute, or other matter, whatsoever to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, that so much of the Statute, made in the.v.
and.vi. years of the late King Edward the.vi. intytuled An act against
Regrators, forestallers, and Ingrocers: And so much of all other Estatutes
against all Regratours, forestallers, and Ingrocers, as does and may concern
the byinge of Sea fish unsalted, or mudde fyshe, or any wine, oil or salt,
to be taken and brought in any English subjects Ships, Crayers, or other
vessel, unto any port, creek, or place of this Realm: shall from
henceforth, to all ententes, constructions and purposes, be utterly repelled
and void, for so much of the said oils, wine, Sea fyshe, mudde fyshe and
salt, as any Byer or Buyers, upon the Sea by way of forstallynge or
regratinge, shall or do bring and discharge in any port or haven within
this Realm. And for increase of provision of fish by the more usual and
common eatinge thereof: Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that from the feast of Saint Michael The Archaungel in the year of our Lord
God. M.D. three score and four, every Wednesdaye in every weke through the
whole year, which heretofore has not by the laws or customs of this Realm
bene-vsed and observed as a fyshe day, and which shall not happen to fall in
Christmas weke, or Easter weke, shall be hereafter observed and kept as the
Saterdayes in every weke be, or ought to be, and that no manner of person shall
eat any flesh on the same day, otherwise then ought to be upon the common
Saturday.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, for the benefytte and
commodities of this Realm, to grow as well in maintenance of the Navy, as in
sparing and increase of flesh, victual of this Realm: that from and after the
feast of Pentecoste next coming, it shall not be lawful to any person or
persons within this Realm to eat any flesh, upon any days now vsuallye
observed as fyshe days, or upon any wednesday now newly limited to be
observed as fysh day, upon pain that every person offendyng herein shall
forfait.iii.li. for every time he or they shall offend, or else suffer three
months close imprisonment without bail or maynprise. And every person or
persons within whose house any such offense shall be done, and being privy, or
knowinge thereof, and not effectuallye punishinge or disclosinge the same, to
some publyque officer, having authority to punyshe the same, for every such
offense, to forfeyt forty shillinges. All which forfeytures for not
abstaynynge from meats, shall be divided into three equal parts: That is, one
part to the use of the Queen's Majesty, her heirs or successors, the other
part to the informer, the third, to the common use of the parish, where the
offense is or shall be committed, and to be leuyed by the Church wardens, after
any conviction in that behalf.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that this act, nor any thing herein
contained, concerning eating of flesh, shall in any wise extend to any person
or persons, that shall hereafter have any special license, upon causes to be
contained in the said lycense, and to be granted according to the laws of
this Realm in such cases provided. Al and every which said license and
lycenses shall be void to all ententes, unless the same conteyne the conditions
hereafter mentioned: That is to say, every license made to any person or
persons, being of the degree of a Lord of Parlyament, or of their wives, shall be
upon condition, that every such person so to be lycensed, shall pay to the
poor men's box within the parish where they shall dwell or remain, in the
feast of the Purification of the blessed virgin Mary, or within vi. days
after the same feast.xxvi.s. viii.d. The same to be paid within one month
next after the same feast, upon pain of forfeiture of every such license.
And every license to any person of the degree of a Knight, or a Knights wife,
shall be upon condition, that every such person so lycensed, shall pay
yearly.xiii.s. iiii.d. to the use aforesaid, and in form before mentioned.
And every license to any person or persons, being under the degrees abouesaid,
shall be upon condition, that every such person so licensed shall pay
yearly.vi.s.viii.d. to the said use, and in form before mentioned.

Provided always, that no lycense shall extend to the eating of any Byefe, at
any time of the year, nor to the eating of any Veale in any year, from the
feast of Saint Michaell the Archangell, until the first day of May.

Provided also, that all persons which by reason of notorious sycknes, shall be
enforsed for recouerye of health to eat flesh, for the time of their sickness,
shall be sufficiently lycensed by the Bishop of the diocese, or by the Parson,
Vycar, or Curat, of the parish where such person shall be sick, or of one the
next parish adioyninge, if the said Parson, Vicar, or Curat of his or their
own parish be wilful, or if there be no Curate within the same parish. Which
lycense shall be made in writing, signed with the hand of the Bishop of the
dioces, or of the Parson, Vycar, or Curate, and not endure longer then the time
of the sickness. And that if the sickness shall continue above the space of.viii.
days, after such lycense granted: then the license shall be registered in the
Church book, with the knowledge of one of the Church wardens, and the party
licensed shall give to the Curate.iiii.d. for the entrye thereof: And that
license to endure no longer, but only for the time of his, her, or their
sickness. And if any license by any Parson, Vicar or Curate, be granted to any
person or persons, other then such as euydentlye appear to have need thereof
by reason of their sickness: not only every such lycense shall be void, but
also every such Parson, Curate, or Vycare shall forfait for every such
lycense otherwise granted, five marks.

Provided also, and be it enacted, that all lycenses heretofore granted to any
subject of this Realm, by any of the late Kings, or by the late Queen Mary,
or by the Queen's Majesty now being, or by any Archebyshoppe of this Realm,
having authority so to do, shall be of as good force in law for the
wednesday, now lymitted, and other accustomed fyshe days, as they were before
the making of this Act for the said other accustomed fyshe days, so as the
parties lycensed do hereafter observe all such conditions as be lymitted in
this estatute, to such as hereafter shall obtain any lycenses. And such
persons also as heretofore were or ought to be lycensed, by reason of age or
other impediment, or cause, by order of the Ecclesiastical laws, shall enjoy
the same privilege and accustomed lycenses, any thing in this Act to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that no
forfeiture of Ship, Crayer, or other vessel, or of any apparel of the same,
nor any other penalty or forfeyture, shall be extended or grow against any
owner or owners of any Ship, Crayer, or other vessel for the transportinge
or carrying of any Wheat or other Corn, or things prohibited by the estatute
made in the Parliament holden the first and second years of King Phillippe
and Queen Mary, unless the same owner or owners shall be wittinge, knowinge,
aydyng, or consenting to the prohibited transporting or carryinge: the said
Estatute, or any thing therein mentioned to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwitstandyng.

And be it further enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that
all and every person and persons, which be, or shall be, by the laws and
estatutes of this Realm, or otherwise, aucthorysed to sell wynes by retaile,
in the several Counties and places where they be, or shall be so aucthorised:
shall and may from hencefourth sell the said wynes, by pynte, quarte,
pottell, gallon, or otherwise, at such price or pryces, and in such form,
as shall be lymitted by the Queen's Majesty's proclamation in that County or
place, made with the assente of such lords and other persons, as by the
statute made in the.xxviii. year of the reign of King Henry the eight, were
aucthorised to set price upon wynes in gross, without any pain or forfeyture
for the same: Any law, usage, or estatute heretofore made or had to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, by the authority of this present Parlyament, that
from and after the feast of saint Michael the Archangell next coming, it
shall be lawful to all and every person and persons, being subjects of the
Queen's Majesty, her heirs or successors, only out of such ports, or crekes,
as by the Queen's Majesty's proclamation hereafter shall be published and
appointed, and not else where, to lode, carry or transporte any Wheat, Rye,
Barley, Malte, Pease or Beans, into any parts beyond the Seas, to sell as a
marchaundise, in ships, Crayers, or other vessels, whereof any English borne
subject then shall be the only owners, so that the price of the said Corns or
graynes so carried or transported, exceade not the prices hereafter followinge,
at the times, havens, and places where and when the same Corn or grain shall be
shipped or laden: Vide. the quarter of Wheat at.x.s. the quarter of Rye, Pease
or Beans, at.viii.s. the quarter of Barley or malte at.vi.s.viii. d. of
curraunte money of England: Any law, usage, or estatute heretofore made to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And where doubt has heretofore ben, whether the statute in the xviii. year
of the reign of King Henry the.vi. heretofore made against Soldiers
retained, which depart from their Captains without lycense, did or ought to
extended unto Mariners and gonners serving on the Seas, taking wages of the
king or Queen of this Realm: Be it expressed, ordained, enacted, and
declared, by authority of this present Parlyament, that the said estatute
made in the said.xxiii. year of the reign of King Henry the.vi. in all
pains, forfeytures and other things, did, does, and hereafter shall extend,
as well to all and every Mariner and gonner, having taken or shall hereafter
take pressed or wages to serve the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, or successors,
to all intentes and purposes, as the same did or does unto any souldyer: Any
diversities of opinion, doubt, matter, or thing to the contrary hereof in any
wise notwithstanding.

And where an estatute concerning sowyng of Flax and Hemp, was made and
provided in the Parlyament holden the.xxiiii. year of the reign of our late
sovereign Lord King Henry the eight, to be universal through every County
of this Realm, for the better provision of nets, for help and furtheraunce
of fishinge, and for eschewinge of Idelnes:

Be it ordained and enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that in
every such County of this Realm, or part of such County, where, by the
Queen's Majesty's proclamation it shall hereafter be published, the said
estatute to be commodious or profitable for the common wealth: The said
estatute, and every clause, article and provision therein contained, be and
shall be reuyued, and stand in full force and strength to be executed and
performed, from the feast of saint Michaell the Archangell next coming, in
all things other then in the proportion of a Road or fourth part of an acre,
and in the pain of.iii.s.iiii.d. by the said estatute limited. In place
whereof, be it ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that in every
case and degree, where by the said former estatute, one Road or fourth part
of an Acre is lymitted to be sown with lynseade, otherwise flax seade, or
hemp seade, from the said feast of Saint Michaell the Archangel next
coming: In stead and lewe of the said Road or iiii. part of an Acre, one
whole Acre, or less, as by proclamation in form aforesaid shall be limited,
shall be sown with lynseade, otherwise flax seade, or Hemp seade, upon pain
of forfeyture of five pounds, for every such defaulte or offense.

And further be it ordained, and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
all and every such of the offenses before mentioned, as hereafter shall be done
on the main Sea or costs of the Sea, being no part of the body of any
County of this Realm, and without the precinct, jurisdiction and liberties
of the Sinque ports, and out of any haven or peer: shall be tried and
determined before the Lord Admiral of England, or his Lieuetenaunt, deputy,
or deputies, and other Justices of Oyer and terminer, according to the form
of the said estatute of Anno.xxviii. Henrici.viii. for causes of pyracie. And
if the same shall be done on the main Sea, or costs of the Sea, within the
jurisdiction or liberty of the Synque ports, and out of any haven or port:
then the same to be tried and determined before the said Lord warden of then
said Syncque ports, or his Lieuetenaunt, or Judge, or before Justices of Oyer
and terminer, according to the true form of the said estatute of
Anno.xxxviii. Henry.viii. for causes of pyracie. And for all and singular such
other of the offenses before mentioned, as shall be done in the land, or within
any haven or peer: all Justices of the peace in their Sessions, and Majors,
Sheriffs and Bailifes, and other head officers in Cities and towns corporate,
in their Sessions, or other Courts within the limittes of their commissions or
aucthorities shall have full power and authority to inquire of the offenders
of this act, as well by the oaths of.xii. men, as otherwise by information, and
thereupon to hear and determine the same. And if any person or persons shall be
presented before the said Judges, Justices, or officers within the lymittes of
their auctorities, or any information given to them of any offender of this
act: that then they shall have full power and authority upon any such
presentment, or Information to make process against the offenders of this act,
like as is commonly used upon enditementes of Trespass. And if any be
presented, and afterward be convicted by confession, or otherwise, that then
every such person shall suffer no less forfeiture or punishment then herein
is before lymitted: All which forfeytures to be levied, in manner and form
following. That is to say, such forfeytures concerning eating of flesh, as
are before lymitted to certain uses, to be to the same uses in that behalf
before expressed, and all such forfeytures, as according to the tenor of this
act shall be determinable before the said Judges, Justices, or other officers
of the Admiralties aforesaid, or before Commissioners of Oyer and terminer in
that behalf, shall be to the use of the Lord Admiral of England, or Lord warden
of the Syncque ports, where such offense shall be presented, or where as the
Jurisdiction of the cause shall apperteyne. And all such forfeitures, as
according to the tenor of this act, shall be determinable before Majors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffes, or other head officers of Cities or towns corporate,
shall be to the common use of the Corporation of the said City or town
corporate, where such offenses shall be presented, or whereas the Jurisdiction of
the cause shall apperteyne. And all such forfeytours, as according to the
tenor of this act, shall be determinable before the Justices of the peace,
shall be to the use of the Queen's Majesty, her heirs and successors. And if
any person shall be convict by confession, or otherwise upon any Information,
made by any person or persons against any offender or offenders of this act,
in any cause (save for the eatinge of flesh, first before specially
lymitted) that then every such person so convict upon any Information, shall
lose such forfeiture as is before lymitted, the one half thereof to be to
such as so shall make the Information, and the other half to those which
upon presentement, without special Information, are before lymitted to have
the whole forfeiture. And that for the leuyinge of every forfeiture growing by
this estatute, as well the said Lord Admiral of England, Lord warden of the
Syncque ports, their Lieuetenaunts; and Judges, as the said Justices, Majors,
Sheriffs, Bayliffes and other head officers within the lymittes of their
Commissions or aucthorities, have and shall have full power and authority to
make such process, as they shall think good by their discressions.

Provided always, that none Information at the su^e of an person concerning
this act, shall be of any effect to put any person to answer or loss of
forfeiture, except the said Information be commenced within half a year
next after the offense done contrary to this act, nor that any Information or
presentment for the Queen's Majesty, her heirs or successors, or for the
Admiral, warden of the Sinque ports, Majors or other officers aforesaid, be
of any effect, to put any person to any answer or loss of any forfeiture by
virtue of this act, except the said Information or presentment be within one
year next after the offense done and committed contrary to this act.

Provided and be it likewise enacted, that it shall be lawful to any person, or
persons, to have at his or their table upon every wednesdaye, being ordered by
this estatute to be observed as a fish day, one only usual competent dishe
of flesh, of one kind and no mo, so that he, she, or they have also served to
the same table and mease at the same meal, their full competent usual dishes
of Sea fish, of sundry kinds, either fresh or salt, and that without fraud
or couyn, and so shall also order, that the same fish be mete and seasonable,
and that it shall be eaten or spent in like manner, as upon Fridayes or Saterdayes
in like cases are used.

And that also such persons as have, or hereafter shall have, upon good and
just considerations, any lawful license to eat flesh upon any fish day
(except such persons, as for sickness shall for the time be licensed by the
Bishop of the dioces, or by their Curates, or shall be licensed by reason of age,
or other impediment allowed heretofore by the Ecclesiastical laws of this
Realm) shall be bound by force of this statute, to have for every one dishe of
flesh served to be eaten at their table, one usual dishe of Sea fish, fresh
or salt, to be likewise served at the same table, and to be eaten or spent
without fraud or couin, as the like kind is, or shall be usually eaten or spent
on Saterdayes.

And that these two articles and clauses next above, shall be taken and
interpreted from time to time, in the favor of expense of Sea fish, and that
the offendour or offenders herein, shall be punished in like manner, as is
ordered by this estatute, for punishment of such as shall eat flesh upon
Fridayes, Saterdayes, or other fish days.

And because no manner of person shall misiudge of the intent of this estatute,
limittinge orders to eat fish, and to forbear eatinge of flesh, but that
the same is purposely intended and meant politikely for the increase of
Fishermen, and Mariners, and repairing of port towns and navigations, and not
for any superstition to be mainteyned in the choice of meats: Be it enacted,
that who soever shall by preachinge; teachinge, writing, or open speech
notify, that any eating of fish, or forbearinge of flesh mentioned in this
statute, is of any necessity for the sauinge of the soul of man, or that it
is the service of God, otherwise then as other politic laws are and be: that
then such person shall be punished, as spreaders of false news are or ought to
be.

Be it enacted in the favor of Fyshermen and Mariners, haunting the sea as
Fyshermen or Mariners, that none of them shall hereafter at any time be
compelled against his or their will, to serve as any soldier upon the land,
or upon the sea, otherwise then as a Mariner, except it shall be to serve under
any Captain of some ship or vessel for landyng, to do some special exploit,
which Mariners have used to do, or under any other person having authority
to withstand any invasion of enemies, or to subdue any rebellion within the
Realm, and also except all such persons as by tenure, lawefull custom, or
covenant, be or shall be otherwise bound to serve.

Provided always, and be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that this Act
or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to take away or diminishe any
liberty, privilege, fraunches, forfaiture or amerciament, fines, issues,
wreckes of the Sea, or any other lawful inheritance or free hold, from any
person or persons, bodies politic or corporate, their heirs or successors,
for or touching any lawful liberty, authority, or jurisdiction admiral, or
for conservation of any water, that they or any of them now have lawfullye, or
hereafter shall have: Any thing in the same to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided always and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
no Fysherman vsyng or hauntyng the sea, shall be taken by the Queen's Majesty's
Commission to serve her hyghnes as a Mariner on the Sea: but that the said
Commission be first brought by her hyghnes taker or takers, to two Justices of
peace, next adioynyng and inhabytyng to the said Sea costs, Towns, or other
places, where the said Mariners are so to be taken, to the intent the said
Justices may chose out, and cause to be returned such sufficient number of able
men, as in the said Commission shall be contained, to serve her Majesty as is
aforesaid.

Saving always to the Sinque Ports, and also to the town of great Yarmouth,
all such lawful liberties as they justly have before the making of this Act,
touching the free fayer kept at Yarmouth, other then in bying of strangers,
and taking of toll, as the same be before prohibited.

Provided always, that any thing in this Act contained, shall not be hurtful
or prejudicial to any authority, style, pre-eminence, dignity, or
jurisdiction, belongyng to the office of the Lord warden of the Sinque Ports.

Provided always, that it shall and may be lawful to and for any person or
persons being strangers borne, to bring yearly in any Ship, Bottom, or
Vessel, whereof any stranger or strangers borne, is or shall be owner or owners,
into the Havens, Ports, and Towns of the Isle of man, or into any of them,
any of the wynes made in any of the dominions or countries belonging to the
Crown of France, and in the same Ports and Towns, or any of them, to
discharge the said wynes so to be brought, so that there be not brought and
discharged by the same strangers, in any such strangers ships, bottomes, or
vessels, in any one year, in, or, at the said Havens, Ports, and Towns, or
any of them, above one hundred Tonnes at the most: This Act or any thing
therein contained to the contrary thereof, notwithstanding.

Provided also, that it shall and may be lawful to and for any person or
persons being strangers borne, to bring yearly in any ship, vessel, or
bottom, whereof any stranger or strangers borne is or shall be owner or owners,
into the Haven, Port, and Town of Chepestowe, in the County of Monmouth, any
wynes made in any of the said dominions or countries belongyng to the said
Crown of France, over and besides all Rochell wynes heretofore in this Act
allowed to be brought, and in the same Port and Town to discharge the said
wynes, so that there be not brought and discharged by the same strangers, in
any such strangers ships, bottomes, or vessels in any one year, in, or at
the said Haven, Port, and Town, above one hundred Tonnes at the most: This
Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also, that it shall and may be lawefull to and for any person or
persons being strangers borne, to bring yearly in any ship, vessel, or
bottom, whereof any stranger or strangers borne, is or shall be owner or
owners, into the Havens, Ports, and Towns of Cardife, Caneruon, Beawmarrys,
and other Havens, Ports, and Towns in Southwales and Northwales, or any of
them, and into the Haven, Port, and Town of Newporte, in the said County of
Monmouth, any of the said wynes made in any of the said dominions or countries
belongyng to the said Crown of France, over and besides all Rochell wines
heretofore in this Act allowed to be brought, and in and at the same Ports and
Towns, or any of them, to discharge the said wynes so to be brought, so that
there be not brought and discharged by the same strangers in any such
strangers ships, bottomes, or vessels in any one year, in, or at the said
Havens, Ports, and Towns, or any of them, above one hundred Tonnes at the
most: This Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary thereof,
notwithstanding.

Saving unto the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, and successors, all such duties
and things which her hyghnes, her heirs, and successors ought to have,
enjoy, be answered and paid, for the said three hundred Tonnes of Wynes,
mentioned in the said three last prouisos, to be brought and discharged, as in
the same three prouisos ben mentioned and declared: Any thing in this Act to
the contrary thereof, notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that
this Act or any thing or things therein contained, shall not in any manner of
wise extend to give unto the Lord Admiral of England for the time being, or
to any his Viceadmiralles, Judge or Judges of the Admiraltie, his or their
deputy or deputies, or to any other the officers or ministers of the
Admiraltie, or to any others having or claymyng any Admiral power,
jurisdictions, or authority within this Realm and Wales, or any other the
Queen's dominions: any other power, right, jurisdiction, pre-eminence, or
authority, then he or they, or any of them lawfully have, has, or had, or
ought to have and enjoy before the making of this Act, other then for such
of the offenses specified in this Act, as hereafter shall be done upon the
main Sea, within the jurisdiction of the Admiraltie: This Act or any article,
branch, clause, provision, or thing therein contained to the contrary thereof,
notwithstanding.

This Act shall continue and endure until the end of ten whole years, to be
accounted from the feast of Saint Michaell the Archangell, which shall be in the
year of our Lord God.M.D.lxiiii. and from thence, to the end of the next
Parliament then following the end of the said ten years.

An Act against such as shall sell any Ware for Apparel without ready money.
The.vi. Chapter.
BE IT enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that whatsoever
person after the feast of Easter next, shall sell or by any means deliver to
any person, having not in possession lands or fees to the clear yearly value
of three thousand pounds auerrable and triable by books of Subsedyes, or by
any other sufficient true way or means, any manner of foreyne stuff or wares,
not grown or first wrought in any the Queen's Majesty's dominions, of what
kind, nature, name, or condition so ever the same be, appertaynyng or tendyng
to the apparellyng, clothyng, deckyng, garnyshyng, or adornyng of the body, or
the part of the body of any manner of person, for all the which stuff or wares,
or for the workmanship thereof, or any part thereof, the seller, delyuerer, or
worker, their executours or administratours, shall not have received the whole
money or full satisfaction either in hand, or within.xxviii. days after the
sale, delyuery, or making thereof: that in every such case, the seller,
delyuerer, worker, or maker, their executours and administratours shall be
without all remedy by order of any law, custom, or decree, to recover or
demand any money or recompense for the said stuff or wares, or for the
workmanshyp of any part thereof, what assurance soever he or they shall have,
by bond, suertie, promise, or pawn, of the party, or of any other on his or
their behalf to the contrary. And that all bonds and assurance whatsoever
made in that case and for that purpose, by any means or ways, directly or
indirectlye, shall be utterly void to all intentes. And this Act shall endure
only to the end of the next Parliament.

An Act for the aduoydyng of diverse forreyne wares, made by handy crafts men
beyond the Seas. The.vii. Chapter.
WHere as heretofore the artificers of this Realm of England (as well within the
City of London, as with in other Cities, Towns, and Boroughes of the same
Realm) that is to wit, Gyrdlers, Cutlers, Sadlers Glouers, Poyntmakers, and
such like handycraftes men, have been in their said faculties greatly wrought
and greatly set on work, as well for the sustentation of them selves, their
wives and families, as for a good education of a great part of youth of this
Realm in good art and laudable exercise: besides the manifold benefits that
by means or by reason of their knowledges, inventions, and continual travel,
daily and universally came to the whole estate of the common wealth of this
said Realm. Yet notwithstanding, so now it is, that by reason of the
abundance of forreyne wares, brought into this Realm from the parts of
beyond the Seas, the said artificers are not only less occupied and thereby
utterly impouerished, the youth not trained in the said sciences and exercises,
and thereby the said faculties and thexquisite knowledges thereof like in short
time within this Realm to decay: but also diverse Cities and Towns within this
Realm of England much thereby impaired, the whole Realm greatly endomaged, and
other countries notably enriched and the people thereof well set on work to
their commodities and liuinges, in the arts and sciences aforesaid, and to
the great discourage of the skylfull workmen of this Realm, being in very deed
nothing inferior to any stranger in the faculties aforesaid.

For reformation whereof: Be it enacted by our sovereign Lady the Queen's
highness, and by the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of this
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that no
person or persons whatsoever, from or after the feast of the Nativity of S.
John Baptist now next ensuyng, shall bring or cause to be brought into this
Realm of England from the parts of beyond the seas, any Gyrdels, harness
for gyrdels, Rapiers, Daggers, Knives, Hiltes, Pummelles, Lockets, Chapes,
Dagger blades, Handels, Scabberdes, and Sheathes for knives, Saddels, Horse
harness, stirrops, Bittes, Gloves, Points Leather laces, or Pinnes, being
ready made or wrought in any parts of beyond the Seas, to be sold, bartred or
exchaunged within this Realm of England or Wales, upon pain to forfaite all
such wares so to be brought contrary to the true meaning of this Act, in whose
hands soever they or any of them shall be found, or the very value thereof,
the one half of the forfaiture to be to our sovereign Lady the Queen's hyghnes,
her heirs and successors, and the other moitie thereof to him or them that
will sease the same, or sue therefore in any court of Record of the Queen's
Majesty, her heirs and successors, by action of debt, byll, plaint,
information, or otherwise, where no wager of law, essoigne, or protection
shall be to him or them allowed. This Act to continue and endure to the end of
the next Parliament.

An Act touching Tanners, Curryours, Shoemakers, and other artificers
occupying the cuttyng of Leather. The.viii. Chapter.
WHere before this time, diverse and many good estatutes have been made for the
true tanning, currying, and working of leather, as a thing very necessary for
the common wealth and commodity for the Queen's Majesty's subjects, for that
every sort of people of necessity must use and have leather for diverse and
sundry purposes, which notwithstanding, leather was never worse tanned,
curryed or wrought, then now a days it is, by reason whereof, diverse persons
are not only put to great loss, charge, and other inconveniences, but also do
take diverse and sundry diseases, to the shortenyng of their lives, as by the
complayntes of diverse persons exhibited in this Parliament it manifestly
appears.

Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's Majesty, with thassent of the Lords and
commons in this present parliament assembled, and by thaucthoritie of the same,
that from and after the feast of Pentecost next coming, no Butcher or other
person shall gashe, slaughter, or cut any hyde of any Bull, Ox, Steare, or
Cow in fleyng thereof or otherwise, whereby the same shall be impaired or hurt.
And that no Tanner or other person or persons using or occupying the craft or
mystery of tannyng of leather, shall after the feast of S. Michaell
tharchangell next coming, by him self or any other person or persons, offer
or put to sale any such hyde or skyn so gashed, flaughtered or cut, upon pain
of forfaiture for every such hyde or skin so offered or put to sale.xx.d.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no Butcher or other
person or persons, after the said feast of Pentecost, shall kill any Calfe to
sell, being under five wekes old, upon pain to forfait for every Calfe so to
be killed and sold.vi.s. viii.d.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no person or
persons occupying the craft or occupation of a Butcher, shall after the feast of
Pentecost next coming, occupy or use by himself, or any other person or
persons, the feat, craft or mystery of a Tanner, during the time that he shall
so use the craft or occupation of a Butcher, upon pain of forfaiture
of.vi.s.viii.d. for every day that he shall so use the feate, craft, or mystery
of a Tanner.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no person or
persons, which at the feast of S. Michaell tharchangell which was in the
first year of the Queen's Majesty's reign that now is, had not lands,
tenementes, rentes, profits, or hereditamentes of estate of inheritance, or
for term of life or lives, of the clear yearly value of.xl.li. or above, or
whose Tanhouse was not at the said feast, is, or shall be hereafter in a City,
Borough, Town corporate, or market Town, where searchers and sealers of
leather has been and shall be usually appointed (except such person and persons
as then had any Tanhouse, and did then occupy the mystery of tannyng of
leather, and except an apprentice or apprentices to a Tanner or Tanners, and
except such as were then, or since, or hereafter shall be brought up, instructed,
or taught as covenant or hired servant for that purpose by the space of.vii.
years in the mystery or craft of tannyng of leather, and except the wife and
such son or sons of a Tanner as has been brought up and has used the
mystery of tanning of leather by the space of four years aforesaid, or the
son or daughter of a Tanner, or such person who shall marry such wife or
daughter to whom he has or shall leave a Tanhouse and fattes) shall tanne any
leather, or shall use, take or have any profit, gain, or commodity of or by
the said mystery or craft of tanning of leather, upon pain of forfaiting of
all such leather by him or them so tanned, or whereof he or they shall receive
any profit or commodity by tannyng, or the just value thereof.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that after the feast of
Pentecost next coming, no person or persons whatsoever, which shall after the
said feast of Pentecost occupy or use by him or them self, or by any other
person or persons, the craft or mystery of tannyng of leather, shall suffer
any hyde or skin to lie in the lymes any longer time then the here falls
of, or may be taken of, nor in any wise to be put into the limes after the
here may be taken of, nor shall use, employ, occupye, or put by them selves,
or by any other person or persons, any thing in any lycour, stuff or
workmanshyp in or about the tannyng of leather but only lyme, Culuer donge, or
Hen donge, and that in cold water only, and wooses made of cold water and
Oken bark only, without any mixture of any other thing or things, nor shall
by him self or by any other person or persons put any hyde or skin in any
tanne wooses, or licour made whot, or warmed in any fat or vessel, to be set or
covered in any tanne hill, or otherwise, nor shall ouerlyme any hydes or
skynnes in the lyme pyttes, nor shall put any hydes or skins into any tanne
fattes or vessels before the lime be well and perfectly sokened and wrought
out of them and every of them, nor shall suffer his or their leather to be
laid, or to hang or to lie wet in any frost until the same be frosen, nor
shall dry or parche the leather with the heat of the fire or of the so^mer
sun, nor shall tanne, or cause to be tanned any hyde or skin being
putrified, rotten, or tainted by long lying, either before the puttyng of it
into the lymes, or after in the water or lycour, or by any other means, nor
shall negligently work the hydes in the wooses, nor shall not renew and make
strong the wooses as often as shall be requisite, nor shall suffer the hydes for
utter sole and clout leather to lie in the wooses any less time then.xii.
months at the least, and the hides for upper leathers in like wooses any less
time then.ix. months at the least, nor shall insufficiently or imperfectly
tanne any hyde or skin, nor shall tanne any Ox hydes, Stere hides, or Cow
hides but whole, without cuttyng of any bellyes commonly called wombes, or
pieces from the same (hydes for cloutyng leather to be cut into three or four
bendes or pieces, ouerthwarte the whole hyde only except) nor shall after the
feast of Saint Michaell the Archangell next coming, put to sale any
tanned hyde or skin which is or shall be raised in or by the tannyng,
workmanship, or otherwise, or by vsyng any other thing or stuff, or in any
other sort then by his statute is limited and appointed, upon pain of
forfaiture of every Ox hyde, steare hyde, Cow hyde or skyn, tanned, used, or
put to sale contrary to the true meaning of this present Act, or the just
value thereof.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that from the feast of
Pentecost next coming, no person or persons whatsoever, shall put or cause to
be put to sale, exchange, or otherwise depart with any kind of tanned leather
red and unwrought, but in open fayer or market, in the places therefore commonly
accustomed, and therefore prepared, nor before the same be searched and sealed,
according to the laws and order in this estatute hereafter mentioned, nor
shall after the feast of S. Michael tharchangel next coming, put to sale,
exchange, or otherwise depart with any tanned leather red and unwrought, but
sufficiently and well tanned, and thoroughly dried, nor shall put or cause to be
put to sale, exchange, or otherwise depart with any ox hide, steare hide, or
Cow hyde, but only whole without cutting any bellies called wo^bes or other
pieces from it (clouting leather cut into bendes as is aforesaid, only excepted)
before ye same be serched and sealed, upon pain of forfaiture for every hide
or piece of leather sold, exchanged, or otherwise departed with, contrary to
the true meaning of this Act.vi.s. viii.d. and for every dosen of calue
skins.iii.s.iiii.d. and the hyde or hydes, skin or skins, and leather in
any otherwise sold, exchanged, or bought, or the value thereof.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no person or
persons using the mystery of tanning of leather, by himself, or by any other
person or persons, from and after the said feast of Pentecost, shall during
that time that he shall use the said mystery, occupy or use the craft or
mystery of a shoemaker, currier, butcher, or of any artificer using or
exercising cutting or workyng of leather, upon pain to forfait and lose all
and every such hyde and hydes, skin and skins so by them or any of them
wrought or tanned, during the time that he shall use the mystery or craft of
tanning aforesaid, or the just value thereof. It is also enacted by
thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no person using the mystery of tannyng of leather
by him self, or by any other person or persons, shall after the feast of the
Nativity of S. John Baptist next coming tanne any Bull hyde, horse hyde, or
sheep skin, or put to sale, exchange, or otherwise depart with any Horse
hyde, Bull hyde, or sheep skin tanned, upon pain to forfait every such bull
hyde, horse hyde, or sheep skin so tanned or put to sale, or the just value
thereof.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no person or
persons after the feast of Pentecost next coming, shall bargayne, bye, make
any contracte for, or bespeake any roughe hyde or Calves skynnes in the here,
but only such person or persons as by virtue of this Act may lawfully use the
craft or mystery of tannyng of leather and shall tanne the same, or such person
or persons as shall tawe the same (except salt hydes for the necessary use of
ships) upon pain to forfaite and lose all and every such hydes and skynnes
so bought, or the just value thereof.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no person or
persons shall or may after the feast of Pentecost next coming, bye, bargayne,
bespeake, or take promys to have any tanned leather, not wrought and converted
into made wares, but only such person and persons as will and shall work and
convert the same leather into made wares, upon pain of forfaiture of the
leather so bought, or the value thereof.

Provided always, and be it enacted, that all and every artificer, and other
person and persons vsyng to convert tanned leather into made wares, as well
stranger borne, as other, may lawfully bye all kind of tanned leather, to
make or convert the same into made wares, at Leaden hall in London, upon every
Monday, the same being first duly searched, sealed, and registered, as is
hereafter limited.

Provided also, that Sadlers and Gyrdlers may sell their necks and shreddes of
tanned leather read, without incurring any pain or forfaiture for the same.

And forasmuch as Bark is now become scant by unreasonable fellyng of Oak out
of barkyng time, and thereby the Tanners be destitute of such bark as is
necessary: Be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no person or
persons shall from and after the feast of Saint Michaell the Archangell next,
fell or cause to be felled any Oken trees mete to be barked, where the bark is
worth.ii.s. a cartlode, over and above the charge of barking and pilling
(timber to be employed or bestowed in or about buylding or reparations of
houses, ships, or milles, or any of the^, only except) but betwixt the first
day of April, and the last day of June, upon pain of forfaiture of every such
Oken tree so felled, or ye double value thereof.

And for the better preservation of Timber, which by the takers of Timber is
spoiled, through the greedy desire of gain, of the loppes, tops, or bark of
Timber trees: Be it therefore enacted, that no taker or takers, purueyour or
purueyours of Timber, or his or their deputy or deputies, shall fell or cause
to be felled for the use of the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, or successors,
any Oken Timber tree or trees mete to be barked, but in barkyng time (trees to
be felled for building or repayrynge of any her Majesty's Houses or Ships,
only except) or shall in any wise take or receive any manner of profit,
gain, or commodity by any loppes, tops, or bark of any tree, to be taken
by them or any of them, or shall in any wise take, carry away, give, sell or
dispose from the owner, any more of any tree, to be taken as is aforesaid,
then only the timber of the same tree or trees, to be used and bestowed, or
employed only in, upon, or about the Queen's Majesty's buyldynges, or ships,
upon pain of forfaiture to the party grieved, for every tree and for the
loppes, tops, or bark of every tree taken contrary to the meaning of this
article.xl.s. And that it shall be lawful to the party of whom such tree or
trees shall be taken, or to any other, for, and in his name, to reteyne,
withholde, take, and keep to him self all the bark, loppe, and top of such
tree or trees: Any Commission or other matter whatsoever, notwithstanding.

And forasmuch as no Leather can be so well tanned, but it may be marred in the
currying: Be it therefore enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that from and
after the feast of Saint Michaell the Archangell next, no person or persons
shall currye any kind of Leather in the house of any Shoemaker or other
person, but only in his own house, situate in a corporat or market town, nor
shall curry any kind of leather except it be well and perfectly tanned, nor
shall after the feast of Pentecost next curry any hyde or skin, being not
thoroughly dry after his wet season, in which wet season he shall not use any
stale, vryne, or any other deceiptfull or subtle mixture, thing, way, or
means, to corrupt or hurt the same, nor shall curry any leather mete for utter
sole leather, with any other stuff then with hard tallowe, nor with any less
of that, then the leather will receive, nor shall curry any kind of leather
mete for over leather and inner soles, but with good and sufficient stuff,
being fresh and not salt, and thoroughly lycoured till it can not receive no
more, nor shall burn or scalde any hyde or leather in the currying, nor shall
shave any leather to thin, or shall gashe or hurt any leather in the shauyng,
or by any other means, but shall work the same sufficiently and substancially
in all points and respects, upon pain of forfaiture for every such offense
or act done contrary to the true meaning of this article (other then in
gashyng or hurtyng in shauyng).vi.s.viii.d. and the value of every such skin
or hyde marred by his evil workmanship, and for every offense to be done
against this article, in gashing or hurtyng by shauyng, double so much to the
party grieved, as the leather shall be impaired thereby, by the judgment of the
Wardens of the Curryers, and the Wardens of the company whereof the party
grieved shall be.

And be it further enacted, that no Cordwayner, Shoemaker, or other person or
persons dwelling or inhabiting within the City of London or the liberty of
the same, nor any person or persons that now is, or hereafter shall be free of
the City of London, dwelling within three miles of the said City, and
occupying wet curryed leather in his art and occupation, shall put or cause to
be put any leather to be curried, but to such person and persons as be or shall
be free of the company of the Curriers of the City of London, upon pain of
forfaiture of all such curryed leather, or the value thereof.

And be it further enacted, that no person or persons shall by any means
occupy or put in any made wares, within the city of Lonlon, or three miles of
the same City, any curried leather, before the same shall be searched, and
allowed by the Wardens of the Curryers of London for the time being, or such
persons as they shall thereto assign, and be sealed with a seal therefore to be
prepared, upon pain that every shoemaker, and other artificer cutter of
leather, offendyng against this article, shall forfayte for every hyde or skyn
otherwise curryed or employed as is aforesaid.vi.s.viii.d. and the value of
every such hyde or skin.

And be it further enacted, that no person occupying the feate or mystery of a
Curryour, shall use or exercise the feate or mystery of a Tanner, Cordwayner,
Shoemaker, Butcher, or other artificer vsyng cuttyng of leather, during the
time that he shall so use or occupye the mystery of a Curryour, upon pain of
forfaiture of.vi.s. viii.d. for every hyde or skin that he shall curry during
the time that he shall occupy or use any of the mysteries aforesaid, contrary
to the meaning of this article.

And further be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no Curryour or
Curryours, vsyng the art of currying of leather, shall after the feast of
Pentecost next, refuse to curry any leather, to him or them for that purpose
brought by any such artificer as is or shall be a cutter of leather, the same
artificer or his servant bryngyng with him or them good and sufficient stuff,
as is before mentioned, for the perfect lycouryng of the same leather, and that
the said leather in the presence of the said artificer cutters of leather, his
servant or servants if he or they will be present, shall be licoured and
curryed in all things and degrees perfectly, and if he or they will not be
present, it shall nevertheless by likewise licoured and curryed in his or
their absence perfectly, and with as convenient speed as may be, not exceading
five days in the So^mer, and ten days in the Winter, after he shall or may
take it in hand, upon pain to forfaite to the party grieved for every hyde
and piece of leather not in this manner curryed, and well and spedely
dressed.x.s.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the Wardens of the
Curryers for the time being, or such persons as they shall assign or appoint
(being thereunto required) shall from time to time, search and try all such
curryed leather, as shall be brought to any of their company to be curryed, and
shall with a Seal therefore to be prepared, with convenient speed, not
exceadyng one day after the currying and request made, seal such leather as
they shall find sufficiently curryed, taking for every hyde so sealed after
the rate of.i.d. for the dycker, and for every sire dosen of Calves
skins.i.d. and not above, to be paid by the Curriour, upon pain of
forfaiture for every hyde which shall not be searched and sealed as is
aforesaid.vi.s.viii.d.

And forasmuch as Leather well tanned and curryed, may by the negligence,
disceipte, or evil workmanship of the Cordwayner or Shoemaker, be used
disceiptfully, to the hurt of the occupyer or wearer of it: Be it further
enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no person or persons, which after the
said feast of Pentecost shall occupy the mystery or occupation of a Cordwayner
or Shoemaker, shall make or cause to be made any boots, buskynnes, shoes,
startvppes, slyppers, or pantofles, or any part of them, of English leather
wet curryed (other then Dear skynnes, Calves skynnes, or Goats skynnes, made
or dressed, or to be made or dressed like unto Spanyshe leather) but of leather
well and truly tanned and curryed in manner and form above specified, or of
leather well and truly tanned only, and well and substauncially sewed with
good threde, well twysted and made, and sufficiently waxte with wax well
rosened, and the stytches hard drawn with handleathers, as has been
accustomed, without mynglyng or mixyng of ouerleathers, that is to say, part
of the over leather being of Neates leather, and part of Calves leather, nor
shall put into any part of any shoes, boots, buskynnes, startvppes, slyppers,
or pantofles any leather made of a sheep skin, bull hyde, or horse hyde,
nor into the upper leather of any shoes, startvppes, slyppers, or pantofles, or
into the nether part of any boots (thinner sole and heel of the shoe only
except) any part of any hyde from which the sole leather is cut, called the
womb, neck, shanke, flank, poll, or cheke, nor shall put into the utter sole
any other leather then the best of the Ox or Stere hyde, nor into the inner
sole any other leather then the wombes, neck, poll, or cheke, nor in the
treswelles of the double soled shoes, other then the flanks of any the hydes
aforesaid, nor shall make or put to sale in any year between the last of
September and the.xx. of Apryll, any shoes, boots, buskynnes, startvppes,
slyppers, or pantofles, wherein any dry (...) mete for any person to wear
excedyng the age of.iiii. years, wherein shall be any dry English leather (other
then Calves or Goats skynnes, made or dressed, or to be made and dressed like
unto Spanysh leather, or any part thereof) nor shall show (to the intent to put to
sale) any shoes, boots, buskinnes, startvppes, slippers, or pantofles upon the
Sunday, before the divine service (used in the forenone) be done and ended,
upon pain of forfaiture for every pain of shoes, boots, buskynnes,
startvppes, slyppers, or pantofles made, sold, showed, or put to sale contrary
to the true meaning of this Act.iii.s. iiii.d. and the just and full value of
the same.

And be it further enacted for the true execution of this estatute, that the
Mayor of the City of London, and the Aldermen of the same for the time being,
or the more part of them, upon pain to forfait.xl.li. for every year that they
make default, the one half whereof to be to the Queen's Majesty, her heirs and
successors, and the other half to him or them that will sue for the same:
shall yearly appoint four or more expert persons by their discressions, to be
searchers, who shall be sworn before the said Mayor and Aldermen for the time
being to do their office truly. Which said serchers shall by virtue of this
Act, four times in the year at the least, that is to say, once every quarter
of a year or oftener (if need require) as they shall think good, make true
search and view of and for all boots, buskynnes, and other wares and things
whatsoever made of tanned leather, in all and every house and houses, place and
places, as well within the said City and suburbs thereof, as in every other
place within three miles of the same City, where any Shoemaker, Sadler,
Gyrdler, or other artificer vsyng cuttyng of leather does or shall dwell, or
occupye any of thoccupations of cuttyng of leather: and after every such search
and view, to make true presentment in writing before the said Mayor and
Aldermen for the time being, of every default that they or any of them shall
find in the making, sellyng, or puttyng to sale of any boots, buskyns,
startvppes, shoes, brydels, saddels, or other things, stuff, or ware made of
leather contrary to the true meaning of this estatut.

And be it further enacted, that the said Mayor of the said City of London,
and Aldermen for the time being, upon like pain likewise to be leuyed and
employed, shall likewise yearly appoint.iiii. or more, other skylfull, expert,
and honest persons, whereof one shall be a sealer, and keep a seal for the
sealyng of leather to be prepared, who shall also be sworn before the said
Mayor and Aldermen for the time being, to do their office truly. Which said
searchers and sealer, shall view and search all and every tanned hyde, skin
or leather, which shall be brought as well to the market at Leaden hall, as to any
other lawefull fayer or market therefore usually appointed, within three miles
of the said City, whether the same be well and sufficiently tanned, according
to the purport and true meaning of this estatute, or no. And fyndyng it
sufficiently and well tanned, in such manner and form as by this estatute is
appointed (and as it ought to be) shall seal the same with the said seal for
that purpose to be provided and prepared.

AND be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all other
Majors, Baylyffes, and other head officers for the time being, in all other
Cities, Boroughes, and market Towns of this Realm, and all Lords of
liberties, fayres, and markets, out of the circuit or compass of the said
three miles: shall upon like pain of.xl.li. likewise to be leuyed and employed
every year that they make default herein, appoint and swear yearly.ii. iii. or
more persons, of the most honest and skylfull men within their several offices
or liberties, by their discression, to search and view within the precinct of
their said offices, liberties, and aucthorities, which shall as often as need
shall be or they think good, make like search within their limittes, and shall
have a mark or seal prepared for that purpose, and that the said searchers,
or one of them, shall keep the same seal or mark, and with the same shall
seal or mark such leather as they shall find sufficient, and no other. And
if the said searchers or any of them, do find any leather sold, or offered to
be sold, or brought to be searched or marked insufficiently tanned, or
insufficiently curryed, or any boots, buskynnes, shoes, startvppes, slyppers,
brydels, saddels, or any other thing made of tanned or curryed leather
insufficiently tanned, curryed, or wrought, contrary to the true meaning of
this estatute, it shall be lawful to the said searchers or any of them, to
sease as forfaited, all such leather, shoes, and wares made of leather, and to
retain the same in their custody, until the same be tried by.vi. expert men,
appointed by such Mayor, Baylyffe, or other head officer, or Lord of liberty,
or his sufficient deputy, within whose precinctes or liberties such seysour
shall happen to be: the same trial to be within.xv. days after such seysour at
the furthest, upon the oaths of the said tryers.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all red tanned
leather which shall be brought into the City of London (whether it be to be
sold, or be bought before hand or no) shall be brought to Leaden hall before it
be housed in his or their own houses, and there viewed, whether it has been
searched or sealed, or no, and shall also be registered by the searchers to be
appointed as is aforesaid, with half such fees therefore to be paid as is
hereafter expressed for leather to be sold in Leaden hall, upon pain that
every person housyng or not bryngyng his leather to Leaden hall as is
aforesaid, shall forfaite for every hyde or skin vi.s.viii. Provided that
this article shall not extend to any leather to be bought in Bartilmewe fayer,
or Southwarke market, being searched, sealed and registered according to the
true meaning of this Act.

And also be it further enacted, that if any person will after the said feast
wylfully withstand or deny any such search to be made, according to the
tenor of this Act as is aforesaid, or will not suffer the said searchers so
appointed, to enter into his or their house or houses, or other place, to view
and search at their will and pleasure all manner of tanned leather, and all
manner of shoes, boots, males, saddels, and all manner of wares wrought and
made, or to be wrought and made of leather, and to sease and carry away all
such leather, shoes, and wares as they shall find insufficiently tanned,
curryed or wrought, or made of evil stuff: that then all and every such
person and persons so denying and withstandyng, and not suffryng the said
searchers or any of them (so sworn and appointed for the time being, to enter
and make search, and sease as is aforesaid) shall lose and forfait for
euerytyme so denying and withstandyng.v.li.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if the persons so
to be appointed for the several searches of leather, and wares made of
leather, as is aforesaid, do refuse with convenient speed to seal leather
sufficiently tanned, or do make default in their search, or do allow that,
which shall be insufficiently tanned, curryed, or wrought, contrary to the true
meaning of this Act, or shall either for affection or corruption conceal the
faults or any of them found in that behalf: that then the Mayor, Baylyffes,
Lords of liberties, and other persons, which by virtue of this Act shall
appoint such searchers and sealers, shall forfait and lose for every such
default and offense.xl.s. the moitie of which forfaiture, shall be to our
Sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs, and successors, and the other moitie to
him or them that will sue for the same in any of the Queen's Majesty's courts
of Record, by byll, playnt, information, or otherwise.

AND forasmuch as heretofore great deceit has been used in cuttyng of the
wombes from the backs, for that the Tanner did not cut of so much as was
meet, but left more to the back (whereof utter sole leather was made) then was
convenient and meet: And forasmuch also as if the Curryer should curry the
whole hyde together, the Shoemaker might then put that part of the hyde called
the wombes into utter sole leather (which is meet but for inner sole leather)
to the great deceipte and damage of the wearer of shoes, boots, or other
stuff made by the shoemaker or cordwayner: Be it therefore enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that such persons as shall be so appointed searchers or
sealers as is aforesaid, shall after the true tanning, and before the currying
of any leather brought to be searched and sealed as is aforesaid, by their
discretions cut of so much of the hyde truly tanned, to be sold to a
Shoemaker, Cordwayner or Cobbler into wombes, as they shall by their oaths think
unmeet to make utter sole leather of, upon pain that the Shoemaker,
Cordwayner, or Cobbler, shall forfait for every such hyde not cut as is
aforesaid.iii.s.iiii.d.

And be it further enacted, that such person and persons as hereafter shall be
assigned and appointed searchers and sealers of tanned leather by virtue of
this Act; shall within the limittes and precinctes of every of their searches,
keep one book or register, wherein they shall enter all such bargaynes as
shall be made for leather, hydes, or skynnes, by any person or persons, during
and by all the time of the fayer or market, being thereto required by the byer
or the seller, and also the pryces of such leather bought and sold, with the
names and dwelling places of the byer and seller, taking for his and their
pain and travel therein to be taken, as well for the sealyng of such leather
and cuttyng of the wombes as is aforesaid, as for registryng thereof, of the
seller of every dycker of leather so entered.ii.d. and so after the rate, and
for every sire dosen of Calves skynnes.ii.d. and of the byer after the same
rate, and no more or greater sum or sums of money to be paid for entryng
of the same, upon pain of forfaiture for not entryng and registryng, or not
cuttyng of, of the wombes as is aforesaid, for every dycker of leather.iii.s.
iiii.d. and for every dosen of Calves skins.iii.s. iiii.d. and so after that
rate.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no person or
persons, shall after the first day of May next coming, sell, exchange, or
put away, or cause to be sold, exchaunged, or put away, any manner of tanned
leather red and unwrought, except he or they register or cause to be registered
the said tanned leather, and every part and parcel thereof, and the price
thereof, upon pain of forfaiture of the value of the leather so sold,
exchaunged, or put away, and not registered.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it shall not be
lawefull to or for any person or persons to bye any tanned leather before the
same shall be searched and sealed, not to carry or cause to be carried out of the
fayer or market, any leather till it be registered as is aforesaid, upon pain
to forfait the said leather or the value thereof, so bought and not searched
and sealed, or carried away and not registered.

And be it further enacted, that no Cordwayner, Shoemaker, or Cobbler, shall
carry or cause to be carried any Ox or Stere hides tanned, whereof any sole
leather shall be cut, out of any fayer or markette whole, before the wombes be
cut of as is aforesaid, upon pain of forfaiture for every hyde otherwise
carried out of the same fayer or markette.vi.s. viii.d. and the hyde or the
value thereof.

AND be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if any Curryer
within the said City of London, or three miles compass, after the feast of
Saint Michaell tharchangell next, do currye any leather insufficiently tanned,
or after the said feast next do not curry such leather, as he does or shall
curry, substauncially and well, according to the meaning and purport of this
Act, or if any Shoemaker, Cordwayner, or Cobbler, within the City of London or
three miles compass of the same, after the said feast of Saint Michaell
tharchangell next, put any tanned leather into any shoes, boots, buskynnes,
startvppes, slyppers, pantofles, or other things made of tanned leather, which
shall not be well and perfectly tanned, according to the purport and true
meaning of this Act, or after the said feast do put any curryed leather into
any boots, buskynnes, startvppes, shoes, slyppers, pantofles, or other things
made of leather, which shall not be well and sufficiently tanned and curryed,
and also sealed as is aforesaid, or do make boots, buskynnes, shoes,
startvppes, slyppers, pantofles, or other things made of English tanned
leather, in other manner then is above specified and ordained, or if any
Shoemaker, Sadler, or other artificer vsyng cutting or working of leather, do
make any wares of any tanned leather insufficiently tanned, and of tanned or
curryed leather, being not sufficientlye tanned and curryed as is aforesaid,
or do not make their wares belongyng to their several occupations sufficiently
and substauncially: That then the Wardens of every of the said companyes of
Sadlers, Curryers, Shoemakers, and other artificers vsyng and exercysyng
cuttyng of tanned leather, for the time being, shall forfaite and lose for
every such default and offense to be committed or done by any person or persons
under their order, survey, or search.v. li.

Provided always, and be it enacted that no manner of person or persons, shall
(after the said feast of Saint Michaell) utter or sell or cause to be uttered
or sold (within the said City of London, or within three miles compass of
the same) any manner of wares apperteynyng to the craft or mystery of any
artificer cuttyng of leather, but only in open shop, common fayer, or
market, whereby the said Wardens may have the true search of the same, in
aduoydyng the penalties upon them by this Act set, upon pain of forfaiture of
all such wares so sold, and.x.s. for every time.

Provided always and be it enacted, that all and every artificer dwelling or
inhabytyng, or which hereafter shall dwell or inhabit within the City of
London, or three miles compass of the same, vsyng or exercysyng any manuell
occupation of cuttyng or workyng of leather into made wares, shall contribute,
pay, and be under the survey and search of the Wardens of such companies of
the said City of London, as the artificers commonly using the like occupation
being free men of the same City of London and of the same company be, touching
and concerning only their wares and stuff made of or with leather, in like
manner and form as other free men of the same company does to the Wardens of
their company within the said City. All which pains, penalties, and
forfaitures aforesaid, of sums of money aforesaid, (except such pains,
penalties, and forfaitures as are before or hereafter by this Act shall
otherwise be disposed) shall be divided into three equal parts, one part
whereof shall be to our Sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs, and successors,
and an other part to him or them that shall first sue for the same in any of
the courts of Record of the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, and successors, by
action of debte, byll, playnt, information, or otherwise: In which suite, no
wager of law or essoigne shall be admitted or allowed, and the third part
thereof, shall go to the City, Borough, Town, or Lord or Lords of liberties,
where the offense shall be committed or done. And all such leather, shoes,
boots, buskynnes, startvppes, slyppers, pantofles, wares, stuff, and other
things whatsoever made of tanned leather, or curryed leather, which shall be
seized by virtue of this Act, or shall be found insufficiently wrought, tanned,
or curryed, and declared by this Act to be forfaited, and shall be seized by the
said searchers, or any other person fyndyng the fault thereof, shall be
distributed as hereafter ensues: That is to say, such leather or stuff so
seized within the City of London or within three miles compass of the same, to
be brought to the Guylde hall in London, there to be praised by indifferent
persons, and the value thereof to be divided into three parts, whereof one part
to be to the first seaser and seasers of the said unlawful stuff, and an
other part to the use of the Chamber of London, and the other part to be
distributed to the poor folks, as well being within the new Hospital of S.
Bartilmewes in London, as to such poor householders as shall be inhabiting within
the City of London, or the circuit aforesaid, at the discressions of such
persons as the Mayor of the same City and four Aldermen of the same for the
time being, shall appoint for the same. And that al such leather, boots,
shoes, saddels, wares, stuff and things made of or with leather as is
aforesaid, which shall be found within any other city, borough, town, or
place win this Realm out of the said City of London and three miles compass,
insufficiently wrought, tanned, or curryed, as is aforesaid, and shall be seized
and taken as forfaited, shall be brought to the common hall of every such City,
Borough, and Town, or to some convenient and open place to be appointed by the
Lord of the liberty, or his deputy, where no common hall is, there to be
praised as is aforesaid, one part of the said value thereof, to be disposed
unto the poor, and in other deeds of charity in those parties, after the
discressio^ of the Majors, Baylyffes, Headboroughes, and Lords of liberties,
an other part to be delivered to the Majors, Baylyffes, and other head officer
of any City, Borough, or Town corporate, to the use of the cominaltie of such
city, borough, or town corporate: and where no such officers be, then to the
Lord or Lords of the liberty where any such forfaiture shall be committed, or
seasour had, and the third part, to the first seaser or seasers of such
leather, stuff, or wares, insufficiently tanned, curryed, or wrought as is
aforesaid, for his and their pains.

Provided always, that no person to whom any such unlawful leather or stuff
shall be given by this Act, shall give or sell any such leather or stuff, to
any person or persons that shall sell the same, upon pain that the byer shall
forfaite for every parcel of such unlawful leather or stuff to be sold
contrary to the true meaning of this last clause.iii.s.iiii.d.

Provided always, that this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not in any
wise be prejudicial or hurtful to the Chauncelours Vicechauncelours, Proctours,
Taxours, and Scholars, their officers, ministers, assigns, or fermers, of the
universities of Oxforde or Cambridge, or any of them, of, for, or concerning
the authority of search of tanned leather, or any of the forfaitures of the
same, which they lawfully had or might have had before the making of this
present Act, so as they do in all things observe such order in, about, or for
searching, sealing, and registring of leather, as by this Act is prescribed
and appointed, upon the pains herein contained: Any thing therein contained to
the contrary hereof, notwtstanding.

And for the aduoydyng of all ambiguities and doubts which may and do grow
upon the definition and interpretation of this word Leather: It is enacted and
declared by these presents, that the hydes and skynnes of Ox, Stere, Bull,
Cow, Calfe, Dear, red and fallowe, Goats, and Sheep, being tanned or tawed,
and every salt hyde, is, shall be, and ever has been reputed and taken for
leather.

And for the better execution of this present Act, be it further enacted, that
all Justices of Assise, Justices of jail delyuery, Justices of peace, and
Stewardes of frauncheses, leetes, and lawedayes, within their several
precintes, jurisdictions and liberties, and Mayor of London for the time being,
within the said City and within three miles compass of the same City, and
all other Majors, Baylyffes, and other head officers of Cities, Boroughes, and
Towns, within their several jurisdictions, liberties, precinctes, offices,
and aucthorities, shall enquire of all the premises in their sessions, leete,
or law day, and hear and determine the same, and also by their discressions
examine all persons suspected to offend this Act or any parcel thereof.

And be it further enacted, that where any manor, liberty, or fraunches
immediately appertains or shall appertain to the Queen's Majesty, her heirs,
or successors: the Steward for the time being of every such manor, liberty,
and fraunches, shall have the like aucthorities, powers, jurisdictions, and
aduauntages, and also shall bear and pay all the like pains, penalties, and
forfaitures as are given, appointed, limited, or laid, by this estatute to or
upon the Lords of liberties and frauncheses, as in this statute is expressed.

And be it declared and enacted, that all currying and dressyng of leather,
commonly called dry currying and freesyng, shall be construed to be dressing and
currying after the manner of Spanishe leather, of what color soever it be, and
that to all artificers (other then Shoemakers, yearly between the last of
September and the xx. of Apryll) it shall be lawefull to use all kinds of
leather dressed and curryed in that manner of dry currying and freesyng, as
they lawfully might before the making of this Act, so that the same leather so
to be used be well and sufficiently tanned, according to the form prescribed
in this Act, and also well and substauncially dressed, curryed, and freesed,
in the kind of dry currying and freesyng abouesayde.

And be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this Act and every part
thereof, shall be construed and adjudged to extend to Wales, as amplye as it does
to this Realm of England, to all intentes, constructions and purposes.

And forasmuch as (notwithstanding the good laws and great penalties in that
behalf provided) great quantities of leather are daily transported out of this
Realm, and specially by the negligence and corruption of comptrollers,
customers, serchers, and their deputies: Be it therefore enacted by the
authority aforesaid, that if any leather, wrought, cut, or unwrought, to the
intent to be sold or bartred, shall hereafter unlawfully be transported or
purposed to be transported into the parts beyond the Sea, from and out of any
Port, Haven, or Creek, of this Realm or Wales, every Comptroller, Customer,
Surueyour, Collectour of tonnage and pondage, and Searcher, and the deputy of
any of them, or any other person hearing or knowing by any ways of any leather
meant to be transported from any place within his office, and do not his best
endeavor to sease the same, or being transported, do not disclose or cause to
be disclosed the same within.xl. days next after such knowledge or hearing
the same, in some court of Record, so as the offendour may be punyshed
according to the laws in that case provided: shall for every the first offense
committed against this article forfaite a C.li. and for the second offense
shall forfait his office.

And be it further enacted, that every Customer, officer, or officers deputy,
that shall make any false certificat of the arrival of any leather in any
Port, Creek, or place of this Realm, shall also forfait for every such
offense a C.li.

Provided always, that neither this Act, nor any article, exposition, or thing
therein contained, shall extend to any Scottishe hydes to be brought into the
town of Barwicke out of the Realm of Scotland, being registered in a book
therefore to be kept, by such person or persons as the Mayor of the said
town for the time being shall thereunto name and appoint, with the name and
surname of the byer and seller, to the intent the English hides may be known
from the Scottyshe, but that the inhabitauntes of the said town of Barwicke
may send, carry, and transport such Scottyshe hydes as they lawefully might
transport before the making of this Act.

And forasmuch as the estatutes heretofore made touching Cordwayners,
Curriers, Tanners, and leather, have been thoroughly considered, and so much of
them and every of them as seems requisite and necessary to be revived and
continued, is inserted and enacted in this present Act: Be it therefore
enacted, that the Statutes hereafter mentioned, that is to say, one Statute
made in the.xxv. year of King Edward the third, the fourth Chapter. And one
other Statute made in the twelfth year of the reign of king Richard the
second the.xii. Chapter. And one other Act or Statute made in the fourth year
of king Henry the fourth the.xxxv. Chapter. And one other act made in the
second year of king Henry the syxt the.vii. Chapter. And one other Act made in
the fourth year of king Edward the fourth, entitled Cordwayners and Cobblers.
And one other Act made in the first year of king Henry the seventh, entitled
an Act against Tanners and Cordwayners. And one other Act made in the.ix. year
of the reign of the said king Henry the seventh, entitled for Curryers and
Cordwayners. And one other Act made in the third year of the reign of our
late sovereign Lord king Henry the eygth, entitled an Act for Curryers to
have search of leather. One other Act made in the fyfth year of our said
sovereign Lord king Henry the eight, entitled an Act for strangers for
bying of leather in open market. One other act made in the xiiii. or.xv. years
of our said late sovereign Lord, entitled an Act concerning the liberty of
Cordwayners and Shoemakers. And one other act made in the.xxii. year of our
said sovereign Lord king Henry the eight, entitled an Act concerning
Tanners and Butchers. And one other Act made in the.xxiiii. year of our said
late sovereign Lord king Henry the eight, entitled an Act concerning true
tannyng and currying of leather. And one other Act made in the second and
third years of the reign of our late sovereign Lord king Edward the syxt
the.ix. Chapter, and revived in the first year of our sovereign Lady the
Queen's Majesty, entitled an Act for true currying of leather. One other Act
made in the third and fourth years of our said sovereign Lord king Edward
the syxt, entitled an Act for bying rough hydes and Calves skins. And as
much of an Act made in the.v. and.vi. years of our said late sovereign Lord
king Edward the.vi. entitled an Act against regrating of tanned leather, as
does provide or give liberty to any person or persons to carry over any shoes,
boots, buskynnes, startvppes, slippers, and other made wares to the town of
Callyce. And one other Act made in the first year of our sovereign Lady the
Queen's Majesty, entitled an Act touching Shoemakers and Curryers. And one
other act made in the said first year, entitled an Act touching sellyng of
tanned leather: shall from and after the said feast of Saint Michaell next
coming be utterly repealed.

An Act for the punishment of such persons as shall procure or commit any
wylfull perjury. The.ix. Chapter.
WHere in the Parliament holden at Westminster in the xxxii. year of the reign
of the late king of famous memory king Henry the.viii. amongst other things
it was ordained, enacted and established, that no person or persons of what
estate, degree, or condition soever he or they were, should from thenceforth
unlawfully suborne any witness or witnesses, by letters, rewards, promises, or
by any other sinister labor or means for to maynteyne any matter or cause, or
to the disturba^ce or hinderaunce of Justice, or to the procurement or occasion
of any manner of perjury by false verdict or otherwise, in any of the kings
courts of the Chauncery, the Star chamber, the white hall, or else where
within any the kings dominions of England or Wales, or the marches of the
same, where any person or persons have, or from thenceforth should have
authority by virtue of the kings Commission, patent, or writ, to hold plea
of land, or to examine, hear, or determine any title of lands, or any matter
or witnesses concerning the title, right, or interest of any lands,
tenementes, or hereditame^tes, upon pain of forfaiture for every such
offense.x.li. the one moitie thereof to be to the king, and the other to the party
that would sue for ye same, as by the same estatute among diverse other
things more plainly it does appear. Since yt making whereof, for that the
said penalty is so small toward the offenders in yt behalf, the said
offense of subornation and sinister procureme^t of false witness has
nevertheless greatly increased and augme^ted, and by reason of the wylfull
perjury committed by the same suborned witnesses, diverse and sundry of the
Queen's Majesty's subjects have sustained disherison and great impoueryshment,
as well of their lands and tenementes, as also of their goods and cattelles.

Be it therefore enacted by our sovereign Lady the Queen, by the assent of the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present parliament
assembled, and by thaucthoritie of the same, that all and every such person and
persons which at any time after the.x. day of April next coming, shall
unlawfully and corruptly procure any witness or witnesses by letters, rewards,
promises, or by any other sinister and unlawful labor or means whatsoever,
to commit any wylful and corrupt perjury, in any matter or cause whatsoever now
depending or which hereafter shall depend in suit and varyaunce, by any writ,
action, hill, complaynt, or information, in any wise touching or concerning any
lands, tenementes, or hereditamentes, or any goods, cattels, debtes, or
damages in any of the courts before mentioned, or in any of the Queen's
Majesty's courts of Record, or in any leete, view of frank pledge, or
lawdaye, ancient demean court, hundred-courte, court baron, or in the court
or courts of the Stannery in the counties of Deuon and Cornwall, or shall
likewise unlawfully and corruptly procure or suborne any witness or witnesses
which shall from and after the said tenth day of Apryll be sworn to testify
in perpetuam rei memoriame that then every such offendour or offenders, shall
for his, hers, or their said offense, being thereof lawfully convicted or
attainted, lose and forfaite the su^me of forty pounds. And if it happen any
such offendour or offenders so being convicted or attaynted, as aforesaid, not
to have any goods or cattelles, lands or tenementes, to the value of.xl.li.
that then every such person so being conuicte or attaynted of any the offenses
aforesaid, shall for his or their said offense, suffer imprisonment by the
space of one half year, without bail or mainprise, and to stand upon the
pyllory by the space of one whole hour, in some market Town next adioynyng to
the place where the offense was committed, in open market there, or in the
market town it self where the offense was committed. And that no person or
persons being so convicted or attaynted, to be from thenceforth received as a
witness to be deposed or sworn in any Court of Record within any of the Queen's
hyghnes dominions of England, Wales, or the marches of the same, until such
time as the judgment given against the said person or persons shall be reuersed
by attaynt or otherwise, and that upon every such reuersall, the parties
grieved, to recover his or their damages, against all and every such person
and persons as did procure the said judgment so reuersed to be first given
against them or any of them, by action or actions to be sued upon his or their
case or cases, according to the course of the common laws of this Realm.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons after the said tenth day of Apryll next coming, either by the
subornation, unlawful procurement, sinister persuasion or means of any
others, or by their own act, consent or agreement, wylfully and corruptly
commit any manner of wylful perjury, by his or their deposition in any of the
Courts before mentioned, or being examined ad perpetuam rei memoriam: that
then every person and persons so offendyng, and being thereof duly convict or
attaynted by the laws of this Realm, shall for his or their said offense lose
and forfait twenty pounds, and to have imprisonment by the space of.vi.
months without bail or mainprise, and the oath of such person or persons so
offendyng, from thenceforth not to be received in any Court of Record within
this Realm of England or Wales, or the marches of the same, until such time
as the judgment given against the said person or persons, shall be reuersed by
attaynt or otherwise. And that upon every such reuersall, the parties grieved
to recover his or their damages against all and every such person and persons
as did procure the said judgment so reuersed, to be given against them or any
of them, by action or actions to be sued upon his or their case or cases,
according to the course of the common laws of this Realm. And if it happen
the said offendour or offenders so offendyng, not to have any goods or
cattelles to the value of twenty pounds: that then he or they to be set on
the pyllorye in some market place within the Shire, City, or Borough, where
the said offense shall be committed, by the Sheriff or his ministers, if it
shall fortune to be without any City or Town corporate: And if it happen to
be within any such City or Town corporat, then by the said head officer or
officers of such city or town corporate, or by his or their ministers, and
there to have both his ears nailed, and from thenceforth to be discredited and
disabled for ever to be sworn in any of the courts of Record aforesaid,
until such time as the judgment shall be reuersed, and thereupon to recover
his damages in manner and form before mentioned. The one moitie of all which
su^mes of money, goods, and cattelles to be forfaited in manner and form
aforesaid, to be to the Queen our sovereign Lady, her heirs, and
successors, and the other moitie to such person or persons as shall be grieved,
hyndered, or molested, by reason of any the offense or offenses before
mentioned, that will sue for the same by action of debte, byll, playnt,
information or otherwise, in any of the Queen's Majesty's courts of Record, in
the which no wager of law, essoigne, protection, or iniunction, to be allowed.

And be it also enacted by the authority aforesaid, that as well the Judge
and Judges of every such of the said courts where any such suite is or
shall be, and whereupon any such perjury is or shall happen to be committed: as
also the Justices of Assizes and jail delyuery in their several circuites,
and the Justices of the peace in every County within this Realm or in Wales,
at their quarter Sessions, both within the liberties and without: shall have
full power and authority by virtue hereof, to enquire of all and every the
defaultes and offenses perpetrated, committed, or done, contrary to this Act,
by inquisition, presentment, byll, or information before them exhibited, or
otherwise, lawfully to hear and determine the same, and thereupon to give
judgment, awarde process, and execution of the same, according to the course of
the laws of this Realm.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Justices of
Assise, of every circuit within this Realm and else where within the Queen's
dominions, shall in every county within their circuites, two times in the year,
that is to say in time of their syttynges, make open proclamation of this
estatute, or of the effect thereof, to the intent no person or persons shall be
ignorant or miscognisaunt of the penalties herein contained.

Provided also that this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not extend
to any spiritual or ecclesiastical court or courts within this Realm of
England or Wales, or the marches of the same: But that all and every such
offendour or offenders as shall offend in form aforesaid, shall and may be
punyshed by such usual and ordinary laws as heretofore has been and yet is
used and frequented in the said ecclesiastical Courts: Any thing in this
present Act contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if
any person or persons, upon whom any process out of any of the courts of
Record within this Realm or Wales, shall be served, to testify or depose,
concerning any cause or matter dependyng in any of the same courts, and having
tendered unto him or them, according to his or their countenance or calling,
such reasonable sums of money for his or their costs and charges, as having
regard to the distaunce of the places is necessary to be allowed in that
behalf, do not appear according to the tenor of the said process, having not
a lawful and reasonable let or impediment to the contrary: that then the
party making defaulte, to lose and forfait for every such offense.x.li. and to
yield such further recompense to the party grieved, as by the discretion of
the Judge of the court out of the which the said process shall be awarded,
according to the loss and hynderaunce that the party which procured the said
process shall sustain by reason of the non appearaunce of the said wytnes or
witnesses, the said several sums to be recovered by the party so grieved
against the offendour or offenders, by action of debte, byll, plaint, or
information, in any of the Queen's Majesty's courts of Record, in which no
wager of law, essoigne, or protection to be allowed.

Provided always yt this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend in
any wise to restrain the power or authority given by Act of parliament, made
in the time of king Henry the.vii. to the Lord Chauncelour of England, and
others of the kings council for the time being, to examine and punysh ryotes,
routes, heinous periuries, and other offenses and misdemeaninges, which Lord
Chauncelour and other since the making of the said act, have most commonly
used to hear and determine such matters in the Court at Westminster commonly
called the Star chamber, nor to restrain the power or authority of the
Lord President and council of the marches of Wales, or of the Lord President
and council in the North, nor of any other Judge having absolute power to
punyshe perjury before the making of this estatute: But that they and every of
them shall and may proceade in the punishment of all offenses heretofore
punyshable, in such wise as they might have done, and used to do before the
making of this Act, to all purposes, so that they set not upon the offender or
offenders less punyshement then is contained in this Act. This Act to
continue unto the end of the next Parliament.

An Act to revive a Statute, made Anno.xxi. H.viii. touching servants
embeaselyng their masters goods. The.x. Chapter.
WHERE in the Parliament holden at London the third day of November, in
the.xxi. year of the reign of the late king of most famous and worthy memory
king Henry the eight, and from thence adiourned to Westminster, and there
holden and continued by diverse prorogations unto the dissolution thereof: It was
ordained and enacted among other things, that all and singular servants to
whom any Caskettes, Jewels, money, goods, or cattelles, by his or their
master or maistres, should from thenceforth be delivered to keep, that if any
such servant or servants withdraw him or them from their said masters or
maistresses, and go away with the said Caskets, Jewels, money, goods, or
cattelles, or any part thereof, to the intent to steal the same, and defraude
his or their said masters and maistresses thereof, contrary to the trust and
confidence to him or them put by his or their said masters and maistresses: Or
else being in service of his said masters or maistresses, without thassent or
commandment of his masters or maistresses, embesell the same Caskets,
Jewels, money, goods, or cattelles, or any part thereof, or otherwise convert
the same to his own use, with like purpose to steal it, that if the said
Caskettes, Jewels, money, goods, or cattelles that any such servant shall go
away with, or which he shall embesell, with purpose to steal it, as is
aforesaid, be of the value of.xl.s. or above: That then the same false,
fraudulent, and untrue act and demeanout, should from thenceforth be demed
and adjudged fellonye, and that he or they so offendyng, should be punyshed as
other fellons for felony committed, by the course of the common law, as by the
said Act among other things therein contained more at large it does and may
appear. Which said Act, in the Parliament begone and holden at Westminster
the.v. day of October in the first year of the reign of the late Queen Mary,
and there continued to the.xxi. day of the same month, that is to say, in
the first session of the same Parliament, by the general words of one Act
then and there made, entitled an Act repealyng of certain treasons,
fellonyes, and praemunire, was from thenceforth utterly repealed and made void.

And forasmuch as since the repeal of the same, the said Act is thought
necessary for the common wealth of this Realm: Be it therefore enacted by our
Sovereign Laid the Queen's Majesty, with thassent of the Lords spiritual
and temporal, and the commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, that the said Act made in the said.xxi. year, and
every clause, article, branch, sentence, and provision therein contained, be
from henceforth revived and put in due execution, according to the intent and
meaning thereof, and from henceforth shall stand good, endure, and continue for
ever.

An Act against the clippyng, washyng, roundyng, or fylyng of the Coins.
The.xi. Chapter.
Where as the offenses of clipping, rounding, washyng, and fylyng of moneys or
coins of this Realm, was declared by an Act of Parliament in the time of king
Henry the fyft, to be treason to the King and the Realm, and according to the
said Act, the same offenses were and did continue treason, until the first
year of the reign of Queen Mary: At which time, the pains and penalties due
for the said offenses, were abrogate and taken away, by the general Act of
repeal then made. By reason whereof, diverse false and evil disposed persons,
perceauyng them selves to be lose and free from the severity and danger of
the said law and penalty, have been of late the more hardy and bold, to
attempt and practyse, for wicked lucre and gaynes sake, to diminishe, impair,
and falsify the moneys and coins curraunt within this Realm, and the
dominions of the same, by such clyppyng, washyng, roundyng, and fylyng thereof,
(not only) to the great dishonor of the Queen's Majesty our sovereign Lady
that now is, by whose great goodness the new moneys or coins of the same,
are now reduced to as much finenesse as ever has been in any time of her noble
progenitors (but also) to the great loss and damage of the good subjects of
this Realm, and more is like to be hereafter, if the same be not spedely met
withal.

For remedy whereof, be it enacted, declared, and establyshed, by the
authority of this present Parliament, that from and after the first day of
May next coming: Clyppyng, wasshyng, roundyng, or fylyng, for wicked lucre or
gaynes sake, of any the proper moneys or coins of this Realm, or of the
dominions thereof, or of the moneys or coins of any other Realm, allowed and
suffered to be curraunt within this Realm, or the dominions thereof, at this
present, or that hereafter at any time shall be the lawful moneys or coins of
this Realm or of the dominions thereof, or of any other Realm, and by
proclamation allowed and suffered to be curraunt hear, by the Queen's Majesty,
her heirs, or successors: shall be taken, deemed, and adjudged by virtue of
this Act, to be Treason, and the offenders therein, their counsaylours,
consentours, and aydours, shall be, from and after the same first day of May,
taken, deemed, and adjudged as offenders in Treason, and being thereof
lawefully convicted or attaynted, according to the due order and course of the
laws of this Realm, shall suffer pains of death, and lose and forfait all
his and their goods and cattelles, and shall also lose and forfait all his and
their lands and tenementes, during his and their natural life or lives only.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and every
person and persons, which have any lawful grant to have and enjoy the
forfaiture of lands, tenementes, goods, or cattelles of offenders, and men
attaynted in high Treason, within any Manor, Lordeshyp, Town, Paryshe
Hundrede, or other precinct within this Realm of England or Wales: shall and
may at all times hereafter have like liberty, to take, sease, and enjoy all
such forfaitures of lands, tenementes, goods, and cattelles, as shall come or
grow within their liberties, by force of the attayndour of any person or
persons, for, and upon any offense or offenses made treason by this Act, as
they or any of them should, ought, or might have, by virtue of any good and
lawefull grant to them or any of them heretofore had or made.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this
Act nor any thing therein contained, nor any attayndour or attayndours of any
person or persons for any offense or offenses made treason by this Act, shall
in any wise extend, or be judged, interpreted, or expounded, to make any
corruption of blood, to any the heir or the heirs of any such offendour or
offenders, or to make the wife of any such offendour to lose or forfait her
dower, of, or in any lands, tenementes, or hereditamentes, or her title,
action, or interest to the same: Any thing in this Act contained, or any
attayndour or attayndours hereafter to be had for any offense or offenses made
treason by this Act, to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any of the
Lords of the Parliament, or Peer of this Realm, for the time being, shall
fortune at any time hereafter to be indicted of any offense made treason by
this Act: that then they and every of them shall have his or their trial by
their peers, as has been used heretofore in cases of high treason.

An Act touching Badgers of Corn and Drouers of Cattle, to be lycensed.
The.xii. Capter.
WHere in the Session of Parliament holden upon prorogatio^ at Westminster
the.xxiii. day of January in the fifth year of the reign of our late sovereign
Lord king Edward the syxt, among other things it was enacted, that
whatsoever person or persons, after the first day of May then next ensuyng,
should ingrosse or get into his or their hands, by bying, contractyng, or
promise taking (other then by demyse, grant, or lease of land or tithe) any
Corn growyng in the fields, or any other Corn or Grain, Butter, Cheese,
Fyshe, or other dead victualles whatsoever, within the Realm of England, to
the intent to sell the same again, shall be accepted, reputed, and taken an
unlawful engrosser or engrossers, with a prouiso and ordinance contained in
the same Act, that it should be lawful to every person or persons, being a
common Badger, Lader, Kydder, or Carryer, which shall be licenced, assigned, and
allowed thereunto by three Justices of the peace of the County where the said
badger, lader, kydder, or carryer shall dwell, which shall sell or deliver in
open fayer or market, or to any other victualler, or to any other person or
persons, for the provision of his or their house or houses, all such Corn,
Fish, Butter, or Cheese, as any such person or persons shall bye or cause to be
bought, and that within one month next after he or they shall so bye any such
corn, grain, butter or cheese, so that the same shall be bought without
forestallyng: shall not be in any wise demed, adjudged, or taken, any offense
contrary to the said Act.

And where also it is provided and enacted by the same Act of Parliament, that
it shall be lawefull to all and every person and persons, known for a common
drouer or drouers, being licensed, aucthorised and allowed in writing by the
Justices of the peace, whereof one to be of the Quoru^, of the County or
Counties where the same Drouer or Drouers shall be most abydyng and dwelling, to
bye Cattle in such Shires or Counties where drouers have been wont in times
past accustomably to bye Cattle, at their free liberty and pleasure, and to
sell the same again. And that it shall be lawful to every person and persons
which shall be assigned and allowed by the Justices of the peace of the County
where he shall dwell, to bye, otherwise then by forestallyng, Corn, Grain, or
Cattle, to be transported or carried by water from any port or place within
this Realm or Wales, unto any other port or place within the said Realm or
dominions, as in the said act amongs other things does appear. Since the
making of which Act, such a great number of persons sekyng only to live
easily and to leave their honest labor, have and do daily seek to be allowed
and licensed to the said offices or doings, being most unfit and unmeet for
those purposes, and also very hurtful to the common wealth of this Realm
as well by thinhaunsyng of the prices of corn and grain, and other the said
victualles, as also by the diminishyng of the number of good and necessary
husbandmen, which said number of drouers of Cattle, and badgers, laders,
kydders, and carryers of corn and grain, are many times without good orders,
and due consideration, assigned and allowed thereunto, to the great prejudice of
the common wealth.

In consideration whereof, be it enacted by the Queen our Sovereign Lady, with
thassent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by thaucthoritie of the same, that no drouer
of Cattle, Badger, lader, kydder, carryer, byer, or transporter of corn or
grain, butter or cheese, be from or after the feast of Easter next after the
first day of this present Parliament, licensed, admitted, assigned, or allowed
to those offices or doings, or to any of them, but only in the general and
open quarters Sessions of the peace to be holden in the shire where such person
or persons so to be admitted, assigned, or allowed, does or shall dwell, and
has or shall have dwelled there by the space of three years next before the
Test of his said license. And that no person or persons after the first day
of May next coming be admitted to the said offices or doings, or to any of
them, but such only as be or have been married men, and shall be at the time of
such license to be granted, householders, and not householde servants, nor
reteyners to any person or persons, and of the age of xxx. years at the least.
And that all lycences being made and granted as is abouesayde, shall have
continuance and be good only for one year next after the date thereof, and
for no more nor longer time. Which said lycences and every of them, shall
bear date of the day and place where the said Sessions shall be holden, and
shall be signed and sealed with the proper hands and seals of three of the
said Justices of the peace being present at the same Sessions at the least,
whereof one to be of the Quorum, upon pain that every person or persons that
shall take any license contrary to this ordinance, to lose and forfait to our
sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs, and successors, five pounds sterlyng.
And that all licenses made and granted, or hereafter to be made and granted,
otherwise then is before expressed, shall from and after the said first day
of May next coming, be void and of none effect.

And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Justices of
the peace, in the said general and open sessions, shall or may by their
discressions, take bond and suertie from time to time by Recognisaunce, of
such as shall be admitted or allowed hereafter a common drouer of cattle, badger,
lader, kydder, carryer, or byer of corn, grain, butter, or cheese, that they,
nor any of them, shall by color of his or their license, forestall or
ingrosse, or otherwise practice or do any act or thing contrary to the tenor
and true meaning, or in defraudyng the said former estatute, or of any matter
or thing therein contained. All which licenses, and every of them, and the said
Recognisaunces, shall be made and written by the clarke of the peace of every
County where such license shall be granted, or by his lawful deputy, and by
none other person or persons. And every person that shall have any such
license, shall pay to the Clarke of the peace or his deputy, for making thereof,
xii.d. at the most, and for every recognisaunce, in form abouesayde to be
made and knowledged.viii.d. at the most, and for registryng of the same
license and Recognisaunce.iiii.d. at the most. For which said fee, the said
Clarke or his deputy, shall have and keep one Register book, and therein
shall register and write all the names, surnames, and dwelling places of such
as shall be licensed as aforesaid, with a brief declaration or entrye of the
said license, and of the day, time, and place, where such a license or
licenses shall be granted. Which book or register, the said Clarke of the
peace, or his deputy, shall have and bring to every Sessyons, to the intent
that it may appear what number of licenses be and shall be from time to time
granted, whereby the better consideration may be had thereof.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that
no person or persons, shall or may by authority of any such license above
mentioned, bye any corn or grain out of open fayer or market to sell again,
unless such person and persons shall be thereunto licenced, and shall have
special and express words contained in such license or licenses that he or
they may so do, upon pain to forfait for every such time that any such person
or persons shall do to the contrary.v.li. The moitie of all which forfaitures
before rehearsed, shall be to the Queen our sovereign Lady, her heirs, and
successors, and the other moitie to him or them that will sue for the same in
any of the Queen's courts of Record, by byll, plaint, action of debt, or
information: in the which byll, playnt, action, or information, no wager of
law, essoigne or protection shall be admitted.

Be it also enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Justices of the
peace in every county within this Realm or Wales, at the quarter sessions,
shall have full power and authority by virtue of this Act, to enquire,
hear, and determine all and every the defaultes and offenses, perpetrated,
committed, or done contrary to this Act, within the County where any such
sessions shall be kept, by inquisition, presentment, byll or information before
them exhibited, and by examination of two lawful witnesses, or by any of the
same ways or means by the discression of the said Justices, and to make
process thereupon, as though they were indicted before them by inquision, or by
verdict of.xii. men or mo. And upon the conuictio^ of the offender, by
information or suit of any other then the Queen, to make extractes of the
moitie of the forfaitures, to be leuyed to the Queen's use, as they use to do of
other fines and amerciamentes grown in the sessions of peace, and to awarde
execution of the other moitie for the complaynant or informer against the
offender, by Fieri facias, or Capias, as the Queen's Justices at Westminster
may do, and use to do. And if any such conviction or attaynder, shall
hereafter happen to be at the Queen's suite only, that then the whole
forfaitures to be extracted and leuyed to the Queen's use only.

Provided always, that this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not in
any wise extend to the prejudice of the liberty of any City or Town
corporate, but that they and every of them shall and may lawefully assign and
license Purueyours for the provision of the same City or Town corporate, in
such manner and form as they might lawefully have done before the making of
this Act.

Provided further, that this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall be in
any wise hurtful or prejudicial unto any the inhabitauntes within the
Counties of Westmerlande, Cumberlande, Lancaster, Chester, and York, or any of
them, but that they may do as heretofore they have lawfully used to do: Any
thing in this present Act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

An Act for the reviving of a Statute, made Anno. ii. and.iii. Phil. and
Marie, for the amending of high ways. The.xiii. Chapter.
WHERE in the Parliament holden at Westminster in the second and third years of
the reigns of the late Princes King Philip and Queen Mary: Amongst other good
Acts then had and made, one necessary Statute was provided and establyshed for
the amendment and reparation of the high ways within this Realm, which Act
was made to endure and continue for seven years, and after the expiration of
the said seven years, till the end of the Parliament then next ensuyng, as by
the same statute more plainly appears. Which seven years, forasmuch as they
be now expired and ended, and the said Act is very beneficial and most
necessary to be continued for the ease and common weal of the people of this
land: Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's excellent Majesty, the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this Parliament assembled, and by
the authority thereof, that the said Act made in the said second and third
years of the reign of King Philip and Queen Mary, touching and concerning the
reparation and amendment of the high ways, and every article and branch of
the same, shall from henceforth be, stand, and continue in full force, effect,
and strength, for and during the term of.xx. years next following from and
after the beginning of this present Parliament: and after thexpiration of the
said.xx. years, to the end of the Parliament then next after the end of the
said.xx. years to be holden and kept.

And forasmuch as the said Statute made in the second and third years of
king Phillip and Queen Mary, in diverse parts of this Realm, serves not to so
good purpose and effect as it may be made, for that such substance and matter
as is most fytt and convenient for the reparations of the said ways, cannot
be lawfullye had, fetched, and taken out of the several grounds and soil
thereunto nygh or adioynyng, being no great loss or detriment to the owners of
the same several grounds and soil, whereby the amendment of the said ways
is little increased, or else of very small and slender continuance, to the
great and continual charge and trouble of the poor people inhabytynge
thereaboutes.

For reformation whereof, and that the reparations of the said high ways may
hereafter in good due manner well and sufficientlye be made: Be it further by
the authority of this present Parliament enacted, that from henceforth it
shall and may be lawful to all and every Superuisour and Superuisours and
orderers of the works for the time being, for the amendment of the said
high ways thereunto elected and appointed, according to the Statute made in
the second and third years of king Phillip and Queen Mary, for the better
reparation and amendment of the ways within their several paryshes and
limittes where they shall be so made Superuisours (if it shall be so to them
thought necessary) to take and carry away of the rubbyshe or smallest broken
stones of any quarry or quarryes lying and being within the paryshe where they
shall be Superuisours, without license, controlment, or impechement of the owner
or owners, so much as by their discressions shall be demed and adjudged
necessary for the amendment of the said ways. And that for default of any
quarrye or quarryes not being within their said paryshe or limittes, or in
defaulte of rubbyshe not to be found in any such quarry or quarryes: it shall
and may be lawful to every such Superuisour or superuisours, for the use
aforesaid, in the several grounds of any person or persons, being within the
paryshe and limittes where they shall be Superuisours, and nyghe adioynyng to the
way or ways wherein such reparations shall be thought necessary to be made, and
wherein gravel, sand, or sinder is lykely to be found, to dygge or cause to
be dygged for Gravel, Sand, or Sinder, and likewise to gather stones lying
upon any lands or grounds within the paryshe, and meet to be used to such
service and purpose, and thereof to take and carrye away so much as by
discression of the said Superuisours shall be thought necessary to be employed
in the amendment of the said high ways.

Provided always, that it shall not be lawful to any such Superuisour, or
superuisours by virtue of this Act, to cause any rubbyshe to be dygged out of
any quarry or quarryes, but only shall extend to such rubbyshe as shall be
found there ready dygged by the owner or owners of the said quarry or
quarryes, or otherwise by his or their license and commandment, nor shall not
extend or give authority to any superuisour or superuisours to dygge or
cause to be dug any gravel, sand, or sinder, in the house, garden,
orcharde, or medowe of any person or persons, nor that it shall be lawefull by
this Act to any such superuisour or superuisours to cause any more pyttes to
be dygged for gravel in any several and enclosed ground, then one only, and
that the same pyt or hole so dug for gravel as is aforesaid, shall not by
any way be in breadth or length above ten yardes over at the most. And that
every such Superuisour as shall cause any such pyt to be made and dygged, for
gravel, sand, or sinder, as is abouesaid, shall within one month next after
any such dyggyng or pyt made, cause the same to be filled and stopped by with
earth, at the costs and charges of the pashioners, upon pain to forfait to
the owner or owners of the soil wherein any such pyt shall be made and dygged,
for every default five marks, to be recovered by action of debte, as in other
like cases of debte has been accustomed.

And forasmuch as the high ways in sundry places of this Realm be full of
continual sprynges and water courses, by continual increase and synkyng
whereof into the ground, the said ways are not only very deep and dangerous,
but also for the most part impossible to be amended and repaired in any good
and sufficient manner, without some further remedy provided for the same: Be it
therefore by thaucthoritie aforesaid further enacted, that from henceforth
every such Superuisour and Superuisours as is aforesaid, shall by force of
this Act, within the paryshe or limittes where he or they shall be Superuisours,
have full power and authority to turn any such water course or spring of
water, being in any of the said high ways, into any dyche or diches of the
several ground or soil of any person or persons whatsoever next adioynyng
to the said ways, in such manner and form, as by the discressions of the said
Superuisours shall be thought metest and most convenient.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the hayes,
fences, dykes, or hedges next adioynyng on either side to any high or common
fayryng way, shall from time to time be dyked, scoured, repaired, and kept
low, and all trees and busshes growyng in the high ways cut down by the
owner or owners of the ground or soil which shall be enclosed with the said
hayes, fences, dikes or hedges aforsaide, whereby the said ways may be open
and the people have more redye and easy passage in the same.

And whereas in the said statute made in the said second and third years of
the reigns of the said King Phillip and Queen Mary, there are but four
days yearly appointed for the reparations and amendment of the said high
ways: Be it further by this present Parlyament enacted, that from hencefourth
there shall be yearly six days, duringe the time and force of this estatute,
observed, used, and employed in reparation and amendment of the said high
ways, in like manner and form as the said four days were lymitted and
appointed to be observed and kept, by the said estatute made in the said
second and third years of King Phillippe and Queen Mary.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from
hencefourth, all and every such Superuisour, or Superuisours, for the time
being, within one month next after defaulte or offense made, done, or
committed by any person or persons, contrary to the provision, purporte and
true meaning of the said estatute made in the second and third years of King
Philippe and Queen Mary, or contrary to the provision, purport and true
meaning of this present Act, shall present every such default or offense, to
the next Justice of peace, for the time being, upon pain to forfait for
every such defaulte and offense, in such forte not by them presented.xl.s.
And that every such Justice of peace, to whom any such defaulte or offense
shall be presented, as is aforesaid, shall certify the same presentment so to
him made, at the next general Sessions within the said County then next
after to be holden, upon pain to forfayt for not certifyinge of every such
presentment, of every such defaulte or offense, as is aforsaide.v.li. And that
the Justices of peace of every County, where the said defaultes or offenses
shall be committed, shall immediately have authority to enquire of any such
defaulte or offense committed within the limittes of their commission, at every
their quarter Sessions, and to assesse such fynes for the same, as they, or
two of them, whereof the one to be of the Quorum, shall think mete.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every Justice of
peace, shall have authority by this statute, upon his own proper knowledge
in the open general Sessions, to make presentment of any high way not well
and sufficiently repaired and amended, or of any other defaulte or offense
committed or done within the County and limittes of his commission, contrary
to the provision and entente of this statute, or the said statute made in the
second and third years of King Phillippe and Queen Mary. And that every such
presentment, made by any such Justice of peace, upon his own knowledge, as is
aforesaid, shall be as good and of the same force, strength, and effect in the
law, as if the same had been presented, found, and adjudged by the oath of.xii.
men. And that for every such defaulte so presented, as is aforesaid, the
Justices of the peace of the said County shall immediately at the said
general Sessions, have authority to assesse such fynes, as to them or two
of them, whereof the one to be of the Quorum, shall be thought mete. Saving every
person and persons, that shall be touched by any such presentment, to have his
or their lawful trauers to the same presentment, as they might have upon any
Indictement of trespass, or forcible entrye, by the laws of this Realm, before
the making of this estatute.

And that all such fynes, forfaitures, and amerciamentes to be assessed by the
said Justices of the peace, at their general Sessions, in any the cases
aforesaid, shall be estreated by the clerk of the peace of the said County,
and shall be leuyed in such manner and form, and employed to such uses and
ententes, as in the said statute made in the second and third years of King
Phillippe and Queen Mary, is limited and appointed. This Act to continue for
twenty years next after the beginning of this present Parliament, and from
thence until the end of the Parlyament, then next after to be holden.

An Act against the forgyng of Evidences and Wrytynges. The.xiiii. Chapter.
Forasmuch as the wicked, perniciouse, and dangerous practice of making,
forging, and publishinge of false and untrue Charters, evidences, deeds, and
writings, has of late time ben very much more practiced, used and put in bre
in all parts of this Realm, then in times passed, not only to the high
displeasure of God, but also to the great iniurye, wrong, hurt, damage,
disherison, and utter undoing of diverse the Queen's Majesty's subjects of this
Realm, and to the great subversion of Justice and truth, which seems to
have grown and happened chieflye by reason that the pains and punishments
limited for such great and notable offenses, by the laws and statutes of
this Realm, before this time have been, and yet are so small, mylde, and easy,
that such evil people have not ben, nor yet are afraid to enterprise the
practisynge and doing of such offenses: Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's
most excellent Majesty, with the assent of the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, that if any person or persons whatsoever, after the
first day of June, now next coming, upon his or their own head and
imagination, or by false conspiracy and fraud with others, shall wittingly,
subtillye, and falsely forge or make, or subtellye cause, or wittinglie assent
to be forged or made, any false deed, Charter, or writing sealed, court roole,
or the will of any person or persons in writtinge, to the intent that the state
of freeholde or inheritance of any person or persons, of, in, or to any
lands, tenementes or hereditamentes, freeholde or Copy hold, or the right,
title or interest of any person or persons, of, in, or to the same, or any of
them, shall or may be molested, troubled, defeated, recovered or charged, or
after the said first day of June, shall pronounce, publishe or show forth
in evidence, any such false and forged deed, Charter, writing, Court roole or
will, as true, knowing the same to be false and forged, as is aforesaid, to
the intent above remembered, and shall be thereof convicted either upon action or
actions of forger of false deeds, to be founded upon this statute, at the suite
of the party grieved, or otherwise, according to the order and due course of
the laws of this Realm, or upon bill or information to be exhibited into the
Court of the Star chamber, according to the order and use of that court:
shall pay unto the party grieved, his double costs and damages, to be found
or assessed in that Court where such conviction shall be, and also shall be set
upon the Pyllorye, in some open market town, or other open place, and there to
have both his ears cut of, also his nosetrelles to be slyt and cut, and seared
with an hot iron, so as they may remain for a perpetual note or mark of his
falshead, and shall forfait to the Queen our sovereign Lady, her heirs and
successors, the whole issues and proffites of his lands tenementes duringe
his life, and also shall suffer and have perpetual imprisonment during his
life. The said damages and costs to be recovered at the suite of the party
grieved, as is aforesaid, to be first paid and leuyed, of the goods and
Cattels of the offendour, and of the yssues and profits of the said lands,
teneme^tes, and hereditamentes of such party convicted, or of one or both of
them, the said title of our said sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs, or
successors to the same, notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, after the said first day of June, upon his or their own head or
imagination, or by false conspiration or fraud had with any other, shall
wittingly, subtelly, and falselye forge or make, or wittinglye, subtelly, and
falsely cause, or assent to be made and forged, any false Charter, deed, or
writing, to the intent that any person or persons, shall or may have, or
claim any estate or interest, for term of years, of, in, or to any manours,
lands, tenementes or hereditamentes, not being copy hold, or any annuitie in
fee simple, fee tail, for term of life, lives, or years, or after the said
day, shall as is aforesaid, forge, make, or cause, or assent to be made or
forged any obligation or bill obligatorie, or any acquittaunce, release, or
other discharge of any debte, account, action, suite, demand, or other thing
personal, or if any person or persons, after the said first day of June,
shall pronounce, publishe, or give in evidence any such false or forged
Charter, deed, writynge, obligation, bill obligatorie, acquittaunce, release or
discharge, as true, knowing the same to be false and forged, and shall be
thereof convicted, by any the ways or means aforesaid: that then he shall
pay unto the party grieved his double costs and damages, to be found and
assessed in such court, where the said conviction shall be had, and shall be
also set upon the Pyllorie in some open market town, or other open place, and
there to have one of his cares cut of, and also shall have and suffer
imprisonment by the space of one whole year, without bail or mainprise.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the party and
parties grieved, by reason of any the offenses aforesaid, shall and may at his
and their pleasure, have and sue his action of forger of false deeds, upon this
statute, against any the offenders in the same, by original writ out of the
Queen's highness Court of Chauncerie, and shall and may have like process
upon the same, as in cases of trespass at the common law, or may at his
pleasure take his suite against any such offenders, in any the premises, by
byl, before the Queen's highness, her heirs and successors, in her Court
commonly called the kings Benche, or in the Court of the Exchequer, in which
suites, no essoygne, iniunction or protection shall be allowed for the party
defendaunt.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that if the party
defendaunt shall be convicted for any the offenses aforesaid, according to the
order and form above lymitted, and shall have received thereupon punishment
corporal; according to this act: that then he shall not eftsoon be
empeached for the same offense.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that although the
party or parties plaintiff, in any such action or byll to be sued, as is
aforesaid, shall after verdyt passed against the defendaunt or defendauntes,
happen to releasse or discharge the judgment or execution upon the same, or
otherwise suffer the same to be discontinued: that yet nevertheless the same
releasse, discharge, or discontinuaunce shall extend only to discharge such
costs and damages, as the same plaintifes should have had against the
defendaunt, and that the Judges before whom the said action or suite shall be
taken, shall and may proceed to Judgment, of, and upon the residue of the
said penalties and forfaitures, and to command execution upon the same, the
said release, discontinuaunce or other discharge, had, made, done, or suffered
by the party plaintiff in any wise notwithstanding: This Act or any thing
therein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that if any person
or persons, being hereafter convicted or condemned of any the offenses
aforesaid, by any the ways or means above limited, shall after any such his
or their conviction or condempnation eftsoon commit or perpetrate any of the
said offenses in fourine aforesaid: that then every such second offense or
offenses, shall be adjudged felonye, and the parties being thereof convicted or
attainted according to the laws of this Realm, shall suffer such pains of
death, loss and forfaiture of their goods, cattles, lands and tenementes, as
in cases of felony, by the common laws of this Realm, ought to be lost or
forfayted, without having any advantage or benefit of Clergy or Sanctuarye.
Saving to every person and persons, bodies polytike and corporate, their
heirs and successors, other then the said offenders, and such as claim to
their uses, all such rightes, titles, interestes, possessions, liberties of
distresses, leasses, rentes, reuercions, offices and other profits and
aduauntages, which they or any of them shall have at the time of such
conviction or attaindour, of, in, or to any the lands, teneme^tes, or
hereditame^tes of any such person, so, as is aforesaid, convicted or
attainted, or at any time before, in as large and ample manner to all intentes
and purposes, as if this Act had never ben had nor made.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that any
such conviction or attaindour of felony, as is aforesaid, or any forfaiture
by reason of the same, shall not in any wise extend to take away the dower of
the wife of any such person attainted, nor to the corruption of blood, or
disherison of any the heir or heirs of any such person or persons so
attainted: This Act or any thing therein contained, or any other statute,
law, usage, custom or thing heretofore used to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that
this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to charge any
ordinary or any there Commissaries, officials, registers, or any other their
officers, or ministers, with any the offenses aforesaid, for puttinge their
Seal of office to any will, to be exhibited unto them, not knowinge the same
to be false or forged, or for writing of the said will or probate of the same:
This Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and every
Justices of Oyer and determiner, and Justices of Assise in their circuites, and
every of them, shall have full power and authority in every of their open and
general Sessions, to enquire, hear and determine, of all and every the
offenses aforesaid, committed or done within the limittes of their Commission,
and to make process for the execution of the same, as they may do against any
person, being indicted before them of trespass, or lawfullye convicted thereof.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that all other
statutes heretofore made provided for forger of false deeds, Charters,
munimentes or writings, and all and every penalty appointed by the same, shall
from and after the said first day of June, be void and of none effect in the
law: Any such statute or thing therein contained to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this Act or any thing therein contained, shall not
extend or be hurtefull in any wise to any Proctour Aduocat, or Register of any
Ecclesiastical court within this Realm, for the writing, setting forth, or
pleading of any proxy made according to the Ecclesiastical laws, or
customs, heretofore used and allowed by the Ecclesiasticalll courts of this
Realm, for the appearaunce of any person or persons, being cited to appear
in any of the said Courts Ecclesiastical, nor to any Archdeacon or
official, for putting their Autentique seal to the said proxies, or proxy,
neither yet to any Judge Ecclesiastical for admittynge of the same: But that
they, and every of them may hereafter do in all points, concerning the same,
as they and every of them might lawfully have done, before the making of this
Act: Any thing in this Act to the contrary in any wise nothwithstandyng.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that if any person or persons whatsoever, that has of his or their own
head, or by false conspiracy and fraud with any other, wittingly, subtelly,
and falselye, forged or made, or shall before the said first day of June,
forge and make any false deed, charter, or writing sealed, or the will of any
person in writing, or any Courterolle, to the intent that the state of
freholde or inheritance, or the right, title or interest of inheritance or
freholde of any person or persons, of, in, or to any manours, lands,
tenementes or hereditamentes, being freholde or copyholde, or that by any such
forged deed, charter, Courtroll or writynge, before the said first day of
June, shall or may be molested, troubled, or defeated of any the said estates
of any lands, tenementes or hereditamentes, being freholde or copyholde, or
if any person or persons have heretofore publyshed or showed forth in evidence,
or before the said first day, shall publyshe or show in evidence, for the
proffe of any title, any false and forged deed, charter, writynge, will or
Courtrolle, as true, knowing the same to be false and forged, as is
aforesaid, to the intent above remembered, and shall be thereof attainted or
convicted, according to the order of the laws of this Realm, either in an
action of forget of false faits, or in an action upon the case, at the suit of
the patrie grieved, his heirs, executours, or assignees: that then the party
so convicted, shall pay and yield damages and costs of suit, to the plaintiff
as shall be assessed, according to the order of the laws of this Realm, in any
such like action or suit, and shall suffer imprisonment, and pay fine and
caunsome at the pleasure of the Queen's Majesty, her heirs and successors.
And if any person or persons, shall after the said first day of June, plead,
publishe, or show forth in evidence, or otherwise, for the proffe of any
title, any false and forged deed, charter, writynge, will, or courtrolle,
(heretofore falselye made and forged, or to be falsely made and forged before
the said first day of June,) as true, knowing the same to be false and
forged, to the intent to have or claim thereby any estate of inheritance,
freholde, or leasse of years, in or to any manoues, lands, tenementes or
hereditamentes, or any annuitye, rent or profit forth of any manours, lands,
tenementes or hereditamentes, or to the intent to alter, defeat, moleste,
trouble, charge, or recover the estate of inheritance, freholde, or for years
of any person, in any manours, lands, tenementes, rentes or hereditamentes:
That then every person and persons that shall so offend, and shall be thereof
convicted in form first above remembered, shall pay unto the party grieved,
double costs and damages, and shall have imprisonment, loss of ears,
slittinge and searynge of nose, and forfaiture of lands, in the same manner and
form as above is lymitted for any person that shall offend by forgynge or
publishynge of any false deed or writynge, as is aforesaid, after the
aforesaid first day of June.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this
Act nor any pain, forfaiture, or thing therein contained, shall extend to
any Attorney, Lawyer, or Counselour, that shall for his clyent plead, show
forth, or give in evidence any false and forged deed, Charter, will,
Courtrolle, or other writing, for true or good, being not party and priuey
to the forgynge of the same, for the pleadynge, showing forth, or geuynge in
euydence of the same: Any thing in this Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this
Act, or any thing therein contained, shall not extend to any person or
persons, that shall plead or show forth any deed or writynge exemplifyed
under the great Seal of England, or under the Seal of any other Autentique
Court of this Realm, nor shall extend to any Judge or Justice; or other
person, that shall cause any Seal of any Court to be set to any such deed,
Charter, or writing, enrolled, not knowing the same to be false or forged:
Any thing in this Act to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act against fond and Fantastical Prophesies. The.xv. Chapter.
Forasmuch as since the expiration and ending of the Statute made in the
time of King Edward the sixte, entytuled an act against fond and
fantastical prophesies, diverse evil disposed persons inclined to the stirring
and mouinge of factions, seditions, and rebellions within this Realm, have been
the more bold to attempt the like practice in fayning, imagining, inuenting,
and publyshing of such fond and fantastical prophesies, as well concerning the
Queen's Majesty, as diverse honorable personages, Gentilmen, and others of this
Realm, as was used and practiced before the making of the said statute, to
the great disquiete, trouble, and peril of the Queen's Majesty, and of this
her Realm. For remedy whereof: Be it ordained and enacted by the authority
of this present Parlyament, that if any person or persons, after the first day
of May next coming, do advisedly, and directly advance, publishe, and set
forth by writing, printing, syngyng, or any other open speech or deed, to any
person or persons, any fond, fantastical or false prophecy, upon or by the
occasion of any arms, fields, beasts, badges, or such other like things
accustomed in arms, cognisaunces, or signettes, or upon, or by reason of any
time, year or day, name, blodshed, or war, to the intent thereby to make any
rebellion, insurrection, dissension, loss of life, or other disturbaunce
within this Reame, and other the Queen's dominions: that then every such person
being thereof lawfullye convicted, according to the due course of the laws
of this Realm, for every such offense shall suffer imprisonment of his body
by the space of one year without bail or mainprise, and shall forfait for
every such offense the sum of ten pounds. And if any such offendour do
after such conviction eftsoon offend in any of the premises, and be thereof
lawfullye convicted, as is aforesaid, that then every such offendour shall for
his second offense and conviction as is aforesaid, suffer imprisonment of his
body without bail or mainprise duringe his life, and shall forfait al his
goods and cattels realles and personales. The moities of every which
forfaitures, shall be to the Queen's highness, her heirs and successors, and the
other moities thereof, to him that shall or will sue for the same in any of the
Queen's courts of record, by action, bill, plainte or information, in which
case no essoygne, wager of law, or protection shall be allowed or admitted.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and every
Justice of assise, Justice of Oyer and determiner, Justice of peace, shall have
full power and authority, by virtue hereof, to enquire, hear and determine,
all and every offense or offenses abouesaid, committed or done within the
lymittes of their commission, contrary to the tenor and meaning of this Act.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no
person or persons; shall at any time hereafter be empeached for any offense
hereafter to be committed or done, contrary to this act, unless he be
therefore empeached or accused within six months next ensuynge any such
offense, by him or them committed or done.

An Act against Coniurations, Enchauntmentes, and Witchcraftes. The.xvi.
Chapter.
WHere at this present, there is no ordinarye ne condign punishment provided
against the practisers of the wicked offenses of coniurations and inuocations
of evil Spirits, and of Sorceries, Enchauntementes, charms and witchcraftes,
the which offenses, by force of a Statute made in the.xxxiii. year of the
reign of the late King Henry the.viii. were made to be felony, and so
continued until the said Statute was repealed by the act and statute of
repeal made in the first year of the reign of the late King Edward the
sixte: Since the repeal whereof, many fantastical and diuelishe persons
have devised and practiced Inuocations and Coniurations of evil and wicked
Spirits, and have used and practiced witchcraftes, enchauntmentes, charms,
and Sorceries, to the destruction of the persons and goods of their niegbours,
and other subjects of this Realm, and for other lewd intents and purposes
contrary to the laws of almighty God, to the peril of their own souls,
and to the great infamy and disquietnes of this Realm.

For reformation whereof, be it enacted by the Queen's Majesty, with the assent
of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, that if any person or
persons, after the first day of June next coming, use, practice, exercise any
Inuocations or Coniurations of evil and wicked Spirits, to or for any intent
or purpose, or else if any person or persons, after the said first day of June,
shall use, practice, or exercise any witchcrafte, enchauntement, charm, or
Sorcerie, whereby any person shall happen to be killed or destroyed: that then
as well every such offendour or offenders in Inuocations or coniurations, as
is aforesaid, their aydours and counselors, as also every such offendour or
offenders, in witchcrafte, enchaunmente, charm, or Sorcerie, whereby the
death of any person does ensue, their aidours and counsailours being of
either of the said offenses lawfully convicted and attainted, shall suffer
pains of death, as a felon or felons, and shall lose the privilege and
benefit of Clergy and sanctuary. Sauinge to the wife of such person, her
title of dower, and also to the heir and successor of such person, his, or
their tytles of inheritance, succession, and other rightes, as though no such
attaindour of the auncestour or predecessor, had been had or made.

And further, be it enacted by the authority aforesiade, that if any person
or persons, after the said first day of June next coming, shall use,
practice, or exercise any witchcrafte, enchauntement, charm, or sorcerie,
whereby any person shall happen to be wasted, consumed, or lamed in his or her
body, or membre, or whereby any goods or Catels of any person shall be
destroyed, wasted, or empayred: then every such offendour or offenders,
their counsailours and aydours, being thereof lawfullye convicted, shall for
his or their first offense or offenses suffer imprisonment by the space of one
whole year, without bail or mainprise, and once in every quarter of the said
year, shall in some market town, upon the market day, or at such time as
any Fair shall be kept, there stand openly upon the Pyllorie, by the space
of.vi. hours, and there shall openly confess his or her error and offense,
and for the second offense; being as is aforesaid, lawefullye convicted or
attained, shall suffer death, as a felon, and shall lose the privilege of
Clergy and Sanctuary. Sauinge to the wife of such person, her title of dower,
and also to the heir and successor of such person, his or their tytles of
inheritance, succession, and other rightes, as though no such attaindour of
the auncestour or predecessor had been had or made.

Provided always, that if the offendour in any of the cases aforesaid, for
which the pains or death shall ensue, shall happen to be a peer of the
Realm, then his trial therein to be had by his peers, as it is used in cases
of fellonye or treason, and not otherwise.

And further, to the intent that all manner of practice, use, or exercise of
Whitchcrafte, Enchauntemente, Charm, or Sorcerie, should be from henceforth
utterly avoided, abolished, and taken away: Be it enacted by the authority
of his present Parlyament, that if any person or persons shall from and after
the said first day of June next coming, take upon him or them, by
wytchcrafte, Enchauntement, charm or Sorcerye, to tell or declare in what
place any treasure of gold or silver should or might be found, or had in the
earth, or other secret places, or where goods or things lost, or stolen,
should be found or become, or shall use or practice any Sorcerie,
Enchauntemente, Charm or Witchcrafte, to the intent to provoke any person to
unlawful love, or to hurt or destroy any person in his or her body, member,
or goods: That then every such person or persons so offendynge and being
thereof lawfullye convicted, shall for the said offense suffer imprisonment by
the space of one whole year without bail or mainprise, and once in every
quarter of the said year, shall in some market town, upon the market day,
or at such time as any Fair shall be kept there, stand openly upon the
Pyllorie, by the space of six hours, and there shall openly confess his or
her error and offense. And if any person or persons, being once convicted of
the same offenses, as is aforesaid, do eftsoon parpetrate and commit the
like offense: That then every such offendour, being thereof the second time
convicted, as is aforesaid, shall forfaite unto the Queen's Majesty, her
heirs and successors, all his goods and cattelles, and suffer imprisonment
during life.

An Act for the punyshement of the vice of Buggorye. The.xvii. Chapter.
WHere in the Parlyament begone at London the third day of November, in
the.xxi. year of the late King of most famous memory King Henry the eight, and
after by prorogation holden at Westminster, in the.xxv. year of the reign of
the said late King, there was one Act and statute made, entytuled, an Act
for the punyshement of the vice of Buggorye, whereby the said detestable vice
was made felony, as in the said Estatute more at large it does and may
appear. Forasmuch as the said statute, concerning the punishment of the
said crime and offense of Buggorie, stands at this present repealed and
void, by virtue of the statute of repeal, made in the first year of the
reign of the late Queen Mary, Sithen which repeal so had and made, diverse
evil disposed persons, have been the more bold to commit the said most
horrible and detestable vice of Buggorie aforesaid, to the high displeasure of
almighty God: Be it enacted, ordained and established by the Queen our
sovereign Lady, and by the assent of the Lords Spiritual and temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parlyament assembled, and by the authority of the
same, that the said statute before mentioned, made in the xxv. year of the
said late King Henry the eight, for the punishment of the said detestable
vice of Buggorye, and every branch, clause, article and sentence therein
contained, shall from and after the first day of June next coming, be
revived, and from thenceforth shall stand, remain, and be in full force,
strength and effect for ever, in such manner, form, and condition as the
same statute was at the day of the death of the said late King Henry the
eight, the said statute of repeal made in the said first year of the said
late Queen Mary, or any words general or special therein contained, or any
other Act or Acts, thing or things, to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act declaryng thaucthoritie of the Lord keeper of the great Seal of
England and the Lord Chauncelour, to be one. The.xviii. Chapter.
WHere some question has of late risen, whether like place, authority,
pre-eminence, jurisdiction and power, does belong, and of right ought to belong
to the office of the Lord keeper of the great Seal of England for the time
being, as of right does and ought to belong to the office of the Lord
Chauncelour of England for the time being, or not.

For declaration whereof, and in aduoydyng such question hereafter: Be it
enacted and declared by the Queen our Sovereign Lady, the Lords spiritual
and temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, that the common law of this Realm is, and always
was and ought to be taken, that the keeper of the great Seal of England for
the time being, has always had, used, and executed, and of right ought to
have, use, and execute, and from henceforth may have, perceive, take, use, and
execute, as of right belongyng to thoffice of the keeper of the great Seal of
England for the time being, the same and like place, authority,
pre-eminence, jurisdiction, execution of laws, and all other customs,
commodities, and aduauntages, as the Lord Chauncelour of England for the time
being, lawfully used, had, and ought to have, use, and execute, as of right
belongyng to the office of the Lord Chauncelour of England for the time
being, to all intentes, constructions and purposes, and as if the same keeper of
the great Seal for the time were Lord Chauncelour of England.

An Act for the repeal of a branch of a Statute, made Anno.i. Ed. vi.
touching the conueying of Horses and Geldynges out of the Realm. The.xix.
Chapter.
WHere in the Parliament holden at Westminster in the first year of the reign
of the late king Edward the sixth, brother to our Sovereign Lady the Queen's
Majesty that now is, amongst diverse other Statutes, there was one Act and
Statute made against the carryng and conueying of any Horses, Geldynges, or
Mares out of this Realm: In which Act, amongst other things, there is one
prouiso or branch contained in these words hereafter following. That is to
say: Provided always that it shall be lawful to every of the kings subjects,
that shall pass over beyond the Sea, to ship and carry with them Horses or
Geldynges for their only occupation in their iourneyes, and not to the intent to
sell the same beyond the Sea, and that intent to be judged by oath of him or
them that so will carry over any Horse or Geldyng, which oath shall be taken
before the Customers or their deputies, or Searcher of every such Port where
the same Horse or Geldyng shall be shypped, before the shyppyng thereof, as by
the same Act and prouiso it does and may appear. And although the same Act
and Statute in all parts thereof (except the said prouiso) is very beneficial
and profitable for this Realm: Yet nevertheless, by color of the said
prouiso and branch contained in the said Statute, many evil disposed
persons, of a covetous and greedy desire, do daily transport out of this Realm
very great numbers of Horses and Geldynges, and do exchange and sell the same
in the parties beyond the Seas, for their own private lucre and gain. And
because the trial of such offenses is by force of the said prouiso and
branch, mentioned in the said Statute, no otherwise to be tried or judged but
only by the oath of the offendour him self: therefore the offenders therein
do escape unpunished, and thereby many persons are greatly encouraged daily to
commit the like offenses, contrary to the true meaning and intent of the said
Statute.

For the redress whereof: Be it enacted by the Queen's Majesty, with thassent
of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by authority of the same, that all the said
prouiso and branch before rehearsed and mentioned, and contained within the
said Act and Statute, and every article and sentence contained within the
said prouiso, shall from henceforth be repealed, made void, and of none
effect, and that all the residue of the said Act and Statute, shall stand,
remain, and be in full force and strength: Any thing herein specified to the
contrary not withstandyng.

An Act for the punyshement of Vagaboundes, calling them selves Egiptians.
The.xx. Chapter.
WHere as since the Act made in the first and second years of the late King
and Queen, king Phillip and Queen Mary, for the punyshement of that false and
subtyle company of vagaboundes calling them selves Egiptians, there is a
scruple and doubt risen, whether such persons as being borne within this Realm
of England, or other the Queen's highness dominions, and are or shall become of
the fellowship or company of the said vagaboundes, by transforming or
disguysyng them selves in their apparel, or in a certain counterfeit speech
or behauour, are punyshable by the said Act, in like manner as others of that
sort are being strangers borne, and transported into this Realm of England.

Therefore for thaduoydyng of all doubts and ambiguities in that behalf, and
to the intent that all such sturdye and false vagaboundes of that sort, living
only upon the spoil of the simple people, may be condignely met withal and
punyshed: Be it enacted by the Queen our sovereign Lady, the Lords spiritual
and temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, that the said Statute made in the first and second
years of the said late king and Queen, concerning those bagaboundes calling
them selves Egiptians, shall continue, remain, and be in full force, strength,
and effect.

And yet moreover, be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all and
every person and persons, which from and after the first day of May now next
ensuyng, shall be seen or found within this Realm of England or Wales, in any
company or fellowship of vagaboundes, commonly called or calling them selves
Egiptians, or counterfaityng, transformyng, or disguising them selves by their
apparel, speech, or other behauour, like unto such vagaboundes commonly
called or calling them selves Egiptians, and so shall or do continue and
remain in the same, either at one time or at several times, by the space of
one month: That then the same person or persons, shall by virtue of this Act,
be demed and judged a felon and felons, and shall therefore suffer pains of
death, loss of lands and goods, as in cases of felony by the order of the
common laws of this Realm, and shall upon the trial of them or of any of
them therein, be tried in the county and by the inhabitauntes of the county or
place where they or he shall be apprehended or taken, and not per medietatem
lingue, and shall lose the privilege and benefit of Sanctuary and Clergy.

Provided always and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that this Act
shall not in any wise extend to any child or children being within the age
of.xiiii. years, nor to any of the said persons being in prison the last day of
this present parliament, so that he or they so being in prison, do
within.xiiii. days next after his or their delivery out of prison, either
depart out of this Realm of England and Wales, or put him or them selves to
some honest service, or exercise some lawful work, trade, or occupation, and
utterly forsake the said idle and false trade, conversation, and behauour, of
the said counterfeit or disguysed vagaboundes, commonly called or calling them
selves Egiptians.

Provided also, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the said
Act made in the first and second years of the said late king and Queen, shall
not extend to compel any person or persons, borne within any the Queen's
Majesty's dominions, to depart out of this Realm of England or Wales, but
only to constrayne and bind them and every of them to leave their said
naughty, idle, and ungodly life and company, and to place them selves in some
honest service, or to exercise them selves at home with their parents, or else
where honestly, in some lawful work, trade, or occupation: Any thing
mentioned in the said former Act to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding.

An Act for the punishment of unlawful taking of Fyshe, Dear, or Hawks.
The.xxi. Chapter.
WHERE as well the Queen's Majesty, and her most noble progenitors, as also
the noble men, gentlemen and diverse other persons of great dominions,
Lordeshyppes, manours, and possessions, within this Realm, have of ancient
and long time had, and many of them now of late, to their great costs and
charges, for the necessary and better provision and maintenau^ce of their
housholdes, have erected and made in and upon their several demeanes,
grounds, and possessions, as well pooles, stanges, stews, motes, pyttes or
pondes, for the only increase of Fish, and have stored the same with Pikerell,
Breame, Tenche, Carpe, and diverse other good kinds of fish, for the necessary
increase of vittayles, and for the better maintenau^ce and provision of their
houses as is aforesaid, and also have emparked, environed and enclosed many
parcels of their said demeanes, soyles, grounds, and possessions, for the
breedyng, cherishyng, and increase, as well of red as fallowe Dear, within
their several parkes and enclosures, for the causes before declared, and also
have breeding within their woods and grounds diverse Eyries of hawks of sundry
kinds, to their great pleasure and commodity. Yet nevertheless, the said
several waters, grounds, parkes, and enclosures so being had, erected, and
made, and also being so stored and replenyshed, have been from time to time by
evil disposed persons, of a very evil, wylfull, and insolent disposition, and
of mallyce and displeasure, not only by night time broken and entered into, but
also the heddes or dammes of the said pondes, pooles, stanges, motes, stews,
or several waters, have been maliciously, wylfully, and unlawfully cut out, and
the pales, fences, and enclosures of the said parkes and grounds, broken,
cast down, and set open, and the Fish, Dear, and Hawks within the same,
taken, destroyed, carried away, and stolen, not only to the great loss and
damage of the owners thereof, and to the small encouragement of other good
subjects myndyng the careful provision of such necessary victualles, but also
to the manifest emboldenyng of many like wylfull malefactors and malicious
offenders, whereby many ryots, manslaughters, mischiefs and other
inconveniences have been daily perpetrated, and like to be committed and done,
if circumspect remedy be not hereunto provided.

Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's Majesty, the Lords spiritual and
temporal, and the commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, that if any person or persons after the feast of
Pentecost next coming, shall at any time by day or by night, unlawfully
without authority, break, cut down, cut out, or destroy any hedde or
heddes, damme, or dammes, of any pondes, pooles, motes, stanges, stews, or
several pyttes, wherein fyshe are, or shall happen to be put in or stored
withal by the owners or possessioners thereof, or do or shall wrongfully fyshe
in any the said several pondes, pooles, motes, stanges, stews, or pyttes, to
the intent to destroy, kill, take, or steal away any of the same fyshe, against
the will, mind, or pleasure of the owners or possessioners of the same, not
having any lawefull title or authority so to do, and thereof be lawefully
convicted, at the suite of our sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs, or
successors, or the party grieved: shall suffer imprisonment of his or their
bodies by the space of three months, and shall yield and pay to the party
grieved his treble damages, and after the said three months expired, shall
find sufficient suerties for his or their good abearing against the Queen our
sovereign Lady, her heirs and successors, and al her liege people, for the
space of seven years after, or else shall remain and continue still in prison,
without bail or mainprise, until such time as he or they so offending can and
shall find such sufficient suerties during the said time and space of seven
years, as is aforesaid.

AND be it also enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that if any
person or persons after the said feast of Pentecost next coming, at any time
by night or by day, in manner aforesaid, wrongfully or unlawfully break or
enter into any park empaled, or any other several ground closed with wall,
pale, or hedge, and used for the keeping, breedyng, and cherishing of Dear, and
so wrongfully hunt, drive, or chase out, or take, kill or slay any Dear within
any such empaled park, or closed ground, with wall, pale, or other
enclosure, and used for Dear as is aforesaid, or do or shall take away any
Hawke or Hawks, or the eggs of any of them, by any ways or means
vnlawefullye, out of any the woods or ground of any person or persons (not
having lawefull authority or license so to do) and thereof be lawfully
convicted at the suite of our sovereign Lady the Queen, or the party grieved
as is aforesaid: shall likewise suffer imprisonment of his or their bodies by
the space of three months, and shall yield and pay to the party grieved his
treble damages. And after the said three months expired, shall find
sufficient suerties for his or their good abearing, for the space of.vii. years
after, against the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, and successors, and all her
liege people, as is aforesaid, or else shall remain and continue still in
prison without bail or mainpryse, until such time as he or they so offending
can and shall find such sufficient suerties during the said time of vii.
years, as is before rehearsed.

Provided always, that this Act or any thing therein contained, extend not
to any park or enclosed ground hereafter to be made and used for Dear,
without the grant or license of our sovereign Lady the Queen, her heirs,
successors, or progenitors.

Provided always, and be it enacted by authority aforesaid, that it shall be
lawful for the party grieved to sue and take his further remedy against all
and every such offendour and offenders for his loss and damages, and to
recover the treble value of the same in this behalf, as well before Justices of
Oyer and determiner, Justices of Assyse in their circuites, and Justices of the
peace, as else where, in any other the Queen's courts of Record, and that upon
the true satisfaction of the said treble damages to the party grieved, or
upon the confession and knowledge thereof by the same party before the said
Justices in open sessions to be holden within the County where the offense was
committed: it shall be at the liberty of the same party grieved, to whom the
said offense was committed, to release at his pleasure the said suertishyp of
good abearyng, at any time within the said seven years, or before: Any thing
in this present Act before specified or expressed to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the Justices of
Oyer and determiner, Justices of Assyse in their circuites, and Justices of the
peace and jail delyuery, in their Sessions, shall by virtue hereof, have power
and authority to enquire, hear, and determine all and singular the offenses
aforesaid, and to make and awarde process thereupon, as well upon inditementes
taken before them, as by byll of complaynt, information, or any other action,
in which suite or action, no essoigne, wager of law nor protection shall be
allowed.

AND be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons, at any time hereafter shall fortune to be bound before any of the
Justices before mentioned, to the Queen her heirs or successors, for his or
their good abearyng for seven years, according to the tenor of this Act, and
the same party or parties so bound, shall afterward within the said seven
years come before the Justices of the peace of the said County where the
said offense was committed, or some of them, in open Sessions, and there in
the said open Sessions confess and acknowledge his or their said offense or
offenses, and be sorry therefore, and satisfy the party or parties grieved,
according to the tenor of this Act: That then the same Justices before whom
the said confession shall be so made, shall and may have power and authority
by virtue of this Act, in the same open Session, or in any other open Sessions
afterward to be holden before the said Justices in the said County, within
the said term of seven years, if it shall seem good to their discressions, to
discharge the said Recognisaunce and bond so taken, and also the said party
and parties so bound: This Act or any thing therein contained to the contrary
thereof, notwithstanding.

An Act against the carrying of Sheep skins and Peltes over the Sea, not
being Staple ware. The.xxii. Chapter.
FOR reformation of many griefs, lamentably declared this present Parliament,
by diverse artificers of this Realm, workyng leather: It may please your
royal Majesty, that it may be enacted and established with thassent of this
high court of Parliament, that it shall not be lawefull to or for any manner of
person or persons whatsoever, from and after the first day of May next
coming, to make any Peltes, that is to say, to pull, sheare, clip, or take
away the woll of any Shepeskynne or Lamb skin, or to bye any skin of any
Stagge, Hynde, Bucke, Do, Goat, Fawn, or Kyd, or the peltes or skynnes of
any of them, unless such person or persons so making any peltes, or bying such
skins, as is aforesaid, do make or cause to be made thereof tawed or lawfully
tanned leather or parchment, or otherwise convert the same into semittes,
panels, or other their own necessary uses, upon pain yt every person so
making peltes, or bying any of the skins or peltes aforesaid, contrary to the
meaning of this Act, shall forfait and lose the value of all such peltes or
skins so made and bought, and.ii.s.vi.d. for every skin or pelte so bought,
or pelt so made, as is aforesaid.

And be it further enacted, that it shall not be lawful to or for any person
or persons whatsoever, from and after the feast aforesaid, to ship, or convey,
or cause or procure to be shipped or conveyed, in, or to any ship, boat, or
vessel, in, or upon the Sea, or in, or upon any Haven, river, creke, or place,
within this Realm of England and Wales, or either of them, any manner of
shepeskinnes, wolfels, shorelinges, morelinges, or the skins of any stagge,
hynde, bucke, do, goat, fawn, or kyd, or the peltes or skynnes of any of
them, or the leather made of them or any of the^, to the intent to transport or
carry the same into any the parts beyond the Seas, there to be uttered,
bartred, or sold, by way of marchau^dise or otherwise, upon pain of forfaiture
of al such skins or peltes, bought, laden, shipped or transported, contrary
to the true meaning of this Act, or the value of them, and also. ii.s.vi.d. of
lawful money of England, for every fell, shorlyng, morling, pelt or skin
aforesaid, bought, laden shipped, or transported, contrary to the tenor and
true meaning of this present Act. The moitie of al which forfaitures, shall be to
our sovereign Lady the Queen's Majesty, her heirs and successors, and the
other moitie to him or the^ that will sue for the same, by action byll, plaint,
information, or otherwise, in any of the Queen's Majesty's courts: In which
action, no essoigne, protection, or iniunction, shall be admitted or allowed.

Provided always, that it shall and may be lawful to the merchants of the
Staple, the merchants of Newcastel upon Tine, Hartilpoole, and Barwicke,
their sruauntes, factours, and atturneyes, and every of them, to carry and
transport all such lawefull wares, as heretofore they have been accustomed, and
lawfully might: Any thing in this Act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

An Act for the due execution of the writ de excomunicato capiendo.
The.xxiii. Chapter.
FOrasmuch as diverse persons offendyng in many great crimes and offenses,
appertaynyng merely to the jurisdiction and determination of the
Ecclesiastical courts and Judges of this Realm, are many times unpunished for
lack and want of the good and due execution of the writ de excomunicato
capiendo, directed to the Sheriff of any County, for the taking and
apprehending of such offenders. The great abuse whereof, as it should seem,
has grown for that the said writ is not retournable into any Court that
might have the judgment of the well executing and seruyng of the said writ,
according to the contents thereof, but hitherto have been left only to the
discretion of the Sheriffs and their deputies, by whose negligences and
defaultes, for the most part, the said writ is not executed upon the offendour
as it ought to be. By reason whereof, such offenders be greatly encoraged to
continue their sinful and criminous life, much to the displeasure of almighty
God, and to the great contempt of the Ecclesiastical laws of this Realm.
Wherefore for the redress thereof: Be it enacted by the Queen's most excellent
Majesty, with thassent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons
in this present Parliament assembled, and by thaucthoritie of the same, that
from and after the first day of May next coming, every writ of Excomunicado
capiendo that shall be granted and awarded out of the high Court of Chauncery,
against any person or persons within the Realm of England, shall be made in the
time of the Term, and returnable before the Queen's highness, her heirs, and
successors, in the court commonly called the kings Bench, in the term next
after the Test of the same writ, and that the same writ shall be made to
conteyne at the least.xx. days between the Test and the return thereof. And
after the same writ shall be so made and sealed, that then the said writ
shall be forthwith brought into the said Court of the kings Benche, and there in
the presence of the Justices shall be opened, and delivered of Record to the
Sheriff or other officer to whom the serving and execution thereof shall
appertain, or to his or their deputy or deputies. And if afterward it shall
or may appear to the Justices of the same Court for the time being, that the
same writ so delivered of Record, be not duly returned before them at the day
of the return thereof, or that any other defaulte or negligence has been used
or had in the not well serving and executing of the said writ: that then the
Justices of the said court, shall and may by authority of this Act, assesse
such amerciament upon the said Sheriff or other officer in whom such default
shall appear, as to the discression of the said Justices shall be thought mete
and convenient, which americiament so assessed, shall be extreated into the
court of the Exchequer, as other amerciamentes have been used.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the Sheriff or
other officer to whom such writ of Excomnicato capiendo or other process by
virtue of this Act shall be directed, shall not in any wise be compelled to
bring the body of such person or persons as shall be named in the said writ or
process, into the said court of the kings Bench at the day of the return
thereof: but shall only return the same writ and process thither, with
declaration briefly how and in what manner he has served and executed the
same, to the intent that thereupon the said Justices may then further therein
proceade, according to the tenor and effect of this present Act. And if the
said Sheriff or other officer to whom thexecution of the said writ shall so
appertain, do or shall return, that the party or parties named in the said
writ, can not be found within his Baylywyke: that then the said Justices of
the kings Bench for the time being, upon every such return shall award one
writ of Capias, against the said person or persons named in the said writ of
Excomunicato capiendo, retournable in the same Court in the Term time, two
months at the least next after the Test thereof, with a proclamation to be
contained within the said writ of Capias, that the Sheriff or other officer
to whom the same writ shall be directed, in the full County court, or else at the
general Assizes and Jail delyuery to be holden within the same County, or at
a quarter Sessions to be holden before the Justices of peace within the same
County, shall make open proclamation, ten days at the least before the
return, that the party or parties named in the said writ, shall
within.vi. days next after such proclamation, yield his or their body or
bodies to the jail and prison of the said Sheriff or other such officer,
there to remain as a prisoner according to the tenor and effect of the first
writ of Excomunicato capiendo, upon pain of forfaiture of.x.li. And thereupon
after such proclamation had, and the said.vi. days past and expired, then
the said Sheriff or other officer to whom such writ of Capias shall be directed,
shall make return of the same writ of Capias into the said court of the
kings Bench, of all that he has done in thexecution thereof, and whether the
party named in the said writ have yielded his body to prison or not. And if
upon the return of the said Sheriff, it shall appear that the party or
parties named in the said writ of Capias, or any of them, have not yielded
their bodies to the jail and prison of the said Sheriff or other officer
according to the effect of the same proclamation: that then every such person
that so shall make default, shall for every such default, forfaite to the
Queen's hyghnes, her heirs, and successors, ten pounds, which shall like wise
be extreated by the said Justices, into the said court of Exchequer, in such
manner and form, as fines and amerciamentes there taxed and assessed are used
to be. And thereupon the said Justices of the kings Bench shall also awarde
forth one other writ of Capias against the person or persons that so shall be
returned to have made default, with such like proclamation as was contained in
the first Capias, and a pain of.xx.li. to be mentioned in the said second
writ and proclamation. And the Sheriff or other officer to whom the said
second writ of Capias shall be so directed, shall be serve and execute the same
second writ in such like manner and form as before is expressed for the
seruyng and executyng of the said first writ of Capias. And if the Sheriff
or other officer shall return upon the said second Capias, that he has made
the proclamation according to the tenor and effect of the same writ, and
that the party has not yielded his body to prison, according to the tenor of
the said proclamation: that than the said party that so shall make default,
shall for such his contempt and default forfait to the Queen's highness, her
heirs, and successors, the sum of.xx.li. which said sum of.xx.li. the
said Justices of the kings Benche for the time being, shall likewise cause to
be extreated into the said court of Exchequer, in manner and form aforesaid.
And then the said Justices shall likewise awarde forth one other writ of
Capias against the said party, with such like proclamation and pain of
forfaiture as was contained in the said second writ of Capias. And the
Sheriff or other officer to whom the said third writ of Capias shall so be
directed, shall serve and execute the said third writ of Capias in such like
manner and form as before in this Act is expressed and declared for the
seruyng and executyng of the said first and second writtes of Capias. And if
the Sheriff or other officer to who^ thexecution of the said third writ shall
appertain, do make return of the said third writ of Capias, that ye party
upon such proclamation has not yielded his body to prison according to the
tenor thereof: that then every such party for every such contempt and defaulte,
shall likewise forfait to the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, and successors,
other.xx.li. which sum of.xx.li. shall likewise be extreated into the said
Court of the Exchequer in manner and form aforesaid, and thereupon the said
Justices of the kings Benche shall likewise awarde for the one writ of Capias
against the said party, with like proclamation and like pain of forfaiture
of.xx.li. And that also the said Justices shall have authority by this Act
infinitely to awarde such process of Capias with such like proclamation and
pain of forfaiture of.xx.li. as is before limited against the said party,
that so shall make default, in yeldyng of his body to the prison of the
Sheriff, until such time as by return of some of the said writtes before
the said Justices, it shall and may appear that the said party has yielded
him self to the custody of the said Sheriff or other officer, according to
the tenor of the said proclamation, and that the party upon every default and
contempt by him made against the proclamation of any of the said writtes so
infinitelye to be awarded against him, shall incur like pain and forfaiture
of.xx.li. which shall likewise be extreated in manner and form aforesaid.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that when any person or
persons shall yield his or their body or bodies to the hands of the sheriff
or other officer, upon any of the said writtes of Capias: that then the same
party or parties that shall so yield them selves, shall remain in the prison
and custody of the said sheriff or other officer, without Bail, Baston, or
maynpryse, in such like manner and form, to all intentes and purposes, as he
or they should or ought to have done if he or they had been apprehended and
taken upon the said writ of Excomunicato capiendo.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that if any Sheriff or
other officer, by whom the said writ of Capias or any of them, shall be
returned as is aforesaid, do make an untrue return upon any of the said
writtes, that the party named in the said writ has not yielded his body,
upon the said proclamations or any of them, where in deed the party did yield
him self according to the effect of the same: That then every such Sheriff
or other officer, for every such false and untrue return, shall forfait to
the party grieved and dampnified by the said return, the su^me of.xl.li. For
the which sum of.xl.li. the said party grieved shall have his recovery and
due remedy by action of debt, byll, playnt, or information, in any of the
Queen's courts of Record, in which action, byll, playnt, or information, no
essoigne, protection, or wager of law shall be admitted or allowed for the party
defendaunt.

Saving and reserving to all Archbyshops and Bishops, and all others having
authority to certify any person excommunicated, like authority to accept
and receive the submission and satisfaction of the said person so
excommunicated, in manner and form heretofore used, and him to absolve and
release, and the same to signify, as heretofore it has been accustomed, to the
Queen's Majesty, her heirs, and successors, into the high court of Chau^cery,
and thereupon to have such writtes for the deliverance of the said person, so
absolved and released from the Sheriffs custody or prison, as heretofore they
or any of them had, or of right ought or might have had: Any thing in this
present Statute specified or contained to the contrary hereof, in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided always, that in Wales, the Counties palatines of Lancaster, Chester,
Durham, and Eley, and in the Sinque ports, being jurisdictions and places
exempt, where the Queen's Majesty's writ does not run, and process of Capias
from thence not retournable into the said Court of the kings Benche, after
any significauit being of record in the said court of Chauncerye, the tenor
of such Significauit by Mittimus shall be sent to such of the head officers of
the said country of Wales, Counties palatines and places exempt, within whose
offices, charge, or jurisdiction the offendour shall be resiaunt, that is to say,
to the Chauncelour or Chamberlayne for the said County palatine of Lancaster
and Chester, and for the Sinque ports, to the Lord Warden of the same, and
for Wales and Eley, and the County palatine of Durham, to the chief Justice
or Justices there. And thereupon every of the said Justices and officers to
whom such tenor of Significauit with Mittimus shall be directed and delivered,
shall by virtue of this estatute have power and authority to make like process
to the inferior officer and officers, to whom the execution of process there
does appertain, returnable before the Justices there at their next Sessions or
Courts, two months at the least after the Test of every such process. So
always, as in every degree they shall proceade in their Sessions and Courts
against the offenders, as the Justices of the said Court of Kings Benche
are limited by the tenor of this Act, in Term times to do and execute.

Provided also, and be it enacted, that any person at the time of any process of
Capias, before mentioned, awarded, being in prison or out of this Realm in the
Parties beyond the Sea, or within age, or of non sane memory, or woman
covert, shall not incur any of the pains or forfaitures before mentioned,
which shall grow by any return or default happenyng, during such time of
nonage, imprisonment, being beyond the Sea, or non sane memory. And that by
virtue of this estatute, the party grieved may plead every such cause or
matter in bar of and upon the distress or other process that shall be made for
leuying of any of the said pains or forfaitures. And that if thoffendour
against whom any such writ of Excomunicato capiendo shall be awarded, shall
not in the same writ of Excomunicato capiendo have a sufficient and lawful
addition, according to the form of the estatute of prime of Henry the.v. in
cases of certain suites, whereupon process of exigent are to be awarded. Or if
in the Significauit it be not contained that thexcommunication does proceade
upon some cause or contempt of some original matter of heresye, or refusyng to
have his or their child baptized, or to receive the holy Communion as it is
now commonly used to be received in the Church of England, or to come to
divine service now commonly used in the said Church of England, or error
in matters of religion, or doctrine now received and allowed in the said
Church of England, incontinencie, usury, simonie, perjury in the
Ecclesiastical court, or Idolatrye: That then all and every pains and
forfaitures limited against such persons excommunicate by this estatute by
reason of such writ of excomunicato capiendo wantyng sufficient addition, or
of such Significauit wanting all the causes before mentioned, shall be utterly
void in law, and by way of plea to be allowed to the party grieved. And if
the addition shall be with a nuper of the place: then in every such case, at the
awarding of the first Capias, with proclamation according to the form before
mentioned, one writ of proclamation (without any pain expressed) shall be
awarded into the County where the offendour shall be most commonly resyant at
the time of the awardyng of the said first Capias, with pain in the same
writ of proclamation, to be retournable the day of the return of the said
first Capias with pain, and proclamation thereupon at some one such time and
court, as is prescribed for the proclamation upon the said first Capias with
pain. And if such proclamation be not made in the County where thoffendour
shall be most commonly resiaunt, in such cases of additions of nuper: that then
such offendour shall sustain no pain or forfaiture by virtue of this estatute,
for not yeldyng his or her body, according to the tenor before mentioned: Any
thing before specified to the contrary hereof, in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for the reuiuyng of a Statute, made Anno xxiii. H. viii. touching the
repayryng of Gaoles. The.xxiiii. Chapter.
WHere in the Parliament begone and holden at London the third day of November
in the.xxi. year of the reign of the late king Henry the eight, and from
thence adiourned to Westminster, and there holden and continued by prorogation
until the.xv. day of January, in the.xxiii. year of the reign of the said
late king Henry the.viii. there was then in that Session of Parliament one Act
and Statute made and establyshed for the making of Gaoles in diverse Shires of
this Realm, which Act was then made to continue and endure for one year next
after the end of the same Parliament, as by the same Act more plainly
appears. And where also the said Act and Statute at diverse Parliamentes
holden and kept after the making thereof, in the time of the said late king
Henry the.viii. was continued and kept in full force and strength until the
death of the said late king, as by the same Acts of continuance more plainly
may appear. And where in the Parliament begone and holden at Westminster the.v.
day of October, in the first year of the reign of our late sovereign Lady
Queen Mary, and there upon prorogation continued and kept until the.vi. day of
December then next following, the said Act and statute, and al clauses and
sentences therein contained, was then made to continue and endure until thend
of.x. years next ensuyng the end of the same Parliament, as by the same Act
more plainly does appear.

And forasmuch as the said Act for the making of Gaoles, made in the
said.xxiii. year of the reign of the said late king Henry the viii. is very
good and profitable for the common wealth of this Realm: Be it therefore
enacted and establyshed by the authority of this present Parliament, that the
said Act for making of Gaoles, and all clauses, articles, and provisions in the
same contained, shall continue and endure in full force and effect, and be
observed and kept in all things unto the end and term of ten years next
ensuyng the last day of this present Parliament.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the Justices of
peace of every of the Shires named and expressed in the said Act, or the most
part of the said Justices of peace in every of the said Shires, within the
limittes of their Commission, shall have full power and authority by virtue
of this Act, at all time and times within the said term of ten years, to do,
make, and execute, and cause to be done, made, and executed, all and every such
Act and Acts, thing and things requisite for the making and buyldyng of the
said Gaoles, as they or any of them might or ought at any time have done by
virtue of the said Act made in the said.xxiii. year of the said late king
Henry the eight.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the
Justices of peace of the Counties of Pembroke, Glamorgan, Cardigan, Radnor, and
Mountgomery in Wales, or the most part of them, resiaunt within every of the
said Counties, and all such Surueyours, Collectours, and other persons to whom
thexecution of the said first resited estatute does or may appertain, shall
have such and like power and authority to do and execute al and every such
thing and things, for and concerning the buyldyng and new making of Gaoles,
as the Justices of peace and other persons before mentioned of any of the
Counties contained in the said first resited estatute have in that behalf.
And that also the most part of the Justices of the peace, resyaunt within any
the Counties specified in the said first resited estatute, shall and may do
and execute all and every thing and things mentioned in the said first resited
estatute, touching or concerning the said Gaoles: Any doubt or ambiguitie
heretofore had or moved, or hereafter to be had or moved, notwithstanding.

Provided also, that thinhabitauntes of any of the Counties specified in the
said first resited Act, or in any of the said Counties of Wales, shall not
be charged, by force hereof or of the said first resited Act, to bear or
sustain any costs or charges for the building, repayryng, or new making of
any Jail or Gaoles, where any other person or persons, body politic or
corporate ought by law, prescription, or by any other good or lawful ways or
means, to build, make, or repair the same.

An Act to fill up Iuries de circumstantibus lackyng in Wales. The.xxv. Chapter.
WHere in the Parliament holden at Westminster in the.xxxv. year of the reign
of our sovereign Lord king Henry the.viii. father to our most dear Sovereign
Lady the Queen's Majesty that now is, one wholesome and profitable Act and
estatute among other was then establyshed and enacted, entitled by the name
of an Act, concerning the apparaunce of Iurers in Nisi prius, where among
other things in the Act, it was established, that where a full Jury returned
betwixt party and party, did not appear before the Justices of Assise or
Nisi prius, or else after apparaunce of a full Jury by challenge of any of the
parties, the Jury was like to remain untaken for defaulte of Jurors, that the
same Justices upon request made by the party plaintiff or demaundaunt, should
have authority by virtue of the same Act, to command the Sheriff, or
other Minister or Ministers, to whom the making of the said return should
appertain, to name and appointe, as often as need should require, so many of
such other hable persons of the said County, then present at the said assise
or Nisi prius, as should make up a full Jury, which persons, so to be named
and impanelled by such Sheriff, or other Minister or Ministers, should be
added to the former panell, and their names annexed to the same, and further,
as in the same Act more plainly may appear. Which said beneficial act
does not extend unto the.xii. Shires of Wales, ne to the County Palatyne of
Chester, nor to the County Palatine of Lancaster, nor to the County Palatine
of Durham, by reason whereof many Iuryes remain untaken betwixt the parties,
what for lack of apparens of Iurers, and some because of chalenges, to the
great hynderaunce of Justice, and great expenses and charges to the parties.

For reformation whereof, be it enacted by the Queen our Sovereign Lady, with
the assent of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and the Commons in this
present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same: That in every
of the Shires of Wales, that is to say, Pembrok, Karmarthyn, Cardigan,
Brecknocke, Radnor, Glamorgan, Mountgomery, Denbighe, Flynt, Meryonith,
Anglesey, Carneruan, and in the County Palatine of Chester, and in the said
County Palatine of Durham, and in the said County Palatine of Lancaster,
where a full Iurye shall not appear before the Justices of the great Session
in any of the said Shires or County Palatines, or their deputies there, or else
after apparaunce of a full Iurye, by challenge of any of the parties the Jury
is like to remain untaken, for defaulte of Jurors: that then the same
Justices, in every of the said Shires, and County Palatines for the time
being, or their deputy or deputies, upon request made by the party plaintiff
or demaundaunt, s^^l have full authority by virtue of this Act, to command
the Sheriff or other Minister or Ministers, to whom the making of the said
Return shall apperteyne, to name and appointe, as often as need shall require,
so many of such other able persons of the said Counties then present at the
said great Session, as shall make up a full Iurye, which persons so to be
named and impanelled, by such Sheriff or other Minister or Ministers, shall be
added to the former panell, and their names annexed to the same. And that every
of the parties shall and may have his or their challenge to the Jurors so
named, added and annexed, to the said former panell, by the said Sheriff or
other minister or ministers, in such wise as if they had been impanelled upon
the venire facias, awarded to try the said issue. And that the said Justices
and every of them, and their deputy or deputies, shall and may proceade to
the trial of every such Issue with those persons that were before impanelled
and returned, and with those newly added and annexed to the said former
panell, by virtue of this act, in such wise as they might or ought to have
done, if all the said Jurors had been returned upon the writ of venire
facias, awarded to try the said issue. And that all and every such trial
had, shall be as good and effectual in the law to all intentes, constructions
and purposes, as if such trial had been had and tried by.xii. of the Jurors
impanelled and returned upon the writ of venire facias, awarded to try such
issue. And in case such persons as the said Sheriff, minister or ministers,
shall name and appointe as is aforesaid, or any of them, after they shall be
called, be present, and do not appear, or after his or their appearaunce, do
wilfully withdraw him or them selves from the presence of the Court: that
then such Justices or their deputies, shall and may set such syne upon every
such Iurour making defaulte or wilfully withdrawinge him self as aforesaid,
as they shall think good by their discressions, the said fine to be levied in
such manner and form as issues forfaited and lost by Jurors for defaulte of
their apperaunce, as is provided by the law and custom of the said Countries
of Wales, and Counties Palatines aforesaid, where such issues are forfaited.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that where any Iurye
that shall be returned by the Sheriff or other Minister or Ministers, shall be
made full, by the commandment of the said Justices, or their deputies, by
virtue of this present Act, that yet nevertheless such persons as were
returned in the said panel, by the Sheriff, or other Minister or Ministers,
to try any such issue, that shall not appear, but make defaulte, shall lose
the issues upon them returned, in such wise as though the same Iurye had
remained for defaulte of Jurors.

Provided always, and be it further enacted, that upon a reasonable excuse,
for the defaulte of appearaunce of any Iurour or Jurors, sufficiently proved
before the Justices of the great Sessions, or their deputies in the Countries
and Countyes Palatines aforesaid, at the day of their appearaunce, by the
oaths of two lawful and honest witnesses, that the same Justices shall have
authority by their discressions to discharge every such Iurour of every
such forfaiture of issues upon him returned, and that the said Sheriff or
Sheriffs, or other Minister or Ministers, having commandment by the said
Justices to omit the retournynge of such issues, as is aforesaid, upon such
Iurour or Jurors, shall be therein discharged of the penalties aforesaid, for
the non retournynge of the said Issues, and that yet notwithstanding the said
return to be good and effectual in the law: Any law, usage, ordinance, or
custom to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if the
said Justices, or their deputies, before whom any such Iurye should appear
in the Shieres or Counties Palatines where such issue is to be tried, do not
come at the day and place appointed: that then every one of the same Jurors
shall be discharged, for forfaitynge of any Issues upon him returned in the same
writ. And the Sheriff or other Minister or Ministers, shall be likewise
discharged of the penalties of this estatute, for the non retournynge of such
Issues, as are before lymitted in this Act: Any article or sentence herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

And also be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that if upon any
such writ of habeas corpora or distringas issues be returned upon any
hundredours, Iurour or Jurors, by the Sheriff or other Minister or Ministers,
to whom the execution of the same writ or writtes shall apperteyne, where as the
same hundredours and Jurors shall not be lawfully somoned, warned, or
distreyned in that behalf: that then every such Sheriff or other Minister or
Ministers aforesaid, shall lose for every such offense so committed, double
so much as the said Issues returned upon such hundredours or Jurors not
lawfully somoned, warned or distreyned, shall amounte unto, the moytie of all
which forfaitures contained in this present Act, other then the issues to be
returned upon the Jurors as is aforesaid, shall be to the Queen our sovereign
Lady, her heirs and successors, and the other half, to him that will sue for
the same, by action of debt, bill, plainte, or information, in the Queen her
graces great Court, within the said County where such forfaiture shall
happen to be, before the said Justices, his or their deputy or deputies, in
which, no wager of law, essoygne, or protection shall be allowed ne admitted.
Sauinge to all manner of persons, and bodies polytike and corporate, their
heirs and successors, having lawful right, title and interest to have such
issues to be before any such Justices or their deputies, at any time or times
hereafter lost and forfaited, all such right, title and interest, as they or
any of them should or ought to have had to such Issues to be lost and
forfeyted as though this Act had never ben had or made.

Provided also that this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to any City or town corporate, or so any Sheriff, minister or
ministers in the same, for the return of any inquest, or panell, to be made
and returned of persons inhabytynge in the said Cities or towns corporate,
but that they and every of them, shall and may return such persons in every
such inquest or panell, as before this time they might and have been accustomed
to do, and as if this Act had never ben had or made, so that the same
Sheriff, mynister or ministers return upon such persons as shall be
impanelled, such like and reasonable Issues, as they ought to return, any
thing in the same contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for the confirmation of a Subsedy, granted by the Clergy. The.xxix.
Chapter.
WHere the Prelates and Clergy of the Province of Cantorburye have most
louynglye and liberallye for certain considerations, given and granted to the
Queen's Majesty, a Subsedye of six shillynges of the pound, to be take and
leuyed of all and singular the spiritual Promotions within the same Province,
duringe the term of three years, now next ensuynge, in such certain manner
and form, and with such exceptions and provisions, as be specified and
contained in a certain instrument by them thereof made and delivered to the
Queen's highness, under the Seal of the most reverend father in God Mathewe
now Archbyshoppe of Cantorburye, and Primat of all England, which instrument
is now exhibited in this present Parliament to be ratifyed. The tenor whereof
ensues in these words:

The Prelates and Clergy of the province of Cantorbury, being lawefully
congregated and assembled together in a convocation or sinode, calling to their
remembrance the great and manyfolde benefits which they have many and
sundry ways received of you Majesty's most gracious bountifulnes,
principally for the setting forth and aduaunceyng of Gods holy word, his
sincere and true religion, and abolyshyng all forrayne power contrary to the
same. Considering also the great debtes wherewith thimperiall Crown of this
Realm was charged, when it pleased almighty God first to call your hyghnes
to the governance of the same. And further, waying the great and intolerable
charges wherewith your Majesty of late has been burdened, in the repayryng and
furnyshyng of your Majesty's Navy, and provision of armor and munitions,
most necessary and requisite for the defense and safegarde of this Realm,
whereof the same at the beginning of your hyghnes reign was void and
destitute. And finallye, ponderyng the inestimable charges sustained by your
hyghnes, as well of late days, in reducyng the Realm of Scotland to unity
and concord, as also in procuryng as much as in your hyghnes lies, by all
kind of godly and prudent means, the abatyng of all hostility and
persecution within the Realm of France, practiced and used against the
professors of Gods holy Gospel and true religion, and in defendyng and
preseruyng this your highness Realm and natuall Subjects, in Christian peace
and tranquillity, against all assaults of forrayne enemies hitherto, during
all the time of your most gracious and happy reign.

In consideration of the premises, and for a true declaration of our bounden
duties, good hearts, and minds toward your Majesty, with one uniform
agreement, accord, and consent, together with most hartye good will, have
given and granted, and by these presents do give and grant to your highness,
your heirs, and successors, one Subsedye in manner and form following. That
is to say: That every Archebyshop, Bishop, Deane, Archedeacon, Prebendarye,
Prouoste, Master of Colleges, Master of Hospitalles, Parson, Vicar, and
every other person and persons of whatsoever name or degree he or they be,
enjoying any Spiritual promotion or other Temporal possessions to the same
Spiritual promotion annexed, now not divided nor separated by Act of
Parliament, or otherwise from the possession of the Clergy, shall pay to your
hyghnes, your heirs, and successors, for every pound that he may yearly
dispende by reason of the said Spiritual promotion, the sum of sire
shyllynges.

And for the true and certain value of the said promotions, and every of
them, whereof the payment shall be made, the rate, taxation, valuation, and
estimation, remaynyng of Record in your Majesty's Court of Exchequer for the
true payment of the perpetual Disme, concerning all such promotions as be in
possession of the Clergy, or any other not divided by Act of Parliament, or
otherwise alienated from the possession of the Clergy, shall be followed and
observed without making any valuation, rate taxation, or estimation, other then
in the said Record is comprised.

Provided always, that forasmuch as the tenth part of the said valuation
and rate before mentioned, is yerelye paid to your hyghnes for the perpetual
Disme, so as there remains only nine parts to the Incumbent clear: this
Subsedye of.vi. shyllynges the pound, shall be understood and meant only of the
same nine parts, and of no more.

Provided always, that no person that is already promoted to any Spiritual
benefice or promotion, since the last day of September last paste, or that
hereafter shall be promoted to any Spiritual benefice or promotion on this side
the last day of September, which shall be in the year of our Lord God a
Thousand five Hundredth sixty and five, by reason whereof they be, shall, or
may be, charged to the payment of the first fruits, shall be contributory or
charged to your hyghnes, your heirs, or successors, with any part of this
Subsedye, during the first year of his said promotion.

AND your said Prelates and Clergy also do grant, that this Subsedye of six
shyllynges the pound, of the yearly value of every promotion taxed as is
aforesaid, shall be paid to your Majesty, your heirs, or successors, within
three years next ensuyng the date hereof. That is to say, two shyllynges of
every pound in every of the said three years. The first payment thereof, to
be due at the last day of September next ensuyng, which shall be in the year of
our Lord God a Thousand five Hundredth sixty and three. And the second
payment thereof to be due at the last day of September then next following,
which shall be in the year of our Lord God a Thousand five Hundredth sixty and
four. And the third payment thereof to be due in the said last day of
September then next following, which shall be in the year of our Lord God a
Thousand five Hundredth sixty and five, and to be delivered and paid yearly
by such person and persons as in this present grant shall be appointed to have
the collection thereof, to the Lord high Treasourer or under Treasourer of
England for the time being, or to such person or persons, and in such place
or places as shall please your highness to appoint, to be paid at or before
the.xiii. day of January in every of the said three years, without paying any
thing to the Receauour or Receauours, or to any other officers or persons to be
assigned for the receipte thereof, for any discharge or Quietus est upon any
payment and receipte of the said Subsedye to be given and delivered, but
only.iii. s. iiii. d. for the general and final acquittaunce or Quietus est
for every years payment.

Item we your said graces Prelates and Clergy also do grant, that every
Priest and all other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical persons, having any pencion
by the reason of the dissolution of any the late Monasteries, Colleges, free
Chappelles, Chauntries, Fraternities, Guyldes and Hospitalles, or of any other
spiritual dignity or corporation now dissolved within the said province of
Cantorbury, shall likewise pay to your highness, your heirs, and
successors.vi. shyllynges of every pound of the said Pencions within the
said three years, at such days and times as is before specified. And that for
the sure payment thereof, deduction and retention of the said six shyllynges,
shall be made yearly in the hands of the payers of the said Pencions after the
rate and proporcion of two shyllynges the pound, every of the said three
years, to be delivered and paid by your hyghnes Receauours and officers
deputed for the payment of such Pencions, unto your Majesty's use, at such
time and to such persons as the Subsedye of.vi. shyllynges of the pound
aforesaid, shall be paid unto.

Item your said Prelates and Clergy do grant, that every Priest or Minister
Stipendary, receauyng annual Stipende of eight pounds by the year and under,
being no perpetuity within the said Province, shall pay unto the use of your
highness, your heirs, and successors, six shyllynges and eight pence in
every of the said three years, at such time and to such persons as the
said Subsedye shall be paid, and under the same penalties as the rest of the
Clergy do pay for their promotions.

And that every Priest receauyng Stipende above eight pounds yearly, and not
above ten pounds, to pay likewise ten shyllynges. And that every Priest
receauyng stypende above ten pounds, and not above thirtene pounds six
shyllynges and eight pence, to pay thirtene shyllynges and four pence yearly
during the said three years, at such time and to such persons as the said
Subsedy shall be paid. And that every Priest taking stipende above thirtene
pound six shyllynges and eight pence, to pay likewise.xii. d. of the pound
every year during the said three years. And for defaulte or lack of payment
of the said stipendaries, that every Parson, Vicar, or other Spiritual or
Temporal person, proprietarie, or Fermour, hyryng any Priest or Minister to
serve in any place, shall be aunswerable for the payment of the said Priest or
Minister in that behalf, after the said rates, and shall and may make
retention of his and their wages quarterly, of so much as the said
Stipendaries be charged with by this present grant, every of the said three
years.

Item your said Prelates and Clergy further do grant, that every
Archebyshoppe and Bishop, and the Sea being void, every Deane and Chapter
of that See void, shall be Collectours of this Subsedye within their proper
diocese, during the said three years, other then of the pencioners
aforesaid. And the said Archebyshoppe, Bishop, or other Collectours, and the Sea being void, the Deane and Chapter shall certify into your Majesty's
court of the Exchequer under their seals, the names and surnames of all such
Stipendary Priests and Ministers, as be chargeable by this Act, before
the.xxiiii. day of January yearly, during the said three years.

And for the better recovery of the said Subsedye, your said Prelates and
Clergy most humblye beseech your hyghnes, that every Collectour of the said
Subsedye, and of every part and parcel thereof, and their lawefull deputy or
deputies, may have full power and authority by your Majesty, and your high
court of Parliament, to use all such ways, means, and process, as be
prescribed in your Act of perpetual Disme, for the collection and leuying of
the same, and shall make account thereof before the Lord high Treasourer or
under Treasourer of England for the time being, or any other officers by your
highness to be appointed for the same, and in such place as your Majesty
likewise shall assign, in such wise and after such form only as the
said Archebyshoppe and Bishops be now charged for the collection of the
perpetual Disme, whereby is meant how the lack and defaulte of payment of
and for any particular promotion, shall only charge the Incumbent, and such
as be bound to pay the same, and that upon such pains as be provided in that
Act to Parliament of perpetual Disme, against them that make defaulte in
that behalf, at or upon the days of payment before expressed.

And that the Archbyshoppe, Bishop, or Deane and Chapter, gatheryng that
which they can receive, and making payment thereof, shall for the rest not by
them received, be discharged by their certificat to be made before the.xxiiii.
day of Ianuarye in every of the said three years, unto your highness court
of Exchequer. And.vi. pence of every pound wherewith the Collectour shall be
charged in his account, clearly to be paid into the said receipte (or into
such other place as shall please your hyghnes to appoint) shall be allowed to the
said Collectour for his said account for the same, for the charges and
collection, portage, safe conueying and paying of the said Subsedye.

Also your said Prelates and Clergy do further most humblye beseech your
hyghnes, that it may be enacted by your Majesty's authority, and your high
Court of Parliament, that where diverse Curates liable to this Subsedye, being
often times remoueable, do serve as well in diverse Impropriations belongyng to
your Majesty, as in other Impropriations and other Spiritual promotions
belongyng to other persons: that for the spedy recovery of the said Subsedye,
it may be lawful to the Collectour or Collectours of the said Subsedye, their
deputy or deputies, to levy the said Subsedye upon the Fermour or Fermours,
and occupyers of all such Impropriation or Impropriations and Spiritual
promotions, by all censures of the Church and every of them, or by way of
distress, of the tithes of the said Impropriation or Impropriations, or
otherwise upon the goods and cattels of the said Fermour or Fermours and
occupyers, in which no inhibition, prohibition, repleuie, or other process
awarded to the contrary shall be obeyed: Any laws, statutes, privileges, or
customs to the contrary hereof, heretofore made, granted, or used, or
hereafter to be made, granted, or used to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding. And that it may be lawful to the Collectours and the officers
and ministers of such Archbyshoppe, Bishop, or Deane and Chapter, for not
payment at any time of the said three years abouesayde, to praise and value
the said distress or distresses, by two indifferent neighbors by him to be
chosen, and the distress or distresses so praised, to sell, and thereof to
detayne so much money as shall amount to the sum paiable to your hyghnes,
with the charges of the said Collectour in that behalf, and and rest of the
money made of the said distress, to be delivered and paid to the owner or
occupyer thereof. And that every Archbishop, and Bishop, or Deane and Chapter,
of every See vacaunt, and other persons chargeable to and with the collection
of the Subsedye of six shyllynges the pound, within the said province of
Cantorbury, may have upon every payment thereof, made to the Lord high
Treasourer or under Treasourer of England for the time being, or to such
person or persons, place and places, to whom and where it shall please your
hyghnes to appoint for the receipte thereof, in, or at the.xiii. day of January
in every of the said three years, a sufficient acquittaunce in writing of the
said Lord high Treasourer or under Treasourer, or such persons as your hyghnes
shall assign for the receipt thereof, the same acquittaunce witnessing the
receipt of as much of the same sum of the said Subsedy as shall be so received.
And every such acquittaunce in writing sealed and subscribed, with the name or
names of the said Lord high Treasourer or under Treasourer for the time
being, or of such other person or persons as it shall please your hyghnes to
appoint for the same receipt as is aforesaid, may be good and affectuall in
the law, and also sufficient discharge to all intentes, constructions, and
purposes. And that every person and persons which shall have and receive any
such acquittaunce, shall pay but only.iii.s.iiii.d. to the Clarke for the
writing of the same.

Provided always that every Incumbent making such default of payment, after
certificat of every such default made, and exhibited into your Majesty's court
of Exchequer, shall forfait and lose only that his benefice or promotion for
which he makes default, and for the same shall incur no other forfaiture,
loss, damage, pain, or penalty: Any other pain, clause, article, or
condition in the said Statute of perpetual Disme to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Provided always, that no Spiritual promotion, or any lands, possessions, or
revenues annexed to the same, being charged by this grant or Act of the
province of Cantorbury, or any goods or cattelles growyng, being, or renewyng
of the same, or appertainyng to the owners of the said Spiritual promotion,
shall be charged or made contributory to any Fyftene or Tenth, or any other
Subsedye already granted to your hyghnes by the laity, or hereafter to be
granted, during the term of the said three years.

Item your said Prelates and Clergy further grant, that all Deanes,
Archdeacons, Dignities, Preachers, and Prebendaries, of all Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches within the said province, shall be charged with this
Subsedye for their own promotions only, thereof to pay.vi. shyllynges of the
pound, within the said three years, as is above rehearsed. And that those
porcions of rentes, revenues, and spiritual promotions, which have been given
or impropried unto the said Cathedral or Collegiate Churches, or any of them,
by your highness or any your highness noble progenitors, or any other person or
persons, whatsoever he or they be, or were, for the yearly maintenance of
poor men, Schoolemaisters, Ushers, Grammarians, Peticannons, Vicars Chorall,
and Readers of divinity, Choristers, and all other necessary and daily
officers and ministers of such Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, shall not be
charged with any part of this Subsedye.

Provided also, that every Parson, Vicar, or other spiritual person, paying
any pention, whereof none allowaunce is made in the valuation of his said
promotion or benefice, shall and may retain.ii.s. of every pound of every
such pention, every year during the said three years, to his own relief, in
consideration that he is charged to pay this Subsedy of.vi. shyllynges of the
pound, out of every pound of the whole value of his promotion.

Provided also, that where certain lands, tenementes, rentes, tithes,
pencions, portions, fruits, and other hereditamentes, lately belongyng to
diverse Cathedral Churches, and to other places Ecclesiastical within the
said province of Cantorbury, which were given and assigned to be bestowed and
spent to and on the fyndyng and maintenance of certain Chaunteries,
Anniuersaries, Obites, Lyghtes, Lamps, and other like charges, intentes and
purposes, of late came into the hands and possession of the late king of
famous memory king Edward the syxt, by force of a Statute thereof made in the
first year of his gracious reign, as by the said Statute more plainly
appears: That the said Cathedral Churches, and the Deanes, or Presidentes
and Chapitours of the same, and all other places and persons, to whom the said
lands, rentes, and all other the premises, or any of them, did latelye
appertain, shall not be charged to and with any contribution or payment of
this Subsedye, of, and for that part or portion whereunto the said late king
was entytled or possessed of, nor of and for any of the said yearly paymentes,
going out or paid out of the premises, or any part thereof: But that this
said Subsedye shall be understood to be chargeable and due only of all and
singular lands, tenementes, rentes, tithes, pencions, porcions, fruits, and
other hereditamentes, which do yet still remain not disseuered from the
hands and possession of the said Cathedral Churches, and other the places
and persons aforesaid. And that deduction and allowaunce be made to them and
every of them in the payment of the said Subsedye, out of the whole value,
taxation, and estimation, made for the payment of the said perpetual Disme,
remaynyng of Record in your hyghnes court of Exchequer, for that rate and
portion, or yearly payment, which came to the hands and possession of the
said late king Edward the syxte, or otherwise severed from the possessions of
the said Cathedral Churches, and other places and persons aforesaid, by force
of the Statute premised.

Provided always that this Subsedy granted by the Clergy, shall not be
demanded or leuyed out of any benefice, house of students, or College,
situate or set within the universities of Cambridge and Oxforde, or of any
benefice or other revenues unto the said universities, or either of them, or
to any house of students or College in the same united, appropried, or
appertaynyng, or of the Colleges of Wyndsor, or Eaten nyghe Wyndsor, or of the
College called Saint Mary College by Winchester, founded by Willyam Wickham,
sometime Bishop of Winchester, or of any Hospitals or Gra^mer Scooles, or of
any other Church or benefice, or of any other revenues to the said
universities, houses, Colleges, Hospitals, Alms houses, Alms halles, or
Grammar Scooles, or to any of them, annexed, appropriated, or otherwise
appertaynyng.

Provided always, that all Parsons and Vicars, whose benefices be of the
valuation of five pounds or under, after the rate of the perpetual Tenth,
shall not be charged or chargeable with this Subsedy, or any part thereof.

Provided also, that every Priest, and all other late Ecclesiastical persons,
having a pention by reason of the dissolution of the late Monasteries,
Colleges, free Chapels, Chauntries, Fraternities Guyldes, and Hospitals, or
any other Incorporations within the province of Cantorbury, or any of them, and
being of the su^me of xl.s. or under, and not above, shall not be charged or
chargeable to this said Subsedy, or any part thereof, for any such pention
of.xl.s. or under: Any thing contained in this grant to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

And for the true and sure payment of this Subsedy granted by your said
prelates and Clergy of the province of Cantorbury, according to the tenor,
purport, effect, and true meaning of this present grant: your said Prelates
and Clergy most humbly desire your highness, that this their said gift, grant,
and Subsedy, and every matter, su^me of money, clause, provisions and sentences
in this instrument contained, concerning the said Subsedy, may be ratified,
established and confirmed by authority of this your hyghnes court of
Parliament.

Wherefore, for the true and sure payment of the said Subsedye, granted by
the said Prelates and Clergy of the said province of Cantorbury, according
to the tenor, effect, and true meaning of the said instrument: Be it enacted
by the Queen's Majesty, with thassent of the Lords spiritual and temporal,
and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of
the same, that the said gift and grant, and every matter, sum of money,
provision, clause, and sentence in the said instrument contained, may be
ratified, establyshed, and confirmed by the authority aforesaid.

And furthermore be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that every person
that shall be appointed to the collection and gatheryng of the said Subsedye,
shall have full power and authority to levy, take, and perceive the same
Subsedye by thaucthoritie of the censures of the Church, in manner and form,
as in the said instrument of grant is contained, without danger of the laws
of this Realm, or by distress upon the possession of the fermours or
occupyers of the lands and tenementes chargeable by the said instrument, for
or to the payment of any sum or sums of money, or otherwise, by the
discretion of the Collectour thereof. And that no Repleuie, Prohibition or
Supersedeas shall be allowed or obeyed, for any person or persons, making default
of payment of the said Subsedye, contrary to the tenor of the grant thereof,
until such time as they have truly satisfied and contented all such part and
portions, as to them in that behalf appertains. And that every such fermour
and fermours, their executours, and assigns (that shall fortune hereafter to
be charged to and with the payment of the said Subsedye or any part thereof)
shall by thaucthoritie aforesaid be allowed and retain in his hands as much of
his yearly rent and ferme, as the sum which he shall fortune to pay for his
Lord or Leassour shall extend unto: Except the said fermour or fermours,
their executours and assigns, by the lease and grant that they have of any
part of the lands, tithes, profits, and tenementes, chargeable to this said
Subsedye, or by force of any couenaunte or article therein contained, be
bounden and charged to pay the same, and thereof to discharge their Leassour
and Landelorde, during the term mentioned in the said Leasse.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, that every lay person having a spiritual promotion, chargeable by
this Act, and also having temporal possessions, goods, cattelles, and
debtes, chargeable to the Subsedye granted in this Parliament by the
Temporaltie: shall be charged, taxed, and set, for his said spiritual
promocions with the Clergy, and for his temporal possessions and cattelles,
with the Temporaltie, and not otherwise: Any thing before mentioned to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that all and every
grant and grauntes, of all and every sum and su^mes of money, which
hereafter shall be granted to the Queen's Majesty by the Clergy of the province
of York, shall be of the same strength, force, and effect in all things, as the
said grant made by the said province of Cantorbury, and shall be taxed,
certified, collected, leuyed, gathered, and paid, according to the tenor,
form, and effect of this present Act of Parliament, to all intentes,
constructions, and purposes, in such manner and form as though it were
specially, plainly, and particulerly expressed and rehearsed in this Act by
express words, terms, and sentences, in their several natures and kinds.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that all
prouisos before rehearsed, contained in the said grant of the Prelates and
Clergy of the province of Cantorburye, and the like of the same provisions
hereafter to be contained in the grant of the Prelates and Clergy of the
province of York, shall be good and effectual, and to be observed and kept in
every point and article, according to the true purport and meaning of the same.

An Act of the Queen's Majesty's most gracious general and free Pardon.
The.xxxi. Chapter.
THE Queen's most excellent Majesty perceauyng ye good wylles and faithful
hearts of her loving and obedient Subjects at al times toward her hyghnes,
for the good governance and defense of this her Realm, and doubting that the
same her obedient subjects have many and sundry ways fallen into the
danger of diverse penalties and forfaitures by the laws and Statutes of this
Realm: Has thaught mete to extend her clemency and pity toward her said
loving and obedient subjects, with her liberal and free pardon, according to
her Princely and Kyngly power, and thereby to discharge some part of such
great pains, penalties, and forfaitures, wherewith her said subjects stand
now burdened and charged, trustyng assuredly that they will continue in their
due obedience and faithfulness toward her Majesty, and hereafter in such
fort obey the good laws and Statutes of this Realm, and specially such as in
this session of Parliament are devised, as to them and every of them of right
and duty appertains. And therefore her Majesty is well pleased and
contented, that it be enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, in
manner and form following.

That is to say, that all and every of her said Subjects (as well Spiritual
as Temporal) of this her hyghnes Realm of England, Wales, the Isles of
Iernesey and Gernesey, the Towns of Barwicke, and Newehauen in Normandy, their
heirs, successors, executours, and administratours of them and every of them.
And all and singular bodies in any manner of wise corporated, Cities, Boroughes,
Shires, Rydynges, Hundredes, Lathes, Rapes, Mapentakes, Towns, Vyllages,
Hamlettes, and Tythynges, and every of them, and the successor and successors
of every of them: shall be by authority of this present Parliament, acquitted,
pardoned, released, and discharged, against the Queen's Majesty, her heirs,
successors, and executours, and every of them, of al manner of Treasons,
Felonyes, Robberyes, offenses, contemptes, alienations, trespaces, Intrucions,
Entrees, wrongs, deceiptes, misdemeanors, forfaitures, penalties and
profits, sums of money, pains of death, pains corporal and pecuniary, and
generally of all other things, causes, quarrels, suites, judgments, and
executions, in this present Act hereafter not excepted nor forprysed, which
may be or can be by her hyghnes in any wise or by any mean pardoned, before
and unto the first day of January, in this present fyfth year of her most
gracious reign, to every or any of her said subjects, bodies corporate,
Cities, Boroughes, Shires, Rydynges, Hundredes, Lathes, Rapes, Wapentakes,
Towns, Vyllages, and Tythynges, or any of them. And also the Queen's hyghnes is
contented, that it be enacted by authority of this present Parliament, that
her said free pardon shall be as good and effectual in the law to every of her
said subjects, bodies corporate, and other before rehearsed, in and against
all things, which be not hereafter in this present Act excepted and
forprysed, as the same pardon should have been, if all offenses, contemptes,
forfaitures, causes, matters, suites, quereles, judgments, executions,
penalties, and all other things (not hereafter in this Act excepted and
forprysed) had been perticulerly, singulerly, specially, and plainly named,
rehearsed, and specified, and also pardoned by proper and express words and
names, in their kinds, natures, and qualities, by words and terms thereunto
requisite to have been put in, and expressed in this present Act of free
pardon. And that her said Subjects, nor any of them, nor the heirs,
executours, or administratours of any of them, nor of the said bodies
corporate and others before named, nor any of them, be nor shall be sued, vexed,
or inquieted, in their bodies, goods, lands, or cattelles, for any manner of
matter, cause, contempt, misdemeanour, forfaiture, trespass, offense, or any
other thing suffered, done, or committed before the said first day of
Ianuarye, against her hyghnes, her Crown, dignity, prerogative, law or
statutes: But only for such matters, causes, and offenses, as be plainly
rehearsed in the exceptions in this present Act, hereafter mentioned, and for
none other: Any Statute or Statutes, laws, customs, vsages, or president
heretofore had, made, or used to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.
Also the Queen's hyghnes of her bounteous liberality, by authority of this
present Parliament, grants and freely gives to every of her said Subjects,
and to every of the said bodies corporate, and other before rehearsed, and
every of them, all goods, cattelles, debtes, fines, issues, profits,
amerciamentes, forfaitures, and sums of money, by any of them forfaited,
which to her hyghnes do or should belong or appertain, by reason of any
offense, contempt, trespass, entree, misdemeanour, matter, cause, or quarrel,
suffered, done, or committed by them or any of them, before the said first day
of January, which be not hereafter plainly forprysed and excepted in this
present Act. And that all and every the Queen's said Subjects, and all and
singular bodies corporate, and other before rehearsed, may by him or them
self, or by his or their deputy or deputies, or by his or their attorney or
attourneys, according to the laws of this Realm, plead and minister this
present Act of free pardon, for his or their discharge, of, and for every
thing that is by virtue of this present Act pardoned, discharged, given or
granted, without any fee or other thing in any wise paying to any person or
persons, for writing or entree of the judgment, or other cause concerning
such plee, writing, or entree, but only.xvi. pence to be paid to the officer
or Clarke that shall enter the plee, matter, or judgment for the parties
discharge in that behalf: Any Statute, usage, or custom to the contrary,
notwithstanding.

AND furthermore, the Queen's highness is contented and pleased, that it be
enacted by thaucthoritie of this present Parliament, that her said free
pardon, by the general words before rehearsed, shall be reputed, demed,
adjudged, allowed, and taken in all manner of Courts of her hyghnes, and else
where, as well in the words and clauses of the exceptions and forprises
specified in this present Act, as in all and singular other clauses, words,
and sentences mentioned and rehearsed in the said free pardon, most
beneficially and auayleably to all and singular her said subjects, bodies
corporate, and others before rehearsed, and to every of them, and most
strongly in bar and discharge against her hyghnes, her heirs, successors,
and executours, in every thing, without any ambiguitie, question, or other
delay whatsoever it shall be to be made, pleaded, objected, or alleged by the
Queen our sovereign Lady, her heirs, successors, or executours, or by her
or any of their general attorney or attourneys, or by any person or persons
for her hyghnes, or any of her heirs, successors, or executours.

And further, it is enacted by the Queen our sovereign Lady, and by the
authority of this present Parliament, that if any officer or Clarke of any of
her hyghnes Courts, commonly called the kings Bench, Chau^cery, and common
place, or of her Exchequer, or any other officer or Clarke of any other of her
Courts within this Realm, at any time after the.xxvi. day of this present
month of Apryll, make out or write out any manner of writtes or other process,
or any extreates, sommons, or other precepts, whereby any of the said
Subjects, or any of the said bodies corporate, or other before rehearsed, or
any of them, shall be in any wise arrested, attached, distreigned, sommoned, or
otherwise vexed, inquieted, or grieved in his or their bodies, lands,
tenementes, goods, or cattelles, or in any of them, for or because of any
manner thing pardoned or discharged by virtue of this Act of free pardon: or if
any Sheriff or Excheatour, or any of their deputy or deputies, or any
Bayliffe or other officer, by color of his or their office, or otherwise,
after the said.xxvi. day of Apryll, do leuye, receive, or take any thing
pardoned or discharged by this Act: That then every such person so offendyng,
and thereof lawfully condemned, shall yield and pay for recompense thereof to
the party so grieved or offended, treble damages, besides all costs of the
suite, and nevertheless, all and singular such writtes, process, extreates,
and precepts so to be made, for or upon any manner thing pardoned or discharged
by this present Act of free pardon, shall be utterly void, and of none effect.

Except and always forprised out of this general and free Pardon, all and all
manner of high Treasons, committed or done by any person or persons, by any
ouert deed or act, against the Queen's most royal person, and all
conspiracies, and confederacies traitorously had, committed, or done by any
person or persons against the Queen's person. And also excepted, all and all
manner of Treasons, committed or done by any person or persons in the parties
beyond the Sea, or in any other place out of the Queen's dominions. And all
suites, punyshementes, executions, pains of death, forfaitures, and penalties,
for or by reason or occasion of any of the treasons and offenses before
excepted. And also (except and forprised out of this free pardon) all and all
manner of forgyng and counterfaityng of whatsoever money or coin curraunt in
this Realm, and all and all manner of offenses, impeticions, punyshementes,
forfaitures, pains of death, judgments, and executions for the same. And
also excepted and forprysed out of this general and free pardon, all and every
pyracy and robbery done upon the Sea, and all manner of voluntary murders, and
wylfull poysonynges, and all and every burgularye in any dwelling house, and
all and every robbery done upon any person or persons in any dwelling house or
houses in the day time, and all robberies done upon or to any man's or woman's
person in the high way, or else where, and all and singular accessaryes of or to
any of the said offenses. And also all rapes and carnal rauyshementes of
women. All wylfull escapes (as well) of Traitors and Felons (as also) of
Clerks attaynted. And also excepted out of this general and free pardon, all
persons attaynted or outlawed for any treason, murder, robbery, or burgulary.
And also (excepted) al and every manner of taking from the Queen of any goods,
issues, rentes, revenues, or profytes, of any manours, lands, tenementes, or
hereditamentes of any Traitor, Murderer, Felon, Clarke or Clerks, being
persons attainted, outlawed, or fugitives, or of any of them. And also excepted
out of this pardon, all manner of Intrucions, had, made, or done, by any person
or persons, in or upon any manours, lands, tenementes, or other
hereditamentes, of our sovereign Lady the Queen, and the taking of any the
issues and profits of the same lands or tenementes of our said sovereign
Lady, and also all suites and impeticions for the same. And (excepted) also all
wastes committed or done in any of the Queen's Wards lands, or in the Wards
lands of any of the Queen's Committees. And also all and every fine and fines,
for the single and double value of the marriage or marriages of all and every the
Queen's wards, at any time grown to the Queen's Majesty or any her noble
progenitors. And also all and every consealement of any Custom or Subsedy.
And all and singular accomptes of al and every Collectour and Collectours of
any Subsedye, Fyftene, Benevolence, Myse, or Contribution. And of every other
person whatsoever, that ought to be accomptaunt to the Queen's hyghnes, or to
her most noble father King Henry the eight, or to King Edward the syxt, or
Queen Mary, or to any of them, and the heirs, executours, and administratours
of every such accomptaunt. And all and singular arrerages of accomptes, and all
impeticions, suites, demaundes, and executions for the same. And also (except)
all enclosures and decays of houses of husbandrye, and the conuertyng of any
land from tyllage to pasture, made, done, committed, or permitted, contrary to
the form and effect of any Statute or Statutes heretofore made. And
excepted and forprised out of this free pardon, all issues, fines, and
amerciamentes, affered, taxed, set, extreated, or entered, severally or
perticulerly, touching and concerning any one person, or mo persons jointly,
extendyng to the sum of.vi. pounds, or above. And yet nevertheless, all and
singular other fines (as well) fines pro licencia concordandi (as other) set,
taxed, entered, or extreated, and all other issues and amerciamentes (as well
real as other) which severally or perticulerly extend not to the sum of.vi.
pounds, whether they be totted, or not totted, taken to the charge of the
Sheryffe, or not taken to his charge, extreated or not extreated, or whether
they be turned into debte or not turned into debte, and not being levied nor
received by any Sheriff or Sheriffs, Bayliffes, ministers or other officers,
to the Queen's Majesty's use: shall be fully, clearly, and plainly pardoned and
discharged against the Queen our sovereign Lady, her heirs, and successors
for ever, by this present Act of free pardon. And also excepted and forprised
out of this free pardon, all and all manner of deceiptes and offenses of all and
singular monyers, and other officers, mynters, or workmen, of, or in any of
the Queen's myntes, within this Realm or any other her dominions, and all
impeticions and punyshements for the same. And also excepted and forprysed out
of this general and free pardon, all rauyshmentes and wrongful taking and
withholdyng of any the Queen's Wards, or Wards lands, at any time commen or
grown to the Queen's hands, and not yet discharged. And also (excepted) all
tytles and actions of Quare impedit, and all homages, relief and reliefes,
Rentes services, Rentes charges, Rentes seckes, and the arrerages of the same,
not done or paid to the Queen's hyghnes. And also excepted, all sums of money
granted to the Queen's Majesty, or to any her noble progenitors, by way or
mean of Subsedye, Fyftene, Benevolence, or Contribution, or by any of the same
ways or means. And also all debtes which were or be due to our sovereign
Lady the Queen, or to the most noble King of famous memory King Henry the
seventh, or to King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, or to the late
Queen Mary, or to any person or persons to any of their uses, by any
condempnation, recognisaunce, obligation, or otherwise, other then such as are
due upon any obligation or recognisaunce forfaited before the said first day
of January for non appearaunce in any court or other place, or for not keeping
of the peace, or not being of good behauyour. And also, excepted and forprised
out of this pardon, al and singular those forfaitures being due or accrewed to
our sovereign Lady the Queen by any penalty of any Statute or Statutes,
which forfaitures be converted into the nature of debt, by judgment, or by
the agreement of the offendour or offenders, or else whereof there is any verdict
past for the Queen. And also (excepted) all forfaitures and other penalties and
profits grown or due to the Queen by reason of any offense, contempt, or
other Act, had, suffered, committed or done contrary to any Statute or
Statutes, or contrary to the common law, whereof any information is given in the
Queen's Exchequer or into the Kings Bench, or whereof the Queen's hyghnes by her
byll signed, or otherwise, heretofore has made any gift or assignement to any
person or persons. And also excepted and forprised out of this general and
free pardon, all such persons as the tenth day of this present month of April
be in prison within the Tower of London, or in the prison of the Marshalsea, or
in the Fleet, and all persons put to execution before the said tenth day of
Apryll. And also excepted out of this free pardon, all offenses of forgyng or
counterfaityng of any false deeds, escriptes, or wrytinges. And also excepted
all penalties, forfaitures, and tytles of condition accrewed or grown to the
Queen's Majesty by reason of the breach or not perfourmyng of any covenant or
condition. And also excepted out of this general and free pardon, al and every
such person and persons which have heretofore fled out of this Realm of
England, or any other the Queen's dominions for any offense of high Treason,
petie Treason, or misprision of Treason. And also excepted out of this pardon,
all and every offense and offenses, touching or concerning the carrying,
sendyng, or conueying over the Seas or out of this Realm, of any gold,
silver, jewels, or any coin of gold or silver, contrary to the laws or
Statutes of this Realm, unless it were or be by the Queen's license. And also
except, all such persons as be fled and gone out of this Realm, contrary to
the laws and Statutes of this Realm, without the Queen's Majesty's license.
And also all such persons as have obtained and had license to depart the
Realm for a time, and now do abide out of the Realm without any lawful
excuse after the time of their license expired.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, that all and every person and persons, which have tendered and
ought to sue lyuery out of our said sovereign Lady the Queen's hands, of, or
for any manours, lands, tenementes, or hereditamentes, whatsoever they be,
shall sue his or their lyuery and lyueryes out of our said sovereign Lady
the Queen's hands, of his or their manours, lands, tenementes, and
hereditamentes, in like manner and form as they and every of them should and
ought to have done if this Act had never ben had ne made: Any article, thing
or things in this present Act of general and free pardon, comprised and
specified to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that in case it be
objected to or against any Sheriff, or Sheriffs, or other accomptantes in the
Queen's court of Exchequer, or in any other her courts, that any Sheriff or
Sheriffs or other officers accomptantes have received or taken any such fines,
issues, or amerciamentes, as by this present Act be pardoned and acquitted:
that then every such Sheriff and Sheriffs, and other accomptantes, shall be
discharged and acquitted thereof, by his or their own corporal oath, to be
ministered and taken openly before the Barons in the said court of Exchequer,
or before the Justices in any other court, without any further trial in that
behalf.

Provided always that this present Act of free pardon, nor any thing therein
contained, in any wise extend to discharge, remitte or acquit any person or
persons, for any such issues, fines, or amerciamentes, as any Sheriff
heretofore have accounted for before the Barons of the Queen's Exchequer, or else
where, and paid the same issues, fines, and amerciamentes, upon his or their
said account, determined to the Queen's use, and has his or their Quietus est
for the same.

Provided always and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that it
shall be lawefull to all and every Clarke and other officer of any the Queen's
Courts, to awarde and make writtes of Capias vtlegatum at the suite of the
party plaintyffe, against such persons outlawed as be pardoned by this Act,
to the intent to compel the defendaunt and defendauntes to make answer to the
playntyffe or playntyffes, at whose suite he or they were outlawed. And that
every person so outlawed, shall sue a writ of Scire facias against the party
or parties at whose suite he or they were so outlawed, before this pardon in
that behalf shall be allowed to him that so is outlawed.

GOD save the Queen.
Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

An Act of a Subsedye with two Fyftenes and Tenthes, granted by the
Temporaltie.
THE certain knowledge and perfect sense that we your Majesty's most humble
subjects have and feel of the great felicity, which since your reign we
hitherto have enjoyed, and now presently do enjoy, far beyond all other
nations our neighbors, yea, much augmented to our happiness, having regard
to the former troublesome times amongst our selves: does vehemently press and
enforce us, first and principally, with all our hearts and souls to
acknowledge our most bounden duties to Almighty God, the king of kings, for
his exceadyng singular and divine goodness showed to us his creatures, in
preseruyng for our safety, after so many storms, your royal princely person,
our most gracious Queen, and in guydyng and directing the same for our
happiness, in so unhappy an age, thus happyly, quietly, and prouidently to
govern us his people committed to your charge. And next, for the same great
benefits bestowed upon us by his merciful goodness, by and through your
Majesty's person and Regiment, to offer our selves most ready, with all
obeysaunce and loyalty, to serve and most humblye obey your Majesty, as Gods
immediate minister in earth, and supreme governor over us, to the uttermost of
our power and end of our lives. And furthermore, consyderyng with our selves,
and beholding manyfestlye with our eyes, the many notable beneficial and
princely acts done by your Majesty, with thassent of Gods favor, in these
few years, for the weal and surety of this your Realm. First, in restoring
peace with your neighbors, which two godly acts, your Majesty did
accomplish immediately at your first entry to this your to our knowledge.
Which princely and notable acts, with many others, not here for length to be
rehearsed, have been, and for continuance thereof, must needs be so burdenous
and chargeable to your Majesty, that though we can not in deed find an
example of any one meet present or gift by name of Subsedye, or any other
relief or aid granted to any of your progenitors, sufficient to recompense
and acquit some one of these your many princely and notable acts, or the
charges therein sustained: yet we meaning, and freely of our selves intending,
according to our bounden duties, to make some kind of declaration,
specification, and recognition of our great debtes of service to your Majesty,
being not able to make any full satisfaction, as your Majesty's most humble
obedient and loving Subjects, humblye on our knees beseech your hyghnes, that
at this time, in stead of satisfaction for our great debtes, due for your
princely demerites and charges, our small gift may not be measured with your
acts, or with our own debtes to your Majesty: but of your accustomed
clemency, accepted ioyntlye with the treasure of our humble, infinite, and
inmeasurable thoughts and intentions of our hearts toward your Majesty, and
that for thacception thereof, it may be by your highness, the Lords spiritual
and temporal, and commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by
authority of the same, enacted as follows.

And be it enacted, that your highness toward the said great costs and
inestimable charges, shall have by authority of this present Parliament, two
whole Fyftenes and Tenthes, to be paid, taken, and leuyed of the moveable
goods, cattalles, and other things usual to such Fyftenes and Tenthes, to
be contributorye and chargeable within the Shires, Cities, Boroughes, Towns,
and other places of this your Majesty's Realm, in manner and form aforetyme
used: Except the su^me of.xii.M. pounds thereof fully to be deducted. That is
to say, vi.M. pounds of either of the said whole Fyftenes and Tenthes, of
the su^me that one whole Fyftene and Tenth attayneth unto, in relief,
comfort, and discharge of the poor Towns, Cities, and Boroughes of this your
said Realm, wasted, desolate, or destroyed, or ouergreatly impoueryshed,
after such rate as was and has before this time ben had and made to every
Shyre, and to be divided in such manner and form as heretofore for one whole
Fyftene and Tenthes, has been had and divided. And the said two Fyftenes and
Tenth (the exceptions and deductions aforesaid, thereupon had, deducted, and
allowed) to be paid in manner and form following. That is to say, the first
whole fyftene and tenth (except before excepted) to be paid to your highness in
the receipt of your highness Exchequer, before the tenth day of November next
coming. And the said second fyftene and tenth (except before excepted) to be
paid to your highness in the receipt of your Exchequer, before the tenth day
of November, in the year of our Lord God. M.D.lxiiii.

And be it further enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that the knights
elected and returned, of, and for the Shyres within this Realm for this
present Parliament. Citezins of Cities, and Burgeses of Boroughes and Towns,
where collectours have been used to be named, and appointed for the collection
of any fyftene and tenth before this time granted, shall name and appoint
yearly before the last day of August, in either of the said two years,
sufficient and hable parsons, for the collection of the said fyftenes and
tenthes, in every of the said Shires, Cities, Boroughes, and Towns, the said
parsons then having lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes in his or
their own right of an estate of enheritau^ce of the yearly value of.x. pounds,
or in goods worth a hundredth pound at the least. And also such parson or
parsons so by them to be named and appointed for the collection of either of
the said Fyftenes and Tenthes, shall be by them severally appointed and allotted
into Hundrethes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Cities, Boroughes, and Towns. And also the
said parsons so named and appointed for the collection of the same Fyftenes and
Tenthes, shall be charged and chargeable upon his or their account or accomptes,
in thexchequer to be made, with all such sum or sums of money, as the
Hundredes, Rapes, Wapentakes, Cities, Boroughes, and Towns, where he or they
shall so happen to be appointed, shall amount unto, and of no more sum or
sums. And upon the payment of such sums of money as he or they shall be
charged with, shall be discharged, and have his and their Quietus est, the non
accomptyng or non payment of any other his fellows, or the insufficiency of
them or any of them, notwithstanding. And the names and surnames of every the
said collectours for the said fyftenes and tenthes, during either of the
said two years, together with the place allotted to their collection and
charge, the said Knights, Citezins, and Burgeses, for the Shires, Cities, and
Boroughes, whereunto they be elected, named, and returned: shall certify
before the Queen in her Chauncery, before the.xx. day of October, in every of
the same two years, according to the tenor of this act. And if defaute of any
such certifying be had or made in form as is aforesaid: then the Lord
Chauncelour of England, or keeper of the great Seal for the time being, shall
immediately after, name and appoint Collectours, for the collection of either of
the said fyftenes and tenthes, in manner and form as the said knights of
the Shires, Citezins of Cities, and Burgeses of Boroughes, should have done,
and as before time has been used. The which said Collectours, and every of
them, shall have like alowaunce upon their accomptes, for their fees, wages,
and rewards, for the collection of the said fyftenes and tenthes, in as large
manner and form, as any Collectour or Collectours of fyftenes and tenthes,
have had at any season in time past. And that the Barons of the Queen's
Eschequer for the time being, shall and may from time to time, awarde such
process for the speedy payment thereof, against the Collectour and Collectours
for the same, as by their discretions shall be thought convenient.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority of this present
Parliament, that the said Lord Chauncelour, or keeper of the great Seal for
the time being, knights of the Shires, Citezins of Cities, and Burgeses of
Boroughes, Towns, and other places, having authority by this present Act,
to name and nominate the said Collectours, of, or for the said fyftenes and
tenthes: shall upon their nomination and election had and made, take by
authority of this present Parliament, sufficient Recognisaunces, or
obligation, of every parson so by them to be named, to be bound to the Queen's
Majesty, in the double sum of the sum of their collection, and to be
indorsed upon such condition, that if the said Collectour or Collectours do
truly content and pay, to the use of the Queen's highness in her receipt of
theschequer, before the.x. day of November in every of the said two years, so
much of the sum of money allotted and appointed to his collection, as the
same Collectour shall have collected and gathered, and do likewise after the
said.x. day of the month of November in every of the said two years, content
and pay to the Queen's Majesty's use, at the same receipt, the residue of his
collection and charge, within one month next after such time as he shall
have gathered and collected the same residue: that then the said Recognisaunce
or obligation to be void, or else to stand in his full strength and virtue.
Which Recognisaunce or obligation so taken, the said knights of the Shire,
Citezins, and Burgeses, and every of them, taking any such Recognisaunces or
obligation, shall certify and deliver to the Lord Treasourer, and Barons of
the same Exchequer, before the said.x. day of November, in every of the said
years, upon pain of forfaiture of.x.li. to the Queen's highness, for every
Reccognisaunce or obligation so to be taken, and not certified. And that every
such collectour, upon request to him made, shall make and knowledge the same
Recognisance or obligation accordyngly, upon like pain and forfaiture of.x.
pound to the Queen, for his refusal thereof. And that the Treasourer and
Barons of the Eschequer, upon the payment of the same collection, or at the
said days, shall cansell and deliver the said Recognisaunce or obligation, to
the said Collectour or Collectours, without any other warraunt, or without any
fee or reward to be paid to any parson for the same.

And furthermore, for the great and wayghtie considerations aforesaid, we the
Lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons of this present Parliament
assembled, do by our like assent and authority of this Parliament, give and
grant to your highness our said Sovereign Lady the Queen's Majesty, your
heirs, and successors, one entier Subsedye, to be rated, taxed, levied, and
paid at two several paymentes, of every parson spiritual and temporal, of
what estate or degree he or they be, according to the tenor of this Act in
manner and form following. That is to say, as well of every parson borne within
the Realm of England, Wales, or other the Queen's dominions, as of all and
every fraternity, Guylde, Corporation, Mystery, Brotherhed, and Cominaltie,
corporated, or not corporated, within this Realm of England, Wales, or other
the Queen's dominions, being worth three pounds, for every pound as well in
coin, and the value of every pound that every such parson, Fraternity,
Guylde, Corporation, Mystery, Brotherhead, Cominaltie, corporate, or not
corporate, has of his or their own, or any other to his or their use: as also
plate, stock of marchau^dizes, all manner of corn and blades, household
stuff, and of all other goods moveable, as well within this Realm, as
without, and of all such sums of money as to him or them is or shall be owyng,
whereof he or they trust in his or their conscience surely to be paid:
Except, and out of the premises deducted, such sums of money as he or they
owe, and in his or their consciences intends truly to pay, and except also
thapparell of such parsons, their wives and children, belongyng to their own
bodies, saving Jewels, gold, silver, stone, and pearl: shall pay to and for
the first payment of the said subsedy.xx.d. of every pound, and to and for the
second payment of the said Subsedye.xii.d. of every pound. And also every
Alien and stranger borne out of the Queen's obeysaunce, as well denizen as
others, inhabytyng within this Realm, of every pound that he or they have in
coin, and the value of every pound in plate, corn, grain, marchaundyzes,
householde stuff, or other goods, iewelles, cattelles, moveable, or
immovable, as is aforesaid, as well within this Realm as without, and of all
sums of money to him or them owyng, whereof he or they trust in his or their
consciences to be paid: Except, and of the same premises deducted, every
such sum or sums of money which he or they do owe, and in his or their
conscience or consciences intend truly to pay: shall pay of and for every
pound, to, and for the first payment of the said Subsedye.iii.s.iiii.d. and
to and for the second payment of the said Subsedye.ii.s. of every pound. And
also, that every Alien and stranger borne out of the Queen's dominions, being
denizen or not denizen, not being contributorye to any the Rates aforesaid,
shall pay to and for the first payment of the said Subsedye.iiii.d. and to,
and for the second payment of the said Subsedy.iiii.d. for every pool. And
the master, or he or she, with whom the same Alien is, or shall be abydyng at the
time of the taxation or taxations thereof, to be charged with the same, for
lack of paymente thereof.

And further, be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that every parson
borne under the Queen's obeysaunce, and every Corporation, Fraternity, Guylde,
Mystery, Brotherhed, and Cominaltie, corporate, or not corporate, for every
pound that every of the same parson, and every Corporation, Fraternity,
Guyld, Mystery, Brotherhead, and Cominaltie, corporate, or not corporate, or
any other to his or their use, has in fee simple, fee tail, for term of
life, term of years, by execution, wardeshyp, or by copye of court roll, of,
and in any honors, castelles, manours, lands, tenementes, rentes, seruyses,
hereditamentes, annuities, fees, corrodies, or other yearly profits, of the
yerelye value of.xx.s. as well within ancient demean, and other places
priuileged, or else where, and so vpwardes: shall pay to, and for the first
payment of the said Subsedye.ii.s.viii.d. of, and for every pound, and to and
for the second payment of the said Subseyde.xvi.d. of and for every pound. And
every Alien borne out of the Queen's obeysaunce, in such case, to pay at the
first of the said paymentes.v.s.iii.d. of every pound, and at the second
payment.ii.s.viii.d. of and for every pound. And that al su^mes presented and
chargeable by this Act, either for goods and debtes, or either of them, or for
lands and tenements, and other the premises, as is in this Act contained,
shall be at either of the said paymentes set and taxed after the rate and
portion, according to the true meaning of this Act (lands, and tenementes
chargeable to the dismes of the clergy, and yearly wages due to servants for
their yearly service, other then the Queen's servants, taking yearly wages
of.v. pounds or above, only excepted, and foreprised.) And that al plate,
coin, jewels, goods, debtes, and cattels parsonalles, being in the rule and
custody of any parson and parsons, to the use of any corporation, fraternity,
guylde, mystery, brotherhead, or any co^minaltie, being corporate, or not
corporate, be and shall be rated, set, a charged by reason of this Act, as the
value certified by the presentours of that certificate, to be sworn of every
pound in goods and debtes, as is abouesaide, and of every pound in lands,
tenementes, annuities, fees, corrodies or other yearly profits, as is
abouesayde, and the su^mes that are before rehearsed, set and taxed, to be
leuyed and taken of them that shall have such goods in custody, or otherwise
charged for lands, as is before rehearsed. And the same parson or parsons, and
body corporate, by authority of this Act, shall be discharged against him or
them that shall or ought to have the same, at the time of the payment or
delivery thereof, or at his otherwise departure from the custody or possession
of the same. Except and always foreprised from the charge and assessement of
this Subsedie, all goods, catteles, jewels, and ornaments of Churches and
Chappelles, which have been ordained and used in Churches or Chappelles for the
honor and service of almighty God. And the first payment of the said Subsedye,
shall be, by the authority aforesaid, taxed, assessed, and rated according to
this Act, in every Shyre, Lath, Wepentake, Rape, City, Borough, Town, and
every other place within this Realm of England, and Wales, and other the
Queen's dominions, before the.xx. day of Apryll next coming. And the second
payment of the said Subsedye, shall be by the authority aforesaid, taxed,
assessed, and rated, before the.x. day of December next coming. And the
particular su^mes of every Shire, Riding, Borough, Town, and other places
aforesaid, with the particular names of such as are chargeable for, and to the
first payment of the said Subsedye, to be taxed and set, by the Commisioners
to the same limited, or two of them at the least, with the names of the high
Collectours, and in the same form shall be certified into the Queen's Exchequer,
before the.xx. day of May next coming. And the particular sums of every
Shire, Rydyng, Borough, Town, and other places aforesaid, with the particular
names of such as are chargeable for and to the second payment of the said
Subsedye, to be taxed and set by Commissioners, to the same to be limited, or
two of them at the least, with the names of the high Collectours, and in the
same form, shall be certified into the Queen's Exchequer before the.xx. day of
January, which shall be in the year of our Lord God a Thousand five Hundredth
Threescore and three. And the said sums, in manner and form aforesaid, to
be taxed for the first payment of the said Subsedye, shall be paid into the
Queen's receipte of her Exchequer aforesaid, to the use of our said Sovereign
Lady, before the first day of June next coming. And the said sums in manner
and form aforesaid, to be taxed for the second payment of the said Subsedye,
shall be paid into the receipte aforesaid, to the use aforesaid, before
the.xx. day of February, which shall be in the year of our Lord God a Thousand
five Hundredth Threescore and three. And the sum abouesayde, of, and for the
said Subsedye, shall be taxed, set, asked, and demanded, taken, gathered,
leuyed, and paid, to the use of our said Sovereign Lady, her heirs, and
successors, in form abouesayde, as well within the liberties, fraunchises,
sanctuaryes, ancient demean, and other whatsoever place exempt or not exempt,
as without: except such Shires places, and parsons, as shall be foreprised, in,
and by this present Act, any grant, charter, prescription, use, or liberty,
by reason of any letters patentes, or other privilege, prescription, alowaunce
of the same, or whatsoever other matter of discharge heretofore to the contrary
made, granted, used, or obtained, notwithstanding.

And it is further enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that
every such parson, as well such as be borne under the Queen's obeysaunce, as
every other parson stranger borne, denizen, or not denizen, inhabytyng within
this Realm, or within Wales, or other the Queen's dominions, which at the time
of the said assessynges or taxations, or of either of them, to be had or made,
shall be out of this Realm, and out of Wales, and have goods or cattels, lands
or tenementes, fees or annuities, or other profits within this Realm, or in
Wales: shall be charged and chargeable for the same, by the certificate of the
inhabytauntes of the parties, where such goods, cattelles, lands, tenementes,
or other the premises, then shall be, or in such other place where such parson
or his factour, deputy, or attorney, shall have his most resort unto, within
this Realm, or in Wales, in like manner, as if the said parsone were or had been at the time of the said assessyng within this Realm. And that every
parson abydyng or dwelling within this Realm, or without this Realm, shall be
charged or chargeable to the same Subsedye granted by this Act, according and
after the rate of such yearly substance, or value of lands and tenementes,
goods, cattelles and other the premises, as every parson so to be charged,
shall be set at in the time of the said assessyng, or taxation upon him to be
made, and in none otherwise.

And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that for thassessyng
and orderyng of the said Subsedye to be duly had, the Lord Chauncelour of
England, or the keeper of the great seal, the Lord Treasourer of England,
the Lord Steward of the Queen's Majesty's household, the Lord President of the
Queen's honorable Counsel, and the Lord Privy seal for the time being, or
two of them at the least, whereof the Lord Chauncelour of England, or keeper of
the great seal for the time being, to be one: shall and may name and appoint,
of, and for every Shire and Rydyng, and other places, as well within this
Realm, as in Wales, and other the Queen's dominions, and also of, and for every
City and Town, being a County of it self, and of, and for the Isle of
Wight, such certain number of parsones of every of the same Shires, Ridinges,
Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Towns, and Isle of Wight, and every other
place, and other the inhabitants of the same, to be Commissioners of and
within the same whereof they be inhabitauntes, and also of, and for the
honorable household of the Queen's Majesty, in what Shire or other places the
said household shall happen then to be. And the Lord Chauncelour or keeper of
the great Seal, and other with him before named, in like manner may name and
appoint of every other such Borowe, and Town corporate, as well in England as
in Wales, and other the Queen's dominions, as they shall think
requisite.vi.v.iiii.iii. or.ii. of the head officers, and other sad honest
inhabitants of every of the said Cities, Boroughes, and Towns corporate,
according to the number and multitude of the people being in the same. The
which parsons, if any such be thereunto named, of the said inhabitants of the
said Boroughes and Towns corporate, not being Counties of them selves: shall be
joined and put in as Commisioners, with the parsons named for such Shires and
Rydynges, as the said Boroughes and Towns corporate, not being counties in
them selves, be set and have their being. Which parsons so named, for, and of
the said Boroughes and Towns corporate, not being counties, by reason of
their dwelling in the same, shall not take upon them, ne none of them, to put
any part of their Commission in execution for the premises, out of the said
Boroughes, and Towns corporate, wherein they being so named only for the
same, be dwelling. And also not to execute the said Commission within the
Borough or Town corporate where they be so dwelling, but at such days and
times as the said other Commissioners for the same Shyre and Rydyng, shall
thereunto limit and appoint, within the same Borough or Town corporate, not
being County corporate, whereof they so be, and not out of such Borough or
Town: and in that manner to be aydyng and assistyng with the said other
Commissioners, in, and for the good executyng of theffecte of the said
Commission, upon pain of every of the said Commissioners, so named for every
such City, Borough, and Town corporate, not being a County, to make such
fine as the said other Commissioners in the Commission, of, and for the same
Shyre or Rydyng so named, or three of them at the least, shall by their
discressions set, and certify into the Queen's Exchequer, there to be leuyed
to the use of the Queen's Majesty, in like manner as such or like sums had been
set and rated upon every such person for the said Subsedye. The which
Commissioners, so named, of, and for the said Cities, Boroughes, and Towns,
not being Counties, and only put in the said Commission by reason of their
dwelling in the same: shall not have any part of the portion of the fees and
rewards of the Commissioners and their Clerks, in this Act afterward
specified and allowed. And the Lord Chauncelour of England, or the keeper of the
great Seal of England for the time being, shall make, and direct out of the
court of the Chauncery under the great Seal, several Commissions, that is to
say, to every Shire, Riding, Lathe, Wapentake, Rape, City, Town, Borough,
Isle, and Householde, unto such person and persons, as by his discression, and
other with him before named and appointed, in like manner and form as is before
rehearsed, shall be thought sufficient for the sessyng and leuying of the said
Subsedye, in all Shires and places, according to the true meaning of this Act.
Which Commission for the first payment of the said Subsedye, shall be directed
and delivered to the said Commissioners, or to one of them, before the first
day of Apryll next coming, and the Commission for the second payment of the
said Subsedye, shall be directed and delivered to the said Commissioners or one
of them, before the first day of November, which shall be in the year of our
Lord God a Thousand five Hundredth Threescore and three, and to every of the
said Commissions, ten Sedules, conteynyng in them the tenor of this Act,
shall be affyled. By which Commission, the Commissioners in every such
Commission, named according to this Act, and as many of them as shall be
appointed by the said Commission, shall have full power and authority to put
the effect of the same Commission in execution. And that by authority of this
Act, after such Commissions to them directed, they may by their assentes and
agrementes, sever them selves for thexecution of their Commission, in
Hundredes, Lathes, Wards, Rapes, Wapentakes, Towns, Parishes, and other
places within the limittes of their said Commission, in such form as to them
shall seem expedient to be ordered, and between them to be comoned and agreed,
according to the tenor and effect of the Commission to them therein directed.
Upon which seueraunce, every person of this present Parliament that shall be
Commissioner, shall be assigned in the Hundred where he dwells.

Provided always, that no person be or shall be compelled to be any
Commissioner, to, and for thexecution of this present Act, but only in the
Shyre where he dwells and inhabiteth, and that any person being assigned to
the contrary thereof, in any wise shall not be compelled to put in execution
the effect of this Act, or any part thereof.

And it is also enacted by the authority of this present Parliament, that the
Commisioners, and every of them, which shall be named, limited, and appointed
according to this Act, to be Commissioners in every such Shire, Riding, Lath,
Wapentake, Rape City, Town, Borough, Isle, and the said Household, or any
other place, and none other: shall truly, effectuallye, and diligently for
their part, execute theffect of this present Act, according to the tenor
thereof in every behalf, and none otherwise by any other means, without
omission, favor, dread, malice, or any other thing to be attempted and done by
them or any of them, to the contrary thereof. And the said Commisioners, and
as many of them as shall be appointed by the said Commission, and none other,
for the execution of the said Commission and Act, shall for the taxation of
the said first payment of the said Subsedye, before the tenth day of Apryll
next coming, and for the taxation of the said second payment of the said
Subsedye, shall before the tenth day of January, which shall be in the year of
our Lord God a Thousand five Hundredth Threescore and three, by virtue of the
Commissions delivered unto them in form aforesaid: direct their several or
joint precept unto.viii.vii.vi.v.iiii.iii. or two, as for the number of the
inhabitauntes shall be requisite, of the most substanciall, discrete, and honest
persons inhabitants, to be named by the said Commisioners, or by as many of
them as shall be appointed by the said Commission, of, and in Hundredes, Lathes,
Rapes, Wapentakes, Wards, Paryshes, Towns, and other places, as well within
liberties, fraunchesis, ancient demeanes, places exempted, and sanctuaries, as
without, within the limits of the shyres, Ridinges, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes,
Cities, Towns, Boroughes, or Isle aforesaid, and other places within the
limittes of their Commission, and to the Constables, Subconstables, Bayliffes,
and other like officers or ministers, of every of the said Hundredes, Towns,
Wards, Lathes, Wapentakes, Paryshes, and other places before said, as to the
said Commissioners and every number of them, or unto three or two of them by
their discretions in division, shall seem expedient, as by the manner and use of
the parties shall be requisite, strayghtly by the same precept, charging and
commanding the same inhabitants, Constables, and other officers aforesaid,
to whom such precepte shall be so directed, to appear in their proper parsones
before the said Commisioners, or such number of them, as they shall divide
themselves, according to the tenor of the said Commission, at certain days
and places, by the said Commisioners, or any number of them, as is aforesaid,
within Cities, Boroughes, or Towns corporate, or without, in any other place
as is aforesaid, by their discressions shall be limited thereunto, to do and
accomplish all that to them on the parties of the Queen's Majesty, shall be
enjoined touching this Act. Commaundyng further by the same precept, that he
to whose hands such precept shall come, shall show or deliver the same to the
other inhabitauntes or officers named in the same precept, and that none of
them fail to accomplish the same, upon pain of.xl.s. to be forfaited to the
Queen's Majesty.

And it is further ordained, by the authority of this present Parliament,
that at the said day and place prefixed and limited in the said precept,
every of the Commissioners then being in the Shire, and having no sufficient
excuse for his absence at the day and place prefixed for that part whereunto
he was limited: shall appear in his proper parson, and there the same
Commissioners being present, or as many as shall be appointed by the Queen's
Majesty's Commission, shall call or cause to be called before them, the said
inhabitauntes and officers, to whom they have directed their said precepts,
and which had in commandment there to appear by the said precept, of the
said Commisioners. And if any parson so warned, make default, unless he then
be let by sickness or lawful excuse, and that let then be witnessed by
the oaths of two credible persons, or if any appearing, refuse to serve in
form following: to forfeit to the Queen's Majesty.xl.s. and so at every time
appointed by the said Commissioners for the same taxation, unto such time the
number of every such parsons have appeared, and certified in form under
written, and every of them so making default, or refusyng so to serve, to
forfeit to the Queen's Majesty.xl.s. And upon the same appearaunce had, they
shall be charged before the Comm^^sioners, by all convenient ways and means
(other then by corporal oath) to inquire of the best and most value of the
Substance of every parson, dwelling and abydyng within the limittes of the
places that they shall be charged with, and of other which shall have his or
their most resort unto any of the said places, and chargeable with any sum
of money by this Act of this said Subsedye, and of all other things
requisite touching the said Act, and according to the intent of the same, and
thereupon as nere as it may be, or shall come to their knowledge, truly to
present and certify before the said Commissioners, the names and surnames, and
the best and uttermost substance and values of every of them, as well of
lands, tenementes, and other hereditamentes, possessions, and profytes, as of
goods, cattelles, debtes, and other things chargeable by the said Act,
without any conceylement, love, favor, affection, dread, fear, or malice,
upon the pain often pounds or under, to be taxed, estreated, and leuyed in
form as hereafter in this present Act, shall be limited or appointed. And
thereupon the said Commisioners shall openly there read, or cause to be read
unto them, the said rates, and openly declare theffect of their charge unto
them, in what manner and form, they ought and should make their certificat,
according to the rates and su^mes thereof abouesayde, and of all manner of
parsons, as well of Aliens and strangers, denizens, or not denizens, inhabytyng
within this Realm, as of such parsons as be borne under the Queen's obeysaunce
chargeable to this Act, and of the possessions, goods and cattelles of
Fraternities, Guyldes, Corporations, Brotherheades, Mysteries, and Cominalties,
and other as is abouesayde, and of parsons being in the parties of beyond the
seas, having goods or cattels, lands, or tenementes within this Realm, as is
aforesaid, and of all goods being in the custody of any parson or parsons, to
the use of any other, as is abouesayde. By the which information and she wyng,
the said parsons should have such plain knowledge of the true intent of this
present Act, and of the manner of their certificate, that the same parsons
shall have no reasonable cause to excuse them by ignorance. And after such
charge, and the statute of the said Subsedye, and the manner of the said
certificate to be made in writing, containing the names and surnames of every
parson, and whether he be borne without the Queen's obeysaunce or within, and
the best value of every parson in every degree, as well of yearly value of
lands and tenementes, and of such like possessions and profits, as the value
of goods and cattelles, debtes, and every thing to their certificate
requisite and necessary to them declared: the said Commissioners there being,
shall by their discressions appoint, and limitte unto the said parsons, an
other day and place, to appear before the said Commissioners, and chargyng
the said parsons, that they in the mean time shall make diligent inquirye, by
all ways and means, of the premises, and then and there every of them, upon
pain of forfeyture of fortye shyllynges to the Queen's Majesty, to appear at
the said new prefyxed day and place, there to certify unto the said
Commissioners in writing, according to their said charge, and according to the
true intent of the said grant of Subsedye, and as to them in manner
aforesaid has been declared and showed by the Commissioners. At which day
and place so to them prefyxed, if any of the said parsons make default, or
appear and refuse to make the said certificat: that then every of them so
offendyng, to forfeyte to the Queen's Majesty fortye shyllynges, except there
be a reasonable excuse of his default, by reason of sickness or otherwise, by
the oaths of two credible parsons there witnessed. And of such as appear,
ready to make certificate as is aforesaid, the said Commyssyoners there
being, shall take and receive the same certificate, and every part thereof, and
the names, values, and substance of every parson so certified, and if the
same Commyssyoners see cause reasonable, they shall examine the said
presenters thereof, and thereupon the said Commissioners at the said days and
place, by their agrementes among them selves, shall from time to time openly
there prefyxe a day, at a certain place or places, within the limittes of
their Commyssyon, by their discression, for their further proceadyng to the
said assessyng of the same Subsedye, and thereupon at the said day of the
said certificat, as is aforesaid, taken, the same Commyssyoners shall make
their precepte or precepts to the Constables, Subconstables, Baylyffes, or
their officers, of such Hundredes, Wapentakes, Towns, or other places
aforesaid, as the same Commyssyoners shall be of, comprysyng and conteynyng in
the same precept, the names and surnames of all parsons presented before them
in the said certificate, of whom if the said Commyssyoners or as many of
them as shall be thereunto appointed by the Queen's Commyssyon, shall then have
vehemente suspecte, to beof more greater value or substance in Lands, goods,
Cattelles, or sums of money owing to them, or other substance before said,
then upon such parsone or parsones shall be certyfyed: the same Commyssyoners
shall make their precepte or precepts, directed to the Constable, Baylyffes,
or other officers, commaundyng the same Constable, Baylyffes, or other
officers, to whom such precepte shall be directed, to warn such parsones whose
names shall be comprysed in the said precepte, at their mansyons, or to their
parsones, that the same parsones named in such precepts, and every of them,
shall parsonallye appear before the said Commyssyoners at the same new
prefyxed day and place, there to be examyned by all ways and means (other
then by corporal oath) by the said Commyssyoners, of their greateste
substance and best value, and of all and every Sums of money owing to
them, and other whatsoever matter concerning the premysses, or any of them,
according to this Act. At which day and place so prefyxed, the said
Commyssyoners then and there being, or as many of them as shall be thereunto
appointed by the Queen's Commyssyon, shall cause to be called the said parsons
whose names shall be comprysed in the said precepte, as is before said, for
their examination. And if any of those parsones which should be warned, as is
before said, to be examyned, which at any time after the warnyge, and before
the prefyxed day, shall be within such place where he may have knowledge of
his said appearaunce to be made, make defaulte, and appear not, unless a
reasonable cause, or else a reasonable excuse, by the oaths of two credyble
parsones, before the said Commyssyoners be truly alleged for his discharge:
that then every of them so making defaulte, to be taxed and charged to the
Queen's Majesty, with, and at the double sums of the rate that he should or
ought to have been set at, for, and after the best value of his lands or
substance upon him certyfyed, if he had appeared, by the discressyon of the
Commyssyoners there being. Which Commyssyoners, shall travail with every of
the other parsones so then and there appearing, whose names shall be expressed
in the said precept or precepts, and in whom any vehement suspecte was or
shall be had, form abouesayde, by all such ways and means they can (other
than by corporal oath) for the better knowledge of their best value, either in
hereditamentes, or possessions, either else in goods or debtes. And that every
Spiritual parson at either of the said taxations of the said Subsedye,
shall be rated and set, according to the rate abouesayde, of, and for every
pound that the same Spiritual parson, or any other to his use has, by
descent, bargayne, or purchase, in fee Simple, fee Tail, term of life, term
of years, by execution, by ward, or by copye of court roll, in any Manours,
Lands, Annuittes, or Hereditamentes, after the true, just, and yearly value
thereof, after and according as other the Queen's Majesty's subjects borne
within this Realm, be charged, in form above remembered, so that it extend to
the yearly value of.xx.s. or above.

And it is further enacted, that if the said taxours and assessours, shall not
duly behave them selves in their inquirye, taxation, assessement, or
certificat, but shall affectionallye, corruptlye, or parciallye demeasne them
selves in that behalf, in such wise, that the Commyssyoners shall by their
consideration deame them offenders, worthy of punyshement for not doing their
duties therein: that then four or more of the Commissioners in that County,
for this Subsedye, shall have power and authority, by their discressions
either to charge the said assessours, upon their corporal oaths, for the
better service aforesaid in that behalf, or else by their discression, to tax
and set upon either of the said assessours, for their misdemeanour in that
behalf, such a fine or pain as they shall think good, so that it exceade
not the sum of ten pounds, and the same fine or pain, at their
discressions to estreate. Every which fine so taxed and set by four of the
Commissioners, or more, and being estreated with the Sedule or books of that
lymytte, shall be leuyed and answered to the Queen's use, in like manner and
form, to all intentes and purposes, as any other sum that shall be taxed and
become due by virtue of this estatute and Act of Subsedye, and not in any
other wise or manner. And if any parson certified or rated by virtue of this
Act, be he Commyssyoner or other, to any manner of value, does find him self
grieved with the same presentment, sessyng, or taxyng, and therevppon complain
to the Commissyoners, before whom he shall be rated, sessed, or taxed, or before
two of them, before the same taxation be certified into the court of the
Exchequer: that then the said Commyssyoners, or two of them, shall by all
ways and means, examine particularly and distynctlye the parson so
complaynyng, upon his oath, and other his neighbors, by their discressyon, of
every his lands and tenementes above specified, and of every his goods,
cattelles, and debtes above mentioned. And after due examination and parfecte
knowledge thereof had, and perceived by the said Commyssyoners, or two of
them, which shall have power by authority aforesaid: the said
Commyssyoners or two of them, to whom any such complaynte shall be made, by
their discressyon, upon the oath of the said parson so complaining, may
abate, defaulke, increase, or enlarge the same assessemente, according as it
shall appear unto them just, upon the same examination. And the same sum
so abated, defaulked, increased, or enlagred, shall be by them estreated in
form as hereafter ensues. And if it be proved by witness, or by the parties
own confession, or other lawefull ways or means, within a year after any
such oath made, that the same parson so taxed, and sworn, was of any better
or greater value in lands, goods, or other things above specified, at the
time of his said oath, then the same parson so sworn did declare upon his
said oath: that then every such parson so offendynge, shall lose and forfeyt
to the Queen's Majesty, so much in lawful money of England, as he the same
parson so sworn, was set or taxed to pay.

And also it is enacted by the same authority, that every parson to be
rated at the said taxation, as is aforesaid, shall be rated, taxed, and
set, and the sum on him set, to be leuyed at such place where he and
his famylye at the time of the same presentemente to be made, shall keep his
house or dwelling, or where he then shall be most conuersaunte, abiding, or
resyaunte, or shall have his most resort, at the time of the said
certyfycate to be made, and no where else. And that no Commyssyoner for this
Subsedye, shall be rated or taxed for his goods or lands, but in the Shyre
and other place where he shall be Commyssyoner. And that if any parson chargeable
to this Act, at the time of the same assessyng, happen to be out of this
Realm, and out of Wales, or far from the place where he shall be known: then
he to be set where he was last abiding in this Realm, or within Wales, and
after the substance, value, and other profytes of every parsone to be known,
by the examination. certificate, or other manner of wise, as is aforesaid. And
that the said Commyssyoners, or as many of them as shall be appointed by the
Queen's Majesty's Commyssyon, or Commyssyons, shall after the rate and rates
aforesaid, cause every parsone to be set, rated, and taxed, according to the
rate of the substance and value of his Lands, goods, Cattelles, and other
profytes chargeable by this Act, whereby the greateste and most best sum
or sums, according to his most substance, by reason of this Act, might,
or may be set or taxed. And that every parsone taxed in any County or
place, other then where he is most resyaunte, or has his famylye, or in any
County or place, other then where he is a Commyssyoner for this Subsedye, if
he be a Commyssyoner, upon certificate made to the said Court of Exchequer,
under the hands and seals of three Commyssyoners for the Subsedye in the same
County or place where such parson is most resyaunte, or has his famylye, or
where he is a Commyssyoner for the taxation and paymente of this Subsedye,
testyfying such his most resyauncie, having of famylye, or being a
Commyssyoner: shall be a sufficient discharge for the taxation of that parson in
all other places, and of, and for all other sums of money upon such parson
so set and taxed, save only the taxation made in that County or place, from
which such certificate shall be made, as aforesaid, and for the sum of money
upon such parson there assessed or taxed. And that such certificate without
any plee or other circumstaunce, shall be a sufficient warraunte, as well to the
Barons and Auditors of the said court of Exchequer, as to all and every
other officers, to whom the alowaunce thereof shall appertain, paying for
such discharge and alowaunce, only two shyllynges, and no more.

Provided always, that every such parson, which shall be rated, set, or
taxed, according to the intent and true meaning of this Act, for payment of
and to this Subsedye, for, and after the yearly value of his lands,
tenementes, and other Real possessions or profits at any of the said
taxations, shall not after be set and taxed for his goods and cattelles, or
other his moveable substance at the same taxations, and that he that shall be
set, charged, or taxed for the same Subsedy, for his goods, cattelles, and
other moueables, at any of the said taxations, according to the true meaning
of this Act, shall not after be charged, taxed, or chargeable for his lands,
or other real possessions and profytes abouesayde, at the same taxations, nor
any of them, nor that any parson by any taxation be double charged for the
said Subsedye, nor set or taxed at several places by reason of this Act.
But if any parson happen to be double set, taxed, or charged, either in one
place, or at several places: then he to be discharged of the one taxation, and
charged with the other, according to the meaning and intent of this Act. Any
thing contained in this present Act to the contrary, notwithstanding.

And that it be ordained by the said authority of this present Parliament,
that no parson having two mansions, or two places to resort unto, or calling
him self householde servant, or waytyng servant to the Queen's Majesty, or
other Lord or Lady, Master or Mysteres, be excused upon his saying, from the
taxes of the said Subsedye, in neither of the places where he may be set,
unless he bring a certificat in writing from the Commissioners, where that he
is so set in deed at one place. And if any parson that ought to be set, by
reason of his remouyng or resortyng to two places, or by reason of his saying
that he else where was taxed, or by reason of any privilege by his dwelling or
abydyng in any place, not being foreprysed in this Act, or otherwise by his
couyn or craft, happen to escape from the said taxation, and be not set and
taxed, and that proved, by presentment, examination, or information before the
said Commissioners, or as many of them as shall be by the same Commyssyon
appointed, or before the Barons of the Queen's Majesty's Exchequer, or two
Justices of the peax, of the County where such parson dwells: then every
such parson that by such means, or otherwise wyllynglye by couyn, shall
happen to escape from the said taxation, or payment aforesaid, and not be
rated, taxed, and set, shall be charged upon the knowledge and proof thereof,
with and at the double value of so much as he should, might, or ought to have been set and taxed at, by virtue of this Act. And the same double value to be
leuyed, gathered, and paid, of his goods and cattelles, lands, and
temementes, toward the said Subsedye, and further to be punyshed according
to the discressions of the Barons, Justices and Commissioners, before whom he
shall be convicted for his offense, and deceit in that behalf.

And further be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the said
Commyssyoners in every Commyssyon, shall according to their divisions, and
after they be divided, have full power and authority by this Act, to set,
tax, and sesse every other Commissioner, joined with them in every such
Commission and division, and shall also assesse every assessour within their
division, for his and their goods, lands, and other the premises as is
abouesayde: by the which said Commission, the said Commissioners shall
indifferently set, tax, and assesse them selves and the said assessours. And
that as well the sums upon every of the said Commissioners and assessours, so
sessed, rated, and taxed, as the sums made and presented by the presenters
sworn as is abouesayde, shall be written, certified, set, and estreated, and the
estreates thereof to be made, with other the inhabitants of that parties,
within the limittes of the same Commission and division so to be gathered and
levied, in like manner as it ought or should have been, if the said
Commissioners had not ben in the said Commission. And that all parsons of
the estate of a Baron or Barons, and every estate above, shall be charged with
their free hold, and value as is abouesayde, by the Chauncelour or keeper of
the great Seal. President of the Counsel, the high Treasourer of England
for the time being, and other such parsons as by the Queen's Majesty's
authority, shall be named and appointed, and they to be charged for the said
several paymentes of the said Subsedye, after the form of the said grant,
according to the taxation aforesaid. And the sums upon them set, with
the names of the Collectours appointed for the gatherynge and payinge of the
same, to be estreated, delivered and certyfyed at days and places above
specyfyed, by the Lord Chauncellor, or keeper of the great Seal, and
Treasourer, and other such parsons as thereto shall be named.

And be it further enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that after the taxes
and assesses of the said sums, upon and by the said assessyng and
certificat, as is aforesaid made, by the said Commyssyoners, or as many of
them as shall be thereunto appointed by the Queen's Majesty's Commissyon: shall
with all speed, and without delay, by the writing estreated of the said tax
thereof, under the seals and signs manuell of the said Commissioners, or as
many of them as shall be appointed, at the least to be made, shall be delivered
unto sufficient and substanciall inhabitauntes, Constables, Subconstables,
Baylyffes, and other officers jointly, of Hundredes, Towns, Paryshes, and
other places aforesaid, within their limittes, or to other sufficient parsons
inhabitauntes of the same, only by the discression of the said Commissioners,
and as the place and parties shall require, as well the particular names and
surnames, as the remembrance of all sums of money taxed and set, of, and
upon every parson, as well men as women chargeable to this Act, householder,
and all other the inhabitauntes and dwellers within the said Paryshes, Towns
and places contributory to this Act of Subsedy. By authority of which
writing or estreate so delivered, the said officers and other parsons so named
and deputed seuerallye, shall have full power and authority by virtue of this
Act, immediately after the delyuery of the said writing or estreate, to
demand, levy, and gather of every parson therein specified, the sum and
sums in the same writing or estreate comprysed, and for non payment thereof,
to distrayne the same parson or parsons so being behind, by their goods and
cattels, and the distress so taken, to keep by the space of eight days, at
the costs and charges of the owner thereof. And if the said owner do not pay
such su^me of money as shall be taxed by authority of this Act, within the
same.viii. days: then the same distress to be appreased by four, three, or
two of the inhabitauntes where such distress is taken, and also then to be
sold by the said Constable, or other Collectours for the payment of the said
money, and the overplus coming of the sale and keeping thereof (if any be) to be
immediately restored to the owner of the same distress. Which said officers and
other parsons so deputed, to ask, take, gather, and levy the said sums,
shall answer and be charged for the portion only to them assigned and
limited, to be gathered, leuyed, and comprysed in the said writing or
estreate so to them, as is aforesaid delivered, to the use of our Sovereign
Lady the Queen's Majesty, and her heirs and successors, and the said sum
in that writing or estreate comprysed, to pay unto the high Collectour or
Collectours of that place, for the collection of the same, in manner and form
under written, thereunto to be named and deputed. And the same inhabitauntes and
officers, so gathering the same particular su^mes, for their collection thereof,
shall reteyne for every.xx.s. so by them received and paid, two pence, and
that to be allowed at the payment of their collection by them to be made, to
the high Collectour or Collectours.

And further, be it enacted by the said authority, that the said
Commissioners, or the more part of them, as shall take upon them execution and
busynes of the said Commission, shall for either of the same paymentes of the
said Subsedye, name such sufficient and hable parsons, which then shall have
and possede lands and other hereditamentes, in their own right, of the yearly
value of.xx.li. or goods to the value of two hundredth marks, at the least.
And the parsons severally by the discressions of the same Commisioners, in
Shires, Ridinges, Lathes, Wapentakes, Rapes, Cities, Towns corporate, or other
whatsoever places, as well within places priuileged as without, not being
foreprised within this Act, to be high Collectours, and have their collection
and receipt of the said sums set, and leuiable within the precinct, limit,
and bounds, where they shall be so limited to gather and receive. To every of
the which Collectours so severally named, the said Commissioners, or two of
them at the least, shall with all speed, and without delay, after the said
whole sum of the said Subsedye, be set by all the limittes of the same
their Commission, or in such limittes as the high Collectours shall be so
severally assigned: shall under the seals and signs manuell, deliver one
estreate indented in parchment, to every of the said high Collectours,
comprysyng in it, the names of all such parsons as were assigned to levy the
said particular su^me and su^mes of every Hundred, Wapentake, Town, or other
place aforesaid, with the names and surnames of the parsones so chargeable,
according to the estreate so first thereof made, as is aforesaid, and
delivered. And the Collectours so to be assigned, shall be charged to answer
the whole sum comprised in the said estreate, limited to his collection, as
is aforesaid.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
said Commissioners having authority by this Act, to name and nominate the
said high Collectours of the said Subsedy: shall immediately upon the
nomination and election, take by authority of this present Parliament,
sufficient Recognisaunces or obligations, without any fee or reward to be
paid therefore, of every parsone so by them to be named to be high
Collectour, to be bounden to the Queen's Majesty in the double su^me of the
su^me of his collection, and to be endorsed and made upon such condition, that
is to say, for the collection of the said first payment of the said Subsedye,
that if the said Collectour, his heirs, or executours, do truly content and
pay to the use of the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, or executours, in the
receipt of the said Exchequer, before the said first day of June next coming,
so much of the said su^me of money allotted and appointed to his collection,
as he shall collect and gather, and content and pay the residue of his
collection and charge, within one month next after such time as he has
gathered and collected the same residue: that then the said Recognisaunces or
obligation to be void, or else to stand in full strength and virtue. And for
the collection of the second payment of the said Subsedy, upon condition that
if the said Collectour, his heirs, or executours, do truly content and pay to
the use of the Queen's Majesty, her heirs, or successors, in her receipt of
the Exchequer, before the.xx. day of February, which shall be in the year of our
Lord God.M.D.lxiii. so much of the said su^me of money allotted and appointed
to his collection, as he shall collecte and gather, and content and pay the
residue of his collection and charge, within one month next after such time as
he has gathered and collected the same residue: that then the said
Recognisaunce or obligation to be void, or else to stand in full strength and
virtue. Which said several recognisaunces, or obligations so taken, the said
Commisioners shall severally certify and deliver the Queen's Majesty's
Eschequer, with the several certificates of the said taxations and rates of
the paymentes of the said Subsedye, at, and by the time to them prescribed and
appointed by this Act, for the certificat of the said several taxations of
the said Subsedye, upon pain of forfaiture of.x.li. to the Queen's Majesty for
every Recognisaunce or obligation not certified. And that every such Collectour
so elected, named, and chosen, upon request to him made, shall knowledge and
make the said Recognisaunce or obligation, upon like pain and forfeyture
of.x.li. to the Queen's Majesty for the refusal thereof. And every Collectour
so deputed, having the said estreate in parchment, as is aforesaid, shall have
authority by this Act, to appoint days and places within the circuit of
his collection, for the payment of the said Subsedye, to him to be made, and
thereof to give warnyng by Proclamation or otherwise, to all the Constables, or
other parsons, or inhabitauntes, having the charge of the particular collection
within the Hundredes, Paryshes, Towns, or other places, by him or them
limited to make payment for their said particular collection of every su^me,
as to them shall appertain. And if at the said day and place so limited and
prefyxed by the said Collectour, the said Constable, officers, and other
parsons, or inhabytauntes, as is aforesaid, for the said particular
collection, assigned and appointed within such Hundred, City, Town, or other
place, do not pay unto the said Collectours, the sum within their several
Hundredes, Towns, Parishes, and other places, due, and comprysed in the said
estreate thereof, to them delivered by the said Commissioners, or some of them,
as is aforesaid, or so much thereof as they have by any mean received.ii. d.
of every pound, for the said particular collection, as is aforesaid, always
to be thereof allowed, excepted, and abated: that then it shall be lawefull to the
said high Collectours, and every of them, and to their assigns, to distrayne
every of the said Constables, officers, and other inhabitauntes, for their
said several and particular collection of the said sums comprysed in the
said estreate and writing thereof to them and every of them, as is before
expressed, and delivered, or for as much of the same sum, as so then shall
happen to be gathered and leuyed, and behind and unpaid, by the goods and
cattelles of every of them so being behind. And the distress so taken, to be
kept, appreased, and sold, as is aforesaid, and thereof to take and leuye the
su^mes so then being behynd and unpaid. And the overplus coming of the sale
of the said distress (if any be) to be restored and delivered unto the owner,
in form above remembered.

Provided always, that no parson inhabiting in any City, Borough, or Town
corporate, shall be compelled to be any Assessour or Collectour, of, or for any
part of the said Subsedye, in any place or places out of the said City,
Borough, or Town corporate where he dwells.

And it is also by the said authority enacted, that if any inhabitaunt, or
offycer, or whatsoever parson or parsons charged to and for the collection or
receipte of any part or parsell of the said Subsedye, by any manner of means,
according to the tenor of this Act, or any parson or parsons for them selves,
or as keeper, guardian, deputy, factour, or attorney, of, or for any other
parson or parsons, of any goods and cattels, of the owner thereof, at the time
of the said assessyng to be made, being out of this Realm, or in any other
parties not known, or of, and for the goods and cattelles of any other parson
or parsons of any Corporation, Fraternity, Mystery, or other whatsoever
Cominaltie, being incorporate, or not incorporate, and all parsons having in
their rule, governance and custody, any goods or cattelles, at the time of
the said assessyng, or any of them to be made, or which for any cause, for and
by collection, or for him self, or for any other, or by reason that he has
the rule, governance, or custody of any goods or cattelles of any other
parson or parsons, Corporation, Cominaltie, Fraternity, Guylde, or Mystery, or
any such other like, or as factor, deputy, or attorney, of, or for any parson:
shall be taxed, rated, valued, and set, to any sum or sums, by reason of this
Act, and after the taxation or assessyng upon any such parson or parsons as
shall be charged with the receipt of the same, happen to dye, or depart from the
place where he was so taxed and set, or his goods or cattelles be so eloyned,
or in such privy and covert manner kept, as the said parson or parsons
charged with the same, by estreates or other wrytynges from the said
Commissioners, or as many of them as shall be thereunto appointed by the said
Commission, as is aforesaid, can ne may leuye the same sum or sums
comprysed within the same estreates, by distress, within the limittes of their
collection, as is aforesaid, or can not sell such distress or distresses as
be taken for any of the said paymentes, before the time limited to the high
Collectour, for his payment to be made in the Queen's Majesty's receipt: then
upon relation thereof, with due examination, by the oath or examination of such
parson or parsons as shall be charged with, and for the receipte and collection
of the same before the said Commisioners, or as many of them as by the said
Commyssyon shall be thereunto appointed, where such parson or parsons, or other
as is aforesaid, their goods and cattelles, were set and taxed, and upon
plain certificat thereof made in the Queen's Majesty's Exchequer by the same
Commissioners, as well of the dwelling place, names, and sums, of the said
parsons of whom the said sums can not be leuyed and had, as is aforesaid:
then as well the Constables and other inhabitauntes appointed for the said
particular collection, against the high Collectours, as the high Collectour
upon his account and oath in the same Exchequer, to be discharged thereof, and
process to be made for the Queen's Majesty out of the said Exchequer, by the
discression of the Barons of the said Exchequer, against such parson, his
heirs, or executours, so being behynd with his payment. And over that, the
same Commisioners to whom any such declaration of the premises shall be made,
in form aforesaid, from time to time, shall have full power and authority,
to direct their precept or precepts unto the said parson or parsons charged
with any su^me, of, for, and upon any such parson or parsons, or other as is
aforesaid, or to any Sheryffe, Steward, Baylyffe, or other whatsoever
offycer, mynyster, parson or parsons of such place or places where any such
parson or parsons so owyng such sum or sums, shall have lands and
tenementes, or other hereditamentes, or real possessions, goods, and
cattelles, whereby any such parson or parsons so indebtted, his heirs,
executours or assigns, or other having the custody, governance, or
disposition of any goods, cattelles, lands or tenementes, or other
heredimantes, which ought or may by this Act lawfully be distrayned or taken
for the same, has and shall have goods, cattels, lands, tenementes, or other
possessions, whereof such su^me or su^mes which by any such parson or parsons,
may, or ought to be leuyed, be it within the limittes of such Commission where
such parson or parsons was and were taxed, or without, in any place within
this Realm of England, Wales, or other the Queen's Majesty's Dominions,
Marches, or Territories. By which precept, as well such parson or parsons as
shall be charged to leuye such sum of money, as the officers of the place or
places where such distress may be taken: shall have full power and authority
to distraine every such parson indebtted, charged, and chargeable by this Act,
or his executours, or administratours, of his goods and cattelles, his
gardians, factours, deputies, lessees, farmours, and assigns, and all other
parsons by whose hands, or out of whose lands, any such parsons should have
rent, fee, annuitie, or other profit, or which at the time of the said
assessynges, shall have goods or cattelles, or any other thing moveable, of
any such parson or parsons being indebtted, or owing such sum. And the
distress so taken, cause to be kept, appreased, and sold, in like manner and
form, as is aforesaid for the distress to be taken, upon such parsons to be
taxed to the said Subsedye, and being sufficient to distrayne within the
limittes of the Collectours, Inhabitauntes, or other officers, charged with, or
for the same sum so upon them to be taxed. And if any such distress for non
payment, happen to be taken, out of the limit of the said parsons, charged and
assigned to levy the same: the parsons so charged for the levy of any such
sum by distress, shall parceiue and take of the same distress, for the
labor of every parson going for the execution thereof, for every mile that any
such parson so labors for the same.ii.d. And every fermour, tenant,
guardian, factour, or other whatsoever parson, being distrayned, or otherwise
charged for payment of any such sum or sums, or any other sum by reason
of this Act, shall be of such su^me or sums of him or them so levied and
taken, discharged and acquitted at his next day of payment of the same, or at
the delyuery of such goods and cattelles, as he that is so distrayned, had in
his custodye and governance, against him or them that shall be so taxed and set:
any grant, or writing obligatorie, or other whatsoever matter to the contrary
made heretofore, notwithstanding. And if any such parson that should be so
distrayned, have no lands or tenements sufficient, whereby he or his tenauntes
and fermours may be distrayned, or have alyened or hyd his goods and
cattelles, whereby he should or might be distrayned, in such manner that such
goods and cattelles shall not be known or found, so that the sum, of, or by
him to be paid in the said form, shall ne can be conveniently levied: then
upon relation thereof to the Commissioners, or to as many of them as by the
said Commission shall be thereunto appointed, where such parson or parsons was
taxed and set, by the oaths of him or them that shall be charged with the levy
and payment of that su^me or su^mes, the same Commissioners shall make a
precepte, in such manner as is aforesaid, for to attache, take, and arrest the
body of such parson or parsons that ought to pay the said sums, and by this
Act shall be charged with and for the said su^me or su^mes: and them so taken,
safely to keep in prison, within the shyre or other place where any such parson
or parsons shall be taken and attached, there to remain without bail or
mainpryse, until he has paid the same su^me or sums that such parson for
him self, or for any other, by this Act shall be chargeable, or ought to be
charged withal. And also for the fees of every such arrest, to him or them
that shall execute such precept xx.d. And that every officer unto whom such
precepte shall be directed, do his true diligence, and execute the same upon
every parson so being indebtted, upon pain to forfeyte to the Queen's
Majesty for every defaulte in that behalf twenty shyllynges. And that no
keeper of any Jail, from his Jail suffer any such parson to go at large by
lettyng to bail, or otherwise to depart out of his prison, before he have
paid his said debte, and the said.xx.d. for the said arrest, upon pain to
forfeyte to the Queen's Majesty fortye shyllynges, and the same Jailer to pay
unto the Queen's Majesty the double value, as well of the rate which the said
parson so imprisoned was taxed, as of the said.xx.d. for the fees. And like
process and remedy, in like manner and form, shall be granted by the said
Commissioners, or as many of them as by the said Commission shall be thereunto
appointed, at like infirmation of every parson or parsons being charged with
any sum of money, for any other parson or parsons by reason of the said
Subsedye, and not thereof paid, but wylfully withdrawn, ne the same leuyable
within the limittes where such parsons were thereunto taxed. And if the sum
or sums being behynd unpaid, by any parson or parsons, as is aforesaid, be
leuyed and gathered by force of the said process to be made by the said
Commissioners, or if indefaulte, or for lack of payment thereof, the parson or
parsons so owyng the said sum or sums of money, by process of the same
Commissioners to be made as is aforesaid, be committed to prison in form
abouesayde: that then the said Commissioners which shall awarde such process,
shall make certificat thereof in the said Exchequer, of that shall be done in the
premises, in the Term next following, after such sum or sums of money so
being behind, shall be leuyed and gathered, or such parson or parsons for non
payment of the same committed to prison. And if it happen any of the said
Collectours to be assigned, or any Majors, Sheryffes, Stewardes, Constables,
the Nedborow, Borsholder, Bailiffe, or any other officer or minister, or other
whatsoever parson or parsons, to disobeye the said Co^missyoners or any of
them, in the reasonable request to them made by the said Commissioners, for
the execution of the said Commission, or if any of the officers or other
parsons do refuse that to them shall appertain and belong to do, by reason of
any precepte to him or them to be directed, or any reasonable commandment,
instaunce, or request, touching the premysses, or other default, in any
appearaunce, or collection to make, or if any parson being suspecte, or not to
be indifferentlye taxed, as is aforesaid, do refuse to be examined, according
to the tenor of this Act, before the said Commissioners, or as many of them
as shall be thereunto assigned, as is aforesaid, or will not appear before the
same Commyssyoners upon warnyng to him made, or else make resistaunce or
rescous, upon any distress upon him to be taken, for any parcel of the said
Subsedye, or commit any misbehauiour in any manner of wise contrary to this
Act, or commit any wylfull omyssion, or other whatsoever wylfull not doing
or misdoyng, contrary to the tenor of this Act or grant: the same
Commisioners and every number of them above remembered, or two of them at the
least, upon probable knowledge of any such misdemeanors, had by information or
examination, shall and may set upon every such offendour for every such
offense, in name of a fine by the same offendour to be forfeyted, fortye
shyllynges, or under, by the discressyon of the same Commissioners. And
further, the same Commissioners and every number of them, or two of them at the
least, shall have authority by this present Act, to punyshe every such
offendour by inprysonment, there to remain, and to be delivered by their
discression, as shall seem to them convenient, the said fynes, if any such
be, to be certified by the said Commyssyoners that so assessed the same, into
the Queen's Majesty's said Exchequer, there to be leuyed and paid by the
Collectours of that parties for the said Subsedy, returned into the said
Exchequer, to be therewith charged with the payment of the said Subsedye, in
such manner as the said fines had been set and taxed upon the said offenders,
for the said Subsedye.

It is also enacted by the said authority of this present Parliament, that
every of the said high Collectours, which shall account for any part of the
said Subsedye in the said Exchequer, upon their several said accomptes to
be yielded, shall be allowed at every of the said paymentes of the said Subsedye,
for every pound limited to his collection, whereof any such Collectour shall be
charged, and yield accopmte.vi.d. as parcel of their charge, that is to say,
of every pound thereof, for such parson as then have had the particular
collection in the Towns and other places as is aforesaid, specified in his
collection.ii.d. and other.ii.d. of every pound thereof every of the said
chief Collectours or their accomptauntes to reteyne to their own use, for
their labor and charge, in and about the premises, and.ii.d. of every pound
residue to be delivered, allowed, and paid, by the said Collectours so being
thereof allowed, to such of the Commissioners as shall take upon them the
business and labor, for, and about the premises, that is to say, every
Collectour to pay that Commissioner or Commissioners which had the orderyng
of the wrytnges, of, and for the said Subsedye, where the said Collectour or
Collectours had their collection, for the expenses of the said Commissioners
so taking upon them the said busynes and labor of their Clerks writing of
the precepts and extractes for the said collections, the same last.ii.d. of
every pound to be divided amongst the said Commissioners, having regard to
their labor and busynes, taken by them or their said Clerks, in, and about
the premises. For the which part so to the said Commissioners attaynyng, the
said Commissioners.vi.v.iiii.iii. or as many of them as shall be thereunto
appointed by the Queen's Majesty's Commission, and every of them, jointly and
severally, for his and their said part, may have his remedy against the
said Collectour or Collectours, which thereof ben and might have been allowed by
action of debt, in which the defendaunt shall not wage his law, neither
protection, neither Iniunction, or other Essoygne shall be allowed. And that no
parson, now being of the number of the company of this present Parliament,
nor any Commissioner, shall be named or assigned to be any Collectour or
Subcollectour, or presentour of the said Subsedye, or of any part thereof, nor
no Commyssyoners shall be compelled to make any presentemente or certificate,
other then in the Queen's Majesty's said Exchequer, of, for, or concerning the
said Subsedye, or any part thereof. And likewise that no other parson that
shall be named or assigned to be Commissioners in any place, to, and for
thexecution of this Act of Subsedye, be, or shall be assigned or named head
Collectours of any of the paymentes of the said Subsedye, neither of any part
thereof. And that every such parson or parsons which shall be named and appointed
as is aforesaid, to be head Collectours in, and for the first payment of this
Subsedye, shall not be compelled to be Collectour for the second payment of the
said Subsedye, or for any part thereof. And the said Collectours which shall be
assigned for the collection of the said Subsedye, or for any part thereof,
and every of them, be, and shall be acquitted and discharged of all manner fees,
rewards, and of every other charges in the Queen's Majesty's Exchequer, or else
where, of them or of any of them, by reason of that collection, payment, or
accomptes, or any thing concerning the same to be asked. And that if any parson
receive or take any fees, rewards, or pleasures of any such accomptaunt: that
then he shall forfeyte to the Queen's Maistie, for every penny or value of every
penye so taken.v.s. and suffer imprisonment at the Queen's Majesty's pleasure.
And after the taxyng and assessyng of the said Subsedye (as is aforesaid) had
or made, and the said extractes thereof in parchment, unto the Collectour, in
manner and form before rehearsed, delivered: the said Commisioners which
shall take upon them thexecutions of this Act, within the limittes of their
Commission by their agrementes, shall have metyng together, at which metyng,
every of the said Commissioners which then shall have taken upon them
thexecution of any part of the said Commission, shall by him self, or by his
sufficient deputy, truly certify and bring forth unto the said
Co^myssyoners named in the said Commission, the certificat and presentment,
made before him and such other Commisioners as were limited with him in one
limitte, so that the same certificat may be accounted and cast with the other
certificates of the other limittes within the same Commission, and then the
said Commisioners and every number of them, unto two at the least, as is
aforesaid, if any be in life, or their executours, or administratours of their
goods if they then be dead, shall jointly and severally, as they were divided
within their limittes, under their seals, by their discressio^, make one or
several wyrtynges indented, conteynyng in it as well the names of the said
Collectours, by the Commissioners for such collection and accomptes in the
Exchequer, and payment in the said receipte, deputed and assigned, as the
gross and several su^mes written unto every such Collectour to receive the
said Subsedye. And also all fines, amerciamentes, and other forfeytures, if
any such by reason of this Act happen to be within the precinct and limitte of
their Commission, to be certified into the Queen's Majesty's said Exchequer by
the said Commisioners. In which writing or writings indented so to be
certified, shall be plainly declared and expressed the whole and entier su^me
or su^mes of the said Subsedy, severally limited to the collection of the said
Collectours, severally deputed and assigned to the collection of the said
su^mes, so that none of the said Collectours so certified in the said
Exchequer, shall be compelled there to account, or to be charged, but only to
and for the sum limited to his collection, and not to or for any su^me
limited to the collection of his fellow, but that every of them shall be
severally charged for their part, limited to their collection. And if the
said Commisioners joined in one Commission, among them selves in that matter
can not agree, or if any of them be not ready, or refuse to make certificat
with other of the same Commissioners: that then the same Commisioners may make
several Indentures in form aforesaid, of their several limittes, or
seperations of Collectours within the limittes of their Commission, upon and in
the Hundredes, Wards, Wape^takes, Lathes, Rapes, or such other like divisions
within their said several limittes of their Commission, as the places there
shall require to be severed and divided, and as to the same Commissioners shall
seem good, to make divisions of their limittes or collections, for the several
charges of the same Collectours, so that always one Collectour shall be charged
and account for his part to him to be limited, only by him self, and not for
any su^me limited to the part of any of his fellows, and the charges of every
of the Collectours to be set and certified seuerallye upon them, and every such
Collectour, upon his account and payment of the su^me of money limited within
his collection, to be severally by him self acquitted and discharged in the
said Exchequer, without paying any manner fees or rewards to any parson or
parsons for the same, upon the pain and penalty last abouesayde, and not to
be charged for any portion of any other Collectour. And if any Com^issioner,
after he has taken certificat of them, that as is aforesaid, shall before any
such Commyssyoner be examined, and the sums rated and set, and the books
and wrytynges thereof being in his hands, or if any Collectour or other
parson, charged with any receipte of any part of the said Subsedye, or any
other parson taxed, or otherwise by this Act charged with and for any parcel
of the said Subsedye, or with any other sums, or fine, amerciament,
penalty, or other forfeyture, happen to dye, before the Commyssyoner,
Collectour, or other whatsoever parson or parsons have executed, accomplyshed,
satisfied, or sufficientlye discharged that which to every such parson shall
apperteyne or belong to do, according to this Act: then the executours and
heirs of every such parson, and all other seized of any lands or
tenementes, that any such parson being charged by this Act, and deceassyng
before he be discharged thereof, or any other to his use only had, of
estate of enheritaunce, at the time that any such parson was named
Co^missioner, Collectour, or otherwise charged with and for any manner of thing
to be done, satisfied, or paid, by reason of this Act. And all those that
have in their possessions or hands, any goods, cattelles, leasses, or other
things, that to any such parson or parso^s at the time of his death, or any
lands, or tenementes, that were the same parsons, at the time he was (as is
aforesaid) charged by this Act, shall be by the same, compelled and charged to
do, and accomplish to do in every case as the same parson so being charged
should have done, and might have been compelled to do, if he had been in plain
life, after such rate, of the lands and goods of the said Commissioner or
Collectour, as the party shall have in his hand. And if the said
Commissioners, for causes reasonable them mouyng, shall think it not
convenient to join in one certificat, as is aforesadye: then the said parson
or parsons that shall first join together, or he that shall first certify
the said writing indented, as is aforesaid, shall certify all the names of
the Commissioners of that Commission, whereupon such wrytynges shall be there
then to be certified, with division of the Hundredes, Wapentakes, Wards,
Tythynges, or other places, to, and among such Commissioners of the same
Commyssyon, with the names of the same Commissioners where such seperations and
divisions shall be, with the gross sums of money, as well of and for the said
Subsedye, taxed or set, of, or within the said Hundredes, Wards, Wapentakes,
or other places to him or them divided or assigned, that shall so certify the
said first writing, as of fines, amerciamentes, penalties, or other
forfeysures, if any happen to be within the same limittes whereof the same
wrytynges shall be certified, and after such writing indented, which, as is
aforesaid, shall be certified, and not conteyne in it the whole and full sums
set and taxed within the limittes of the same Commission, the other
Commissioners of the same, before the day of payment of the said Subsedye,
shall certify into the said Exchequer, by their writing or wrytynges
indented, to be made as is aforesaid, the gross and several sums, set and
taxed within the places to them lymytted for the said Subsedye, and other
fines, amerciamentes, penalties, and forfeytures, with the names of the
Hundredes, Wards, Wapentakes, and other places to them assigned, or else by
their said wrytynges indented, to certify at the same place, before the said
day of payment, such reasonable causes for their excuses, why they may not make
such certificat, of, and for the said Subsedye, fynes, amerciamentes, and
other forfeitures growyng or set by reason of the causes of their lettes, or
of their non certifying, as is aforesaid, or else in default thereof, process to
be made out of the Queen's Majesty's said Exchequer, against the said
Commissioners and every of them, not making certificate, as is aforesaid, by
the discression of the Treasourer or Barons of the said Exchequer.

Provided always, and be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the
Inhabitauntes of the Paryshe of Saint Martin, called Stampforde Baron, in the
Suburbs of the Borowe and Town of Stampforde, in the South part of the water
there, called Wellande, which hereafter shall be contributory to the payment of
this present Subsedie, granted to the Queen's Majesty, her heirs and
successors, shall be assessed, rated, and taxed for this time by such
Commissioners which shall be appointed for the taxing, rating, and sessing of
such Subsedie or Tax within the County of Lincoln, and shall be for this time
contributory and pay the said Subsedye to the Collectour or Collectours which
shall be assigned and appointed for the leuying and gatheryng of the same, with
the Aldermen and Burgesses of the said Borowe and Town of Stampford.

Provided always, and be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that all and every parson and parsons having manours, lands, tenementes, and
other hereditamentes, chargeable to the payment of the Subsedye granted to the
Queen's Majesty by this Act, and also having spiritual possessions chargeable
to her said Majesty by the grant made by the Clergy of this Realm in their
Convocation, and over this, having subtaunce in goods and cattelles chargeable
by this said Act: that then if any of the said parson or parsons be
hereafter charged, assessed, and taxed, for the said manours, lands, and
tenementes, and spiritual possessions, and also assessed, charged, and taxed
for his or their goods and cattelles: that then he or they shall be only
charged by virtue of this Act for his and their said manours, lands,
tenementes, hereditamentes, and spiritual possessions, or only for his said
goods and cattelles, the best thereof to be taken for the Queen's Majesty, and
not to be charged for both, or double charged for any of them: Any thing in
this Act contained to the contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided always, that this grant of Subsedye nor any thing therein
contained, in any wise extend to charge the Inhabytauntes or dwellers in
Irelande, Iernesey, and Garnesey, or any of them, of, or concerning any
manours, lands, tenementes, or other possessions, goods, cattelles, or other
moveable substance, which the said inhabytauntes, or dwellers, or any other
to their use have within Irelande, Iernesey, and Garnesey, or in any of them,
or of, for, or concerning any fees, or wages, which any of the said
inhabitauntes or dwellers, have of the Queen's Majesty, for their attendaunce,
and doing service to our Sovereign Lady in Irelande, Iernesey, and Garnesey,
or in any of them: any thing in this present Act to the contrary, in any wise
notwithstanding.

Provided also, that this present Act of Subsedy, ne any thing therein
contained, extend to any of the English inhabitants or resiantes in any of
the counties of Northumberlande, Cumberlande, Westmerlande, the Town or
Barwycke, the Town of Newcastell upon Tine, and the Bishopric of Durham* nor
to any of them, of, for, or concerning any manours, lands, tenementes, or
other possessions, goods, cattelles, or other moveable substance, which the
same inhabitants or dwellers, or any other to their use, have within the said
counties of Northumberlande, Cumberlande, Westmerlande, or the Town of
Barwycke, the Town of Newcastell upon Tine, or the Byshoprycke of Durham, or
any of them, or of, for, or concerning any fees or wages, which any of the
said inhabitauntes or dwellers have of the Queen's Majesty, for their
attendaunce and doing service to the Queen's for, or within the said Counties
of Northumberlande, Cumberlande, Westmerlande, the Town of Barwicke, the Town
of Newecastell upon Tine, and the Byshoprycke of Durham, or any of them, to, or
for the said taxyng, leuying, gatheryng, or payment: but that the English
inhabytauntes and resyauntes, and every of them, of the said Counties,
Byshoprycke, and Towns, and every of them, shall be of, and from the said
Subsedye, and every parcel thereof, and for their manours, lands, tenementes,
fees, wages, goods, and cattelles, lying and being in the said Counties,
Towns, and Byshoprycke, or any of them, utterly acquitted and discharged: any
thing in this present Act before rehearsed to the contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also, that all letters patentes granted by the Queen's Majesty, or
any of her most noble progenitors, to any Cities, Boroughes, or Towns within
this Realm, of any manner of liberties, privileges, or exemptions, from the
burden and charge of any such grau^tes of Subsedy, which be at this present
time in force and vayleable, shall remain good and effectual, to the said
Cities, Boroughes, and Towns hereafter, according to the purportes thereof,
though the inhabitauntes of the same, shall upon the great and wayghtie
consideration of the grant abouesayde, be for this grant charged and
contributory, in like manner, form, and sort, as other Cities Boroughes, and
Towns, which be not in any wise pryuyleged, be from such grant of Subsedye
excepted.

Provided always, and be it enacted by thaucthoritie aforesaid, that no
Orphan, or Infant within the age of xxi. years, borne within any of the Queen's
Majesty's dominions, shall be charged to any payment of this Subsedy, for his or
her goods and cattels, to him or her left or bequeathed: any thing in this Act
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, that this Act nor any thing therein contained, shall not
extend to the goods or lands of any College, Hall, or Hostell, within the
Universities of Oxforde and Cambridge, or any of them, or to the goods or
lands of the College of Wynton, founded by Bishop Wykeham, or to the goods
or lands of the Colleges of Wyndsor, and Eaton next Wyndsor, or to the goods
or lands of any common free Grammar Scole within the Realm of Engalnde or
Wales, or to the goods of any Reader, Scolemaister, or Scoler, or any graduate
resyant or remaining for study, without fraud or couin, within any of the
said Universities and Colleges, or Towns of Cambridge and Oxforde, or
Suburbs of the same, or any of them, or to any their servants daily
attendaunt upon any of them, nor to the goods of any officer, minister,
almesman, or servants belongyng to any of the said Universities, Colleges,
Halles, or Hostelles, and dwelling and resyaunt within the said Universities,
or either of them, or within either of the said Towns of Cambridge and
Oxforde, and Suburbs of the same, without fraud or couyn. Nor to the goods
and lands of any Hospytall, Measondue, or Spittell house, prepared and used
for the sustentation and relief of poor people: any thing in this Act
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

Provided also, that the said grant of Subsedye, or any thing therein
contained, do not in any wise extend, or be prejudicial or hurtefull to the
inhabitauntes or resyauntes at this present time within the five Ports
corporate, or to any of their members incorporate or united to the same five
Ports, or to any of the same five Ports, of, or for any part or parcel of
the said sums granted in this Parliament, of the said inhabitauntes now
resyaunt, or any of them, to be taxed, set, asked, leuyed or paid. But the
said inhabytauntes and resyauntes in the said five Ports, and their members,
be, and shall be, of, and from the said grant and paymente of the said
Subsedye, during their resyauncye there, and no longer, clearly acquyted and
discharged: any matter, or whatsoever thing in this Act, had or made to the
contrary, notwithstanding.

Provided also, and be it enacted, that forasmuch as diverse and sundry the
Queen's Majesty's tenau^tes, and other inhabitants and dwellers within the
counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen, Cardygan, Brecknocke, Glamorgan, Radnour,
Mongomery, Denbygh, Flynt, Merioneth, Anglesey, Carnaruan, and of the County
palentine of Chester, be at this present time charged and chargeable, as well
with the several paymentes of diverse great sums of money, by the name of
Myse due to her Majesty, according to the several customs of the said
Counties: as also with the paymentes of diverse several Subsedyes, lately
granted to our late sovereign Lord and Lady, king Phylyp and Queen Mary, and
to the Queen's highness that now is, and yet unpaid.

Be it therefore ordained and enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this
Act of Subsedy, or any thing therein contained, shall not extnde to charge any
of the Queen's tenauntes, and other inhabitants and dwellers within any of the
said Counties of Penbroke, Carmarthen, Cardygan, Glamorgan, Brecknocke,
Radnour, Mongomery, Denbygh, Flynt, Merioneth, Anglesey, Carnaruan, and the
County palentine of Chester, being charged or chargeable with the said Myse,
or several Subsedyes, for, or in any of the paymentes of the said Subsedye,
granted to the Queen's Majesty by this Act, until the said several days
and times for the paymente of the said Myses shall be expyred, and until the
days and times as well of the said several Subsedyes lately granted to our
said late Sovereign Lord and Sovereign Lady, King Phylyp and Queen Mary, as
also of the said Subsedye heretofore granted to the Queen's Majesty that now
is, be also past and expyred. And that then the first payment of the said
Subsedye granted by this present Act, shall be made at the receipte of the
Queen's Exchequer before the first day of June, next following after the last
days of the last payment to be had or appointed of the said Myses, and of the
payment of the said former Subsedyes. And the second payment of this
Subsedye, to be made by or before the xx. day of February, next after the said
payment of the said Subsedye.

Furthermore, be it enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the tenauntes
and dwellers of every of the said Counties in this prouiso remembered, shall
seuerallye before the feast of Penthecost next ensuyng, certify into the
said court of Exchequer, under the seals of two Justices of peax, of every of
the said Counties, whereof one to be of the Quorum, when and what day the last
payment of the said several Myses now due in any of the said Counties,
shall end and expyre.

Provided also, that the said grant of Subsedye, and two Fyftenes and
Tenthes, do not in any manner of wise extend or be prejudicial or hurtefull to
the inhabitauntes or resyauntes at this present time within the liberties of
Romney Marshe, of, or for any part of the said sums granted in this present
Parliament, of the said inhabitauntes now resyauntes, or any of them, to be
taxed, set, asked, leuyed, or paid. But that the said inhabitauntes, and
now resiauntes of Romney Marshe aforesaid, and every of them, be, and shall be
of, and from the said grant and payment of the said Subsedye and Fyftenes
and Tenthes, during their resyauncie there, and not longer, acquyted and
discharged: Any matter or whatsoever thing in this present Act made, or had
to the contrary, notwithstanding.

God save the Queen.
Imprynted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


